08ANKARA1888
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Oct 30 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO9218
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1888/01 3041519
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 301519Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7841
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9266
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4911
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3341
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6943
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6787
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3362
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001888 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 30, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Republic Day Celebrations across Turkey 
All media outlets feature prominent and flashy front page coverage 
of the celebrations marking the 85th anniversary of the Turkish 
Republic.  Reports highlight that although people celebrated the 
anniversary across the country with great enthusiasm, some members 
of the opposition parties Republican People's Party (CHP) and 
Democratic Left Party (DSP) boycotted official ceremonies.  CHP 
leader Deniz Baykal and most CHP deputies, along with DSP leader 
Zeki Sezer and all deputies of the DSP, were absent from as 
President Gul received visitors following ceremonies to mark the 
85th anniversary.  In addition, the parliamentarians did not attend 
an additional reception at presidential palace hosted by Gul and his 
wife.  Most of the pro-Kurdish opposition party DTP parliamentarians 
attended both official events in Ankara.  Meanwhile, local 
ceremonies in various provinces were boycotted by mayors from the 
DTP.  The only CHP deputy who was present at a later reception at 
the presidential palace in Cankaya was Sukru Elekdag, a retired 
ambassador. 
 
High ranking military attended the official events.  Diplomatic 
mission representatives were present at the presidential palace 
reception along with the prime minister of Pakistan Gilani, who is 
on an official visit to Turkey. 
 
Mainstream Hurriyet carries the front-page headline, "Our Spirits 
Were Enlightened by the Republic's Values," while Islamist Zaman 
commented "On this 85th Anniversary We All Are Longing For a 
First-Class Democracy." Mass appeal Aksam highlights under the 
headline, "One Republic and Three Receptions" that in response to 
President Gul's reception, which allowed no spouses, at the 
presidential palace, General Basbug, the Chief of General Staff, 
hosted a separate reception at the Officers' Club where spouses were 
welcome to attend. 
 
In Islamist leaning Zaman, Huseyin Gulerce commented: "Let's tip our 
hats one more time to another year for the Republic, and let's note 
that our military is one of the best in the world and is a great 
source of pride for our country.  But let's also remember that this 
is not a regime of the elites." 
 
Mainstream Sabah's Erdal Safak commented about this booklet:  "In an 
effort to solve the Kurdish problem, the DTP has suggested a 
'Democratic Autonomy Project' in a 64-page booklet in three 
languages (Turkish, English and Kurdish) and the cover is decorated 
in green, red, and yellow.  Strong reactions have come from 
deputies, including CHP's Mustafa Ozyurek, who says the proposal 
'appears to divide the Turkish federation.'  We believe in nurturing 
every kind of proposal for Turkish democracy's solution to the 
Kurdish problem.  Proposing a Kurdish autonomous region is not a new 
idea.  The 7th president Kenan Evren and 8th president Ozal and even 
the late PM Bulent Ecevit in the 1970s called for reviews of the 
democratic system and talked about regional governing system.  Even 
though DTP uses the 1921 Constitution as a basis for its autonomous 
region suggestion, that constitution itself cannot be a precedent 
for the Democratic Autonomy Project.  Nevertheless all of the 
suggestions should be discussed and we should not be afraid of the 
debate.  Already TGS Chief General Basbug at the Council of 
Ministers meeting said, 'In order to finish off terror, we must try 
everything, everyone must be met with in order to support the 
efforts.'  We want to see this as a first step." 
 
EU Progress Report on Turkey 
Media outlets report the EU's latest report on Turkey criticized the 
performance of the government in many areas, but praised President 
Gul for his reformist profile.  Mainstream Milliyet writes "The 
report says the government failed to prepare a stable and 
comprehensive reform program despite its huge political power.  The 
government is criticized for its failure to prepare a comprehensive 
 
ANKARA 00001888  002 OF 004 
 
 
strategy to fight corruption and for making partisan appointments in 
the bureaucracy."   Milliyet's columnist Semih Idiz concludes that 
"The EU expects more direct engagement from President Gul in order 
to compensate for the government's negligence."  Idiz notes that the 
report "not only praised President Gul's performance but also 
emphasized the importance of his efforts to mediate between 
political actors and civil society."  Mainstream Sabah writes the 
report "draws attention to the AKP closure case process" and the 
European Commission will ask Turkey "to change the law of political 
parties as per AIHM decisions and the Venice criteria."  The 
religious freedoms for Alevis were raised in the report as well and 
Turkey was criticized for the unfair treatment of Alevis. 
 
Semih Idiz wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "As the report states, the 
government did not move forward with reforms and Turkey is still 
being remembered with an increasing number of torture stories.  This 
in and of itself is a huge shame for the AKP government because of 
prior claims of 'zero tolerance for torture.'  Given the 
government's negligence, the EU obviously expects Gul will take a 
more direct role in the EU negotiation process." 
 
Karabakh Summit in Moscow 
News outlets report with a tinge of skepticism regarding Sunday's 
Moscow summit between Russia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan regarding the 
disputed region of Karabakh.  Mainstream Milliyet reports in "An 
Armenian-Azeri Summit in Moscow," that "on Sunday, Russian President 
Medvedev will host Armenian President Sargsyan and Azeri President 
Aliyev for the sole purpose of solving the crisis in Karabakh." 
Liberal Radikal reports "The Russian leader wants a solution to the 
disputed mountainous region."  In "A Russian-Azeri-Armenian Summit 
for Karabakh," leftist Taraf reports, "During Azeri President 
Aliyev's October 24th official swearing-in ceremony, Aliyev promised 
that his first visit outside of his country would be to Turkey 
because of the strong ties between Turkey and Azerbaijan. Instead, 
his first trip is to Russia."  In addition, the paper notes, "Since 
the Georgia-Russia war broke out and Russia recognized South Ossetia 
and Abkhazia, their activities in the Caucasus have increased," and 
"while the Karabakh crisis is not likely to be solved in this 
summit, the meeting can be a step towards decreasing the tensions in 
the region."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports, "Russia, 
following the war with Georgia, is dressing itself up like a 
mediator in the Caucasus." 
 
Barzani's Meetings in Washington 
Mainstream Sabah reports, "Kurdish Regional Government President 
Massoud Barzani met with President Bush about the bilateral security 
agreement (SOFA) and the fight against the PKK, but that no 
statement was made after the meeting."    Leftist Taraf reports 
"Barzani met with U.S. Secretary of State Condoleeza Rice and with 
Vice President Cheney," in order to discuss, "Iraq's general 
situation, the bilateral security agreement, the future of Iraq's 
Kurds, U.S. policy in Iraq during the new administration, and 
relations between the Iraqi Kurds and Turkey."  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet carries the headline, "Barzani Presents Thanks," as the 
KRG President told U.S. President Bush the "Kurdish people are 
grateful to the U.S. people and to the men and women in the U.S. 
armed forces." 
 
Syria Attack Complicates SOFA 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "The Syria Attack Challenges the 
Security Agreement," noting, "Iran has again raised concerns that 
the agreement with the U.S. would not bring security," as "experts 
argue that because of the attack against Syria, Iranian Shiite 
leaders have increased pressure against the agreement by saying that 
control over Iraq's domestic arena is not in the hands of the 
Iraqis."  In a related article, Zaman also reports, "Damascus 
Demands an Apology and Compensation from the U.S." for the 
cross-border attack.  Liberal Radikal reports "Following the U.S. 
attack in Syria on Sunday, Baghdad shared with the public that 
sections of the SOFA provisions proposed by Iraq specifically state 
 
ANKARA 00001888  003 OF 004 
 
 
that no attacks against Iraq's neighbors can be staged from bases in 
Iraq." CNN Turk reports, "Syria demands that the U.S. apologize for 
an American raid launched from Iraqi territory into Syrian territory 
that killed eight people." 
 
Davutoglu's Warnings for the Next U.S. President 
News outlets cover the prime minister's foreign affairs advisor 
Prof. Dr. Ahmet Davutoglu's visit to the U.S. to meet with the two 
presidential campaigns.  Mainstream Milliyet reports in "A Warning 
from Davutoglu to Obama," that Davutoglu warned Barack Obama against 
"taking the wrong step" regarding recognition of the events of 1915 
as a genocide.  Mainstream Hurriyet reports in "A Warning from 
Ankara to Obama," that Davutoglu warned the presidential candidate 
against the recognition of claims of an Armenian genocide, "Do not 
offend us and do not to pose a potential risk to the strategic 
relationship with Turkey."  Liberal Radikal calls Davutoglu "The 
lead architect of Turkey's foreign policy" and notes he warned "If 
you want to see the continuation of relations between Turkey and 
Armenia, steps must not be taken to offend us."  Leftist Taraf 
reports, "Davutoglu expressed concern over the demands of the 
Armenian diaspora to Barack Obama's foreign policy advisors," and 
said, "In the interest of keeping Turkey as an important global and 
regional ally, you must not pose this potential risk to the Turkish 
public," by recognizing the genocide claims.  In "Don't Offend 
Turkey," leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports, "Davetoglu went to 
Washington in order to prevent the likely crisis," over recognition 
of the genocide claims. 
 
Milliyet also added that adviser Davutoglu, along with the Obama and 
McCain foreign policy advisers, met with NSC Adviser Stephen Hadley 
and Jim Jeffrey, the new Ambassador to Turkey. 
 
U.S. Elections 
Based on observations from the ongoing election campaign, Radikal's 
editorial board carried the banner front page headline, "Here Comes 
Obama" and the paper's columnist Cengiz Candar wrote from 
Washington: "Being in Washington to check the pulse in upcoming 
presidential elections provided a valuable insight - clearly Barack 
Obama is leading the presidential race.  Despite fabricated stories 
regarding his origin as well as his faith, Obama managed to turn 
these speculations into opportunities.  There is now less than a 
week before we learn who will be the next leader of America, and of 
the world.  The world wants Obama and America wants Obama." 
 
TV News: 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
Turkey celebrates the 85th anniversary of the founding of the 
Turkish Republic. 
The governor of Adana has warned that the parents of children who 
participated in violent protests against security forces will lose 
their access to free medical services. 
Civil organizations in Antalya staged protests against the killing 
of Cagdas Gemik, 18, who refused to stop at a police checkpoint. 
DTP distributes to members of parliament a booklet containing 
details about the "democratic autonomy project" of jailed PKK leader 
Abdullah Ocalan. 
Vakit journalist Huseyin Uzmez, facing trial for raping a minor 
girl, appears on TV to reject all accusations. 
CHP leader Deniz Baykal says the 85th anniversary of the founding of 
the Turkish Republic is celebrated while republican values are worn 
out. 
 
International News 
At least 170 people are killed and many other are injured after an 
earthquake measuring 6.4 on the Richter scale hits western Pakistan. 
 
US President Bush meets Massoud Barzani, the president of the 
 
ANKARA 00001888  004 OF 004 
 
 
semiautonomous Kurdish region in northern Iraq. 
Iraq's national security adviser Mowaffak al-Rubaie says the 
security pact between Iraq and the U.S. would prevent the U.S. 
military from launching attacks on Iraq's neighbors. 
 
WILSON