08ANKARA1657
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Sep 16 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3784
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1657/01 2601142
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 161142Z SEP 08 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7471
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9170
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4744
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3235
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6864
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6705
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3275
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001657 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 16, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Turkey Watches the Deniz Feneri Court Case in Germany 
All media outlets continue reporting on the fraud case in a German 
court regarding the German-owned Deniz Feneri charity.  Speaking to 
a court in Frankfurt on Monday, Chief Police Inspector Alexander 
Bohm, who is in charge of the investigation into irregularities in 
the charity, said the Turkish government did not exert pressure on 
German officials, but that they displayed close interest in the 
investigation.  Bohm disclosed the minutes of meetings between PM 
Erdogan, Justice Minister Mehmet Ali Sahin and German Ambassador to 
Ankara Eckart Kuntz.  The minutes show that Erdogan and Sahin were 
following the developments in the Deniz Feneri charity investigation 
even when the German prosecutor had not finalized the indictment. 
In one meeting, Erdogan asked Kuntz whether there were any links 
between Deniz Feneri investigation and Kanal 7 Television.  Erdogan 
also complained about the long detention of the suspects, according 
to the minutes.  Inspector Bohm told the court there was no evidence 
showing that Deniz Feneri suspects delivered funds to Prime Minister 
Erdogan.  He, however, added that Erdogan's name was written on an 
electronic receipt dated February 2, 2005, indicating that funds 
collected by the charity were to be delivered to the PM.  There is 
no amount on the receipt, but the charity's accountant Firdevsi 
Ermis confessed the document was related to the transfer of 250,000 
Euro from Mehmet Gurhan (Director of Kanal 7 TV Europe) to Zekeriya 
Karaman (Director of Kanal 7 TV Turkey) who, according to Ermis, 
gave the money to Erdogan.  Bohm said the confessions of Ermis made 
the German inspectors conclude that initials in the receipts such as 
ZA and ZK referred to Zahid Akman (Turkish media watchdog RTUK's 
chair) and Zekeriya Karaman.  Bohm also testified that Akman 
couriered the charity funds to Turkey. 
 
Papers report the AKP leaders are expected to discuss the Deniz 
Feneri case at a party board meeting on Wednesday. 
 
International Press Institute Responds PM Erdogan's Criticism 
Hurriyet and Radikal carry a statement from the International Press 
Institute Committee on Turkey in response to Prime Minister 
Erdogan's retort to IPI warning not to pressure the media. 
Yesterday, papers reported the PM replied to the IPI warning by 
saying, "Who is IPI to give me an ultimatum?"  The IPI Turkey 
Committee, in a written statement, criticized Prime Minister Erdogan 
for creating a pro-government media and called his treatment of 
stories critical of the government a "serious threat against press 
freedom."  IPI pointed out that Prime Minister Erdogan has attended 
two different IPI meetings in Istanbul. 
 
 
Cartoon in today's mainstream Hurriyet depicting a newsstand in the 
shape of PM Erdogan's head and implying the PM seeks to see the 
media as his mouthpiece. (Note: Hurriyet is the Dogan Media Group's 
flagship newspaper.) 
 
 
 
 
Editorial Commentary on Deniz Feneri Case 
 
Hasan Cemal in Milliyet comments on PM Erdogan's attitude regarding 
the Deniz Feneri case: "At the end of the day, Erdogan has now 
criticized and insulted even the International Press Institute 
(IPI).  Of course, Erdogan is not the first PM to attack IPI since 
1950s.  But, there is one thing you should never forget - the Prime 
Ministers who have attacked press freedoms in Turkey and the IPI 
never win this kind of conflict." 
 
Mustafa Mutlu wrote in mainstream Vatan:  "While PM Erdogan 
threatens and blackmails the media in Turkey regarding the 'Deniz 
Feneri' case, German police Chief Alexander Bohme claimed at 
yesterday's court session that there was a connection between the 
 
ANKARA 00001657  002 OF 004 
 
 
government in Turkey and the courier of Deniz Feneri in Germany. 
Now, the Turkish media will write about this serious claim and the 
PM will get angry with Turkish columnists once again.  Mr. Prime 
Minister, I would suggest that you continue to attack the 
journalists like me who do not keep quiet, but never ever dare to 
attack the German police chief verbally.  Because, there is law, 
democracy and freedoms behind the German police chief and he will 
always be the winner." 
 
CJCS Admiral Mullen Calms the Montreux Frenzy 
All media outlets pay special attention to CJCS Admiral Mullen's 
press conference in Ankara yesterday.  Mainstream Sabah reports 
Mullen emphasized, "The U.S. will continue to support Turkey as long 
as Turkey asks for U.S. support," regarding the war on terror. 
Leftist Taraf carries the headline, "The U.S. Military Chief Gives 
the Green Light for Cross Border Operations."  Mainstream Hurriyet 
carries the front-page headline, "The U.S. will abide by the 
Montreux Agreement," and noted, "This is not the first time the U.S. 
has delivered aid via military ships to countries in trouble." 
Islamist-oriented Zaman writes, "The U.S. Has No Intention to Change 
the Montreux Agreement." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Admiral Mullen Visit 
 
Murat Yetkin wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "U.S. Chairman 
of the Joint Chiefs Admiral Mike Mullen's visit indicates the good 
level of Turkish-American relations between the two militaries. 
Earlier, General General Basbug called the bilateral 
military-to-military relations "excellent," particularly in the 
fight against the PKK.  However, there is a limit to the results 
achieved through military means, and Basbug is well aware of this. 
He knows that, regardless of the cooperation level with the American 
military against the PKK, this fight cannot be won via military 
methods only.  Thus his meeting with the press today is very 
important.  Basbug will likely mention the importance of 
implementing other measures to enhance internal peace while fighting 
against PKK at the highest level of international cooperation." 
 
NATO Military Exercises Raise Eyebrows in the Black Sea 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak carries the front-page headline, 
"Jackals in the Black Sea," and reports, "7 countries, including the 
U.S., are engaging in military exercises called "Jackal Stone"  in 
the Black Sea as a "rehearsal for war."   Mainstreams Milliyet and 
Sabah report a total of 1300 soldiers will be involved in the 
exercises, according to a statement from a Romanian court, and the 
exercises will end on September 24th. 
 
Yerevan Positive towards Ankara's History Commission Proposal 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports that President Gul's visit to 
Yerevan began a new era in the Turkey-Armenia relationship.  During 
the visit to Yerevan, Turkish officials observed that Armenia was 
more positive towards Turkey's proposal to set up a joint commission 
of historians to do a scientific research on 1915 incidents.  Ankara 
is very pleased with this approach and interprets it as the 
"realizing the facts." 
 
Global Economic Meltdown 
All media outlets report anxiously on the effects of the continuing 
crises in global financial markets, particularly to the Bank of 
America buyout of Merrill Lynch and Lehman Brothers filing for 
bankruptcy protection.  Mainstream Sabah carries the headline, "The 
Crisis of the Century," as "The entire world is feeling the effects 
of the mortgage crisis."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet carries the 
front-page banner headline, "Earthquake in the Markets."  Mainstream 
Vatan notes, "The Global Crisis Brings Down a 158-Year-Old Giant," 
referring to Lehman Brothers, and calls there bankruptcy claim "The 
Biggest Bankruptcy in U.S. History."  Mainstream Milliyet reports, 
"A Giant collapses, and the World is dumbfounded."  Liberal Radikal 
calls yesterday "Black Monday," as, "The global financial crisis 
collapses two global financial giants."  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
 
ANKARA 00001657  003 OF 004 
 
 
carries the headline, "The Masterminds of the Economy are ruined." 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak leads with the headline, "The Brothers 
Collapse," as "Lehman Brothers collapses and the Bank of America 
buys out Merrill Lynch in order to prevent a global crisis." 
Conservative-nationalist Turkiye carries the headline, "Earthquake 
in the Economy - A Giant Bank Collapses and World Markets are 
Rocked."  Economic daily Referans notes, "Markets Tumble as Wall 
Street's Giants Collapse." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Global Economic Meltdown 
 
Ibrahim Karagul wrote in Islamist leaning Yeni Safak: "The current 
events go beyond ordinary bankruptcy cases.  This is clearly the 
demise of a global finance system led by the United States, a system 
that is a colossal failure.  Those who were after a new world order 
will have to clean their own back yards because the system that they 
tried to design for the whole world has collapsed." 
 
Editorial Commentary on DTP Closure Case, the Caucasus, Israel, 
German Marshall Fund Survey 
 
Ergun Babahan wrote in mainstream Sabah:  "Even if the DTP is 
closed, the Kurds' demands will not end, violence will not end, and 
the Kurdish issue will not be resolved.  However, our fears should 
not create obstacles for democratization.  Turkey's aim should be EU 
membership.  A developing Turkey on the path to the EU will be a 
happy place for everyone regardless their ethnic origin." 
 
Mustafa Balbay in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet: "We have no energy 
agreement with Iran despite the fact that Turkey has wanted this 
badly for years.  Additionally, as seen in the arbitrary cuts of 
natural gas flow to Turkey, we have trouble keeping intact the few 
agreements we have with Tehran.  Turkey has sunk into total impasse 
regarding the Balkans and the Caucasus.  Together with the U.S., we 
were among the first countries to recognize Kosovo.  Russia, 
inspired by the status of Kosovo, called on Turkey to recognize 
South Ossetia and Abkhazia.  Turkey should be cursing itself instead 
of boasting." 
 
Husnu Mahalli in mainstream Aksam: "Sooner or later, the truth will 
be disclosed and all will see it -- just like the Israeli PM Olmert 
who was forced to resign over corruption.  Olmert says, 'The dream 
of a Great Israel has ended.  Our people must see this fact and 
accept coexisting with the Palestinians and Syrians."  We must 
congratulate Olmert for this speech.  May Bush and his successors as 
well as our politicians and the lovers of the U.S. and Israel in 
Turkey see the same thing." 
 
Ihsan Dagi in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "A recent poll conducted by 
the German Marshall Fund (GMF) shows Turks feel close to 
Palestinians by 40 percent.  Europeans rank the second by 33 
percent, Americans follow by 14 percent, and Russians 18 percent. 
Americans, toward whom Turks have chilly feelings, love the Turks by 
47 percent - much more than we feel for them.  The same rate for the 
Europeans regarding their warm feelings for Turks is 43 percent.  No 
need to be offended, but as long as we continue viewing the world 
from a perspective of conflict and not cooperation, and thus 
continue seeing the outside as enemies instead of partners, we will 
continue swinging back and forth between democracy and militarism." 
 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Pro-Kurdish DTP supporters protested the lawsuit for the closure 
of their party in front of the Constitutional Court. 
 
- The ruling AKP's provincial board member, businessman Ali Askin, 
 
ANKARA 00001657  004 OF 004 
 
 
was abducted by the PKK in the eastern city of Tunceli. 
 
- 40 suspects, including four doctors, were taken into custody in 
the southeastern city of Siirt over irregularities in health 
dealings. 
 
International News 
 
- Russian President Medvedev warned that any state which imposes 
sanctions on Russia over its military intervention in Georgia would 
suffer "symmetric losses." 
 
- EU foreign ministers approved that on October 1, the 200 EU 
monitors will start their monitoring mission in Georgia and on the 
borders of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. 
 
- EU envoy in Afghanistan, Francesco Vendrell, says conditions there 
had become the worst since 2001. 
WILSON