08ANKARA1991
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Nov 17 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO2825
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1991/01 3221446
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 171446Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8028
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9311
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5022
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3401
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6980
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6833
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3402
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001991 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Erdogan's Iran Remarks Create Controversy 
Media outlets over the weekend and today carried Prime Minister 
Erdogan's address to the Brookings Institution in Washington, in 
which the PM made some controversial remarks on Iran. 
In response to a question about Iran's nuclear aspirations, Erdogan 
said "The countries who are working to prevent a nuclear-armed Iran 
should also not own nuclear weapons."  Erdogan added,"The use of 
nuclear energy for the production of nuclear weapons is 
unacceptable," and he stressed that Turkey continued "to warn" Iran 
on this matter.  In, "Erdogan Puts up a Nuclear Shield over Iran," 
liberal Radikal reported on Sunday that Erdogan defended Iran. 
Mainstream Milliyet says Erdogan's remarks are in direct opposition 
to Turkey's official disarmament policy because up to this point, 
Turkey has viewed a nuclear-armed U.S. as a necessity for the 
security of Turkey and its NATO allies.  Retired ambassadors reacted 
to the PM's remarks in Sunday's Milliyet.  Retired ambassador Umit 
Pamir said, "If Erdogan was referring to the U.S. when he called on 
those who oppose Iran's nuclear program to disarm, then his 
statement contradicts NATO's defense doctrine."  Retired ambassador 
Ilter Turkmen asked in Milliyet, "Where did this feeling of 
solidarity with Iran come from?  Do we see Iran as a responsible 
state?" 
 
Editorial Commentary on Erdogan on Iran 
 
Tamer Korkmaz wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "Whenever PM 
Erdogan tries to address the nuclear weapons crisis in a 
comprehensive manner by emphasizing that 'Iran as well as others 
should have no nuclear weapons,' he gets criticized by some for 
deviating from the American and NATO line.  Why should improvements 
in ties between Turkey and Iran negatively affect Turkish-American 
relations?  Let's not forget that when former U.S. President Jimmy 
Carter spoke with Hamas leaders, he was criticized both by Israelis 
and Americans.  However, it was also Jimmy Carter who had the 
courage to say that Israel has 150 nuclear weapons.  But, some of 
our former diplomats and commentators like to take a double standard 
regarding nuclear capabilities.  In their world, it's okay if Israel 
has WMD, but even the possibility of Iran having WMD is 
unacceptable." 
 
Semih Idiz wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "In order to 'form a 
bridge' between Turkey and the incoming Obama Administration, PM 
Erdogan decided to speak at the Brookings Institute, which is 
considered to be the ivory tower of the Democrats.  However, in his 
remarks regarding Iran's nuclear program, Erdogan made a big gaffe 
to anger the U.S.  Unfortunately, his remarks upset the U.S. and all 
of Turkey's NATO allies.  Erdogan's foreign policy advisers should 
remind him that it takes a long time to mend the damage from 
tactless remarks.  On the eve of a new era with the new 
administration in the U.S., Turkey should be careful to consider our 
mutual interests through diplomatic dialogue." 
 
Okay Gonensin wrote in mainstream Vatan:  "During his visit to the 
U.S., PM Erdogan made a political gaffe by saying "The countries who 
are working to prevent a nuclear-armed Iran should also not own 
nuclear weapons."  Turkey's PM can use such logic only if he is 
unaware of the efforts exerted globally regarding nuclear 
non-proliferation.  Obviously, PM Erdogan did not consider the 
impact these words would have on Turkey's NATO allies.  Moreover, 
Iran's nuclear power is a huge threat for us, our region and the 
entire world.  PM Erdogan's defense of Iran indicates that he can 
make big mistakes in foreign policy, which an issue of grave 
concern." 
 
Mustafa Balbay wrote in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet: "In its 
essence, the PM's statement on Iran is right.  The U.S. follows a 
policy of allowing the countries that it favors to have nuclear 
weapons, but not allowing them in other countries that it does not 
 
ANKARA 00001991  002 OF 003 
 
 
hold favorable.  And Erdogan rejects this.  If this is our official 
policy, then our job should not be mediating between Iran and the 
U.S." 
 
Kadri Gursel in mass appeal Milliyet (11/16): "PM Erdogan's remarks 
contradict to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty signed by Turkey, 
as well as to the national interests of Turkey as a member of the 
Western alliance.  A nuclear Iran would pose a big threat for 
Turkey.  The messages issued by Erdogan at the Brookings Institution 
known for its close ties with the Democrat Party must have aroused 
serious suspicions.  The PM has shown that he is not impartial, and 
this has harmed his ability to act as go-between in the nuclear 
controversy between the U.S. and Iran." 
 
Germany's Obama: Cem Ozdemir 
Media outlets hail the success story of the new German Green Party 
leader Cem Ozdemir who was elected co-chairman of the party on 
Saturday.  Reports are featured on the front pages of Sunday's 
papers and some continue into Monday papers by emphasizing Cem 
Ozdemir is the first ethnic Turk to be selected as a leader of a 
political party in Germany.  Ozdemir's rise within the Green Party 
is compared to Barack Obama's rise in the Democratic Party. 
Mainstream Hurriyet asked on Sunday in its banner headline, "Is Cem 
the Obama of Germany?" while Islamist oriented Yeni Safak headlined 
with, "The First Turkish Leader in Germany." Islamist oriented Zaman 
played off of Obama's campaign slogan by inserting Ozdemir's first 
name, "Yes We Cem." Mainstream Aksam called Ozdemir, "Germany's 
Turkish Obama." 
 
Turkey-Iran Natural Gas Deal 
Islamist oriented Yeni Safak reports that negotiations continue 
between Turkey and Iran in order to increase level of natural gas 
flow.  Turkish Energy Minister Guler is leading a Turkish delegation 
to Iran today and negotiations will continue with his Iranian 
counterpart Oil Minister Gulam Nozari.  Based on earlier statements 
made by the two ministers, Yeni Safak reports that Ankara "hopes to 
conclude a Memorandum of Understanding with Iran and get more 
natural gas from this country." 
 
Turkish Media Criticize G20 Summit 
Media outlets are not impressed with the outcome of the G20 summit - 
namely due to the lack of a decisive action plan.  Reports of $500 
bottles of wine that were served at the summit fueled criticism of 
the G20 leaders' ability to deliver relief to those who are 
suffering from the effects of this crisis.  Mainstream Hurriyet 
carries the headline, "Criticism is Directed at the $53.6 Trillion 
Summit - Where Are the Concrete Steps?"  Hurriyet reports, "The 20 
countries that comprise 86% of the world's economy have, altogether, 
infused their economies with $53.6 trillion in order to curb the 
financial crisis."  However, the paper also points out, "Talks will 
continue," but notes, "There is no concrete plan."  Mainstream Sabah 
reports, "The G20 decide to tighten their belts" regarding public 
expenditures in order to "support economic growth." 
 
Huseyin Bas of leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet writes in "From One 
Summit to Another," that "while we wait on the next summit (in April 
2009), the recession will not stop, and the effects from rising 
rates of unemployment will be felt in our daily lives." 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "We Must Get Off of the Donkey 
before We Ride the Horse," referring to the need of the G20 leaders, 
including "the U.S. with its large public expenditures on military 
initiatives," to be unified in efforts to redirect their priorities 
towards encouragement of economic growth (i.e. the horse) instead of 
towards public expenditures (i.e. the donkey).  Islamist-oriented 
Yeni Safak reports, "The G20 leaders talked to Bush, but they did 
not make any promises." 
 
Cartoon from today's leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet depicting Uncle 
Sam forcing a sweating Atlas to hold up the world. 
 
 
ANKARA 00001991  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
The U.S. Sets a Date (Ortadogu) 
Media outlets report on the Iraqi Cabinet's approval of a Status of 
Forces agreement with the U.S. - focus is on the timeline for 
withdrawal of U.S. forces from Iraq.  Mainstream Milliyet reports in 
a banner front-page headline, "The U.S. Will Withdraw in 2011." 
Mainstream Hurriyet carries the front-page feature headline, "This 
is How This Era Will End," as "the Baghdad government approves a 
timetable for the withdrawal of 152,000 U.S. troops from Iraq." 
Mainstream Sabah reports, "Baghdad and the U.S. Finally Reconcile 
Their Differences."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet carries the 
headline, "The U.S. Will Stay in Iraq for Three More Years." 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports on its front page, "The U.S. will 
stay in Iraq until 2012."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports, in 
"The U.S. will stay in Iraq for Three More Years," that, "the 
agreement is final and cannot be changed," which "poses a challenge 
to President-elect Barack Obama's promises to withdraw by the end of 
2009." Far-right Ortadogu reports, "Here is the day the U.S. has set 
to withdraw completely from Iraq - November 15, 2011," and notes, 
"The White House was pleased to hear of the Iraqi Cabinet's 
decision," as "from March 20, 2003 until now, talks have finally 
come to an end regarding when U.S. troops will leave Iraq." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Iraq 
 
Fatih Cekirge argued in mainstream Hurriyet: "There are some 
important issues to be considered prior to the U.S. withdrawal from 
Iraq.  What is going to happen if the north falls under full control 
of the Peshmerge forces?  What if the Peshmerge forces refuse to 
become part of national army?  What are the security arrangements 
going to be in Musul and Kirkuk?  And, most important of all, will 
the U.S. establish a military base in northern Iraq?  Unless those 
issues are addressed, Turkey faces continued security threats from 
northern Iraq.  Turkey must make sure to pursue full contact and 
direct engagement in Iraq before it is too late." 
 
 
TV News: CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- At the end of November, AKP officials will hold a two-day meeting 
in Kizilcahamam to discuss preparations for the forthcoming 
municipality elections and the problems facing the Kurds and the 
Alevis. 
 
- On Monday, Greek and Turkish Cypriot leaders Christofias and Talat 
will come together for talks. 
 
- IMF Managing Director Dominique Strauss-Kahn said Turkey and the 
IMF should reach an agreement on a finance package in the near 
future. 
 
International News 
 
- Iraq endorses a security agreement with the U.S. that would allow 
an American military presence in the country until 2011. 
 
- Afghan President Hamid Karzai offers to protect Taliban's fugitive 
leader Mullah Mohammad Omar in exchange for peace. 
 
- Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert orders the army to speed up 
plans for wide-scale operations against rocket attacks from Gaza. 
 
WILSON