08ANKARA1498
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Aug 19 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3896
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1498/01 2321329
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 191329Z AUG 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7193
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9096
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4618
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3162
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6799
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6640
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3210
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001498 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Sudanese President Al-Bashir's Istanbul Visit Draws Strong Reactions 
 
All papers report the first Turkey-Africa Cooperation Summit began 
Monday in Istanbul with the participation from about 50 African 
countries, including Sudan's controversial President Omar Hassan 
al-Bashir.  Prime Minister Erdogan will attend the official launch 
of the summit on Tuesday. 
 
Media coverage widely criticizes Sudanese President Omar Al-Bashir's 
participation in this week's Turkey-Africa Summit in Istanbul. 
Liberal Radikal carries the headline, "The Man Who Instigated a 
Genocide is in Istanbul," and notes, "The (Turkish) government was 
seriously criticized for al-Bashir's visit to Ankara," earlier this 
year.  NTV notes this is, "Al-Bashir's second visit to Turkey in the 
last eight months."  Mainstream Vatan carries the headline, 
"Al-Bashir Crisis," as, "Sudan's Al-Bashir Stuns the World by Coming 
to Istanbul for the Africa Summit."  Erdal Safak of mainstream Sabah 
wrote today, "My concern is that this summit will be overshadowed in 
the international arena due to the participation of one guest, even 
though no arrest warrant has been issued for Al-Bashir and Turkey is 
not a signatory to the agreement which established the International 
Criminal Court (ICC)."  Mainstream Hurriyet notes, "Al-Bashir even 
shocked the Western press with his participation in Istanbul's 
Africa Summit," as Western reports of the summit "are not about the 
summit, but about Al-Bashir."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
criticized the government for receiving Al-Bashir as, "The red 
carpet was rolled out to welcome a man accused by the ICC of 
genocide," and, "though he is held responsible for the deaths of 
hundreds of thousands of people, he is able to come and go 
comfortably to and from Turkey."  Leftist Taraf carries the 
front-page banner headline, "A Genocide Suspect is a Guest of the 
State," and inside the headline reads, "The Butcher of Darfur in 
Istanbul."  Taraf says "Bashir should be arrested if the ICC issues 
an arrest warrant for the Sudanese president while he is in Turkey, 
citing the 1998 arrest of Chile's Former President Pinochet in 
Britain upon an arrest decision by a Spanish court.  Taraf quotes 
the Ankara-based International Criminal Court Coalition as "slamming 
Turkey for violating international law by inviting and hosting a 
leader who has committed genocide."  Papers recall that in January, 
Turkey had come under fire when President Gul hosted Bashir in 
Ankara. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Bashir at Turkey-Africa Cooperation Summit 
 
Erdal Safak wrote in mainstream Sabah (8/19):  "The Turkey-Africa 
Cooperation Summit is a very good example of the importance the AKP 
government gives to Turkish foreign policy.  Turkey was declared a 
"strategic partner" by the African Union.  Because Turkey has no 
intensions of looting the resources of the African continent, 
Africa's approach towards Turkey is more sympathetic than the other 
strategic partners.  This summit was created after long and 
intensive diplomatic efforts.  Our one concern is that such an 
important summit will be overshadowed in the international arena 
because of one guest: Sudanese President Al-Bashir.  Even though the 
International Criminal Court charged him with perpetrating genocide, 
this court case has not yet been finalized.  Moreover, Turkey is not 
a signatory to the agreement establishing the International Criminal 
Court.  Of course, nothing will happen to Al-Bashir in Istanbul but 
it will be real shame if such an important summit is overshadowed by 
Al-Bashir in the international media. 
 
Musharraf Resigns 
Media outlets have little sympathy for Pakistani President Musharraf 
as he is seen as coming to power under a military coup and leaving 
office before impeachment proceedings by a civil parliament had 
nearly commenced.  Mainstream Sabah notes, "He forced his way into 
office, and he was forced out."  Liberal Radikal carries the 
headline, "Pakistan Settles Its Accounts with Musharraf." 
 
ANKARA 00001498  002 OF 003 
 
 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak notes, "He came to office via a coup 
and he was forced out," as "the public took to the streets to 
celebrate Musharraf's resignation." Leftist Taraf headlines with 
Government Spokesman Cemil Cicek's words, "Musharraf Has Not Applied 
to Live in Turkey," despite the Pakistani leader's strong ties to 
Turkey.  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "There is uncertainty 
about where Musharraf will flee," as, "PM Erdogan told Pakistani 
Awaz Newspaper that Musharraf would be welcome in Turkey for a short 
time," but not as a permanent resident "because that could create 
new tensions between Turkey and Pakistan." 
 
 
Editorial Commentary on Musharraf's Resignation 
 
Rusen Cakir wrote in Vatan:  Musarraf could choose not to resign but 
under these conditions it wouldn't be possible for him to rule for 
any longer.  If he is sent to exile, Western countries will not be 
too willing to accept him.  Between Saudi Arabia and Turkey, I am 
sure Musharraf will choose to settle in Turkey.  But there are many 
serious problems in Pakistan which will not be resolved immediately 
after Musharraf leaves the country. 
 
U.S. and Turkish Officials Negotiate Delivery of Aid to Georgia 
Sabah and Cumhuriyet:  Papers note Pentagon Spokesman Bryan Whitman 
told reporters yesterday, "The State Department is looking at other 
options for sustaining the humanitarian relief operations and is 
looking at some naval vessels." In addition, Whitman noted, "The 
State Department is working at the necessary agreements to achieve 
some passage in the straits of Turkey and things like that." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Georgian President Saakashvili 
 
Husnu Mahalli writes in tabloid Aksam: "The U.S., NATO, and Israel 
sell Georgia USD 200 million of weapons every year.  Saakashvili was 
used by the U.S., NATO, Israel, and George Soros." 
 
Turkish Energy, Foreign Ministers to Tehran for Natural Gas Deal 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Sabah, Radikal, Cumhuriyet, Zaman and others 
report Energy Minister Hilmi Guler said Monday that Turkey and Iran 
were working on technical details to finalize an energy deal between 
the two countries within a month.  "I will probably go to Iran in 15 
days together with Foreign Minister Ali Babacan.  We want to 
finalize the deal within a month," Hilmi Guler told reporters.  On 
whether the deal was cancelled due to U.S. pressure on Turkey, Guler 
said, "Turkey is an independent country, and Turkey's interests are 
in question here.  When making investments, we must consider 
Turkey's energy security," he said. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Iran, Ahmadinejad's Turkey Visit 
 
Fikret Bila commented in mainstream Milliyet (8/19):  "Everyone is 
aware that Iran is a U.S. target because of its nuclear program. 
Washington should really calculate the possible results of such an 
attack very carefully.  Because of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, 
the Middle East is already on fire.  The U.S. should not open a 
third front in the Middle East by attacking Iran.  Naturally, Turkey 
is not very warm towards the idea of a nuclear-armed Iran.  Such a 
development will have negative impact on Turkey as well.  Ankara 
will not object Iran's nuclear technology for peaceful means but 
Ankara should warn the U.S. that it will not contribute in an 
offensive against Iran." 
 
Mustafa Balbay in Cumhuriyet: "Ahmadinejad made it clear his most 
important 'political message' was delivered by attending Friday 
prayers in a Sunni mosque in Istanbul.  During Ahmadinejad's visit 
to Turkey, no energy deal was signed.  What was the aim of this 
visit?  What of Turkey's interests were met by the visit?  It seems 
that Turkey's traditional foreign policy and the AKP's foreign 
policy are moving along separate paths again." 
 
 
ANKARA 00001498  003 OF 003 
 
 
Turkey's Draft National Program for EU Ready 
All papers report Government Spokesman Cemil Cicek told the press on 
Monday a draft for Turkey's third national program regarding 
European Union (EU) reforms is complete. 
Cicek said the national program will be finalized after the Foreign 
Minister and chief EU negotiator Ali Babacan explains it to the 
representatives of political parties and NGOs.  "Turkey continues 
working on the 400-page national document that will be submitted to 
the EU.  The program consists of four parts over the next four 
years.  The program requires 131 law changes for EU harmonization," 
Cicek said. 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal said AKP vice-chairman Saban 
Disli's parliamentary immunity should be removed so he can be tried 
in connection with the corruption charges against him. 
 
- On Monday, the residents of the Black Sea town of Rize staged 
protests against government plans to build 62 hydroelectric power 
plants in the region. 
 
- A draft bill approved by the parliament's planning committee 
replaces three separate state institutions for natural disasters by 
a single agency named the Department for Natural Disasters and 
Emergencies. 
 
International News 
 
- A U.S. defense official said Russia has deployed several tactical 
missile launchers to South Ossetia, putting the Georgian capital, 
Tbilisi, within their striking range. 
 
- NATO foreign ministers are to meet on Tuesday to discuss the 
Georgian crisis. 
 
- In order to enable Georgians to leave the country via air and 
facilitate humanitarian aid, Turkey relaxed its flight quotas over 
its air space to and from Yerevan. 
 
- Turkish trucks carrying goods for Georgia and Azerbaijan have to 
use mountain roads as Russian troops block the road from Gori to 
Tbilisi. 
SILLIMAN