08ANKARA843
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu May 01 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3093
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0843/01 1221322
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 011322Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6148
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8857
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4177
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2896
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6578
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6407
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2983
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000843 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, MAY 1, 2008 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Tensions Escalate Prior to May Day Celebrations in Istanbul 
All news outlets report tight security in Istanbul's Taksim Square 
where Turkey's major labor unions and civic organizations are 
planning to celebrate May Day.  All roads leading to Taksim Square 
are closed, and 25,000 policemen will be deployed in the area to 
block the demonstrations.  Labor unions DISK and KESK have announced 
that 500,000 workers will gather in Taksim Square to mark May Day. 
Justice Minister Mehmet Ali Sahin said Wednesday, "Labor unions are 
defying a constitutional order by holding May 1 rallies in Taksim 
Square."  President Abdullah Gul has expressed regret regarding the 
escalation of tensions, and stressed that he would ask the 
government to declare May 1 official holiday. 
 
All news outlets feature the impasse between the government and 
labor unions over permission to hold May Day celebrations.  Coverage 
recalls the 1977 May Day demonstrations in Istanbul's Taksim Square 
during which 36 people were killed.  This event was largely viewed 
as the beginning of the provocations that led to the 1980 military 
coup.  Mainstream Sabah writes, "The Siege of Taksim Means the 
Workers' Day Will Be Celebrated with Teargas and Barricades." 
Mainstream Milliyet writes, "Happy May Day," as "The World 
Celebrates May Day While Tensions Between Labor Unions and the 
Government in Turkey Escalate."  Conservative-nationalist Turkiye 
writes, "Istanbul is Paralyzed Amid Controversy about May Day 
Celebrations." Liberal Radikal notes in "Democracy's May Day Test," 
that, "Erdogan calls the labor unions' insistence to hold May Day 
celebrations 'not well-intentioned.'"  Nationalist-oriented 
Cumhuriyet's banner headline reads, "This Is Just Like the Days of 
Martial Law," as "The AKP government is determined to poison the 
Worker's Day."  Conservative Bugun writes in "May Day Torture," 
that, "Indignant Labor Unions Turn Taksim into A State of 
Emergency."  Extreme Right Tercuman writes, "Beware of Tensions: 
Traitors Want to Stage Provocations on May Day."  Mainstream Vatan 
writes, "Erdogan's Provocative Words End in a Nightmare in 
Istanbul."  Mainstream Aksam notes, "There is Emergency Rule in 
Istanbul as Subways, Buses, and Boats Will Not Be in Service Today 
and 66 Schools are Closed in Taksim."  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
notes, "31 Years Ago, 36 Labor Union Supporters Died in May Day 
Clashes," but warns, "The Labor Unions Did Not Take Care of the 
Families of Those Who Died." 
 
Editorial Commentary on May Day 
 
"Common Sense is Gone" 
Can Dundar wrote in mainstream Milliyet (5/1): "Unions are insisting 
on May Day celebrations in Taksim Square for a reason.  In 1977, the 
so-called 'Deep State' organization turned May Day celebrations in 
Taksim into bloodshed.  Now labor unions want to celebrate in Taksim 
as a symbolic sign of solidarity.  The ruling AKP refused to permit 
labor unions' celebrations in Taksim, which was a lost opportunity 
for the AKP and for Turkey. The AKP could have allowed the unions to 
celebrate May Day, which would have served as an opportunity for the 
AKP to gain credit with the unions.  Instead, Turkey, once again, 
turned itself toward the mentality of intolerance.  Thus, 
intolerance has prevailed over common sense." 
 
"The AKP Seems Like It Is Searching For Isolation" 
Ali Bayramoglu wrote in Islamist Yeni Safak (5/1): "While anti-AKP 
circles make irrational attempts to corner the ruling party, the AKP 
is also taking steps to isolate itself.   Opportunities are ignored 
and chances are missed for creating democratic alliances, especially 
at this time of immediate need.  The ruling AKP had the chance to 
abolish Article 301, and it was missed.  On the Kurdish issue, the 
government pursued harsh rhetoric that was nearly compatible with 
military rhetoric. The government is in charge with 47 percent 
support; at the very least, the AKP owes the people some democratic 
courage.  Fighting with union leaders, calling workers' concerns 
'riff-raff,' and engaging in a symbolic fight over May Day 
 
ANKARA 00000843  002 OF 003 
 
 
celebrations are the wrong steps to take in this political 
environment." 
 
"The AKP's Secret Mentality" 
Ahmet Altan wrote in leftist Taraf (5/1): "Unfortunately, Turkey is 
still haunted by the September 12, 1980 military coup.  The 
mentality at that time was fiercely intolerant.  However, it is 
really hard to understand the reason why the AKP fully embraces an 
intolerant approach set by the military coup.  The military regime 
banned labor union marches, and today the AKP is doing the same 
thing.  Streets are closed, barricades are erected, and workers are 
prevented from celebrating a holiday.  The government is justifying 
its actions with fears of provocations.  But aren't clashes between 
police and demonstrators provocative?  The AKP's bans are fueling 
polarization.  The more the AKP acts with intolerance, the more the 
AKP reflects the mentality of the September 12, 1980 coup." 
 
[Background: May Day was a national holiday until the 1980 military 
coup.  Prior to the 1980 coup, labor unions traditionally organized 
large gatherings in Istanbul's Taksim Square.  In 1977, May Day 
Celebrations ended in bloodshed when 36 died after someone opened 
fire on the crowd of 500,000.  Later, papers reported the so-called 
"Deep State" was involved in the violence and thus it was an act of 
provocation.  The military coup of 1980 ordered a full ban on May 
Day celebrations and annulled the May Day holiday.] 
 
 
AKP Submits Its Defense in Closure Case 
All papers report the AKP submitted its preliminary defense to the 
Constitutional Court in the lawsuit for disbanding Turkey's ruling 
party.  The defense claims the case was "politically motivated," and 
that the AKP, "was not the focal point of actions against 
secularism."  Leftist Taraf writes, "AKP Hides Behind the Venice 
Criteria," saying that "according to Venice Criteria, only parties 
that support violence can be closed."  The defense also says the 
political ban demanded for President Abdullah Gul is 
"unconstitutional," stressing presidents can only be tried on 
treason charges.  The defense notes the headscarf reforms proposal 
was prepared together with the opposition MHP, and was passed by the 
parliament with the backing of 411 lawmakers. 
 
Mainstream Milliyet calls the defense a "Thematic Defense," as the 
defense claims the chief prosecutor's charges are, "rooted in 
politics," with "no legal basis."  Liberal Radikal notes, "The 
defense argues that the party is not tied to a great many of the 
charges."  Specifically, Radikal notes, "The defense calls 
Parliamentary Speaker Bulent Arinc's statements non-binding to the 
AKP," because, "The defense claims Arinc was above politics and thus 
not tied to the party when he served as parliamentary speaker." 
Columnist Rusen Cakir of mainstream Vatan writes in "Erdogan Goes to 
the Guillotine," that "Erdogan is not optimistic about the outcome 
of the closure case, but he also does not want to appear weak," and 
"submitting the defense early is a sign of Erdogan's 
self-confidence."  In addition, Cakir says, "Erdogan wants an end to 
this crisis soon," which proves, "he is willing to sacrifice his 
political career for the sake of his country."  Meanwhile, columnist 
Bilal Cetin of mainstream Vatan writes, "The AKP would likely face 
defeat in a referendum regarding constitutional reforms."  Thus he 
says, "Due to his fear of failure in a referendum, Erdogan is not 
sharing his strategy for dealing with the closure case."  In 
addition, Cetin notes, "If the Constitutional Court annuls the AKP's 
headscarf reforms as a violation against constitutional secularism, 
it will strengthen the prosecutor's allegations against the AKP." 
Sukru Kucuksahin of mainstream Hurriyet writes, "The opposition CHP 
Leader Baykal has also referred to religion in speeches, 
particularly the one he gave on April 23rd."  Kucuksahin asks, 
"Since leaders of other political parties have made comments 
regarding religion, will the court see that the AKP is not the 
center of anti-secular activities?"  Columnist Huseyin Gulerce of 
Islamist-oriented Zaman writes, "The only way for the AKP to find a 
 
ANKARA 00000843  003 OF 003 
 
 
way out of this is to take its constitutional amendments to a 
referendum."  Columnist Mustafa Erdogan of mainstream Star writes, 
"The AKP thinks a good defense will save them," but he recommends to 
the AKP, "Do not believe that even a good defense can save you." 
 
Turkey-Iraq Strategic Dialogue 
Hurriyet, Vatan, Zaman, Radikal:  Mainstream Hurriyet reports that 
Turkey and Iraq are establishing a strategic dialogue mechanism in 
the fight against PKK.  Turkey's special envoy to Iraq Murat Ozcelik 
and PM Erdogan's foreign policy advisor Ahmet Davutoglu will go to 
Baghdad within a week to hold contacts with Iraqi officials. 
Ozcelik and Davutoglu are expected to hold talks with Iraqi PM 
Maliki, President Talabani, and Kurdish Regional Administration's 
Prime Minister Nechirvan Barzani.  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
highlights that the meeting between the Turkish delegation and 
Nechirvan Barzani will be the first high-level contact between 
Turkey and the Kurdish Administration in northern Iraq.  Mainstream 
Vatan reports that the Turkish delegation will not go to northern 
Iraq and all contacts will take place in Baghdad.  Vatan adds that 
Talabani's deputy Tarik El-Hasimi will meet with President Gul and 
PM Erdogan in Ankara today. 
 
U.S. Report on Global Terrorism for 2007 
Milliyet and Vatan:   The 2007 U.S. Report on Global Terrorism 
emphasizes that last year 22,000 people were killed by the 
terrorists.  The report noted the PKK continued its separatist 
activities and attacked Turkish Security Forces from their bases in 
northern Iraq.  Following the Bush-Erdogan meeting on November 5 at 
the White House, the Turkish military carried out operations against 
the PKK along the Turkey-Iraq border.  The report also highlights 
that the PKK continued to use Belgium as a financial base for its 
terrorist activities.  Milliyet reports that Saudi businessman Yasin 
El-Kadi, whose name is on the UN's terrorism financer list, was on 
the U.S. Global Terrorism report as well. 
 
TV Highlights 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- President Abdullah Gul will travel to Macedonia to participate in 
a meeting of the heads of state of Central European countries from 
May 1-3. 
 
- Higher Education Board (YOK) President Professor Yusuf Ziya Ozcan 
said during a meeting with the ambassadors from EU countries, 
"Headscarf restrictions at universities will be abolished." 
 
- Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom will pay a formal visit 
to Turkey on May 6. 
 
International News 
 
- Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki vows to disband the Shiite 
Mahdi Army, Sunni insurgent groups, and al-Qaeda in Iraq. 
 
- U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates said sending a second aircraft 
carrier to the Persian Gulf could serve as a 'reminder' to Iran. 
 
- The Simon Wiesenthal Institute has published a list of the top 10 
most wanted Nazi war criminals. 
 
WILSON