08ANKARA242
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Feb 11 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO4480
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0242/01 0420750
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 110750Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5180
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8671
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3859
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2680
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6406
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6234
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2817
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000242 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 8, 2008 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
EU Joins Headscarf Debates in Turkey 
All papers report that yesterday, Prime Minister Erdogan denounced 
criticisms from the Inter-University Council of university rectors 
and the Turkish Union of Bar Associations against AKP-MHP's 
proposals for turban reforms.  Erdogan said the two institutions did 
not represent all academics and lawyers in Turkey.  "The parliament 
is the only authority that can speak on behalf of the Turkish 
people," Erdogan emphasized. 
 
On Thursday, 10,000 people rallied in the Aegean port city of Izmir 
to protest against headscarf reforms.  Representatives of 76 NGOs 
will stage an "Independence and Secularism" rally on Saturday in 
Ankara when parliament holds the second round of voting on 
constitutional changes to headscarf laws. 
 
The Turkish Union of Chambers (TOBB) president Rifat Hisarciklioglu 
joined the turban debates by criticizing efforts to discuss clothing 
in the constitution. "The constitution is not a fashion magazine. 
Politicians should work toward social compromise on the matter," 
Hisarciklioglu said. 
 
Papers report European Union Expansion Commissioner Olli Rehn's 
office said the EU has "never asked Turkey to make any headscarf 
reforms."  Mainstream Milliyet says this statement came in response 
to Foreign Minister Babacan's attempts to link the headscarf debate 
to the EU entry bid.  Marc Pierini, the Head of the Delegation of 
the European Commission to Turkey, urged the Turkish government to 
also consider the rights of those who do not wear the headscarf. 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports the European Parliament 
official reporting on Turkey's accession, Ria Oomen-Ruijten, has 
expressed concern that women in Turkey would be put under religious 
pressure to wear the headscarf if the ban is removed.  Liberal 
Radikal says on its front page the Constitutional Court decision on 
the headscarf reforms will be a difficult challenge because it will 
change the direction of Turkey's future. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turban Debates 
Mehmet Tezkan wrote in mainstream Vatan (2/8):  "This week's debates 
are enough to prove the turban is a political symbol.  If this was 
not true, the debates would not have conjured up controversies 
surrounding secularism and democracy.  The turban was a symbol in 
the past as well.  But the reason for today's political polarization 
in Turkey is that the turban has become the flag of a political 
party.  People re-opened old wounds and turban debates intensified. 
What caused all this?  The AKP was not successful in being 
persuasive and establishing trust among people.  People believe the 
AKP is gradually returning to its previous Islamist policies.   This 
belief makes people turn to the streets and attracts harsh criticism 
from the judiciary.  In other words, the high judiciary is adding to 
the fears Turkey will become like Iran.  Despite all the guarantees 
given by PM Erdogan regarding the protection of secularism, people 
are increasingly skeptical about AKP policies.  Thus, AKP members' 
past policies are causing deep secularism debates." 
 
Yilmaz Oztuna commented in conservative-nationalist Turkiye (2/8): 
"For years, I argued in my columns that Turkey's most important 
national issue is its accession to the European Union.  Recently, it 
has become difficult to understand our position regarding EU 
reforms.  It is obvious that only the 'turban issue' is on Turkey's 
agenda at the moment.  Unfortunately, the EU and the struggle 
against terrorism no longer have a place on the agenda.  Turkey's 
turban polarization has become more defined and the debates are 
harsher than ever.  I am concerned that this polarization will turn 
into a permanent national characteristic.  The solution lies with 
implementing turban freedom in the universities with calmness.  We 
should end this debate now.  Otherwise, Turkey, under these 
conditions, will fail to reach the level of other contemporary 
civilizations." 
 
ANKARA 00000242  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
New High Court Chief Criticizes Turban Reforms 
All papers report the new Court of Appeals Chairman Hasan Gerceker 
told a gathering of judiciary members in a ceremony before he 
assumed office Thursday that the question of freeing the turban in 
universities was "not simply a turban issue."  "It's not possible 
for the country to go back to a system filled with superstitions," 
Gerceker said, stressing that judges had "the authority and 
responsibility to point out wrongdoings."  He noted the parliament 
had the power to carry out constitutional and legal reforms, but 
stressed that this authority cannot be used to "weaken secularism." 
Gerceker also said the court would make a statement about the turban 
initiatives soon. 
 
Erdogan Visits the Site of the Ludwigshafen Fire 
All papers report Prime Minister Erdogan called for calm on Thursday 
when he visited the site of a fire in Ludwigshafen in western 
Germany, which killed nine Turks and heightened community tensions. 
Erdogan was greeted by Turks who carried signs that read "Yesterday 
it was Jews, now it is Turks."  "The pain of Ludwigshafen should 
pave the way for peace," Erdogan said in front of the burnt-out 
building, "Let us all help to strengthen the friendship between 
Germany and Turkey."  He urged the Turkish press to stop fuelling 
tensions.  Meanwhile, the German Ambassador to Turkey Eckhard Cuntz 
asked the Turkish press not to exploit the racial issue.  "The 
investigation in Ludwigshafen continues; no conclusions have been 
made that racists started the fire," Cuntz told the 
Islamist-oriented Zaman. 
 
The cause of the February 3 blaze in an apartment block in 
Ludwigshafen remains unclear but speculation in the local Turkish 
community and in Turkish media claim it was a racially motivated 
arson attack.  A Turkish team has traveled to Germany to assist in 
the investigation. 
 
Taraf: Turkey Holds 'Secret' Talks with PKK 
Leftist Taraf says on page one that Ankara has established contact 
with the PKK indirectly while carrying out diplomacy with northern 
Iraqi Kurdish leaders. According to leftist Taraf, "In 2008, the 
Turkish government plans an 'official opening' to northern Iraq with 
a three-stage plan in which the Iraqi President Talabani will be 
invited to Turkey, a Turkish consulate will be opened in Erbil, and 
the federal Kurdish administration in northern Iraq will be 
recognized.  In talks with Kurdish leaders, Turkey discussed amnesty 
for PKK members who have not joined armed action, and sending the 
organization's leaders to third countries.  The Turkish military is 
not opposed to a 'political solution' by the AKP government and the 
Turkish intelligence service MIT.  The Turkish military operations 
into northern Iraq, however, suspended the talks and delayed 
attempts to reach a solution." 
 
Belgium Frees Dev-Sol Leaders 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Sabah, Radikal, Taraf, Cumhuriyet, Zaman and 
others report a Belgian court acquitted the leaders of the far left 
DHKP-C (Dev-Sol) Thursday.  The court did not take into account 
attacks outside Belgium and rejected calls to describe the group as 
a terrorist organization.  The court in Anvers acquitted the 
organization's leader Dursun Karatas, as well as other top members 
Zerrin Sari, Sukriye Akar and Bahar Kimyongur.  Fehriye Erdal, Musa 
Asoglu and Kaya Saz were sentenced to suspended prison terms from 21 
months to 6 years.  One of the acquitted suspects was Fehriye Erdal, 
who is wanted by Turkish law enforcement for the assassination of 
Ozdemir Sabanci, a renowned Turkish businessman. 
 
TV News: 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- The trial of the murderers of Armenian Turkish journalist Hrant 
 
ANKARA 00000242  003 OF 003 
 
 
Dink will resume February 11. 
 
- US Ambassador to Turkey Ross Wilson said Thursday in Hatay that 
"the US would never provide arms for the PKK or other terror 
organizations."  Wilson also said the US is not taking sides in the 
ongoing headscarf debate in Turkey. 
 
- Two cars in Istanbul have been set on fire by unknown attackers. 
 
 
International News 
 
- Admiral Mike Mullen, the Chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff, 
said Wednesday Turkey and US cooperation against the PKK in recent 
months was "remarkable." 
 
- Israeli Defense Minister Ehud Barak is to pay an official visit to 
Turkey on February 12-13 to meet with President Abdullah Gul, Prime 
Minister Erdogan, the Defense Minister, and the military Chief of 
Staff. 
 
- Secretary Rice and British Foreign Secretary David Miliband paid a 
surprise visit to Kabul where they called on NATO allies to provide 
more troops to Afghanistan. 
 
WILSON