08ANKARA2069
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Dec 01 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3022
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #2069/01 3361405
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 011405Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8162
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9344
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5093
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3437
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7010
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6863
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3439
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002069 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 28, 2008 
 
           A QUICK LOOK AT THE TURKISH PRESS 
                               December 1, 2008 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Thousands Protest AKP Policies in Ankara 
Media outlets report that over the weekend, more than 50,000 
demonstrators in Ankara protested the AKP's handling of the global 
financial crisis in Turkey.  The rally, held in Ankara on Saturday, 
was organized by Turkey's leading labor unions KESK and DISK, and 
several NGOs and political parties.  Clashes erupted between the 
demonstrators and riot police with the police using tear gas and 
batons, and demonstrators throwing stones.  Scores of demonstrators 
and six policemen were hurt and nearby shops were damaged.  The 
rally protested rising unemployment, price increases in natural gas 
and electricity, and the ruling AKP policies that protect the 
wealthy at the expense of laborers, papers report. 
Editorial Commentary on Erdogan-Domestic Politics 
Ismail Kucukkaya in tabloid Aksam: "If PM Erdogan had continued his 
policy of conflict with the military, those who criticize him now 
would continue praising him.  TGS chief General Basbug and Erdogan 
place a high priority on the fight against terror.  Some simply 
can't stand this.  They want to attribute a negative image to 
Erdogan, and push him into his old orbit.  It's true that Erdogan 
has made many mistakes.  The economy is in critical condition.  We 
must not allow disputes on the basic principles of the republic, 
such as secularism.  We have already lost too much time on abstract 
matters, and our problems continue to grow.  Today, Erdogan's basic 
political line is correct, and southeast policies form the backbone 
of this line.  Erdogan must not be sacrificed, the new way he's 
experiencing could provide a way out for Turkey." 
 
Erdogan: Global Crisis Will Have Limited Effect on Turkey 
Media outlets report Prime Minister Erdogan, in a televised address 
to the nation on Sunday, said the global economic crisis has begun 
to subside and that the crisis would have a limited effect on 
Turkey.  The PM did not announce a package of economic measures to 
deal with the crisis, but said his government had introduced various 
tax incentives to attract funds to Turkey, and had offered 
zero-interest loans totaling 350 trillion YTL to small and 
medium-size enterprises.  Business daily Referans says economic 
indicators show the measures taken by the government have not 
produced results, and warns about a possible drastic decline in 
domestic consumer demand on the eve of the forthcoming Feast of 
Sacrifice and New Year holidays.  The paper also criticizes the 
government for delaying a critical deal with the IMF.  "Erdogan 
Still Underestimates the Crisis," says leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet in a front page headline.  Liberal Radikal, too, finds 
Erdogan's approach "too optimistic." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Global Economic Crisis-Turkey 
Erdal Saglam wrote in mainstream Hurriyet:   "At his party group 
meeting in Kizilcahamam last weekend, PM Erdogan said 'The source of 
the economic crisis is not Turkey, but the US and Europe. 
Therefore, no one can blame the AKP government for the crisis.' 
This interpretation of the crisis ignores the efforts taken by 38 
countries to halt the crisis.  We cannot expect much from this AKP 
government.  When the AKP government was asked to make an agreement 
with the IMF in May, the government just pushed aside the suggestion 
and insisted, "This crisis will not hit Turkey."  After such 
comments and a refusal to take precautions, the government is saying 
"no one can blame the AKP government!"  Thus, Turkey is affected by 
the economic crisis because of bad governance." 
 
Suleyman Yasar wrote in a column entitled, "Is the Government Late?" 
in leftist Taraf:  "In dynamics of internal 2001, Kemal Dervis cited 
two reasons for Turkey's economic crisis that year.  First, he noted 
the debt and he noted the problems with the unhealthy structure of 
the public banking system.  Because of this, a crisis of confidence 
 
ANKARA 00002069  002 OF 003 
 
 
emerged in Turkish markets which lead to the 2001 financial crisis. 
Now, due to the global financial crisis, foreign investment in 
Turkey is beginning to be affected.  When the current global crisis 
began to hit, our government leaders insisted that Turkey had 
already taken steps to strengthen our economy and Turkey would not 
be affected by the crisis.  The AKP government's crisis lobby 
accused foreign investors of being irresponsible and criticized them 
for losing money.  But still the government did not take any 
measures to cope with the crisis.  Yes, the government is late. 
Only now is the government planning to implement measures that are 
parallel to what the Federal Reserve did to address the crisis in 
the U.S.  As the IMF opens their pockets to address the effects of 
the financial crisis in Turkey, our government leaders are working 
to deepen the effects of the financial crisis on Turkey by creating 
tensions and criticizing those - like the IMF - who are helping 
Turkey take steps to curb the effects of the global crisis.  The 
government's criticism of the IMF could very well affect trust in 
Turkey's markets and trust in the government's approach to economic 
policy." 
 
Metropoll Survey on Local and General Elections 
Mainstream Vatan reports that according to a public survey carried 
out by Metropoll Research Company, which is known for its ties to 
the AKP, support for the AKP decreased both in a possible general 
election and for upcoming local elections in March.  The survey was 
conducted in 30 provinces, among 1248 people in November 24-26. 
According to the poll, in a possible general election AKP's votes 
were 32.6 percent, CHP's 12.5, MHP's 7.6 and DTP's 3 percent. For 
upcoming local elections AKP's votes were 28.5 percent, CHP's 12.7, 
MHP's 7.2 and DTP's0.8 percent.  A total of 26.7 percent of 
participants said they had no idea for whom they would vote. 
 
The "Baby-Faced Butcher" Reveals Mumbai Attackers Sought 5000 Deaths 
(Hurriyet) 
In the aftermath of the bloody terrorist attacks last week in 
Mumbai, media outlets note the frightening confessions of the one 
terrorist to be captured alive.  In addition, media pay attention to 
the ensuing tensions between India and Pakistan, while PM Erdogan 
actively pursued 'telephone diplomacy' in order to call the 
reduction of tensions in the fragile relationship between the two 
nuclear-armed democracies.  Mainstream Sabah reports in "The Butcher 
of Mumbai," that captured terrorist Azam Amir Kasab, whose last name 
means "butcher" in Turkish, told Indian officials "our target was to 
kill 5000 people."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports, "The only 
terrorist to be captured alive after India's September 11th-like 
attacks made a terrifying confession when he said their target was 
to kill 5000 people."   Mainstream Hurriyet calls Kasab, "the 
baby-faced butcher."  Liberal Radikal carries the headline, "The 
Example of India's Bad Temper," and reports, "India is blaming 
Pakistan for the terrorist attacks in Mumbai," while, "protestors 
take to the streets to protest the government's failure to prevent 
the blood-letting."  In "The 'Moral' Resignations in India," 
mainstream Milliyet reports, "The Interior Minister and the National 
Security Advisor have resigned due to their 'moral responsibility' 
for the attacks in Mumbai.  CNN Turk reports this morning, "At a 
time when relations were improving between India and Pakistan, the 
deadly terrorist attacks in Mumbai threaten the fragile relationship 
between the two nations."  Leftist Taraf reports, "The Indian 
Government is Furious," with Pakistan and Indian government 
officials want to "reevaluate the process of peace and dialogue" 
with Pakistan. 
 
Meanwhile, media also note that Turkish PM Erdogan spoke with 
leaders in order to contribute to peace in the region.  In "Erdogan 
Sought Peace and Spoke With Five Leaders," mainstream Vatan reports, 
"Erdogan phoned world leaders in order to ease tensions between 
India and Pakistan."  According to the article, Erdogan spoke with 
UN Secretary General Ban Ki Moon, Israeli PM Olmert, British PM 
Brown, Pakistani PM Gilani, and Indian PM Singh. Mainstream Milliyet 
calls Erdogan's approach "telephone diplomacy."  Mainstream Sabah 
 
ANKARA 00002069  003 OF 003 
 
 
reports Erdogan "initiated his mediation efforts after the Pakistani 
PM requested his help" because Pakistan "is being held responsible 
by India for the attacks."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports, 
"Erdogan told UNSG Ban Ki Moon that the UN could step in and diffuse 
tensions." 
 
Ambassador Jeffrey Arrives in Turkey 
In "Ambassador Jeffrey: I'm Happy to be in Turkey," mainstream 
Milliyet reports the newly-appointed U.S. Ambassador to Turkey James 
Jeffrey spoke to journalists in Turkish as he arrived at the airport 
in Ankara.  Mainstream Sabah notes the new U.S. Ambassador "is a 
diplomat with a military background."  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
reports Jeffrey is "a diplomat who knows Turkey very well." 
 
El Pais: Guantanamo Prisoners Transported Through Turkey 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports in "Guantanamo Clearance 
through Incirlik," that Spain's El Pais newspaper published secret 
documents indicating "Guantanamo prisoners were transported through 
Turkey under the guise of 'an emergency situation.'" 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet carries the headline, "Ankara Also 
Knew," and reports, "El Pais contends that officials from Spain, 
Portugal, Italy and Turkey knew about prison transfers to Guantanamo 
via their countries." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-Iraq 
 
Semih Idiz wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "Following the SOFA 
agreement between Iraq and the US, allegations have increased 
regarding Turkey's need for Iraq's permission to conduct cross 
border operations.  However, if these operations are necessary 
because of Iraq's weakness and inability to control its own 
territory, then Turkey should not need Iraq's permission.  Moreover, 
article 51 of the UN Charter gives a country the right to defend 
itself against external attacks.  Unfortunately, this article has a 
drawback from Turkey's angle because if the operations are launched 
based on this article, then, Turkey should inform the UN Security 
Council immediately and then both countries would have to abide with 
the UN decisions.  In short, the Turkish military will have the 
right to launch CBOs against the PKK until Iraq says "CBOs are 
unnecessary because the region is fully under Iraqi control", and of 
course then, Iraq will need to prove this. 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- The Prime Ministry Ethics Board has initiated an investigation 
into corruption and fraud claims against Zahid Akman, the head of 
the Turkish media watchdog RTUK. 
 
- The ruling AKP will name its candidates for the municipal 
elections by January 15. 
 
- The Turkish Parliament will celebrate on "World Human Rights Day" 
December 4. 
 
International News 
 
- The head of Iran's atomic energy agency, Gholam Reza Aghazadeh, 
proposes building nuclear power plants jointly with neighboring Arab 
countries. 
 
- Four Turkmen are killed in attacks in northern Iraq over the last 
two days. 
 
- Hamas blocks scores of Muslim pilgrims from leaving the Gaza Strip 
for the annual hajj pilgrimage. 
SILLIMAN