08ANKARA481
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Mar 12 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO2826
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0481/01 0721430
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 121430Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5555
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8742
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3982
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2767
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6468
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6305
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2882
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000481 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 12, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Court Suspends YOK Order Concerning Turban in Universities 
All papers report the Council of State (Danistay), which is the High 
Court of Administrative Appeals, suspended a controversial 
headscarf-related directive yesterday.  Higher Education Board (YOK) 
President Yusuf Ziya Ozcan distributed the order, which instructed 
all university rectors to allow students wearing headscarves to 
enter campuses and classes.  The order was distributed the Sunday 
after parliament passed constitutional reforms regarding the turban. 
 The Danistay determined the law does not provide sole authority to 
the YOK President to issue such directives, which renders this order 
ineffective.  Mainstream Hurriyet expects the court decision will 
end the turban controversy in universities. 
 
Papers Speculate Admiral Fallon Resigns over Iran 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Sabah, Radikal, Taraf, Cumhuriyet, Yeni Safak 
and others report Centcom Commander Admiral William Fallon, "the 
commander who suggested Turkey negotiate with the PKK," has 
resigned.  Papers speculate Fallon resigned over disagreements with 
the Bush Administration about a possible war with Iran.  Mainstream 
Milliyet writes in "The Commander Who Suggests Negotiations with the 
PKK Resigned," noting "the common opinion concerning the reason for 
his resignation is he disagrees with George Bush's politics 
concerning Iran."  Leftist nationalist Cumhuriyet reports in "He 
went against the Iran Political Line: A Surprise Resignation from 
Fallon, Who Wanted Negotiations with the PKK," that "Esquire 
Magazine ran an article which called Fallon 'the only voice against 
a military response to Iran.'"  Liberal Radikal reports in "Fallon 
Leaves; Is a War with Iran Coming?" that Fallon has said "the Iraq 
war is the biggest obstacle," to US military action against Iran, 
but that "Bush and Cheney are expected to say they will strike Iran 
this year."  Islamist-oriented Zaman writes, "Fallon surprised 
people with his resignation yesterday." 
 
Cheney Due in Turkey to Seek Support on Iran, Afghanistan 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Sabah, Radikal, Taraf, Zaman, Yeni Safak and 
others report Turkey will be the last stop in Vice President Dick 
Cheney's Middle East tour, which begins March 16.  Papers comment 
Cheney will ask for Turkey's support for moves against Iran, and is 
expected to discuss missile defense and Afghanistan. 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports the topics in "Cheney's 
handbag," include "missile defense in Eastern Europe, new sanctions 
against Iran, the PKK problem, Israel-Palestine, and cross-border 
operations into northern Iraq." 
 
Islamist-oriented Zaman writes Pentagon spokesman Geoff Morrell 
confirmed press reports Defense Secretary Robert Gates told 
President Gul and Prime Minister Erdogan the US wants to install 
missile defense systems in Turkey "against possible missile attacks 
from Iran." 
 
Polemic Continues Between the PM and the Opposition 
All papers report that the prime minister and the leaders of the 
opposition continued their debates over controversial military and 
political issues.  Prime Minister Erdogan focused on the 
controversial social security reform bill.  Erdogan accused labor 
unions of telling lies and said "Turkey cannot afford to delay 
social security reform any further; we cannot carry this burden any 
longer.  When the social security reform bill enters into effect, 
all workers' rights will be protected."  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet reports that Chairman of the DISK (Revolutionary Labor 
Union) Suleyman Celebi said, "the government is attacking pension 
and health care rights which he qualified as the 'twin towers' for 
workers."  During his speech at the CHP parliamentary group meeting, 
Deniz Baykal targeted the government and said, "the land operation 
in northern Iraq had ended sooner than planned because of the 
influence of the US."  In response to PM Erdogan's criticism that 
the opposition party CHP should have solved the Qandil problem when 
they were in power, CHP Leader Baykal retorted, "The problem with 
 
ANKARA 00000481  002 OF 003 
 
 
Qandil emerged during the AKP government's administration, not ours. 
 You are responsible for Qandil."  MHP leader Bahceli addressed his 
party's parliamentary group and ended the arguments between the TGS 
and the opposition parties.  He said, "the Turkish Military 
conducted its task with success; it is the AKP government that 
should be held accountable on this issue.  During the land operation 
into northern Iraq, the US consciously put pressure on Turkey and 
the PM could not hold up under US pressure." 
 
A New Process Commences Regarding DTP 
Sabah, Hurriyet, Milliyet, Yeni Safak, Cumhuriyet and others: 
Mainstream Sabah gives extensive front page coverage to the mainly 
Kurdish DTP delegation that was received by the State offices.  The 
headline reads, "A New Process in Ankara."  Papers report that the 
state doors, which have been closed to the Democratic Social Party 
(DTP) for months, are now opening one after another.  Following 
their meetings with the Speaker of the Parliament Koksal Toptan and 
Minister Cemil Cicek, DTP members were received by President Gul 
yesterday.  Reportedly, during the meeting with the Parliament 
Speaker Koksal Toptan, the speaker warned that the DTP should 
distance itself from the PKK.  The DTP delegation asked for 
constitutional freedoms and cultural rights.  Mainstream Hurriyet 
describes the DTP meeting with President Gul as "historic." 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet says that DTP officials requested an 
appointment from PM Erdogan but Erdogan passed the request on to 
Deputy PM Cemil Cicek. 
 
Meanwhile, papers report that Court of Appeals Chief Prosecutor 
Abdurrahman Yalcinkaya presented his arguments regarding DTP's 
closure to the Constitutional Court yesterday.  He emphasized that 
the DTP should be closed down, urgently, and that the evidence 
presented is enough to close the party.  He also call for a 
political ban on 220 people, including Ahmet Turk, Aysel Tugluk, 
Osman Baydemir and Nurettin Demirtas. 
 
Editorial Commentary on the Upcoming NATO Summit in Bucharest 
 
"Water and Security" 
Erdal Safak wrote in mainstream Sabah (3/12):  "The correlation 
between environment and security has become a major priority for 
NATO.  The upcoming NATO summit has listed security threats posed by 
global warming as one of its top priorities.  Prior to the NATO 
summit, EU leaders will get a chance to discuss the same issue a 
great deal.  The leaders of 27 nations will assess a report 
concluding that global warming will impact international security. 
The report, prepared by EU representative Javier Solana, has some 
nightmarish conclusions, including mass migration and massive 
floods.  Solana even predicts some countries will be wiped off the 
map due to rising ocean levels.  The means the planet is, in fact, 
moving toward a point of no return.  The EU report mentions Turkey 
and the Middle East specifically, warning about serious social and 
political destabilization due to a shortage in water resources. 
Given the environmental developments around the world, it seems that 
we are heading toward a global war for water.  There is an urgent 
need for the establishment of a new international organization, like 
the UN, in order to control water resources around the world and to 
treat them as common possession of humanity." 
 
"NATO Summit" 
Umur Talu commented in mainstream Sabah (3/12):  "We have every 
right to ask our leaders: Will Turkey send combat troops to 
Afghanistan?  Why is Cheney visiting Ankara?  What are his demands? 
Are we going to say "no" if he asks Turkey to send combat troops to 
Afghanistan?  The upcoming NATO summit in Bucharest will address the 
Afghanistan issue extensively.  Of the 26 NATO member countries, 
only 9 have troops in the combat zone of Afghanistan.  These nine 
countries are threatening to withdraw their troops unless others 
contribute forces to the combat zone.  As the US Joint Chiefs of 
Staff and the UN Secretary General say, the clashes in Afghanistan 
are getting worse.  With this in mind, it seems inevitable that 
 
ANKARA 00000481  003 OF 003 
 
 
Ankara will be asked to send combat troops to Afghanistan.  However, 
it is not clear how the Turkish leadership will react to such a 
demand.  If Turkey complies with such a demand, we citizens will 
have every right to question this judgment." 
 
TV Highlights 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Labor unions in Izmir staged protests against current proposals 
for social security reforms. 
 
-  The Diyarbakir prosecutor demands prison sentences of up to two 
years for 56 pro-Kurdish DTP mayors.  The mayors sent a letter to 
Danish Prime Minister Anders Fogh Rasmussen which asked the Danish 
government not to close Roj TV.  This broadcast station is based in 
Copenhagen and is largely viewed as the mouthpiece of the PKK. 
 
- The Diyarbakir prosecutor demands a five-year prison sentence for 
Mayor Osman Baydemir in connection with a speech delivered in a 
Kurdish meeting in London. 
 
International News 
 
- Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica said he expects the 
upcoming elections will confirm the policy that only a Serbia that 
includes Kosovo can continue towards European integration. 
 
- On Tuesday, Foreign Minister Ali Babacan held talks with his Iraqi 
counterpart Hoshyar Zebari during the Organization of the Islamic 
Conference (OIC) meetings in Dakar, Senegal. 
 
- Turkish Cyprus is preparing to open a trade and business office in 
Tel Aviv. 
 
WILSON