08ANKARA1202
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Jul 02 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO8242
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1202/01 1841412
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 021412Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6723
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8996
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4415
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3051
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6702
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6535
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3113
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001202 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, JULY 2, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
New Detentions in The Ergenekon Investigation Rock Turkey 
All news outlets report 21 suspects were detained yesterday on 
charges of membership to a terrorist organization, known as 
Ergenekon.  The suspects include retired Generals Hursit Tolon and 
Sener Eruygur, Cumhuriyet daily's Ankara bureau chief Mustafa 
Balbay, and Ankara Chamber of Commerce President Sinan Aygun.  In 
addition, warrants were issued for the arrests of former AKP 
lawmaker Turhan Comez and retired General Levent Ersoz.  A total of 
seven were detained in Ankara, eleven in Istanbul, two in Antalya, 
two in Erzurum, and one in Trabzon.  The Ergenekon investigation 
began eleven months ago, but an indictment has not been prepared 
yet.  Islamist-oriented Zaman says the indictment is expected to be 
submitted before this weekend.  Papers note the prosecutor might 
prepare an additional indictment, including the suspects taken into 
custody yesterday. 
 
The Ergenekon network is alleged to be an underground organization 
comprised of retired military officers, journalists and opposition 
politicians who seek to overthrow the government.  After hand 
grenades, TNT explosives and fuses were seized in a house in 
Istanbul's Umraniye district on June 12 last year, forty-five 
suspects were detained without being charged with any crime.  Since 
then, suspects detained in relation to the case include retired 
general Veli Kucuk, leftist-nationalist Workers' Party leader Dogu 
Perincek, nationalist lawyer Kemal Kerincsiz, Turkish Orthodox 
Patriarchate spokesperson Sevgi Erenerol, former Istanbul University 
President Kemal Alemdaroglu, and Cumhuriyet chief editor Ilhan 
Selcuk. 
 
Domestic Reactions to 'Ergenekon' Detentions 
Prime Minister Erdogan told reporters Tuesday the government expects 
the case to be concluded "as soon as possible." In addition, Erdogan 
said, "Police executed the decision of the high criminal court.  I 
think these detentions are a step forward to conclude the 
indictment."  AKP deputy chair, Dengir Mir Mehmet Firat warned 
politicians to stay away from legal processes.  "We should not be 
involved in the case as politicians; all should respect the 
judiciary's independence," Firat was quoted as saying.  Main 
opposition CHP slammed the detentions, and accused the government of 
"creating an empire of fear."  CHP leader Deniz Baykal said 
Ergenekon was "a campaign to save Prime Minister Erdogan."  Baykal 
said the detentions were "not likely to be seen in democracies," and 
"resembled the crackdowns of Hitler, Mussolini, Stalin and 
Khomeini."  The nationalist MHP's leader, Devlet Bahceli, said the 
prosecutors should make a satisfactory explanation on the case. 
"The PM is moving forward on an inadvertent journey which will 
jeopardize democracy, Turkey's parliamentarian regime, and his 
party," warned Bahceli.  The pro-Kurdish DTP acting chairwoman Emine 
Ayna criticized the operation, saying, "The AKP has been conducting 
this operation in line with its political program. Carrying out this 
operation on the same day as the verbal indictment is given in the 
closure case against the AKP has created legitimate question marks 
in the public opinion. It is impossible to think the choice of the 
date is a coincidence."  Former AKP MP Turhan Comez, who is wanted 
for charges related to the operation, spoke from London to 
mainstream Vatan and called the operation "an attempt to set up an 
empire of fear."  Yilmaz Ates, Deputy Leader of CHP, said Ergenekon 
"seems like a campaign against those who support national unity and 
the integration of this country as well as a democratic and secular 
republic. Unfortunately the main actors of this campaign are the 
government and its supporters. We will pursue this. I hope the 
indictment is announced as soon as possible."  Zeki Sezer, Leader of 
the DSP, pointed out, "This operation took place as the chief 
prosecutor delivered his verbal arguments. The public's attention 
intentionally was averted. First the owner of Cumhuriyet daily was 
detained in a very nasty way. And now, Mr. Mustafa Balbay. Nobody 
will benefit from confronting the nation and the judiciary."  Tayfun 
Icli, DSP Deputy, noted, "The investigation is not being held on 
 
ANKARA 00001202  002 OF 004 
 
 
June 29, but today, on a day when the top prosecutor of the Court of 
Appeals presents his arguments. They harm the principles of 
secularism and the social state. Only the principle of the rule of 
law remained and now they are harming this by attacking the 
judiciary and bringing society head to head with the judiciary. This 
is an unacceptable course of conduct." 
 
Press Play of Ergenekon Detentions 
In "The Great Intimidation," the leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
writes on its front page today the Ergenekon operation has 
transformed into an operation to "silence dissident voices," adding, 
"These events remind one of the September 1980 military coup 
period."  Mainstream Hurriyet claims the "military General Staff 
(TGS) was informed about the detentions," because the TGS must be 
notified in order to enter the military lodgings where retired 
generals stay.  Papers also note yesterday's round-up came after the 
recent meeting between PM Erdogan and Land Forces Commander General 
Ilker Basbug meeting.  In addition, in August the High Military 
Council (YAS) convention will decide on the appointments of the new 
commanders in the military. 
 
Islamist-oriented media call the developments a lesson in 
accountability against those attempting to overthrow the government. 
 Mainstream media lash out against the arrests as targeting the 
opponents of the AKP in a "McCarthy-esque fashion."  Liberal Radikal 
says the Ergenekon investigation "Finally Catches Some Big Fishes." 
Meanwhile, far right Tercuman, whose editor was detained in 
connection to the case yesterday, asks "Where Is Turkey Headed?" 
Mainstream Vatan points out that the arrests came while the chief 
prosecutor was charging the president, the prime minister and the 
ruling party with plotting to introduce an Islamic regime in Turkey. 
 Mainstream Aksam and Hurriyet report "the police were informed of 
the arrest warrants and a plan was devised on June 29," but Aksam 
speculates, "The actual arrests were delayed until Tuesday so they 
could overshadow the chief prosecutor's concluding arguments to 
close the AKP." Liberal Radikal notes, "There is a freedom of 
expression issue here.  The journalists who were arrested were 
simply expressing their opinions." 
 
Ibrahim Karagul of Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak calls these 
developments, "a major and critical settling of scores."  Mustafa 
Unal of Islamist-oriented Zaman notes, "Those who are planning coups 
should be held accountable because in democracies a coup is a major 
crime."  Ergun Babahan of mainstream Sabah writes, "Turkey is headed 
toward democracy and this is a lesson for future coup plotters." 
Tufan Turenc of mainstream Hurriyet writes, "This purge reminds one 
of the McCarthy era."  Bilal Cetin of mainstream Vatan writes, "The 
majority of the public believe the operation was carried out in 
order to muzzle the opposition."  Can Dundar of mainstream Milliyet 
writes, "In response to the closure case, some people were bullying 
those who exposed their dirty laundry," and "it's the judiciary that 
will suffer from this duel." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Ergenekon Arrests and the AKP Closure Case 
 
Ismet Berkan wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "These recent 
detentions look like the final phase of the ongoing Ergenekon 
investigation.  It is very important that those who are involved in 
coup plots are brought to justice.  If this case proves a link 
between those high level names and a plot to overthrow the 
government, for the first time in our modern democratic history, 
those responsible for planning a coup will be held accountable." 
 
Haluk Sahin wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "There is a 
freedom of expression issue here.  There are writers and journalists 
among the detainees.  These writers and journalists haven't done 
anything besides express their views, which were not liked by the 
government.  Moreover, there is no evidence and no indictment in the 
Ergenekon case.  However, something is clearly wrong: suspects have 
been kept in jail for a year without knowing what they are charged 
 
ANKARA 00001202  003 OF 004 
 
 
with." 
 
Ali Bayramoglu wrote in Islamist-leaning Yeni Safak: "For the very 
first time in this country, high-level generals are facing charges 
due to their coup attempts.  It is an important investigation in 
both its nature and its political consequences.  Eventually we may 
or may not end up with a civilian political system." 
 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet carried this op-ed from its editorial 
board: "What kind of investigation is this that has lasted over a 
year and is still collecting evidence?  In the meantime, those 
opposed to the government are labeled and accused, but no actual 
charges are made.  One wonders if the purpose is to conduct an 
investigation based on legal norms or to use the legal system to 
carry out the ruling party's agenda?" 
 
Melih Asik wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "The Ergenekon case seems 
like PM Erdogan's personal pursuit rather than a legal 
investigation.  The way the arrests were carried out and the way 
journalists were treated cause serious suspicions about the real 
intentions of the investigation.  The AKP government, with the 
support of the U.S. and the EU, is conducting its own coup against 
the nationalist forces in this country.  Republicans, secularists, 
and Ataturkists, i.e. everybody supporting the secular republic, is 
now an open target of the AKP." 
 
Fikret Bila wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "The Ergenekon 
investigation has lasted for more than a year.  Given the broader 
focus, one wonders if there is an attempt here to create a link 
between different events and to present them as if they are all 
connected.  The general outlook looks like more of a settling of 
scores which can bring some very serious consequences in the end." 
 
Chief Prosecutor Presents his Verbal Statement 
All papers report that Court of Appeals Chief Prosecutor Abdurrahman 
Yalcinkaya completed his closing arguments in favor of closing the 
AKP in Ankara yesterday.  The statement lasted for one and a half 
hours.  Yalcinkaya said that "AKP wanted to bring Sharia to Turkey, 
which poses a clear and present danger. Therefore, the party must be 
closed down."  Yalcinkaya stated that the AKP's proposed turban 
amendments to the Constitution strengthened the arguments against 
the AKP.  The Chief Prosecutor also made reference to AKP Vice 
Chairman Dengir Mir Firat's recent remarks when he called Ataturk's 
reforms "traumatic" for Turkish society.  Yalcinkaya also noted that 
PM Erdogan supported Yasin Al-Kadi, whose name is on the UN's list 
of those who support global terrorism, which Yalcinkaya argued shows 
that the AKP has an inclination towards violence. 
 
Cypriot Leaders Agree on Single Sovereignty and Single Citizenship 
Mainstream Sabah and liberal Radikal report that Greek Cypriot 
leader Dimitris Chrstofias and Turkish Cypriot Leader Mehmet Ali 
Talat met yesterday in order to invigorate the peace negotiations on 
the island.  Both leaders agreed in principal that any solution 
should be based on single sovereignty and single citizenship. 
Further details will emerge during future negotiations. 
 
TV News: 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- On Tuesday, Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov arrived in 
Ankara to meet   Foreign Minister Ali Babacan on Wednesday.  The two 
ministers will hold a joint press conference after their meeting. 
Lavrov will also meet with President Abdullah Gul. 
 
- Prime Minister Erdogan will travel to Malaysia on July 7-8 to 
participate in the Developing-8 (D-8) Islamic countries meeting. 
 
- Suleyman Celebi, the head of the left-leaning labor union DISK, 
 
ANKARA 00001202  004 OF 004 
 
 
was acquitted in the lawsuit for provoking illegal demonstrations 
with his calls urging workers to gather in Istanbul's Taksim Square 
for May Day celebrations. 
 
International News 
 
- French President Nicolas Sarkozy is to meet Syrian President 
Bashar al-Assad in Paris on July 12. 
 
- Former Australian Foreign Minister Alexander Downer has confirmed 
he will quit domestic politics and take up the roll of UN special 
envoy for Cyprus. 
 
- Armenian President Sarkisian has invited Turkish President 
Abdullah Gul to watch the September 6 soccer game between the 
Armenian and Turkish national teams in Yerevan. 
 
WILSON