08BAGHDAD1004
RRT ERBIL: IIP SPEAKER TRAINS BROADCAST
Tue Apr 01 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO0018
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #1004/01 0921222
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 011222Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6588
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 001004 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR ECA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP OEXC SCUL OPRC KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: RRT ERBIL: IIP SPEAKER TRAINS BROADCAST 
JOURNALISTS IN THE KURDISTAN REGION 
 
This is an Erbil Regional Reconstruction Team message. 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (U)  RRT Erbil hosted IIP Specialist Professor Robert 
Hooper of the University of California - San Diego, who 
conducted a two-week training workshop from March 3 through 
March 13 for eighteen local television journalists.  The 
program improved the technical skills of Iraqi journalists 
and strengthened USG contacts with local media. 
 
Context 
------- 
 
¶2.  (U)  Television is the primary source of information for 
residents of the Kurdistan Region, as it is for residents of 
the rest of Iraq.  Although most media organs in the 
Kurdistan Region are controlled by the major political 
parties, the recent protests by journalists regarding the 
Media Law passed by the Kurdistan National Assembly in 
December 2007 and the subsequent decision by the KRG 
President to return the law to the KNA for amendment indicate 
a growing independent role for media within civil society. 
Journalists have identified training as one of their most 
important needs; international NGOs, such as IREX, have also 
indicated a need for training of journalists.  Journalists 
(reporters, editors, and camera operators) from Zagros TV 
(KDP), Kurdsat (PUK), Galle Kurdistan (PUK), Yegirtu TV 
(KIU), and Nowruz TV (KRG) participated in the training 
program which was conducted at a local hotel. 
 
Training program 
---------------- 
 
¶3.  (U)  Professor Hooper is an experienced television 
producer and documentary maker who has extensive 
international experience training broadcast journalists and 
developing curricula in several countries.  In his workshop 
in Erbil, Hooper focused on basic techniques of interviewing 
and reporting, writing and story narrative, lighting, camera 
framing, and presentation.  Hooper brought several video 
clips to demonstrate concepts and had sent worksheet handouts 
in advance for translation, but the class most appreciated 
the hands on exercises.  Although security considerations 
precluded leaving hotel premises, workshop participants 
utilized various locations on the hotel grounds for their 
exercises.  At the end of the workshop, Hooper could identify 
specific areas of improvement in technical skills. 
 
¶4.  (U)  Participants exhibited great determination to attend 
the workshop.  Journalists from Kurdsat came from 
Sulaimaniyah to attend and during the second week of the 
conference, downtown roads were closed to normal traffic due 
to the Conference of Arab Parliamentarians taking place in 
Erbil - forcing participants to walk a great distance to 
reach the training venue.  Workshop participant and reporter 
Hemim Mam Rash said "as a journalist in more than one 
organization (Galle Kurdistan TV, Radio, Kurdistane Nwe 
newspaper, and PUKmedia.com) and a journalism student at 
Salahaddin University, it was very useful to have an expert 
professional provide practical training, especially such a 
person as Dr. Hooper who has spent years in the media field. 
The experience and information that I learned during these 
two weeks was more valuable than two years in university." 
 
¶5.  (U)  During free afternoons, Professor Hooper accompanied 
the RRT PDO to visit the Journalism Department of the local 
Technical Institute and three local television stations 
(Galle Kurdistan, Yegirtu, and Zagros).  In some cases, these 
visits were the first by USG personnel to the partner 
institutions and all served to strengthen the RRT's 
connection to local contacts.  All of the station managers 
stressed how useful their journalists found the workshops and 
expressed interest in further collaboration. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6.  (U)  The mission of the PRTs is to build capacity with 
local government and civil society organizations; training is 
one of the most effective means to build that capacity. 
Professor Hooper's training program was also an important 
component in RRT outreach to local media.  RRT has also 
provided OBS videos to local television stations for 
broadcast; translated IIP's "Handbook of Independent 
Journalism," and nominated local journalists for a study tour 
and a TV Coop - but training of this type is the most 
important element.  It has improved the technical skills of 
local journalists and has built great goodwill for the USG 
 
BAGHDAD 00001004  002 OF 002 
 
 
among key opinion leaders. 
 
¶7.  (U)  Post appreciates IIP's support of this program in a 
new and challenging environment.  This was RRT's first 
speaker program and the direct person-to-person interactions 
that a speaker/specialist program provides were invaluable. 
At the conclusion of the workshop, Hooper indicated a 
willingness to conduct a follow-up workshop in the Fall. 
Post would welcome that opportunity or other opportunities to 
program IIP speakers or specialists. 
CROCKER