08BAGHDAD111
UPDATE ON GOI MINISTERIAL COMMITTEE ON RULE OF LAW
Tue Jan 15 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0003
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #0111/01 0150807
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 150807Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5229
INFO RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS BAGHDAD 000111 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/I, L 
JUSTICE FOR JOHN EULER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL IZ
SUBJECT: UPDATE ON GOI MINISTERIAL COMMITTEE ON RULE OF LAW 
AND DETENTION 
 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (U) Summary.  Since its formal commissioning in mid-2007, 
the Ministerial Committee on Rule of Law and Detention 
(MCRLD) has made significant progress in the practical 
application of its operation.  MCRLD has ensured all relevant 
ministries are adequately represented, meaningful issues are 
identified and placed on the agenda, and it has developed a 
deliberative process for addressing problems associated with 
detainee processing.  In 2008, the leadership and the 
membership of the committee need to continue taking steps to 
ensure the committee becomes a genuine mechanism for 
accomplishing the goals set forth in Prime Ministerial Order 
207 on detention operations. End Summary. 
 
---------------------- 
HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT 
---------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) In 2006, the Mission (Rule of Law Office) and MNF-I 
(Task Force 134) proposed the concept of an inter-ministerial 
committee to address detention operations.  The leaders of 
the Higher Juridical Council and the Ministries of Interior 
and Justice responded in a positive fashion to the concept. 
In 2007, the President of the Higher Juridical Council 
commissioned a previous committee to have the responsibility 
for identifying and addressing critical court related 
challenges in the management of Iraqi detainee populations. 
However, the previous group did not adequately represent the 
necessary ministries, nor did the members (with some 
exceptions) have sufficient authority to effect real change. 
 
¶3.  (U) In mid-2007, the Prime Minister issued an order 
officially directing that this inter-ministerial committee be 
reorganized and re-commissioned to respond with practical 
proposals to remedy the numerous issues associated with the 
increasing size of the detainee population.  After a series 
of high-level discussions held in August 2007 between the 
Deputy Prime Minister, the National Security Advisor, and the 
President of the Higher Juridical Council, the Prime Minister 
issued Order No. 207 in September 2007.  (Comment: The text 
of the order is both motivational and directive.  It is 
motivational in that it articulates broad goals to which the 
Government of Iraq should aspire in its management of the 
detainee population.  It is directive in that it commissions 
particular ministries to engage in specific acts to meet 
clearly identified needs and interests with respect to 
detention operations.  End comment.) 
 
---------------- 
PRESENT ACTIVITY 
---------------- 
 
¶4.  (U).  The MCRLD membership now includes relatively 
senior-level representatives of the Ministries of Defense, 
Interior, Health, Human Rights, Justice, and Labor & Social 
Affairs, as well as officials from the Office of the Deputy 
Prime Minister, the Office of the National Security Advisor, 
and the Higher Juridical Council.  Chief Prosecutor 
Ghandanfer al-Jasem of the Higher Juridical Council serves as 
the chairman.  It also includes representatives of both the 
Mission and MNF-I who regularly attend the bi-weekly meetings. 
 
¶5.  (U).  The principal detainee-related topics addressed by 
MCRLD include: medical issues; juvenile issues; women's 
issues; investigative issues; judicial issues; human rights 
issues; and corrections issues. 
 
------------------ 
CURRENT CHALLENGES 
------------------ 
 
¶6.  (U).  Despite the progress made in the evolution of this 
committee, MCRLD has not yet pursued some of the key 
policy-related and strategic problems identified in Prime 
Ministerial Order No. 207.  With that in mind, the Rule of 
Law Coordinator sent Chairman Ghandanfar al-Jasem a letter 
re-identifying the principles in Prime Ministerial Order No. 
207 and recommended that they form the basis for committee 
attention and activity in the first quarter of 2008. 
(Comment: As a procedural matter, we continue to encourage 
the Chair to make routine, substantive reports on its 
progress and on the challenges to the Ministerial Committee 
on National Security.  Furthermore, a year-end summary of 
accomplishments to the MCRLD leadership group (i.e. the 
Deputy Prime Minister, the National Security Advisor, and the 
President of the Higher Juridical Council) should be 
 
considered.  End comment.) 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶7.  (U).  The MCRLD appears to have overcome its initial 
organizational and administrative challenges.  It has the 
potential to become a meaningful forum for resolution of 
detention-related issues.  However, it must begin to address 
the critical, policy-related challenges codified in Prime 
Ministerial Order No. 207.  The Mission and MNF-I will 
continue to encourage the committee members to fashion the 
agendas to ensure the committee addresses those pivotal 
issues in 2008. 
CROCKER