08BAGHDAD547
Chalabi's Provision of Services Committee - February 19
Mon Feb 25 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO6461
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #0547/01 0561500
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 251500Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5904
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000547 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREL IZ REL UK
SUBJECT: Chalabi's Provision of Services Committee - February 19 
 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: The February 19th meeting for the Provision of Services 
Committee heard concerns, including fiscal, from the Baghdad 
Sheraton Hotel and the Babil Hotel. The Baghdad General Manager for 
the Ministry of Transportation was there to discuss bus shortages 
and transportation costs. For the second week in a row, the 
committee discussed power station security and importing fuel at 
international prices. Along those same lines, the Energy Fusion Cell 
presented a basic briefing to the committee. Finally, the committee 
reviewed several previous recommendations. END SUMMARY. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - 
Meeting Highlights 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2. Resulting from the hotel briefs, Dr. Chalabi will seek low 
interest loans through the Raffadin Bank to address hotel repairs. 
The committee will also send a letter to the Ministry of Interior 
(MoI) asking them to remove their security from the Babil Hotel 
which currently inhabits an entire floor, rent free. The hotel 
representatives complained of high utility rates and limited 
availability. The Ministry of Electricity (MoE) said they would not 
be responsible for interdictions, but would repair or maintain any 
electricity lines downed for other reasons. Dr. Chalabi offered to 
resolve this issue in a private session with the hotels. 
 
¶3. Chalabi reviewed the I-ESC decision to create a battalion, under 
the direction of the Baghdad Operations Command (BOC), to protect 
threatened power stations. The committee will write a letter to the 
BOC granting access to power stations for the purpose of protecting 
them. The Deputy Minister of Electricity (DMoE) detailed a recent 
threat to staff in Taji, noting that power has since been restored. 
Dr. Chalabi suggested the local sheiks be engaged to minimize future 
threats. The committee will write a letter to the local Awakening 
Council and MoI, providing a report on the threat. (Note: A police 
report was made locally. End Note) 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Open for Business - Not Exactly 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4. Representatives from the Baghdad Sheraton Hotel and the Babil 
Hotel attended the Services Committee for the first time. Both 
relayed similar concerns; hotels in disrepair, labor shortages, 
inadequate funds to pay employee wages, guest shortages, security 
and unreliable electric and water services. The hotel managers 
requested a five year tax exemption and reduced utility rates. Dr. 
Chalabi did not address either suggestion, but did note that low 
interest loans may stimulate the hotel and tourism industry. Dr. 
Chalabi will write a letter to the PM to encourage the Raffadin Bank 
to offer such promotional loans. The Chairman also said that any 
state-owned hotels should be sold off to the private sector and that 
international firms should be welcome to take over management of the 
hotels. (Note: According to the committee, there are 49 state owned 
hotels and 51 privately held hotels. End Note) 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Getting Around Baghdad, Getting Around Iraq 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5. According to the General Manager (GM) of Transportation for the 
Ministry of Transportation, over one-third (1/3) of the ministry's 
bus fleet has been stolen since the start of the war. (Note: The GM 
said that the buses were stolen and taken to neighboring countries; 
however, we have heard reports that the buses were stolen by former 
drivers and are still in Iraq. End Note) Despite a smaller fleet, 
the staffing levels have remained steady at approximately 6,000 
people. Explaining this, the GM says that he is "required to take on 
employees who were fired from other ministries, but have "political 
connections". The GM particularly noted that college students are 
squeezed in this transportation shortage and have difficulty 
affording taxis to get to and from classes. The GM claims that 250 
buses are needed immediately to meet student needs. Dr Chalabi told 
the GM to write a memo to the committee explaining how much students 
pay for transportation, what the costs of the additional buses will 
be and what benefits the buses will bring. 
 
- - - - - - - 
Other Issues 
- - - - - - - 
 
¶6. In addition to sharing the I-ESC development, Dr. Chalabi also 
noted that the Russafa and Karkh commands are studying which 
electrical control stations need to be protected. 
 
¶7. Dr. Chalabi questioned the Deputy Minister of Health about the 
previous recommendation to pay doctors overtime. According to the 
DM, the money has still not gone through. (Note: The committee 
passed this resolution October 25. End Note) Dr. Chalabi will again 
raise this issue with the PM. 
 
¶8. The Ministry of Oil (MoO) delivered a written report on threats 
and attacks at gas stations which he states are overwhelmed by 
militias. The DM noted the ministries reticence to sell fuel to 
 
BAGHDAD 00000547  002 OF 002 
 
 
these stations. Dr. Chalabi suggested auctioning the fuel, but the 
DM of Oil retorted that the gas stations should be sold to the 
private sector and not be state owned. Also regarding oil, Dr. 
Chalabi intends to send a letter to all ministries to inform and 
encourage them to import their own fuel at the international market 
price rather than through SOMO. 
 
¶9. The BOC handed out a list of approved street openings throughout 
Baghdad. (Note: At last week's meeting, the Amanat distributed a 
list of streets that they wanted re-opened due to improved security. 
The BOC was to review the list for this week's meeting. End Note) 
The BOC also reported that the checkpoint of concern in Abu Ghraib 
was handed over to the Abu Ghraib police. (Note: Abu Ghraib 
representatives attended the 11/27 meeting and requested a 
checkpoint be moved. The BOC said the checkpoint could not be moved 
or eliminated. As a compromise they handed it over to the local 
police. End Note) 
 
¶10. The Energy Fusion Cell presented an overview of their mission 
and operations. This included a shift from past efforts primarily on 
coordination for security of infrastructure and repairs to one of 
supporting an Iraq National Energy Policy. They are working with the 
Ministries of Oil and Electricity to understand the mutually 
supportive relationships. 
 
 
Crocker