08BAGHDAD1245
CHALABI'S PROVISION OF SERVICES COMMITTEE - APRIL 15
Tue Apr 22 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO4562
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #1245/01 1131303
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 221303Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6966
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 001245 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREL IZ REL UK
SUBJECT: CHALABI'S PROVISION OF SERVICES COMMITTEE - APRIL 15 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY: At the April 15 Provision of Services Committee a large 
portion of time was dedicated to service delivery in Sadr City. The 
Deputy Minister of Transportation attended and provided a report to 
the committee on civil aviation in Iraq. Again, water was on the 
agenda with the Ministry of Water Resources in attendance for the 
first time. The Baghdad Water Authority, a division of the Amanat, 
as well as the Director of the Karkh Water Treatment Plant were also 
there to discuss water. END SUMMARY. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Civil Aviation: Report from Ministry of Transportation 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2. Following up with last week's discussion, the Ministry of 
Transportation (MoTrans) prepared a report that detailed issues and 
concerns with Baghdad International Airport (BIAP) specifically, and 
civil aviation in Iraq, generally. According to the report, BIAP is 
burdened with an abundance of contractors and Government of Iraq 
(GoI) presence. The report suggests that contracts be re-bid and 
include billeting for the contractors outside of the terminal. The 
report also noted that there were too many Government of Iraq 
ministries with office space at the airport. The committee suggested 
that the ministries coordinate with the MoTrans when special guests 
or government officials are transiting through BIAP in lieu of 
maintaining office space. The MoTrans stated that this space could 
instead be used for needed passport, customs and health offices. Dr. 
Chalabi will send a memo to all ministries and organizations with 
office space at BIAP, requesting them to reduce their presence. Dr. 
Chalabi encouraged the MoTrans to lease the space for additional 
revenues. However, Chalabi again reminded the ministry that they 
could not keep their revenues, but if they needed more money they 
should see the Ministry of Finance (MoF). 
 
¶3. In addition, the Deputy Minister of Transportation complained 
that the Ministry of Interior (MoI), Iraq's police, are crowding 
passenger areas. The MoI did send a representative to the meeting 
who responded - "coordinate with us (MoI) and we will work to 
accommodate your needs". MoTrans underscored the necessity of MoI's 
presence under extraordinary circumstances, but civil aviation is 
now ready to be controlled by the Ministry of Transportation. The 
Provision of Services Committee will draft a memo to that effect and 
emphasize that civil aviation should meet international standards. 
 
¶4. MoTrans also sought better coordination with the Amanat and 
funding for two airports. (Note: It is unclear whether the funding 
is for new airports or for the rehabilitation of existing airports. 
End Note) General Snyder followed up with MoTrans request to control 
the hangers at BIAP. He commented that the U.S. Mission and 
Multi-National Force is keenly aware of the new planes purchased by 
the GoI. A short term accommodation for their maintenance is being 
discussed by GOI/USG while a longer term arrangement will likely 
take until early 2009. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
Services to Sadr City 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5. Dr. Chalabi again highlighted that 50% of all Baghdadis are 
currently under a curfew and those people are becoming increasingly 
frustrated. According to Dr. Chalabi, many of the locals fear that 
Sadr City will be segregated by the addition of new security walls. 
He said that there is no systematic way to reach out to the locals 
to address these misunderstandings. Chalabi also claimed that 
several militias have U.S. weapons. 
 
¶6. The Ministry of Electricity (MoE) immediately followed with a 
more optimistic tone, noting that the substation in Sadr City 
referenced at last week's meeting is now working. The Deputy 
Minister of Electricity commented that entrance into Sadr city 
remained problematic. He also said sectors 1 through 10 were 
difficult to survey due to ongoing violence. Dr. Chalabi will send a 
memo to the Baghdad Operations Command (BOC) to ease transit 
requirements for the MoE. Dr. Chalabi also called upon Multi 
National Division - Baghdad (MND-B) to provide security to MoE's 
employees in Sadr City. 
 
¶7. The Ministry of Trade (MoT) also reported good news - the empty 
warehouses in Sadr City were not due to corruption or theft, but 
were empty because the rations had already been distributed. 
Unfortunately, the Deputy Minister reported that a warehouse in Sadr 
City for the Hurriyah area was under militia control which has 
prevented Hurriyah from receiving their fare share of rations. 
 
¶8. The Deputy Minister said that 17,000 bags of flour have been 
delivered to Sadr City. 123 trucks of cooking oil bound for Sadr 
City is held up in Abu Ghraib by the Muthanna Brigade. Dr. Chalabi 
asked the Deputy Minister of Defense to order the brigade to allow 
these trucks to pass. (Note: The Deputy Minister immediately excused 
himself from the room to place the call. After returning, he did not 
offer any updates. End Note) The Deputy Minister of Trade provided a 
list of May ration items that will be problematic to deliver to Sadr 
City because of stock shortages and/or transportation complications. 
Among them was milk, beans, rice, flour and soap. Dr. Chalabi tasked 
 
BAGHDAD 00001245  002 OF 002 
 
 
his staff to coordinate with the MoT regarding the times, dates, 
number of trucks and contents for delivery to Sadr City. This 
information will in turn be shared with the BOC to minimize 
checkpoint delays. Chalabi emphasized that transportation, not 
distribution, is the issue. 
 
¶9. The Ministry of Trade also complained that their representative 
to the BOC was ignored by them. Deputy Minister Soiba said that it 
shouldn't require a call from a Deputy Minister to initiate 
coordination at the BOC. The ministry has a representative at the 
BOC. The BOC said in response that the representative doesn't even 
show up for work. As a result, Dr. Chalabi requested his staff to 
facilitate coordination between the BOC and Ministry of Trade. He 
will send a committee representative to Modafa Square for this 
purpose. He recommended that Trade do the same. ITAO Director raised 
a question about the Prime Minister's request to deliver additional 
rations to Sadr City. The Deputy Minister replied that there were 
not enough food supplies to honor that request, but that they could 
be purchased. The Ministry of Finance would have to provide an 
additional $37 millionfor Trade to purchase an additional month's 
food rations. 
 
¶10. The Baghdad Water Authority maintained that water service in 
Sadr City and other curfewed areas was normal. He asked Chalabi for 
some appreciation of their efforts. Dr. Chalabi will issue a memo of 
commendation to BWA, but pointedly stated that he will not recognize 
the Russafa Water District because they have not dealt with expected 
summer water shortages. 
 
- - - - - - - 
Water Issues 
- - - - - - - 
 
¶11. The Karkh Water Treatment Plant Director said that the Karkh 
Water Treatment Plant is currently operating at nearly double 
capacity from the pervious regime's ownership. According to the 
Director, production currently hovers at about 2.4 million cubic 
meters and is expected to increase to 2.5 million cubic meters in 
the near future. The Plant Director gave a detailed report to Dr. 
Chalabi. The Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR) was in attendance at 
this meeting. They discussed two possible improvements to the Karkh 
Water Treatment Plant. A permanent solution would entail the 
construction of a barrier in the Tigris River to increase the flow 
of water near the plant. This would cost between 3 and 3.5 million 
dinars. A temporary solution includes dredging the river. The MoWR 
agreed with MND-B's proposal to float a smaller dredger under a 
trestle bridge in Taji to assist with this effort. They also offered 
to help the Amanat repair their larger, currently inoperable, 
dredger. The Provision of Services Committee will send a letter to 
the Mayor of Baghdad suggesting that the Amanat build and finance 
the permanent solution. 
 
¶12. There was further discussion on low water levels in the Tigris. 
MoWR contended that water levels were primarily dictated by 
conditions outside of Iraq. The BWA suggested a floating dam to help 
control the water levels. Dr. Chalabi asked for a report on this 
issue. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Chalabi Responds to MND-B Memo 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶13. General Milano sent a letter to the Provision of Services 
Committee last week regarding the Ministry of Trade's accusation 
that MND-B wanted to take over several of their grain warehouses in 
the Taji area. The memo maintained that it was the MoI who wanted to 
borrow unused space at the warehouses to emplace a temporary Iraqi 
Police station until a permanent station can be built. The MoI is 
working the issue with the MoTrade and Coalition Forces are not 
involved. The letter did note MND-B's support for MoI on this issue. 
Dr. Chalabi will send a follow-up memo to Trade. 
 
Butenis