08BEIJING1267
April 3 MFA Press Briefing: Hu Jia Case, Olympic Boycott,
Thu Apr 03 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO2111
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1267/01 0941114
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 031114Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6269
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001267 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM PTER CH PK TN TZ CI QA KZ AS SW
FR, IR 
 
SUBJECT:  April 3 MFA Press Briefing: Hu Jia Case, Olympic Boycott, 
IAEA Iran Intelligence, Lhasa Incident, Xinjiang Disturbances, Boao 
Forum Attendees 
 
¶1. Key points at the April 3 MFA Press Briefing were: 
 
-- China has handled the Hu Jia case according to law and will not 
accept criticism. 
 
-- The IOC is right to reject calls to boycott the Beijing Olympics 
and the torch relay should not be disrupted. 
 
-- Reports China supplied the IAEA with intelligence about Iran are 
false. 
 
-- Reports that a Chinese Embassy official in Paris apologized for 
his comments comparing riots in Paris to Lhasa are "not accurate." 
 
-- Local authorities in Xinjiang are capable of maintaining order. 
 
China Will Not Accept Criticism of Hu Jia Case 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶2. At the April 3, 2008 regular MFA press briefing, MFA Spokesperson 
Jiang Yu said China could not accept criticism of its handling of 
the Hu Jia case.  China is a rule of law country and will not stop 
implementing its laws because of the Olympics.  Hu Jia was tried 
according to the law, said Jiang. 
 
Olympic Boycotts, Torch Relay Protests 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶3. The International Olympic Committee (IOC) is fulfilling its 
duties under the Olympic Charter, said Jiang in response to a 
question regarding IOC Coordinating Commission Vice Chairman Kevan 
Gosper's statements that the IOC does not support an Olympics 
boycott.  Jiang emphasized that the Olympic Games is a sporting 
event which enhances understanding, cooperation and friendship 
between countries.  She urged countries to make active contributions 
to the development of the Games. 
 
¶4. When asked about potential protests at the Paris torch relay, 
Jiang said that the relay would be the "glory and pride" of Paris 
and an opportunity for Parisians to show their Olympic spirit. 
Jiang urged activists not to act contrary to the will of the people 
and cause a "disruption" of the event.  Jiang said she considers 
Paris Mayor Bertrand Delanoe's reported plans to display a banner on 
human rights in China to be a "disruption."  When asked the reason 
for these demonstrations, Jiang said it is well known that activists 
want to challenge and provoke "people around the world." 
 
Denial of Reports China Gave IAEA Iran Intelligence 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶5. Jiang said she has seen media reports that China gave the IAEA 
intelligence regarding Iran, but called the reports "totally 
groundless."  There are "ulterior motives" behind the reports. 
China has been consistent in its position that the Iran nuclear 
issue be resolved peacefully through negotiation.  China calls on 
all parties to exert creativity and show flexibility to seek an 
"all-round and long-term solution" to the issue.  China will play a 
constructive role toward this goal, said Jiang. 
 
Lhasa Incident 
-------------- 
 
¶6. Jiang said reports that an official from the Chinese Embassy in 
Paris apologized to the French Government over comments comparing 
the Lhasa riots to riots in Paris were "not in line with the facts." 
Jiang went on to say that the incident in Lhasa was not a peaceful 
demonstration, but a "grave, violent crime."  China hopes countries 
will respect the facts, take an objective and impartial position and 
"understand and support China's legitimate measures to stop violent 
crimes in accordance with the law."  In accordance with 
international law, nations are obligated to protect the security and 
dignity of diplomatic missions and personnel.  China hopes France 
can continue its effective protection of the Chinese Embassy, said 
Jiang. 
 
¶7. When asked how Chinese online bulletin boards were able to post 
detailed, personal information about the journalists who 
participated in the Chinese Government's organized tour of Lhasa, 
Jiang had no response.  The journalist's trip to Lhasa helped them 
"understand the truth," she stated. 
 
Xinjiang Disturbances 
--------------------- 
 
¶8. Jiang referred reporters to local authorities in Hetian, Xinjiang 
for information regarding disturbances there.  Jiang said local 
authorities were able to maintain stability and safeguard life and 
property. 
 
 
BEIJING 00001267  002 OF 002 
 
 
Musharraf Visit 
--------------- 
 
¶9. Jiang said Pakistan President Musharraf will visit China April 
10-15 and meet President Hu Jintao, Chairman Wu Bangguo, Premier Wen 
Jiabao and Chairman Jia Qinglin.  Musharraf will also attend the 
Boao Forum for Asia April 11-13.  China and Pakistan's cooperative 
and strategic partnership has developed well in recent years and the 
visit will promote good neighborly relations and fruitful 
cooperation in the long-term, said Jiang. 
 
Boao Forum for Asia 
------------------- 
 
¶10. Jiang announced the attendees of the Boao Forum for Asia which 
will be held April 11-13 in Hainan.  The attendees include: Tonga 
King George Tupou V, Pakistan President Musharraf, Tanzania 
President Jakaya Kikwete, Chile President Michelle Bachelet, Qatar 
Prime Minister Hamed bin Jasim bin Jabor al-Thani, Kazakhstan Prime 
Minister Karim Massimov, Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and 
Swedish Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt.  Mongolian President 
Nambaryn Enkhbayar and Sri Lankan President Mahinda Rajapaksa were 
also invited, said Jiang. 
 
RANDT