08BEIJING1123
March 25 MFA Press Briefing: Selected Journalists To Lhasa,
Tue Mar 25 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO3782
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1123/01 0851216
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 251216Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6035
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001123 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM PTER CH TW
SUBJECT: March 25 MFA Press Briefing: Selected Journalists To Lhasa, 
Dialogue With Dalai Lama, Taiwan's New Leader, Olympic Torch Relay, 
China-ROK FTA, Iran and SCO, Nansha Island, Visits 
 
¶1. Key points at the March 25 MFA Press Briefing: 
 
-- Selected foreign journalists will participate in a reporting trip 
to Lhasa. 
 
-- China is open to dialogue with the Dalai Lama as long as he gives 
up separatist activities. 
 
-- China will continue to follow the One China policy to further 
develop relations with Taiwan. 
 
-- Free trade agreement between China and ROK should "proceed with 
strategic perspective." 
 
-- China welcomes Iran's initiative to deepen the cooperation with 
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO). 
 
-- China has indisputable sovereignty over Nansha Island. 
 
Selected Foreign Journalists Going To Tibet 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. At the March 25 regular MFA press briefing, MFA Spokesperson Qin 
Gang said the MFA will release a list of 10 foreign news agencies 
allowed to participate in a reporting trip to Lhasa.  Journalists 
will be able to interview the victims and visit the sites damaged by 
the protesters, Qin added. 
 
¶3. At the height of the situation in Tibet, foreign journalists were 
kept out of affected areas for their own safety and to safeguard 
local stability.  Local authorities have the right to take special 
measures according to Chinese laws and regulations.  China hopes all 
obey and cooperate with the special measures in effect. 
 
¶4. Asked about the actual number of casualties, Qin said the number 
for Lhasa has been released, but incidents from Aba are still under 
investigation.  Qin confirmed the March 24 clash between armed 
police and Tibetan protesters in Gansu Province, which killed one 
police officer and injured a few others.  Local police are currently 
investigating this matter, Qin added. 
 
China Open To Dialogue With The Dalai Lama 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶5. Asked about the international community's efforts to encourage 
China to start a dialogue with the Dalai Lama, Qin said the door for 
dialogue is always open as long as the Dalai Lama gives up 
separatist activities.  "The Chinese Government has already 
requested the Dalai Lama give up separatist propositions and cease 
separatist activities," Qin added.  With regard to the Dalai Lama's 
connection with Uighur activists, Qin said further investigation is 
needed in this matter. 
 
¶6. According to Qin, 110 countries have expressed their support for 
the Chinese Government and oppose criminal acts and violence 
organized by the "Dalai clique."  Asked whether countries that have 
open dialogue with Dalai Lama will be "punished by China," Qin hopes 
that other countries can recognize the true nature of Dalai Lama. 
 
 
Taiwan's New Leader 
------------------- 
 
¶7. "China will continue to follow the One China policy to further 
develop relations with Taiwan," Qin said regarding China's position 
on Taiwan's newly elected leader Ma Ying-jeou.  "The Mainland and 
Taiwan belong to one China," Qin added. 
 
Disruption of Olympic Torch Ceremony In Greece 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶8. Asked about the disruption during the Olympic torch ceremony in 
Greece, Qin said such acts of disturbance are shameful and in 
violation of the Olympic spirit.  China has the competence and 
capability to carry out a smooth torch relay and successful Olympic 
Games.  The torch relay in Tibet will go on as scheduled, Qin said. 
 
With regard to the European Council's discussion of boycotting the 
Olympic Games, Qin said China opposes any country or individual 
politicizing the Olympic Games. 
 
China-ROK: Possible Free Trade Agreement 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. With regard to a possible free trade agreement between China and 
ROK, Qin said the two sides should "proceed with strategic 
perspective."  Currently, academic institutions are conducting 
in-depth studies on this matter and hope to provide practical 
suggestions, Qin added.  Regarding a possible meeting between 
leaders of China, Japan and Korea, specific arrangements are being 
discussed through diplomatic channels. 
 
BEIJING 00001123  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
Iran And Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶10. Iran has applied for full membership status in the Shanghai 
Cooperation Organization (SCO).  China welcomes Iran's initiative to 
deepen the cooperation and will make a decision through 
consultations, Qin added. 
 
China Has Sovereignty Over Nansha Island 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. Regarding recent reports of Philippine President Arroyo's plan 
to visit Nansha Island, Qin said China has indisputable sovereignty 
over Nansha Island.  China and the Philippines will address this 
issue through consultations, Qin added. 
 
Visits 
------ 
 
¶12. Malawi President Bingu Mutharika will meet with President Hu 
Jintao and Premier Wen Jiabao this week.  Premier Wen will visit 
Laos March 29-31.  Vice President/Prime Minister/Ruler of Dubai 
Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum will visit China March 31 - 
April 3. 
 
PICCUTA