08BEIJING1550
APRIL 22 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: HARASSMENT OF CHINESE STUDENT,
Tue Apr 22 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO4521
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1550/01 1131228
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 221228Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6810
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 001550 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM PTER KOLY CH FR KS KN JA RS HK XG
ZI 
 
SUBJECT: APRIL 22 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: HARASSMENT OF CHINESE STUDENT, 
PROTESTS, U/S DOBRIANSKY-DALAI LAMA MEETING, FOREIGN JOURNALISTS, 
VISAS, FRANCE-CHINA RELATIONS, MORE 
 
¶1. Key points at the April 22 MFA press briefing were: 
 
-- Domestic and Overseas Chinese demonstrations are "spontaneous" 
expressions of patriotism that are "encouraging and touching." 
 
-- A "U.S. State Department official" ignored Chinese opposition, 
violated "basic norms of international relations" and "interfered in 
China's internal affairs" by meeting with the Dalai Lama. 
 
-- China can protect the security and legitimate rights and 
interests of foreign journalists in China. 
 
-- China's visa policy remains "unchanged." 
 
-- DPRK Minister of Foreign Affairs Pak Ui-chun will visit China 
April 26-29 at the invitation of Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi, 
although specifics of the visit are still under consultation.  Jiang 
had no information on a rumored upcoming visit to China by Kim 
Jong-il. 
 
-- An arms shipment to Zimbabwe is part of "normal trade," has 
nothing to do with "recent developments" in Zimbabwe, and was 
carried out on a contract signed "last year." 
 
-- Other Visits:  Zhao Jinjun, a former ambassador to France, is 
visiting France as a special representative of President Hu Jintao. 
France's President of the Senate, Christian Poncelet, is visiting 
China April 21-27.  French Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin will 
visit China April 23-27, and presidential advisor Jean-David Levitte 
will visit April 26-27 for "unofficial talks" with State Councilor 
Dai Bingguo.  EU President Jose Manuel Barroso will visit China 
April 24-26. 
 
Overseas Chinese Acting Out of Patriotism 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. At the April 22, 2008 regular MFA press briefing, MFA 
Spokesperson Jiang Yu said she would not comment on individual 
cases, when asked about a Chinese student at Duke University in the 
United States who had received death threats and whose family had 
been harassed after she urged dialogue between pro-Tibet and 
pro-China protestors.  Jiang added that "Chinese students overseas 
did what they did out of patriotism and the pursuit of truth," 
stating that "justice will prevail."  "What they are opposing is 
very clear," said Jiang. 
 
People Can Express Patriotism in Legal, Rational Way 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶3. Chinese students and other Chinese people "spontaneously" erupted 
in calls for boycotts recently, said Jiang when asked about protests 
against French-owned Carrefour stores.  The Chinese people can 
"express patriotism in a legal and rational way," stated Jiang, 
noting that the Government has taken some "guiding measures."  She 
added her hope that the French side can "respond positively" to the 
calls of Chinese people. 
 
¶4. Asked whether the Government is worried that foreigners might 
feel unwelcome in the face of recently expressed patriotic zeal in 
China, Jiang replied that people should understand the "true 
aspirations and intentions" of the Chinese people, which are to 
express "firm determination to safeguard China's national 
sovereignty and territorial integrity," and to "oppose separatist 
acts against the Motherland" and "distorted" media reports.  Such 
"patriotic enthusiasm is encouraging and touching," said Jiang.  She 
held that the Chinese people "love peace, uphold justice and value 
friendship" and said the Olympic Games will enhance world friendship 
and cooperation. 
 
U.S. State Department Official "Ignores" China 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶5. A "U.S. State Department official deliberately ignored China's 
resolute opposition" by meeting with the Dalai Lama and "pointing a 
finger at the Tibet issue," an internal affair of China, stated 
Jiang in response to a reporter's question referring to Under 
Secretary Dobriansky.  The U.S. official committed a "serious 
 
SIPDIS 
violation of basic norms of international relations" and "interfered 
in China's internal affairs," Jiang said, adding that China has made 
"solemn representation" to the United States side.  "Hard facts" 
show that the March 14 riots were "premeditated by the Dalai Lama 
clique and colluded by Tibetan independence separatist forces."  The 
U.S. official tried to "make excuses" and blame the Chinese 
Government and Chinese people.  China hopes the official can 
understand the facts and stop indulging in and supporting the Dalai 
Lama in his separatist activities, so as not to harm U.S.-China 
relations and the image of the United States, Jiang stated. 
 
China Can Protect Foreign Journalists 
 
BEIJING 00001550  002 OF 003 
 
 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. China will continue to protect the security and legitimate rights 
and interests of foreign journalists in China, said the spokesperson 
in response to a question about death threats made toward foreign 
reporters.  China follows "Olympic practices" and continues to 
facilitate the work of foreign journalists, she added. 
 
Arms Shipment to Zimbabwe a Normal Commercial Activity 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶7. The contract for an arms shipment to Zimbabwe via a Chinese 
company's ship was signed "last year" and has nothing to do with 
"recent developments" in Zimbabwe, said Jiang, responding to 
repeated questions on the matter.  The shipment constitutes "normal 
trade" between the two countries.  The ship was "unable to unload" 
in Zimbabwe and thus might return to China.  Jiang maintained that 
the Chinese Government is "prudent and cautious" in the sale of 
weapons and she hopes that others will not "politicize" the issue. 
Jiang pointed out that China's weapons sales make up two percent of 
global arms sales, noting that the United States is the number one 
arms dealer worldwide, with the UK as the sixth largest and China 
the ninth.  If the United States obstructed the unloading of arms 
shipments, as one reporter suggested, Jiang said such action would 
be "groundless." 
 
Visa Policies "Unchanged" 
------------------------- 
 
¶8. China's visa policy remains "unchanged," said the spokeswoman 
when asked repeatedly about reported restrictions recently 
implemented on the issuance of visas to foreigners.  Jiang referred 
the reporter to local authorities, in response to a question noting 
that the foreign chambers of commerce in Hong Kong had written 
complaints to the Government claiming a serious disruption of normal 
business travel. 
 
Sarkozy's Letter to Jin Jing "Appreciated" 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. China appreciates French President Sarkozy's "friendly" letter to 
Special Olympics fencer Jin Jing as well as Sarkozy's opposition to 
the "attacks" on Jin Jing during the Olympic torch relay in Paris, 
said Jiang.  China hopes the French Government can uphold justice, 
support China's necessary and justified measures to safeguard social 
order and the safety of people's lives and property, and oppose the 
politicization of the Olympics.  Asked about the Paris City 
Council's decision to make the Dalai Lama an honorary citizen of 
Paris, Jiang said that the MFA would release a statement on the 
matter soon. 
 
¶10. Zhao Jinjun, a former ambassador to France, is visiting France 
as a special representative of President Hu Jintao, which Jiang said 
is an "important diplomatic move."  At the invitation of the NPC and 
Chinese People's Institute of Foreign Affairs (CPIFA), France's 
President of the Senate, Christian Poncelet, is visiting China April 
21-27 to meet with President Hu Jintao, NPC Chairman Wu Bangguo and 
Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) Chairman 
Jia Qinglin.  French Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin will visit 
April 23-27 to meet with PM Wen Jiabao.  Jean-David Levitte, a top 
advisor to Sarkozy, will also visit China April 26-27 for 
"unofficial talks" with State Councilor Dai Bingguo to discuss a 
China-France strategic dialogue, said the spokesperson. 
 
Any Effort to Safeguard Order Justified 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. When asked about reports of drug raids, migrant worker 
expulsions and harassment of homosexuals in the run-up to the 
Olympics, Jiang replied that she was not aware of the situation 
mentioned and referred reporters to the Beijing Municipal 
Government.  However, Jiang added that "any effort to safeguard 
social order is justified and necessary." 
 
Tibet Closed, East China Sea, Spy Case, Torch Relay 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶12. Jiang addressed a number of other issues, commenting that 
"special measures" are in place in Tibet because of "special 
circumstances," but China hopes Tibet can be open again to tourists 
and journalists as in the past.  The East China Sea issue cannot be 
resolved overnight, President Hu's trip to Japan is still under 
consultation and China opposes visits by Japanese officials to the 
Yasukuni Shrine.  Espionage charges against China are groundless, 
unacceptable and rooted in ulterior motives.  Overseas Chinese are 
"spontaneously" showing support for the Olympic torch relay, Jiang 
said when asked about reports that overseas consulates and embassies 
are organizing demonstrations abroad. 
 
 
BEIJING 00001550  003 OF 003 
 
 
Other Visits: DPRK FM, EU President 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶13. DPRK Minister of Foreign Affairs Pak Ui-chun will visit China 
April 26-29 at the invitation of FM Yang Jiechi, although specifics 
of the visit are still under consultation.  Jiang had no information 
regarding the DPRK's declaration of its nuclear programs or of a 
rumored upcoming visit to China by Kim Jong-il.  EU President Jose 
Manuel Barroso will visit April 24-26. 
 
RANDT