08BEIJING1600
APRIL 24 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: ZIMBABWE ARMS SHIPMENT,
Thu Apr 24 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO6825
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1600/01 1151105
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 241105Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6872
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001600 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KOLY CH FR KN JA SY PA XG ZI
SUBJECT: APRIL 24 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: ZIMBABWE ARMS SHIPMENT, 
SYRIA-DPRK NUCLEAR ISSUE, CHINESE VISAS, DALAI LAMA, TORCH RELAY, 
CHINESE NETIZENS 
 
¶1. Key points at the April 24 MFA press briefing were: 
 
-- A Chinese cargo ship will return to China with arms intended for 
Zimbabwe. 
 
-- An EU resolution critical of China's involvement in Africa is 
"irresponsible" and "groundless." 
 
-- The Syria-DPRK nuclear issue should not affect the Six-Party 
Talks. 
 
-- China has begun requiring foreigners to submit "necessary 
materials" with visa applications but will continue to issue 
multiple entry visas to eligible applicants. 
 
-- The door to dialogue is open to the Dalai Lama if he gives up 
separatist and disruptive activities. 
 
-- The Olympic torch relay was completed successfully in Canberra. 
 
-- Suits against CNN are spontaneous activities by Chinese 
civilians; the Chinese Government is waiting for a reply from CNN to 
its recent demands for an apology. 
 
 
 
Zimbabwe Weapons; EU Resolution on Africa 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. At the April 24 regular MFA press briefing, MFA Spokesperson 
Jiang Yu said the Chinese ship carrying weapons to Zimbabwe will 
return without delivering its cargo.  China's conventional weapons 
trade policy is consistent with Chinese law, UN Security Council 
resolutions and international obligations.  China has been 
responsible and cautious and has a strict management system for 
weapons exports, said Jiang.  People should not politicize the 
issue.  Jiang said "some in the United States are always critical, 
posing themselves as the world's policemen" but these people are 
"not popular."  Attempts to disrupt China-Africa relations will not 
be successful, said Jiang. 
 
¶3. Jiang called the European Parliament's resolution on China's 
relations with oppressive African nations "irresponsible."  The 
resolution "ignored the facts" and made groundless accusations." 
Jiang said she requets that theEU stop "such activities which 
create conflicts."  The African people support China's relations 
with the continent.  China respects African social systems and does 
not impose its values on African countries.  China follows the 
principle of "mutual benefit" with regard to trade with Africa and 
does not export weapons to countries under UN sanctions.  Asked 
whether the issue would be discussed during EU President Jose Manuel 
Barroso's visit to China, Jiang said China hopes the EU will take an 
"objective view" and contribute to the development of China-EU 
relations instead of "imposing personal values" on other people. 
 
DPRK-Syria Reactor Issue 
------------------------ 
 
¶4. Jiang said the issue of North Korea's alleged assistance to 
Syria's nuclear program was an issue for "these two countries" to 
resolve.  The issue should not affect the Six-Party Talks.  Jiang 
said she had no information about whether the United States provided 
China intelligence on the Syria-DPRK relationship and directed such 
questions to the United States.  The DPRK and the United States 
reached an important consensus recently and China hopes "their 
consultation" will be "fruitful and make progress."  China also 
hopes relevant parties will continue to promote the Six-Party Talks 
and denuclearization. 
 
Visa Policy/Attack of an American Citizen 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. China's visa rules are consistent with "China's laws and past 
experience," Jiang said, noting that China has begun requiring 
foreigners to submit "some necessary materials" with their 
applications.  Eligible applicants will continue to receive multiple 
entry visas.  China's visa system is more convenient than many other 
countries, said Jiang, and recommended that foreigners apply early. 
 
¶6. Asked about reports of violence towards an American citizen in 
Hunan, Jiang said China always protects foreigners' lives and 
legitimate rights and interests in China.  China does not agree with 
"some radical remarks," though she did not specify to which remarks 
she was referring. 
 
Door for Dialogue with Dalai Lama Open 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶7. Jiang said she has no information as to whether President Hu 
Jintao received a letter from the Dalai Lama requesting that the 
Dalai Lama's representatives be allowed into Tibet.  China considers 
 
BEIJING 00001600  002 OF 002 
 
 
the Tibet issue an internal one and objects to outside interference. 
 If the Dalai Lama stops all separatist and disruptive activities, 
the door for dialogue is "definitely open." 
 
Torch Relay 
----------- 
 
¶8. Jiang said the torch relay in Australia was completed 
successfully and that cooperation from Canberra had been 
"effective."  She questioned the intentions of a questioner who 
asked whether the Chinese Embassy assisted in bringing Chinese 
supporters to the torch relay in Canberra, saying that if those who 
wished to disrupt the event had the right to be there, then Chinese 
supporters did too.  Jiang said the people of Nagano, Japan should 
feel honored that their city was chosen to receive the Olympic 
flame.  The exact arrangements for the event in Nagano have not been 
finalized but China is confident the Japanese police will protect 
the flame. 
 
Lawsuits Against CNN 
-------------------- 
 
¶9. Efforts to sue CNN for comments deemed offensive to China are 
"spontaneous activities" by Chinese civilians, Jiang said.  The 
Chinese Government has elaborated its position to CNN and "looks 
forward to their response."  Jiang refused to comment on calls by 
netizens for a rally in Tiananmen, but said all netizen remarks must 
be made in the framework of the law and she hopes they can express 
themselves in a "rational and legal manner."  Asked whether angry 
comments online are damaging China's image, Jiang encouraged 
journalists to look at the provocative and insulting comments made 
against the Chinese people by others. 
 
Raffarin Visit 
-------------- 
 
¶10. China attaches great importance to the visit of former French 
Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin and considers him an "old friend 
of China."  Jiang noted that some "farsighted" people in France have 
recently made efforts to improve relations with China. 
 
Diplomatic Relations with Paraguay, Heparin 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. Asked whether China will establish diplomatic relations with 
Paraguay, Jiang said China would like to establish relations with 
all countries on the basis of the one China policy.  Jiang had no 
information about the FDA's review of Chinese made Heparin. 
 
RANDT