08BEIJING2143
JUNE 3 MFA Press Briefing: Human Rights, Sichuan
Tue Jun 03 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO0430
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2143/01 1552310
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 032310Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7696
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID 0725
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 4346
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 1004
RUEHLJ/AMEMBASSY LJUBLJANA 0086
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 0688
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 1954
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 9008
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI 4553UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 002143 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM MARR EAID IN JN KS KN CH
SUBJECT: JUNE 3 MFA Press Briefing: Human Rights, Sichuan 
Earthquake, Japanese Destroyer's Port Call, FM Yang Travel to 
Europe, Indian FM Visit to Beijing 
 
¶1. Key points at the June 3 MFA Press Briefing: 
 
-- China believes there is a "new opportunity" in the Six-Party 
Talks and hopes the relevant parties will show "flexibility" in 
overcoming differences. 
 
-- The U.S.-China Human Rights Dialogue was "candid," "positive" and 
"constructive," helping the two countries promote "mutual respect" 
and "equality." 
 
-- China is grateful for foreign assistance to victims of the 
Sichuan Earthquake and hopes the international community will donate 
more tents. 
 
-- China and Japan are discussing the possibility of delivering 
earthquake relief supplies via Japanese military aircraft but have 
made no decision. 
 
-- The Japanese destroyer Takanami will make a port call to China in 
the latter half of June, marking the first visit to China of a Japan 
Maritime Self Defense Force vessel. 
 
-- FM Yang departs on June 7 for a trip to Spain, Italy, Slovenia 
and France, during which he will attend an EU ministerial meeting 
and an international conference on Afghanistan. 
 
-- Indian FM Mukherjee will visit China from June 6-9 to discuss 
issues of mutual interest, including the Sino-Indian boundary 
dispute. 
 
Six-Party Talks 
--------------- 
 
¶2. At the June 3 regular MFA press briefing, MFA Spokesperson Qin 
Gang said VFM Wu Dawei had met and exchanged views on the Six Party 
Talks with the U.S., DPRK, ROK and Japanese representatives, as well 
as with the Russian Ambassador to China.  VFM Wu encouraged parties 
to implement the second phase in a "comprehensive" and "balanced" 
way.  Parties have had bilateral contacts, reached a consensus and 
shown the political will to advance and implement their commitments. 
 There is now a "new opportunity" and China hopes parties will show 
"flexibility" in overcoming differences, move ahead with talks and 
produce positive results.  Remaining differences include energy 
cooperation, normalization of relations between "relevant countries" 
and a possible Northeast Asia Peace and Security Mechanism.  These 
issues will take time to resolve and the parties should continue in 
the meantime to enhance coordination, cooperation and mutual trust 
while "marching" toward Korean denuclearization.  China will 
continue to play a positive role in the talks, stated Qin. 
 
Human Rights 
------------ 
 
¶3. Qin said China has long maintained that discussion of human 
rights issues should be conducted with mutual understanding and 
avoid the "double standard" of using the "pretense of human rights" 
to interfere with China's internal affairs.  China has been making 
efforts to increase "ecosystem development" and raise living 
standards and has made great achievements.  China will not make its 
decisions based on the will of another country or organization, he 
said.  China's policies are "consistent" and follow the principle of 
socialism with Chinese characteristics.  Qin called the U.S.-China 
Human Rights Dialogue "candid," "positive" and "constructive."  Both 
sides elaborated on progress in the field of human rights and 
discussed freedom of speech as well.  He said the dialogue helped 
the two countries promote "mutual respect" and "equality." 
 
Sichuan Earthquake 
------------------ 
 
¶4. Qin said China hopes the international community would donate 
more tents to China in the aftermath of the Sichuan earthquake.  He 
thanked other nations, especially Japan, for donating tents over the 
past few weeks.  Qin reported that foreign countries have given 
251,000 tents to China, and most have now been delivered to the 
affected area.  Other donations will be delivered soon, he said. 
Referring to questions about more restrictive access for 
journalists, Qin said that since the earthquake, China has 
facilitated open news coverage.  He said the principle of 
transparency must be implemented "according to local conditions" and 
in accord with the needs of localities.  Local authorities are not 
trying to "block the news" or "make difficulties," he said. 
 
BEIJING 00002143  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
Disaster Assistance in Japanese Military Aircraft 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶5. Asked whether the Japanese Government will deliver more aid in 
civilian or military aircraft, Qin said the two parties were still 
consulting and had not yet made a specific decision.  The "friendly 
affection" and people-to-people interaction between China and Japan 
are indications of a new phase in the Sino-Japanese relationship, as 
underscored during President Hu Jintao's recent visit to Japan, Qin 
said. 
 
Japan Maritime Self Defense Force Ship Visit 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. The Japan Maritime Self Defense Force (JMSDF) destroyer JDS 
Takanami will make a port visit to China in the latter half of June, 
stated Qin.  The Takanami will be the first JMSDF ship visit to 
China.  The visit reciprocates the visit of the PLA Navy destroyer 
Shenzhen to Japan in November 2007. 
 
Upcoming Tiananmen Anniversary 
------------------------------ 
 
¶7. Regarding the upcoming 19th anniversary of the Tiananmen Square 
crackdown, Qin said the events at Tiananmen were a "political 
incident" that occurred at the end of the 1980s and which relates to 
China's internal affairs.  He declined to comment further. 
 
FM Yang to Travel to Spain, Italy, Slovenia, France 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶8. Qin said Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi will depart for Spain on 
June 7.  While in Madrid, Yang is scheduled to meet the Spanish 
Foreign Minister, Prime Minister and King Juan Carlos II.  FM Yang 
also plans to travel to Italy and to attend a European Union 
ministerial meeting in Slovenia.  FM Yang will also attend the 
international conference on Afghanistan in Paris on June 12. 
 
Indian FM to Visit China June 6-9; Boundary Dispute 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶9. Indian Foreign Minister Pranab Mukherjee will make his first 
visit to China June 6-9.  FM Mukherjee is slated to meet Premier Wen 
Jiabao, FM Yang and other Chinese leaders.  Indian Prime Minister 
Singh's recent visit to China was "successful," noted Qin, and the 
two countries reached a consensus on expanding cooperative 
exchanges, on not regarding each other as "threats" and on working 
toward peace and stability in the region.  The Sino-Indian border 
issue will likely be discussed, Qin said, but China and India have a 
special mechanism for discussion of the border issue and progress 
has been made in recent years.  There have been eleven rounds of 
border talks and the two countries have agreed on guiding principles 
for negotiations.  The two sides are now discussing a framework for 
resolution.  In the mean time, China will make efforts to maintain 
"tranquility" and "stability" in the border region and push for the 
"sound development" of Sino-Indian ties. 
 
China-Japan-ROK Foreign Ministers Meeting 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶10. Qin said that the upcoming meeting of Chinese, Japanese and 
South Korean Foreign Ministers is a "regular exchange mechanism" and 
the three ministers will discuss issues of great importance to 
peace, stability and development in the region.  China hopes the 
meeting will promote trilateral cooperation and "generate good 
results." 
 
PICCUTA