08BEIJING931
MARCH 12 CPPCC OLYMPIC PRESS BRIEFING: PROTESTS,
Thu Mar 13 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO3841
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0931/01 0731158
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 131158Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5701
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BEIJING 000931 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KOLY ASEC PHUM CH
SUBJECT: MARCH 12 CPPCC OLYMPIC PRESS BRIEFING: PROTESTS, 
SECURITY, OPENING CEREMONIES AND MORE 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (U) Members of the Chinese People's Political Consultative 
Conference (CPPCC), the largely ceremonial advisory body that 
is currently in session in Beijing, held a press conference 
March 12 to discuss preparations for the August Olympic 
Games.  CPPCC members present included Beijing Vice Mayor Liu 
Jingmin, General Administration of Sport Vice President Cui 
Dalin, Science and Technology Daily Director Zhang Jing'an, 
Beijing Organizing Committee Deputy Director for the Olympic 
Village Deng Yaping, and Director for the Olympic Opening and 
Closing Ceremonies Zhang Yimou.  Highlights from the press 
conference: 
 
-- Security for the Olympics is "guaranteed," despite recent 
Olympic-related threats.  Protestors must apply for 
permission with Beijing security authorities to protest "in 
accordance with Chinese law." 
 
-- Politburo Standing Committee (PBSC) member Xi Jinping will 
chair a "leader's task force" to "support" the final stages 
of Olympic preparations.  Fellow PBSC member Zhou Yongkang 
along with Politburo Member and Beijing Party Secretary Liu 
Qi will serve as Xi's deputies on the task force. 
 
-- Traffic control during the Games will include the use of 
odd/even license plate days, 280 km of Olympic lanes and the 
diversion of non-essential traffic around the city. 
 
-- Zhang Yimou "personally regrets" Spielberg's resignation 
as an artistic consultant to the Games.  Celebrities are not 
feeling pressured to participate in the Opening and Closing 
Ceremonies but do have to sign confidentiality agreements. 
 
-- Olympic costs have been paid for by sponsorship fees.  The 
Central and Beijing Municipal Governments have not directly 
paid for Olympic costs. 
 
-- Beijing authorities are "confident" that there will be a 
"less than 10 percent chance" of rain during the Olympic 
opening ceremonies. 
 
-- Medal counts are not the main priority for China.  The 
General Administration of Sport says China is "still not a 
strong sports country like the United States and Russia." 
China will have a drug-free team during the Olympics and has 
increased anti-doping measures since 2006. 
 
-- Macau has not been granted permission to have its own 
Olympic Committee due to a new International Olympic 
Committee regulation prohibiting non-sovereign states to have 
their own team.  End Summary. 
 
Olympic Safety is "Guaranteed" 
------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (U) At the beginning of the March 12 CPPCC press 
conference to discuss preparations for the Olympic Games, 
Beijing Vice Mayor Liu Jingmin, responding to a security 
question on the effect of recent Olympic threats, including a 
plane hijacking in Urumqi last week, noted that he did not 
have full details about the case and had learned about the 
event through the media.  Liu stated that BOCOG has taken 
five measures to "guarantee" security during the Olympics. 
One, the Central Government has established a national-level 
command center staffed by the Ministry of Public Security, 
the People's Liberation Army and other relevant security 
organizations.  Two, there is a "comprehensive security 
plan."  Three, the Chinese Government has increased 
communication and established liaison relationships with 
international security organizations.  Liu cited Interpol's 
recent expression of confidence in Beijing's ability to host 
a safe games as an example.  Four, security and venue 
construction have been closely linked.  Five, there has been 
an increase in educating and training security staff and 
general Olympic personnel.  With all these measures in place, 
Liu reiterated that "Olympic security can be guaranteed." 
 
¶3. (U) Regarding protests, Liu added that "politics" should 
not ruin what was mainly an "athletic event."  Whether 
protestors are local or foreign, Liu noted that they must 
apply to the relevant security agencies for a permit and act 
"in accordance with Chinese law." 
 
Traffic Plans 
------------- 
 
¶4. (U) Liu said results from last year's Olympic test events 
illustrated that traffic congestion is not a matter of scale. 
 
BEIJING 00000931  002 OF 004 
 
 
 Beijing was used to handling large-scale events such as the 
two million daily visitors to Beijing during a "Golden Week" 
holiday.  The 16-day Olympic period was longer than the 
seven-day Golden Week, Liu admitted.  However, tourism 
traffic during a Golden Week, while very different from 
traffic flow during entry and exit of an event from a large 
venue, showed that large-scale traffic was not the problem, 
congestion was.  In order to address traffic, Beijing would 
establish 280 km of traffic lanes and follow an odd/even 
license plate program.  The odd/even program was tested 
during last August's test events and resulted in a 30 percent 
decrease in traffic and 20-40 percent decrease in 
traffic-related pollution.  In Athens and Sydney, most roads 
had two lanes of traffic each way.  In Beijing there were 
three lanes of traffic each way, so normal traffic should not 
be adversely impacted, Liu stated.  Vehicles supplying the 
daily needs of normal Beijing life, such as groceries, would 
be permitted into the city, while other traffic would be 
diverted around town.  This traffic plan would ensure Beijing 
citizens could maintain a "normal life."  In addition, Liu 
refuted any plans to divert the population for the Olympics. 
He noted that in Athens the Government had encouraged 
everyone to consolidate their vacation time around the 
Olympics but had not mandated anyone to leave. 
 
Chance of Rain 10 Percent 
------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) Worrying over the weather for the opening ceremonies 
was everyone's concern, said Liu.  However, the Beijing and 
Central Weather Bureaus had formed a task force two years ago 
that has analyzed over 10 years worth of weather data.  They 
will use Beijing One, a small weather satellite, to predict 
the weather and provide hourly updates during the Games. 
Based on past data, the chance of rain during the Opening 
Ceremony on August 8 is less than 10 percent.  The chance of 
a thunderstorm is even less.  Liu joked that the chance of a 
tornado was thus "non-existent." 
 
¶6. (U) Liu was also "confident" in the good weather 
prediction for the ascent of Mount Everest with the Olympic 
torch.  He proclaimed last year's test ascent as "successful" 
due to the support of the General Administration of Sport, 
the Tibetan regional government and the weather bureaus. 
 
¶7. (U) Zhang Yimou, director of Opening and Closing 
ceremonies (as well as a number of acclaimed films), talked 
about his concerns that weather could mar the ceremonies. 
Rehearsals for the ceremonies have already begun on the 
outskirts of Beijing.  However, there are plans in place 
should there be "small, medium, or big rains."  Zhang noted 
that if there were thunderstorms, then certain elements such 
as flying performers or some equipment would have to be 
eliminated from the program.  All we can do is hope God 
protects us, Zhang said. 
 
Spielberg's Resignation 
----------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) Zhang noted that he "personally regretted" Spielberg's 
resignation as an artistic consultant to the Games.  He 
reminisced that Spielberg had traveled to Beijing twice last 
year with other artistic consultants and had "very much 
looked forward" to participating in the Games.  Zhang 
reassured attendees that Opening Ceremony plans would not be 
impacted by the resignation, noting that the number of 
Chinese and foreign consultants involved in the ceremony is 
"extensive." 
 
¶9. (U) Zhang refused to divulge any details about the 
ceremonies but did note that the Opening Ceremony show would 
be only 50 minutes.  The total opening program would be 3.5 
hours, but at least two hours would be devoted to the parade 
of athletes into the stadium.  Zhang sighed that it was 
difficult to encompass five thousand years of Chinese history 
into 50 minutes and that he received "hundreds" of 
suggestions every day on what should be incorporated into the 
ceremony.  He added that there would be elements of "East is 
Red" because he liked the color red, but that one needed more 
than just one color in a show. 
 
Celebrity Censorship 
-------------------- 
 
¶10. (U) In a subtle reference to Bjork's recent protest, 
Zhang Yimou skirted the question of whether he was only 
allowed to pick celebrities from pre-approved lists.  He did 
note that he was in constant contact with various celebrities 
about artistic questions and that there would be both Chinese 
and foreign performers in the ceremonies, but none felt 
 
BEIJING 00000931  003 OF 004 
 
 
"pressure."  When asked his opinion about Kang Wei, the 
leading actress in the movie "Lust, Caution" who has been 
banned from the Chinese media, Zhang noted that this was a 
question for the artistic world and had nothing to do with 
the Olympics.  Zhang added that he was good friends with Li 
Ang, the director of "Lust, Caution," who is a personal 
friend and artistic consultant to the Opening Ceremony 
department.  They discussed artistic issues, but that was 
all, Zhang said. 
 
¶11. (U) Zhang confirmed that all ceremony performers and 
staff had to sign a confidentiality agreement.  He denied 
that there was a seven-year imprisonment penalty for leaking 
plans for the ceremony.  Zhang added that the documentation 
was mostly IOC language with a few "Chinese amendments." 
 
Post-Olympic Effects 
-------------------- 
 
¶12. (U) Vice Mayor Liu emphasized that Olympic operational 
costs had been primarily paid for by sponsorship fees.  The 
Central and Beijing Governments gave tax breaks but did not 
directly invest in any Olympic projects.  The Olympics will 
leave a "lasting legacy" in the form of improvements to 
traffic, the environment and infrastructure, added Liu.  The 
newest subway line, Line 5, has a daily passenger load of 
500,000 people, significantly decreasing north/south traffic 
congestion on the city's east side.  Three additional subway 
lines will further help traffic congestion.  The Olympics' 
legacy is beyond the "hardware" and also includes more 
Chinese/foreign interaction and a better understanding of the 
Olympic spirit.  Liu added that there had been an evident 
effect of the "humanistic Olympics" on an "increased 
morality." 
 
¶13. (U) Olympic venues will be accessible to the public, 
confirmed Vice Mayor Liu.  He explained that during the 
bidding process, all contractors were required to submit a 
post-Olympic use plan for the venue they wished to operate 
and demonstrate that they had the capital to implement it. 
The Water Cube, for example, would be transformed into a 
recreational water park and 11,000 of its 17,000 seats would 
be removed. 
 
Drug-Free Olympics 
------------------ 
 
¶14. (U) General Administration of Sport Vice President Cui 
Dalin reaffirmed that China would have a drug-free team in 
¶2008.  Cui noted that under the State Council's direction, 
the General Administration of Sport (GAOS) has emphasized 
prevention and education to prevent doping.  The Central 
Government has built an anti-doping center and improved drug 
testing facilities.  GAOS has also signed anti-doping 
contracts with all provincial sports bureaus, coaches and 
athletes.  In 2007, over 10,000 athlete drug tests were 
conducted.  When the World Anti-Doping Agency officials 
visited Beijing last year, they commented that they had full 
confidence in China and that the "Chinese model" was an 
example for the rest of the world. 
 
High-Tech Olympics 
------------------ 
 
¶15. (U) Zhang Jing'an, Director of the Science and Technology 
Daily and Secretary General of the Ministry of Science and 
Technology, expounded on efforts to have a "high-tech 
Olympics."  Zhang described the Ministry of Science and 
Technology's task force that included 13 organizations from 
the Beijing Municipal Government, Ministry of Education and 
other institutions.  He noted that there were action plans 
ranging from energy-saving vehicles, reusable energy, water 
treatment and green construction techniques.  500 "green" 
cars, including electric cars used within the Olympic Green 
and hybrid cars used throughout town, would be examples of 
clean transportation.  Reusable energy sources would be used 
to power Olympic venues.  Water would be recycled, including 
80 percent of rain water in venues, and all waste water would 
be treated. Construction of the venues utilized advanced 
techniques that were all done locally including the 
super-strong concrete for the National Stadium.  Zhang also 
noted that the torch's design reflected the hi-tech 
characteristics of the Olympics by overcoming three 
challenges during the ascent of Mount Everest:  low 
temperature, high wind and lack of oxygen. 
 
Medal Count Not Goal 
-------------------- 
 
¶16. (U) Vice President Cui Dalin refuted claims that the 
 
BEIJING 00000931  004 OF 004 
 
 
Chinese Olympic team was aiming to have the largest medal 
haul in the 2008 Olympics.  "China is still not a strong 
sports country like the United States and Russia," Cui 
lamented.  Cui supported his statement by noting that the 
United States had won 103 medals in the 2004 Olympics in 
Athens, while China had only won 63.  He added that in just 
two non-Olympic events in 2007, the United States had won 17 
gold medals in swimming and 14 in track and field, which was 
almost equal to China's total gold medal count in 2004. 
Instead of aiming for a medal count, the Chinese Olympic team 
was following a "holistic approach" aimed at contributing to 
a "harmonious society" through:  1) developing the Olympic 
spirit among China's athletes, 2) inducing national pride in 
the team through enhanced sportsmanship and economic 
development for the country through promotion of the sports 
industry, 3) increasing international exchanges, and 4) 
increasing Chinese citizens' passion for sports and 
healthiness through public fitness programs and competition. 
 
Olympic Village With Chinese Characteristics 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶17. (U) Deng Yaping, Deputy Director of the Olympic Village 
for the Beijing Organizing Committee for the 29th Olympiad 
Games (BOCOG) and a former ping-pong Olympic gold medalist, 
reported on Olympic village construction.  Deng announced 
that village construction was in accordance with 
International Olympic Committee (IOC) regulations and that 
athletes that had competed in Athens and Sydney would find 
all the standard facilities.  However, while the 
infrastructure of the Olympic village is to IOC 
specifications, the customer service and other "soft touches" 
will display "Chinese characteristics" and uphold the 
principles of a "humanistic Olympics."  (Note:  A "humanistic 
Olympics" is one of the three Chinese Olympic goals, the 
other two being a "green Olympics" and a "hi-tech Olympics." 
End note.)  BOCOG's cultural department is currently 
arranging for cultural activities/performances in the village 
to showcase Chinese culture.  There will be three areas in 
the village:  1) the residential area, 2) the operational 
area and 3) the international zone.  The international zone 
will be available for the press to interview athletes, offer 
shopping for the athletes and be the site of the flag-raising 
ceremony. 
 
Macau Wants To Establish Its Own Team 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶18. (U) Cui remarked that the Minister of Sport, Liu Peng, 
had petitioned the IOC to support the establishment of a 
Macau Olympic Committee similar to that of Hong Kong and 
Chinese Taipei.  (Note:  Chinese Taipei is the official name 
under which Taiwan competes in the Olympics.  End note.)  Cui 
noted that despite the Chinese Olympic Committee's support 
for Macau there has been no resolution of this case since the 
IOC's new regulation restricts Olympic Committees to 
sovereign nations only. 
 
Yao Ming Recovering 
------------------- 
 
¶19. (U) Cui noted that the Chinese Basketball Association is 
in continuous contact with the National Basketball 
Association in the United States regarding Yao Ming's health. 
 Yao Ming's March 3 surgery was successful, but given China's 
"respect for athletes," whether Yao chooses to play depends 
on his and his doctor's opinions.  The Chinese basketball 
team, in the meantime, is preparing to play without Yao, Cui 
stated. 
RANDT