08BEIRUT1771
Lebanon: Media Reaction - December 19, 2008
Fri Dec 19 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beirut
O 191254Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIRUT
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3807
NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 
USMISSION USNATO PRIORITY 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA PRIORITYUNCLAS BEIRUT 001771 
 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ELA - IRWIN, NEA/ELA - LAWSON, NEA/PPD, R, 
INR/R/MR, INR-PARENT, 
NSC - ABRAMS/RAMCHAND/YERGER/MCDERMOTT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF PREL KMDR OPRC KPAO KISL KPAL LE
SUBJECT:  Lebanon: Media Reaction - December 19, 2008 
 
Atmospherics: 
------------- 
 
Media outlets continued to report extensively on the Russian MiG-29 
donation to Lebanon.  Many outlets reported on an interview that the 
Defense Minister gave to the Lebanese Broadcasting Corporation 
International TV station (LBCI) last night.  El Murr said that "any 
country that will deal with Lebanon (about) military assistance will 
from now on have to deal with it from the level of the Russian 
donation upward," i.e., the Russians have set a new standard. 
 
The media seemed to be confused about the U.S. position on the 
issue.  Moderate anti-Syrian An-Nahar newspaper quoted an "American 
official who is briefed about the Lebanese file," as saying that the 
USG adopts "a neutral position" toward the Russian donation.  Arab 
nationalist As-Safir said "the U.S. administration is very 
dissatisfied with, first, the Lebanese military and political course 
toward Russia, and second, with Russia's sudden decision."  Several 
newspapers reported that Hizballah and the opposition were satisfied 
with the donation. 
 
Selected Headlines 
------------------- 
 
"Washington Is Neutral toward the MiG Jetfighters to Lebanon and El 
Murr Confirms That the Russian Donation Is Unconditional" Moderate 
anti-Syrian An-Nahar 
 
"The Mig-29 Gift Will Be Followed By Choppers to Fight Fires" 
Centrist Al Anwar 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"Political Roaring over the MiGs Precedes the Arrival of the 
Jetfighters: A Russian Landing (airlift) in Lebanon which Relieves 
the Opposition and Hizballah," an editorial by Imad Marmal in Arab 
nationalism As-Safir: 
 
"Reactions to the 'Russian surprise' continue to echo strongly in 
Beirut, as though the roaring (sound) of the MiG-29s preceded the 
arrival of the ten jetfighters...  While  March 14 welcomed the 
donation...it was clear that there were those who intended to imply 
that the Russian donation embarrassed the opposition in general and 
Hizballah in particular because strengthening the LAF with developed 
weapons could take away from the 'Resistance' the reasons for 
continuing and the philosophy of its existence.  Active leadership 
circles in the opposition...note that Hizballah could be in the lead 
of those who feel great relief over the Russian step, which is very 
important because Hizballah believes that it fell- in its strategic 
sense - into the category of strengthening the international 
presence that competes with the United States in the Middle East. 
As such, this step gains vital dimensions that bypass local details 
to touch on new balances that are being established in the region... 
 Information (from) highly informed sources in Beirut confirms that 
the Russian donation to the LAF is an expression of  a strong 
political stand that was taken at the highest political levels in 
Moscow and which calls for strengthening the Russian role in the 
Middle East in response to the American decision to build the 
missile shield in Europe...  Hizballah and the opposition both look 
at the Russian donation as coinciding with a deep desire to 
strengthen any international presence on the Lebanese stage other 
the American...  The circles...reveal that Hizballah tends to be 
cautious about making a public welcoming ...so that the positive 
reaction does not affect military cooperation between Lebanon and 
Russia, especially since the Israelis are now watching such 
cooperation closely and could exploit any official Hizballah 
position to exercise pressure on Russia to close the door on arming 
the LAF under the banner that Hizballah is the beneficiary..." 
 
"Arming the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) a Settlement or a Deal? An 
editorial by Ghada Halaweh in independent Al Balad: 
 
"...As usual, politicians were divided between supporters and those 
who expressed reservations...  We want the LAF to be armed and 
strong but we disagree over the source, even if the source this time 
is in the middle even if it is an ally of the Syrians and the 
Iranians.  The Russian decision was a surprise without any doubt and 
no one can deny that the issue might include the word 'probable' 
international deal or bargain or some settlement...from which 
America or Israel are not distant...  But if all that was untrue 
presumptions then we are facing a Russian challenge to America which 
until recently was refusing the issue of equipping the LAF in order 
for it not to become an extra scarecrow facing Israel.  The nature 
of matters supposes that there is a price for equipping the LAF... 
and (it is evident in) the various messages that Russia has been 
sending in more than one direction.  The first message is that 
Russia was not affected by the world financial crisis and that it 
has other sources to make up for any possible losses.  Also, it is 
an opportunity for Russia at this transitional phase in America's 
history, to establish a presence in Lebanon and from there to the 
region in general..." 
 
Sison