08BEIRUT407
LEBANON: NOMINATIONS FOR MEPI STUDENT LEADERS PROGRAM
Wed Mar 19 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beirut
VZCZCXRO9411
PP RUEHAG RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHKUK RUEHLZ RUEHROV
DE RUEHLB #0407/01 0791440
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 191440Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIRUT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1324
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 09 BEIRUT 000407 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/PI FOR SULLIVAN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL KMPI KPAO LE
SUBJECT: LEBANON: NOMINATIONS FOR MEPI STUDENT LEADERS PROGRAM 
 
¶1.  (U) On March 7 and 10, a four-member Embassy panel conducted 
interviews with short-listed applicants for this summerQs MEPI 
Student Leaders Program.  Ten principal candidates and four 
alternates were selected based on their qualifications for the 
program and interview performance.  The ten principal nominees are 
in rank order:  Nermine Chatila, Dima Matta, Maria Hamalian, Mohamad 
El Amin, Yara Zogheib, Roldy Arrouk, Amal Dib, Raghid Charara, 
Brenda Iara Younes, and Sandra Ayoubi.  The four alternates are in 
rank order:  Adel Nehme, Lana Salman, Ashraf Shouaib, and Elias 
Karam. 
 
¶2.  (U) Following is complete biographical data and post 
justifications for the ten principal nominees: 
 
Nermine Shatila 
 
a.  Shatila; 
 
b.  Nermine; 
 
c.  Abdul Sattar; 
 
d.  10/28/1988; 
 
e.  Beirut; 
 
f.  Lebanon; 
 
g.  Lebanon; 
 
h.  Lebanon; 
 
i.  Female; 
 
j.  Maamari Basha bldg, 2nd floor, Bahrain Street, Caracass, Beirut, 
Lebanon; 
 
k.  Mobile: 961-3-550575; 
 
l.  nas22@aub.edu.lb; 
 
m.  None; 
 
n.  American University of Beirut (AUB); 
 
o.  BA Economics Q minors in Human Rights, Anthropology and 
Transitional Justice (September 2006-present); 
 
p.  Research Assistant at the Career and Placement Service at the 
AUB Student Affairs Office since February 2007.  Guide at the 
VisitorsQ Bureau at the AUB Office of Information and Public 
Relations since September 2006; 
 
q.  Citizenship award for extensive involvement in community 
services and extra-curricular activities; 
 
r.  Member of the AUB Awareness Club; 
 
s.  Reading, writing, drawing, painting, jewelry making, soccer and 
morning jogging; 
 
t.  Assistant Editor at AUBQs Outlook Student magazine since 
September 2006.  Secretary of the UNESCO Club at AUB since August 
¶2006.  Co-founder and leader of local group Aie Serve since March 
2007 (see section x); 
 
u.  None; 
 
v.  Excellent oral and written English as evidenced by application 
and interview; 
 
w.  Master Program in Public Policy; 
 
x.  Nermine plans to pursue a career in public policy-making in 
Lebanon with an emphasis on culture and education.  This choice of 
career comes from her passionate desire to change, develop and 
improve her country rather than immigrate to a more sheltered and 
peaceful nation.  Since high school, she has intensively engaged in 
clubs and activities that work to build a better community.  In 
pursuit of this goal, she founded a student group named Aie Serve in 
February 2007 which she currently leads and plans to develop into a 
more effective and influential institution.  As a team, Aie Serve 
members have been able to adopt a less-privileged school in Beirut 
and introduce changes to its curriculum by establishing its 
first-ever co-curricular block for high school students.  This block 
centers around a debate club which aims to increase awareness and 
activism amongst its students, in addition to teaching leadership, 
critical thinking, communication, and research skills.  Besides the 
co-curricular block, weekend activities aimed at environmental 
 
BEIRUT 00000407  002 OF 009 
 
 
improvement were introduced in collaboration with environmental 
organizations.  The MEPI summer leadership program will indubitably 
enable Nermine to develop her newly established and infant group by 
providing her with proper leadership, management, and team-building 
skills.  At the same time, fellow participants will greatly benefit 
from NermineQs creative ideas and extensive experience in community 
activities; 
 
Dima Matta 
 
a.  Matta; 
 
b.  Dima; 
 
c.  Mikhael; 
 
d.  09/29/1988; 
 
e.  Beirut; 
 
f.  Lebanon; 
 
g.  Lebanon; 
 
h.  Lebanon; 
 
i.  Female; 
 
j.  Abadjian bldg, Bloc B, 6th floor, Mar Mkhayel Street, Mar 
Mkhayel El Nahr, Beirut, Lebanon; 
 
k.  Home: 961-1-443485 ; 
 
l.  dima.matta@haigazian.edu.lb; 
 
m.  None; 
 
n.  Haigazian University; 
 
o.  English Literature Major and Teaching Diploma (September 
2006-present); 
 
p.  Since October 2006, Dima has served as the Assistant Director at 
the Haigazian University ActorsQ Club.  Specifically, she leads the 
cast in play rehearsals and manages schedules and performance 
publicity drives.  While still in high school, Dima also led a 
Beirut summer camp in 2005 where she supervised different children 
activities, including swimming, dancing, art and crafts; 
 
q.  None; 
 
r.  None; 
 
s.  Acting, writing, dancing, reading, public speaking; 
 
t.  In October 2006, Dima joined a philanthropic club QDesert 
StreamsQ which provides basic supplies to poor families, organizes 
charity events and helps renovate schools and clinics.  Since 
October 2007, she has been a member of Haigazian UniversityQs 
Education Club which organizes book fairs and promotes reading 
awareness.  From October 2006 to July 2007, Dima was a member of a 
kick boxing team.  She participated in tournaments and competitions 
and obtained an orange belt. 
 
u.  None; 
 
v.  Excellent oral and written English as evidenced by application 
and interview; 
 
w.  English teacher; 
 
x.  DimaQs career goals are very focused.  She wants to become an 
English teacher because she rightly believes that her country is in 
dire need of fresh and qualified teachers.  The MEPI summer 
leadership program will help her achieve her goals by intriducing 
her to native English speakers and the American culture.  More 
importantly, she convinced the Embassy panel that this program will 
give her the leadership skills needed to become a better teacher and 
a strong role model for her future students.  She wants to inspire 
her future students to chose the right path, expand their horizons 
and help them master the learning and English language skills they 
will need to succeed in life; 
 
Maria Hamalian 
 
a.  Hamalian; 
 
b. Maria; 
 
 
BEIRUT 00000407  003 OF 009 
 
 
c. Garabet; 
 
d. 01/01/1987; 
 
e. Bourj Hammoud; 
 
f. Lebanon; 
 
g. Lebanon; 
 
h. Lebanon; 
 
i. Female; 
 
j. Sfeir bldg, 2nd floor, Jbeil main street, Blat; 
 
k. Mobile: 961-70-843425 ; 
 
l. whitebutterfly25@hotmail.com; 
 
m. None; 
 
n. Lebanese University; 
 
o. English language and literature (November 2006-present); 
 
p. Hair dresser since March 2006; 
 
q. Started an internship in a translation office in January 08; 
 
r. None; 
 
s. Writing (poetry, plays, novels), reading, dancing, oil painting, 
traveling, learning languages; 
 
t. Worked as a volunteer at an orphanage in the summers of 2001 and 
2002; 
 
u. None; 
 
v. Good oral and written English as evidenced by application and 
interview; 
 
w. Translator; 
 
x. Maria comes from a lower middle class background.  She has been 
working as a hairdresser for the past two years to pay her own way 
through university.  She is self-confident, poised, ambitious and 
hard working.  She chose translation as a future career because she 
sees it as a cultural mission aimed at bringing people from 
different backgrounds closer together.  The MEPI summer leadership 
program will give her a unique opportunity and practical experience 
in dealing with people from different cultures and backgrounds.  At 
the same time, we believe that MariaQs participation in this program 
will have a very positive impact on the group because she has a lot 
to give and share with others.  Her volunteering experience in 
humanitarian activities has shaped her personality, developed her 
team work spirit and unfolded her leadership potential.  On several 
occasions, she was assigned to lead groups in the QBirds Nest 
orphanage where she successfully supervised a number of activities 
which brought smiles on young childrenQs faces; 
 
Mohamad El Amin 
 
a.   El Amin; 
 
b. Mohamad; 
 
c. Naaman; 
 
d. 02/28/1988; 
 
e. Tyre; 
 
f. Lebanon; 
 
g. Lebanon; 
 
h. Lebanon; 
 
i. Male; 
 
j. El Nour bldg, Block A, 7th floor, Tyre, Abbassiye crossing; 
 
k. Home: 961-7-345459; Mobile: 961-70-843425; 
 
l. mohamad.amin@lau.edu.lb; 
 
m. None; 
 
BEIRUT 00000407  004 OF 009 
 
 
 
n. Lebanese American University (LAU); 
 
o. Economics (September 2005-present); 
 
p. Since October 2007, Mohamad works as a Web journalist/Developer 
at the Lebanese Red Cross.  From May 2006 to October 2007 he held 
the positions of team leader and fundraiser with the Greenpeace 
Mediterranean organization; 
 
q. University Academic Recognition: Distinguished List Spring 2006, 
Honor List Fall 2006, Distinguished List Fall 2007; 
 
r. None; 
 
s. Chess, cultural and environmental tourism, economics, philosophy, 
music, writing, poetry; 
 
t. Volunteer in Greenpeace oil spill team and the Oceans campaign 
marine reserves team.  Volunteer in summer camps organized by the 
Ministry of Social Affairs in 2002, 2003 and 2004.  Member of the 
UNESCO club at the LAU since February 2006; 
 
u. None; 
 
v. Good oral and written English as evidenced by application and 
interview; 
 
w. Pursuing a career in a non-governmental organization; 
 
x.   Mohamad is from Tyre, South of Lebanon.  He comes from a lower 
middle class background and has impressively combined paid work in 
NGOQs, work study programs at LAU and a full-time course load.  Even 
though a job in the provate sector may have eased his financial 
situation a bit, he opted to work with NGOs because he strongly 
believes that work is not only a way to earn money but more 
importantly to contribute to the well-being of society.  His 
commitment is impressive.  Mohamad is determined to pursue a career 
in the NGO field and we believe this program will provide him with 
the necessary skills to achieve his long-term goal of serving the 
community in the best possible way.  At the same time, MohamadQs 
extensive volunteering experience with Greenpeace will help raise 
awareness amongst fellow participants on the impact of such action 
both on the personal and community levels. 
 
Yara Zogheib 
 
a.  Zogheib; 
 
b.  Yara; 
 
c.  Youssef; 
 
d.  11/21/1989; 
 
e.  Zabbougha; 
 
f.  Lebanon; 
 
g.  Lebanon; 
 
h.  Lebanon; 
 
i.  Female; 
 
j.  Bldg 29, 3rd floor, Ain Aar, main street, Metn, Lebanon; 
 
k.  Home: 961-4-911709; Mobile: 961-3-164502; 
 
l.  yara.zgheib@gmail.com; 
 
m.  None; 
 
n.  Notre Dame University (NDU); 
 
o.  International Affairs and Diplomacy; 
 
p.  Provided private tutoring in English and Math for 11-12 year old 
students; 
 
q.  University Academic Recognition: DeanQs list; 
 
r.  None; 
 
s.  Ballet and latin dancing, piano playing, acting (she was part of 
her high school drama club), reading, writing (she was the editor of 
her high school magazine); 
 
t.  Yara joined the Scouts Movement in Lebanon in 1997 and has 
 
BEIRUT 00000407  005 OF 009 
 
 
continued her involvement in the organization.  She is currently the 
assistant troop leader of the QCaravellesQ branch (for girls aged 15 
to 17).  She is also a member in the University Christian Outreach 
(UCO) which aims at bringing college students together to educate 
them more about their faith.  In November 2006, she took part in an 
inter-scholar and inter-confessional effort to reenact the Lebanese 
peopleQs declaration of unity and independence.  Specifically, she 
worked with 24 other high school students from diverse religious 
backgrounds to write a unified declaration of LebanonQs unity, 
sovereignty and independence.  The document was presented to, and 
acclaimed by the main religious leaders in Lebanon.  In May 2006, 
she was selected to attend the Model United Nations-Global 
Classrooms in New York where she won, along with another Lebanese 
student, the QBest Delegation awardQ; 
 
u.  Traveled to New York from May 20-27, 2006 to attend the Model 
United Nations-Global Classrooms; 
 
v.  Excellent written and oral English skills as evidenced by 
application and interview; 
 
w.  International Affairs and Diplomacy; 
 
x.  Yara is strongly attached to her country and has chosen to 
pursue a political career in Lebanon because she genuinely believes 
that this is how she can best contribute to its development.  She is 
aware however that it is still very difficult for a woman to be 
taken seriously in politics in Lebanon, but she is convinced that 
her generation will be the one to change that.  The MEPI summer 
leadership program will provide her with the necessary tools to gain 
more self-confidence and hence assert herself in her future career. 
At the same time, we strongly believe that YaraQs participation will 
add a lot to the program.  She has a vibrant and joyful personality. 
 She smiles often, laughs a lot and came across as someone who 
stands up for what she believes in.  She has so far engaged in many 
diverse interesting activities despite her young age.  Scouting 
taught her discipline, teamwork, determination and integrity.  Model 
United Nations taught her leadership, diplomacy, negotiation skills 
and respect for others.  Ballet taught her to put her heart in 
everything she does.  If admitted to this program, she will enrich 
it with heartfelt enthusiasm and willingness to give both alone and 
in a group a unique Lebanese perspective to the debate, a 
good-humored attitude and a disposition to serve. 
 
Roldy Arrouk 
 
a.  Arrouk; 
 
b.  Roldy; 
 
c.  Miled; 
 
d.  10/20/1988; 
 
e.  Chiah; 
 
f.  Lebanon; 
 
g.  Lebanon; 
 
h.  Lebanon; 
 
i.  Male; 
 
j.  Nouhad al Boustany Bldg., Basement floor, Antonios Street, 
Adonis, Zouk Mosbeh, Lebanon; 
 
k.  Home:  961-9-222926; Mobile:  961-3-481153; 
 
l.  roldy-a19@hotmail.com; 
 
m.  None; 
 
n.  Notre Dame University (NDU); 
 
o.  Marketing; 
 
p.  Waiter and Cook's assistant at La Maison restaurant (August 
2002-October 2007); waiter at Orange restaurant (October 2005-May 
2006); 
 
q.  Notre Dame University, Marketing degree expected in June 2008; 
listed on the university's Dean's List of Academic Recognition; 
 
r.  Member of SEF Amicale (Service de l'Enfant au Foyer), member of 
the Pastoral Club and member of the Marketing and Advertising Club 
at NDU; 
 
s.  Photography, camping, drawing, and reading; 
 
BEIRUT 00000407  006 OF 009 
 
 
 
t.  Volunteer at Caritas since 1999, certified member of QCentre 
d'entrainement aux methodes d'education active du Liban 
(C.E.M.E.A.L.) since 2005, an organization that organizes training 
camps for youth; volunteer at Anta Akhi, 1998-2004, an organization 
that provides a decent life for individuals with physical and/or 
mental disabilities; 
 
u.  None; 
 
v.  Good oral and written English as evidenced by application and 
interview; 
 
w.  Marketing Manager; 
 
x.  Roldy comes from a poor neighborhood in BeirutQs southern 
suburbs.  He lost his father at a very young age and started working 
since the age of fourteen (as a waiter and a cook assistant) to 
sustain his familyQs needs.  He is hard working and ambitious and 
this program would provide him with his first opportunity to travel 
outside of Lebanon.  His dream is to become a successful marketing 
manager and to serve consumers by delivering what they need and 
want.  This leadership program will teach him how to better use 
power, influence, persuasion, conceptual and communication skills to 
achieve his career goal.  At the same time, Roldy has a lot to share 
about his extensive volunteering experience mainly with humanitarian 
organization CARITAS since 1999 and Anta Akhi which empowers 
individuals with physical and mental disabilities.  He said that 
these organizations helped his family during difficult times in the 
past and it is a testament to his character that he has learned the 
importance of giving back at such a young age. 
 
Amal Dib 
 
a.  Dib; 
 
b.  Amal; 
 
c.  Antoun; 
 
d.  01/09/1988; 
 
e.  Bterram; 
 
f.  Lebanon; 
 
g.  Lebanon; 
 
h.  Lebanon; 
 
i.  Female; 
 
j.  University of Balamand, P.O. Box 100-606, El Koura, Lebanon; 
 
k.  Home:  961-6-416080; Mobile:  961-3-882313; 
 
l.  amal.dib@hotmail.com; 
 
m.  None; 
 
n.  University of Balamand; 
 
o.  Major in Mass Communication and minor in Political Science and 
International Affairs; 
 
p.  Assistant at the Office of Students' Affairs at the University 
of Balamand since February 2006; free lance journalist at a monthly 
newspaper called Hamzet Wassel since May 2007; 
 
q.  University of Balamand, Mass Communication degree and minor 
degree in Political Science and International Affairs; placed on the 
Dean's List in Fall and Spring semesters of 2005, 2006, and 2007; 
winner of Fares el-Hajj scholarships for two consecutive years 2006 
and 2007; 
 
r.  Co-founder of the Balamand Students Support Group (BSSG), member 
of the Miss University of Balamand committee, member of the Astro 
Club, Photography Club, Cine Club, and Oriental Choir at the 
University of Balamand, member of the Youth Coalition for Electoral 
Reform and the University Initiative for Electoral Reform, president 
of the Human Rights Club at the University of Balamand; 
 
s.  Reading and writing political studies and articles and an active 
person in favor of humanitarian issues; 
 
t.  Assistant Chief in the Scout National Orthodox Scout group since 
1992; volunteer at Offre Joie NGO that promotes inter-confessional 
dialogue and tolerance, organizes youth camps and helps in 
reconstructing schools and prisons; member of the European Project 
 
BEIRUT 00000407  007 OF 009 
 
 
for Interreligious Learning (EPIL), a roaming course that aims at 
building dialogue among women from different religions in Europe and 
the Middle East; 
 
u.  None; 
 
v.  Excellent oral and written English as evidenced by application 
and interview; 
 
w.  Journalism; 
 
x.  Amal Dib is a brilliant student as evidenced by the 
scholarships, awards and honors she received.  She has a lively and 
energetic personality and came across as a confident, open-minded 
and tolerant person.  She is preparing to become a journalist and is 
always looking to broaden her outlook.  The MEPI Summer leadership 
program will help sharpen her communication and leadership skills 
which are essential for her future professional goals.  At the same 
time, Amal has a lot to share about her experience with the Scouts 
movement, her volunteering activities with NGO Offre-Joie, her 
participation in the European Project for Interreligious Learning, 
her human rights activities at her university club and her action in 
support of electoral reform in Lebanon. 
 
Raghid Charara 
 
a.  Charara; 
 
b.  Raghid; 
 
c.  Nabil; 
 
d.  01/01/1989; 
 
e.  Beirut; 
 
f.  Lebanon; 
 
g.  Lebanon; 
 
h.  Lebanon; 
 
i.  Male; 
 
j.  American University of Beirut, P.O. Box 11-0236/4326, Riad 
el-Solh, Beirut, 1107 2020, Lebanon; 
 
k.  Home:  961-1-857037; Mobile:  961-3-070614; 
 
l.  rns27@aub.edu.lb; 
 
m.  None; 
 
n.  American University of Beirut (AUB); 
 
o.  Biology Pre-Med and minor in General Business Administration 
(September 2006-present); 
 
p.  Assistant Teacher at the International College Summer Camp (July 
2004-September 2004; July 2005-September 2005), private tutoring 
(July 2005-October 2005); 
 
q.  Award of Achievement in Mathematics (CAAP test, part of IORA 
research center) AUB; Distinguished Scholars' Award from the 
International College, 2004, 2005, 2006; Acting Award, International 
College 2006; Community Service Award, International College 2006; 
Information Technology Award, International College 2006; 
 
r.  Member of Drama Club at the International College, 2005 and 2006 
and the Arabic Club at the International College 2006; 
 
s.  Acting; 
 
t.  Assisted children suffering from cancer at the Saint Judes 
Cancer Center; provided educational assistance to Palestinian 
children at the Bourj el-Barajneh Palestinian camp, voluntary work 
at the al-Nasma NGO that packed food, water, and basic needs for the 
displaced during the July 2006 war; Mouvement Social, provided 
community service activity at the International College where major 
social problems were discussed and feasible solutions were sought; 
 
u.  None; 
 
v.  Excellent oral and written English as evidenced by application 
and interview; 
 
w.  Physician; 
 
x.  Raghid is a brilliant student as evidenced by his grades and the 
 
BEIRUT 00000407  008 OF 009 
 
 
special honors and awards he received.  His application essays 
thoughtful, thought-proviking and extremely well-prepared.  This 
leadership training will significantly contribute to his aspirations 
of becoming a successful physician as he hopes to improve his 
communication, decision-making, and coordination skills for later 
use in emergency and operating rooms.  Furthermore, the community 
service training that the program offers complements RaghidQs 
personal interests.  He has volunteered with various NGOs in Lebanon 
working on projects targeting Palestinian refugee camps, and others 
with children suffering from cancer and underprivileged families. 
His exposure to community service projects in the U.S. will allow 
him to acquire methods to enhance his involvement and participation 
in voluntary social services in Lebanon.  Raghid also dreams of 
starting his own organization that delivers vaccinations and 
healthcare to poor children.  This training will help him develop a 
vision for his organization and provide him with the necessary 
skills to bring it to life, lead it and inspire others to join him 
on this project. 
 
Brenda Iara Younes 
 
a.  Younes; 
 
b.  Brenda Iara; 
 
c.  Nader; 
 
d.  04/07/1988; 
 
e.  Cordoba; 
 
f.  Argentina; 
 
g.  Lebanon; 
 
h.  She holds an Argentinean passport, but is also a Lebanese 
citizen and can obtain a Lebanese passport if needed; 
 
i.  Female; 
 
j.  Nagib Younes Bldg., 2nd floor, Blat Jbeil, Lebanon; 
 
k.  Home:  961-9-795722; Mobile:  961-70-140791; 
 
l.  yara_younes@yahoo.com; 
 
m.  Allergic to caffeine; 
 
n.  Notre Dame University (NDU); 
 
o.  Journalism; 
 
p.  Activity leader at Arne Osland, local refugee house in Forde, 
Norway where she entertained refugees and gave English lessons to 
refugee women; 
 
q.  Award in the Lebanese American University's Science and Arts 
fair:  first place in essay writing; Saiid Akel award for her 
performance in a play; placed on the Dean's List for academic 
recognition at NDU since her first semester; 
 
r.  Member of Avaaz, a web movement involved in various 
economic/political and environmental petitions and action plans; a 
participant in the American Islamic Congress, she attended one of 
their workshops in Amman Jordan last spring; 
 
s.  Dancing, skiing, reading, and writing; 
 
t.  Has organized a Book Club with friends that meet every three 
weeks to discuss novels; Cine Club, a weekly movie session followed 
by a discussion; member of the Board of Advisors of her previous 
school, Universal School of Lebanon; 
 
u.  None; 
 
v.  Excellent oral and written English as evidenced by application 
and interview; 
 
w.  Writer; 
 
x.  Brenda aspires to make change through what she does best, 
writing.  She wants to become a successful journalist and looks 
forward to an idealistic new generation of thinkers, philosophers, 
political analysts and opinion leaders who can educate others.  This 
leadership training will help her assert herself both as a woman and 
a journalist.  In addition to her passion for writing, Brenda is 
very active.  At school, she took on many responsibilities: the 
school magazine, the yearbook committee, the organization of major 
events, plays, musicals, projects and contests.  When she was later 
 
BEIRUT 00000407  009 OF 009 
 
 
admitted to the United World Colleges in Norway, she acted in the 
same way: she joined the Red Cross group and became a first aid 
responder.  She was also elected to represent the student body in 
the student council and worked on the environmental committee.  She 
also conducted community service activities, including weekly visits 
to a refugee center.  If admitted to this program, she will bring a 
lot of enthusiasm and know-how to the group. 
 
Sandra Ayoubi 
 
a.  Ayoubi; 
 
b.  Sandra; 
 
c.  Nabil; 
 
d.  08/12/1986; 
 
e.  Tripoli; 
 
f.  Lebanon; 
 
g.  Lebanon; 
 
h.  Lebanon; 
 
i.  Female; 
 
j.  Massoud Center, 10th floor, Jemayzat Street, Tripoli, Lebanon; 
 
k.  Home:  961-6-428988; Mobile:  961-3-137016; 
 
l.  sandra.ayoubi@hotmail.com; 
 
m.  None; 
 
n.  Lebanese University; 
 
o.  Civil Engineering; 
 
p.  None; 
 
q.  Seven Honorary Awards from her school and a Thank You Award from 
Inma2 summer camp; 
 
r.  None; 
 
s.  Music; 
 
t.  Supervisor at the Inma2 summer camp (July-September 2003), 
debater at the Chaen and Injaz workshops (2006-2007), and scout at 
the College National Orthodoxe Scouts (June 1997-September 1998; 
 
u.  None; 
 
v.  Good oral and written English as evidenced by application and 
interview; 
 
w.  Civil Engineer 
 
x.  Sandra Ayoubi comes from Tripoli, North of Lebanon.  She is 
ambitious and hard working.  She is currently studying civil 
engineering at the Lebanese University, a public university, and 
would like to pursue an MBA after she graduates.  She has a 
sustained high level of academic achievement as indicated by the 
numerous honorary awards she received at school.  She is timid but 
has a lot of potential.  Engaged in various cultural and community 
service activities, she has already demonstrated strong leadership 
when she led a youth summer camp in 2003.   This program is a key 
opportunity for her personal, social and professional development. 
 
 
¶3.  (U) Post action officer: Jacqueline Ward; telephone number: 
961-4-542600 ext.4432; fax number: 961-4-544318; email address: 
wardjl2@state.gov 
 
¶4.  (U) Biographical data and justification for alternate candidates 
will be provided as needed. 
 
SISON