08BEIJING2928
JULY 29 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SECURITY, INTERNET CENSORSHIP,
Tue Jul 29 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO8423
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2928/01 2111015
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 291015Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8849
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 4376UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 002928 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PTER KOLY ENRG PHUM RS FR
SUBJECT: JULY 29 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SECURITY, INTERNET CENSORSHIP, 
HUMAN RIGHTS, MEDIA FREEDOM 
 
¶1.  Key points at the July 29 afternoon MFA press briefing were: 
 
-- The Kunming bus bombings were not connected to the Olympics, and 
China is focused on ensuring the safety of those who attend the 
games. 
 
-- You can "get all the information you need" from the Internet in 
China, but some foreign websites may have their own technical 
problems making them difficult to view in China. 
 
-- Amnesty International needs to "take off its colored glasses" 
when viewing China.  China takes an open attitude towards human 
rights discussions, however. 
 
-- Regulations allowing free rein for foreign journalists have yet 
to be "100 percent enacted." 
 
-- China will make comments if U.S. presidential candidates meet 
with "separatists or terrorists" Such as the Dalai Lama. 
 
-- China and Russia are planning a Prime Minister's meeting focused 
on energy. 
 
 
 
Olympic Security 
---------------- 
 
¶2. The July 21 bus bombings in Kunming had "no connection" with the 
Olympics said spokesman Liu Jianchao at the July 29 regular press 
conference. However, security remains an important part of a 
successful Olympics.  China will do what it takes to protect both 
the Chinese people as well as foreigners who attend the games, said 
Liu.  Asked to clarify what threats there were to the Olympic Games, 
Liu said that terrorists exist both in China and in the 
international community.  Liu specifically singled out the Turkestan 
Islamic Party as one terrorist group about which the international 
community should be "concerned."  Asked about conspiracy theories 
claiming China is manipulating the threat of terrorism to justify 
enhanced security, Liu said that some groups invented conspiracy 
theories to attack the Chinese government. 
 
Internet Censorship 
------------------- 
 
¶3. Asked repeatedly why some foreign websites are still not 
accessible in China, Liu said that you can "get all the information 
you need" from the Internet in China.  China will facilitate 
athletes' access to the internet during the games, said Liu.  Liu 
also pointed out that individual foreign websites may have their own 
technical problems which make them difficult to access from China. 
Asked whether illegal websites such as those created by outlawed 
spiritual movement Falungong would be unblocked, Liu responded that 
"Falungong is a cult and we will adhere to our position." 
 
Human Rights 
------------ 
 
¶4. No one who knows China will agree with the recent Amnesty 
International report saying human rights in China have deteriorated, 
said Liu.  Liu said that he hopes the group will "take off its 
colored glasses" and "see China in an objective way." China takes an 
"open attitude" toward discussions of human rights and does not 
"evade the topic," said Liu.  Liu acknowledged that some parties 
follow human rights in China very closely but sometimes they 
disregard China's "great improvements" in human rights to attack 
China with groundless accusations.  China opposes attempts to use 
human rights to interfere in China's domestic affairs. 
 
Foreign Media Freedom 
--------------------- 
 
¶5. Responding to accusations that foreign journalists continue to be 
harassed in Beijing, Liu said that the problem lies with the Chinese 
side, the foreign journalists and miscommunication.  Liu admitted 
that the regulations allowing free rein for foreign journalists had 
not been "100 percent enacted" and asked for cooperation while 
officials are made aware of the new rules. 
 
Presidential Candidates and Dalai Lama 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. Asked whether China considers its comments on Senator McCain's 
meetings with the Dalai Lama to be inappropriate meddling in the 
internal politics of the United States, Liu said that China would 
comment if presidential candidates meet with "separatists or 
terrorists."  Asked to clarify whether the Dalai Lama is a 
terrorist, Liu backtracked saying that China only considers him a 
separatist.  Liu would not comment on whether Senator Obama would 
visit China. 
 
 
BEIJING 00002928  002 OF 002 
 
 
Protest Zones 
------------- 
 
¶7. Liu referred to "relevant authorities" questions regarding the 
three "protest zones" which Beijing plans to designate during the 
Olympic Games. Liu could not elaborate on or explain the laws 
governing protests which seem to indicate that foreigners may only 
participate in protests in China if the protests are led by a 
Chinese citizen nor could he comment on laws prohibiting protests 
against the government and Communist Party. 
 
Olympic Attendees 
----------------- 
 
¶8. Liu would not comment on President Bush's schedule while in 
China.  Though he could not provide an exact list of dignitaries who 
will attend the games, Liu said more than 80 would be present at the 
Opening Ceremony.  Asked whether China would lift its ban on 
foreigners with HIV/AIDs as it has for foreigners with leprosy 
during the games, Liu said that the entry and exit of foreigners 
would be governed by the relevant laws of China. 
 
French Companies in China 
------------------------- 
 
¶9. Asked to confirm reports that French companies are finding it 
harder to register in Beijing, Liu said that the reports are "not in 
line with the facts."  Liu provided statistics indicating that there 
has been an increase in trade between France and China this year. 
China hopes to continue developing its partnership with France, said 
Liu. 
 
FDA Opening Offices in China 
---------------------------- 
 
¶10. China attaches great importance to food safety, said Liu in 
response to a question regarding the opening of Food and Drug 
Administration offices in China.  Liu said that China and the United 
States have "been in contact" regarding the issue and will "find a 
way to resolve the issue in a proper way." 
 
China-Russia Prime Minister Meeting on Energy 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. China and Russia have agreed to hold a prime minister level 
meeting on energy in Moscow sometime later this year, said Liu.  Liu 
could not confirm reports that the meeting would be held in October. 
 
 
WTO Negotiations 
--------------- 
 
¶12. Liu said that accusations that China was to blame for lack of 
progress in the Doha Round of WTO negotiations are "groundless." 
Liu said that developed countries should be more understanding of 
developing countries and stop "setting up obstacles."  China will 
continue to work to find a solution acceptable to all parties, he 
said. 
 
RANDT