08BEIJING92
January 8 MFA Press Briefing: India PM visit, A/S Hill
Tue Jan 08 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO6774
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0092/01 0081129
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 081129Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4362
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000092 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM CH
SUBJECT: January 8 MFA Press Briefing: India PM visit, A/S Hill 
Travel, Tibet, Human Rights, China-Singapore Relations 
 
 
¶1. Key points at the January 8 MFA Press Briefing: 
 
-- Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh will meet with President Hu 
Jintao, NPC Chairman Wu Bangguo and Premier Wen Jiabao during his 
January 14-15 visit to China. 
 
-- EAP Assistant Secretary Christopher Hill will meet with VFM Wu 
Dawei during his January 10-11 trip to Beijing.  All parties are 
continuing "positive communication and coordination" on the issue of 
Pyongyang's declaration of its nuclear programs. 
 
-- Tibet is an "internal affair" of China.  The Dalai Lama always 
engages in "separatist activities" under the name of religion. 
 
-- The MFA Spokesperson "had not heard" of any plan to dispatch 
Chinese troops to the DPRK in the event of instability, as reported 
by an American think tank. 
 
-- Human Rights:  Concerning the arrest of activist Hu Jia,  "China 
abides by the rule of law."  Some organizations "use the Olympics" 
to "play up" human rights issues "in violation" of the principles of 
the Games. 
 
-- Security cooperation between China and Singapore has "developed 
rapidly." 
 
Indian PM Visit 
--------------- 
 
¶2. At the January 8 regular MFA press briefing, MFA Spokesperson 
Jiang Yu confirmed that Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh will 
meet with President Hu Jintao, National People's Congress (NPC) 
Chairman Wu Bangguo and Premier Wen Jiabao during his January 14-15 
visit to China.  China attaches great significance to its "strategic 
partnership" with India, Jiang added.  Commenting on bilateral 
issues between the two countries, Jiang said positive progress has 
been made on territorial issues and both Beijing and New Delhi are 
"willing to work together to reach a fair resolution."  Regarding 
the Dalai Lama, Jiang merely said that China hopes the Indian 
government will "honor its commitments." 
 
Tibet: An Internal Chinese Affair 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶3. In response to a separate question about Tibetans reportedly 
being forced to sign a petition opposing the Dalai Lama's return, 
Jiang replied that Tibet is an "internal affair of China."  Jiang 
also accused the Dalai Lama of "always engaging in separatist 
activities under the name of religion." 
 
A/S Hill Trip to Beijing 
------------------------ 
 
¶4. Jiang confirmed that EAP Assistant Secretary Christopher Hill 
will meet with VFM Wu Dawei during his January 10-11 trip to 
Beijing.  When asked about the DPRK's commitment to make a full 
declaration of its nuclear programs, Jiang said that all parties are 
"continuing positive communication and coordination." 
 
Unaware of Any Plan to Dispatch Troops to DPRK 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶5. In response to a recent U.S. think tank report claiming that 
China plans to dispatch troops to North Korea to secure nuclear 
weapons in the event of instability, Jiang said she had "not heard" 
of any such plan. 
 
Hu Jia Arrest, Human Rights, Olympics 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. When asked to comment on the recent arrest of activist Hu Jia, 
Jiang replied that China "abides by the rule of law" and "protects 
the freedom" of its citizens.  Turning to the broader issue of human 
rights and the Olympic Games, Jiang accused some organizations of 
"using the Olympics" to "play up" human rights issues "in violation" 
of the principles of the Games. 
 
China-Singapore Relations 
------------------------- 
 
¶7. A reporter commented that a recent security agreement between 
China and Singapore has extended China's "reach" into the South 
China Sea.  In reply, Jiang said that in recent years, security 
cooperation has "developed rapidly" between the two countries. 
Regardng Singapore Air's bid to buy a stake in China Eastern 
Airlines, Jiang declined to comment beyond saying that the matter is 
one of "business cooperation." 
 
Visits 
------ 
 
¶8. Addressing a number of upcoming visits, Jiang said VFM Wang Yi 
 
BEIJING 00000092  002 OF 002 
 
 
will visit South Korea in mid-January as a "special envoy."  Vice 
Premier Zeng Peiyan will attend the 2008 World Economic Forum in 
Davos later this month.  Responding to a ROK media report that 
former leader of the ROK Grand National Party Park Geun Hye will 
visit China to meet with President Hu Jintao, Jiang simply said 
there is "no specific schedule" for the visit. 
 
RANDT