08BEIJING1731
MAY 6 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: IRAN, TIBET, VISAS, BURMA,
Tue May 06 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO6874
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1731/01 1272238
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 062238Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7070
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001731 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM PTER KOLY MARR CVIS TW CH KS KN JA
NP, IR 
 
SUBJECT: MAY 6 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: IRAN, TIBET, VISAS, BURMA, 
XINJIANG, HU VISIT TO JAPAN, CHINESE SUBMARINE BASE, MORE 
 
 
¶1. Key points at the May 6 MFA press briefing were: 
 
-- Iran enjoys the right to peaceful nuclear energy use, but also 
should show a sense of "responsibility." 
 
-- Central Government policy toward the Dalai Lama is "consistent 
and clear-cut" and the "door for contact is always open." 
 
-- China has "made some arrangements according to usual 
international practice," making the visa approval procedure "more 
strict and more serious." 
 
-- China has decided to send a "first batch" of USD 1 million in 
aid, including "cash and aterials" to help Burma with post-cyclone 
recnstruction efforts. 
 
-- The Olympic torch relay is the aspiration of the Xinjiang people 
and will display Xinjiang's ethnic solidarity, economic development 
and social progress. 
 
-- President Hu began a "very significant" state visit to Japan 
today, and the two sides are "working toward the goal" of a new 
joint statement. 
 
Iran Can Use Nuclear Energy, But Must Be Responsible 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶2. At the May 6, 2008 regular MFA press briefing, MFA Spokesman Qin 
Gang stated that a May 2 six nations foreign minister-level meeting 
on the Iran nuclear issue, which AFM He Yafei attended on behalf of 
FM Yang, "reiterated the six nations' willingness" to solve the 
issue through a "diplomatic approach."  China supports the 
international nonproliferation mechanism and believes that solving 
the problem through diplomatic negotiation so as to safeguard the 
peace and stability of the Middle East is in the interest of all 
parties.  Qin held that Iran enjoys the right to peaceful nuclear 
energy use, but also should show a sense of "responsibility."  All 
sides should step up diplomatic efforts to achieve a long-term 
proper solution, Qin said. 
 
Tibet Meetings: "Door Always Open for Contact" 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶3. Central Government policy toward the Dalai Lama is "consistent 
and clear-cut" and the "door for contact is always open," stated the 
spokesman.  China hopes the Dalai Lama will "mean what he says," 
stop carrying out separatist activities, stop plotting and provoking 
violent activities and stop disrupting the Olympic Games so as to 
create conditions for further contact.  During May 4 talks with 
Dalai Lama representatives in Shenzhen, Central Government officials 
"clearly and comprehensively" expounded upon the Central Government 
position, patiently answered questions from the Dalai Lama 
representatives and "exchanged views on contact."  This contact is 
"only a beginning" and will continue if the Dalai Lama shows 
sincerity, especially in his actions, Qin said.  He told reporters 
they should focus "more on contact, rather than format," when asked 
about a Xinhua News Agency report stating that the talks only 
addressed the March 14 incident, not actual policy. 
 
Visas: Some "Arrangements" Made for a "Period of Time" 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶4. China has "made some arrangements according to usual 
international practice," making the visa approval procedure 
"stricter and more serious," stated Qin.  He said the purpose is to 
"ensure a safe environment," "safeguard national security" and 
ensure the safety of foreigners in China.  The Chinese Government 
and people will continued to adhere to the policy of opening and 
reform, to be open to the world and to welcome foreigners to China 
for work, study or travel.  The principle behind China's visa policy 
is one of sovereignty, and compared to "some countries" that ask for 
fingerprints or eye examinations, China's procedure is "more 
convenient."  Asked if the arrangements were temporary, Qin 
responded that they will be maintained for a "period of time." 
 
China Offers USD 1 Million in Aid to Burma 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶5. To assist in Burma's reconstruction efforts in the wake of a 
disastrous cyclone, China has decided to send a "first batch" of USD 
1 million in aid, including "cash and materials," said the spokesman 
in a prepared announcement.  The Chinese Government is in close 
contact with the Chinese Embassy in Burma and is very concerned 
about Chinese people working and studying in Burma.  President Hu, 
PM Wen and FM Yang have all sent messages to Burma expressing 
condolences to the victims of the cyclone. 
 
Xinjiang: Solidarity, Development, Progress 
------------------------------------------- 
 
BEIJING 00001731  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶6. The Olympic torch relay is the aspiration of the Xinjiang people 
and will display Xinjiang's ethnic solidarity, economic development 
and social progress, said the spokesman in response to a question on 
reports of increased repression in Xinjiang before the Olympic torch 
relay arrives there.  "Separatists" fear the presentation of the 
Xinjiang people's "new image," said Qin. 
 
Hu in Japan, New Joint Statement is "the Goal" 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶7. President Hu began a "very significant" state visit to Japan 
today, with the purpose of building trust, strengthening 
cooperation, deepening friendship and developing a strategic 
relationship of mutual benefit, said Qin.  The two sides are 
"working toward the goal" of a new joint statement, which would 
"materialize" the "new development" in the bilateral relationship 
and expand cooperation into a wider field. 
 
¶8. Responding to reporters' questions, Qin said "fully responsible" 
investigations into the poisoned dumplings issue are still underway 
and until a conclusion is reached China cannot rule out any 
possibility.  Anti-China demonstrators in Japan do not represent the 
Japanese people, stated Qin on the topic of Tibet- and 
Olympics-related protests in Japan.  Qin had nothing to add on 
prospects for the two sides solving the East China Sea dispute. 
 
China the "Backbone" of World Peace and Stability 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶9. Asked about reports that China is building a secret submarine 
base on the southern tip of Hainan, the spokesman replied that China 
is following the path of peaceful development, China's national 
defense policy is defensive in nature and China's military build-up 
will pose no threat to any country.  He added that China will 
"always be the backbone of world peace, security and stability." 
China's military has the "sacred duty" of safeguarding security on 
the seas, the sovereignty of its maritime territory and its maritime 
rights and interests. 
 
Bus Fire, Disease Outbreak, Taiwan, Nepal 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. An investigation into a May 5 bus fire in Shanghai is still 
underway, said Qin.  China takes a reported outbreak of hand, foot 
and mouth disease in southern China very seriously and will take 
necessary measures.  Asked about Taiwan President-elect Ma 
Ying-jeou's call for an end to checkbook diplomacy, Qin stated that 
China firmly opposes efforts to create "two Chinas" or "one China, 
one Taiwan" and will discuss the question of Taiwan's international 
actions after the "resumption of normal talks."  China believes 
Nepal will protect Chinese diplomatic facilities and personnel in 
accordance with international conventions. 
RANDT