08BEIJING4078
OCTOBER 28 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SUDAN HOSTAGE CRISIS, SYRIA
Tue Oct 28 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7222
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHPOD RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #4078/01 3022247
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 282247Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0651
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCNMEU/EU INTEREST COLLECTIVE
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS 0332
RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0236
RUEHSA/AMEMBASSY PRETORIA 0444UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 004078 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PBTS PHUM PTER ECON EFIN SU SY KN
SUBJECT: OCTOBER 28 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SUDAN HOSTAGE CRISIS, SYRIA 
STIKES, FINANCIAL SUMMIT, DALAI LAMA 
 
¶1.  Key points at the October 28 afternoon MFA press briefing were: 
 
 
-- China condemns the killing of five kidnapped Chinese citizens in 
a rescue attempt by the Sudanese government. 
 
-- China "opposes any deed which harms another country's sovereignty 
and territorial integrity," said the spokesperson in reference to 
the reported U.S. military strike on Syrian soil. 
 
-- China "has received and is considering" the U.S. invitation to 
attend a summit meeting on the financial crisis and would like to 
see participation by developing countries. 
 
-- China hopes that the Dalai Lama will "better understand the 
situation, demonstrate sincerity and do something good for his 
people during his lifetime." 
 
 
Sudan Hostage Crisis 
------------------------- 
 
¶2. Five Chinese citizens were killed, two were rescued and two are 
missing in Sudan, said Ministry of Foreign Affairs spokesperson 
Jiang Yu at the October 28 regularly scheduled press briefing.  The 
five victims, all of whom were employees of the China National 
Petroleum Corporation (CNPC), were killed during a Sudanese 
government rescue attempt, said Jiang.  Jiang indicated that 
President Hu Jintao and Premier Wen Jiabao themselves had followed 
events in the Sudan closely and had directed the MFA to work closely 
with the Sudanese.  China expresses its "grave condolences" to the 
five victims, "sympathy" to their families and "strong condemnation" 
to the kidnappers over the killings.  CNPC and the Chinese Embassy 
in Sudan will form a "joint group" focused on the aftermath of the 
crisis.  China "values" its relationship with Sudan and "requests 
the government of Sudan to guarantee the safety of foreigners, 
including Chinese" in Sudan.  China's cooperation with Sudan "will 
continue."  Asked whether China had been informed of or took part in 
the rescue attempt, Jiang only said that China and Sudan had "close 
cooperation" in trying to resolve the crisis. 
 
¶3. The spokesperson emphasized China's role in Sudan's development 
noting that "many Chinese not-for-profit organizations are in 
Sudan."  China also "plays an important role in promoting local 
people's well-being and economic development."  China is also 
willing to work with the international community to promote peace in 
Sudan.  China's involvement in Sudan is "on the basis of "mutual 
benefit and joint development," Jiang added. 
 
Syria Strikes 
------------- 
 
¶4. Asked to comment on reported U.S. military strikes on targets in 
Syria, Jiang said that China "opposes any deed which harms another 
country's sovereignty and territorial integrity." Asked whether 
these comments referred specifically to the U.S. strike, Jiang said 
that they did. Jiang added that "relevant parties should properly 
handle this case to safeguard peace and stability in the Middle 
East." 
 
Financial Crisis and Summit 
--------------------------- 
 
¶5. China "has received and is considering" the U.S. invitation to 
attend a summit meeting on the financial crisis, said Jiang.  China 
also "hopes that relevant parties will pragmatically and effectively 
solve this and future financial crises."  China would like to see 
the summit "develop an equal, mutually beneficial global partnership 
and make a contribution in safeguarding the financial markets and 
promoting world economic development."  The recent crisis has 
"exposed the deficiencies and defects in the international financial 
system," said Jiang.  The international community should "conduct 
effective and comprehensive reform of the international financial 
system on the basis of full consultation with all stake holders to 
ensure the stable development of the world economy."  China would 
like to "increase the representation of developing countries and 
give them a bigger say" in the discussions," said the spokesperson. 
 
Dalai Lama 
---------- 
 
¶6. The specifics of the next round of talks with the Dalai Lama are 
still "under discussion," said Jiang.  The Chinese policy toward the 
Dalai Lama is "consistent and sincere."  China hopes that through 
the discussions the Dalai Lama will "better understand the 
situation, demonstrate sincerity and do something good for his 
people during his lifetime."  Jiang said that China has "taken note 
of some remarks made by the Dalai side" a likely reference to the 
 
BEIJING 00004078  002 OF 002 
 
 
Dalai Lama's recent comments that he has lost faith in negotiations 
with the Chinese.   "If Dalai wishes to improve relations with the 
Central Government he should fulfill the commitment he made in 
July," said Jiang. 
 
Food Safety 
----------- 
 
¶7. The spokesperson referred reporters to relevant authorities for 
questions regarding tainted eggs.  Jiang said that China "attaches 
great importance to food safety."  If any food safety problems are 
confirmed "relevant authorities will ask the company to recall the 
products," he added. 
 
Green Energy 
------------ 
 
¶8. Asked to comment on recent NGO reports calling on China to 
improve energy efficiency, Jiang said that the NGOs may "not have 
been aware of China's energy policy."  China has issued a new energy 
law which encourages the development of green energy, said Jiang. 
China also "attaches importance to the clean use of coal."  Jiang 
called on the international community to work together to improve 
energy efficiency. 
 
Ivory Sales 
----------- 
 
¶9. Jiang had not heard reports of ivory sales by China in South 
Africa, but said that China adheres to all of its international 
obligations to protect endangered animals and has been recognized 
for its efforts. 
 
Kim Jong-Il 
----------- 
 
¶10. The spokesperson had not seen reports that Kim Jong-Il has been 
hospitalized. 
 
 
PICCUTA