08BEIJING2840
JULY 22 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: OLYMPICS AND FREEDOM, KUNMING
Tue Jul 22 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO4608
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2840/01 2042308
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 222308Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8710
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 002840 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER KOLY PHUM KN VM ZI LI
SUBJECT: JULY 22 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: OLYMPICS AND FREEDOM, KUNMING 
BOMBING, EXXON AND VIETNAM, ZIMBABWE MOU 
 
BEIJING 00002840  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  Key points at the July 22 afternoon MFA press briefing were: 
 
-- All athletes should promote friendship while in China, said the 
spokesmen when asked to respond to President Bush's comments that 
athletes should be ambassadors of freedom. 
 
-- The MFA continues to "urge all relevant departments and local 
governments" to implement and fulfill Olympic related promises. 
 
-- China condemns the violence of the recent bus bombings in Kunming 
and has not found any links between the bombings and international 
terrorism. 
 
-- China has made its position known to "relevant parties" in a 
potential deal between Exxon and Vietnam regarding oil in the South 
China Sea. 
 
-- China welcomes the recently signed MOU between Zimbabwe 
opposition leaders and the government. 
 
Olympics and Freedom 
--------------------- 
 
¶2. At the July 22 regular press conference, spokesman Liu Jianchao 
said that he had taken note of President Bush's recent comments that 
U.S. Olympic athletes should be ambassadors of freedom when they 
compete in Beijing.  Liu said that China hopes all athletes 
"including those from the United States" make efforts to "promote 
friendship" while in China. Asked to comment on complaints from 
Olympic sponsors that China has not lived up to their agreements, 
Liu said that "competent departments" had "taken note of the 
sponsors' demands" and that they were "reasonable."  Liu noted that 
when considering the demands, security should come first.  The 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) will do its best to support the 
sponsors in their discussions with competent authorities.  Liu said 
he could not comment on general accusations of harassment of foreign 
journalists.  The MFA continues to urge "all relevant departments 
and local governments" to implement and fulfill Olympic related 
promises, said Liu. 
 
Kunming Bus Bombing 
------------------- 
 
¶3. Asked about the July 21 bus bombings in Kunming, Liu said that 
China condemns the violence.  Chinese police are currently 
investigating the incident and so far have found no evidence of 
links to international terrorism.  China will continue to "make 
efforts to find out the truth." 
 
Exxon Mobile - Vietnam Oil Deal 
------------------------------- 
 
¶4. Asked to confirm reports that China urged the cancellation of an 
oil deal between Vietnam and Exxon Mobile, Liu Jianchao said that 
China's position on the South China Sea is "clear and consistent." 
China has stated its position to "relevant parties" and opposes any 
action that infringes on Chinese sovereignty. 
 
Zimbabwe Memorandum of Understanding 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶5. China welcomes the recent Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) 
signed between the Zimbabwean government and opposition leaders. 
The MOU indicates that "relevant parties" are dedicated to solving 
their problems by peaceful means, said Liu.  China hopes that all 
parties will put the needs of the people first to find a solution. 
 
 
Visas 
----- 
 
¶6. Asked to confirm a Liberian Embassy official's reported 
statements that Liberian businesspeople have been deported from 
China despite their holding the correct China visas and the 
official's claim that multiple countries would make representations 
to China regarding the issue, Liu said that relevant authorities 
deal with foreigners according to law.  Liu also said that no such 
representations had been received. 
 
North Korean Border, Nepal Constitutional Assembly, British Citizen 
and Tibetan Youth Congress 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶7. The border with North Korea is not closed and everything on the 
border is normal, said Liu.  Asked to comment on the recent 
constitutional assembly in Nepal, Liu expressed China's 
congratulations to Nepal.  Liu said that as a "good neighbor, friend 
and partner" China hopes that Nepal will have national solidarity 
and political stability.  Asked about the controversy surrounding 
British Citizen Dechen Khando Pemba who was deported from China 
after being accused of being a member of the Tibetan Youth Congress, 
Liu said that Pemba admitted what she did and that authorities had 
 
BEIJING 00002840  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
made an investigation and taken measures consistent with the law. 
 
PICCUTA