08BRUSSELS1588
EU FOREIGN MINISTERS, MEETING IN LUXEMBOURG,
Tue Oct 14 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
USEU Brussels
VZCZCXRO5421
PP RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHLN
RUEHLZ RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHBS #1588/01 2881518
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 141518Z OCT 08
FM USEU BRUSSELS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHJB/AMEMBASSY BUJUMBURA PRIORITY
RUEHSB/AMEMBASSY HARARE PRIORITY
RUEHKM/AMEMBASSY KAMPALA PRIORITY
RUEHLGB/AMEMBASSY KIGALI PRIORITY
RUEHKI/AMEMBASSY KINSHASA PRIORITY
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO PRIORITY
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY
RUEHNT/AMEMBASSY TASHKENT PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BRUSSELS 001588 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EUN GG RU BO UZ CG IR ZI MX MO
SUBJECT: EU FOREIGN MINISTERS, MEETING IN LUXEMBOURG, 
DISCUSS RUSSIA, GEORGIA, BELARUS AND MORE 
 
¶1.  Begin Introduction and Summary: Meeting in Luxembourg 
October 13, the General Affairs and External Relations 
Council (GAERC) of the 27 EU Foreign Ministers reviewed draft 
Presidency conclusions for the European Council meeting of 
EU-27 heads of state/government to take place in Brussels on 
October 15-16.  Much of that meeting will be on the global 
economic and financial situation. The European Council will 
also address the Lisbon Treaty, the European Pact on 
Immigration and Asylum, environmental and energy questions 
(including energy security), and the crisis in Georgia. 
 
¶2.  On Russia/Georgia, the GAERC Conclusions of October 13 
highlighted the urgent need to discuss Georgia's upper Kodori 
valley and the Akhalgori region at the international talks to 
begin in Geneva on October 15, where, according to French 
Foreign Minister Kouchner's comments to the press, 
representatives of South Ossetia and Abkhazia would 
"probably" be accepted as such.  Kouchner added that Foreign 
Ministers would further discuss future EU/Russia relations on 
the margins of the October 15 European Council meeting in 
Brussels, but was categorical in stating that the EU/Russia 
summit would take place in November. 
 
 
¶3.  To mark and further encourage democratic developments, 
the GAERC removed travel bans for Uzbekistan and Belarus, 
with some exceptions for the latter.  Belarusian President 
Lukashenko was reportedly included in the list of names that 
would be removed from the list.  Belarusian Foreign Minister 
Martynov, after meeting with EU troika counterparts on the 
margin of the GAERC, told the press that an EU team would 
travel to Belarus in a few weeks.  GAERC Conclusions on 
Moldova provide for a deeper relationship and reaffirm the 
EU's engagement in resolving the conflict with the breakaway 
region of Transnistria.  The GAERC authorized the conclusion 
of an agreement with the U.S. on its participation in EULEX 
Kosovo. 
 
¶4.  The GAERC noted that a government of national unity had 
not yet been formed in Zimbabwe; however, it reiterated the 
EU's intention to provided humanitarian assistance to the 
population.  The GAERC decided to establish a strategic 
partnership with Mexico.  Furthermore, the neighborhood 
policy with Morocco was strengthened.  At the press 
conference, Kouchner and Solana sounded the alarm about the 
deteriorating situation in the DR Congo.  Kouchner also noted 
with satisfaction the passage of UNSC Resolution 1835 on 
Iran.  End Introduction and Summary. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Georgia/Russia: Council Conclusions 
Raise Kodori and Akhalgori 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  The Council Conclusions "note with satisfaction" that 
Russian troops have withdrawn from zones adjacent to South 
Ossetia and Abkhazia.  The Council calls on the parties to 
continue to implement their commitments, including with 
regard to the role of OSCE and UNOMIG observers, and welcomes 
UNSCR 1839 to extend the UNOMIG mandate for four months. 
Reiterating its support for the territorial integrity of 
Georgia, the Council reaffirms the willingness of the EU to 
take an active part in the international discussions starting 
October 15, "under the auspices of the EU, the UN and the 
OSCE."  It makes particular mention of the need to discuss 
(in Geneva) the upper Kodori valley and the Akhalgori region. 
 The Council thanks the Commission for convening the October 
22 donors conference aimed at assisting displaced persons and 
restarting the Georgian economy, saying the EU will 
contribute substantially.  Finally, the Council states it is 
preparing to begin negotiations with Georgia soon on visa 
facilitation and read mission, and invites the Commission to 
continue preparatory work on a possible free trade area with 
Georgia. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Georgia/Russia: The Press Conference 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶6.  Noting that the GAERC's discussion on Georgia and Russia 
lasted three hours, Foreign Minister Kouchner, who was last 
in Georgia on October 10, reported that the EU maintains its 
 
BRUSSELS 00001588  002 OF 004 
 
 
unity on this crisis.  He congratulated the EU monitors for 
their "remarkable" deployment into the zones adjacent to 
South Ossetia and Abkhazia, and he looked forward to the 
Geneva talks, which he promised would be long.  Kouchner said 
that representatives from the breakaway provinces would 
"probably" be accepted as such at Geneva.  He suggested that 
Akhalgori would be an early agenda item, noting that, for the 
time being, only IDPs holding Russian passports are being 
allowed to return there. 
 
¶7.  External Relations Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner 
promised EC support for Georgia's reconstruction, noting that 
the needs are less than originally foreseen.  Both 
Ferrero-Waldner and Kouchner responded in the affirmative 
when asked if the November 14 EU/Russia summit (in Nice) was 
still on.  Kouchner stated that the subject of the resumption 
of negotiations with Russia on a new cooperation agreement 
with the EU would be further discussed at the EU Foreign 
Ministers' dinner on October 15 (on the margins of the 
European Council meeting). 
 
---------------------------- 
Belarus: Council Conclusions 
Ease Travel Restrictions 
---------------------------- 
 
¶8.  In their formal conclusions, the EU-27 Foreign Ministers 
call upon Belarusian authorities to address the shortcomings 
which kept the September 28 parliamentary elections below 
OSCE standards.  On the positive side of the ledger, the 
Council notes that the political opposition in Belarus had 
broader access to the media and was able to demonstrate 
peacefully on the evening of the elections.  The Council 
reiterates its approval of the release of the last 
internationally recognized political prisoners before the 
elections. 
 
¶9.  Hoping for a gradual re-engagement with Belarus, the 
Council took note of the troika meeting with the Belarusian 
Foreign Minister (taking place on the margins of the GAERC) 
and decided to restore contacts with Belarusian authorities, 
restricted since November 2004.  To that end, the Council, 
while deciding to extend for another year restrictive 
measures previously adopted, is suspending for six months 
travel restrictions imposed on certain leading figures in 
Belarus, including President Lukashenko. (USEU will provide 
updates on the EU revised visa ban list as the information 
becomes available.)  Meanwhile, it is expected that Belarus 
will make progress toward reforming its electoral code, and 
guaranteeing freedom of expression and assembly.  Exempt from 
this relaxation are those involved in the disappearances 
which occurred in 1999 and 2000 and the President of the 
Central Electoral Commission. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Belarus Press Stake Out: 
EU Team "Soon" to Travel to Minsk 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  Javier Solana told the press that the just-completed 
troika meeting with Foreign Minister Martynov had created a 
favorable climate and would lead to the visit to Minsk of an 
EU team soon.  Martynov said Belarus was willing to work with 
the EU, and that the EU team would be traveling in a few 
weeks. 
 
----------------------------- 
Uzbekistan: Travel Ban Lifted 
----------------------------- 
 
¶11.  Noting progress with respect to rule of law and 
protection of human rights - particularly the release of Mrs. 
Mukhtabar Tojibaeva, the abolition of the death penalty, the 
introduction of habeas corpus, the ratification of 
conventions combating child labor, and the resumption of ICRC 
prison visits - the Council decided not to renew travel 
restrictions applying to certain individuals; however, in a 
decision evidently calculated to reach consensus on 
Uzbekistan, it did renew, for one year, the arms embargo it 
imposed in 2007.  The Council nonetheless said it is 
"seriously concerned" about human rights in Uzbekistan, and 
calls on Uzbek authorities to release all imprisoned human 
 
BRUSSELS 00001588  003 OF 004 
 
 
rights defenders, cease harassing others, accept the 
accreditation of the new Country Director of Human Rights 
Watch, and revoke restrictions on NGOs. 
 
----------------- 
Moldova: On Track 
----------------- 
 
¶12.  According to the Council Conclusions, the EU is ready to 
deepen its relationship and negotiate a "new and ambitious" 
agreement soon with Moldova, going beyond the current 
Partnership and Cooperation Agreement and to include a 
comprehensive free-trade area.  Furthermore, visa-free travel 
is a long-term perspective.  Reaffirming its attachment to 
the territorial integrity of Moldova, the EU will increase 
its efforts to resolve the conflict in Transnistria, and 
calls upon all parties to resume negotiations in the 5   2 
format. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Kosovo: U.S. EULEX Participation 
Agreement Adopted 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶13.  The EULEX Kosovo U.S.-EU Participation Agreement was 
formally adopted without discussion. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Zimbabwe: Standing By With Assistance 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶14.  The Council noted with concern that a government of 
national unity has not been formed, and called for continued 
engagement by SADC, the African Union and the UN.  Noting 
that the Commission had just released another EUR 10 million 
in humanitarian aid, the Council reaffirmed that the EU 
stands ready to adopt a package of measures to assist the 
rehabilitation of the country, once the September 15 
agreement is actually implemented. 
 
--------------------------- 
Mexico: A Strategic Partner 
--------------------------- 
 
¶15.  Noting the many phases of their relations since 1960, 
the Council decides to accept the recommendation of the 
Commission to establish a strategic partnership with Mexico. 
 
------------------------ 
Morocco: Advanced Status 
------------------------ 
 
¶16.  The seventh meeting of the EU-Morocco Association 
Council took place on the margins of the GAERC, and it was 
marked by the launch of the "Advanced Status" that had been 
requested by Morocco for reinforcing its relations with the 
EU under the European Neighborhood Policy (ENP).  (See 
http://ec.europea.eu/external relations/morocco for details.) 
 
---------------------------- 
Press Conference: Further on 
Financial Crisis, DRC, Iran 
---------------------------- 
 
¶17.  In addition to commenting on Russia and Georgia (see 
para 3 above), Foreign Minister Kouchner noted the positive 
reactions in financial markets to the Euro-zone summit which 
took place on October 12.  Kouchner characterized the meeting 
as a political affirmation of the Euro-zone, and he ventured 
that the situation would be much worse without the Euro.  He 
pondered a "more moral" financial system, and said that an 
international conference - a G-7, G-8, or G-14 format - would 
be needed to revive global finances.  Kouchner said that 
revised draft conclusions for the October 15 European Council 
meeting on this subject would be circulated on October 14. 
 
¶18.  Both Kouchner and Solana expressed growing concern about 
the security situation in the DR Congo, and especially about 
the violence perpetrated against women in conflict zones. 
Solana said he had been in contact with Congolese President 
Joseph Kabila.  For his part, Kouchner lamented that the 
peace plan is not being implemented and that rebel General 
 
BRUSSELS 00001588  004 OF 004 
 
 
Nkunda seemed ready to launch a major offensive.  Sounding 
the alarm, Kouchner said that massacres could be 
"frightening."  When asked if the EU thought about sending 
troops to the region (as it did briefly in 2003), Kouchner 
said anything is possible.  In a brief comment on Iran, 
Kouchner welcomed the passage of UNSCR 1835, saying that it 
maintained P5   1 unity. 
 
MURRAY 
.