08CAPETOWN224
ANC PRESIDENT JACOB ZUMA ADDRESSES PRESS CLUB
Mon Nov 10 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Cape Town
P 101446Z NOV 08
FM AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2873
INFO AMEMBASSY PRETORIA 
AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 
AMCONSUL DURBANUNCLAS CAPE TOWN 000224 
 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM SF
SUBJECT:  ANC PRESIDENT JACOB ZUMA ADDRESSES PRESS CLUB 
 
¶1. (U) African National Congress (ANC) president Jacob Zuma 
addressed the Cape Town Press Club at a breakfast meeting on Friday 
November 7, 2008. Mr. Zuma opened his address by referring to the 
U.S. elections and reflecting on his recent visit to the United 
States. He highlighted the importance of continued co-operation 
between the U.S. and South Africa and congratulated President-Elect 
Obama on his historic victory.  Mr. Zuma hailed Obama's victory as a 
victory for non-racialism. He said that it was an exciting milestone 
in the history of Americans and the world, and that it was the 
beginning of a new era for international relations. 
 
¶2. (U) During the question and answer session Jacob Zuma was asked 
what the ANC would do to curb possible election violence in the 
upcoming 2009 elections. He said the country would hold peaceful 
elections next year and pledged to reign in officials from the 
party's youth league who have made inflammatory statements. Zuma 
also said the ANC had noted fears expressed by some opinion makers 
that the 2009 elections may be fraught with violence, and that South 
Africans should not encourage such pessimism. He continued by saying 
the South African democracy has matured since 1994 and there is no 
reason why a robust contest between political parties should lead to 
violence. Mr. Zuma was also asked whether he would stop singing the 
Umshini wam song, as it is seen by many as a call to violence. 
Note: Jacob Zuma regularly encourages supporters at political 
rallies to sing a revolutionary song entitled Umshini Wam, which 
literally means "bring me my machine gun." The song has become 
synonymous with the ANC President and remains very controversial as 
many feel that the modern political message should be about 
reconciliation, peace and development. End note.  While Zuma agreed 
that the ANC must oppose any political violence and teach the young 
people to live peacefully he failed to give a definitive answer on 
whether he would continue to sing the song. When asked specifically 
about Julius Malema, leader of the ANC Youth League, Mr. Zuma said 
that the issue had been addressed with Malema.  Note: Julius Malema 
has threatened to 'kill' for Zuma and warned that any attempt to 
prevent Zuma from becoming president could be met with violence. End 
note. Zuma said that Malema is like any other hot headed young man 
who will mature with time and added that even Nelson Mandela was hot 
headed as a young man. 
 
¶3. (U) Responding to a question regarding government corruption, 
and, in particular the tender process, Mr. Zuma said the final 
decisions on government tenders must be taken out of the hands of 
politicians. He suggested creating a tender board to address this 
issue. Zuma was also asked whether he believed it would be a good 
for President Motlanthe to remain in office for a five year term for 
the sake of the country's stability. Zuma said he did not operate as 
an individual and his views on this matter are shaped by the ANC, 
and the ANC has the final word on that matter. 
 
4 (U) The issue of Zimbabwe was also raised and the question asked 
whether Thabo Mbeki should be removed as mediator since many people 
feel that Mbeki's ties to President Mugabe cloud his judgment. Zuma 
said that it was up to SADC to deal with Zimbabwe, and also noted 
that the ANC would not interfere with Mbeki's role as mediator as 
Mbeki represented the SADC group not South Africa specifically. 
 
¶5. (U) Note: The event was attended by about 150 people, including 
the CG and Consulate staff. Throughout the event Mr. Zuma appeared 
at ease and made light of his judicial and political woes. He 
Qat ease and made light of his judicial and political woes. He 
remains a powerful politician who profoundly affects South Africa 
and its future. He responded warmly to often hostile questions and 
like any good politician he avoided answering difficult questions by 
offering pleasantries and a smile. End note.