08CARACAS1573
VENEZUELAN MEDIA HIGHLIGHT BENEFITS OF FOURTH FLEET
Thu Nov 13 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Caracas
R 131608Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY CARACAS
TO WESTERN HEMISPHERIC AFFAIRS DIPL POSTS
SECSTATE WASHDC 2136
NSC WASHDC
HQ USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
DIRJIATF EASTUNCLAS CARACAS 001573 
 
 
SOUTHCOM FOR VILLAVICENCIO, RUIZ, AND POLAD 
STATE FOR PETER SAMPSON WHA/PPD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PGOV PREL VE
SUBJECT: VENEZUELAN MEDIA HIGHLIGHT BENEFITS OF FOURTH FLEET 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: Thanks to the combined efforts of the USS 
Kearsarge, SouthCom, and the U.S. Embassies in Venezuela and 
the Dominican Republic, Venezuelans received a thorough and 
accurate look into the humanitarian work of the Navy's 
newly-reactivated Fourth Fleet.  Reporters from two major 
Venezuelan daily newspapers saw the Kearsarge provide 
humanitarian services, respond to local needs, and strengthen 
ties with the Dominican Republic. The result was two 
excellent newspaper articles that clearly demonstrated the 
Fourth Fleet's Mission, while countering considerable 
Venezuelan government propaganda. Post wishes to thank all 
those who made this successful trip possible. END SUMMARY 
 
¶2. (U) SouthCom's reactivation of the Fourth Fleet provoked 
forceful condemnations from the Venezuelan government, which 
alleges that the United States' intent is to intimidate 
Venezuela and the Hemisphere. To counter this misinformation, 
post worked with SouthCom and the staff of the USS Kearsarge 
to bring Venezuelan journalists onboard the ship during its 
stop in the Dominican Republic (DR) to get a first-hand look 
at what the multinational military and NGO staff do as part 
of the Fleet's "Continuing Promise" mission. 
 
¶3. (U) Thanks to the efforts of Dan Day, Chris Hwang, and 
Eduardo Villavicencio and his SouthCom staff, two reporting 
teams traveled to the DR from October 6 - 9 and had access to 
the crew, patients, government and non-government officials 
on the ship, and accompanied the crew to visits to medical 
clinics and construction projects. 
 
¶4. (U) The Kearsarge team not only arranged these visits, but 
both Commodore Frank Ponds and Captain Walt Towns met 
personally with the reporters to brief them and hold informal 
discussions about the Fourth Fleet, Continuing Promise, and 
relations between the United States and other Western 
Hemisphere countries.  The reporters highlighted comments by 
Commander Ponds and Cpt. Towns in the stories.  The 
appreciation reporters felt for the personal attention and 
information "from the top" was evident both in their articles 
and personal comments during the trip. 
 
¶5. (U) Ultimas Noticias, the country's leading national daily 
newspaper (circulation: 250,000; tabloid style) devoted two 
pages to the visit in its Monday, October 20th edition.  The 
reporter wrote three stories, each focusing on different 
aspects of the Mission.  He discussed the opposition of the 
Venezuelan government to the Fourth Fleet and then featured 
Cpt. Ponds' comments about the humanitarian role of the 
Fleet.  The articles and accompanying photographs highlighted 
the international aspects of the Mission, the humanitarian 
focus, and the partnership of nations that made Continuing 
Promise a success.  Generally a "Chavista light" news outlet, 
these articles in Ultimas Noticias exposed a politically and 
socieconomically diverse cross section of Venezuelans to the 
role of the Fourth Fleet and helped correct Venezuelan 
government misinformation. 
 
¶6. (U) The article and pictures in the Sunday, October 19, 
edition of El Carabobeno (circulation 50,000, broad sheet 
style) also furthered this goal. Through interviews with 
patients, the reporter painted a vivid picture of the medical 
and infrastructure needs of the Dominicans and how the 
Kearsarge staff fulfilled them.  One woman was quoted as 
saying that Continuing Promise's attention to her town was "a 
miracle." 
 
¶7. (U) This reporting trip immensely furthered post's efforts 
to counter misinformation about the Fourth Fleet's mission 
and brought a human face to U.S. military forces. 
 
¶8. (U) Post thanks Commodore Ponds, Cpt. Towns, Eng. Day, Col 
Villavicencio, PAO Gary Keith, their colleagues and staffs 
for their outstanding contributions that made this reporting 
tour a resounding success.  Post looks forward to future 
cooperation with SouthCom to present the Venezuelan public 
with accurate information about the Fourth Fleet. 
 
 
GENNATIEMPO