08CAPETOWN223
CAPE TOWN'S PREPARATIONS FOR 2010:  EFFORTS
Fri Nov 07 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Cape Town
R 071331Z NOV 08 ZDK
FM AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2870
INFO AMEMBASSY PRETORIA 
AMCONSUL DURBAN 
AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 
USDOC WASHDCUNCLAS CAPE TOWN 000223 
 
 
PLEASE PASS TO AF/S RUSH MARBURG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EIND SOCI SA
SUBJECT: CAPE TOWN'S PREPARATIONS FOR 2010:  EFFORTS 
UNDERWAY TO HAVE A "GREEN" WORLD CUP 
 
¶1.  Summary:  The City of Cape Town and the Western Cape 
Provincial Government showcased their plans and preparations 
for the FIFA 2010 World Cup at separate events during the 
last two weeks.  The first event, hosted by the City of Cape 
Town and the German Konrad-Stiftung NGO, included a lively 
presentation of Cape Town's goal to host a "Green" World Cup 
in 2010.  Both Mayor Helen Zille and Western Cape Premier 
Lynn Brown attended the festivity and sat side-by-side at the 
same table.  Various presenters outlined the Green Goal 
Action Plan to be implemented by the City and the Konrad 
Adenauer Stiftung.  The Plan involves forty-one different 
projects in nine target areas.  The second event, held by the 
South African Institute of International Affairs (SAIIA), 
featured Western Cape Coordinator for the 2010 FIFA World Cup 
Dr. Laurine Platzky who provided an overview of 
infrastructure and other priorities underway for the big 
event.  She emphasized that both the provincial and municipal 
governments aim to host a world-class event in 2010 and leave 
a lasting legacy that will bring benefits to the area's 
residents over the long-term.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  Two separate presentations held over the past two weeks 
demonstrated the preparations made by the City of Cape Town 
and the Western Cape Province in their efforts to host a 
world-class and "green" World Cup. The Green Goal Action Plan 
Launch, the first of the two events, took place on Friday, 
October 17 and was as much a celebration as a press briefing. 
 The launch, which opened to loud singing, dancing and horn 
blowing, provided numerous details and plans for minimizing 
the impact of the World Cup on its surrounding environment. 
Speakers volunteered that Cape Town will host eight matches 
including one semi-final game at the Green Point Stadium 
between June 11 and July 11, 2010.  A Konrad Adenauer 
Stiftung official pointed out that the impact of an event 
like the World Cup can adversely affect its surrounding 
environment.  He shared that transportation, accommodation, 
and stadia construction tend to have the most severe impact 
on the environment and must be included in Cape Town's Green 
Goal Action Plan.  He added that Germany was pleased to share 
its "event greening" experience gained from the 2006 World 
Cup and its "tool box" of potential projects with the City of 
Cape Town and the Western Cape province. 
 
What is the Action Plan? 
------------------------ 
 
¶3.  According to hand-outs provided at the launch, Cape Town 
municipal and Western Cape provincial government employees 
participated in a series of "greening strategy workshops" 
over the past several months that were held by Konrad 
Adenauer Stiftung.  The result was the Green Goal Action Plan 
for the 2010 World Cup.  The Plan includes forty-one projects 
targeting nine different areas that will minimize the carbon 
footprint of the 2010 events and leave a positive 
environmental legacy.  The nine target areas include:  1) 
energy and climate change, 2) water, 3) integrated waste 
management, 4) transport, mobility and access, 5) landscaping 
and biodiversity, 6) green building and sustainable 
lifestyles, 7) responsible tourism, 8) green goal 
communications and 9) monitoring, measurement and reporting. 
Specific projects include identifying and implementing carbon 
offset projects in Cape Town, installing energy efficient 
technologies and water saving devices in World Cup venues, 
recycling drop-off centers in the City Bowl District (CBD), 
Qrecycling drop-off centers in the City Bowl District (CBD), 
an indigenous gardening training program for Green Point 
Urban Park and eco-taxis, among others.  The Plan foresees a 
range of actors and partnerships implementing the various 
projects in the different target areas.  Some projects are 
part of existing initiatives undertaken by the city, 
provincial and national governments.  Some have been budgeted 
under municipal and provincial budgets.  The remainder will 
require partnerships among donors, business, civil society 
and government to be completed. 
 
¶4.  Cape Town Mayor Zille and Western Cape Premier Lynn Brown 
both participated in the launch of the Green Goal Action Plan 
and committed their administrations to work together to host 
an excellent and environmentally sustainable World Cup. 
Zille, who spoke first, mentioned that this event was the 
first time where both she and the Premier attended an 
official function together.  She commented that since Brown 
took office, the two levels of government worked together 
much better.  Zille also pointed out that the province's and 
city's environmental assets were valuable and that both 
governments would work together to conserve them.  She 
concluded that the 2010 FIFA World Cup would be beneficial 
for both Cape Town and the Western Cape.  Premier Brown, at 
her turn, expressed the hope that the World Cup would be an 
opportunity for community participation at all levels, 
including for those who had been historically marginalized by 
apartheid.  Brown shared that the province had three 
objectives for the 2010 events including environmental 
integrity, social equity and economic growth.  She committed 
her administration to promote initiatives (for World Cup 
preparations) that would minimize the impact of the event on 
the environment and nearby communities while, at the same 
time, generating income. 
 
Dr. Platzky Provides More Details 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  The second event, held by the South African Institute of 
International Affairs (SAIIA), featured Western Cape 2010 
FIFA World Cup Coordinator Dr. Laurine Platzky.  Dr. Platzky 
outlined the province's role in preparations for 2010.  She 
noted that the province and the city have different roles. 
The City of Cape Town is the contracting authority for the 
World Cup and has signed the Host City Agreement with FIFA. 
The province, on the other hand, has a more developmental 
role in preparations.  Platzky shared that the Western Cape's 
objectives for the World Cup included successfully hosting 
the eight matches that will take place in Cape Town, 
maximizing the public's benefit from the event and enhancing 
the entire province's attraction as an investment, trade and 
tourist destination.  As part of these efforts, the province 
will create additional infrastructure and economic 
opportunities, promote social cohesion with "a home for all," 
and increase environmental integrity. 
 
¶6.  Dr. Platzky began her presentation with information and 
updates on Cape Town's Green Point Stadium.  She indicated 
that more and more people were feeling better about the 
location of the stadium in Green Point because it is the most 
accessible part of the city, being within walking distance of 
many city hotels and public transportation points, such as 
the train station.  Platzky indicated that the stadium, which 
will seat 68,000 spectators, is currently four days ahead of 
schedule and about forty percent completed.  She predicted 
that construction would be completed in October 2009. 
Platzky added that the stadium meets various FIFA 
requirements.  It is a multi-purpose building to be used for 
both soccer and rugby matches.  Its design will mitigate the 
visual and audio impact of the event on nearby neighborhoods. 
 In line with FIFA requirements, the stadium will run on 
generators with the national grid as a back-up.  Platzky 
maintained, nevertheless, that Eskom is committed to the 
success of the World Cup events.  The city has also signed a 
contract with a management company for a thirty year 
concession.  The Fan Park, which is located by the stadium on 
one side and the castle on the other, will include both 
entertainment and hospitality opportunities.  A large viewing 
screen will be erected in the Fan Park with three other 
viewing areas to be constructed around Cape Town.  In 
addition, planners envision the construction of another five 
to eight viewing areas to be set up around the province. 
 
¶7.  The private sector, including small, young businesses, 
will provide accommodation for the 400,000 estimated visitors 
and tourists to Cape Town.  Platzky indicated that the 
province currently has about 108,000 beds within sixty 
kilometers of Cape Town, with 14,300 beds being within two 
kilometers of the stadium.  She noted that eight new hotels 
were also under construction in the city and that two cruise 
ships would sit at the V&A Waterfront during the World Cup to 
Qships would sit at the V&A Waterfront during the World Cup to 
provide still more accommodation. 
 
¶8.   Numerous upgrades and initiatives are also underway in 
the transportation sector Platzky continued.  The airport and 
the Cape Town train station are central to the World Cup, and 
massive upgrading is underway in both places.  Platzky 
pointed out that World Cup planners expect the airport to be 
the arrival and departure hubs for the South American teams, 
and they expect to implement a rapid transit route to the 
city from the airport.  The train station will serve the 
stadium and the fan park.  Road upgrades are also taking 
place at the Koeberg Interchange outside Cape Town and 
Hospital Bend near Groot Schuur Hospital.  There will be park 
and ride venues as well as special bus routes.  Parking for 
the World Cup events will be available in District Six with 
shuttles going back and forth to the fan park. 
 
A Lasting Legacy for the Province 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  Dr. Platzky enumerated several initiatives that planners 
hope will promote a lasting legacy for the area.  One is to 
build a soccer culture that will help kids to get off the 
streets and to be involved in healthy activities.  FIFA is 
building twenty Centers of Hope around the country that will 
teach soccer and life skills.  Platzky indicated that the 
first center will open in Khayelitsha in March/April of 2009. 
 Still another idea is to upgrade the stadium in Philippi, 
which is a very poor township outside of Cape Town. 
 
¶10.  Comment:  Both events were quite impressive and showed a 
great deal of preparation and thought by the City of Cape 
Town and the Western Cape province.  A lot of enthusiasm and 
clever planning went into the Green Goal Action Plan launch. 
If the presentations are anything to go by, both the Western 
Cape and Cape Town will host a very successful 2010 FIFA 
World Cup.  End Comment. 
 
 
MAYBERRY