08DAKAR857
SENEGALESE MEDIA BLACKS OUT
Wed Jul 23 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Dakar
O 231648Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0858
INFO ECOWAS COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS DAKAR 000857 
 
 
STATE FOR AF/PDPA, AF/W AND IIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP PGOV KPAO SG
SUBJECT: SENEGALESE MEDIA BLACKS OUT 
 
Ref: Dakar 765 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  On 21 July, private Senegalese media sources observed 
a news blackout as a show of solidarity in support of two Senegalese 
sports journalists beaten by police on 22 June (retel).  Journalists 
are demanding the Government of Senegal (GOS) take punitive action 
against the officers involved.  Relations between the GOS and the 
press remain tense after a series of incidents involving violence 
against journalists or their arbitrary detention by government 
authorities over the last few years.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.   On 21 July, private Senegalese media sources observed a 24-hour 
news blackout as a show of solidarity in support of two Senegalese 
sports journalists beaten by police on 22 June.  The blackout 
included daily newspapers, radio programming, and several news web 
sites.  State-run media, including the only news television station, 
RTS, continued to operate normally. 
 
¶3.  Senegalese journalists are demanding the GOS take punitive 
action against police officers involved in the 22 June beating of 
sports journalists Boubacar Campbell Dieng (Radio Futurs Medias), 
and Karamokho Thioune (West Africa Democracy Radio).  The incident 
occurred at Leopold Sedar Senghor stadium in Dakar as the 
journalists were attempting to interview Senegalese national team 
soccer players after a match against Liberia.  According to the 
Union of Information and Communications Professionals of Senegal 
(Synpics), the assault occurred in an area where the media is 
allowed to interview players and the teams' staff.  After police 
subdued the journalists, they were handcuffed and detained for 30 
minutes before being taken to the hospital for medical treatment, 
where Dieng was admitted for approximately 20 days. 
 
¶4.  On 9 July, after the Committee for the Defense and Protection of 
Journalists (an ad-hoc organization recently formed to defend 
journalists from government harassment) lodged a formal complaint, 
Senegalese Minister of Interior Cheikh Tidiane Sy indicated the GOS 
would investigate the incident.  On 10 July (the following day) the 
GOS issued a statement noting that two police officers involved in 
the beatings were administratively punished and transferred to 
another unit. 
 
¶5.  The GOS claimed, however, that police involved in the 
altercation were defending themselves after being assaulted by 
journalists.  This statement was reinforced by the Minister of Armed 
Forces Becaye Diop who noted police are regularly attacked by 
civilians while on duty.  (COMMENT: The claim that Senegalese police 
are regularly assaulted by civilians is dubious; post has no 
evidence to support this assertion.  END COMMENT.) 
 
¶6.  Journalists remain unconvinced the GOS is serious about 
restraining police and have called for an independent investigation. 
 The Committee has unveiled an action plan that includes street 
demonstrations and other civil disobedience; the observance of a 
"day without press" was part of the action plan.  Relations between 
the GOS and the press remain tense after increasingly frequent 
incidents involving violence against journalists or their arbitrary 
detention by government authorities over the last few years. 
 
 
SMITH