08JAKARTA2190
WINDOW OPEN NOW FOR S&T IN INDONESIA
Tue Dec 02 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXYZ0006
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHJA #2190/01 3370607
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 020607Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0857UNCLAS JAKARTA 002190 
 
 
SIPDIS 
UNCLASSIFIED 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/MTS, EAP/EX, IIP/STC, OES/STC, OES/PCI, AND STAS. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TSPL ID TRBY TPHY TBIO
SUBJECT: WINDOW OPEN NOW FOR S&T IN INDONESIA 
 
REF: A) Jakarta 1905, B) Jakarta 2025 
 
¶1. (U) Summary.  Post as well as the Government of Indonesia (GOI) 
have identified science and technology as a priority area for 
long-term engagement.  The GOI is especially keen to conclude a 
Science and Technology Framework Agreement with the United States as 
soon as possible in order to facilitate cooperative science and 
technology activities.  Post requests Washington's assistance in 
three areas:  1) completing the draft text for the S&T Framework 
Agreement; 2) providing short term science advisors to Jakarta; and 
3) including Indonesia in S&T programs targeted for Muslim 
populations.  End summary. 
 
--------------------------- 
Why Science and Technology? 
--------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) While cooperation with Indonesia has improved broadly over 
the past decade, political stumbling blocks and differing priorities 
continue to delay progress on many political, economic and 
commercial issues.  Science and technology, however, is an area of 
strategic importance where U.S. and GOI interests are closely 
aligned. 
 
¶3. (U) Indonesia, an environmental superpower with critical marine 
and jungle biodiversity, is home to major oceanic and tectonic 
processes that affect the climate and environment of the entire 
world.  Protection of these unique resources and investigation of 
these processes is critical to understanding and responding to a 
host of international challenges, including natural disasters, 
climate change, and marine resource depletion.  Indonesian President 
Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono (SBY) recognizes Indonesia's importance to 
world environmental health, and has demonstrated leadership on 
environmental issues, proposing the creation of the Coral Triangle 
Initiative (CTI) and preparing to host the World Oceans Conference 
(WOC) and first CTI Summit in May 2009. 
 
¶4. (U) During the past few years, the GOI and USG have recognized 
our shared interests and Post has moved to capitalize on 
opportunities and support Indonesian leadership on the environment. 
The 2006 Natural Hazards MOU and accompanying Implementing 
Arrangements for tsunami early-warning technologies and volcano 
monitoring systems have set precedents for successful scientific and 
technical collaboration between GOI institutions and USG partners. 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) These successes on environmental science should be used as 
a platform to push for broad science and technology engagement with 
Indonesia.  Besides the environment, Indonesia is a key country for 
understanding and combating public health challenges including 
HIV/AIDS and avian influenza.  U.S. scientific expertise is highly 
respected and provides an important public diplomacy channel for 
engaging Indonesia, the world's most populous Muslim-majority 
nation.  Finally, advanced competence and capability in science and 
technology will create a more prosperous Indonesia. 
 
¶6. (U) The first step to advancing this broad S&T partnership will 
be the completion of a Science and Technology Framework Agreement. 
A broad blanket agreement will negate the necessity to negotiate 
separate MOUs for each scientific discipline as is now the case. 
Such an agreement would also provide baseline protection for 
intellectual property rights and taxation, removing these hurdles 
from negotiations on implementing arrangements for specific 
projects.  Finally, a framework agreement would institutionalize a 
mechanism for developing and implementing bilateral cooperative S&T 
projects. 
 
-------- 
Why now? 
-------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) SBY's interest and personal support for collaboration on 
environmental issues, natural hazards, and marine affairs provides a 
foundation for securing access for engagement across the full range 
of scientific and technological disciplines.  Minister of Research 
and Technology Kusmayanto Kadiman has specifically raised completion 
of an S&T Framework Agreement as a priority for the GOI.  (See 
Reftel A)  However, this high-level support is not guaranteed after 
the legislative and presidential elections in 2009. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Our supporters within GOI institutions are prepared to move 
quickly to codify cooperative activities.  For example, during a 
recent workshop a representative of the State Ministry of Research 
and Technology (MINRISTEK) stated that the GOI is awaiting the U.S. 
draft for an S&T Framework Agreement and could be prepared to review 
for signing by the end of 2008.  Such speed is not customary.  We 
should take advantage of this strong Indonesian interest now in 
order to advance U.S. interests in broad scientific engagement. 
 
----------------------------- 
Post outreach strategy on S&T 
----------------------------- 
 
¶9. (U) Outreach to Indonesian legislature:  Post has established an 
outreach program to key committees of the Indonesian legislature. 
In order to alert the Indonesian House of Representatives (DRP) of 
upcoming bilateral S&T activities, Post will brief the Chairman and 
staffers from the DPR Commission VII (which covers energy, natural 
mineral resources, research and technology, and the environment). 
This commission is roughly equivalent to the U.S. House Committee on 
Science and Technology. 
 
¶10. (U) Multilateral initiatives:  Post is reaching out to local 
foreign embassies in Jakarta to identify ways that S&T outreach can 
be coordinated more effectively on a multilateral level.  In 
particular, Post is interested in including Indonesia more fully in 
G8 discussions on science and technology.  Additionally, Post will 
seek to include S&T innovation as a designated area of cooperation 
under the Trilateral Security Dialogue with Japan and Australia. 
 
------------------ 
How DC can support? 
------------------ 
 
¶11. (U) S&T Framework Agreement:  Post requests a draft text for the 
S&T Framework Agreement, drawing as much as possible from already 
agreed language from the U.S.-Indonesia MOU on Natural Hazards. 
 
¶12. (U) Science Fellow:  Post requests Washington's assistance in 
securing individuals with science backgrounds for short term 
postings (3 months) as resident science advisors in Jakarta.  (See 
Reftel B)  The science advisor will work directly with the 
Indonesian Institute of Sciences (LIPI) and the Indonesian Academy 
of Sciences (AIPI) as well as other relevant government ministries 
to assist in long-term planning for U.S.-Indonesian engagement on 
science and technology.  Additionally, the advisor will track 
progress on the S&T Framework Agreement and seek to identify 
opportunities for its application with Indonesian counterparts. 
 
¶13. (SBU) Muslim World Outreach and Science:  Post wishes to be 
considered for projects designed for outreach to Muslims on S&T, 
including the Muslims in Science and Women Leaders in Science 
programs.  Indonesia is the most populous Muslim-majority nation and 
Indonesian interest is very high in U.S. science and technology. 
Such programs would support shared goals on advancing science and 
research as well as provide exceptional public diplomacy 
opportunities for the USG, both within Indonesia and the broader 
Muslim community. 
 
HUME