08JERUSALEM2048
JERUSALEM MEDIA REACTION (11/17):  URGENT CALLS FOR
Mon Nov 17 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Jerusalem
VZCZCXRO2646
OO RUEHROV
DE RUEHJM #2048/01 3221105
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 171105Z NOV 08
FM AMCONSUL JERUSALEM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3253
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEADWD/DA WASHINGTON DC//DAS-ZD/DACS-ZK//
RUEAHQA/CSAF WASHINGTON DC//POLAD//
RHMFIUU/CMC WASHINGTON DC
RUENAAA/CNO WASHINGTON DC//POLAD//
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS 7404
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 4384
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 4237
RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 5731
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 4153
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2719UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 JERUSALEM 002048 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS BBG 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR ABRAMS 
CMC WASHINGTON DC FOR POLAD 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON FOR HKANONA AND POL - TSOU 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KMDR KPAL KWBG KPAO IS
SUBJECT: JERUSALEM MEDIA REACTION (11/17):  URGENT CALLS FOR 
"NATIONAL PALESTINIAN UNITY" 
 
------------- 
Main Stories: 
------------- 
The three papers lead with news of the killing of four Palestinians 
in a November 16 Israeli air strike on Gaza, with Al Ayyam adding 
that two homemade rockets were fired on Israel, injuring six 
Israelis.  Front page reporting continues that Israeli Premier 
Olmert has ordered the Israeli military to draw up plans for an 
attack on Hamas in Gaza, with Al Hayat Al Jadida adding that the 
Israeli Defense Ministry has called for a resumption of targeted 
assassinations of Gaza Hamas leaders.  In related reporting, all 
front pages carry statements by Palestinian Authority President 
Abbas calling on Israel to maintain the Gaza truce while headlines 
also highlight statements by Hamas denying media reports that the 
group has agreed to a halt of rocket attacks on Israel. 
 
In photo coverage, Al Hayat Al Jadida leads with a photo of women 
mourning the death of a Palestinian killed in a November 16 Israeli 
air-strike on Gaza, while Al Ayyam's front page shows an Israeli 
tank near the Gaza border.  Al Quds and Al Ayyam front page photos 
related to Gaza-Egypt smuggling tunnels, showing Palestinians 
handling gallons of smuggled fuel.  The coverage is accompanied by 
stories about the suffering of Gaza civilians, noting the emergence 
of black markets, lengthy power outages and U.N. warnings that, 
"humanitarian assistance warehouses" are empty.  Meanwhile, Israel 
announced that Gaza crossing points will remain closed on November 
17, according to front pages. 
 
Al Quds, citing a report by London's Sunday Times, front pages a 
photo of president-elect Obama next to news that he plans to pursue 
an ambitious peace plan in the Middle East by backing the Saudi 
peace initiative.  According to one of Obama's senior advisors, the 
president-elect commented privately during a July visit to the 
Middle East, that it would be "crazy" for Israel to refuse a deal 
that could, "give them peace with the Muslim world." 
 
Israel's Jerusalem municipality officials have issued an ultimatum 
to the Al Kurd family of the East Jerusalem Sheikh Jarrah 
neighborhood to remove their protest tent, according to Al Quds' and 
Al Ayyam's front pages and Al Hayat Al Jadida's inside story.  The 
Palestinian Al Kurd family erected a tent on their property after 
being evicted by Israeli police from their Jerusalem home, which was 
turned over to "Israeli settlers."  Al Kurd family member Um Kamil, 
told press that she would remain on her land with her handicapped 
husband since they have "nowhere else to go," papers report. 
 
Al Quds' front page reports that Egypt may opt for the launch of 
secret talks between Fatah and Hamas, in light of other policy 
failures.  Citing DPA, the paper quotes "Palestinian official Ali 
Badwan noting that Egypt has failed to accomplish a prisoners 
exchange deal between Israel and Hamas and the launch of internal 
Palestinian talks in Cairo.  In related news, Al Ayyam's front page 
reports that Arab League Secretary General Amr Musa met with Hamas 
Chief Khaled Misha'al at the Syrian Foreign Ministry in Damascus on 
November 16 to discuss Palestinian talks.  The paper also reports 
that Fatah leader Nabil Sha'ath ruled out the possibility of 
Palestinian talks before the meeting of Arab foreign ministers on 
November 26. 
 
In response to official Israeli denials, Israeli daily Haaretz 
confirmed on November 17, that it is in possession of a detailed 
document proving that Israeli Defense Minister Barak has approved 
the building of 400 new settlement units in the West Bank, according 
to Al Quds' front page.  Al Quds' inside page runs related news from 
 
JERUSALEM 00002048  002 OF 003 
 
 
a report released by the Palestinian Applied Research Institute 
"Arij."  The report contends that Israel has, "escalated violations 
against Palestinians," since the Annapolis conference by building 
41,559 new settlement units and 12 new settlement outposts, 
demolishing 90 Palestinian houses, and uprooting 8,000 trees. 
 
A Palestinian woman lost her baby when she was prevented from 
reaching a Palestinian hospital by Israeli soldiers at the Huwarra 
checkpoint near the West Bank city of Nablus, according to Al Quds' 
inside story.  Reporting notes that the soldiers laughed as they 
watched the woman giving birth and highlights UN statistics that 52 
Palestinian women have given birth at checkpoints; 29 infants have 
died during these births. 
 
Al Ayyam's front page publishes a photo of President Bush waving to 
an audience at the Summit on Financial Markets and the World Economy 
in Washington.  The paper, citing DPA, said it was a farewell 
meeting for Bush who left the meeting with a "bye" that no one in 
the hall mistook for a, "see you." 
 
--------------- 
Weekend stories 
--------------- 
Sunday, November 16 
 
All front pages reported that the Israeli military is examining the 
option of conducting a broad-scale military operation in the Gaza 
Strip.  The dailies highlighted a statement by Israeli Defense 
Minister Barak commenting that, "the attack on Gaza would expose 
Israel to security risks.  We will pay a high price for the release 
of [captured Israeli soldier] Shalit.  Barak continued that a 
large-scale operation would not be launched now and that 
"provocation is not useful.  I am a defense minister, not a minister 
of war."  The papers also noted that an Israeli Ministry of Defense 
source explained that Israel has no intention of re-occupying the 
Gaza Strip and that any operation would be designed to deliver a 
strong blow to Hamas and end rocket attacks against Israeli towns 
and cities.  In related reporting, the front pages quoted Israeli 
Foreign Minister Livni confirming that, "Israel will respond 
strongly to missile attacks against its citizens." 
 
Palestinian Authority Prime Minister Fayyad called for "quick 
intervention" by president-elect Obama to save the peace process, 
according to Al Ayyam's front page.  Citing statements originally 
published in the French daily, Le Figaro, the report quoted Fayyad 
asserting that there will be no solution without "strong" 
international intervention, spearheaded by the U.S., who would 
monitor compliance by Israel and the Palestinians to their 
obligations.  In contrast, the dailies front paged comments by 
Israeli Foreign Minister Livni commenting that Israel does not need 
the help of a third party to bridge gaps between the two parties 
[final status solutions], however, Israel does need help with 
multi-lateral negotiations. 
 
Palestinian Authority President Abbas will not give up an inch of 
Palestinian land, according to the front pages of Al Ayyam and Al 
Hayat Al Jadida.  Abbas also asserted that Israel must withdraw to 
the 1967 borders, "if it desires peace and security.  Abbas' remarks 
also focused on the suffering of Palestinians in the Gaza Strip and 
called upon the international community to intervene in lifting "the 
siege" that constitutes, "a war crime, against the women, children, 
youth, and elderly living there."  Abbas made the remarks on the 
occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the PLO's, "declaration of 
independence." 
 
JERUSALEM 00002048  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
Saturday, November 15 
 
Tensions are rising between Israel and Palestinian factions in the 
Gaza Strip following the intensification of missile attacks against 
Israeli towns, all front pages noted.  The two sides exchanged blame 
for igniting the situation that since November 4, has killed 12 
Hamas activists and unleashed a barrage of 70 missiles on southern 
Israeli towns, including Grad missiles used for the first time by 
Palestinian factions.  Meanwhile all front pages headlined E.U. 
calls on Israel to reopen Gaza crossing points. 
 
Al Ayyam and Al Hayat Al Jadida headlined remarks by Palestinian 
Authority (PA) Premier Fayyad that the PA is committed to a 
two-state solution but will refuse to make more concessions.  In 
related reporting, the same papers front paged news that Israeli 
Premier Olmert told E.U. ambassadors that he intends to continue 
indirect talks with Syria at the beginning of next year before 
Israeli elections.  He added that Israel and the Palestinians are 
closer now to a peace agreement than ever before and that what is 
needed is a show of leadership by the Palestinians. 
 
------------ 
BLOCK QUOTES: 
------------ 
 
1)  Al Quds daily editorial is titled, "An escalation targeting 
everything national" (11/17):  "[Israeli threats against Gaza] are 
collectively rejected and condemned by national Palestinian 
consensus... perhaps, the dangerous Israeli escalation can serve as 
impetus for the Palestinians, especially Fatah and Hamas, as well 
as, the Palestinian Authority] Presidency and Prime Minister 
Fayyad's Government and the fired government in Gaza, to rise above 
the wounds and reestablish national Palestinian unity.  Israel has 
proven to all that it is targeting the whole of the Palestinian 
cause... thus, we say that it is time to take from Israel's hand, 
the [internal Palestinian] rift card and embark on a serious effort 
to unite Palestinians..." 
 
2)  Regular columnist Talal Okal opines in Al Ayyam under the title, 
"The Israeli escalation:  Why and whither?" (11/17):  "so, the truce 
[between Israel and Hamas] is about to collapse because of Israel. 
Israeli aggression may turn into a massive military operation... 
Once again, and certainly not for the last time, events highlight 
that ending internal Palestinian division is key to addressing the 
Palestinian crisis..." 
 
Walles