08JERUSALEM1224
Daughter of Prominent Palestinian Activist Faces
Fri Jul 11 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Jerusalem
VZCZCXRO4350
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHJM #1224 1930419
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 110419Z JUL 08
FM AMCONSUL JERUSALEM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2093
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS JERUSALEM 001224 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE, IPA; CA FOR CA/OCS/ACS/NESCA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: CASC PREL IS KWBG KPAL
SUBJECT: Daughter of Prominent Palestinian Activist Faces 
         Loss of Jerusalem Residency 
 
REFTEL: Jerusalem 1190 
 
¶1. Zeina Hutchison, a U.S. legal permanent resident and daughter of 
prominent Palestinian legislator and human rights activist Hanan 
Ashrawi, contacted Post July 9 to report the problems she had 
encountered when entering Israel with her Israeli Travel Document 
(carrying a tourist visa) at Ben Gurion Airport on July 9. 
Recommendation at Para 6. 
 
¶2.  The GoI recently revoked Ms. Hutchison's residency status and 
travel documents on the basis of a GOI policy of revoking the 
Jerusalem resident status and laissez passer of anyone who acquires 
immigrant status or citizenship in another country (reftel).  When 
Ms. Hutchison went to the Israeli Embassy to renew her laissez 
passer, the request was refused and her Jerusalem ID cancelled. In a 
rare reversal, once it appeared the case would receive significant 
media attention, the Embassy issued her a new laissez passer for 
travel but did not restore her Jerusalem ID. 
 
¶3. According to Ms. Hutchison, she and her ten-month old American 
citizen son arrived at Ben Gurion Airport July 9.  She was traveling 
on her laissez passer bearing a three-month tourist visa from the 
Embassy of Israel in Washington; her son had a U.S. passport, also 
with a three-month tourist visa.  The immigration official reviewed 
the travel documents and asked Ms. Hutchison to take her son and 
step aside while she made some inquiries.  The official returned and 
asked for Ms. Hutchison's U.S passport.  When Ms. Hutchison said she 
did not have one, the official said she and her child would not be 
permitted to enter Israel, because "we instructed you to get a U.S. 
passport."  Ms. Hutchison told ConOff that she explained to the 
immigration official that the GoI agreed to give her a new laissez 
passer in Washington, D.C.  When the immigration official told Ms. 
Hutchison that she would have to go to the Ministry of Interior to 
resolve the issue if permitted to enter, she responded that 
resolving her residency issue with the Ministry was one of the 
purposes for her visit. 
 
¶4. Approximately two hours later, the immigration official returned 
the travel documents, according to Ms. Hutchison, stating "You are 
leaving in two weeks."  The three-month tourist visa in each 
passport was stamped to authorize a two-week maximum stay.  Ms. 
Hutchison told ConOff that, at that point, she decided to take the 
documents and leave the airport for Ramallah. 
 
¶5. Ms. Hutchison emphasized to ConOff her strong frustration with 
feeling forced to accept a three-month tourist visa ("to my own 
home") and with having nearly been denied entry.  Ms. Hutchison 
expressed concern that this incident represented a renewed effort by 
the GoI to deny her residency, nothing that at least she is 
fortunate to have connections to help her; whereas, many others in 
similar situations are being stripped of their residency without 
recourse (reftel). 
 
¶6.  Post recommends that the USG engage with the GOI to seek the 
restoration of her status as a Jerusalem resident.