08KINSHASA553
JUNE 19 MEETING OF STEERING GROUPS FOR AMANI AGREEMENTS,
Wed Jun 25 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kinshasa
VZCZCXRO2958
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHGI RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHKI #0553/01 1771430
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 251430Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY KINSHASA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8159
RUEHLGB/AMEMBASSY KIGALI 4815
INFO RUEHXR/RWANDA COLLECTIVE
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RHMFISS/HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE
RUZEJAA/JAC MOLESWORTH RAF MOLESWORTH UKUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KINSHASA 000553 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MOPS KPKO CG RW UN
SUBJECT: JUNE 19 MEETING OF STEERING GROUPS FOR AMANI AGREEMENTS, 
NAIRTOBI COMMUNIQUE 
 
¶1.  A joint meeting of the steering committees for the "Amani 
Process" (or Amani Program), and the "Nairobi Process' met in 
Kinshasa June 19 at the Ministry of the Interior.  The meeting was 
chaired by Interior Minster Denis Kalume.  Presenting an update on 
the Amani Process was its coordinator, Father Apolinnaire Malumalu; 
the "Nairobi Process" spokesperson was Roving Ambassador Seraphin 
Ngwej, an advisor to President Kabila.  Other prominent attendees 
included the Ministers of Social Affairs (Jean-Claude Muyambo) and 
of Planning (Olivier Kamitatu).  The senior GDRC military official 
was Vice-Admiral Didier Etumba, who serves on the Amani Process' 
Mixed Technical Commission on Peace and Security.  Foreign attendees 
were from the UN (SRSG Alan Doss), the EU (represented by the 
ambassador of France), the EU Commission (represented by its 
delegate to the DRC), Tanzania (ambassador) and the United States 
(DCM).  An unofficial translation of the communique describing the 
meeting, signed June 19 but not distributed until June 23, is 
contained at para 5. 
 
¶2.  The long (almost three hours) meeting was largely uneventful, 
with each spokesman going over developments pertaining to his 
respective process.  The ministers of humanitarian affairs and of 
planning did not speak.  The most salient facts gleaned from the 
presentations by the spokespersons for each process are:  (1) the 
Amani process appears to have run out of steam due to a lack of 
resources and waning interest by key parties in moving forward 
towards demobilization and other goals; and (2) the GDRC sees little 
enthusiasm at the local level to receive and resettle former FDLR 
forces.  Emphasis, Ngwej stated, should be given to pushing first 
for FDLR repatriation to Rwanda while holding out resettlement as a 
limited option for only a few individuals.  Ngwej handed out a 
proposed budget for the repatriation/relocation plan (see para 4). 
 
 
¶3.  A potentially controversial scene unfolded when, at SRSG's Doss' 
request, retired Canadian lieutenant general Marc Caron outlined a 
four-phase MONUC plan for a possible integration ("brassage") of 
forces loyal to dissident General Laurent Nkunda.  Vice-admiral 
Etumba responded vigorously that such plans were not welcome because 
it was the Ministry of Defense, and only the Ministry of Defense, 
that should deal with such matters.  Kalume and Malumalu politely 
thanked both Caron and Etumba but did not make substantive comments. 
 
 
¶4.  A number of documents handed out at the meeting were scanned and 
sent to the Department via e-mail on June 19.  These include:  (1) 
the "brassage" plans outlined by General Caron; (2) the proposed 
operational budget for the FDLR's repatriation/relocation; and (3) 
the minutes of the Amani Process Steering Committee's previous 
meeting on March 25, 2008. 
 
¶5.  Following is embassy's unofficial translation of the communique 
of the June 19 meeting. 
 
COMMUNIQUE 
Unofficial translation 
 
 The Steering Committees of the Amani Program and for the 
implementation of the Nairobi Communique met in joint session in 
Kinshasa on June 19 under the chairmanship of Minister of State for 
the Interior, Decentralization and Security, and in the presence of 
members of the Government or their representatives, as well as 
members of the International Facilitation group for these two 
committees, to wit the United Nations, the African Union, the 
European Union and the United States. 
 
 The Amani Program Monitoring Committee delegation presented a 
report on the status of the work of the different Commissions, 
particularly the Mixed Technical Commission of the Commission on 
Peace and Security (CMPTS), specifically the adoption of internal 
rules, the calendar of activities, the public awareness campaign 
agreed to by the signatories to the Goma Accords, the setting up of 
sub-committees and technical structures, as well as the imminent 
launching of the work of provincial  coordination teams.  The 
Monitoring Committee also outlined certain problems of diverse 
origin and announced the formulation of an Operational Plan for the 
entire program. 
 
 The delegation for the Nairobi Communique presented the Operational 
Plan formulated after the pertinent resolutions of the Kinsangani 
Conference.  The Plan includes continued public awareness campaigns, 
bringing together elements of armed foreign groups, to begin with 
the RUD/Urunana faction, with a view to their repatriation or their 
temporary relocation.  The presentation ended with an appeal for 
national and international support for this process, which is 
entering into its operational phase. 
 
KINSHASA 00000553  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
 Based on the above-mentioned evaluations, the following was 
revealed: 
 
-- There is a lack of respect by several members of the Mixed 
Technical Committee of the texts they themselves drafted and 
signed; 
-- Economic plunder continues; 
-- There is a flow of IDP's following repeated confrontations; 
-- There are new recruitments into the ranks of armed groups; 
-- There are unending rapes and other human rights violations in 
localities occupied by certain parties that are signatories to the 
"Actes d'engagement" (Goma agreements); 
-- ID documents of local populations are confiscated and destroyed; 
 
      Based on the preceding, the Steering Committees have decided 
that: 
 
-- The Steering Committees request the formulation of a scheme of 
integration covering both processes, based on concepts and work that 
already exist, with clearly established phases and tasks that are 
well defined for the different parties, both national and 
international; 
 
-- The Committees strongly condemn the continuation of 
confrontations between armed groups and the use of violence of by 
these groups against civilian populations; they (the Committees) put 
on notice armed groups that do not respect their commitments and 
international human law; 
 
-- The Committees denounce the plundering of natural resources and 
the illegal taxation and extortion in return for the movement of 
persons, including border controls by an armed group; 
 
-- The Committees denounce impunity and urge Congolese authorities 
to commit to strengthening, with support from the international 
community, law enforcement actions in the east of the country in 
order to combat crime and illegal practices; 
 
-- The Committees remind (armed groups) of the formal prohibition of 
any new recruitment into the ranks of armed groups and encourage the 
Mixed Technical Commission for Peace and Security, as well as 
Monitoring Committee for the Nairobi Communique to rigorously carry 
out their duties with a view to the improvement of the situation on 
the ground; 
 
-- The Committees agree, via their members, to mobilize resources to 
assure the financing of projects and to respond effectively to the 
humanitarian crisis in the east of the country. 
 
Signed in Kinshasa, 19 June 2008 
 
 
Denis KALUME NUMBI 
President of the Steering Committee of the Amani Program 
 
End embassy translation of Communique 
 
GARVELINK