08MOSCOW444
MOSCOW RESPONSE TO STATE 10743 FOR REQUIRED REPORTS TO
Fri Feb 15 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Moscow
VZCZCXYZ0021
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMO #0444/01 0461525
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 151525Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 6680UNCLAS MOSCOW 000444 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EEB/ESC/IEC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG ECON AFIN ABUD RS
SUBJECT: MOSCOW RESPONSE TO STATE 10743 FOR REQUIRED REPORTS TO 
CONGRESS ON ENERGY 
 
REF: STATE 10743 
 
¶1.  In response to action request in reftel, Embassy Moscow provides 
the following answers: 
 
¶A.  Energy issues in Russia are handled by various sections in 
Embassy Moscow and the constituent posts.  In the Embassy, from the 
State Department, the Economic Section, the Environment, Science, 
and Technology Section, and the Executive Office all engage on 
energy matters.  The Political/Economic Sections in the Consulates 
General in St. Petersburg, Yekaterinburg and Vladivostok handle 
energy issues from the regional perspective.  The total number of 
State Department staff in all these sections, including LES, is 47 
(15 in Econ, 13 in EST, 9 in EXEC, and 10 in relevant sections of 
CGs).  In addition, the Department of Energy has two employees, an 
attache and an LES, in Moscow devoted to non-nuclear energy issues. 
The Department of Commerce's Commercial Service handles 
energy-related commercial support, primarily assisting U.S. 
companies interested in entering or expanding their business in the 
Russian energy market.  The DOE energy attache has extensive 
experience specifically covering Russian and Eurasian energy 
matters. 
 
¶B.  Time devoted to energy issues: 
 
Economic Section: 
 
1 Minister Counselor for Economic Affairs -- 20% 
1 Deputy Minister Counselor for Economic Affairs -- 20% 
1 Trade and Investment Unit Chief -- 20% 
1 Economic Officer (Oil and Gas) -- 85% 
1 Economic Officer -- 35% 
1 OMS -- 10% 
1 LES Economic Assistant -- 15% 
1 LES Economic Assistant -- 15% 
1 LES Economic Assistant -- 5% 
1 LES Economic Assistant -- 5% 
 
Environment, Science, and Technology (EST) Section: 
 
1 EST Deputy Counselor -- 35% 
1 EST Officer -- 65% 
1 LES EST Assistant -- 50% 
 
Executive Office: 
 
1 Ambassador -- 10% 
1 DCM -- 5% 
1 OMS -- 5% 
1 Interpreter -- 5% 
 
CG St. Petersburg: 
 
1 Pol/Econ Officer -- 10% 
1 LES Pol/Econ Assistant -- 10% 
 
CG Vladivostok: 
 
1 Pol/Econ Officer -- 20% 
1 LES Economic Assistant -- 35% 
1 LES Political Assistant -- 10% 
 
CG Yekaterinburg: 
 
1 Pol/Econ Officer -- 10% 
 
¶C. Brief descriptions of work performed: 
 
Economic Section: 
 
The Economic Minister Counselor and Deputy MC meet with a wide range 
of government and industry contacts, encouraging a more open and 
productive business climate for energy companies; monitor and report 
on economic developments; and direct the work of the section, 
including that described below. 
 
The Trade and Investment Unit Chief meets with a wide range of 
government and industry contacts; monitors and reports on economic 
developments; and directs the work of the Unit, including those of 
the Economic Officer responsible solely for oil and gas issues. 
 
The Oil and Gas Officer monitors and reports on the oil and gas 
sector in Russia, the world's largest producer and exporter of 
hydrocarbons; develops and maintains relevant government, industry, 
and NGO contacts. 
 
The Economic Officer covering economic reform issues monitors and 
reports on developments in the power sector; and develops and 
maintains relevant contacts. 
 
The Economic Section's OMS and LES Economic Assistants support the 
 
work of the section by setting up appointments, conducting research, 
attending meetings, serving as translators and interpreters when 
needed, writing relevant reports, and developing and maintaining a 
wide range of contacts. 
 
EST Section: 
 
The Deputy EST Counselor meets with a wide range of government 
contacts to engage them on climate change issues and encourage 
active participation in relevant multilateral fora; reports Russian 
views and drafts memos, talking points, etc., reflecting GOR and NGO 
approaches; and directs the work of the EST officer and LES. 
 
EST officer monitors and reports on the evolution of the civilian 
nuclear sector in Russia, Russia's export of civil nuclear 
technology; maintains relevant government, industry, and NGO 
contacts; is the liaison for Embassy programs involving the Nuclear 
Regulatory Commission (NRC) and the Russian government; and 
coordinates with DOE office on all nuclear energy issues. 
 
LES supports these activities by accompanying EST officers, 
performing research on selected issues, and maintaining continuous 
contact with GOR counterparts. 
 
Executive Office: 
 
The Ambassador and DCM engage the Russian government at the highest 
levels to discuss U.S. and Russian domestic and international energy 
policies, and to advocate for a more transparent, efficient, and 
productive investment climate; meet with energy company senior 
executives to share perspectives on Russian and global energy 
issues; direct the activities of the entire Mission, including those 
of the sections relevant to this report.  The Ambassador's OMS and 
interpreter support these activities. 
 
CG Vladivostok: 
 
The Pol/Econ Officer and two LES monitor, analyze, and report on any 
and all political and economic developments in the region.  This 
includes monitoring and reporting on:  the Russian legal framework, 
developments related to the oil and gas sector, and developments in 
the environmental, nuclear, coal, and power generation fields. 
They also develop and maintain relationships with individuals 
involved in the sector, including oil company employees, government 
officials, and representatives in the media. 
 
CG Yekaterinburg: 
 
Pol/Econ Officer oversees one DOE FSN employee, who reports to 
Moscow's Department of Energy Attache.  Oversight includes 
energy-related reporting, and support for VIP visits to the region 
from Washington and Moscow.  Officer also regularly participates in 
weekly DVC with DOE, and outreach to Energy Department employees and 
contractors in the region. 
 
CG St. Petersburg: 
 
Pol/Econ Officer and LES meet with energy company officials and 
industry experts; visit export terminals; meet with 
environmentalists to discuss ecological impact of pipelines, power 
plants, etc.; and report on energy issues as they impact NW Russia. 
 
¶D.  State Department funds spent by post in FY 2007 on 
energy-related activities are as follows: 
 
-- personnel:  $ 232,937 ($65,179 for LES and $167,758 for 
Americans) 
-- program:  $2,897 (travel)