08OTTAWA767

Fri Jun 06 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO3593
RR RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHOT #0767 1582110
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 062110Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7984
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO 1839UNCLAS OTTAWA 000767 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAN, EEB/IFD/OIA and EEB/DCT 
 
STATE PASS DEPARTMENT OF LABOR FOR CRISPIN RIGBY AND CHARLOTTE 
PONTICELLI 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ELAB ECON ETRD PREL CA
SUBJ:  Labor Secretary Chao Attends North American Agreement of 
Labor Cooperation Meeting in Ottawa 
 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: U.S. Secretary of Labor Elaine Chao, Canadian Labor 
Minister Jean-Pierre Blackburn, and Mexican Secretary of Labor and 
Social Welfare Javier Lozano Alarcsn attended a Ministerial meeting 
of the North American Agreement of Labor Cooperation (NAALC) in 
Ottawa on April 23-23.  The meeting provided the three NAALC 
Ministers the opportunity to reaffirm their commitment to the NAALC 
and NAFTA, to discuss future priorities for the Secretariat of the 
Commission for Labor Cooperation, and to sign a joint declaration 
resolving a public communication filed in 2003 concerning freedom of 
association and collective bargaining rights in Puebla, Mexico.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (U) The U.S. Secretary of Labor and her Canadian and Mexican 
counterparts held the Eighth Regular Session of the North American 
Agreement of Labor Cooperation (NAALC) Council of Ministers in 
Ottawa, Canada on April 23-24.  The meeting took place in a very 
positive atmosphere.  The Ministers reached consensus on all matters 
under discussion and provided concrete guidance to the Secretariat 
staff, which was represented by incoming Executive Director Daniel 
Bernier and Director of Administration Gabriel Jimenez.  The 
Ministers agreed to hold these meetings annually in the future.  The 
Seventh Session of the Council of Ministers was held in Washington 
on November 13, 2003. 
 
¶3. (U) Secretary Chao reaffirmed the United States' commitment to 
the NAALC and emphasized the benefits that each of the three North 
American countries have enjoyed as a result of NAFTA. 
 
¶4. (U) Scott Streiner, the Council Designee from Canada, delivered a 
presentation on future priorities for the Commission of Labor 
Cooperation.  He presented the Ministers with possible topics for 
cooperative activities and research to be undertaken by the 
Secretariat and proposed an increased commitment to more efficient 
handling of public communications under the NAALC.  In addition to 
approving current plans to pursue cooperative activities on youth 
employment and mine safety, the Ministers expressed interest in 
activities focusing on workplace protections for vulnerable workers, 
addressing the employment challenges of new and emerging 
technologies such as biofuels, and producing materials on the 
benefits of trade.  There was also discussion on the topic of labor 
law reform, which is of particular relevance in Mexico. 
 
¶5. (U) The Ministers agreed that they would make every effort to 
resolve public communication cases within one year of the filing of 
a complaint with the National Administrative Offices.  The meeting 
concluded with the signing of the joint declaration resolving the 
"Puebla case."  The declaration mandates the Secretariat to develop 
a variety of reports and informational materials concerning 
procedures to resolve unjust dismissal complaints, processes for 
registration of unions, and access to collective bargaining 
agreements.  The Mexican authorities committed to host a 
government-to-government session in Puebla with federal and state 
authorities to exchange information on best practices on the 
subjects noted above.  This session is to be followed by a seminar, 
which will include other relevant stakeholders.  The joint 
declaration calls for a plan of action to be developed within 90 
days (July 2008) and to complete planned activities within 15 months 
(July 2009). 
 
¶6. (U) The Secretary said that private ballot elections in union 
formation and the selection of collective bargaining representatives 
Qformation and the selection of collective bargaining representatives 
is an important protection for workers.  Mexico and Canada provided 
their views on this issue and the Ministers agreed to charge their 
Council Designees to hold discussions on the issue, with the 
possibility of requesting further examination of the topic by the 
Secretariat in the future. 
 
BREESE