08OTTAWA241
ENERGY AND CLIMATE CHANGE WORK AT MISSION CANADA:
Tue Feb 19 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO1323
RR RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHOT #0241/01 0501305
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 191305Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7318
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 OTTAWA 000241 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR EB/ESC, OES, AND WHA/CAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG SENV APER ABUD CA
SUBJECT: ENERGY AND CLIMATE CHANGE WORK AT MISSION CANADA: 
INPUT FOR REPORTS TO CONGRESS 
 
REF: STATE 10743 
 
¶1. Befitting U.S. representation in Canada, with which we 
have the globe's largest bilateral energy relationship, every 
post in Mission Canada devotes significant resources to 
energy matters.  The Ambassador regularly speaks to Canadian 
audiences about climate change and the importance of our 
energy relationship, fields questions on energy matters 
during interviews, and meets with industry executives and 
government energy policy makers.  The principal officers in 
our seven constituent posts address energy and climate issues 
in public speaking engagements and are involved in energy 
matters with provincial governments, which play a major role 
in energy policy in Canada.  In recent years, energy and 
climate change have become fixtures in our IVP and speaker 
programs.  And Mission Canada posts host a range of senior 
U.S. government officials and congressional representatives 
visiting Canada for policy discussions and to see first hand 
the Canadian energy picture, from getting the resources out 
of the ground to developing the technologies that allow our 
integrated energy industries to serve the energy demands of 
our economies more efficiently and with less cost to the 
environment. 
 
¶2. This message provides information requested reftel on 
where in Mission Canada posts energy and climate issues are 
managed, and the resources our posts devote to managing these 
issues.  Amounts for "personnel costs" are direct salary 
costs only. 
 
¶3. Embassy Ottawa 
   -------------- 
¶A. For the most part, the Environment, Science and 
Technology, and Health (ESTH) Section handles energy and 
climate change matters, with support from Public Affairs. 
The executive office (Ambassador and DCM) conducts outreach 
on energy and climate matters, and the Economic 
Minister-Counselor provides guidance.  ESTH has two FSOs. 
Two LES Economic Specialists are shared with the Economic 
Section.  The Public Affairs Section supports a range of 
energy related programming (particularly speaker and IV 
programs) and press work. 
 
¶B. Econ Minister-Counselor: 5 percent. 
ESTH Counselor: 60 percent. 
LES Economic Specialist: 20 percent. 
LES Economic/Environment Specialist: 25 percent 
Public Affairs Officers and staff (11 persons): 5 percent 
each. 
 
¶C. The ESTH Counselor is primary action officer for all 
energy and climate change issues.  His duties include meeting 
with government officials (largely at the federal level), 
industry associations, company executives, and NGOs across 
the range of energy and climate issues, to encompass oil and 
gas, electricity, renewables and civilian nuclear energy. 
The ESTH Counselor reports on climate and energy policy and 
commercial developments in Canada and represents U.S. policy 
interests to the Canadian government.  He also makes 
arrangements for and supports energy and climate components 
of visits to Ottawa of U.S. government officials and 
congressional representatives.  The ESTH Counselor completed 
FSI's oil and gas industry training, and has served three 
assignments focusing solely on energy issues in the 
Department and overseas.  LES staff maintain contacts with 
industry and government.  PA officers and staff are involved 
in planning and executing speaker and IV programs and in 
responding to press inquiries on energy issues. 
 
¶D. Personnel Costs: $170,690. 
Program Costs: $56,600.  (This figure is for IV and speaker 
programs and represents a significant portion of funds 
available to the Public Affairs Section for these activities. 
 Energy and climate IVs, for example, used 34 percent of 
Q Energy and climate IVs, for example, used 34 percent of 
Mission Canada's IV budget for FY07.) 
 
¶4. Vancouver 
   --------- 
¶A. The Political/Economic Section normally handles energy 
matters, though the Consul General and Public Affairs Section 
also contribute.  The Political/Economic Section currently is 
staffed by two officers but will be reduced to one officer in 
summer 2008.  The Public Affairs section provides support. 
 
¶B. Consul General: 5 percent. 
Pol/Econ Chief: 5 percent. 
Pol/Econ Officer: 10 percent. 
Public Affairs Officer and staff (2): 5 percent each. 
 
¶C. The Consul General gives speeches and engages in 
 
OTTAWA 00000241  002 OF 003 
 
 
representational work on energy issues.  The Pol/Econ Chief 
follows environmental issues with a special focus on climate 
change and non-fossil fuels.  She has contact with natural 
gas and wind/wave energy industries as well as British 
Columbia's (BC) Ministry of Energy, Mines and Petroleum 
Resources, and BC Climate Change Secretariat.  The Pol/Econ 
Officer maintains contacts with BC's Ministry of Energy, 
Mines, and Petroleum Resources, and BC Hydro.  The Pol/Econ 
Officer follows and reports on a variety of mining (coal, 
natural gas) and alternative energy developments. 
 
¶D. Personnel Costs: $28,540. 
Program Costs: zero. 
 
¶5. Calgary 
   ------- 
¶A. While the bulk of the Consulate General's energy and 
climate work is accomplished in the policy sections 
(executive, economic, political and public diplomacy) nearly 
all Consulate General personnel, including in the consular 
section, have work touching on energy issues and have contact 
with energy industry representatives. 
 
¶B. Consul General: 33 percent. 
Deputy Principal Officer (Pol/Econ Officer): 33 percent. 
LES OMS: 33 percent. 
LES Pol/Econ Specialist: 66 percent. 
LES PA Specialist: 10 percent. 
Consul: 25 percent. 
Vice Consul: 25 percent. 
3 LES Consular visa staff: 25 percent each. 
LES Consular receptionist: 20 percent. 
4 LES Consular citizen's service staff: 10 percent each. 
 
¶C. The Consul General works with the Canadian, Alberta and 
U.S. governments on energy policy, and maintains contacts 
with industry and academia on energy issues through public 
speaking and formal dialogues.  The Consul General previously 
served as energy officer at Embassies Ottawa and Moscow.  The 
Deputy Principal Officer reports on Canadian and Alberta 
energy policies, and maintains contacts with industry and 
academia through public speaking and formal dialogues.  The 
LES OMS supports contacts with government and industry.  The 
LES Pol/Econ Specialist reports on Canadian and Alberta 
energy policies and maintains contacts with industry.  She 
has been working energy issues at the Consulate for 20 years, 
has taken several FSI energy training courses, and was 
selected WHA's FSN of the year in 2003 based on her energy 
work.  The LES PA Specialist maintains contacts with industry 
and supports the PA aspects of visiting energy delegations. 
The Consular officers and eight Consular LES staff maintain 
contacts with industry on visa and citizen's services issues. 
 
¶D. Personnel Costs: $261,350. 
Program Costs: zero. 
 
¶6. Winnipeg 
   -------- 
¶A. Winnepeg is an APP post.  The Consul and the LES Pol/Econ 
Specialist handle all substantive work at post, including all 
energy and climate work. 
 
¶B. Consul (Principal Officer): 5 percent. 
LES Pol/Econ Specialist: 10 percent. 
 
¶C. Both maintain contacts with government officials and 
company executives on energy matters, which in Manitoba 
usually have a national dimension.  Consul provides policy 
guidance, and Pol/Econ Specialist takes the lead in actually 
following and reporting on developments. 
 
¶D. Personnel Costs: $12,990. 
Program Costs: zero. 
 
¶7. Toronto 
   ------- 
¶A. The Pol/Econ Section handles energy issues, with support 
from the Consul General and Public Affairs Section.  Pol/Econ 
has three staff members (two FSOs and one LES). 
 
¶B. Consul General: 5 per cent. 
Pol/Econ Chief: 10 percent. 
Public Affairs Officer and staff (2): 10 percent each. 
 
¶C. Both the Consul General and Pol/Econ Chief meet with 
government officials and company executives; additionally the 
Pol/Econ chief meets with NGOs and drafts reporting on energy 
QPol/Econ chief meets with NGOs and drafts reporting on energy 
issues.  The Public Affairs Section provides press support 
and manages speaker and IV programs on energy matters.  The 
Pol/Econ Chief has taken FSI's coal and power training course. 
 
OTTAWA 00000241  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
¶D. Personnel Costs: $38,620. 
Program Costs: zero. 
 
¶8. Montreal 
   -------- 
¶A. The Econ/Pol Section handles energy matters, though the 
Consul General and Public Affairs Officer are also directly 
involved from time to time. 
 
¶B. Econ/Pol Officer: 20 percent. 
Public Affairs Officer and staff (2): 10 percent each. 
 
¶C. Econ/Pol Officer reports on and maintains official and 
private sector contacts within the energy sector, including 
Quebec's electricity industry, and gas and petroleum sectors. 
 The Public Affairs Section works regularly on energy issues, 
including arranging speaking engagements on energy, setting 
up DVCs and other events with energy contacts, and arranging 
IVLPs.  Both Econ/Pol and Public Affairs Sections support 
delegations and other energy and climate-focused U.S. 
government visitors. 
 
¶D. Personnel Costs: $33,045. 
Program Costs: $1,820. 
 
¶9. Quebec City 
   ----------- 
¶A. The Consul General handles energy and climate matters, 
with the assistance of LES staff. 
 
¶B. Consul General: 10 percent. 
LES Specialist: 10 percent. 
LES Specialist: 10 percent. 
 
¶C. All three maintain contacts with government officials and 
private sector executives and report on developments in the 
energy sector. 
 
¶D. Personnel Costs: $24,010. 
Program Costs: zero. 
 
¶10. Halifax 
    ------- 
¶A. The Consul General and an LES Pol/Econ Specialist handle 
energy and climate issues with the support of an LES Public 
Affairs Representative. 
 
¶B. Consul General: 10 percent. 
LES Pol/Econ Specialist: 20 percent. 
LES Public Affairs Representative: 15 percent. 
 
¶C. The Consul General develops and maintains contacts with 
senior industry and provincial government officials 
(including at the political level), directs the work of the 
POL/ECON Specialist who draws on working level contacts to 
prepare reports on offshore energy exploration and 
production, sustainable energy developments (including wind 
and tidal power), and nuclear power.  The Public Affairs 
Representative arranges speaking programs and DVCs in the 
district for U.S. energy experts and arranges IVP programs in 
the U.S. for energy officials from the district.  The Consul 
General earlier served as Embassy Ottawa's energy officer, 
and the POL/ECON Specialist has been handling energy issues 
at the consulate for 25 years.  Both completed FSI's oil and 
gas industry course. 
 
¶D. Personnel Costs: $32,995. 
Program Costs: zero. 
 
 
Visit Canada,s Economy and Environment Forum at 
http://www.intelink.gov/communities/state/can ada 
 
WILKINS