08OTTAWA1417
NSDD 38 - Department of Homeland Security (DHS), United
Thu Nov 06 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
R 061631Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 8696UNCLAS OTTAWA 001417 
 
 
FOR M/PRI AND WHA FROM THE AMBASSADOR 
 
DEPT PASS TO DHS - COAST GUARD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AODE AMGT KMRS CA
SUBJECT:  NSDD 38 - Department of Homeland Security (DHS), United 
States Coast Guard Request to Establish a Coast Guard Liaison 
Officer Position in Ottawa, Canada 
 
REF: A) NSDD-38 CASE NUMBER DHS-CAN-70905-10152008 
 
¶1. The Embassy has received the NSDD-38 request from the Department 
of Homeland Security, United States Coast Guard (USCG) to establish 
an 0-4 Coast Guard Liaison Officer billet at the Royal Canadian 
Mounted political (RCMP) Headquarters in Ottawa.  The Chief of 
Mission approves the establishment of this position.  Filling this 
position will constitute explicit acceptance of USCG's 
responsibility to pay ICASS charges outlined herein and your 
acceptance of Chief of Mission authority over this position.  As 
such, he/she is required to keep the Ambassador fully and currently 
informed with respect to all activities and operations in accordance 
with the Ambassador's letter of instructions and 22 U.S.C. 3927.  In 
the absence of a USCG-charged Attache accredited to the Embassy, the 
person encumbering this position will report to the Ambassador and 
DCM through the DHS Attache assigned to Embassy Ottawa.   Current 
USCG staffing in Ottawa is zero.  (There is currently a USCG Attach 
position in the Chancery but it is not charged to USCG, rather to 
the Defense Attach office.) With this approval, staffing level for 
USCG will be one American officer. 
 
¶2.  Post would like to advise Coast Guard that all agencies are 
required to sign a Memorandum of Understanding with regard to 
subscription of ICASS services.  Coast Guard will need to sign an 
ICASS agreement for the services to be provided upon arrival at 
post.  Cost center descriptions may be found at www.icass.gov in the 
ICASS Handbook link, section H-340. 
 
 
ADMINISTRATIVE ICASS SUPPORT COSTS: 
 
¶3. Coast Guard must agree to pay all security-related costs and 
support future Ottawa ICASS budgets proposed and approved by the 
local ICASS Council.   The following are estimated current annual 
ICASS costs for one position located outside the chancery: 
 
Basic package: $1,209 
Health Services: $239 
CLO: $500 
Shipping and Customs: $1,100 
Mail and Messenger: $544 
Overhead: $54 
ICASS Redistribution: $1,897 
TOTAL: $5,845 
 
OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE AND SECURITY ISSUES: 
 
¶4. DIPLOMATIC OR ADMINISTRATIVE/TECHNICAL STATUS:  Post would like 
to advise Coast Guard that approval of this NSDD-38 does not 
automatically confer diplomatic status.  All requests for diplomatic 
titles must be submitted by Coast Guard to the Titles and Rank 
Office in the State Department's Bureau of Human Resources.  If a 
diplomatic title is not required, or not approved, the incumbent 
will be announced to the Canadian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and 
Foreign Trade (DFAIT) as Administrative and Technical Staff (A&T). 
In Ottawa, all personnel (diplomatic or A&T) enjoy the same 
privileges and immunities. 
 
¶5. Security Briefing:  All American personnel transferring to an 
overseas location under Chief of Mission authority must complete 
appropriate overseas personal security training prior to their 
travel.  This applies to all American personnel performing extended 
(more than 30 days) TDY travel as well.  Employees may take the 
Department of State's Foreign Service Institute (FSI) approved 
minimum four-day training course "Serving Abroad for Families and 
Employees" (S.A.F.E.).  Agencies may choose to provide their own 
equivalent training if it has been certified by the State 
Department's Bureau of Diplomatic Security.  All personnel must 
certify that training for covered employees will be completed prior 
to travel.  Additionally, the employee will need to complete the 
Embassy security briefing as part of the check-in process. 
 
¶6. Pre-arrival and Check-In:  Coast Guard must announce the 
assignment of all new employees and their accompanying family 
members to U.S. Embassy Ottawa well in advance of arrival.  All 
employees are required to check-in with the Embassy Human Resources 
Office (HRO) as soon as possible after arrival in Ottawa.  Personnel 
should contact the HR Office at 613-688-5264 to make an 
appointment. 
 
¶7. With regard to typical allowance entitlements at post, please 
refer to the following website:  www.state.gov/m/a/als/. 
 
CONTACT INFORMATION: 
 
¶8. ICASS/Financial Issues:  Kemp Long/Carolyn Paquette in the 
Financial Management Office (613-688-5282); 
Security Issues: Kevin Flanagan, RSO (613-688-5390); 
General post information: KarenKay Hall or Rachel Hecker, Community 
 
Liaison Officers (613-688-5274 or 613-688-5403); 
HR Issues: Patricia Duffy, HRO (613-688-5265). 
 
RESPONSE TO QUESTIONS FROM M/R: 
 
¶9. Q1: Is the need for the proposed staffing change reflected in the 
most recent MSP? 
 
Yes.  This position was included in the FY 2009 MSP but perhaps 
inadvertently left off Table C, new position requests.  The position 
supports the Mission Strategic Plan goal 1: Modern Efficient, Secure 
Border.  Key priorities include enhancing the security of 
U.S./Canadian border and promoting law enforcement cooperation. 
 
Q2:  If the agency proposes to add staffing based on workload, are 
there other resources already present at post that are performing or 
could perform the function? 
 
No. 
 
Q3:  Could the function be accomplished through the use of TDY, 
Foreign National, contract or other local-hire personnel? 
 
No.  The incumbent will represent the U.S. Coast Guard, one of the 
five USG and Canadian Government law enforcement agencies that 
signed the Integrated Border Enforcement Team (IBET) Charter to 
further law enforcement cooperation along the U.S. Canadian border. 
Ongoing liaison with partner law enforcement agencies and Canadian 
officials is required and therefore the duties cannot be 
accomplished from the United States or through the use of TDY, 
contract of other personnel. 
 
Q4:  Identify the specific administrative support, space and funding 
arrangement that have been made for the increase in staffing. 
 
The position will be located at the RCMP (outside the Embassy) so no 
space arrangements are required.  ICASS support and charges are 
detailed in para 3. 
 
Q5:  Do the benefits of increasing staff outweigh the inherent 
security risks associated with additional personnel? 
 
Yes.  The establishment of the position will strengthen U.S./Canada 
relations and support our key goals - enhancing the security of our 
border with Canada and closing the gap in law enforcement 
cooperation. 
 
WILKINS