08OUAGADOUGOU427
BURKINA FASO: ESTH DEVELOPMENTS IN MINING, WILDLIFE
Tue May 20 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ouagadougou
VZCZCXRO8853
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHGI RUEHJO RUEHMA RUEHMR RUEHPA RUEHRN RUEHTRO
DE RUEHOU #0427/01 1411706
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 201706Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY OUAGADOUGOU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3701
RUEHRC/USDA FAS WASHDC 0053
INFO RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE
RUEHIN/AIT TAIPEI 0130UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 OUAGADOUGOU 000427 
 
AF/W EMILY PLUMB, JASON HUTCHISON 
OES/E/ETC CHRISTINE DAWSON 
DEPT PASS EPA FOR OIA/MARTIN DIEU, OPPT/CHARLIE AUER 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID EAGR EMIN SENV GH UV CH TW
SUBJECT: BURKINA FASO: ESTH DEVELOPMENTS IN MINING, WILDLIFE 
CONSERVATION, ECO-TOURISM AND ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: During a May 9-14 mission to Burkina Faso, the Regional 
Environmental Officer (REO) met with Government of Burkina Faso 
(GOBF) officials (Bureau of Mines and Geology, Ministry of 
Environment, National Tourism Board) and the International Institute 
for Water and Environmental Engineering to discuss government 
initiatives for mining, wildlife conservation, eco-tourism, and 
environmental education. END SUMMARY. 
 
Mining 
------ 
 
¶2. According to Mr. Pascal Deindere, Director General (DG), of the 
Bureau of Mines, the 2004 mining code revisions mandate best 
management practices for all industrial mining concessions.  All 
industrial mining projects must be developed under the guidelines of 
a comprehensive activity plan that includes environmental impact 
assessments and mine closure plans with site rehabilitation 
projects. Mr. Pascal spoke of the necessity for balanced regulation 
to both promote international investment in the mining sector, and 
ensure that mining companies operate as good environmental stewards. 
 
 
¶3. The DG spoke positively of progress made on the industrial mining 
front, but described the artisanal gold mining sector as difficult 
and complicated.  Artisanal or informal mining occurs in more than 
200 sites throughout the country, and is destructive to the 
landscape/habitat, hazardous to human health, and remains outside 
the realm of government regulation.  The lack of regulatory capacity 
is cause for concern because use of mercury and arsenic is 
widespread throughout the informal gold mining sector.  The DG said 
the illegal chemicals are supplied in Ghana by the Chinese and cross 
border mercury trafficking continues due to lack of border 
surveillance, inspection and control. 
 
¶4. On May 15, EconOff traveled to Essakane, one of the country's 
largest artisanal mining sites located near the Burkina Faso- Niger 
border. The vast site was covered with hundreds of piles of dirt dug 
from open pits ranging from 50 to 100 meters in depth.  Children and 
livestock were running through the site while miners either worked 
deep in pits or knee-deep in muddy water.  Workers admitted to using 
drugs in order to have the courage and stamina to carry on their 
daily tasks.  They also claimed that severe health problems plagued 
the community primarily in the form of respiratory ailments caused 
by inhalation of the dust.  Despite confirmation of mercury use by 
Burkinabe officials, workers refused to admit to use of illegal 
chemicals in their mining practices. 
 
¶5. COMMENT: The use of mercury threatens the health of those who 
come in direct contact with the heavy metal, as well as potentially 
contaminating groundwater and food supply (agricultural, domestic 
livestock, and wild species) adjacent to these mining sites.   The 
GOBF should be encouraged to develop and enforce legislation to 
control the illegal trafficking and use of mercury in artisanal gold 
mining operations and should also be encouraged to engage their 
counterparts in Ghana on this issue. Although the GOBF has developed 
a plan to deal with illegal mining that includes site reclamation 
and reeducation of the local population, they lack the capacity, 
expertise and financial resources to carry it out in the foreseeable 
future.   END COMMENT. 
 
Wildlife 
-------- 
 
¶6. The Director of Ecology for Flora and Fauna, Mr. Rigobert Bayala, 
was happy to discuss conservation programs, and acknowledged the 
need for improved capacity for national park and reserve management, 
game law enforcement, and public education for increased awareness 
and cooperation to prevent illegal hunting and reduce human/wildlife 
conflict.  The Director noted human/wildlife conflict to be a 
growing concern and on May 7, 2008 the local press, "Le Pays," 
reported ongoing human/elephant encounters that resulted in the 
deaths of several elephants after a small troop of elephants took up 
residence in the near three villages in the Tiefora region.  The 
Director stressed the need for improved education and community 
cooperation for successful management of human/wildlife conflict. 
Mr. Bayala is now on a trans-boundary mission to evaluate the 
regional eco-tourism potential of the Arli National Park, sharing 
borders with Benin and Niger. 
 
¶7. COMMENT:  Historically, Burkinabe grazing livestock have been 
allowed to cross into Panjeri National Park (Benin) causing stress 
on the wildlife habitat and potentially impacting the park's 
eco-tourism business according to Beninese wildlife managers.  It 
will be interesting to learn if errant grazing herd animals will 
impact the desired results of the tripartite trans-boundary mission. 
 The final report is scheduled to be delivered at the beginning of 
 
OUAGADOUGO 00000427  002 OF 002 
 
 
June 2008 and Mr. Bayala said he would be glad to share information. 
 END COMMENT. 
 
Eco-Tourism, Including Role of Taiwan 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. Mr. Souleman Ouedraogo, Director General (DG) of the Office of 
National Tourism for the Ministry of Tourism, said the GOBF is very 
concerned with Burkina Faso's image in the international eco-tourism 
sector.  He was happy to discuss the upcoming and expanded 
(increased from 9 to 15 countries) fifth annual International 
Tourism and Hotelier convention scheduled for September 2008 as well 
as highlight numerous eco-tourism attractions in Burkina Faso.  When 
asked, he seemed to be aware of the impact artisanal mining has on 
the landscape, less aware of the connection between good 
environmental stewardship and the positive impact it can have on the 
eco-tourism sector.  He was reluctant to discuss the potential 
damage that irresponsible mining practices have on human health and 
eco-system health and ultimately the image of the eco-tourism 
sector.  After further discussion, he noted the need for greater 
awareness and involvement, if only to be given a chance to review 
initiatives for consideration of potential linkages to the 
eco-tourism sector/image. 
 
¶9.  When asked about Chinese influence in the country, the DG said 
Burkina Faso could see increased Chinese investment in agriculture, 
health and perhaps infrastructure.  Mr. Ouedraogo also mentioned 
Taiwanese investment in a 2 billion CFA (US 2.36 million), 
industrial and eco-tourism center near Tenkodogo which is scheduled 
to be completed in December 2008.  The center will include 
hydroelectric power generation, rice crop production, fish meal 
production for export, guest bungalows, swimming facilities and a 3 
kilometer artificial beach.  (COMMENT: Burkina Faso is currently one 
of only four countries in Africa with diplomatic ties with Taipei. 
Investment from mainland China into Burkina Faso will likely remain 
limited until Ouagadougou shifts diplomatic recognition from Taipei 
to Beijing.  END COMMENT.) 
 
Environmental Education 
----------------------- 
 
¶10. The International Institute for Water and Environmental 
Engineering (2IE) is a 40 year old institution dedicated to 
education, training and research.  The institute offers education 
and certification at the bachelors, masters and PHD levels with 
programs in water, energy, the environment and infrastructure.  The 
institute receives support from various sources including the 
European Community, Switzerland and Canada.  Mr. Paul Ginies, 
Director General (DG), and Mr. Amadou Maiga, Deputy Director General 
(DDG), are committed to expanding the programs at the institute, 
while at the same time developing education, research and 
professional capacity in Africa.  The DG and the DDG are interested 
in developing collaborative efforts for improved potable water 
development, water collection and transport systems, remote sensing, 
renewable energy (Bio-mass), renewable construction materials, 
sanitation and solid waste management.  (COMMENT:  The institution 
shows promise as another avenue for USG outreach in general, and 
specifically for increased outreach into primarily Muslim 
communities in Burkina Faso and the region.  U.S. English Language 
Fellow (ELF) professors have been assigned to 2IE for the last three 
years and will be in place for one more.  Given the success of this 
program, post has requested a bi-lingual Fulbright position for 
2009-2010 academic year.)  END COMMENT.) 
 
JACKSON