08PARIS889
UNESCO - Internationalized Domain Names
Fri May 09 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHFR #0889/01 1301109
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 091109Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2963
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 2880UNCLAS PARIS 000889 
 
FROM USMISSION UNESCO PARIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR IO/UNESCO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNESCO KPAO EAID EINT ETRD
SUBJECT: UNESCO - Internationalized Domain Names 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  UNESCO held a May 6, 2008 Information Meeting on 
Internationalized Domain Names (IDN), entitled "Using Your Script to 
Access the Internet." Assistant Director General (ADG) for 
Communication and Information (CI) Abdul Waheed Khan (India) hosted, 
with the Latvian Ambassador to UNESCO and France, Janis Karklins, 
who is on the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers 
(ICANN) Board of Directors and Chairman of its Governmental Advisory 
Committee. Khan provided an overview of UNESCO's policy on Internet 
governance, while Karklins and an ICANN staffer previewed the fast 
track process for introducing a limited amount of IDNs, which will 
be considered for approval at the upcoming ICANN Public Meeting in 
Paris this June.  Karklins urged member states, particularly those 
from developing countries, to attend the Paris meeting (funded by 
India) and voice their views on permanently adding IDN strings to 
the root zone.  Member states in attendance included many EU and 
Arab states, Venezuela, China, Thailand, Russia and India.  The 
audience posed questions that revealed an inability to grasp what 
IDNs are.  While the UNESCO Secretariat is firmly committed to 
facilitating World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) 
outcomes, UNESCO member delegations have little expertise on the 
Internet.  Accordingly, their value-added at the ICANN meeting would 
be limited and may even confuse debate.  END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------ 
UNESCO AND THE INTERNET: 
------------------------ 
¶2.  (SBU) ADG Khan, staffed by Miriam Nesbit (U.S.), Director of the 
Information Society Division in CI and Mauro Rosi (Italy), Division 
of Cultural Expressions, Culture Sector, outlined UNESCO's support 
of access, freedom of expression, linguistic diversity, openness and 
interoperability on the Internet. Khan stated that UNESCO has 
contributed to the issue of multilingualism on the Internet through 
its 2007-2009 budget and program, the 2003 Recommendation on 
Multilingualism and Cyberspace and the 2007 UN resolution on 
Multilingualism. When questioned about censorship on the Internet, 
Khan categorically stated that UNESCO is vehemently opposed to 
censorship in all media. (COMMENT:  Khan also mentioned a few CI 
programs that are on life support, such as Initiative Babel, whose 
webpage has not been updated since 2004.  UNESCO CI does not have 
the resources to make much of these programs - its role as an 
advocate for a free and interoperable Internet is much more 
important.  END COMMENT.) 
 
-------------------- 
Fast Track for IDNs: 
-------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Ambassador Karklins and the Internet Corporation for 
Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) representative explained how 
ICANN and its Governmental Advisory Committee (GAC) function.  They 
then defined IDNs, and provided practical reasons why countries 
(where languages with non-Latin, or ASCII, alphabets are used) need 
them in top-level domain names and country codes (the .com or .uk 
part of an Internet address), and then outlined the fast track 
process currently under review to deploy a limited number of 
non-contentious IDNs in ICANN's root zone. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The fast-track process would deploy these IDNs within a 
short timeframe and would be used where near-term demand and 
readiness exists for top-level country codes (For example, .uk or 
.fr).  If it were finalized at the June 2008 ICANN meeting in Paris, 
then ICANN would launch the application process by 2009.  The 
addition of these IDNs to the root zone will be permanent, Karklins 
stated.  It would, at this point, only involve top-level domain 
names for websites and not emails. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
KARKLINS PLEADS WITH DEVELOPING WORLD TO ENGAGE: 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Karklins outlined a list of general issues that IDNs 
raise, including which territories are eligible for an IDN; how many 
scripts per territory, should they be two and three letters long as 
in the Latin-script Domain Name System (DNS) (.com and .uk); is a 
reference table necessary if it takes 10 years to make; are there 
"rights" attached to a given script; who will run the IDNs; should 
the IDN be an abbreviation like the DNS (Chinese and Arabic do not 
use abbreviations); and is the operation and management of IDNs 
different from the Latin/ASCII script DNS?  Karklins noted these 
questions might seem trivial but reveal important security, cultural 
and other issues, and stated that there still needs to be a 
discussion so that stakeholders in ICANN's bottom-up process are 
comfortable. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) To demonstrate the challenge, Karklins cited the 
importance of local efforts to examine the impact of IDNs, noting 
the example of the Arabic Script IDN Working Group, which unites 
players from Iran to Saudi Arabia.  He stated that while all 
nationals involved used Arabic script, they identified similar 
characters in Arabic and Persian that look identical on a screen, 
but actually have different Unicode points.  This creates possible 
security implications for Arabic IDNs.  Now that this has been 
discovered, people can work on it before it becomes part of the root 
zone.  Karklins added that thus far mostly Anglo Saxon countries had 
engaged in the debate on IDNs, with very little comment from Asia or 
the Arab world. He urged UNESCO member states present to report to 
capitals on his briefing, advise their governments to consider 
becoming a member of the ICANN GAC and attend the June, 2008 ICANN 
meeting in Paris.  UNESCO's ADG Khan added that UNESCO, as a WSIS 
facilitator, was playing a role in promoting multilingualism by 
publicizing this meeting to UNESCO member states and also encouraged 
them to sign up for the next Internet Governance Forum in Hyderabad, 
India. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) COMMENT:  The presentation, which, while engaging and 
thoughtful, was very technical for UNESCO delegations more familiar 
with cultural and educational issues.  Karklin's rallying cry to 
engage governments and local stakeholders on the practical 
challenges of IDNs before it is too late sailed majestically over 
everyone's head.  One delegate asked if this meant he could now type 
in the UNESCO website address in Arabic.  Another asked if ICANN had 
a membership fee.  Another asked if people would now buy up IDNs in 
advance of their operability, and yet another asked if IDNs would 
prevent spam.  Disconcertingly, it is these same voices that will 
try to draft UNESCO resolutions on Internet governance once this 
 
issue becomes sexy.  One would hope that Karklins and ICANN are 
reaching out to better-informed audiences, for example, at the ITU 
in Geneva.  We also note ADG Khan's interest in using the UNESCO 
platform to promote the Indian-government sponsored ICANN meeting 
and the IGF, also to be hosted by India this December.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
Oliver