08PARAMARIBO436
PRESIDENT VENETIAAN'S STATE OF THE REPUBLIC -- OLD AND NEW
Wed Oct 15 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paramaribo
VZCZCXRO6475
RR RUEHGR
DE RUEHPO #0436/01 2891807
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 151807Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY PARAMARIBO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0424
INFO RUCNCOM/EC CARICOM COLLECTIVE
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 1684
RUEHTC/AMEMBASSY THE HAGUE 1662
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARAMARIBO 000436 

SIPDIS 

DEPT FOR WHA - JROSHOLT 

E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL NS

SUBJECT: PRESIDENT VENETIAAN'S STATE OF THE REPUBLIC -- OLD AND NEW 
PLANS 

¶1. (U) Summary. President Venetiaan's September 29 State of the 
Republic speech made clear that he and his coalition government are 
finally moving into pre-election mode. In the lead-up to the 2010 
elections, Venetiaan focused on the government's plans for 
development of the interior, and for implementing infrastructure, 
housing, and school projects. Most of the plans mentioned, however, 
were not new but plans that had been previously announced during his 
administration. While his 2007 speech focused on specific examples 
of bilateral cooperation, this year Venetiaan stressed multilateral 
cooperation -- and neglected to make specific mention of even China 
or Cuba as partners. As usual, Venetiaan made no direct reference 
to Suriname's partnership with the United States, although the 
President did, characteristically, indulge in a passing remark about 
the current financial crisis, in what used to be the most powerful 
country on earth. End Summary. 

-------------------------------- 
MULTILATERAL COOPERATION: 
NO MENTION OF CHINA OR THE U.S 
-------------------------------- 

¶2. (U) On September 29, President Ronald Venetiaan held his annual, 
constitutionally required State of the Republic speech at the 
Parliament. Like last year, Venetiaan mentioned the global crises 
faced by small countries like Suriname, including natural disasters, 
food and energy crises, and war. Characteristically, the President 
also indulged in a passing swipe at the United States, referring to 
the current financial crisis, in what used to be the most powerful 
country on earth. (Note: This was the only allusion he made to the 
United States. End Note.) Venetiaan said his administration's 
policies and Suriname's flexibility spared Suriname from being 
strongly affected by these crises, but we need to stay vigilant. 
Unlike in previous years, when Venetiaan focused heavily on 
bilateral cooperation, during this year's speech he focused more on 
development based on cooperation with Suriname's multilateral 
partners, specifically referencing the United Nations, the 
Inter-American Development Bank, the European Union, and CARICOM. 
While it is customary for President Venetiaan to avoid mentioning 
support provided by the United States in his speeches, it was 
noticeable that he also did not refer to Suriname's partnerships 
with China and Cuba, as he had in 2007. 

----------------- 
AMBITIOUS PLANS 
----------------- 

¶3. (U) The President's speech seemed crafted to make clear that his 
administration is taking citizens' concerns seriously. With the 
2005 inclusion of the A-Combination Party in the New Front plus 
coalition government, the administration is under increased 
political pressure from the Maroon parties and their constituencies 
to pay attention to the country's interior. In apparent response, 
Venetiaan mentioned ambitious plans for the interior, such as 
economic stimulation projects, infrastructure projects in the 
interior, land rights for Maroons and indigenous peoples, and the 
building and renovating of schools and boarding schools. He also 
mentioned scheduled road rehabilitation/building along the coastal 
strip, in both the districts and inwards into the interior. 

¶4. (U) Since the start of the current administration in 2005, there 
has been much controversy and public dissatisfaction regarding the 
government's land and housing policies. Making big pre-campaign 
promises, Venetiaan re-announced and went into detailed explanation 
of government plans to execute an electronic system of land 
management, build 900 low cost homes in various districts before the 
end of 2009, and continue to expand the current low cost housing 
programs. Venetiaan spent several minutes referencing the 
government's renewed focus on youth, the country's Youth Parliament, 
and sports. Suriname holds the portfolio for Culture, Gender, Youth 
and Sport within the CARICOM, and Venetiaan had been criticized 
after his 2007 speech for not mentioning either the Youth Parliament 
or policies on youth issues. 

----------------- 
MIXED REACTIONS 
----------------- 

¶5. (U) Reactions to the speech were mixed. Radjkoemar Randjietsingh, 
Secretary of the United Reform Party (VHP, coalition member party 
headed by Vice-President Ramdien Sardjoe), praised the government's 
prudent monetary policies and claimed the government's 2009 plans 
clearly show its long term planning vision. The political opposition 
characterized the speech as nothing new and said it provided no 
answer to the developmental challenges Suriname is facing. Sham 
Binda, Chairman of the Association for Small and Medium-Sized 

PARAMARIBO 00000436 002 OF 002 


Enterprises, noted the absence of government plans for Public Sector 
Reform, the lack of policies to stimulate the production sector, and 
the lack of a policy to mitigate the effects of the rising gas 
prices on local production. 

¶6. (U) Comment. With general elections only 18 months away and the 
current low approval ratings for the Venetiaan government, it was 
very important for the President to use his 2008 State of the 
Republic speech to start making re-election campaign promises. So 
he seized the opportunity to announce the government's plans for 
housing, land, and education, and to address other issues which have 
been bottlenecked over the past five years. There is nothing new, 
however, about the announced plans, as most had been previously 
announced by his administration. It is now more important than ever 
for the government to actually deliver on these promises, as Desi 
Bouterse's opposition National Democratic Party (NDP) and its 
Mammoth Coalition continue to ramp up for the 2010 elections by 
making promises, staging rallies, throwing parties, and continually 
accusing Venetiaan's administration of inaction. Faced with such an 
aggressive opponent, the President will do well to deliver on the 
promises he made on September 29. End Comment. 

SCHREIBER HUGHES