08PARIS2328
FRANCE AGRICULTURAL BIOTECH OUTREACH PROPOSAL
Wed Dec 24 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXYZ0004
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHFR #2328 3591211
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 241211Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5140
INFO RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS 2466UNCLAS PARIS 002328 
 
STATE FOR EEB/TPP/MTAA/ABT - MARCELLA SZYMANSKI AND JACK BOBO 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR ECON TBIO ETRD KPAO FR
SUBJECT: FRANCE AGRICULTURAL BIOTECH OUTREACH PROPOSAL 
 
REF: STATE 129940 
 
¶1. Economic Minister-Counselor, Agricultural Minister-Counselor, 
Public Affairs Minister-Counselor and Science Counselor present this 
joint request for support from EEB FY 2009 biotech outreach funds 
for critical public outreach in France.  France remains an 
influential country both in the EU and worldwide, especially in 
Francophone developing countries. 
 
¶2. During its EU presidency, France positioned itself as a leader in 
the areas of addressing the global food crisis and climate change. 
At the same time, it launched a number of initiatives within the 
Council of Environmental Ministers which, if ultimately adopted, 
would retard the adoption and trade of genetically-modified products 
both within Europe and with some of its trading partners.  This 
anti-biotech approach is often inconsistent with France's climate 
change and international development objectives. 
 
¶3. The proposed program would be designed to encourage France to 
support the adoption of biotechnology in developing countries as a 
means for enhancing their food security and their options for 
addressing climate change. The program would also de designed to 
encourage acceptance of the environmental benefits of biotechnology 
by policymakers and consumers in France. 
 
¶4. The proposed program would build upon the visit of Dr. Martina 
Newell under the 2008 Biotech Outreach Program, as well as the 
recent biotech travel to the U.S. by Dr. Mark Fellous (head of the 
former competent authority on biotech).  A number of outreach 
activities are envisaged to follow up on the Fellous visit, which 
was sponsored by the French America Foundation in partnership with 
Public Affairs. It would be ideal if a U.S. speaker under the 2009 
Biotech Outreach Program could accompany Dr. Fellous, particularly 
to address biotech applications in the developing world. 
 
¶5. A.  Program description: We are requesting a speaker who will 
highlight the benefits for developing countries of using biotech 
crops for food production and consumption, and address how GM plants 
interact with the environment. 
 
¶B. Time Frame: We are requesting a speaker for three days in Paris. 
If available for a longer period, we could develop other programs 
outside of Paris.  An appropriate time would be the first quarter of 
¶2009. 
 
¶C. Purpose of the Program: To counterbalance the recent French 
negative stance on biotechnology by increasing understanding by 
policy makers and the public of how genetically-modified crops can 
help address food shortages in the developing world, including their 
potential for ameliorating the effects of climate change. The 
program would draw the connection between France's environmental and 
climate change goals, and the environmental benefits of biotech. 
 
¶D. Audience: The speakers will give presentations to development 
organizations (both governmental and Paris-based NGOs), regulators 
(government representatives and Parliamentarians), think tanks, farm 
organizations, planting seed associations, the animal feed industry, 
agri-food industry and students. The program would have a strong 
press component to make a public case for the potential role of GMOs 
in addressing climate change and other environmental issues, and as 
a tool for helping the developing world increase food production and 
consumption. 
 
¶F. We anticipate the cost of the proposed program to be $4,000.00. 
 
¶G. (U) NAME AND CONTACT OF PROGRAM OFFICER:  Sylvie Vacheret, 
Economic Public Affairs Specialist.  Tel. 33-1-4312-2928, cell 
phone: 33-6-20 35 16 41.  E-mail: vacheretsr@state.gov 
 
PEKALA