08PRETORIA2476
HOME INVASIONS ON THE RISE
Fri Nov 07 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
R 071531Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 6383
INFO AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 
AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 
AMCONSUL DURBANUNCLAS PRETORIA 002476 
 
 
FOR DS/DSS, DS/IP/AF, DS/DSS/OSAC, DS/TIA/ITA, DS/IP/OPO, AND AF/EX 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT ALOW ABLD SF
SUBJECT: HOME INVASIONS ON THE RISE 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  On November 4, 2008 RSO attended a presentation 
hosted by the Institute for Security Studies (ISS) on the "Incidence 
of House Robberies in South Africa."  Presented by a Senior Lecturer 
on Forensic Investigations at the University of South Africa 
(UNISA), the seminar focused on the alarming increase in house 
robberies (commonly referred to as home invasions) in South Africa. 
According to police statistics, the number of home invasions that 
typically involve violence or the threat of violence against 
residents has increased 25.4% since 2006.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) On November 4, 2008 RSO attended a seminar hosted by the 
Institute for Security Studies (ISS) on the "Incidence of House 
Robberies in South Africa." The presenter, Dr. Rudolf Zinn, is a 
Senior Lecturer on Forensic Investigations at the UNISA who has 
written extensively on crime trends in South Africa. Dr. Zinn's most 
recent study focuses on the rapid increase in house robberies, 
otherwise known as home invasions, where criminals intent on 
maximizing profits specifically target homes where the residents are 
at home. According to police statistics, the number of home 
invasions since 2006 has increased 25.4%, while house burglaries 
(where no confrontation between residents and perpetrators occurs) 
have decreased steadily. 
 
¶3. (U) To understand the causes behind the increase, Dr. Zinn 
conducted a qualitative study that involved interviews of thirty 
convicts currently serving time in prisons across South Africa. The 
results showed that the inmates unanimously preferred home invasions 
over traditional burglaries because they are more lucrative. By 
targeting homes between the hours of 7pm and midnight, criminals 
knew that the residents were awake and did not have their alarm 
systems on. Of greater concern, however, was the admission that the 
violence or the threat of violence could be used to force victims to 
reveal where valuables were hidden.  In instances where people 
failed to comply with demands, they often tortured children or women 
to get what they wanted. Eighty-three percent said they would rather 
shoot or injure their victims than take any personal risk.  The 
respondents also indicated a strong preference for cash, jewelry, 
and other valuables that could not be easily traced. 
 
-------------- 
Modus Operandi 
-------------- 
 
¶4. (U) Affluent neighborhoods continue to be the top targets for 
home invasions.  Houses with little or no security were chosen first 
although those with "a lot of security" were sometimes targeted 
because of the perception that the owners must have cash or very 
valuable items to protect.  In most cases, the criminals conducted 
pre-operational surveillance to identify homeowner's habits or 
weaknesses in security.  Mobile patrol schedules were also observed 
to establish patterns and identify optimal times to conduct home 
invasions. Inside information, especially when large sums of cash 
are at stake, was used to determine which houses to target. 
 
------------------------ 
How does this impact us? 
------------------------ 
 
¶5. (U) The increase in home invasions is troubling given the 
criminal's propensity for violence. When asked what security 
features had the greatest deterrent effect against home invasions, 
Dr. Zinn's subjects said that homes with fences, dogs, security 
lights, and alarm systems connected to armed response companies made 
them less desirable targets. The single most effective 
countermeasure, however, was frequent and unpredictable security 
patrols because they made pre-operational activities difficult. 
Qpatrols because they made pre-operational activities difficult. 
 
---------- 
What next? 
---------- 
 
 
¶6. (U) The Emergency Action Committee approved a policy in January 
2007 that required post housing to transition from stand-alone 
residences to apartments, gated communities, and compounds.  This 
remains a top priority.  By August 2009, 74.9% of leased residences 
(113 homes) will be in compounds or gated communities. 
 
BOST