08PRETORIA2501
SOUTH AFRICAN ENVIRONMENT, SCIENCE, AND TECHNOLOGY MONTHLY
Thu Nov 13 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO0187
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSA #2501/01 3181453
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 131453Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6417
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
INFO RUEHTN/AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 6272
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 0411
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 8623UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 PRETORIA 002501 
 
DEPT FOR OES/PCI, OES/ENV, AND AF/S 
DEPT PASS EPA/OIA, 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: SENV SOCI ETRD SF
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICAN ENVIRONMENT, SCIENCE, AND TECHNOLOGY MONTHLY 
BRIEFINGS, OCTOBER 2008 
 
PRETORIA 00002501  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  This is the South African Environment, Science and 
Technology Monthly Briefings Newsletter, October 2008, Volume 3, 
Number 10, prepared by the U.S. Embassy Pretoria, South Africa. 
 
Topics of the newsletter: 
 
-- LOCAL COMMUNITY GROUPS FIGHT SOUTH DURBAN PETROLEUM PIPELINE 
 
-- SOUTHERN AFRICA AUCTIONS IVORY TO CHINA, JAPAN 
 
-- SOUTH AFRICAN SCIENTISTS SCOOP TOP INTERNATIONAL AWARDS 
 
-- ROBBEN ISLAND TO CULL 10,000 RABBITS 
 
-- SOUTH AFRICANS VIEW CLILMATE CHANGE AS DISTANT THREAT 
 
-- DME TO BEGIN REHABILITATE DEFUNCT MINES 
-- MERCURY CONTAMINATES DAMS IN KZN 
-- POLLUTION THREATENS SOUTH AFRICAN COASTLINES 
 
-- COMAPANIES SET ASIDE LAND TO PRESERVE GRASSLANDS 
 
-- JOHANNESBURG UPGRADES WATER SERVICES 
 
-- SOUTH AFRICA TO CREATE DIGITAL REEF ATLAS 
 
-- MONTHLY FACTOID 
 
------------------------------- 
Local Community Groups Fight 
South Durban Petroleum Pipeline 
------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) South Durban community groups object to Transnet's plan to 
establish a pipeline to transport petroleum products from coastal 
refineries to inland locations.  Durban South Communities 
Environmental Alliance (SDCEA) representative Desmond D'sa noted 
that there is heavy air pollution in local communities, and that 
fifteen other conduit pipelines already pass through this area. 
D'sa said that these pipelines carry hazardous products such as 
benzene, putting South Durban residents at risk for asthma or 
cancer.  D'sa added that over forty pipeline leaks have been 
recorded in South Durban since 1995.  Transnet Public Relations 
Manager Saret Knoetze said her company wants to build the pipeline 
to deal with increased inland demand for petroleum products.  She 
advised that Transnet had consulted with all relevant parties 
including SDCEA, and emphasized that Transnet felt it had obtained a 
balanced and sound environmental evaluation.   SDCEA has threatened 
to file suit to stop the proposed pipeline project. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Southern Africa Auctions Ivory to China, Japan 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶3. (U) The first global legal ivory sales in nearly a decade were 
held in late October at a special auction after the Convention on 
International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora 
(CITES) authorized four African countries to make a once-off sale of 
108 tons of ivory to Chinese and Japanese buyers.  China and Japan 
are the world's largest markets for ivory, which is used for 
handicrafts and for families' traditional seals to stamp documents. 
South Africa will hold the biggest sale (51 tons), followed by 
Botswana (44 tons), Namibia (9 tons) and Zimbabwe (4 tons).  The 
ivory can only be sold to China and Japan, which then must track it 
to prevent it from being resold overseas. 
 
¶4. (U) CITES officials state they agreed to the once-off sale only 
if sales were limited to those African countries with healthy 
elephant populations.  More than 312,000 elephants live in Southern 
Africa.  CITES officials also advised that most tusks were taken 
from elephants that died from natural causes or from culling of 
herds.  The auctions, which are closed to the public and to media, 
will sell only tusks from government stocks.  CITES Secretary 
General Willem Wijnstekers will supervise the sales.  He will also 
meet with Chinese and Japanese authorities regarding measures to 
monitor the ivory after the sale.  Profits from the sales must go 
Qmonitor the ivory after the sale.  Profits from the sales must go 
toward elephant conservation projects, or toward programs aimed at 
developing communities that live around elephant ranges. 
 
¶5. (U) Some conservationists fear that the arrival of so much legal 
ivory on the Chinese and Japanese markets would provide poachers 
with an opportunity to smuggle illegal ivory past regulators. 
International Fund for Animal Welfare Elephant Program Head Michael 
Wamithi said China and Japan are the top destinations for illegal 
ivory from poached elephants.  Wamithi said:  "Several multiple-ton 
seizures have been made at Chinese ports in recent years.  The lack 
 
PRETORIA 00002501  002.2 OF 004 
 
 
of enforcement for the registration systems in both countries 
provides a convenient loophole for illegal traders."   Wildlife 
trade watchdog NGO Traffic said it has confidence in the auctions. 
 
 
¶6. (U) Traffic South Africa National Representative David Newton 
said, "As far as we're concerned, it's a well-managed process." 
Newton added that Traffic believed China had made efforts to comply 
with international ivory trade regulations.  He stated, "We're 
always urging caution, and the ivory trade needs to be very strictly 
managed.  For the one-off trade, we're confident that the monitoring 
mechanisms are in place."  International ivory trade was banned in 
¶1989.  CITES authorized South Africa, Botswana, Namibia and Zimbabwe 
to carry out occasional sales beginning in 1997 because CITES 
believes elephant populations in those countries are strong.  The 
last sale in 1999 earned five million dollars.  The four countries 
agreed not to hold a new sale for at least another nine years. 
 
------------------------------ 
South African Scientists Scoop 
Top International Awards 
------------------------------ 
 
¶7. (U) South African scientists won first and third places in the 
2008 UN Environmental Programs (UNEP) Thesis Award on Migratory 
Species Conservation.  World Wildlife Fund (WWF - SA) biologist Dr. 
Samantha Petersen took first place for her research on 
"Understanding and Mitigating Vulnerable By-catch in Southern 
African Trawl and Long-line Fisheries".  That study focused on the 
South African commercial fishing industry's impact on migratory 
seabirds, sea turtles and sharks.  Bird Life International's Dr. 
Ross Wanless won third place for his investigation on the decline of 
seabirds on South Africa's Gough Island.  Dr. Wanless' research 
revealed that mice were attacking and eating albatross chicks.  The 
competition included thirty-two candidates from eighteen other 
countries.  Second place was won by Dr. Lin Xia for his research on 
the impact of traffic on Tibetan antelope migration.  WWF-SA Chief 
Executive Officer Dr. Morne Du Plessis noted the awards demonstrated 
"not only the scientific expertise of WWF in South Africa, but also 
the growing concern over the impact of human activity on marine 
resources". 
 
------------------------------------ 
Robben Island to Cull 10,000 Rabbits 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶8. (U) Robben Island authorities are calling for culling over 10,000 
rabbits on the island, beginning in November 2008.  The rabbit 
population has increased exponentially, however the lack of rainfall 
and natural water sources has led to animal starvation.  A 
fourteen-member Robben Island Museum Council decided to recommend 
culling after year-long deliberations with interested parties 
including environmental and animal rights groups and the Department 
of Environmental Affairs and Tourism.  Robben Island Museum Acting 
CEO Seelan Naidoo said the decision to cull was difficult and 
emotionally charged.  He added that culling would not be a pleasant 
task; however, it was the most effective method of dealing with the 
problem.  Naidoo said rabbits and other island animals were 
starving, and were being run over by vehicles.  Other animals to be 
culled include feral cats and fallow deer.  Naidoo added that the 
workers who were involved in the culling project may need emotional 
counseling after the project is completed because they are supposed 
Qcounseling after the project is completed because they are supposed 
to be protecting animals and not culling them. 
 
---------------------------------- 
South Africans View Climate Change 
as a Distant Threat 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (U) The Human Sciences Research Council (HSRC) 2007 South African 
Social Attitudes Survey revealed that 72% of the survey participants 
knew what global warming was with 44% more worried about the issue 
than they had been a year ago.  Seventy-one percent of South 
Africans regard global climate change as a very serious or somewhat 
serious threat compared to 95% of Brazilians and 90% of Britons, 
Canadians and Indians.  Human Sciences Research Council (HSRC) 
researcher John Seager noted that although many South Africans know 
about climate change, they regard it as a"distant threat."  He said 
most South Africans are reluctant to pay the costs associated with 
curbing greenhouse emissions.  Seager added that for South Africans 
the environment is number ten on a list of the most important 
challenges facing South Africa, behind  unemployment, HIV/AIDS, 
poverty and other economic issues.  Seager said:  "If you're not 
sure where your next meal is coming from, that is more pressing than 
something that will affect future generations."  Seager noted that 
South Africans do support government expenditures on developing 
 
PRETORIA 00002501  003.2 OF 004 
 
 
renewable energies. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
DME to Begin Rehabilitating Defunct Mines 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (U) Department of Minerals and Energy (DME) Chief Director of 
Economic Analysis Tseko Nell said this week that mining activities 
have resulted in "disastrous environmental acts."  Nell noted that 
mining is the leading generator of solid waste, and that this waste 
has both direct and indirect impacts on air, biological, water 
resources and land.  DME is spending millions of rand to 
rehabilitate and manage derelict South African mines to which no 
owners lay claim.  Nell said the DME has commissioned the Council 
for Geo-Science to develop a national strategy to manage abandoned 
mines.  The Council will develop a methodology to allow DME to 
create and maintain a derelict mine database, and will rank the 
mines in the order of their negative impact on the environment, 
health, and safety of local communities.  Nell said DME is also 
developing a strategy for regional mine closures. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Mercury Contaminates Dams in KZN 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (U) The Kwa-Zulu Natal Department of Agriculture and 
Environmental Affairs (DAEA) is investigating dams reported to be 
contaminated by mercury.  DAEA spokesman Thami Ngidi said his 
department was inspecting the dams, some of which supply water to 
the cities of Durban (eThekwini) and Pietermaritzburg, to determine 
the source and levels of contamination.  Ngidi added that Durban and 
Pietermaritzburg's water remains safe to drink, although they are 
treating the matter as an "urgent issue".  The South African Medical 
Research Council released results of a study assessing community 
exposure to mercury for those living near the Inanda Dam; that study 
showed high levels of mercury in hair samples taken from villagers 
in the area. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Pollution Threatens South African Coastlines 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶12. (U) The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism's (DEAT) 
Marine Coastal Management (MCM) unit released a report that 65 
percent of South Africa's coastline is polluted, with twelve percent 
at a critical stage.  Sewage discharges into estuaries and oceans 
have dramatically increased since 1991.  Populations along the coast 
have doubled; 128,800 cubic meters of waste water are pumped into 
the ocean every day by the mining industry; and there are rising 
concerns about toxic chemicals and malfunctioning sewage pump 
stations.  The study, which compared 1994 litter collections with 
2005 collections, found a 184% increase in medical and sewage waste, 
a 171% increase in plastic lids, a 157% increase in packaging and 
single-use items, and an 88% increase in floating recreational 
litter. 
 
¶13. (U) MCM Director Dr Monde Mayekiso said DEAT will begin a major 
clampdown against marine polluters.  Suggested courses of action 
include introducing new legislation, enacting a comprehensive 
monitoring program, and the possible introduction of new 
marine-protected areas.  DEAT Head of Marine Pollution Dr. Yazeed 
Petersen said DEAT will also launch a cleanup campaign targeting 
major land-based polluters.  Petersen said, "Eighty percent of all 
marine pollution can be linked to some kind of land-based activity. 
In total, we have identified 14 or 15 such activities or direct 
QIn total, we have identified 14 or 15 such activities or direct 
causes".  Petersen noted that South African beaches and bays remain 
relatively clean compared to those found in other parts of the 
world, especially in the northern hemisphere. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Companies Set Aside Land to Preserve Grasslands 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶14. (U) Eight South African forestry companies have allocated 45,000 
hectares of grasslands at 37 sites in the Mpumalanga and Kwa-Zulu 
Natal (KZN) provinces as nature reserves or protected land.  The 
grasslands are the second largest biome after the Western Cape's 
fynbos biome.  The grasslands biome currently accounts for less than 
three percent of protected land, but will increase to about five 
percent when these grasslands are allocated.  Grasslands Program 
Spokesman Steve Germishuizen said South African grasslands have 
always been overlooked.  He noted that grasslands have been ploughed 
over by farmers, planted over with alien species by foresters and 
destroyed by the commercial industry.  The recently-established 
Grasslands Program will increase the number of protected grasslands, 
 
PRETORIA 00002501  004.2 OF 004 
 
 
especially the highly-threatened "mist belt grasslands" in KZN and 
Mpumalanga provinces.  Germishuizen said agriculture and forestry 
had the biggest impact on the grasslands.  Germishuizen noted that 
one in seven grasslands is actually grass; the rest are species in 
the bulbs, geophytes and flowering plants.  Over 100 species exist 
in any 10-square-meter area, with extensive networks of roots over 
100 years old.  Germinshuizen said that his organization would work 
with the provincial conservation agencies and tribal authorities on 
the 37 sites, over the next five years to improve grassland 
management capacity and protect endemic species found on the lands. 
 
 
------------------------------------ 
Johannesburg Upgrades Water Services 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶15. (U) Johannesburg Water launched a R15 million ($1.5) million 
upgrade project for the Ferndale area on October 6, 2008.  MD Gerlad 
Dumnas noted that "SA is a water scarce country" and advised that 
Johannesburg Water is also launching water conservation education 
programs to the public and in schools.  In fiscal year 2008/9, 
Johannesburg Water will spend R471 million (US $4.7M) on upgrading 
the city's water infrastructure, which is about 50 years old. 
Ferndale is prioritized because there have been 43 burst pipes in 
that area in the past year.  The upgrades consist of replacing the 
old asbestos cement pipes with new high impact pipes.  One hundred 
and sixteen kilometers of pipes have already been replaced in 
Soweto.  Water supply systems have also been improved in Diepsloot 
and Fourways, and new sewer network infrastructures are scheduled 
for Diepsloot, a sprawling township outside Fourways.  A R 22 
million (US $ 2 M) project in the Ransburg area will be completed by 
the end of October. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
South Africa to Create Digital Reef Atlas 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶16. (U) South African National Biodiversity Institute (SANBI) Reef 
Atlas Program Project Manager Prideel Majiedt announced a new 
project to create South Africa's first-ever reef atlas, showing the 
distribution of reef types in South African waters.  Majiedt said, 
"South Africa is one of the few countries where you get cold water 
corals, soft corals and subtropical corals on one coastline.  Some 
species are found only in South Africa and it's our global 
responsibility to look after them."  She added that measures such as 
the Reef Atlas are vital in planning for oceanographic changes 
brought on by climate change and to protect coral reefs from 
accidental damage by the fishing industry.  Little is known about 
South Africa's coral reefs because most research has focused on 
terrestrial eco-systems.   Majiedt said SANBI believed many reefs 
are threatened, but lacked scientific knowledge regarding where 
those reefs are located, how threatened they are, and what the 
actual threats are to each reef. 
 
¶17. (U) Majiedt noted that activities change depending on the 
coastline in South Africa.  She said: "On the West Coast there's a 
lot of fishing, on the East Coast pipelines, on the South Coast oil 
and gas mining, and diamond mining in the north-west.  By mapping 
all of these uses, we can partition the ocean in such a way that 
everyone gets to benefit."  The program encourages divers to submit 
photographs of reefs, kelp beds and ship wrecks.  Majiedt advised 
that response has been slow because some dive shops are "very 
Qthat response has been slow because some dive shops are "very 
protective of their information because they have the GPS 
co-ordinates, which is the lifeblood of the industry - they have 
secret spots they take their customers to."  Majiedt says that SANBI 
will not make those co-ordinates publicly available "to ensure the 
protection of vulnerable reef habitats and protection of the 
information shared by divers. 
 
--------------- 
Monthly Factoid 
--------------- 
 
¶18. (U) The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism has 
secured an investment of R500 million ($50 million) over the next 
three years to ensure that all South African national parks are 
exemplary energy-efficient showcases.  South Africa Yearbook 2007/8 
 
Bost