08PRETORIA1227
ACE Nomination from AMEMB Pretoria for Eli Lilly and
Mon Jun 09 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO4180
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSA #1227/01 1610530
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 090530Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4690
INFO RUEHTN/AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 5669
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 8090
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 9879
RUEAUSA/DEPT OF HHS WASHDC
RUEHPH/CDC ATLANTA GA 2345
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PRETORIA 001227 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT. FOR EEB/EPPD: N SMITH-NISSLEY, AF/S, OES/IHB 
STATE PLEASE PASS OGAC: BPATEL; WCOGGINS 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USAID/W FOR GH AND AFR/SA 
HHS/PHS FOR OFFICE OF GLOBAL HEALTH AFFAIRS WSTEIGER 
CDC FOR GLOBAL HEALTH OFFICE SBLOUNT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON BEXP EINV ELAB ETRD AMGT SOCI TBIO SENV SF
SUBJECT:  ACE Nomination from AMEMB Pretoria for Eli Lilly and 
Company, South Africa 
 
PRETORIA 00001227  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
REFTEL: STATE 34994 
 
¶1.  Summary:  The U.S. Mission in Pretoria nominates Eli Lilly and 
Company, South Africa (Lilly SA) for the Secretary's Award for 
Corporate Excellence in the multi-national enterprise (MNE) 
category.  Lilly SA's pioneering initiative to fight the rapidly 
growing threat of multi-drug resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) in 
South Africa (SA) and around the world makes it an exemplary model 
of good corporate citizenship.  A centerpiece of parent company Eli 
Lilly and Company's (Lilly) global MDR-TB Partnership is the 
transfer of technologies and expertise needed to manufacture two 
Lilly antibiotics used to treat MDR-TB to facilities in countries 
most burdened with TB.  This technology transfer is essential to 
achieve Lilly's goal of increasing the supply of critically needed, 
quality, affordable, second-line TB drugs.  Lilly SA has transferred 
its formula, technology, and trademark to generic drug-maker Aspen 
Pharmacare (Aspen) in South Africa.  Lilly SA's MDR-TB partnership 
contributes to the overall economic and social development and 
welfare of South Africa, while furthering the growth of competitive, 
innovative activities and scientific capacity.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Lilly Partners to Fight Multi-Drug Resistant TB 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶2.  Highly contagious MDR-TB afflicts about 450,000 people each 
year. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that the average 
MDR-TB patient infects up to twenty other people in his or her 
lifetime.  MDR-TB is much more difficult and costly to treat 
than non-drug resistant TB and is often fatal.  Lilly SA supports a 
comprehensive, multi-pronged strategy to fight MDR-TB through 
efforts to increase the supply of drugs that can cure this 
life-threatening disease, train health care personnel, and focus 
public attention on prevention, diagnosis, and proper treatment. 
Lilly SA's MDR-TB Partnership also concentrates on ensuring that 
patients are not subject to stigma within their communities.  On 
World TB Day 2006, South African Nobel Peace Prize Laureate 
Archbishop Desmond Tutu declared that the Lilly MDR-TB Partnership 
is an "excellent example of coordinated action against the 
disease." 
 
 
¶3.  Lilly SA's MDR-TB Partnership with Aspen began in 2004 and is 
increasing the supply of two much-needed MDR-TB antibiotics that 
will be supplied to the WHO at discount prices.  It involves a 
transfer of intellectual property, technical know-how and training 
related to the manufacture, testing, packaging, storage and handling 
of active pharmaceutical ingredients and finished dose product for 
cycloserine (Seromycin(R)) and capreomycin (Capastat(R)) and aims to 
develop a south-to-south quality and efficient supply chain.  The 
Partnership includes: training funded by Lilly SA and provided by 
Purdue University in good manufacturing practices, transfer of Lilly 
SA's customers and supply chain to ensure sustainability, a $3 
million dollar commitment for the establishment of manufacturing 
plants and an additional $1.6 million investment to date in the 
project, with an additional $2.5 million anticipated investment 
Qproject, with an additional $2.5 million anticipated investment 
through 2011.  In conjunction with the transfer, Lilly SA provided 
the first in-country specialized lyophilizer (freeze drying) machine 
for the manufacture of the product, contributing to the development 
of local scientific and technological capacity. 
 
¶4.  Aspen staff have been trained to manufacture, test and release 
cycloserine capsules.  The factory has the capacity to produce over 
four billion capsules of cycloserine per year.  The ability to 
manufacture cycloserine locally is essential to treating the 
explosive epidemic of MDR-TB in South Africa.  The factory 
manufactured its first batch of cycloserine in 2006 and Aspen 
cycloserine is currently being supplied to South Africa, southern 
Africa and other world markets.  Objectives for 2008 include 
obtaining WHO product pre-qualification of the product dossier and 
supplying the drug to WHO and all markets outside of the U.S. 
previously supplied by Lilly. 
 
¶5.  The manufacturing facility for capreomycin vials was completed 
at the end of 2007.  Aspen staff will be trained to manufacture, 
test and release capreomycin in 2008 and will submit a dossier to 
WHO for product pre-qualification at the end of 2008.  Lilly SA 
donated 3,000 vials of capreomycin to the South African Department 
of Health (NDOH) and made provision to supply an additional 6,500 
vials should the need arise for treatment of MDR-TB and Extremely 
 
PRETORIA 00001227  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
Drug Resistant TB(XDR-TB). 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Lilly Launches Innovative Training Programs 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  Lilly SA has launched innovative educational, training and award 
programs to fill critical gaps in health care training.  Lilly and 
the International Council of Nurses (ICN) created a pilot "train the 
trainer" program for nurses on TB and MDR-TB for delivery in 
southern Africa with the Democratic Nurses Organization of South 
Africa (DENOSA) and the NDOH.  The program trained seventeen nurses 
in South Africa in 2005 who used the knowledge they gained to train 
more than five hundred other nurses.  The program also trained 
twenty nurses from Botswana and twenty from Swaziland in 2006. 
"Through this unique and effective partnership, the ICN and nurses 
on the ground aim to bring quality, dignified care to communities 
and individuals living with TB, improved adherence to treatment, and 
strengthened prevention strategies," said International Council of 
Nurses CEO Judith Oulton.  "We are convinced that the 
cross-sectoral, multi-disciplinary approach of the Lilly Partnership 
will lead not only to better outcomes for TB and MDR-TB patients, 
but also a reduction in disease burden and drug resistance.  This is 
an innovation that works," she continued. 
 
¶7.  Lilly SA and the International Hospital Federation in 2006 
piloted the first-ever training for Hospital Managers in South 
Africa in partnership with DENOSA, the NDOH, and the Foundation for 
Professional Development.  Lilly SA and the NDOH sponsored a ten-day 
intensive MDR-TB training for thirteen doctors and nurses from seven 
of the nine provincial MDR-TB Hospitals in South Africa at the World 
Health Organization (WHO) and Centers for Disease Control (CDC) 
Center of Excellence facility in Latvia.  Lilly SA, DENOSA and the 
NDOH launched the global ICN/Lilly Award for Nursing Excellence in 
TB Care in 2007.  A nurse from Mpumalanga province in South Africa 
won the first award which was presented on World Nurses Day in May 
¶2007. 
 
¶8.  Lilly SA launched the Lilly for Life Achievement Awards in 2006 
to celebrate achievements of people of all ages who live with 
diabetes, as well as those who have positively impacted the diabetes 
community with their personal or professional efforts. The awards 
acknowledge and honor people who are living full, healthy lives, 
despite the fact that they have diabetes, and those who support 
others with diabetes.  The awards enhance public awareness of 
diabetes and its symptoms, which can be a life-threatening disease 
if not managed properly. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Lilly - A Leader in South Africa 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  Lilly SA places a significant emphasis on the development of its 
employees and has consistently been recognized as one of the 
top-twenty best employers in South Africa.  Lilly SA was recognized 
as one of the "Top 5 Best Companies to Work For in South Africa" and 
the "Best Pharmaceutical Company in South Africa" in 2005.  Lilly SA 
is committed to the South African government's policy of Broad-Based 
Qis committed to the South African government's policy of Broad-Based 
Black Economic Empowerment (BBBEE) for previously disadvantaged 
people and has made progress across all seven BEE compliance 
categories, including skills development and employment equity.  The 
company philosophy is one of equal opportunity and all staff have a 
customized plan to best assist them to realize their potential. 
 
¶10.  Lilly is headquartered in Indianapolis, Indiana and views 
protection of the environment and the health and safety of its 
employees, contractors and visitors as fundamental values that must 
be pursued vigorously.  The company has established health, safety 
and environmental policies, procedures and programs that apply 
worldwide to promote safe and healthy working conditions, protect 
the environment, and support its commitment to compliance with 
applicable laws and regulations.   Lilly SA is committed to working 
only with suppliers that are in full compliance with local laws and 
Lilly SA's standards of social, environmental, and economic 
performance.  Lilly SA conducts its business consistent with all 
U.S. and local laws, regulations and government standards, and is 
committed to honesty in its dealings with employees, customers, 
suppliers, competitors, shareholders, and communities. 
 
Bost