08RIODEJANEIRO215
Rio de Janeiro Sets Up Municipal Election Task Force to
Mon Aug 11 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Rio De Janeiro
VZCZCXRO7779
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHRI #0215 2241114
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 111114Z AUG 08
FM AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4580
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 0919
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 5172
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 3443UNCLAS RIO DE JANEIRO 000215 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PGOV SOCI BR
SUBJECT: Rio de Janeiro Sets Up Municipal Election Task Force to 
Counter Voter Intimidation in Slums 
 
¶1.   Summary.  In advance of the October municipal elections, a new 
trend has emerged involving the use of intimidation to organize and 
deliver massive voter blocks from favela communities to candidates 
willing to align themselves with drug traffickers and militias.  The 
Brazilian Federal Police, together with the Rio state government, 
has set up an election task force to monitor the situation more 
closely.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  The Brazilian Federal Police are investigating widespread 
reports that drug traffickers and militias (off-duty law enforcement 
officers turned community mob bosses) in the state of Rio de Janeiro 
are intimidating members of the communities they control to sell 
large voting blocks to candidates for the October municipal 
elections.  Under Brazilian law, this practice is considered 
illegal.  However, the practice of voter intimidation is nothing new 
in Rio, according to political scientist Jairo Nicolau. 
 
¶3.  Nicolau, a Professor at the University Research Institute 
(IUPERJ), told the Consulate that voter intimidation has been 
widespread in Brazil, but on a small scale.  In previous campaigns, 
candidates have been previously prohibited from entering favelas as 
part of their campaigns for that very reason.  The new trend, says 
Nicolau, is that  drug traffickers and militias are taking a much 
more active role to organize and sell "blocks" of voters - basically 
conducting a public auction for their support, or in some cases 
launching their own candidates for lower level offices such as city 
council. 
 
¶3.  In large favela communities, drug traffickers and/or militias 
act as a parallel government.  They control access into the favelas 
and dictate the activities that go on within them.  On July 26, for 
example, drug traffickers allowed mayoral candidate Marcelo Crivella 
to enter their community for a campaign event.  However, they did 
not allow the accompanying press to photograph or film the event. 
This episode of press censorship is considered by many observers as 
evidence of a deteriorating democratic process in Rio.  On other 
occasions, various mayoral candidates have complained that drug 
traffickers and militias are denying their entry into communities 
thereby limiting their ability to interact with voters. 
 
¶4.  On July 29, Rio de Janeiro created a joint task force to 
guarantee public safety and electoral integrity during the October's 
municipal elections.  Approved by President of the Regional 
Electoral Court (TRE) Roberto Wider, Rio State Secretary for Public 
Security Jose Beltrame and Federal Police Chief Jacinto Caetano, the 
task force involves the Civil, Military and Federal Police.  Rio 
Governor Sergio Cabral lauded the task force as a successful 
partnership between the state and federal governments.  He further 
admitted that the situation in Rio de Janeiro may require that the 
task force remain in place after the municipal elections. 
 
¶5.   Comment.  Favela communities could account for more than 
one-quarter of the voting public in Rio's municipal elections.  As 
such, candidates, drug dealers and militias all know that support 
from these communities is valuable.  It remains to be seen how 
effective the new electoral task force will be, or if organized 
voter intimidation spreads to other areas of Brazil where there are 
large, concentrated communities of the urban poor.  End comment. 
 
Martinez