08RIODEJANEIRO347
Brazil Telecom Operators To Cooperate With Police On
Wed Dec 24 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Rio De Janeiro
VZCZCXRO4816
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHRI #0347 3591704
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 241704Z DEC 08
FM AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4730
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 1056
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 5219
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 3486UNCLAS RIO DE JANEIRO 000347 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS EINT PGOV PHUM KCRM BR
SUBJECT: Brazil Telecom Operators To Cooperate With Police On 
Internet Child Porn Cases 
 
¶1.  Brazilian telecommunications companies TIM (Italian 
majority-owned), Oi, and Brasil Telecom signed a cooperation deal on 
December 17, 2008 with the country's police authorities for quick 
supply of data in the investigation of internet child pornography 
cases.  Representatives of the federal government including Senate 
President Garibaldi Alves and Magno Malta, head of the Parliamentary 
Inquiry Committee (CPI) which investigates pedophilia cases in 
Brazil, also signed the document.  The stated goal of this project 
is to have a central location where allegations are received, 
filtered and responded to in the quickest possibly fashion by law 
enforcement, Internet and telecommunication companies. 
 
¶2.  According to the agreement, the telecom operators are obliged to 
provide information about suspects in child pornography cases within 
three days.  If the minors involved are under life threat, the data 
must be provided in 24 hours and if the risk is imminent, in two 
hours. 
The telecom operators will have a year to make technical adjustments 
needed for the speedy supply of information to the police.  The two 
sides also agreed to set up a committee within 60 days to oversee 
the implementation of the cooperation deal. 
 
¶3.  Joco de Deus Pinheiro Machado, Oi's Executive Planning Director, 
told ConGen Rio that the initiative was part of Oi's corporate 
social responsibility agenda.  Paulo Roberto da Costa Lima, TIM's 
Director for Regulatory Affairs said that the agreement would help 
his company assist government authorities in a more coordinated way 
rather than the current ad hoc system.  Neither Machado nor Lima 
forsee any technical or financial difficulties in implementing the 
agreement.  They acknowledged that other telecom companies operating 
in Brazil (Vivo, Claro Abranet, Myspace, NET, Telefonica, Terra and 
UOL) participated in the negotiations but did not speculate on their 
motivations for choosing not to sign the agreement. 
 
¶4.  Senator Eduardo Azeredo, deputy chair of the special 
congressional committee on pedophilia, told the press that some 
companies have cited potential cost increases as their main 
impediment to signing the agreement.  Congress plans to call in 
representatives from those companies to learn more about their 
position.  Telefonica, Claro, and Vivo are claiming that they were 
not invited to the signing ceremony - something which Senator Malta 
says is absolutely false. 
 
¶5.  This message was cleared/coordinated with Embassy Brasilia. 
 
MARTINEZ