08STATE63759
GUIDANCE FOR JUNE 13 UNSC MIDYEAR REVIEW OF MNF-I
Fri Jun 13 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO8236
OO RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK RUEHTRO
DE RUEHC #3759/01 1650223
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 130213Z JUN 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 2190
INFO IRAQ COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 STATE 063759 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MOPS UNSC IZ
SUBJECT: GUIDANCE FOR JUNE 13 UNSC MIDYEAR REVIEW OF MNF-I 
 
¶1. USUN is instructed to draw from the following text in 
its statement at the June 13 UNSC midyear review of MNF-I. 
 
¶2. Begin text: I am pleased to report to the U.N. Security 
Council on behalf of the Multi-National 
Force-Iraq(MNF-I).  I would like to welcome Foreign 
Minister Zebari and am grateful for his participation here 
today.   I would also like to thank Special Representative 
Staffan de Mistura and the staff of UNAMI for their 
dedication and hard work. 
 
¶3. The security environment in Iraq continues to improve 
and all major violence indicators are markedly lower 
compared to pre-surge levels.  While this progress is 
encouraging, challenges still remain and for many Iraqi 
families, the effects and threats of continued violence 
continue to be a daily concern. 
 
¶4. The Iraqi Security Forces and MNF-I have made 
hard-fought security gains.  Today, the Government and the 
people of Iraq are working hard to build-upon those gains 
in their efforts to achieve a secure, unified, and 
democratic Iraq that can govern, defend and sustain 
itself. 
 
¶5. Today I would like to outline five points on behalf of 
MNF-I. 
 
¶6. First -- over the last three months, there has been a 
significant increase in Iraqi-led operations. 
 
¶7. In March 2008, the Iraqi Government launched Operation 
Saulat al-Fursan (Note: Arabic for Operation "Charge of 
the Knights." End note.) to restore law and order in 
Basra.  In April and May 2008, the GoI planned and 
executed similar operations in Sadr City and Mosul. 
Violence levels temporarily increased during these 
actions, but despite this spike of activity, total 
security incidents have now fallen to their lowest level 
in over four years. 
 
¶8. These operations demonstrated the growing capability 
and confidence of Iraqi Security Forces, enabled them and 
Coalition forces to seize the initiative from extremists, 
and helped to free major population centers from militias 
and criminal gangs. 
 
¶9. Iraqi and Coalition forces achieved these security 
gains even as Coalition forces continued to draw down from 
surge levels.  By the end of May 2008, three U.S. Brigade 
Combat Teams, two U.S. Marine battalions and a Marine 
Expeditionary Unit had left Iraq without replacement. 
Additionally, Australia withdrew its forces from Dhi Qar 
province in early June. 
 
¶10. Second - security incidents and violence continue to 
decrease. 
 
¶11. The number of civilian deaths due to violence has 
fallen by 75% since July 2007 and the number of incidents 
and Coalition deaths caused by Improvised Explosive 
Devices remains on a consistently low six-month trend. 
 
¶12. Monthly high-profile attacks in Iraq such as car bombs 
and suicide attacks decreased in May 2008, falling below 
the previous two-year low reached in December 2007.  And 
high-profile attack explosions for May 2008 are down over 
70% from the peak in March 2007.  Nonetheless, al Qaeda in 
Iraq and other extremists still have the intent and the 
capability of carrying out high-profile atrocities as they 
did on April 15th when 150 civilians were killed in a 
series of attacks throughout Iraq.  We remain concerned at 
the presence of foreign fighters in Iraq.  The Government 
of Syria must act to halt the operation of foreign fighter 
networks within its territory, which continue to supply 
the overwhelming majority of suicide bombers responsible 
for the deaths of innocent Iraqis.  The Government of Iran 
must also cease the training, equipping and financing by 
the Iran Republican Guards Corps-Quds Force of violent 
Iraqi elements who have challenged the security of Iraq 
and the authority of the Iraqi government and Security 
Forces.  We call on the Government of Iran to follow through 
on its pledge to respect the sovereignty of Iraq 
and the integrity of its borders, which to date it has not 
done. 
 
¶13. The enemy's use of suicide bombers (including female 
 
STATE 00063759  002 OF 003 
 
 
suicide bombers) remains a threat, especially as 
population security measures and local opposition to 
insurgents in some provinces make effective targeting 
using suicide vehicle-borne IEDs more difficult.  The 
number of person-borne IED incidents increased from 
October 2007 to February 2008, before declining in March 
and April 2008. 
 
¶14. The number of deaths due to ethno-sectarian violence 
is now at the lowest level in the past several years, 
illustrating the enemy's inability to re-ignite the cycle 
of ethno-sectarian violence.  During the last two weeks of 
May 2008, there were no confirmed ethno-sectarian deaths 
in Baghdad.  In April and May 2008, there were 17 and 11 
deaths, respectively, in the Baghdad Security Districts. 
This is a remarkable improvement when compared to the over 
1,600 ethno-sectarian deaths in December 2006. 
 
¶15. Third - more than 30 countries currently play a 
critical role in enhancing security in Iraq, whether by 
participating as a Coalition member, supporting the NATO 
Training Mission, or contributing to UNAMI operations. 
 
¶16. Coalition members other than the United States 
contribute some 10,000 forces to the Coalition, and 
another 450 personnel to support UNAMI.   Every 
contributor, large and small, from the British in the 
southeast to the Italian Carabinieri police trainers 
providing paramilitary expertise to the Iraqi National 
Police, from the Mongolians who are providing camp security 
to the Georgians whose many missions include protecting UNAMI 
staff members - 
each plays a vital role in enabling the Government of Iraq 
to assume full responsibility for the defense and security 
of its people. 
 
¶17. Fourth - Iraqi Security Forces continue to make 
significant progress and develop increased capability and 
proficiency. 
 
¶18. More than 559,000 personnel now serve in the Iraqi 
Security Forces -- an increase of over 19,000 personnel 
since I last reported to you in April.  As of May 1, 2008, 
147 Iraqi Army combat battalions are conducting operations 
- an increase of 24 combat battalions since my last 
report.  Another eight battalions are currently in force 
generation, and MNF-I plans an additional 14 for force 
generation in 2008.  Four Special Operations battalions 
are capable of conducting operations with minimal 
Coalition support and another two are in force 
generation. 
 
¶19. Among the formed Iraqi Army combat battalions, 65% are 
rated as not only being able to take the lead in 
operations, but also being able to plan, execute and 
sustain operations with minimal or no assistance from 
Coalition forces.  Since March 2008, nine additional 
battalions have improved their proficiency and can now 
conduct counterinsurgency operations with Coalition 
support. 
 
¶20. Both the Iraqi Air Force and the Iraqi Navy are 
gaining proficiency as well.  Over the past nine months, 
the Iraqi Air Force sortie rate has increased by almost 
750%, with the Iraqi Air Force flying over 5,000 sorties 
so far this year.  In that same nine-month period, the 
number of Iraqi Navy patrols has grown by approximately 
250% with an average of 35 patrols per week now conducted 
in Iraqi territorial waters. 
 
¶21. The Iraqi National Police also continues to increase 
its proficiency.  There are now 44 National Police 
battalions authorized, including the National Emergency 
Response Unit.  And of those, 11 battalions are capable of 
planning, executing and sustaining operations with 
Coalition support. 
 
¶22. Fifth - the Coalition continues to transfer 
responsibility for security to the Government of Iraq. The 
United States and Iraqi governments are now in the process 
of negotiating a long-term relationship which will 
recognize this transition and the increasing ability of 
Iraqi Security Forces to assume greater responsibility for 
security and stability. 
 
¶23. Currently, half of Iraq's 18 provinces are under 
Provincial Iraqi Control (PIC) and security responsibility 
for Anbar and Qadisiyah Provinces are scheduled to 
transition to Iraqi control in June and July 2008, 
respectively.  This will bring the total number of 
provinces for which the GoI has lead security 
 
STATE 00063759  003 OF 003 
 
 
responsibility to 11 of 18 provinces. 
 
¶24. The ability of the Iraqi Security Forces to support 
and sustain fielded forces is also improving.  During 
recent and ongoing events in Basrah, Mosul and Sadr City, 
the ISF have demonstrated their capability to conduct 
simultaneous extensive operations in three parts of the 
country. 
 
Conclusion 
 
¶25.  Though the recent improvements in the security 
situation across Iraq are significant, the Iraqi 
Government, MNF-I, NATO, the international community, and 
UNAMI will have to take deliberate measures to sustain 
these gains.  These measures include the development and 
employment of a sustained, robust security posture; 
delivery of humanitarian assistance and essential services 
to all the citizens of Iraq; continued improvement in 
budget execution that will advance Iraqi responsibility 
for reconstruction and development; the generation of 
sustainable employment; and continuing progress on 
political reconciliation.  Free and fair provincial 
elections will also be important in facilitating 
reconciliation and the formation of representative 
provincial governments. We look forward to these elections 
taking place later this year.   Together, we can help Iraq 
achieve success. End text. 
RICE