08STATE72696
ZIMBABWE: TALKING POINTS FOR JULY 8 BRIEFING
Mon Jul 07 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0008
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #2696 1892216
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 072221Z JUL 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS STATE 072696 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL PHUM ZI XA ZU
SUBJECT: ZIMBABWE: TALKING POINTS FOR JULY 8 BRIEFING 
 
¶1.  Action Request:  USUN is instructed to draw on the points 
in para 2 below during the July 8 UNSC meeting in 
which D/SYG Migiro and A/SYG Menkerios will provide briefings 
on the situation in Zimbabwe.  If the UNSC votes 
on the draft resolution during this same meeting, USUN may 
use these points in its Explanation of Vote.  USUN may 
also draw on these points in speaking to the press after the 
meeting.  End Action Request. 
 
¶2.  Begin points: 
 
-- I would like to thank Deputy Secretary General Migiro and 
Assistant Secretary General Menkerios for their briefings. 
The United States remains deeply concerned with the situation 
in Zimbabwe. 
 
-- Even now, after the June 27 sham election, the Mugabe 
regime's violence, harassment, and intimidation against 
opposition supporters in Zimbabwe continues.  Just this past 
weekend a group of armed militia raided two internally 
displaced person camps near Ruwa leaving 8 hospitalized and 
over a dozen others missing.  On July 2, over 200 members of 
the opposition sought refuge at the U.S. Embassy in Harare, 
and internally displaced persons fleeing the violence have 
sought shelter in other Embassies, churches, NGO facilities, 
and the opposition headquarters. 
 
-- Today, I would like to make four points. 
 
-- (If resolution is voted and passes) First, we are very 
pleased that the Council decided to send a clear message to 
the Mugabe regime that its actions in defiance of the will of 
the Zimbabwean people and the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights will not be accepted by the international community. 
 
-- (If resolution is voted and fails or is vetoed)  First, we 
are extremely disappointed that the Security Council failed 
to adopt the draft resolution and send a clear message to the 
Mugabe regime that its actions in defiance of the will of the 
Zimbabwean people and the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights will not be accepted by the 
international community.  We are deeply concerned that the 
Council's failure to act will contribute to the suffering 
of the Zimbabwean people and to further instability in 
Zimbabwe and the region. 
 
-- (If there is no vote on Tuesday)  First, Mr. Mugabe cannot 
claim victory in the June 27th run-off election.  Election 
observers from the African Union, Southern African 
Development Community, and Pan-African Parliament have all 
reported that the June 27 elections were neither free nor 
fair.  The Mugabe regime used violence and intimidation to 
force opposition candidate Morgan Tsvangirai -- the winner of 
the March 29 election -- out of the run-off election.  An 
election conducted in those circumstances cannot be 
considered legitimate. 
 
-- Since the sham election, new evidence has emerged that 
confirms international suspicions that Mugabe and top 
Government of Zimbabwe officials not only plotted to steal 
the election, but led a well-orchestrated and deeply 
disturbing military-style campaign of violence and 
intimidation against the opposition and its supporters. 
According to media reports, the Mugabe regime even referred 
to this campaign as CIBD or Coercion, Intimidation, Beating, 
and Displacement.  This military operation involved up to 200 
senior army officers, who established nearly 2,000 base camps 
around the country to conduct brutal violence against the 
opposition.  The small farming village of Chaona, which had 
voted for Morgan Tsvingarai in the March election, was the 
first to feel the brunt of this military assault.  Starting 
May 5, the village suffered a rampage that left seven people 
dead and many more seriously beaten and injured, including 
women and children. 
 
-- This military style offensive continued through the 
country targeting the members and supporters of the 
opposition.  Then on election day, as an additional measure 
to ensure victory, the Mugabe regime forced voters to the 
polls and threatened to track through ballot serial numbers 
those who refused to vote or who cast their votes for 
Tsvangirai despite his withdrawal from the run-off.  No 
election conducted in these circumstances can produce 
legitimate results. 
 
-- Second, the United States introduced a draft resolution on 
Zimbabwe because we believe that it is important for the 
Security Council to send a clear message to the Mugabe regime 
on the need to immediately end the violence and to begin a 
serious dialogue with the opposition to achieve a solution 
that reflects the will of the Zimbabwean people as expressed 
in the March 29 elections.  Such a dialogue is needed to end 
the crisis that threatens Zimbabwe and the region. 
 
-- Third, the crisis in Zimbabwe continues to be a threat to 
regional peace and security.  As Deputy Secretary General 
Migiro said at the AU Summit last week, "Zimbabwe is the 
single greatest challenge to regional stability in 
Southern Africa."  The people of Zimbabwe have few options to 
address their dire situation.  Their government has failed 
them economically and politically.  Since they were refused 
the chance to democratically express their frustrations, I 
fear many will decide to flee the country, further straining 
the resources of Zimbabwe's neighbors.  Still, we urge 
neighboring governments to provide asylum to Zimbabweans and 
to work with UNHCR to ensure protection and assistance to 
refugees.  We also urge neighboring governments to cease 
deportations of Zimbabweans during this period of conflict in 
Zimbabwe. 
 
-- Finally, we want to express our deep regret that Robert 
Mugabe, who was once welcomed as a liberator, has 
led his country into this unnecessary crisis through his own 
repressive political actions and misguided economic 
policies.  The Mugabe regime must allow the people of 
Zimbabwe, through their legitimately elected 
officials, to chart a democratic and prosperous course for 
Zimbabwe. 
 
End points. 
RICE