08STATE82138
SOMALIA UN AMB RESIDENCE
Wed Jul 30 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #2138 2121938
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 301934Z JUL 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2644UNCLAS STATE 082138 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OFDP PREL SO
SUBJECT: SOMALIA UN AMB RESIDENCE 
 
REF: USUN 611 
 
¶1. This is an action request.  Please see para 2. 
 
¶2.  Reftel reports the request of the city of New Rochelle, 
New York (CNR) to &lift immunity8 from a dilapidated 
property owned by the Government of Somalia to mitigate 
public safety hazards on the premises.  In view of previous 
unsuccessful attempts to persuade GOS to make repairs, 
Mission should advise the Permanent Mission of Somalia to the 
UN to execute a limited waiver of inviolability for the 
purpose of allowing CNR to make necessary repairs to mitigate 
health and safety hazards on the property.  If the Somali 
Mission is unable to provide such a waiver, Department will 
revisit the diplomatic status of the property, including its 
inviolability and exemption from property taxes. 
 
Begin text of note: 
 
The United States Mission to the United Nations presents its 
compliments to the Permanent Mission of Somalia to the United 
Nations and has the honor to inform the Permanent Mission 
that it has received an urgent request from the City of New 
Rochelle to address the public safety hazards at the former 
Somali Permrep residence at 250 Elk Avenue, New Rochelle. 
 
As the Permanent Mission is undoubtedly aware, the grounds 
are in disrepair and have attracted considerable negative 
attention from local residents, government officials, and the 
media.  Most recently, trespassers broke into the unsecured 
property on June 29. 
 
The City of New Rochelle's Buildings Department has issued 
several citations to the Permanent Mission for hazards 
related to broken windows, broken doors, an unsecured house 
and pool area, vegetation overgrowth, and an abandoned 
vehicle on the premises.  The deadline of 10 days from the 
June 25 issuance of these citations has passed, and these 
hazards must now be remedied on an urgent basis. 
 
If the Permanent Mission is unable to secure these areas, the 
United States Mission requests that the Permanent Mission 
formally waive the inviolability of the property for the sole 
purpose of allowing the City of New Rochelle to enter and 
make necessary repairs to mitigate existing health and safety 
hazards.  The City will then send an abatement bill to the 
Permanent Mission for the cost of the repairs, which the 
Mission is urged to pay promptly. 
 
If the Permanent Mission is unable to provide such a waiver 
within 30 days from the date this note is delivered, the 
United States Mission will have to reconsider the diplomatic 
status of the property, including its inviolability and 
exemption from property taxes. 
 
Complimentary close. 
 
End text. 
RICE