08STATE56306
GUIDANCE:  MIDDLE EAST BRIEFING, MAY 28
Tue May 27 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0004
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #6306 1481618
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 271609Z MAY 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 056306 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL LE IS SY
SUBJECT: GUIDANCE:  MIDDLE EAST BRIEFING, MAY 28 
 
¶1.  (U)  This is an action message.  USUN is authorized to 
draw from the points in para 2 below during the Middle 
East Briefing, currently scheduled for May 28. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Begin points: 
 
--  Mr. President, over the last two months, the United 
States has been increasingly dismayed about the 
unproductive and divisive tone of these briefings.  Mutual 
recriminations and hostile interventions do not reflect 
well on the UN Security Council given the seriousness of 
this subject.  More importantly, the Israeli and 
Palestinian people deserve better from this Council.  I 
hope that today's discussion can demonstrate the Council's 
ability to deal in a fair and balanced way with this 
issue.  With that in mind, I would like to make the 
following four points today with regard to the 
Israeli-Palestinian peace process and then turn to the 
situation in Lebanon. 
 
--  First, achieving a peaceful, two-state solution 
continues to be a top priority for the United States. The 
United States remains committed to a peace agreement 
before the end of the year.  President Bush's recent trip 
to the region reflected his continuing personal engagement 
and commitment to this issue.  Secretary Rice continues to 
travel to the region on a monthly basis.  There is a solid 
negotiating structure in place and talks are moving 
forward.  We believe these are the most serious talks the 
parties have had for some time, touching on all of the core issues. 
The talks are, as one would expect, difficult, and due 
to the private nature of the dialogue, progress may not be 
visible, but that should not be mistaken for a lack of 
progress. 
 
--  Second, we understand the importance of achieving 
progress on the ground in the form of improved economic 
and humanitarian conditions for Palestinians and improved 
security for Israelis.  We are working hard to support the 
parties' efforts in this area, both through the efforts of 
General Fraser, who continues to work with the parties to 
monitor and promote implementation of the Roadmap, and 
through the efforts of General Dayton.  Dayton's program 
is in full swing, helping to train and reform the 
PA Security Forces.  We are looking forward to the Berlin 
Conference on Palestinian Civil Security on June 24, which 
we expect to expand international efforts in this crucial 
area. Secretary Rice is also deeply involved in this part 
of the process.  She has held several trilateral meetings 
with Prime Minister Fayyad and Minister of Defense Barak. 
These meetings have begun to yield tangible results that 
can improve conditions on the ground.  Likewise, the PA 
security forces have deployed to Jenin in coordination 
with Israeli authorities and are working to uphold law and 
order and crack down on terrorism. 
 
-- Third, Palestinian capacity building also remains a 
central issue, key to the success of this process.  The Ad 
Hoc Liaison Committee met in London on May 2 to maintain 
donor coordination and to seek to expand donor support for 
the PA.  The PA remains in dire straits financially, 
facing a projected budget deficit of over $500 million in 
¶2008.  The U.S. is making every effort to channel 
assistance to the PA and we have already delivered on over 
$218 million of our $555 million pledge in Paris last 
December.  We would urge others to do all that they can to 
support the PA. 
 
--  Fourth, we congratulate the Palestinians on the 
success of the Bethlehem Private Investment Conference 
held in Bethlehem May 21-23.  The conference showcased the 
potential for private sector investment there and resulted 
in the conclusion of significant investment agreements on 
the margins of the event.  We also commend all of those 
states and companies that attended and contributed to the 
success of this event, as well as the Government of Israel 
which took all possible steps to ensure the event's 
success. 
 
-- We will continue to work to advance each of these 
tracks, and to coordinate with our partners in the 
international community, principally through the Quartet 
which last met in London on May 2, and which continues to 
play an important role supporting the parties' efforts and 
coordinating international engagement on this extremely 
important issue. 
 
-- We understand that Israel and Syria have agreed to 
conduct indirect peace talks under the auspices of Turkey 
and that the parties have declared an intention to proceed 
in good faith and with open minds with a view to achieving 
a peace agreement.  It is our hope that discussions 
between Israel and Syria will cover all the relevant 
issues, including the Syrian Government's support for 
terrorist groups, facilitation of the passage of foreign 
fighters into Iraq, and intervention in Lebanon, as well 
as repression inside Syria. 
 
--  (if needed)  Regarding the situation in Gaza, we 
remain committed to a Palestinian state in the West Bank 
and Gaza, and we will never abandon the people of Gaza. 
We have encouraged Israel, the Palestinian Authority and 
Egypt to work together to formulate a new approach that 
will provide security to all three parties, empower the 
Palestinian Authority, ensure the humanitarian needs of 
Gazans are being met, and work towards conditions that 
will permit implementation of the 2005 Agreement on 
Movement and Access.  The United States condemns the 
ongoing effort by Hamas to usurp violently the lawful 
authority of the Palestinian government.  A Palestinian 
state will never be born through terror but rather through 
the commitment of responsible Palestinian leaders.  The 
international community must support the efforts of 
responsible Palestinian leaders, like President Abbas and 
Prime Minister Fayyad, who are working to build a better 
life and a future of peace for the Palestinian people. 
Hamas can be part of that peaceful process by accepting 
the principles outlined by the Quartet: renunciation of 
violence and terror, recognition of Israel, and acceptance 
of previous agreements between the parties, including the 
Roadmap. 
 
--  Turning to Lebanon, the United States was deeply 
concerned by the Hizballah-initiated violence of the last 
few weeks.  The Lebanese people deserve an independent and 
secure country where they are free to make decisions and 
participate in the political process without fear of 
violence or intimidation.  The use of force to implement a 
political agenda is unacceptable.  Hizballah has clearly 
shown its wanton disregard for the well-being of the 
Lebanese people as well as the previous resolutions of 
this Council. 
 
--  The United States welcomes the election of Michel Sleiman 
as president of Lebanon, which was made possible by the 
agreement reached by Lebanese leaders in Doha, Qatar. 
We view this agreement as a positive step towards resolving 
the current crisis by electing a President, forming a new 
government, and addressing Lebanon's electoral law, consistent 
with the Arab League initiative.  I commend those Lebanese 
leaders, supported by the Arab League, who refused to meet 
violence with violence.  The international community must 
stand with Lebanon's legitimate government in rejecting the 
use of violence to achieve political ends in Lebanon, and 
insisting upon the authority of the state and the illegitimacy 
of militias such as Hizballah that seek to undermine that 
authority in defiance of this Council. 
 
--  The United States will continue to support the legitimate 
authorities in Lebanon, including the government and its 
security establishment and its complete authority over all 
of Lebanese territory.  We call on all Lebanese leaders to 
implement this agreement in its entirety, in accordance 
with the Arab League initiative and in conformity with UN 
Security Council resolutions 1559, 1680, 1701, and 1757, and to 
address the root causes of this ongoing conflict. 
 
End points. 
RICE