08STATE24301
GUIDANCE FOR UNSC RESOLUTION 1701 CONSULTATION,
Sat Mar 08 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0282
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #4301 0680040
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 080035Z MAR 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 024301 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL IS LE SY
SUBJECT: GUIDANCE FOR UNSC RESOLUTION 1701 CONSULTATION, 
MARCH 10 
 
¶1.  (U)  This is an action request.  USUN may draw from the 
points in para 2 below during UNSC resolution 1701 
consultations, currently scheduled for March 10.  End action 
request: 
 
¶2.  (U)  Begin points. 
 
--  We welcome the Secretary General's report and the 
briefing by Mr. Pedersen on the implementation of resolution 
¶1701. 
 
-- Before I begin discussing implementation of UNSC 
resolution 1701, I would like to reiterate our concern that 
it has not yet been possible to hold a presidential election 
in Lebanon.  The United States urges the Lebanese to move 
quickly to pave the way for a president to be elected. 
Although the Lebanese have agreed on a candidate, we are 
concerned that Syria and its allies within Lebanon are using 
other preconditions to further perpetuate the political 
stalemate. However, until such time as a new president takes 
office, the United States has full confidence in, and fully 
supports, the legitimate Lebanese Government in managing the 
affairs of the state and in continuing to provide security 
through the Lebanese Armed Forces. 
 
--  I would also like to observe that, since the last report 
on UNSCR 1701, Lebanon has witnessed two more political 
assassinations:  That of Lebanese Armed Forces Brigadier 
General Francois al-Hajj on December 12, 2007 and that of 
Internal Security Forces Captain Wissam Eid on January 25, 
¶2008.  It is appalling that these kinds of political 
assassinations continue to occur with impunity in Lebanon 
three years after the assassination of former PM Rafik Hariri 
and almost a year after the Council passed resolution 1757 to 
establish the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. 
 
-- I wish to make seven main points about the situation in 
Lebanon as it relates to the provisions of resolution 1701. 
 
--  First, the U.S. remains deeply concerned about illegal 
arms transfers across the Syrian-Lebanese border in 
contravention of UNSCR 1701. I note that Hizballah claims it 
has replenished its military arsenal since the 2006 war.  We 
fully support the Secretary General,s call for a process to 
disarm all militias in Lebanon in accordance with resolution 
1559 and the Ta,if Accords. As the Secretary General 
reports, Hizballah has not denied reports that it is 
conducting training and constructing new facilities in the 
Bekaa valley and north of the Litani River.  In accordance 
with resolutions 1559 and 1680 of this Council, Hizballah 
must disarm, and it must do so now. 
 
--  Hizballah,s statements stand in stark contrast to Syrian 
claims that allegations of weapons smuggling across the 
Syrian-Lebanon border are motivated by political rather than 
security considerations.  We strongly support the Secretary 
General,s observation, which he has made for the fifth time 
since last summer's war, that Syria and Iran have a 
particular responsibility to ensure that the arms embargo in 
resolution 1701 is fully respected. 
 
--  Second, the U.S. shares the Secretary General's concerns 
that militias such as the Popular Front for the Liberation of 
Palestine - General Command and Fatah al-Intifada maintain 
heavily armed military positions along the Syria-Lebanon 
border.  As the report notes, the existence of these 
positions pose a direct and continuing challenge to the 
sovereignty of Lebanon.  The U.S. joins with the Secretary 
General in calling again for full border delineation between 
Lebanon and Syria.  We note that meetings between Syrian and 
Lebanese border control officials did not address the issue 
of border delineation, despite Syria's claims. 
 
-- Third, although the Syrian-Lebanese border can only be 
secured when all regional states decide to honor their 
commitments under resolution 1701, the recommendations of the 
Lebanon Independent Border Assessment Team (LIBAT) serve as a 
blueprint for increasing Lebanon's border security capacity. 
We are encouraged that Lebanon has made 
progress in implementing these recommendations and welcome 
the Secretary General's proposal for a follow-on mission. 
The U.S. stands ready to assist this assessment team.  We 
would also like to encourage the UN assessment team to liaise 
with the German-led border project. 
 
-- Fourth, we commend UNIFIL and the troops serving in it for 
their efforts to carry out their mandate. We want to 
highlight in particular the close working relationship 
General Graziano and his team have established with the 
Lebanese Armed Forces.  We call for further support for 
UNIFIL,s quick impact projects in the south that are 
essential for UNIFIL to build confidence and support among 
the local population.  The U.S. supports UNIFIL,s plans for 
mitigating risks to its personnel in the wake of recent 
terrorist attacks and continuous threats. 
 
--  Fifth, we commend the LAF and other Lebanese security 
services for their professionalism in the face of daunting 
political and security challenges.  We share the Secretary 
General,s concern that the Lebanese Armed Forces are 
stretched too thin and encourage Member States to support the 
LAF by providing funding and materiel.  The United States has 
already committed $371 million in grant assistance to the 
LAF, but this meets only a portion of their needs. 
 
--  Sixth, we welcome the commitment of both Lebanon and 
Israel to the full implementation of resolution 1701. We 
urge all sides to accelerate trilateral efforts to find an 
early resolution to the issue of Ghajjar, to address the 
issue of unexploded ordnance in south Lebanon, and to mark 
and ensure full respect for the Blue Line. 
 
-- Finally, we deeply regret Hizballah,s continual refusal 
to provide any information about the two abducted Israeli 
soldiers, Eldad Regev and Ehud Goldwasser.  We are appalled 
that Hizballah is placing conditions and demands for their 
release that are outside the scope of 1701.  We reiterate our 
call on Hizballah to immediately and unconditionally release 
them. 
 
-- While much has been accomplished towards implementing the 
Council,s decree in UNSC resolution 1701, much more remains 
to be achieved. We must all recommit ourselves to ensuring 
that resolution 1701 is fully implemented, including 
compliance with the arms embargo, release of soldiers, and 
progress towards disarmament. The United States stands ready 
to do its part towards this goal. 
 
End points. 
RICE