08TELAVIV1053
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Tue May 20 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #1053/01 1411025
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 201025Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6726
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 3850
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 0487
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 4130
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 4653
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 3863
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 2145
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 4613
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 1482
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 1926
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 8474
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 5961
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 0865
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 4984
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 6934
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 9725
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 001053 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Iran 
 
¶3.  U.S.-Israel Relations 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Ha'aretz reported that the Gaza cease-fire (tahdiya) deal  is 
expected to take effect in a couple of days.    Maariv reported that 
Defense Minister Barak during his visit to Sharm el Sheikh told 
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak that the continuation of terror 
from Gaza will lead to a military confrontation, and that the truce 
will only be possible if Israel's conditions -- cessation of all 
forms of terror -- are met.  The Egyptian Chief of Intelligence, 
General Omar Suleiman, who has been mediating between the parties, 
is scheduled to meet today with the heads of the Palestinian 
factions in the Strip. Israel is waiting to learn from Suleiman 
whether the Palestinian groups will agree to an unofficial deal to 
cease terrorist activities  in return for an end to IDF attacks. 
According to Ha'aretz, Israel does not intend to officially announce 
that it has accepted the tahdiya deal, but will let the situation 
unfold gradually -- and evaluate the results on the ground.  The 
Jerusalem Post quoted PM Ehud Olmert as saying in recent closed-door 
meetings that Israel is skeptical that a cease-fire with Hamas will 
be reached and that, therefore, the IDF is preparing for a 
large-scale military operation.  The Jerusalem Post quoted Osama 
Hamdan, Hamas's representative in Lebanon, as saying yesterday that 
Israel is mistaken if it thinks that a truce with Hamas would mean 
that the "resistance operations" would end.    Hamdan added: "Hamas 
does not trust the Israelis because they are likely to violate the 
tahdiya and launch fresh aggressions against our people.  As far as 
Hamas is concerned, all options remain open." 
 
Ha'aretz reported that on Thursday, when Livni meets her French 
counterpart Bernard Kouchner, she intends to ask for clarifications 
on the contacts that France is having with Hamas.  Ha'aretz and 
Israel Radio reported that senior political sources in Jerusalem 
expressed anger yesterday at comments made by the French minister 
yesterday confirming that France has contacts with Hamas officials, 
and that these have been in place "even before Hamas took over 
Gaza."  Kouchner made the statements following a report in the 
French daily, Le Figaro, that a former senior French diplomat met 
several weeks ago in the Gaza Strip with senior Hamas figures, 
including Ismail Haniyeh and Mahmoud Zahar.  Meanwhile, the media 
reported that Vice PM Haim Ramon accused PM Olmert, Defense Minister 
Barak and FM Livni of negotiating with Hamas. 
 
Yediot quoted PM Olmert as sayng that he has agreed to speak with 
the police again on Friday about  the Morris Talansky affair.  The 
media reported that State Attorney Lador publicly declared yesterday 
that the state suspects Olmert of personally receiving cash money 
from Talansky, committing fraud, breach of trust, and possibly other 
crimes.  The media reported that the High Court of Justice is 
debating whether to allow early testimony from Talansky on Sunday, 
which Olmert's attorneys are opposed to.  The Jerusalem Post quoted 
Lador as saying that the prosecution needs Talansky's testimony to 
make its case against Olmert.  Maariv cited the belief of senior 
Labor and Kadima members that the affair increases the chance of 
early elections. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that President Bush told Israeli leaders 
during his visit that he will obtain the necessary funding to aid 
the development and production of Israel's Arrow 3 ballistic missile 
defense system.   The newspaper quoted senior defense officials as 
saying that while Bush did not coming bearing other gifts such as 
the F-22 stealth fighter, he  did commit to work with Congress to 
support the  development of the Arrow 3.  Defense Minister Ehud 
Barak discussed the Israeli request for funding with House Speaker 
Nancy Pelosi, with whom he met in Jerusalem on Sunday.  The 
Jerusalem Post reported that Israel is seeking close to $150 million 
for the project. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that FM Tzipi Livni suggested during talks 
yesterday with visiting House Speaker Nancy Pelosi that Israel and 
the Palestinians are not likely to reach agreement on the core 
issues during 2008.  "The time frame in which an agreement will be 
reached is important, but its content is even more important," Livni 
said.  In reference to the situation in Gaza, Livni was quoted as 
saying that the "peace process is in and of itself important, but 
will not alter the situation in Gaza. If there is no change in Gaza, 
Gaza will become a regional problem that will constitute an obstacle 
to the ability to reach an agreement and to its implementation." 
Yediot reported that PM Olmert told the members of Pelosi's CODEL 
that Iran will provide a nuclear umbrella for terrorists.  Yediot 
also reported that the CODEL gave Knesset Speaker an original 
document of Congressional support for Israel marking 60 years of its 
independence, 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted Russian Ambassador to Israel Petr Stegniy 
as saying during a Hebrew University conference yesterday that a 
nuclear Iran is as much a "nightmare" for Russia as it is for the 
U.S. and Israel, and that Moscow does not differ with Washington and 
Jerusalem on the need to stop Tehran, only on the way to do it. 
 
Israel Radio reported that a far-Right group violently opposes the 
support of the Yesha Council of Jewish Settlements in the 
Territories for the removal of unauthorized settler outposts. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that yesterday the Knesset approved the first 
reading of a bill to prevent illegal entry into the country.  The 
draft law, passed by a vote of 21-1, would impose a sentence of up 
to five years in prison on people who cross the border illegally, 
including refugees and labor migrants, while infiltrators from enemy 
states, such as Sudan, could be sentenced to as much as seven years 
behind bars.  The bill also authorizes the state to hold illegal 
entrants, including refugees, for up to 18 days without bringing 
them before a judge for arraignment. In addition, it would legally 
authorize "hot returns" of infiltrators back to Egyptian territory, 
a practice that endangers their lives.  Knesset Member Dov Khenin 
(Hadash), the sole dissenter in the plenum vote, called the bill 
draconian, while refugee rights organizations said it contained a 
number of "terrible" provisions 
 
Major media reported that the U.S. Supreme Court denied an appeal by 
convicted Nazi camp guard John Demjanjuk to overturn his deportation 
order.  Demjanjuk was sentenced to death in Israel in 1988, and 
later returned to the U.S. 
 
Maariv reported that Attorney Uzi Aharon, the Deputy Mayor of the 
town of Or Yehuda, who is fighting against "missionaries" who try to 
convert Jews to Christianity, ordered the burning of hundreds of 
copies of the New Testament.  The newspaper quoted Dr. Ephraim 
Zuroff, the Director of the Simon Wiesenthal Center in Israel, as 
saying that Jews must respect all Holy Scriptures of Christianity 
and Islam, but that missionary activity should not be allowed. 
 
Major media reported that yesterday at Tel Aviv University former 
U.S. vice president Al Gore received the $1 million Dan David Prize 
for his work in raising international awareness of the threat of 
global warming.  Ha'aretz quoted Gore as saying that he would 
contribute the award to bodies that work to protect the earth. 
Leading Israeli author Amos Oz also was among the recipients of the 
prize. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted the Israel Antiquities Authority as saying 
that for the second time in the past year, archeologists have 
uncovered a Second Temple Period quarry whose stones were used to 
build the Western Wall.  It is located about two kilometers north of 
the Old City of Jerusalem. 
 
Leading media reported that President Bush's speech in Sharm 
el-Sheikh on Sunday has aggravated tensions between Washington and 
Cairo. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that an emergency evacuation plan for 
the kibbutzim within rocket and mortar range of Gaza was finalized 
this week, but that the (Labor-affiliated) United Kibbutz Movement 
has no plans to execute it. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that a new police station has quietly 
opened in E1, an area between Jerusalem and Ma'aleh Adumim that has 
been a subject of continuing controversy. 
 
In a Maariv feature, Daniel Levy and Jeremy Ben-Ami, founders of the 
new Jewish lobby in the U.S., explain why their conciliatory policy 
is good for Israel. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that last weekend an IDF committee rejected an 
appeal by Palestinians to revoke the declaration of two plots of 
land near the West Bank settlement of Kiryat Arba as state lands. 
 
Ha'aretz and Israel Radio reported that yesterday at the Hawara 
roadblock south of Nablus a female corporal identified a would-be 
suicide bomber, who was immediately killed by security forces. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Ilan Bracha and Lenny Sporn, two Israeli 
realtors in New York City, have joined forces with 16 other property 
brokers to control the local market. 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Military correspondent Amos Harel wrote on page one of the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "If nothing happens at the last 
minute, Israel is heading toward a tahdiya [lull].  It is doing 
this, paradoxically, at a time when the terrorism of Hamas in the 
Gaza Strip is the less troublesome threat." 
 
Former Ambassador to the U.S., former Minister of Foreign Affairs, 
and former Minister of Defense Moshe Arens wrote in Ha'aretz: "A 
truce with the terrorists, meaning that Israel would cease its 
attacks against organizations in Gaza whose leaderships are pledged 
to Israel's destruction, is ludicrous and self-defeating." 
 
Chief Economic Editor Sever Plotker opined in the mass-circulation, 
pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "For the first time, there is local 
economic optimism in Palestine (not in Gaza), which is disconnected 
from Israel's good or ill will." 
 
Op-Ed Page Editor Ben-Dror Yemini wrote in the popular, pluralist 
Maariv: "Bin Ladin remembered Israel as it marked its 60th 
anniversary.... But Islam is the Muslims' biggest enemy -- not just 
an enemy, but a murderous one." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "In Gaza Conflict, Iran's Fingerprints Are Everywhere" 
 
Military correspondent Amos Harel wrote on page one of the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (5/20): "Israel finds it hard to 
explain to the world what is very clear from its point of view -- 
the unacceptable threat posed to Sderot, Ashkelon and other areas. 
A foreign minister from a European country, who recently visited 
Israel, asked his hosts how many civilians have died since the 
Qassam rockets began falling.  When he was told that there have been 
15 dead in seven years, less than those killed in a large suicide 
bombing, the minister's response was almost disdainful.  If nothing 
happens at the last minute, Israel is heading toward a tahdiya 
[lull].  It is doing this, paradoxically, at a time when the 
terrorism of Hamas in the Gaza Strip is the less troublesome threat. 
Israel will opt for a cease-fire for several months, even though it 
has no illusions where things are headed: toward a future 
confrontation with Hamas, which may involve a conflagration on other 
fronts -- for example, a strong response from Hizbullah to fighting 
in the Gaza Strip.  Several years ago, in a relatively rare 
presentation, [then] Iran's Defense Minister Ali Shamkhani unfolded 
the defense doctrine of his country: the concept of 'from afar and 
near.'  Hizbullah, it was hinted, will serve as the forefront of the 
Iranian effort, in case the U.S. or Israel target Iran's nuclear 
installations.  Since then, Israel has been readying for the likely 
scenario where a future attack on Iran will result in Shihab 
ballistic missiles being fired from Iran, but also barrages of 
rockets fired by Hizbullah, Hamas, and possibly also Syria.." 
 
II.  "A Cease-Fire with Terror?" 
 
Former Ambassador to the U.S., former Minister of Foreign Affairs, 
and former Minister of Defense Moshe Arens wrote in Ha'aretz (5/20): 
"Israel's victory over Palestinian terror, which put an end to the 
daily bouts of suicide bombings, also induced amnesia in the minds 
of some of Israel's leaders.  The lesson was quickly forgotten.... 
After the latest attack on Ashkelon, the Defense Minister declared 
that we must think before we act.  He has had two years to think 
about this problem, but has still not found the answer -- which is 
simple, even if unpleasant:  The rockets have to be moved out of 
range of Israeli towns by the presence of Israeli ground troops in 
the area.  Now the Olmert government is placing its hopes on 
proposing a cease-fire to the terrorists.  A truce with the 
terrorists, meaning that Israel would cease its attacks against 
organizations in Gaza whose leaderships are pledged to Israel's 
destruction, is ludicrous and self-defeating.  It has not worked 
with Hizbullah, it will not work with Iran, and it won't work with 
Hamas.  Until such time as Israel adopts the only strategy that 
works in the war against terror - -attacking the terrorists until 
they are soundly defeated -- Israel will continue to be weakened, 
and its citizens will continue to be casualties of terrorist acts." 
 
III.  "We Are Not in the Middle East" 
 
Chief Economic Editor Sever Plotker opined in the mass-circulation, 
pluralist Yediot Aharonot (5/20): "[At the 1994 Middle East/North 
Africa Economic Summit in Casablanca], the Israeli initiative and 
desire to lead an economic revolution throughout the Arab Middle 
East stood out in every meeting and panel discussion.... It turns 
out that the Arabs can, and prefer to, develop without us. 
Particularly now, when they have a great deal of money to invest: 
the financial reserves of the Arab-Muslim world amount to $3.4 
trillion and are increasing every moment.... Look at the 
Palestinians.  From the Palestinian cities of the West Bank come 
reports about positive economic ferment, a rising wave of local 
initiatives and the population's strong desire to pull itself out of 
poverty.  This time no thanks to us, without our involvement and 
despite our roadblocks.  The extreme change in the atmosphere and 
attitude have given rise to the impressive Palestinian Investments 
Conference, which will meet tomorrow in Bethlehem with the 
participation of leading businesspeople in the region, but with no 
clear Israeli presence.  For the first time, there is local economic 
optimism in Palestine (not in Gaza), which is disconnected from 
Israel's good or ill will.  Maybe it is better that way.....  The 
Palestinian and Arab business community is not enthusiastic over the 
idea of an economic alliance with us.  Its members are not 
interested in our bear hugs. They have the capabilities and the 
resources to develop without Israel getting under their skin.  From 
their perspective, we are still not in the Middle East.  When their 
opinion changes and they become interested in working together with 
us, they know where to find us.  It will not be at the 
conferences." 
 
IV.  "Until the Last Muslim" 
 
Op-Ed Page Editor Ben-Dror Yemini wrote in the popular, pluralist 
Maariv (5/20): "Bin Ladin remembered Israel as it marked its 60th 
anniversary.  It was so sweet of him to join our celebrations, and, 
like his hated Shi'ite 'Shi'ites are worse than Jews') Ahmadinejad, 
he proclaims the joint goal of eliminating Israel.  The struggle 
will go on, the Islamist tyrant promises, 'until the last 
centimeter, the last Muslim'.... But Islam is the Muslims' biggest 
enemy -- not just an enemy, but a murderous one.... [This is the 
case in] Algeria ... in Afghanistan ... and in Sudan.... [As in 
Africa in 1998] Al Qaida's men deal in infernal bombings in Iraq, 
whose sole purpose is to murder masses of other Muslims.... Bin 
Ladin has said that the struggle would go on 'until the last 
Muslim.'  Experience proves that he means every one of his words." 
 
--------- 
¶2.  Iran: 
--------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Former Mossad director Ephraim Halevy wrote in the mass-circulation, 
pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "[When it starts speaking with Iran], 
Washington will be in need of the talents and experience of 
conductors of dialogue like [Robert] Gates, [Dennis] Ross and Henry 
 
Kissinger, who also came out recently in support of dialogue with 
Iran.  At such a time Israel must not be absent from the discussion 
table.  For us it is a matter of life and death." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"Very Soon We'll Be Talking" 
 
Former Mossad director Ephraim Halevy wrote in the mass-circulation, 
pluralist Yediot Aharonot (5/20): "There are many signs that in the 
near future the United States is likely to countenance attempts at a 
serious dialogue, overt or covert, in one form or another, with 
Tehran.  It will have to address this possibility especially if 
President Bush is contemplating the possibility of resorting to 
force in one form or another in the next few months, because it is 
reasonable to assume that he will feel that he has to show his 
people that he repeatedly examined  the possibility of negotiations 
before he decided that all else had failed.  In order to create all 
these 'levers of influence' on Iran about which Defense Secretary 
Gates spoke [on the day before President Bush's speech to the 
Knesset], and as an essential background for dialogue, the United 
States will have to step up growing pressure on Iran, both in the 
economic and financial areas, and by a demonstration of threatening 
military power.  Then perhaps Iran will want to hold  a dialogue and 
to achieve understandings, just as Hamas is seeking them today. 
Then Washington will be in need of the talents and experience of 
conductors of dialogue like Gates, [Dennis] Ross and Henry 
Kissinger, who also came out recently in support of dialogue with 
Iran.  At such a time Israel must not be absent from the discussion 
table.  For us it is a matter of life and death." 
 
-------------------------- 
¶3.  U.S.-Israel Relations: 
-------------------------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: "No 
gatekeeper stifles criticism of Israeli policies among U.S. Jews. 
There are no risks, not on the Left or on the Right, in proffering 
advice to Israel from the Diaspora.  All one needs is lots of 
hubris." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"Urban Legend" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized (5/20): 
"The founding of Peace Now, the zealously anti-settlement movement, 
led its U.S. Jewish supporters to begin their own lobbying, starting 
in 1978.  Some U.S. Jews, still more to the Left, went further.  It 
was a Jewish academic who drafted the November 1988 declaration of 
independence for the 'State of Palestine which Yasser Arafat in 
Tunis dutifully proclaimed.  And rightist Diaspora groups, rabbis 
notably among them, have since 1993 been bitterly and prominently 
critical of Israeli government efforts to reach land-for-peace deals 
with the Palestinians.  So the notion that U.S. Jews have ever been 
hesitant to break with Israeli policies is simply uninformed by 
history.... Most U.S. Jews have never visited Israel, let alone a 
'settlement.'  Many are clueless about the strategic value of the 
West Bank and couldn't distinguish between an 'ideological' 
settlement in the heart of Samaria [the northern West Bank] and Har 
Homa in Jerusalem.  All this makes [Atlantic Monthly staff writer 
Jeffrey] Goldberg's calls for a 'radical rethinking of what it means 
to be pro-Israel' both anachronistic and disingenuous.  Goldberg 
might glance across the page [of his own article] at veteran New 
York Times columnist Thomas L. Friedman, who's been redefining what 
it means to be pro-Israel for decades.  Friedman, too, argues that a 
'pro-Israel' president is one who draws 'red lines when Israel does 
reckless things' like building settlements.  So let's restate the 
obvious: No gatekeeper stifles criticism of Israeli policies among 
U.S. Jews.  There are no risks, not on the Left or on the Right, in 
proffering advice to Israel from the Diaspora.  All one needs is 
lots of hubris." 
 
JONES