08TELAVIV1084
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Thu May 22 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
P 221043Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6789
WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
DA WASHDC PRIORITY
CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 
USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 
AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 001084 
 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Israel-Syria Talks 
 
¶2.  Iran 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
The top story in all of the major media outlets was the announcement 
of indirect peace talks with Syria.  Most media linked the timing of 
the announcement with the lifting of the gag order on the bribery 
investigation into PM Olmert.  Both Yediot and Maariv bannered: 
"Investigation and Peace," which in Hebrew sounds like "striving for 
peace."   Olmert was quoted as saying last night that he has 
"reached the conclusion that the chances in this case outweighed the 
risks, and with this hope, today we embark on this path."  He added 
that "it's always better to talk to shoot."  The Jerusalem Post 
quoted Turkish sources as saying that Israel and Syria understand 
that a future peace agreement will include a full Israeli withdrawal 
from the Golan Heights, as well as Syria's distancing itself from 
Iran and an end to  "aiding and abetting" Hamas and Hizbullah. 
Ha'aretz quoted a senior Turkish official as saying that Ankara is 
impressed by the upbeat mood and that it hopes that by next month 
there might even be a direct meeting between Israelis and Syrians. 
Ha'aretz reported that Olmert tried to soften the Americans' stance 
during President Bush and Vice President Cheney's visits to Israel, 
and that he was backed by Defense Minister Barak.   Israel Radio 
reported that FM Tzipi Livni told French FM Bernard Kouchner that 
Israel will accept nothing less from Syria than its total 
disengagement from terror (Hamas, Hizbullah, etc.) and Iran. 
Ha'aretz believes that Israel might request billions of dollars from 
the U.S. in the event of a peace treaty with Syria.  Maariv wrote 
that in a treaty with Syria, Israel hopes to resolve water rights, 
receive cheap oil, and open up overland access to Europe.  The media 
also reported on several polls (see the poll section below) in which 
two-thirds of the respondents said they do not support leaving the 
Golan for peace and an overwhelming majority also connect the 
announcement to Olmert's legal troubles and do not believe he has 
the legitimacy needed to enter into serious negotiations. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted a senior law enforcement official as 
saying that the National Fraud Unit believes that Olmert made 
"personal use" of the funds he received from New York financier 
Morris Talansky.  The newspaper further quoted the official as 
saying that Shula Zaken, Olmert's former bureau chief and secretary 
of many years "knowingly handed the funds."  All media cited notes 
that Zaken wrote and e-mails she sent Olmert. 
 
Leading media quoted Hamas as saying yesterday that Egypt is 
expected to announce today that efforts to reach an agreement with 
Israel have failed.  Hamas spokespeople placed the blame on Israel 
for this development, saying that Israel did not want to give up 
anything in exchange for the truce.  Israel Radio reported that this 
morning a suicide bomber blew up an explosives-laden truck on the 
Gazan side of the Erez Crossing.  No Israeli was harmed.  Islamic 
Jihad and a fraction of Fatah claimed responsibility for the 
attack. 
 
Israel Radio quoted Secretary Rice as saying yesterday: "We would 
welcome any steps that might lead to a comprehensive peace in the 
Middle East.  We are going to work very hard on the 
Palestinian-Israeli front. We hope for the best on the 
Israeli-Syrian side and we do believe that there is work to be done 
vis-a-vis the outstanding issues with Lebanon, as well." Leading 
media quoted White House Press Secretary Dana Perino as saying that 
the U.S. does not object to the talks but "the United States, 
Israelis and many others" are concerned about Syria's support for 
Hamas and Hizbullah. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted Israeli defense officials as saying that 
they are concerned that Hizbullah would use its newly-gained veto 
power in the Lebanese cabinet to prevent the renewal of UNIFIL's 
mandate this summer. 
 
Major media reported that yesterday the French Court of Appeals 
ruled in favor of Jewish activist Philippe Karsenty, overturning a 
lower court decision that he had libeled France 2-TV and its 
Jerusalem correspondent Charles Enderlin when he accused them of 
knowingly misleading the world about the death of the Palestinian 
child Muhammad al-Dura in Gaza in 2000.  Last night France 2-TV 
reported that it would appeal to the Cour de Cassation (the court of 
last resort in France). 
 
Ha'aretz -- and other media previously -- reported that the USTR's 
2007 watch list of countries where intellectual property is not 
respected, names Israel as one of the countries that are a "focus of 
increased bilateral attention".  The Israeli case deals mainly with 
legislation regulating the ability to produce generic drugs and to 
distribute them both in Israel and overseas.  Ha'aretz quoted 
several sources involved in the issue as saying that the Israelis 
believe it is not their lax legislation hat is keeping them on the 
list, but rather the pressure exerted by American pharmaceutical 
companies to protect their products from Israeli generic versions. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that yesterday in Eilat Internal 
Security Minister Avi Dichter defended the millions of dollars of 
funding that the International Fellowship of Christians and Jews 
(IFCJ) -- a "Jewish-Evangelical alliance" -- has put toward the 
GOI's City of Non-Violence program. 
 
Major media reported that Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer arrived in 
Israel yesterday for a three-hour visit to inaugurate the company's 
new R&D center in Herzliya.  The ceremony was attended by President 
Shimon Peres.  The media quoted Ballmer as saying that "Microsoft is 
as much an Israeli company as an American company," adding that the 
proportion of Microsoft employees per capita in Israel was similar 
to that in the U.S. 
 
Maariv reported that 300 of 1,500 historic Jerusalem buildings 
slated for preservation have been pulled down. 
 
Channel 2-TV commissioned a poll, whose results it presented last 
night: 
 
Do you support or oppose a concession of the Golan in the framework 
of a peace treaty? 
 
Oppose: 70%; support: 22%. 
 
Do you believe that the timing of progress in the negotiations is 
related to Olmert's investigation? 
 
     Yes: 57%; no: 32 %. 
 
Do you believe that Olmert's decision to conduct negotiations with 
Syria is legitimate? 
 
      No: 58%; yes: 33%. 
 
Ha'aretz cited a recent survey by the right-leaning Maagar Mohot 
research institute that found that about two-thirds (68%) of 
Israelis object to withdrawing from the Golan Heights even for peace 
with Syria -- more than those who object to dividing Jerusalem for 
ending the conflict with the Arab world. 
 
----------------------- 
¶1.  Israel-Syria Talks: 
----------------------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: "This is the 
moment to tell Olmert: Turn over every stone.  Let the 
investigations continue as if there were no peace talks, and let the 
peace talks continue as if there were no investigations -- and 
perhaps it will turn out to be a blessing in disguise." 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote on page one of the 
popular, pluralist Maariv: "I hope that we wake up to a reality in 
which there is peace and no Talansky, but we are liable to wake up 
to a reality in which there is Talansky but no peace.  And we are 
going to have to learn to live with that." 
 
Middle East affairs commentator Dr. Guy Bechor, a lecturer at the 
Interdisciplinary Center, wrote in the mass-circulation, pluralist 
Yediot Aharonot: "From a great strategic asset for Israel, the Golan 
Heights [may] become a burden, which [would] add its part in the 
broadening struggle for Israel's liquidation." 
 
Eytan Haber, veteran op-ed writer and assistant to the late Prime 
Minister Yitzhak Rabin, wrote in Yediot Aharonot: "We Israelis once 
claimed that Arab countries act ... against Israel out of 'domestic 
needs.'  Israelis are now saying the same about our Prime 
Minister." 
 
Senior op-ed writer Akiva Eldar commented in Ha'aretz: "The Arab 
peace initiative that was born in Beirut solved the dilemma of 
'Syria or Palestine first'.... It is a shame that the choice between 
territorial assets and strategic assets falls on Israel at [this] 
time." 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: "A peace 
treaty with Syria is in Israel's strategic interest -- but not at 
any price." 
 
Editor-in-Chief Amnon Lord wrote in the editorial of the 
nationalist, Orthodox Makor Rishon-Hatzofe: " Facing the four-way 
Iranian-Hamas-Hizbullah-Iran strategic pressure, Olmert decided on a 
redeeming diplomatic step.  If at this stage his steps can lack 
responsibility, in the future they may be disastrous." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "Turn Over Every Stone" 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (5/22): "Now, 
at this blatantly late hour, another historic opportunity is being 
offered the Prime Minister of Israel and the members of his 
government, to try to challenge the peace declarations that have 
been consistently coming from Syria for some time.  The Israeli 
government is currently headed by a person immersed in criminal 
investigations and under the most serious suspicions.  The fear that 
this is spin meant to extricate Ehud Olmert from the investigations, 
which politicians voiced yesterday from the right and left of the 
political spectrum, is not completely unfounded.  Nevertheless, this 
hour of opportunity must in no way be allowed to pass by.... This is 
the moment to tell Olmert: Turn over every stone.  Let the 
investigations continue as if there were no peace talks, and let the 
peace talks continue as if there were no investigations -- and 
perhaps it will turn out to be a blessing in disguise." 
 
II.  "Investigate as if There Were no Peace, Make Peace as if there 
Were no Talansky" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote on page one of the 
popular, pluralist Maariv (5/22): "There is not nor will there ever 
be anything more important to the State of Israel than an historic 
peace accord with Syria. An accord of that kind must push Syria away 
from the 'axis of evil,' diminish Hizbullah, and contribute to 
IranQs isolation.  An accord of that kind will oblige Israel to part 
with a beloved tract of land, the Golan Heights.  An accord of that 
kind, had it been achieved by one of Olmert's predecessors, would 
have produced a dramatic change on the map of the entire region and 
our situation, at present, would have been far better than it 
currently is.  But all of Ehud Olmert's predecessors, five prime 
ministers, failed.  They preferred two Palestinian cats in the bag 
over one Syrian lion on the Golan Heights.... It is true that peace 
between Israel and Syria is important, but cleaning out our filthy 
political stables is no less important.  That is why we need to 
investigate as if there were no peace, and to make peace as if there 
were no Talansky.  I hope that we wake up to a reality in which 
there is peace and no Talansky, but we are liable to wake up to a 
reality in which there is Talansky but no peace.  And we are going 
to have to learn to live with that." 
 
III.  "The Day after the Agreement" 
 
Middle East affairs commentator Dr. Guy Bechor, a lecturer at the 
Interdisciplinary Center, wrote in the mass-circulation, pluralist 
Yediot Aharonot (5/22): "When Assad's regime is toppled, the Golan 
Heights will become the radical spearhead against Israel, and not 
only from Syria: From Iran, Afghanistan, and more.  The terror will 
be doubled: From Lebanon and the Golan Heights.  Life in the north 
will become an intolerable nightmare.  Instead of being empty of 
residents, the Golan Heights will be populated with a million 
fanatic Syrians.  It will become a bone in Israel's throat, like the 
Gaza Strip, which can neither be swallowed nor regurgitated.  The 
Sinai Peninsula is so large that the situation there can always be 
reversible.  With Jordan, we did not cede anything, and with the 
Palestinians we can always reoccupy any territory.  But with Syria, 
the situation will be different: From an empty buffer zone, the 
Golan will become a densely populated anti-Israel territory for 
generations.  From a great strategic asset for Israel, the Golan 
Heights will become a burden, which will add its part in the 
broadening struggle for IsraelQs liquidation.  Our generations to 
come will not forgive anyone who does this to them." 
 
IV.  "Spin for Peace" 
 
Eytan Haber, veteran op-ed writer and assistant to the late Prime 
Minister Yitzhak Rabin, wrote in Yediot Aharonot (5/22): "All 
Israeli prime ministers have refrained from paying the price [for 
peace with Syria].  Thus, they always backed down from their 
agreements.... Spin or no spin, the talks will go on until they 
ripen -- or they will stop for real reasons, but not because of 
spin.  We Israelis once claimed that Arab countries act ... against 
Israel out of 'domestic needs.'  Israelis are now saying the same 
about our Prime Minister." 
 
¶V.  "Once Again, Syria First" 
 
Senior op-ed writer Akiva Eldar commented in Ha'aretz (5/22): "The 
Syrians and the Lebanese, the Palestinians and the Jordanians, the 
Egyptians and the Saudis, all have had a common denominator as of 
March 2002.  The Arab peace initiative that was born in Beirut 
solved the dilemma of 'Syria or Palestine first.'  For the first 
time, Israel has the opportunity to choose between holding onto all 
the territories or reaching peace with all the members of the Arab 
League.  Not merely any peace but normalization of its ties with the 
surrounding countries.... It is a shame that the choice between 
territorial assets and strategic assets falls on Israel at a time 
when the State Prosecutor's Office is about to reach a decision over 
the fate of the leader on whose shoulders the responsibility rests. 
However, should it transpire that what we have is a chance to create 
a historic change in the life of a nation -- peace with all the 
countries of the region -- no person, no matter how important, 
should be allowed to miss it." 
 
VI.  "Peace for the Golan?" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized (5/22): 
"What matters most now is what Syria is offering to make a 
withdrawal worth Israel's while.... For Israelis to take its 
overtures, seriously, Damascus would have to disconnect itself 
totally from the Iranian mullahs.  Rather than helping arm 
Hizbullah, Syria would have to isolate it.... A deal with Syria 
could also potentially bolster relative moderates among the 
Palestinians, but not if Syria continues to host the Hamas 
leadership in Damascus.  From state-sponsor of terror, it would have 
to transform itself into strategic opponent of terror.  Nor can 
Israel afford a deal perceived as being with Bashar Assad's Alawite 
clique alone.... A peace treaty with Syria is in Israel's strategic 
interest -- but not at any price.  Jerusalem is being called upon to 
make irrevocable concessions in return from the promise of Syrian 
goodwill." 
 
 
VII.  "Olmert Corrupts Peace" 
 
Editor-in-Chief Amnon Lord wrote in the editorial of the 
nationalist, Orthodox Makor Rishon-Hatzofe (5/22): "Corrupting peace 
means creating a situation of distrust from the part of the public 
regarding [the links between Olmert's investigation and the talks 
with Syria].... This also happened in the past during the contacts 
with the Palestinians... Facing the four-way 
Iranian-Hamas-Hizbullah-Iran strategic pressure, Olmert decided on a 
redeeming diplomatic step.  If at this stage his steps can lack 
responsibility, in the future they may be disastrous." 
 
--------- 
¶2.  Iran: 
--------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Washington correspondent Shmuel Rosner wrote in the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz: "Anyone who presumes to say at this point 
whether [President Bush] will use force to stop Iran's nuclear 
program, or will pass the problem on to the next administration, is 
suffering from baseless presumption." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"Will He or Won't He Attack?  It's Doubtful Bush Knows" 
 
Washington correspondent Shmuel Rosner wrote in the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz (5/22): "President George W. Bush has nearly 
eight months left, and anyone who presumes to say at this point 
whether he will use force to stop Iran's nuclear program, or will 
pass the problem on to the next administration, is suffering from 
baseless presumption: It's doubtful whether Bush himself knows the 
answer to that question.... The U.S. Secretary of Defense, Robert 
Gates, appeared Tuesday before the Senate defense appropriations 
subcommittee.  [He said that] talking to the Iranians might be 
possible, but "the key here is developing leverage, either through 
economic or diplomatic or military pressures.... The Iran with which 
it might, perhaps, have been possible to talk in 2003 is not the 
Iran of today.  More importantly, the United States is not the same 
U.S.  Then it was at the height of a lethal display of power -- 
following victory in Afghanistan and a speedy occupation of 
Iraq..... But the Iran of today is in another bargaining position, 
while the U.S., worn down by years of war, suddenly seems a lot less 
intimidating.... Gates ... is ... one of the more cautious [U.S. 
statesmen].  If he said 'military,' he meant surely that such a 
possibility exists." 
 
JONES