08WARSAW393
CODEL BOUCHER'S MEETINGS WITH POLISH MINISTRIES OF
Fri Mar 28 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Warsaw
VZCZCXRO7360
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHLZ RUEHROV
DE RUEHWR #0393/01 0881258
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 281258Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY WARSAW
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6200
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES
RUEHKW/AMCONSUL KRAKOW 2048
RHEBAAA/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 WARSAW 000393 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NCE LLOCHMAN, BPUTNEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON ETRD ENRG SENV EU PL
SUBJECT: CODEL BOUCHER'S MEETINGS WITH POLISH MINISTRIES OF 
ECONOMY AND ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
WARSAW 00000393  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1.  (U)  Summary:  On March 20, a visiting delegation of six 
U.S. Members of Congress met with Rafal Baniak, Under 
Secretary in the Polish Ministry of Economy, and with 
 
SIPDIS 
Minister of Environment Maciej Nowicki.  Given Poland's heavy 
dependence on coal, the Polish government is scrambling to 
respond to the European Union's "3x20" objectives.  Polish 
policy will focus on energy saving, diversification, 
modernization of power plants, introducing devices to control 
SO2, NOx and particulate matter, and introduction of clean 
coal solutions.  Polish scientists are researching coal 
gasification, and the Polish government is working to 
identify potential CO2 storage sites, as well as drafting a 
national conservation strategy for industry, housing and 
transport.  Currently, Poland is allocating emissions permits 
based on benchmarks for a given industry's efficiency.  It 
has serious concerns about the potential economic effect of 
EU proposals for the period 2013-2020.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Congressman Rick Boucher led the delegation, which 
included Representatives Fred Upton, Tammy Baldwin, Albert 
Wynn, Nick Rahall and Dan Lungren.  They were accompanied by 
Under Secretary Bud Albright, from the Department of Energy, 
and Marty McGuinness from the Office of White House 
Legislative Affairs. 
 
------------------- 
Ministry of Economy 
------------------- 
 
¶3.  (U)  At the Ministry of Economy, Under Secretary Baniak 
stated that Poland has the largest coal reserves in Europe. 
Ninety percent of Poland's electricity comes from coal -- 58 
percent from hard coal and 36 percent from brown coal. 
Congressman Boucher noted that the United States is also 
dependent on coal for energy generation.  The United States 
has enough coal reserves to last 200-250 years.  While the 
U.S. is importing natural gas, and the amount will climb, gas 
is not available in sufficient quantity to replace coal.  The 
United States has a long-term commitment to coal, but the 
Congress is also developing a policy of mandatory controls on 
emissions.  Rep. Boucher stated that the United States needs 
a policy on carbon separation and emissions sequestration, 
and to support federal research and development to perfect 
the technologies.  He noted the current focus is on carbon 
separation, including integrated gasification, a chilled 
ammonia application and combustion technology.  He noted that 
these three technologies are competing for market share, and 
should be available commercially within three to five years. 
He added that sequestration presents a greater challenge. 
Work is being done to identify storage media for CO2 and then 
"characterize" it -- map it out, pressurize it with CO2, and 
then monitor for five to eight years to ensure the site's 
integrity and that there is no leakage of CO2.  Congressman 
Upton stated that U.S. energy needs will grow by 40 percent 
by 2040, and demand will exceed generation within 12 years. 
Yet, in 2007, no new sites for coal generation were started 
in the United States.  Investors in the U.S. are all waiting 
for clean coal technology to come online before building new 
coal sites.  Under Secretary Albright noted that the Bush 
Administration is committed to the issue, and has spent USD 
37 billion on climate change. 
 
¶4.  (U)  Under Secretary Baniak noted that last year the EU 
agreed to "3x20" objectives: reduce emissions by 20% (30% if 
an international agreement is reached); reduce energy use by 
20%, and achieve 20% of renewable energy in its energy 
supply.  Poland is now working to incorporate clean coal into 
its energy policy.  Poland is trying to identify possible 
sequestration sites.  However, at this time the Polish 
government has no funds to do so, although it is hoping for 
support from the European Commission.  Poland wants big 
Polish companies in the pilot program the EU is preparing. 
Under Secretary Baniak explained that Polish entrepreneurs 
have announced four large projects, and Polish scientists are 
trying to perfect traditional methods of gasification, and 
are also working on underground gasification.  The Polish 
government is also interested in possible synergies between 
coal and nuclear power.  For example, one could have a single 
complex that included nuclear energy, a petrochemical plant 
and a clean coal plant.  Under Secretary Baniak saw 
developing such a facility as a 15-year project, with five 
years needed to get to the testing phase, and costs still 
unknown. 
 
----------------------- 
Ministry of Environment 
----------------------- 
 
WARSAW 00000393  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
 
¶5.  (U)  At the Ministry of Environment, Minister Nowicki 
stated that Poland was heavily polluted in 1989, accounting 
for 10-12 percent of Europe's SO2 and particulate matter. 
Today, SO2 is 38 percent of 1989 levels, particulate matter 
is 23 percent of 1989 levels and N02 is 63 percent of 1989 
levels.  (NO2 levels shrunk less because of an increase in 
the number of cars in Poland).  Greenhouse gas emissions are 
only 65% of 1988 levels, but GDP is 159% of what it was in 
1988 so the economy has grown while the environment has 
become cleaner. 
 
¶6.  (U)  Minister Nowicki explained that Polish policy to 
2020 will focus on: energy saving; diversification; 
modernization of power plants; introducing devices to reduce 
SO2, NOx and particulate matter; and introduction of clean 
coal solutions.  The government is preparing a national 
strategy for conservation in industry, housing and transport. 
 Regarding diversification, the most promising sources of 
renewable energy are wind power and biomass (especially use 
of waste food and straw as a local energy source).  Minister 
Nowicki expects a boom in windfarming in northern Poland.  He 
noted that Spanish and Danish firms are eager to invest in 
Poland.  The problem will be transmission, because existing 
lines could not handle the amount of power expected to be 
generated.   Poland has little geothermal potential because 
its thermal water is less than 100 degrees, which is enough 
for heating, but not sufficient to generate energy.  Poland 
has some natural gas deposits, but because of high nitrogen 
content it can not be put in pipelines, although it can be 
used locally.  Looking further ahead, Minister Nowicki 
stated, "For me, solar will become the main source of energy 
in the world." 
 
¶7.  (U)  Minister Nowicki stated that 50% of Poland's power 
plants are more than 20 years old, and will need to be 
replaced in the next 10-15 years.  He reiterated Poland's 
interest in gasification of coal, stating that current high 
oil prices make this a good time to invest in gasification 
and liquid coal fuel.  He stated that the United States has 
the most experience with coal-bed methane, which Minister 
Nowicki had wanted to introduce to Poland at the beginning of 
the 1990s, but this was blocked by the opposition of coal 
miners.  Poland is conducting an inventory of possible 
storage sites for CO2, but Nowicki believed it will be hard 
to find enough suitable locations, and stated that coal mines 
are not good storage sites because of the soil structure. 
 
¶8.  (U)  Representative Boucher asked about Poland's 
experience allocating emissions permits.  Minister Nowicki 
replied that for 2008-2012 Poland had wanted permits for 288 
million tons of emissions, but received only 208.5 million. 
Polish industry could have gotten by with 250 million tons, 
but if the economy continues to develop at the current pace, 
in four or five years they will need 280 million tons.  The 
shortfall in permits is thus a serious problem.  The former 
PiS-led government had proposed across-the-board cuts. 
Minister Nowicki, in contrast, pushed a system based on 
benchmarks for a given industry's efficiency.  He noted, for 
example, that the cement industry already had invested 
heavily in modernization.  Because there are few emissions 
savings left for the industry to squeeze out, if the industry 
got fewer permits its only option would be to produce less. 
The gap in the market would be filled by less-efficient 
producers in Ukraine and Belarus, resulting in a net global 
rise in CO2.  Minister Nowicki stated that the situation will 
be much tougher in 2013-2020, when the European Commission 
has proposed that there be no free allowances and that all 
allowances be purchased at auction beginning in 2015.  He 
said that if a permit to emit 100 tons costs EUR30, that 
would add up to EUR4-5 billion/year, leading to a 50-70 
percent rise in energy costs.  Given this prospect, Poland is 
working to change the European Commission's approach. 
 
¶9.  (U)  Congressman Upton asked about conservation measures. 
 Minister Nowicki replied that Communist-era buildings were 
heat-inefficient, with little insulation.  He stated that 
with remedial treatment it is possible to reduce the energy 
consumption of such buildings by 77 percent.  He stated that 
further savings are possible by insulating transmission 
lines.  Representative Rahall asked whether the political 
will to change exists in Poland.  Minister Nowicki noted that 
energy had been very cheap under the Communists, and that 
mentality was hard to change.  He cited the Climate Change 
conference in Poznan in December as a chance to raise public 
awareness. 
 
 
WARSAW 00000393  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶10.  (U)  The delegation did not have the opportunity to 
clear this cable before departing Poland. 
ASHE