09ABUDHABI317
UAE PRESIDENT'S PRESS REMARKS ON REGIONAL ISSUES
Sun Mar 29 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Abu Dhabi
VZCZCXRO3065
PP RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHDIR
DE RUEHAD #0317/01 0881052
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 291052Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2300
INFO RUEHZM/GULF COOPERATION COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS 0921UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ABU DHABI 000317 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: N/A 
TAGS: PREL EAID ENRG KPAL SU IS IR SY IZ AE
SUBJECT: UAE PRESIDENT'S PRESS REMARKS ON REGIONAL ISSUES 
 
REF: ABU DHABI 312 
¶1.  Summary:  In a rare press interview (this time with Qatar's 
Al-Watan newspaper) in advance of the Doha summit, UAE president 
Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan commented on the continuing 
strength of relations with the U.S. as Washington changes leadership, 
expressing optimism in the Obama Administration's approach to key 
Middle East issues.  He called for calm dialogue with Iran and 
reiterated the desire for a territorial dispute to be settled by the 
ICJ.  He hoped for Kuwaitis to unite politically, in the best 
interests of the country, and put the "fair price per barrel" of oil 
at US $70 - $75.  Citing improvement within Iraq, Sheikh Khalifa also 
emphasized progress in Baghdad's regional integration.  He addressed 
Israeli-Palestinian issues and Sudan (repeated reftel).  The 
following draws from the UAEG's official news agency translation of 
the President's remarks.  End summary.U.S. RELATIONS 
-------------- 
 
¶2.  "Our relations with the United States are old and are governed by 
fixed political realities which do not change as a result of 
succeeding US administrations.  The first of these facts is that the 
United States is a great power which shoulders huge responsibilities 
for international peace, security and stability.  Therefore, 
relations with the United States are a necessity for any other 
country, regardless of any differences and different perspectives. 
Secondly, there is the accumulated legacy of relations between our 
two countries that has allowed us to make our point of view heard on 
regional and international issues as well as to build cooperation in 
many areas benefiting the interests of the two countries and 
strengthening the ties of friendship and reciprocal respect.  Within 
this framework of political realities, we hope to continue working 
with the new US administration under President Barack Obama.  We feel 
optimistic about his new approach towards many regional and 
international issues, and the situation in the Middle East and Iraq 
in particular." 
 
¶3.  "We hope that the recent activity by the US, represented by the 
frequent visits by US officials to the region, would lead to serious 
action on the Arab-Israeli conflict to ensure the establishment of 
peace and security in the region as well as to allow citizens of the 
region's countries to devote their full attention to the process of 
construction and development." 
 
IRAN 
---- 
¶4.  Sheikh Khalifa said the recent U.S. presidential message to Iran 
could be a positive prelude to a serious dialogue.  He called for 
"dialogue to preserve stability, because we are against tension" to 
safeguard Gulf security; better U.S.-Iran relations can help the 
region avoid crises.  He also raised the three UAE islands occupied 
by Iran, stating that the UAE would accept any ruling made by the 
International Court of Justice (ICJ) and said Syrian President 
al-Asad's mediation with Iran was welcome.  The "Iranian nuclear 
program is a worry for us, particularly if it is not peaceful," he 
was quoted as saying. 
 
POSSIBLE U.S.-IRAN MILITARY CONFRONTATION 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  "As a matter of principle, we do not condone the use of force in 
solving international disputes no matter how far away the location of 
this dispute may be.  How much more so, when it is next door!  We 
always stress the need to listen to the sense of reason in resolving 
differences on Iran's nuclear program, which should be by peaceful 
means.  We still hope these efforts will succeed.  We also hope that 
all parties will exercise self-restraint and meet the demands of the 
international community on this issue." 
 
KUWAIT'S EXPERIENCE WITH DEMOCRACY 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  "We wish all the best to the leadership, government and people of 
our sisterly country, Kuwait.  We hope that the new Kuwaiti cabinet 
will be formed and a new Parliament will be elected.  We also hope 
that both bodies will engage in joint action to reunite, in the best 
interest of Kuwait and for the prosperity and the welfare of the 
Kuwaiti people. 
 
OIL PRICES AND THE ECONOMY 
-------------------------- 
 
¶7.  Low world oil prices affect all countries, as does the global 
financial crisis -- including the UAE, which plays "pivotal regional 
and international financial and economic roles."  "We believe that 
oil prices went up to inconceivable levels, but now are so low that 
some countries are not able to develop their oil fields because of 
the decrease of revenues.  We believe the low price of oil hurts the 
interests of everybody.  A fair price for oil, in our view, should be 
anywhere between US $70 to $75." 
 
IRAQ'S RETURN TO NORMALCY 
------------------------- 
 
 
ABU DHABI 00000317  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶8.  "Indications and reports reaching us show that there is 
significant improvement in this regard.  There is a sharp fall in the 
number of security incidents and number of deaths.  On the other 
hand, there is a significant improvement in the general climate in 
the country which was shown by the relatively successful provincial 
elections recently held in that country.  As for an open policy 
towards Iraq by countries in the region, it is something that is 
actually happening.  There have been a number of visits to Iraq by 
official delegations from Gulf and other Arab countries, and, 
moreover, a number of these countries have reopened their diplomatic 
missions in Iraq." 
 
FOLLOWING TOPICS REPEATED FROM REFTEL 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  ISRAEL/PALESTINIAN ISSUE:  Sheikh Khalifa called on the US, 
European countries and others to put pressure on Israel to accept a 
just solution to the Palestinian problem in line with the Arab Peace 
Initiative.  "We hope that the United States and European countries 
would maintain pressure on Israel to force it to approve a just and 
peaceful solution to the Palestinian cause.  This is in harmony with 
the Arab Peace Initiative which entails the creation of an 
independent Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital, in 
return for a recognition of Israel.  Extremists in Israel might well 
opt for the peaceful solution at any time, if they seriously consider 
a solution that would serve peace and stability in the whole region." 
 
¶10.  PALESTINIAN RECONCILIATION AND NATIONAL UNITY:  "We have always 
expressed our belief in the importance of uniting ranks and 
positions, not only within each Arab country, but also on the 
Pan-Arab level.  Therefore, it goes without saying that the United 
Arab Emirates is sparing no efforts, both declared or undeclared, to 
unite the ranks of the Palestinians and to support, in this regard, 
all the good offices of Arab countries, in particular our big sister 
country, Egypt, which has hosted the dialogue among Palestinian 
factions.  We call on our brother Palestinians to respond to those 
efforts and good offices and to prioritize the higher national 
interests over factional or partisan interests.  We hope those 
efforts would result in building a solid Palestinian position that 
can meet the requirements of the coming stage, whether relevant to 
the peace process or to the process of reconstruction." 
 
¶11.  SUDAN: "We expressed our concern over the impact of the decision 
taken by the International Criminal Court (ICC) on the stability of 
Sudan and the current political dialogue as well as on the efforts 
being made to activate the political process in Darfur aimed at 
implementing the peace agreement.  At the same time, however, we 
expressed our astonishment at the fact that the same court did not 
pay attention to the crimes of genocide against the Palestinian 
people in Gaza." 
 
OLSON