09AITTAIPEI1210
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Thu Oct 08 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1210 2811001
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 081001Z OCT 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2460
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 9426
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0840UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001210 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/P, EAP/PD - THOMAS HAMM 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage October 8 on the controversy revolving around Taiwan's 
National Palace Museum (NPM), which denied it received an offer by a 
French businessman to donate two Qing Dynasty bronze sculptures he 
owns to the NPM; and on the discussion of "fat cats" in Taiwan.  In 
terms of editorials and commentaries, an op-ed in the 
mass-circulation "Apple Daily" discussed U.S. President Barack 
Obama's recent decision not to meet with the Dalai Lama and its 
connection to U.S. arms sales to Taiwan.  The article said that, 
given the Obama administration's concerns that any decision made in 
terms of U.S. arms will likely jeopardize its relations with China, 
the chances are slim that the United States will sell F16 C/D 
fighter jets to Taiwan in the near future.  End summary. 
 
"The Dalai Lama and F-16 C/D Fighter Jets" 
 
Liu Shih-chung, now a Visiting Fellow at the U.S.-based Brookings 
Institution, opined in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" 
[circulation: 520,000] (10/8): 
 
"... By contrast, given China's violation of human rights, its 
attempts to stifle Tibet, and the already marginalized Taiwan issue, 
it is not surprising that [President] Obama decided not to meet with 
the Dalai Lama this time.  For the Ma Ying-jeou administration in 
Taiwan, cross-Strait relations are now in a relatively stable state; 
[such a development] could free Obama, who is now working on the 
U.S. health care and economic issues, from having to worry [about 
the Taiwan Strait].  Even though the Ma administration has being 
sending out strong signals showing [Taiwan's] interest in purchasing 
F16 C/D fighter jets by strengthening its lobbying in Washington 
D.C., via its legislative contacts, and having Ministry of National 
Defense officials attend the 'U.S.-Taiwan Defense Industry 
Conference', the Obama administration remains unmoved. 
 
"In addition to the afore-mentioned factors shaping the new 
U.S.-Taiwan strategic framework, the high-ranking U.S. officials are 
also concerned whether any new decision they make in terms of U.S. 
arms sales to Taiwan would jeopardize the current atmosphere in the 
Taiwan Strait, which, as a result, like the meeting with Dalai Lama 
now, will surely create uncertainty for the development of 
U.S.-China relations.  It seems evident that promises made by the Ma 
administration to the United States will not be able to remove such 
concerns [of Washington].  After all, U.S. arms sales to Taiwan have 
always been a major difference between Washington and Beijing.  On 
the other hand, the Obama administration was confused by Ma 
Ying-jeou's recent remarks on Taiwan's national defense policy.  For 
example, during a press conference in the wake of Typhoon Morakot, 
Ma said 'Taiwan's biggest enemy is no longer China but mother 
nature.'  Also, Ma directly announced before even consulting with 
the Ministry of National Defense that he had agreed to alter the 
number of Black Hawk helicopters that Taiwan decided to buy from the 
United States from 60 to 45 and use the money saved to buy rescue 
helicopters. ...  In any case, Ma's flip-flopping remarks in terms 
of strengthening Taiwan's self-defense capabilities have indeed 
conveyed a mixed message to Washington. 
 
It is either that the Ma administration is playing a two-handed 
strategy, or that Ma is, under the military's pressure, forced to 
change his previous attitude not to strengthen Taiwan's national 
defense.  Such unusual signals indicate that Ma's leadership, 
prestige and the foundation of his relations with the military are 
very fragile, and the impact of such fragility will not only weaken 
the awareness of Taiwan's national army of telling apart friend from 
foe but will also cause the international community to question the 
Taiwan government's determination to beef up its national defense 
capabilities. 
 
"Given all the factors above, the chances are slim that the Obama 
administration will announce that it will sell F16 C/D fighter jets 
to Taiwan next summer.  The only likelihood will be that the United 
States will announce its decision to sell other non-sensitive 
weapons to Taiwan just to placate the Ma administration." 
 
MADISON