09AITTAIPEI751
MEDIA REACTION: IRAN, U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Tue Jun 23 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0004
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0751/01 1740632
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 230632Z JUN 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1806
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 9258
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0684UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000751 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/P, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAN, U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused June 23 
news coverage on former President Chen Shui-bian's daughter, 
son-in-law, and son's admission of perjury in the case of 
embezzlement of the state affairs fund; on Taiwan's historically 
high 5.82 percent jobless rate; and on the controversy around the 
merger of some municipalities with their surrounding counties.  All 
four major Chinese-language newspapers and the three 
English-language newspapers carried reports with photos on the site 
dedication ceremony of the American Institute in Taiwan's future 
office compound. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, regarding the current 
post-election unrest in Iran, a column in the centrist, KMT-leaning 
"China Times" warned the United States that it must be cautious in 
dealing with current problems in Iran to avoid complicating its 
future relations with Iran.  The column criticized the U.S. State 
Department at the beginning of the article, saying that the State 
Department's alleged interference with the social networking service 
Twitter's plan to upgrade its service as a way to keep Iranians 
connected to the rest of the world via Internet is a very stupid 
method.  Concerning the relations among the United States, China and 
Taiwan, a column in the conservative, pro-unification, 
English-language "China Post" welcomed former United States Deputy 
Assistant Secretary of State Susan Shirk's recent remarks in Taipei. 
 Shirk said Washington is more than happy to see the recent 
improvement in cross-Strait relations.  The column further 
emphasized that improved cross-Strait relations will benefit the 
United States eventually.  End summary. 
 
¶3. Iran 
 
"The U.S. Should Be Very Cautious About the Iran Situation" 
 
The "International Lookout" column in the centrist, KMT-leaning 
"China Times" [circulation: 130,000] wrote (6/23): 
 
"The term, Twitter, all of a sudden is becoming popular in news.  It 
[Twitter] is a social networking website with a micro-blogging 
service as its main feature... It [Twitter] planned to upgrade its 
service and the U.S. State Department planned to provide assistance. 
 This is ready evidence of the United States' interference in Iran's 
election. ... 
 
"During the Cold War from the 1950s to 1990s, the United States had 
the 'Voice of America (VOA),' with its European Station and Asian 
Station, and used it to encourage peaceful evolution in Communist 
countries.  It was a tool of the CIA, which obviously interfered in 
other countries' domestic affairs.  However, with the advance of 
technology and the advent of the information age, the application of 
Internet is more powerful than radio broadcasting.  Furthermore, 
since the website [for Twitter] is not funded by the CIA, [the role 
of Twitter in Iran's election and post-election unrest] cannot be 
considered as interfering in the domestic affairs [of Iran, but] the 
State Department having a hand in Twitter's service upgrade was as 
stupid as it can be. ..." 
 
¶4. U.S.-China-Taiwan Relations 
 
"Improved Relations with China Benefit Not Just Us but U.S." 
 
Columnist William Fang wrote in the conservative, pro-unification, 
English-language "China Post" [circulation: 30,000] (6/23): 
 
"In a speech on U.S.-China relations delivered in Taipei on June 21, 
Dr. Susan Shirk, U.S. a former assistant secretary of state, said 
that the world has been impressed by China's pragmatic policy on 
China-Japan relations and the question of Taiwan.  She pointed out 
that Beijing's handling of the Taiwan issue strikes a sharp contrast 
with that of Tibet, indicating that it intends to further improve 
its image in the minds of the Taiwanese, a development that is also 
what Washington has long hoped for.  Shirk stressed that the United 
States is more than happy to see the recent improvement in the 
cross-strait relations because it will not only lower the 
possibility of a cross-strait military confrontation but also 
contribute to the establishment of a constructive 
Washington-Beijing-Taipei relationship.  Shirk's comments should be 
welcomed by all concerned as a refreshing spring breeze. ... 
 
"In this three-way relationship, Washington is certain to play a 
significant, and sometimes, decisive role.  It has long been 
asserted by some observers that the U.S., deep in its heart, 
supports an independent Taiwan because it is in its national 
interest to rely on the island as a staunch anti-Communist ally. 
Hence, it is wary of any progress in cross-strait ties. 
Washington's calculation is not difficult to understand.  But, this 
worry may not be quite justified as unification in any form may be a 
matter of the distant future. 
 
"Besides, America should also be concerned about the well-being of 
the over one-billion-strong Chinese people.  Is it the U.S. policy 
to befriend China in the hope that its influence may help move the 
country gradually away from totalitarianism toward democracy, which 
is supposed to be the best political system for all mankind, 
including the Chinese?  This is also the hope cherished by Taipei 
through an acceleration of cross-strait contacts." 
 
YOUNG