09AITTAIPEI648
MEDIA REACTION: NORTH KOREA, U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Wed Jun 03 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0005
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0648 1540910
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 030910Z JUN 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1672
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 9221
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0651UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000648 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: NORTH KOREA, U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage June 3 on President Ma Ying-jeou's trip in Central America, 
including the Ma Administration's latest foreign aid policies and 
his interaction with U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton; on two 
local companies' alleged insider trading; and on the exchange of 
harsh criticisms between Taiwan's National Communications Commission 
and the China Times Group over a recent NCC ruling concerning the 
ownership of the media group.  In terms of editorials and 
commentaries, a column in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" 
discussed North Korea's nuclear test.  The article urged Washington 
to stop detouring through Beijing and start to engage with Pyongyang 
fearlessly, saying this is the only to meet the most compelling 
interests of the two countries.  An op-ed piece in the 
pro-unification "United Daily News" discussed President Ma 
Ying-jeou's recent transit stops in the United States and bilateral 
relations.  The article said the Ma Administration's cross-Strait 
policy has made every party feel relieved, and with mutual trust 
restored between Taipei and Washington, the two sides can talk about 
almost anything.  End summary. 
 
¶2. North Korea 
 
"Build a Direct Route, Not a Beijing Detour" 
 
Apple Daily Publisher James Tu wrote in his column in the 
mass-circulation "Apple Daily" [circulation: 520,000] (6/3): 
 
"... Again, Pyongyang is causing trouble using its nuclear weapons 
and missiles, and all its moves are aimed at the United States. 
This is North Korea's typical 'courtship'; it may be coarse and 
rash, but absolutely there are signs that can be detected. 
Pyongyang hopes that Washington will offer economic aid, engage in 
dialogue, and eventually recognize North Korea.  But for a long 
time, the United States has outsourced its foreign relations with 
Pyongyang to China; Washington lacks the impetus [to deal with] 
North Korea, and it has never had a comprehensive policy concept 
[toward North Korea].  If Washington is willing to engage in 
dialogue with Iran and Cuba, why can it not do so with North Korea? 
For Pyongyang, Washington could engage with it in both a hard and a 
soft way.  Kim Jong Il's health is getting weaker since his stroke, 
and Pyongyang has started to make preparations for someone to take 
over his duties.  If Washington does not start to contact, engage or 
even have multilateral exchanges with North Korea in a timely 
manner, the influence the United States will be able to exercise 
should a great change happen in North Korea will be greatly reduced. 
 For now, Washington has always tried to have dealings with 
Pyongyang through Beijing, which, without a doubt, has increased 
Beijing's bargaining chips and reduced [the U.S.'s] prestige. 
Washington should stop its Beijing detour and start to build a 
direct route to Pyongyang fearlessly.  After all, a direct route 
will be [the only way] to meet the most compelling interests of both 
Pyongyang and Washington." 
 
3) U.S.-Taiwan Relations 
 
"Diplomatic Truce: Neither Side of the Taiwan Strait Wants to Be a 
Fathead" 
 
Professor Edward Chen from Tamkang University's Graduate Institute 
of American Studies, opined in the pro-unification "United Daily 
News" [circulation: 400,000] (6/3): 
 
"... Prior to his departure this time, President Ma only requested 
in a very low-profile manner to have a 'transit stop on the West 
Coast' of the United States en route to and back from [Central 
America]; he has never asked to transit the East Coast.  In return, 
the United States has not only agreed that [Ma] can expand his 
dinner party with overseas Taiwan people but also allowed Ma to meet 
with many Congressional representatives.  Washington has also said 
it is pondering [Taiwan's] proposal for an extradition agreement 
with the United States.  Additionally, Ma sat at the same dinner 
table with U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton in El Salvador, 
and the two reached a consensus that 'a stable cross-Strait 
relationship will do everyone good.' 
 
"The United States is willing to consider signing an extradition 
agreement with Taiwan mainly because the Ma Administration's 
cross-Strait policy has made every party feel relieved.  [For Ma,] a 
transit stop is simply a transit stop, and he did not make any 
extraordinary moves or anything that would surprise the United 
States.  With mutual trust restored, [both Taiwan and the United 
States] can talk about almost anything." 
 
YOUNG