09AITTAIPEI465
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Wed Apr 15 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0465/01 1051000
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 151000Z APR 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1407
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 9123
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0558UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000465 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused April 15 
news coverage on a New York Yankees' game with the Tampa Bay Rays 
Tuesday, in which the Yankees' Taiwan pitcher Wang Chien-ming 
suffered his worst setback with a 15-5 loss to the rival team; on 
developments in cross-Strait relations; on chaos in Thailand; and on 
the KMT's chairmanship elections this coming summer.  In terms of 
editorials and commentaries, an op-ed in the pro-independence, 
English-language "Taipei Times," written by former AIT chairman Nat 
Bellocchi, discussed U.S.-China-Taiwan relations.  The article 
concluded by saying that "one wonders whether it is wise to tie 
Taiwan's economy to what is now a faltering export-driven economy in 
China" and "whether the US Congress might seek to restrict trade 
with its largest importer and perhaps work for some gains for Taiwan 
in terms of recognition in the international community."  A separate 
"Taipei Times" editorial discussed Taiwan's possibly successful 
attempt to join the World Health Assembly as an observer this year. 
The article said that "Taiwan's participation at the health body 
would never be 'meaningful' if it became an instrument with which 
Beijing could make demands of the international community."  End 
summary. 
 
A) "Changes in Taiwan, China, US Ties" 
 
Nat Bellocchi, former chairman of AIT and a special adviser to the 
Liberty Times Group, opined in the pro-independence, 
English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 30,000] (4/15): 
 
"... Through the years, the TRA has helped maintain the 'status quo' 
in relations between Taiwan and China, as well as the US' 
relationship to both. However, it has done little to advance the 
cause of Taiwanese or their fight for a place in the world 
community.  The TRA anniversary is a good time to reflect on the 
status of trilateral relations. ...  During a visit to Taipei last 
month, American Institute in Taiwan Chairman Raymond Burghardt 
reiterated US support for Taiwan, but said that the level of 
cross-strait engagement should be decided by Taiwan and China. 
Washington will support Taiwan whenever it can in international 
bodies, he said, but would not mediate between the two sides. He 
added that military dialogue between Taiwan and the US would 
continue.  With the administration of President Ma Ying-jeou 
favoring closer ties with China, relations between the US, China and 
Taiwan have changed. ... 
 
"The Ma government has stated repeatedly that signing an EFCA with 
China is vital to Taiwan's competitiveness in the world market and 
that failing to do so would result in Taiwan being marginalized when 
China and ASEAN forms a trade bloc next year. The government, 
however, overlooks the fact that China has tried in every way to 
block Taiwan's efforts to sign free-trade agreements with other 
countries. ...  The ECFA issue in Taiwan is still not clear. Many 
Taiwanese are looking to the US - especially Congress - for support. 
...  However, one wonders whether it is wise to tie Taiwan's economy 
to what is now a faltering export-driven economy in China. Another 
question is whether the US Congress might seek to restrict trade 
with its largest importer and perhaps work for some gains for Taiwan 
in terms of recognition in the international community." 
 
B) "A Participant, Not a Beggar" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (4/14): 
 
"Based on a US State Department report leaked to this newspaper over 
the weekend and a report in the China Times yesterday, Taiwan may be 
on the brink of obtaining observer status at the World Health 
Assembly (WHA), the decision-making body of the WHO.  After many 
years of unsuccessful attempts to join either the WHO or at least 
the WHA, the US' charm offensive on Taipei's behalf, combined with 
Beijing's ostensible flexibility of late, is cause for satisfaction, 
as Taiwan may finally have a voice at and benefit from the global 
health body, thereby filling a senseless gap in the global health 
network.  As Taipei, Beijing, Washington and the WHO work on an 
agreement, one key element to keep an eye out for will be 
'compromise' -- often a euphemism for political gains by Beijing. 
... 
 
"One such compromise -- supported by the US, as the State Department 
report seems to indicate -- is the possibility that Taiwan's 
observer status at the WHA would be renewable on an annual basis. 
This would be a grave mistake, however, as it would put Beijing in a 
position to blackmail Taiwan and the US every time renewal is at 
hand. Each year, China could make demands of Taipei, Washington and 
the international community. To keep what it has, Taipei and its 
supporters would have to beg to China, while the latter could use 
the carrot of participation in the WHA to exert political influence. 
...  To prevent this potential subjugation from becoming reality, 
Taiwan's observer status at the WHA should be permanent and not 
subject to Beijing's whims.  Given the right of Taiwanese to have 
representation at the global health organization, observer status 
 
should not be used to give Beijing any leverage over Taiwan. ... 
Taiwan's participation at the health body would never be 
'meaningful' if it became an instrument with which Beijing could 
make demands of the international community. Condescending as the 
terminology is (who would want meaningless participation?), Taiwan's 
role at the WHA could amount to little more than self-harm if it 
were hostage to ulterior political motives." 
 
YOUNG