09AITTAIPEI61
2008 OVERSEAS SECURITY ADVISORY COUNCIL (OSAC)
Thu Jan 15 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
R 150931Z JAN 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 0749UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000061 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/IP/EAP, DS/DSS/OSAC, DS/TIA/ITA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT APER ASEC TW
SUBJECT: 2008 OVERSEAS SECURITY ADVISORY COUNCIL (OSAC) 
CRIME AND SAFETY REPORT 
 
REF: A. 08 STATE 132056 
     ¶B. 07 TAIPEI 00089 
 
 
¶1. (U) Responses are keyed to reftel A. 
 
¶I.  OVERALL CRIME AND SAFETY SITUATION:  The overall crime 
threat in Taiwan is LOW, with the majority of crime, like 
many large cities, occurring in downtown Taipei and other 
metropolitan areas.  The American Institute in Taiwan (AIT) 
is not aware of any specific threats directed against 
American citizens or U.S. Government personnel.  However, all 
visitors to Taiwan should be aware of the current worldwide 
travel advisories before undertaking travel to the region. 
 
Crime reports for the year 2008 revealed a significant 
increase in incidents of intimidation/extortion when compared 
to 2007. All other crime rates registered decreases, with 
violent crimes registering a decrease of 14%.  While Taiwan 
has a significant law enforcement presence, travelers should 
exercise caution and pay particular attention to personal 
belongings while in crowded areas like night markets and while 
traveling on public transportation.  As a gauge, visitors 
should take precautions similar to that of any major 
metropolitan city in the United States, using a common sense 
approach to travel around Taiwan. 
 
Public Transportation in Taiwan is safe and efficient.  Road 
maintenance in Taiwan is good, however city roads are 
generally narrow and congested and the traffic situation can 
be dangerous for both pedestrians and drivers.  The many 
scooters and motorcycles that weave in and out of traffic 
further hamper driving conditions.  Visitors are encouraged 
to wear seat belts, refrain from riding motorcycles or 
scooters and to use caution when crossing local streets and 
alleys.  It is also noteworthy to know that taxis in Taiwan 
seldom have working seat belts in the backseat.  When 
crossing streets, the pedestrian does not automatically have 
the "right of way" in Taiwan.  Mountain roads are typically 
narrow, winding, and poorly banked, and may become impassable 
by mudslides after heavy rains or flash floods. 
 
 
II.  POLITICAL VIOLENCE:  AIT is not aware of any specific 
threats directed against American citizens or U.S. Government 
personnel in Taiwan.  However, all visitors should be aware 
of the current worldwide travel advisories before undertaking 
travel to the region.  Visitors should obtain the latest 
advisories and travel warnings via the internet at 
http://www.travel.state.gov/.  There are no known indigenous 
terrorist groups operating in Taiwan.  War and civil unrest 
are non-existent in Taiwan.  On occasion, sporadic 
demonstrations do occur, but most often in larger 
metropolitan areas.  These demonstrations are almost always 
peaceful.  There have been very few cases of violence 
associated with demonstrations but even peaceful protests 
can turn confrontational. 
 
Visitors are cautioned to avoid large crowds and 
demonstrations, and use vigilance in their daily travels 
around Taiwan. 
 
 
III.  POST SPECIFIC CONCERNS:  Taiwan is subject to strong 
earthquakes that can occur anywhere throughout the island. 
In recent years, Taiwan has recorded several earthquakes at 
or above 6.0 on the Richter scale each year.  Taiwan is also 
subject to typhoons, usually in the July to October time 
frame.  Travelers planning a trip to Taiwan can obtain 
general information about natural disaster preparedness via 
the internet from the U.S. Federal Emergency Management 
Agency (FEMA) at http://www.fema.gov/.  Additional 
information about currently active typhoons can be obtained 
on the University of Hawaii Tropical Storm webpage at 
http://www.solar.ifa.hawaii.edu/Tropical/trop ical.html.  The 
Central Weather Bureau of Taiwan also maintains a website 
that provides information about typhoons and earthquakes at 
http://www.cwb.gov.tw. 
 
 
IV.  POLICE RESPONSE:  The general evaluation of police 
support and response to foreigners who are victims of crime 
is considered very good. The police are professionally 
trained.  The National Police Agency maintains a 
Foreign Affairs Police division that is responsible for all 
foreigners traveling or residing in Taiwan.  There are 
numerous police sub-stations strategically located throughout 
the various districts and communities of Taiwan.  All have a 
Foreign Affairs Police officer assigned to aid foreigners and 
assist with law enforcement matters.  Only a limited number 
of these officers are fluent in English though.  The local 
police/fire emergency telephone number is 110 (similar to 
dialing 911 in the U.S.).  In the Taipei metropolitan area, 
the Foreign Affairs Police do maintain a 24-hour English 
capable officer who can be reached at 02-2556-6007.  In 
Kaohsiung call (07)281-5019.  For all other cities dial 
(02)2394-0238. 
 
 
¶V.  MEDICAL EMERGENCIES:  For emergency medical assistance 
dial 119 from any phone in Taiwan. 
 
Some recommended medical facilities in Taiwan are: 
 
-Taiwan Adventist Hospital (Taipei) - (02)2771-8151. 
 
-Chang Gung Memorial Hospital (Kaohsiung) - (07)731-7123. 
 
For further information on medical facilities in Taiwan please 
look at the following website: 
www.ait.org.tw/en/uscitizens/healthcareintw.a sp 
 
 
VI.  TRAVEL PRECAUTIONS:  You can greatly reduce your chance 
of being victimized by following these basic security 
precautions: 
 
-Keep a low personal profile.  Avoid ostentatious displays of 
money or wealth. 
 
-Be alert to your surroundings. 
 
-Avoid high crime areas and business establishments like 
brothels, massage parlors, illegal "barbershops" and 
"nightclubs" which are frequented by prostitutes.  Many of 
these establishments are run by criminals. 
 
-Avoid disputes with local citizens, especially in bars or 
nightclubs. 
 
-At night, travel on well lighted streets and avoid deserted 
streets or alleyways. 
 
 
VII.  FURTHER INFORMATION:  The American Institute in Taiwan 
(AIT) is a non-profit organization established by Congress 
shortly after the United States government changed its 
diplomatic recognition from Taipei to Beijing on 1 January, 
¶1979.  The Taiwan Relations Act authorized the continuation 
of commercial, cultural and other relations between the 
United States and Taiwan.  AIT is organized along the lines 
similar to those of a foreign service post and undertakes the 
usual wide range of activities representing U.S. interests. 
 
The Regional Security Officer (RSO) is David R. EBERHARDT and 
he is available to provide additional security information 
and guidance to U.S. firms and their employees.  The Assistant 
Regional Security Officer is Marcella E. PHELPS and is also 
available to answer any other security related questions. 
The Regional Security Office can be reached at 
(886-2)2162-2333. 
 
Other AIT contact numbers: 
 
-Medical Unit (886-2)2162-2222 
 
-Consular Section (886-2)2162-2239 
 
-Political Section (886-2)2162-2241 
 
-Economic Section (886-2)2162-2240 
 
-Post One (886-2)2162-2319 
 
 
VIII.  OSAC COUNCIL:  AIT-Taipei has an OSAC Country 
Council. Point of Contact is RSO David R. EBERHARDT and can be 
reached at (886-2)2162-2333 or at EberhardtDR@state.gov. 
 
 
SYOUNG