09AITTAIPEI881
MEDIA REACTION: NORTH KOREA, PAKISTAN
Wed Jul 22 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0881/01 2030948
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 220948Z JUL 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1978
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 9291
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0724UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000881 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/P, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: NORTH KOREA, PAKISTAN 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage July 22 on a security breach in Taiwan's Presidential 
Office in late June; on the solar eclipse that happened on the 
morning of the 22nd; and on developments in cross-Strait relations. 
In terms of editorials and commentaries, a column in the centrist, 
KMT-leaning "China Times" discussed the Obama administration's 
policy toward North Korea.  The article said the proposed 
'comprehensive package' approach to solve the nuclear issue on the 
Korean Peninsula is no different from gambling, which will only make 
tension on the Korean Peninsula go on and on.  With regard to the 
United States and Pakistan, a column in the mass-circulation "Apple 
Daily" said that without Pakistan's help, Afghanistan will 
eventually become a quagmire that will trap U.S. President Barack 
Obama.  End summary. 
 
¶2. North Korea 
 
"Obama's Gambling Game over North Korea's Nuclear Issue" 
 
The "International Lookout" column in the centrist, KMT-leaning 
"China Times" [circulation: 120,000] wrote (7/22): 
 
"... Why was Pyongyang so anxious to launch a nuclear test and 
test-fire its ballistic missiles?  It was because Pyongyang knows 
that there is a big gap between itself and the United States.  North 
Korea had awaited a [new U.S.] policy after [President Barack] Obama 
took over the helm, but it discovered afterwards that Obama's policy 
toward North Korea's nuclear issue was even tougher than that of 
[former President] Bush, and that the establishment of diplomatic 
ties [between the two countries] and a security mechanism on the 
Korean Peninsula are nothing but a dream.  What is the point then 
[for Pyongyang] to walk a long way and gain nothing in the end?  The 
Obama administration's decision to transfer [former Assistant 
Secretary of State Christopher] Hill was already an omen, and the 
appointment of pro-Japan Kurt Campbell to be the new Assistant 
Secretary was no different from strengthening the United States' 
relations with Japan and South Korea to work jointly against North 
Korea. 
 
"According to the United States, North Korea has no intention at all 
to abandon its nuclear programs, yet it has pretended to talk [with 
other countries] so as to net real benefits for itself before it 
canceled all the agreements.  [Pyongyang] has been constantly acting 
shamelessly, [the United States said].  But in reality, since the 
beginning of the Six-Party talks, how many 'real benefits' has 
Pyongyang got?  Why not let Hill do the math?  'Being removed from 
the U.S. list of countries supporting terrorism' was fundamentally a 
result of secret negotiations between the two sides outside of the 
[Six-Party] talks; such secret meetings were held in Berlin as well 
as in Singapore.  The United States was removing [Pyongyang] from 
the blacklist on the one hand, while on the other hand it was 
strengthening sanctions against it.  North Korea saved its face but 
lost more substantive interests. 
 
"Washington, Tokyo and Seoul are now saying that such an approach to 
talks would not work and they want to adopt 'a comprehensive 
package' approach.  To put it more bluntly, this is gambling -- 
gambling to see which side has the better cards, and the results are 
immediate and clear.  [The new approach] either works or fails, and 
tension over North Korea's nuclear issue will only go on and on. 
The United States finds such a gambling game worth a try, because 
severe sanctions would make it very difficult for Pyongyang to break 
free, and the chances are that it will likely yield once heavier 
pressure were placed on it to talk.  The United States has a firm 
belief that 'North Korea has no alternative but to return to the 
negotiating table.'  Let's just wait and see." 
 
¶3. Pakistan 
 
"Battles Fought to Show Other People" 
 
Apple Daily Publisher James Tu wrote in his column in the 
mass-circulation "Apple Daily" [circulation: 520,000] (7/22): 
 
"Pakistan's army recently fought a civil war, which lasted for a 
total one month. ...  Objectively speaking, Pakistan was compelled 
by the United States to launch such a battle.  The Taliban is 
expanding rapidly in the northwestern part [of Pakistan], but 
Pakistan seldom pays attention to it.  The president of Pakistan 
merely touched on the situation lightly, while Pakistani military 
leaders have been acting indifferently [to it].  It is the United 
States which is really worried.  Washington believes that the 
Taliban in Pakistan has linked together with the Taliban in 
Afghanistan, resulting in the constant setbacks suffered by the NATO 
military [forces] in Afghanistan.  Washington is also worried that 
the nuclear weapons deployed near Islamabad will fall into the hands 
of Taliban.  Due to United States coercion and inducements, Pakistan 
finally sent its troops into the battle. ... 
"The United States needs Pakistan's cooperation to fight the war in 
Afghanistan, but Pakistan's strategic interests differ greatly from 
those of the United States.  [President] Obama is anxious to achieve 
military success in Afghanistan, but unfortunately, if Washington 
cannot persuade Pakistan [into doing what it wants], Afghanistan 
will be doomed to be a deadlock.  It will eventually become a 
quagmire that will trap Obama deeply and he will find it hard to 
extricate himself." 
 
WANG