09AITTAIPEI333
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS
Tue Mar 24 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0022
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0333 0830918
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 240918Z MAR 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1201
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 9046
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0487UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000333 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
March 24 news coverage on the island's unemployment rate, which 
surged to a new high of 5.75 percent in February; and on the 
Government Information Office's (GIO) decision Tuesday to fire one 
of its Toronto-based officials for writing online articles smearing 
Taiwan and Taiwan people.  In terms of editorials and commentaries, 
a column in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" discussed China's 
plan to build its own aircraft carriers.  The article said the move 
will surely keep China's neighbors on their toes.  An editorial in 
the conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
continued to discuss the recent naval confrontation between the 
United States and China in the South China Sea and follow-on 
developments.  The article said those responsible for the marine 
survey vessel of Columbia University "should secure Beijing's 
consent to ensure no problems arise.  They should also tackle 
concerns about possible effects on marine life raised by some green 
groups in Asia."  End summary. 
 
A) "China's Big Dream of [Building] Aircraft Carriers" 
 
Columnist Antonio Chiang wrote in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" 
[circulation: 520,000] (3/24): 
 
"... Judging from the military perspective, the costs for [building] 
an aircraft carrier and its real effects are so disproportionate 
that they are beyond comparison.  Should any conflict break out in 
the Taiwan Strait, Beijing will not have to resort to its aircraft 
carrier.  But once it possesses an aircraft carrier, in a short 
range it can break through the second island chain, while in the 
longer range it can turn the South China Sea into China's 
territorial waters upon which no one can encroach, and its power of 
intimidation will go beyond the Strait of Malacca and reach the 
marine channel of the Indian Ocean. 
 
"Beijing's building its own aircraft carriers will surely keep all 
its neighboring countries on their toes.  The U.S.-Japan security 
alliance will bear the first brunt, and without a doubt, Japan will 
strengthen its submarine combat capabilities and the intensity of 
its lobbying to purchase F-22 fighter jets from the United States. 
It will also beef up its anti-submarine combat capabilities and 
incorporate into [its] defense plan guidelines the factor of China 
building aircraft carriers. ..." 
 
B) "U.S. Ship vs. U.N., PRC Laws" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (3/24): 
 
"A U.S. survey vessel is risking another confrontation in the waters 
around China when it arrives in the region this week -- less than a 
month after a standoff near Hainan Island between Chinese patrol 
boats and a U.S. Navy surveillance ship. ...  The marine survey 
vessel has impeccable scientific credentials.  There is no doubt the 
survey off Taiwan and the southern mainland is genuine and 
scientifically valid.  But operating within China's exclusive 
economic zone (EEZ) without permission is provocation.  The ship's 
visit could be even more provocative than the USNS Impeccable's 
mission that led to the recent standoff. 
 
"Beijing's stance on its EEZ over the Impeccable incident should 
give the Columbia University scientists pause for thought.  Right or 
wrong, it has accused the U.S. of violating international and 
Chinese laws by conducting surveillance in its exclusive zone. 
Those responsible for the Langseth survey shuld secure Beijing's 
consent to ensure no problems arise.  They should also tackle 
concerns about possible effects on marine life raised by some green 
groups in Asia. ..." 
 
YOUNG