09AITTAIPEI499
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Mon Apr 27 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0007
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0499 1170750
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 270750Z APR 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1454
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 9135
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0573UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000499 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused April 
25-27 news coverage on the third round of negotiations between 
Taiwan's Straits Exchange Foundation (SEF) and China's Association 
for Relations across the Taiwan Strait (ARATS) in Nanjing, China 
over the weekend and the three agreement signed between the two 
sides; on the swine flu outbreak in Mexico and the United States; 
and on a crane crash accident in Taipei last Friday, which killed 
two and injured three Chinese tourists.  In terms of editorials and 
commentaries, a column in the pro-unification "United Daily News" 
discussed a recent digital video conference (DVC) held between 
President Ma Ying-jeou and the Washington-based Center for Strategic 
and International Studies celebrating the thirtieth anniversary of 
the Taiwan Relations Act (TRA).  The article said the DVC "has not 
only cleverly involved the United States in the interaction 
framework across the Taiwan Strait but also implicitly contained 
unique strategic thinking on national security."  End summary. 
 
"Overtones behind the Taiwan-U.S. Digital Video Conference" 
 
Journalist Lee Ming-hsien noted in the "United Notes" column in the 
pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] (4/25): 
 
"While both sides of the Taiwan Strait were busy preparing talks 
with each other, the Ma Ying-jeou Administration had been hosting a 
series of activities [celebrating] the [thirtieth anniversary of 
the] Taiwan Relations Act (TRA), including a digital video 
conference (DVC) with the Center for Strategic and International 
Studies, an important think tank based in Washington D.C.  The move 
has not only cleverly involved the United States in the interaction 
framework across the Taiwan Strait but also implicitly contained 
unique strategic thinking on national security.   Having undergone 
the 'break-in' period for several months, a stable structure for 
[relations among] the United States, China and Taiwan has gradually 
taken shape -- just as [National Security Council Secretary-General] 
Su Chi described, 'a regular triangle has been formed.'  In other 
words, issues concerning national defense, cross-Strait and foreign 
relations must be conducted under such a structure, and none of the 
three sides will be happy to see any mishaps. ... 
 
"For Taipei, its strategic thinking in terms of national security is 
'to net as many interests as possible, quietly' -- namely, to vie 
for the greatest possible substantive interests for Taiwan under the 
stable Washington-Beijing-Taipei triangular structure.  Even 
[Taipei's] bid to become an observer in the World Health Assembly 
(WHA) in May is being conducted in a low-profile manner.  Through 
the interaction and the DVC between Taiwan and the United States, 
the Ma Administration conveyed the message to [people on] the island 
that 'reconciliation and diplomatic truce across the Taiwan Strait 
is the trend of the time,' refuting a pro-China policy, as the Green 
camp has accused.  [Former AIT Director] Douglas Paal also held the 
same opinion, which was tantamount to strong support for the 
cross-Strait policy of the Ma Administration.  In addition, the move 
to highlight the Taiwan Relations Act (TRA) via various activities 
was akin to declaring that, in addition to the three U.S.-China 
communiques, sitting on the other side of the scale is the TRA.  The 
TRA is not only a legal document but also a political commitment 
Washington made to Taipei, which will maintain a stable triangular 
structure on the foundation of 'one act and three communiques.' 
 
"While both sides of the Taiwan Strait are entering a time of 
intense talks, politics will unavoidably be touched upon, no matter 
whether the talks are between Taiwan's Straits Exchange Foundation 
(SEF) and China's Association for Relations across the Taiwan Strait 
(ARATS), about the Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement (ECFA), 
the WHA, a military confidence-building mechanism or a peace pact 
between the two sides.  With TRA reinforced, it would be akin to 
building a defensive mechanism for cross-Strait talks. Washington, 
[on the other hand,] remains as a stable force behind the talks 
across the Taiwan Strait.  The hotline conversation between [former 
U.S. President George W.] Bush and Chinese President Hu Jintao last 
year served as a turning point for both sides of the Taiwan Strait 
to resume dialogue.  In the future, when it comes to the various 
exchanges between the two sides of the Taiwan Strait, Washington 
will continue to provide steady support for Taiwan under the 
framework of the TRA.  Such were the overtones that the Ma 
Administration was trying to convey to Beijing." 
 
YOUNG