09ANKARA686
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Tue May 12 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1947
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0686/01 1321025
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 121025Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9631
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0025
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5727
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3831
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7293
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7171
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3749
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000686 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
TUESDAY, MAY 12, 2009 
 
IN TODAY'S PAPERS 
 
"The German Model" Suggested for the Kurdish Initiative 
Mainstream Sabah reports that the government is working on a "German 
model" regarding initiatives toward the Kurdish issue.  Sabah quotes 
"an unnamed senior official who participates in National Security 
Council meetings," as saying, "The new move proposes that citizens 
of Kurdish origin in Turkey should be given the same rights as 
Turkish citizens living in Germany."  As an example, Sabah lists the 
steps to be undertaken as follows:  Turks in Germany are free to use 
Turkish names, so Kurds will be allowed to use Kurdish names 
containing the letters "w", "x" and "q"; Turks in Germany are free 
to learn their own language, so students in Turkey should be allowed 
to take optional Kurdish language classes; Turks in Germany enjoy 
religious freedom and the freedom of association, so Kurds in Turkey 
should enjoy the same rights; and finally, because Turks in Germany 
have Turkish language TV and radio broadcasts, the obstacles 
blocking Kurdish language broadcasts in Turkey should be removed. 
 
Editorial Commentary on the Kurdish Problem 
 
Murat Yetkin wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "Interior 
Minister Atalay's approach is good enough to maintain hopes for 
resolving the Kurdish problem.  The way Atalay described the recent 
statements from the PKK leadership indicates that Ankara may even 
consider making the PKK a part of the solution process." 
 
Cengiz Candar wrote in business daily Referans: "Given the recent 
messages, it is obvious that PKK militants are ready and eager to 
leave the armed struggle.  Achieving this endeavor will require them 
to find a formula for political action and courage." 
 
Mehmet Yilmaz wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "There is an ongoing 
optimism amid government circles and the presidency that now is the 
time to solve the Kurdish problem.  If this view is true, we should 
be able to see a plan for democratization with full parliamentary 
support.  However, no efforts along these lines are happening, and 
moreover there is no sign of political will.  It looks like the 
so-called 'Kurdish initiative' is doomed to remain as merely 
lipservice." 
 
Ali Bayramoglu wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "Resolving the 
Kurdish issue requires us to think outside the box.  We have tried 
to separate the Kurds from the PKK before in order to address the 
problem, but this did not quite work.  There are many examples 
around the world that can serve as a model to solve the issue. 
Taking the PKK into account in the solution process might be one 
possible approach." 
 
Government to Set up New Coordination Body for Counter Terrorism 
Cumhuriyet, Vatan, Sabah, Zaman, Yeni Safak, Radikal:  Today's 
papers report that Interior Minister Besir Atalay announced plans to 
establish a new agency in order to coordinate efforts in the fight 
against terrorism.  Minister Atalay said, "The Undersecretariat for 
Public Order and Security will not have any operational functions, 
instead, it will form a strategy and pass it to the decision 
makers."  The new agency "will have broad powers and authority and 
it will be able to ask for any information and documents from the 
General Staff, the Foreign Ministry, the National Intelligence 
Agency, the Gendarmerie and the Police department," notes mainstream 
Vatan. 
 
Agreement to be Reached in June on Nabucco Gas Pipeline 
Mainstreams Hurriyet and Milliyet report that an official from the 
EU said "The partners of the Nabucco pipeline project are expected 
to sign a deal on June 25 in Ankara."  The deal on the Nabucco 
pipeline project will come as an alternative route to Russian 
pipelines that run through Ukraine to Europe.  The Nabucco pipeline 
will carry natural gas to European markets from the Caspian basin, 
the Middle East and Central Asia via Turkey.  Milliyet notes that 
 
ANKARA 00000686  002 OF 003 
 
 
Turkey backed down on transit fees and discount issues with Nabucco, 
and the gas project is supported by both Europe and the USA. 
 
Iraqi President Talabani to Visit Qandil 
Mainstream Sabah cites Firat News Agency to report that, prior to 
Iraqi President Jalal Talabani's visit to PKK leaders in Qandil, 
U.S. forces have deployed some troops and tanks in the area. 
Reportedly around 1000 troops, including peshmerge and U.S. troops 
were deployed around Kuzine village in Qandil and U.S. tanks are 
accompanying the troops. 
 
The U.S. Changes Commander in Afghanistan 
Media report that Army Lieutenant-General Stanley McChrystal has 
been recommended to replace David McKiernan as the U.S. commander of 
its forces in Afghanistan. Mainstream Milliyet reports, "A New 
Commander is Appointed in Afghanistan," and notes, "this surprising 
change comes after intense reactions to a U.S. airstrike in which 
many civilians were killed."  Liberal Radikal reports, "The U.S. 
changed command in Afghanistan out of what Secretary Gates called 'a 
need for a new approach and for new military leadership.'" 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "Secretary Gates notes this change 
comes at a time when there is a need for a new approach to the 
struggle against the Taliban." 
 
Who Used White Phosphorous in Afghanistan? 
Today, media is largely implying that the white phosphorous that was 
allegedly used in an attack on civilians last week was used by the 
U.S., not the Taliban, and also imply that this may be linked to the 
change of command announced yesterday. Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak 
reports in "Phosphorous Was Used in Afghanistan," that "After U.S. 
war planes killed more than one hundred civilians during airstrikes 
in two villages, claims have emerged that phosphorous bombs were 
used in the attack," but the paper does not mention the Pentagon's 
claim that the Taliban used white phosphorous, but instead notes 
that "the U.S. commander in Afghanistan was changed following the 
attack."  Mainstream Sabah headlines, "The U.S. Launched Banned 
White Phosphorous Bombs" and reports "After last week's shocking 
U.S. air strike against a village that killed 147 civilians, now 
frightening claims are being made about the attack," and, "The U.S. 
claims that they do not use phosphorous, and that the Taliban may 
have used phosphorous," but "human rights groups noted that in 2004 
white phosphorous was used in the U.S. attack on Falluja."  Liberal 
Radikal reports, "The controversy deepens over last week's U.S. 
attack on a village in Afghanistan" over "who used white phosphorous 
in the attack," as "The U.S. accuses the Taliban of using white 
phosphorous."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports in, 
"Suspicions of White Phosphorous in Taliban Operations," that "The 
U.S. Defense Spokesperson said the U.S. does not use white 
phosphorous." 
 
Iran Frees U.S. Journalists Roxana Saberi 
Most media are reporting Roxana Saberi's release from an Iranian 
prison in a straightforward manner, with some saying her release was 
a gesture from Iran to the U.S.  Mainstream Haberturk reports, "A 
Saberi Gesture from Iran to the U.S." and notes, "Obama's 
intervention in Saberi's case is thought to have affected the 
court's decision to release her."  Mainstream Milliyet headlines, 
"Obama's First Victory," as "Barack Obama wanted the woman 
journalist released," and "she was set free yesterday." Liberal 
Radikal headlines, "Iran Says 'The U.S. Is Not An Enemy Country,' 
and Releases Saberi." Mainstream Sabah reports simply, "An American 
Journalist Is Freed." 
 
The Pope's Visit to Israel is Met with Controversy 
Media note that the Pope's visit to Israel this week is marked by 
protests over his past membership to the Nazi youth wing and his 
support for an independent Palestinian state.  Mainstream Haberturk 
reports, "The Pope Makes Israel Tense," noting "he wants an 
independent Palestinian state."  Mainstream Sabah headlines, "The 
Pope Gives Support to A Palestinian State."  Leftist-nationalist 
 
ANKARA 00000686  003 OF 003 
 
 
Cumhuriyet headlines, "The Pope's Most Sensitive Summit," and claims 
"In Israel, homosexuals, holocaust survivors, and the far right are 
all on the same side against the Pope's visit to Israel."  In "A 
'Nazi Pope' Mutiny in The Sacred Lands," mainstream Vatan reports, 
"The Pope's five-day visit to Israel was greeted with protests," in 
which demonstrators called him the "Nazi Pope" due to "his 
membership in the Nazi party during his youth."  Meanwhile, 
Islamist-oriented Zaman calls the visit, "The Pope's Olive Branch to 
Jews." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-Azerbaijan 
 
Erdal Safak wrote in mainstream Sabah: "Baku wants to hear directly 
from PM Erdogan that Nagorno Karabakh is a precondition for the 
normalization of ties between Ankara and Yerevan.  There have been 
similar statements from Ankara but these statements have not 
eliminated the dark clouds on bilateral ties.  It looks like the 
main goal of PM Erdogan's trip to Baku today is to fully comfort 
Baku." 
 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
-  Prime Minister Erdogan goes to Azerbaijan today at 18.00. 
 
- FM Davutoglu met with UN Secretary General Ban-Ki-Moon, UK Foreign 
Secretary and French Foreign Minister in New York.  During his 
speech at the UN, he issued a call to revitalize the Middle East 
peace process. 
 
- Nine Mortar shells mistakenly fell on Turkish soil in Hakkari on 
Monday after Iranian soldiers opened fire on PJAK positions in 
northern Iran. 
 
- Turkish General Staff announced that bodies of five terrorists 
were found in a cave in Sirnak. 
 
- Salt-Lake 2009 Military exercises were held in Sereflikochisar 
which were observed by the TGS Chief, force commanders and 27 
foreign military attaches. 
 
World 
 
-  A US soldier shoots to death five of his fellow troops at a 
stress clinic in Baghdad. 
 
-  China has confirmed its first case of Swine flu on the Chinese 
mainland. 
 
JEFFREY