09ANKARA922
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Tue Jun 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO2246
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0922/01 1811022
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 301022Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0051
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0135
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5930
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3961
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7392
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7281
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3861
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000922 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
TUESDAY, JUNE 30, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
PM Erdogan and TGS Chief General Basbug Meet Ahead of Security 
Council Meeting 
All papers:  PM Erdogan and General Basbug held a tete-a-tete 
meeting on Monday.  Papers call the meeting "an emergency meeting" 
prior to a National Security Council (NSC) meeting today. 
Mainstream Sabah reports that Erdogan and Basbug met to discuss the 
controversy about an alleged plan against religious fundamentalism 
and new regulations permitting civilian courts to take up charges 
against military suspects.  The meeting lasted for one hour and 35 
minutes and no statement was made after the meeting.  Mainstream 
Hurriyet says Basbug emphasized three points during the meeting: the 
alleged coup plan in question was not prepared by TGS, the draft 
bill allowing civilian courts to try military officials is creating 
concern in the army, and the intelligence service must find the 
source of the "ugly defamation campaign" against the army. 
Meanwhile, Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports Erdogan told Basbug 
"the regulation allowing civilian courts to try military officials 
is important to EU harmonization," and "is a source of concern for 
EU officials." 
 
Editorial Commentary 
Deniz Zeyrek wrote in liberal Radikal: "TGS Chief Ilker Basbug's 
remarks during his press conference Friday indicate the National 
Security Council (MGK) will discuss the coup controversy, the fight 
against terror, talks in Cyprus, and developments in Iran, Iraq, 
Afghanistan and Pakistan. While the MGK is holding a critical 
meeting, U.S. CENTCOM Commander, General David Petreaus, is coming 
to Turkey. Turkey wants to continue to cooperate with the U.S. to 
end PKK presence in Iraq and to destroy PKK camps in the Kandil 
Mountains. Meanwhile, General Petreaus will bring concrete plans 
regarding Afghanistan and Pakistan to the agenda." 
 
Bilal Cetin of mainstream Vatan writes: "The General Staff and the 
government are divided by deep disagreements about a controversial 
plan to fight religious fundamentalism.  The PM describes the 
alleged plan as "a document" while the TGS Chief calls it "just a 
piece of paper."  Apparently, the PM and the military do not trust 
each other and neither party is likely to persuade the other to 
abandon the debates about the alleged coup plot." 
 
President Gul Comments on the Controversial New Law Allowing 
Civilian Courts to Prosecute Military Officials 
Aksam, Hurriyet, Sabah, Cumhuriyet, Radikal, Vatan, Zaman:Turkish 
President Abdullah Gul said Monday that legal experts of the 
presidency were examining the amendment passed by the Parliament on 
Friday that allows for trials of military personnel before civil 
courts. Turkish Government Spokesman, State Minister and Deputy 
Prime Minister Cemil Cicek said it was up to the President to 
approve or disapprove the law on the trial of military personnel. At 
his arrival in Ankara after his formal visit to China, President Gul 
told reporters that he would not make his decision based on 
politics. "Our legal departments are examining in detail bills 
passed by the parliament. If we see any contradiction to the 
constitution, then we will send it back to the parliament to be 
debated once again. Our experts are working on it right now," Gul 
said.   Gul also warned against steps that would "place Turkey in a 
state of emergency," by threatening Turkey's democratic regime. 
 
Education Minister Cubukcu: "No Mature Decision on the Halki 
Seminary Yet" 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports that in response to questions of 
journalists yesterday, Education Minister Nimet Cubukcu said "a 
political decision needs to be made in order to solve the 
controversy about Halki Seminary.  When the government makes a 
political decision on the issue, it will be announced by the Prime 
Minister or the Government Spokesman.  There is no matured political 
decision on the issue yet."  The Seminary has been closed for 38 
years.   Hurriyet says the Fener Patriarch wants to restore the 
seminary's status to the level it was prior to 1971.  Before 1971, 
 
ANKARA 00000922  002 OF 003 
 
 
the seminary was a private school administered by the Education 
Ministry. 
 
Turkey and the EU Open Talks on Taxation 
Mainstream Sabah reports that the seventh meeting of the Turkey-EU 
Accession Conference at ministerial level will be held in Brussels 
on Tuesday, the Turkish Foreign Ministry said in a statement. 
Turkish State Minister & Chief EU Negotiator Egemen Bagis will 
represent Turkey at the meeting, the ministry said on Monday. Turkey 
and the European Union are set to start negotiations over a policy 
chapter on taxation as part of their talks aimed making Turkey a 
member of the 27-nation bloc. The chapter on taxation would be the 
eleventh of a total of 33 chapters. 
 
DAS Bryza Meets TRNC President Talat 
CNN Turk reported that Cypriot Leader Mehmet Ali Talat received 
Matthew J. Bryza, U.S. Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for 
European and Eurasian Affairs, in Nicosia Monday. Speaking to 
reporters following his meeting with Talat, Bryza said that he had a 
"very constructive" meeting with Talat. "An agreement reached in 
Cyprus would help all of our strategic interests," Bryza stressed. 
Congratulating the two communities of Cyprus for opening the 
Yesilirmak Gate, Bryza said that this was "an encouraging step."  "I 
believe that the opening of the Yesilirmak Gate will lead to new 
energy and excitement on the part of the two communities," Bryza 
said. Bryza said he hoped that "the energy created by the opening of 
the Yesilirmak Gate will reflect on the negotiations in the island" 
and that the leaders reach an agreement by the end of the (current) 
year. 
 
Holiday in Iraq! (Milliyet) 
Media draw attention to the celebrations in Baghdad and throughout 
Iraq today to celebrate the withdrawal of U.S. forces from cities. 
In "American Soldiers Are Withdrawing from Cities," mainstream 
Haberturk reports, "In the sixth year of the U.S. invasion of Iraq, 
today U.S. forces begin their withdrawal from city centers," and 
"now the Iraqi government will take responsibility for national 
security."  Mainstream CNN Turk reports, "Today feasts and festivals 
will be held in towns and cities all over the country," to mark "the 
long-awaited withdrawal of U.S. forces and the turnover of 
responsibility for security to Iraqi forces."  Fikret Ertan of 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "Today will be  a very historic day 
for Iraq," as "President Maliki has declared the day a holiday" and 
"we hope that Iraq will be successful in maintaining its own 
security" as "American forces have occupied Iraq since March 2003 
and today they will begin to withdraw from cities."  He also notes, 
"Today is like a double holiday for some Iraqis" as "it also marks 
the 89th anniversary of Iraq's independence from England." 
 
Recount in Iran 
Media note the partial recount in Iran did little to ease the 
tensions following the June 12th elections.  Mainstream Sabah 
reports in "The Final Official Decision in Iran: Ahmadinejad Is The 
Victor of The Elections," that "The Guardian Council, in response to 
bloody street protests against the election results, have reached 
the final point in the June 12th elections," and "for the second 
time, Ahmadinejad has officially won the election." 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet criticizes today's recount in various 
locations, "A Random Recount in Iran," as "only ten percent of the 
votes were recounted."  Mainstream Hurriyet reports, "The votes were 
recounted, the results were the same," as "Ahmadinejad was declared 
the winner."  Liberal Radikal reports, "The tension in the streets 
continues despite the regime's iron-fisted response" against the 
protestors, but President Ahmadinejad "wants an investigation into 
Neda's death."  In a related story, Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak 
headlines, "Did The CIA Kill Neda?" as "The Tehran administration 
suggests the CIA killed Neda intentionally in front of the cameras," 
and "the bullet used to kill her is not used by the security 
forces." 
 
U.S. Not Pleased With Turkey's Response to Iranian Elections.  Ahu 
 
ANKARA 00000922  003 OF 003 
 
 
Ozyurt of mainstream Milliyet reports from Washington, "Sources in 
the State Department say the U.S. is not happy with Turkey's 
response to the Iranian elections," as "it is understood that Turkey 
is in a special situation as Iran's neighbor," but "Turkey was among 
the first countries to congratulate Ahmadinejad." 
 
Editorial commentary on Iran and US-Turkey Relationship 
Sami Kohen wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "Iran is getting tougher, 
both inside and out. It looks like the Ahmedinejad administration is 
choosing to act with violence in order to pressure his opponents. 
He is also trying to pressure the EU countries and the U.S., who 
criticized him for his post election attitude.  Iran should 
understand that this policy is not in its own interest or favor." 
 
Cuneyt Ulsever wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "The identity of U.S. 
allies in Turkey did change in 2003 with the March 1st bill and now 
it changes again. The U.S. counters the PKK threat and distances 
itself from the AKP and Fethullah Gulen movement.  Moreover, the 
Obama administration abandons the Broader Middle East Initiative. 
The Turkish Armed Forces are the new U.S. allies in Turkey." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
-  Main opposition CHP says it will apply to the Constitutional 
Court for the annulment of new regulation for the trial of army 
officials in civilian courts.  The regulation has been submitted to 
President Gul for approval. 
 
- Istanbul police chief Celalettin Cerrah hands over his post to 
Huseyin Capkin.  Cerrah has been appointed as Osmaniye governor. 
 
- The wages of civil servants will increase in the second half of 
¶2009. 
 
- Turkish exports decline by 33.9 percent since the beginning of the 
year. 
 
 
World 
 
- Russia begins its largest military exercises in the Caucasus since 
last year's war with Georgia. 
 
- Russia and Azerbaijan sign an agreement for Russia to buy 500 
million cubic meters of gas annually starting next year. 
JEFFREY