09ANKARA193
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Feb 06 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO4764
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0193/01 0371109
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 061109Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8700
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9459
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5344
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3590
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7106
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6963
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3553
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000193 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 6, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Foxman: 'Davos Wounds will Heal in Time' 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet carries an on-the-phone interview 
with the Anti-Defamation League (ADL) chairman Abraham Foxman.  On 
Prime Minister Erdogan's storming out of a panel meeting with 
President Peres in Davos, Foxman said from time to time, friends 
have disagreements.  "The Jewish community has nothing to do with 
the bombardment of Gaza.  The harshness of Erdogan's remarks shocked 
both the Jewish community and Israel.  Such a tough reaction should 
not have come from the Turkish leader.  In fact, some who don't like 
the Turkish-Israeli and Jewish-Muslim friendship try to stir 
trouble," emphasized Foxman.  He noted the Turkish leadership 
realized that Erdogan's remarks "went too far," and several figures 
including the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister have begun talking 
about the importance of bilateral ties.  He also said the Davos 
"outburst" inflicted unexpected wounds, but that this would be 
"healed in time."  On the Armenian Genocide Resolution expected to 
be taken to US Congress under the new administration, Foxman said, 
"Some claim we, with an aim to punish the Turks, will not support 
Turkey this time.  We do not punish.  Some in Turkey want to damage 
the ties between us; we must be very careful." 
 
Prosecutor Initiates Genocide Investigation Against Israeli 
Officials 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports that Ankara prosecutor's office has 
initiated an investigation against Israeli officials for committing 
genocide in Gaza against the Palestinians.  The investigation was 
initiated after a complaint was filed by "Mazlum-Der Association" 
for human rights and solidarity for the oppressed.  The paper notes 
that this is the first time the prosecutor has initiated an 
investigation for crimes against humanity under international 
treaties. 
 
Turkish Intellectuals Initiate a Signature Campaign Against 
Anti-Semitism 
Mainstream Sabah reports that 250 intellectuals have begun a 
signature campaign against growing anti-Semitism in Turkey.  In 
their statement, the intellectuals urged Israel to stop its violence 
in Gaza and asked all Turkish civilian and official organizations to 
stop supporting anti-Semitism in Turkey. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey/Israel/Hamas 
 
Mumtazer Turkone wrote in Islamist oriented Zaman: "Turkey has 
gained an enormous popularity among Arab nations.  This is the very 
time for Turkey to act as a democracy model and use the potential 
influence for democracy in the region." 
 
Ece Temelkuran wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "There is talk about 
the "Davos spirit" as a remedy for Middle East nations.  Given AKP's 
intolerance to different views and efforts to silence political 
criticism inside Turkey, it is hard to believe that the mastermind 
of the "Davos spirit" can bring any good to the region." 
 
Bagis: 'Turkish Troops Released in 2003 after Erdogan Called VP 
Cheney' 
Media outlets report Turkey's chief EU negotiator Egemen Bagis said 
the Turkish special force members detained in 2003 by US forces in 
Suleymaniye in northern Iraq were released after the intervention of 
Prime Minister Erdogan.  Following a visit on Thursday to the AKP 
provincial branch in Izmir, Bagis told reporters that Erdogan phoned 
VP Dick Cheney and asked the Turkish soldiers be released 
immediately, saying that as a person who served a prison sentence, 
he knew about the conditions  of detention.  Papers comment Bagis' 
statement came in response to opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal's 
criticism of Erdogan that unlike his walkout in Davos, the PM had 
remained silent to the detention of Turkish soldiers in 2003. 
 
Employers to Erdogan: 'We're Dying, Help Us' 
 
ANKARA 00000193  002 OF 003 
 
 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports Turkish employers' and 
laborers' union representatives lobbieed for a rescue package to 
save the faltering economy at Thursday's meeting of the Economic and 
Social Council, chaired by Prime Minister Erdogan.  Turkey's 
influential employers' union federation TISK chair Tugrul 
Kutadgobilik complained to the PM that his government "could not 
manage the crisis."  "The situation has become intolerable.  It was 
we who grew this economy, and we will continue doing so after the 
crisis.  We are waiting to see economic rescue packages announced by 
the government.  We're dying, please help us," stated Kutadgobilik. 
After the meeting, a bill of economic support measures was sent to 
the parliament for approval, says Cumhuriyet. 
 
DTP's Tugluk Sentenced to 18 months for PKK Propaganda 
Mainstreams Sabah and Milliyet report that DTP Diyarbakir deputy 
Aysel Tugluk was sentenced to 18 months in prison for referring to 
PKK members as "heroes" in a speech in 2006.  Tugluk said "I 
instructed my lawyers to appeal.  I am acting in the name of 
democracy and peaceful settlement of the Kurdish issue.  This 
penalty shows that there is no change in the state's approach, 
official ideology and tyranny regarding the Kurdish issue.  I am 
ready to serve 50 years in jail if this would help to solve the 
Kurdish issue.  The current approach of the government will not help 
resolve the Kurdish issue.  Meanwhile, the trial of DTP Istanbul 
deputy Sebahat Tuncel started in the Istanbul 10th heavy penalty 
court for being a member of the terrorist organization.  The 
prosecutor demanded 7.5 to 15 years prison sentence for Tuncel. 
 
Turkey to Send Frigates off Somalia Coast to Counter Piracy 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports the ruling AKP government submitted to 
parliament a motion for the deployment of Turkish navy vessels off 
the Somali coast and in the Gulf of Aden for a one-year period, in a 
move to back international efforts to fight piracy.  Giresun frigate 
will be the first ship to be sent to the region.  According to the 
motion, 15 ships affiliated with Turkey with over 300 crew including 
37 Turks have been hijacked.  "The threat to our commercial vessels 
and our seamen has reached a dimension where it negatively affects 
our country's commercial and economic interests," says the motion. 
 
 
Report: Situation of Turkish Women in Politics, Societal Life 
'Shameful' 
Under a headline, "The Shameful Picture," liberal Radikal carries a 
report by the General Directorate for the Status of Women, which 
shows 5.7 million women were "illiterate" in Turkey.  Women 
constitute a mere six percent of the officials in the 
decision-making mechanisms -- the related figure in the US is 46 
percent, and in Russia 39 percent.  Women represent only 9 percent 
of the members of the Turkish parliament, while the related figure 
is 47 percent in Sweden and 36 percent in Spain.  Women in Turkey 
face job discrimination, and become the first victims of economic 
troubles that force companies to cut jobs.  Only 22.2 percent of 
Turkish women are employed, while the same figure for the first 15 
EU members is calculated as 59.7 percent.  Sixty-four percent of the 
employed women have no social security or job guarantees.  The 
report also says 39 percent of Turkish women believe they deserve to 
be beaten by their husbands for burning the dinner, talking back, 
misspending money, neglecting their children or refusing to have 
sex. 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- Turkey's main opposition party CHP is divided by concerns over 
party leader Deniz Baykal's decision that CHP would open community 
centers teaching the Koran. 
 
- On Friday, Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas will travel to 
Ankara to meet President Abdullah Gul and PM Erdogan. 
 
ANKARA 00000193  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
- The European Court of Human Rights rules Turkey must pay 
compensation to high school students who were imprisoned as 
suspected PKK members in Diyarbakir eight years ago. 
 
- CHP claims the ruling AKP distributes household goods in Tunceli 
to 'bribe' voters before the municipality elections.  The goods 
distributed in Tunceli have been purchased from two companies which 
have ties two the AKP. 
 
World 
 
- Prime Minister Nuri Maliki's party scores a sweeping victory over 
rival Shiite Muslim groups in Iraqi provincial elections. 
 
- Egyptian authorities say a senior Hamas official has been 
prevented from crossing back into Gaza with millions of dollars in 
cash. 
 
- Swedish police arrest two protesters after they hurl a shoe and 
books at Israel's ambassador while he was addressing a university 
seminar in Stockholm. 
 
- Secretary of State Hillary Clinton will visit Japan, Indonesia, 
South Korea and China from February 15-22. 
JEFFREY