09ANKARA719
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Wed May 20 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO8800
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0719/01 1401026
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 201026Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9692
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0042
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5756
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3852
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7309
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7187
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3768
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000719 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
WEDNESDAY, MAY 20, 2009 
 
IN TODAY'S PAPERS 
 
Thousands Bid Farewell to Turkan Saylan 
Media outlets report Professor Turkan Saylan, the chairwoman of the 
Support for Modern Life Association (CYDD) who died of cancer on 
Sunday, was laid to rest in Istanbul yesterday.  Saylan was mourned 
by tens of thousands of people, including students who received 
scholarships from CYDD for their education.  Saylan has become a 
highly politicized name, especially after her house was searched 
under the controversial 'Ergenekon' investigation probing a shadowy 
deep-state organization alleged to have tried to topple the current 
government.  Kemal Kilicdaroglu, the opposition CHP's deputy group 
chief, said at the funeral ceremony that he expected an apology from 
the state for its treatment of Saylan.  The military General Staff 
(TGS) released yesterday a statement commemorating Saylan, which 
says "Saylan's service to the country will not be forgotten." 
Papers report no cabinet ministers or the ruling party members 
attended Saylan's funeral ceremony. 
 
Saylan was a doctor who received in 1986 the International Gandhi 
Award for her work to battle leprosy in Turkey.  She founded the 
Support for Modern Life Association (CYDD) in 1989 to build schools 
and support with loans for around 40,000 underprivileged students, 
especially girls. 
 
Davutoglu: Turkey-EU Relations Deep-rooted 
All papers report that Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu said 
that relations between Turkey and the European Union were 
"deep-rooted and have a vision." Together with Turkey's chief EU 
negotiator and State Minister Egemen Bagis, Davutoglu spoke at a 
joint press conference after the 47th session of the EC-Turkey 
Association Council with EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, 
Czech Foreign Minister Jan Kohout whose country holds the rotating 
EU presidency, and Swedish Foreign Minister Carl Bildt whose country 
will take over the presidency. "This council has a special place in 
Turkey-EU relations," Davutoglu told reporters. "Even its existence 
and having held the 47th session shows how deep-rooted Turkey-EU 
relations have become," he said. Davutoglu recalled that relations 
began in 1959 and said relations with EU were a strategic choice of 
Turkey. He reiterated that Turkey had only one goal since that time. 
"It is full membership to EU. Today we are fully committed to that 
goal," he stated. Davutoglu also warned that nobody should discuss 
advantages, disadvantages and history of relations to create a new 
uncertainty. "More than anything, this is a matter of commitment. As 
we have earlier made our commitment, we have to fulfill our 
obligations in the future and we are aware of our responsibilities," 
he said. 
 
Minsk Group Uneasy with Turkey's Preconditions (Radikal) 
Liberal Radikal reports Ambassador Bernard Fassier, the French 
co-chair of the Minsk Group, warned yesterday that "problems could 
arise if preconditions are put in front of the normalization process 
between Turkey and Armenia."  Speaking with the press after wrapping 
up his contacts in Ankara yesterday, Fassier said instead of placing 
preconditions, the sides needed to take "coordinated steps."  "The 
negotiation process between Turkey and Armenia is not an element of 
the Karabakh question.  PM Erdogan's statements that Turkey closed 
the border because of the war in Karabakh will negatively affect the 
talks," emphasized Frassier. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-Azerbaijan-Armenia 
 
Bulent Aras wrote in mainstream Sabah: "Following the latest 
developments, particularly related with Turkey and Azerbaijan, both 
Russia and the U.S. undoubtedly will concentrate their efforts on 
the Nagorno Karabakh process.  The outcome of these efforts will 
shape the future pace of Turkish- Armenian dialogue as well as 
Turkey-Azerbaijan relations." 
 
DTP MPs Attend Official May 19 Celebrations 
 
ANKARA 00000719  002 OF 004 
 
 
Media outlets report the pro-Kurdish DTP lawmakers, for the first 
time, participated in the official May 19 Youth Day celebrations in 
Ankara and the southeastern cities.  At the ceremonies, PM Erdogan 
and CHP leader Baykal "shook hands with DTP members." "We need 
peace," said DTP deputy Sirri Sakik, adding "Dialogue among state 
institutions is important."  Nuri Yaman, another DTP deputy, said 
the handshakes were a good gesture.  "The PM had a positive smile on 
his face when he shook hands with us; this is an important firs 
step," he said. 
 
Editorial Commentary on the Kurdish Issue 
 
Hasan Cemal wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "There are lots of debates 
at all levels going on regarding how to resolve the Kurdish issue. 
Frankly there is no miraculous way to end such a long problem 
overnight.  A process toward settlement however must have been 
started since there is political will in that regard.  Once a de 
facto ceasefire can be achieved, it will easily lead to a process 
where secret negotiations can be held.  That seems to be the only 
logical formula for a peace process regarding the PKK issue." 
 
Controversy on Court Decision on President Gul Grows 
Media outlets continue reporting on an Ankara court ruling Monday 
that President Abdullah Gul should stand trial in the case publicly 
known as "the missing trillions case," involving missing funds from 
the Welfare Party (RP) accounts during the 1990s.  Necmettin 
Erbakan, former leader of the RP, was convicted of fraud over 
altering party records to hide money that was ordered to be seized 
by Treasury after the RF party was disbanded in January 1998 for 
"violating secularism." 
 
President Abdullah Gul's office issued a statement, citing the 
constitution, which said, "Presidents cannot be tried for any reason 
other than treason" after the court ruling that the President should 
stand trial for "actions before he attained the presidency." 
Government spokesman Cemil Cicek told reporters Monday, "It's 
unthinkable that presidents are not protected by immunity when 
lawmakers are."  Parliament Spokesman Koksal Toptan said "Presidents 
can only be put on trial for treason and this, however, requires 
rigid conditions," said Toptan. 
 
Opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal said "Gul could be tried over his 
actions before he was elected president." 
 
Editorial Commentary the Court Decision on President Gul 
 
Ilhan Selcuk wrote in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet: "It is not 
possible to claim whether or not President Gul is guilty at this 
point, but he is certainly a suspect in a fraud case that dates back 
to 1997.  He should be tried so that the judicial process itself can 
make the verdict, otherwise he will continue to be labeled as a 
fraud suspect." 
 
Mustafa Unal wrote in Islamist oriented Zaman: "President Gul made a 
statement about the court decision and called it 'incompatible with 
goodwill.'  There is a clear message here as he implies that the 
court's action is not normal and comes along with some other kind of 
intentions.  It looks like the Sincan court is taking an action 
against President Gul's personality." 
 
Oktay Eksi wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "Can the judiciary try the 
president of this country?  There are different opinions on this. 
Regardless, the fact of the matter is that Abdullah Gul knew he was 
suspected of fraud before he assumed the presidency.  I wish he were 
able to say that he was willing to face the court before he became 
president." 
 
Bardakoglu Warns Against Yoga: Yoga, Meditation, and Reiki Indicate 
Modern Man's Despair, Poisons Religion 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Vatan and Cumhuriyet report Professor Ali 
 
ANKARA 00000719  003 OF 004 
 
 
Bardakoglu, the head of the religious affairs directorate (Diyanet), 
wrote in a Diyanet periodical that "public interest in methods such 
as yoga, reiki and meditation, which were presented as ways to be 
relieved from stress, depression and fatigue, were actually related 
to the modern individual's loneliness and despair."  He also said, 
"No matter how such currents are backed by diverse approaches such 
as 'healthy living, success and happiness,' they are actually fed by 
Indian-oriented Far Eastern philosophies and have common grounds 
with the humanistic and religious rhetoric of Western culture," said 
Bardakoglu. 
 
A 25-Year Civil War Ends in Sri Lanka 
Media note Sri Lanka's 25-year civil war has finally come to an end 
after the publication of photos of the slain leader of the Tamil 
Tigers.  Mainstream Vatan headlines, "The Tigers Say 'Our Leader Has 
Been Killed,' The Military Shows the Body."  Mainstream Hurriyet 
comments in the headline, "This Photograph Took Down the Tamils," 
under the photo of the slain Tamil leader Vellupillai Prabhakaran. 
Mainstream Haberturk quotes the Sri Lankan Defense Minister in the 
headline, "We Killed A Psychopath," and reports, "The publication of 
photos of the slain Tamil Tiger leader have ended the 25-year 
terror." Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports, "Sri Lanka Locked 
Up the Body," of Prabhakaran.  Mainstream Sabah reports "Yesterday 
Sri Lanka organized a ceremony" in order to "officially commemorate 
the end of terror." 
 
Zardari Blames the U.S. for Losing Bin Laden in Tora Bora 
Media misinterpret the words of Pakistani President Ali Asif Zardari 
during a May 10 interview on Meet the Press. While Zardari did blame 
the U.S. for "losing Osama Bin Laden in Tora Bora," the media today 
are taking it a step further and reporting the Pakistani President 
said Pakistan apprehended Bin Laden and the U.S. let him go. 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak, mainstream Sabah, and mainstream Vatan 
all carry the headline "We Apprehended Bin Laden, The U.S. Set Him 
Free," and Vatan reports that Pakistani President Asif Ali Zardari 
claimed during a May 10 interview with David Gregory on NBC's Meet 
the Press "Three months after 9/11 we apprehended Bin Laden and 
handed him over to the U.S.  But they let him go." 
Islamist-oriented Zaman quotes Zardari in the headline, "He Blames 
The U.S. for Bin Laden: 'He's Your Man, You Lost Him," and the paper 
notes "Zardari said it is necessary that the U.S. know if Osama Bin 
Laden is alive and where he is" but "after hearing no news of Bin 
Laden for the past seven years, he said 'You lost him in Tora 
Bora.'" 
(Note: In response to this story this morning Ankara PAS distributed 
to media outlets the correct and full transcript of David Gregory's 
May 10 interview with Zardari.  According to the transcripts, 
Zardari never said during the interview, "Three months after 9/11 we 
apprehended bin Laden and handed him over to the U.S.  But they let 
him go." 
 
Swarming Rumors of U.S. Involvement in Assassination of Bhutto and 
Hariri 
Media report U.S. journalist Seymour Hirsh told Arab media former 
vice president Dick Cheney ordered the assassinations of former 
Pakistani PM Benazir Bhutto and Lebanese PM Rafik Hariri.  While 
Hirsh has denied ever saying this, only a few media outlets report 
his denial. Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak headlines "Cheney Killed 
Bhutto," but later in the article admits "Hirsh denied he ever said 
this."  Under the headline, "The CIA Killed Bhutto and Hariri," 
mainstream Vatan reports, "Seymour Hirsh, the Pulitzer-prize winning 
journalist who exposed the U.S. massacre in My Lai and the Abu 
Ghraib torture scandal, told Arab media that former Vice President 
Dick Cheney gave the order for the assassination of Benazir Bhutto" 
and "he also gave the same order for Lebanese PM Rafik Hariri." 
Mainstream Haberturk also headlines, "Cheney Killed Benazir Bhutto," 
and says "the former vice president gave the order to kill Benazir 
Bhutto." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
ANKARA 00000719  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
Domestic 
 
- The Health Ministry asked Turkish citizens to put off their travel 
to foreign countries until the swine flu alert is over. 
 
- Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu, in Brussels for the Turkey-EU 
Partnership Council meetings, said no development in its region 
could take place without the knowledge and approval of Turkey. 
 
- Husamettin Cindoruk, the new leader of the Democrat Party (DP), 
said his party would merge with the Motherland Party (ANAP). 
 
- Turkish Foreign Ministry says there were no plans to cancel the 
Israeli drone sales to Turkey. 
 
World 
 
- German high court freezes a decision to remove the license of Roj 
TV, and Interior Minister Wolfgang Schaeuble says they were 
discussing the decision of the court. 
 
- The Iraqi government in Baghdad has denied the Iraqi Kurds to 
supply the Nabucco pipeline with gas for Europe. 
 
- Russia and Georgia concluded in Geneva a "constructive" round of 
talks held to discuss both security and humanitarian issues. 
 
- Former US President Bill Clinton is named the UN's special envoy 
for Haiti. 
 
JEFFREY