09ANKARA218
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Feb 11 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO8047
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0218/01 0420614
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 110614Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8747
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9465
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5363
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3598
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7113
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6974
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3563
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000218 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 10, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
PM Erdogan's Reaction to IMF 
Radikal, Vatan, Milliyet, Yeni Safak, Sabah, Hurriyet:  Speaking at 
an award ceremony for small and medium size enterprises in Istanbul 
Chamber of Commerce, PM Erdogan responded to a criticism that IMF 
deal was delayed.  Erdogan said "Sorry, but we won't sign a deal 
with the IMF if it is not to Turkey's benefit.  They bring a new 
clause to each meeting.  IMF exists to help the countries affected 
by the economic crisis.  If they bring a more distressing protocol 
at a time like this, I will not sign it.  Turkey's debt to IMF was 
around $23.5 billion in 2002 when the AKP came to power.  Now this 
figure has dropped to $8 billion.  If IMF does not agree, then we 
pay our debt to it and proceed on our way by our own resources." 
 
Baykal in Brussels 
Milliyet, Zaman, Cumhuriyet, Hurriyet, Vatan, Sabah:  Main 
opposition party CHP leader Deniz Baykal is in EU's capital Brussels 
after a long time.  Baykal met with EU Commissioner for enlargement 
Olli Rehn.  Following the meeting, Rehn and Baykal had a joint press 
conference.  Baykal said "we believe that it is our obligation to 
support negotiation process because Turkey's relations with the EU 
is a national matter."  Olli Rehn, on his part, said "It is very 
important for Turkey to work out compromise in uniting different 
lifestyles  within the framework of democratic secularism." 
Mainstream Sabah reports that Baykal and Turkey's Chief EU 
negotiator and State Minister Egemen Bagis were on the same plane to 
Brussels.  Bagis informed Baykal on Turkey's EU reform program on 
the plane.  Earlier, Baykal had refused to meet Bagis when the EU 
negotiator toured party leaders to seek support for the EU bid. 
 
Babacan: "From Now On, Americans Will Listen to Turkey" (Zaman) 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports Foreign Minister Babacan told a 
press conference yesterday "American officials will from now on 
listen more to Turkey regarding developments in the Middle East." 
Babacan's comments come after he met with U.S. Vice President Joe 
Biden and U.S. Special Envoy to Afghanistan and Pakistan Richard 
Holbrooke in Munich over the weekend.  Mainstream Hurriyet reports 
"Babacan Sent a Warning to the U.S. During the Security Conference 
in Munich Over the Weekend," regarding the potential passage of the 
Armenian Genocide Resolution (AGR) in the U.S. Congress. 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports, "Babacan warned U.S. officials 
that the passage of the AGR could harm the progress made in 
relations between Turkey and Armenia." 
 
Editorial Commentary on AGR 
 
Erdal Safak wrote in mainstream Sabah: "Turkey and Armenia continue 
to maintain their contacts and Foreign Minister Babacan is doing his 
best to pursue improved bilateral dialogue with Armenia.  The path 
is long because there are at least 50 issues to resolve before the 
establishment of diplomatic ties can be realized, but Turkey is 
getting there.  However, if the U.S. Congress passes the Armenian 
Genocide Resolution, it will undermine the diplomatic progress 
between Turkey and Armenia." 
 
Ekrem Dumanli wrote in Islamist oriented Zaman: "Those who claim 
anti-Semitism is on the rise in Turkey comprise a small circle of 
folks who do not want Turkey to progress.  Anti-Semitism has never 
been a problem in Turkey, and anti-Semitism will not be a problem in 
the future either.   However, if the AGR passes in the U.S. 
Congress, Turkish-Israeli relations will be damaged.  Losing Turkey 
in this region might be a worst case scenario for Israel." 
 
'Susurluk' Suspect Agar Appears before Court 
Media outlets report former Interior Minister Mehmet Agar appeared 
Tuesday before court in connection with the Susurluk scandal of 
"deep state-mafia" links, 12 years after the scandal broke out. 
Agar is charged with forming an illegal armed organization.  Agar 
rejected the charges in his first hearing, and told the court he 
 
ANKARA 00000218  002 OF 003 
 
 
only "served the state."  He said he never met Abdullah Catli, a 
leading right wing-mafioso figure who died in a traffic accident in 
the same car with a former police chief.  Agar is charged with 
issuing a gun license and fake passport for Catli.  Agar also 
praised intelligence operative Korkut Eken and police intelligence 
chief Ibrahim Sahin, both known to be controversial figures who are 
also suspects in the ongoing 'Ergenekon' case. 
 
High Court: Wiretapping Alone Not Sufficient to Charge Suspects 
Media outlets highlight an important ruling of the Court of Appeals 
(Yargitay,) which rejected yesterday a penalty given to suspected 
arms smugglers in the southeastern city of Gaziantep.  Yargitay says 
there was no solid evidence to support the charges other than 
wiretapped telephone conversations.  Papers expect the ruling to 
have an impact on the ongoing investigation of the 'Ergenekon' 
formation, in which most of the charges in the indictment are based 
on bugged phone talks.  After the ruling, papers expect most of the 
Ergenekon suspects to object to their detention. 
 
Mubarak's Jet Diplomacy for a Lasting Peace (Sabah) 
Media outlets note the importance regional leaders are placing on 
Turkey's role in seeking a solution to the Palestinian issue. 
Following Palestinian President Abbas' visit to Ankara this weekend, 
Egyptian President Mubarak is expected in Istanbul tomorrow. 
Leftist Taraf reports in "Mubarek Is Coming to Istanbul," that 
"because of Turkey's mediation efforts for a lasting peace in the 
Middle East, Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak will come to Ankara in 
the wake of Palestinian President Abbas' visit here this weekend." 
In addition, Taraf notes Mubarak's visit comes "amid criticisms from 
other Arab countries that only Arab countries should be involved in 
the Mid East peace process," and Mubarak "is showing that Turkey has 
an important role to play in the process" as "Foreign Minister 
Babacan pledged Turkey will always support Egypt's mediation 
efforts."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet calls the visit "a clear 
indication that Turkey will play a key role in support of peace 
negotiations led by Egypt."  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports unnamed 
diplomatic sources said "Turkey and Egypt are not rivals in the 
Middle East," as "Turkey is popular among Palestinian groups" and 
"Ankara supports Cairo's leadership role in the process." 
 
A Right Wing Coalition Expected in Israel (Milliyet) 
Media is united in predicting a victory for the right in Israel's 
elections, but the larger issue here is concern over the effect a 
right-wing win will have on the peace negotiations.  In "The Hawks 
Will Be Elected," leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports, "Even 
though 20% of the electorate is undecided, it is likely that the far 
right will see an increase in votes."  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
reports, "In Israel, There Are Expectations for a Right Wing 
Coalition." Leftist Taraf reports "The Israeli Public's Trust in The 
Far Right Is on The Rise."   Mainstream Sabah reports, "The Three 
Top Candidates Are Using the Gaza Operations to Win Votes," and "the 
outcome of this election is likely to complicate efforts toward 
peace in the region."  Meanwhile, mainstream NTV reports, 
"Palestinians are not hopeful about the outcome of elections in 
Israel." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Municipalities' Free Distribution of 
Household Goods 
 
Oktay Eksi wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "The widespread 
distribution of free household goods from is a clear violation of 
law and an obvious election-time bribe.  When government officials 
criticize those who oppose this election bribery, they clearly stand 
against the implementation of laws and regulations." 
 
Gungor Mengi wrote in mainstream Vatan: "The Higher Board of 
Elections has warned that the free distribution of household goods 
by a municipality prior to local elections is a constitutional 
violation; but who is going to enforce this law?  Turkey has become 
a country that is ruled by a government who buys votes in the name 
 
ANKARA 00000218  003 OF 003 
 
 
of free elections." 
 
A cartoon from today's Milliyet depicts a man with no shoes, ragged 
clothes, and no water who has just received a new white washing 
machine from the AKP-led municipality.  The irony is, how will this 
man run a brand new washing machine with no water? 
 
Baghdad Vetoes Kurdish Visas (Milliyet) 
Mainstream Milliyet reports the Iraqi Interior Ministry warned that 
foreigners to enter Iraq through the border crossings controlled by 
the Kurdish Regional Government (KRG) in the north would be 
penalized.  A statement which was issued after the arrest of an 
unidentified Italian national arrested in Fallujah for entering Iraq 
on a ten day visa issued by the KRG says the sole authority for 
issuing visas for foreigners was the Iraqi Interior Ministry. 
 
Iranian Gays Face Discrimination, Violence in Turkey 
Mainstream Milliyet reports gay Iranian refugees, who fled to Turkey 
to escape persecution in their country, said they were settled in 
conservative provinces such as Van, Kayseri, Isparta, and Nevsehir 
where they were subjected to insults and mistreatment by local 
Turks.  The Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transvestite and Transsexual 
Platform prepared a report after meeting with 70 Iranian refugees 
settled in Kayseri, Eskisehir, Isparta and Ankara from November 
2007-June 2008.  The asylum seekers said if they had opted to stay 
in Iran, they would face a series of penalties from whipping to 
execution, and that they had to flee without even notifying their 
families.  "Being subjected to discrimination and violence in the 
conservative provinces they were settled where life is difficult 
even for the local gays, Iranian refugees escape to major cities 
such as Istanbul, Izmir and Ankara," says the report.  The Iranians 
said people spit on them on the streets, that they were insulted by 
being called "faggot" and other names, and that they had to change 
their homes constantly.  "They don't help, they only deride us," an 
Iranian told Milliyet. 
 
 TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- A post office in Istanbul's conservative Sultangazi neighborhood 
is robbed by unidentified gunmen. 
 
- The Nationalist Action Party, MHP, marks the 40th anniversary of 
its foundation. 
 
- State Minister Kursad Tuzmen says economic stimulus packages in 
the U.S. and Europe had not been effective, and warned that the 
Turkish economy should be ready to face new hardships. 
 
- A survey by Turkey's Central Bank predicts the year-end inflation 
to stand at 7.22 percent. 
 
World 
 
- A new poll conducted in Gaza by the Palestinian Center for Public 
Opinion says support for Hamas has drastically gone down following 
the Israeli offensive in Gaza. 
 
- American Thinker journal says moderate Arab powers were "uneasy" 
with the policies of Turkish PM Erdogan. 
 
- Pollsters say Israel's national election outcome is likely to be 
determined by undecided voters. 
 
- Slovenia's parliament approves Croatia's and Albania's efforts to 
join NATO. 
 
JEFFREY