09ANKARA1165
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Wed Aug 12 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO0594
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1165/01 2241322
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 121322Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0489
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0242
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6149
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4078
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7486
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7374
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3956
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001165 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 12, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Erdogan Calls On Doors To Be Kept Open To "Democratic Move" 
Initiatives 
All papers:   Speaking at his party group meeting yesterday,  Prime 
Minister Erdogan said that doors should not be closed to the Kurdish 
 initiative to expand democratic freedoms.  "We do not expect help 
from the circles that deepened the problem so far but they should 
not overshadow and impede our efforts. Don't close your doors to 
this brotherhood, peace, integration, and national unity project. 
Let us fulfill this work together.  Turkey would be at a different 
point if it had not wasted the past 25 years on energy, budget, 
tranquility and welfare to terrorism.  The "democratic move" process 
continues under the coordination of Interior Minister Besir Atalay. 
My party will do its best to find a permanent solution and for the 
restoration of tranquility and a climate of friendship."  Mainstream 
Hurriyet quotes PM Erdogan as saying "we will do whatever the cost 
will be."  Mainstream Sabah headlines, "Nothing Is More Painful Than 
Losing Your Child" and reports that Erdogan delivered "the most 
emotional speech of his life" and many of the AKP deputies were 
unable to hold back their tears.  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak and 
liberal Radikal quoted PM Erdogan as saying "The suffering of a 
mother of a martyr shook my world.  A mother doesn't have ideology 
or policy.  It is clear that there is a very serious mistake if a 
mother in Yozgat and a mother in Hakkari say the same prayer." 
 
Reactions to the AKP's "Democratic Move" Initiatives 
Media outlets report that on Tuesday, the opposition CHP leader 
Deniz Baykal told his party group in the parliament they could meet 
with the government only after the "plan is made public."  The CHP 
has no problem with "granting rights to the Kurds with an aim to 
improve their lives without hurting the country's unity," said 
Baykal.  In order to further integrate Kurds with the rest of the 
nation, Baykal proposed the AKP should, "Launch an education 
campaign in the southeast, build the country's best schools there, 
and create employment through state plants."  Baykal also recalled 
Erdogan's promise in 2007 to invest USD 12 billion in the region, 
but said the government had not kept its pledge. 
 
Chairman Devlet Bahceli told his MHP lawmakers, "Those who gamble 
over the destiny of the Turkish nation aimed to direct Turkey toward 
division and separation."  Bahceli said Turkey was fighting for its 
survival due to the AKP's "foreign-crafted" policies, adding the 
government had already recognized the PKK's imprisoned chief 
Abdullah Ocalan as the "fourth coordinator in the process alongside 
the U.S. and northern Iraqi leaders."  Bahceli stressed his party 
would never be part of this treason project." 
 
The pro-Kurdish DTP's deputy chair Emine Ayna told a gathering in 
Igdir that a "peace process" could not succeed without the 
involvement of the PKK and its imprisoned leader Abdullah Ocalan. 
Ayna stressed the DTP was looking forward to the "roadmap" to be 
unveiled by Ocalan on August 15. 
 
Mainstream Milliyet reports the ruling AKP lawmaker Dengiz Mir 
Mehmet Firat suggested the Turkish military could allow the 
withdrawal of the PKK militants to their camps.  Firat noted it was 
possible to hold secret talks with the PKK for a settlement, and 
added the government might already have kicked off such talks. 
Firat said some 200 PKK militants in Iraq wanted by Turkey could be 
sent to a third country, and the remaining others could be allowed 
to return to Turkey without facing any sanctions. 
 
Editorial Opinion on The Kurdish Settlement Initiative 
 
Okay Gonensin wrote in mainstream Vatan: "It is good to hear from 
the PM as well as other government officials that the Kurdish plan 
is a democratic initiative.  If that is the genuine intention and if 
that will be the AKP's guidance for a settlement, the government has 
to take steps toward expanding democracy in every aspect of life 
which calls for political courage and a democratic spirit." 
 
ANKARA 00001165  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
Fehmi Koru wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "The leaders of 
two opposition parties, CHP and MHP, are stubbornly playing the 
impossible.  In fact politicians have no luxury to close the door 
for dialogue because the political system is for finding 
reconciliation and bringing solution.  On the government's Kurdish 
initiative, the attitude of these two leaders is a typical example 
of leadership failure." 
 
Hasan Bulent Kahraman wrote in mainstream Sabah: "The truth is the 
PKK is an armed organization and has politicized itself through the 
DTP.  At this current stage, there has to be strong intellectual 
capacity within PKK to overcome the armed action and its imprisoned 
leader Ocalan from the Kurdish settlement process.  Therefore DTP 
should take the lead on this for the sake of a successful outcome." 
 
Mehmet Yilmaz wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "Clearly two main 
opposition parties have no intention even to talk with government on 
Kurdish settlement process.  They are pursuing a wrong attitude and 
neglecting the very essence of politics.  Political system is meant 
to be problem-solver not to create new animosity." 
 
Turkey, Iraq Strategic Partners 
AA, Sabah, Hurriyet, Milliyet, Zaman, Turkiye and others:  Sabah 
reports that following his meeting with Iraqi Foreign Minister 
Hoshyar Zebari, Foreign Minister Davutoglu, held a joint press 
conference in Baghdad yesterday.  Davutoglu said "We are planning to 
re-convene the trilateral mechanism involving Turkey, Iraq and 
Syria, which met in March 2007 in Antalya and in Damascus in April 
2008, the controversy over the sharing of the mighty rivers at the 
root of Iraq's ancient name of Mesopotamia - meaning "between the 
rivers" in Greek - is almost as old as the country itself. In July, 
Iraq's water-resources ministry called for talks with Turkey and 
Syria after the flow of water in the Euphrates River fell by more 
than half in less than a month. We want the Mesopotamia region to 
again become one of the world's most productive and the most 
prosperous regions in all areas, including water. We are offering 
limitless cooperation to friendly and brotherly countries, 
particularly Syria and Iraq, to make our region the world's rising 
star again."  Zebari said one of the topics in the talks was the 
trilateral mechanism involving Turkey, Iraq and the United States, 
which met in Ankara last month, to combat the PKK. He stressed that 
Iraq would remain committed to its promises.  "Terror is a very 
serious problem. We discussed it in detail with Mr. Davutoglu ... 
The Iraqi administration and the regional administration in the 
North will implement all the decisions made to counter terrorism and 
be loyal to the decisions. We are working for this cooperation to 
enhance even more," Zebari was quoted as saying by the Anatolia news 
agency. 
 
Bryza to Sargsyan: Go to Turkey-Armenia Soccer Game in Turkey 
(Aksam) 
Mainstream Aksam reports Deputy Assistant Secretary Matt Bryza 
called on Armenian President Sargsyan to continue "soccer diplomacy" 
and "go to Turkey" to watch the soccer game between the two 
countries in October.  "We were very happy when President Gul 
visited Yerevan; and we will be very happy when President Sargsyan 
visits Turkey," Bryza told Radio Free Europe-Radio Liberty's 
Armenian radio.  Bryza said that in the last period, the 
U.S.-supported Turkey-Armenia dialogue almost came to a standstill. 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- From August 17-21, Turkey, Israel and the U.S. will hold "Reliable 
Mermaid" joint search and rescue exercises off Turkey's East 
Mediterranean shore.  The exercises will mark the first coming 
together of the Turkish and Israeli militaries after PM Erdogan's 
outburst at Davos against the Israeli President Peres. 
 
 
ANKARA 00001165  003 OF 003 
 
 
- The Turkish Parliament has approved unemployment insurance law, 
overriding the veto of President Abdullah Gul. 
 
- Officials report almost 100 percent compliance around Turkey to 
smoking restrictions that entered into effect on July 19. 
 
World 
 
- Human rights lawyers urge the Pentagon to take control of an 
Iranian exile camp in eastern Iraq, accusing Iraqi security forces 
there of human rights violations against camp residents. 
 
- Tensions at the border in Cyprus escalate after press reports that 
Greek Cypriot motor bikers were planning to attempt to cross the 
border. 
 
JEFFREY