09ANKARA1194
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Fri Aug 14 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO2597
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1194/01 2261233
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 141233Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0539
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0248
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6159
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4084
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7492
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7380
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3962
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001194 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
FRIDAY, AUGUST 14, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Interior Minister Campaigns for Support for Kurdish Initiative 
Papers report today that Interior Minister Besir Atalay continues 
his outreach to opposition political parties and to NGOs in support 
of the government's Kurdish Initiative.  Mainstream Sabah draws 
attention to Atalay's meeting yesterday with opposition DTP leader 
Ahmet Turk.  Sabah reports that after the meeting, Atalay said, 
"Turkey is a big country. Let us rely on ourselves. We will solve 
all the problems as long as we have self confidence," and he 
emphasized, "this is Turkey's brotherhood and peace project." 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet notes Turk said he hopes the 
government's plan will not be disappointing, noting that a road map 
was needed. Liberal Radikal reports that the Democratic Society 
Party (DTP) group deputy chairman Selahattin Demirtas said after the 
meeting with Atalay that the demands of the party were not brought 
up in the meeting, but these demands could be discussed in 
parliament at a later date. According to Radikal, the DTP wants a 
new democratic and civil constitution which does not include 
references to ethnicity or restrictions on the use of Kurdish as a 
mother tongue.  In addition, the party would like to see measures in 
which local administrations are strengthened. 
 
Cumhuriyet also points out Atalay visited the Confederation of 
Turkish Labor Unions (Turk-Is), the Union of Bars (TOBB), and 
Hak-Is. After the meetings, Turk-Is Chairman Kumlu said "Turkey's 
independence and borders should carry priority in all discussions." 
TOBB chairman Ozok said, "We want peace in our country." 
 
In a related article, Islamist-oriented Zaman reports that, 
"Following the support of opinion leaders in the East and the 
Southeast to the 'peace and brotherhood' project initiated by the 
government to resolve Kurdish issue," NGOS and businessmen are 
saying "The problem will be solved if the government and the 
opposition work hand in hand," and "will relieve Turkey of a very 
big burden." 
Papers also report that the town of Eruh, which is located in the 
southeastern province of Siirt, will serve as the location for the 
announcement of jailed-PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan's 'Roadmap' for a 
solution to the Kurdish problem.  Ocalan's lawyers and DTP members 
have been dispatched to the town for its annual cultural festival, 
where Ocalan's plan will be announced tomorrow, August 15th.  In 
addition, reports indicate up to 2000 police have also been 
dispatched to the area as a security precaution. 
 
Diyarbakir Is Hiring Police Who Speak Kurdish 
Papers report that the southeastern city of Diyarbakir is recruiting 
Kurdish-speakers to apply for positions as police officers. 
Mainstream Vatan calls the measure, "The Police's Kurdish Move." 
Mainstream Hurriyet and Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak call it "The 
Kurdish Initiative from The Police."  All papers report Mustafa 
Saglam, who is the newly appointed chief of police in Diyarbakir, 
said, "I have come here voluntarily. I want to serve well by 
improving relations between the citizens and police. In order to 
achieve this, we will reinforce the cadre of the department with 
police who know the language of the region well." Vatan notes, 
"Although the contents of the government's Kurdish move are hidden 
as secret, according to the sources close to the government, the 
employment of personnel who know Kurdish in state departments is one 
of the topics of the move," and thus, "The Diyarbakir police will 
undertake a pioneering role in this sense."  Yeni Safak also notes 
Saglam said, "Our target is zero crime in the province of 
Diyarbakir." 
 
Editorial Debates on the Kurdish Initiative 
Fikret Bila wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "Remarks from DTP 
leadership clearly indicate that this party will not commit itself 
to the Kurdish initiative process nor it will shape a position until 
a plan becomes available from the PKK as well as its imprisoned 
leader Ocalan.  One wonders how come the stance of opposition 
parties is so much under fire by some opinion makers while the DTP 
 
ANKARA 00001194  002 OF 003 
 
 
cannot even go to a point beyond the PKK's clout." 
 
Fehmi Koru wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "Unlike Turkey, it 
is a traditional practice for opposition parties to campaign for 
thorny issues.  The government party is doing something unusual by 
taking a determined stance on addressing the Kurdish issue and it is 
taking all of the political and other risks.  Is it not the time for 
opposition parties in Turkey to change themselves?" 
 
Ismet Berkan wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "Apart from the 
Kurdish issue, the government should consider to reintroduce the 
long-standing administrative system reform package.  Turkey's system 
needs to be decentralized, and after all, it will also contribute to 
the Kurdish initiative process." 
 
Mehmet Yilmaz wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "One of the Turkey 
experts in the U.S., Henri Barkey made some interesting comments, 
particularly on the role of Constitutional Court in Turkish rule of 
law system.  He thinks that there will be some efforts for 
proceeding by the government but the Constitutional Court may be an 
obstacle.  It is very hard to understand why and how the Court can 
be an obstacle to the reform process as long as it is compatible 
with the Constitution of this country.  Just watch and see that 
Barkey's remarks will be start of a delibarate 'anti court' campaign 
within Turkey's pro-government media.  The ultimate goal is to 
eliminate everything in the checks and balances system so that there 
will be no power against PM Erdogan.  The end of this road 
undoubtedly leads to saying goodbye to democracy." 
 
Erdal Safak wrote in mainstream Sabah: "Henri Barkey made a rightful 
observation in his article in Wall Street Journal.  He was giving a 
good example by noting Turkey's worry on human rights violation in 
Israel and China while Kurdish is still banned in Turkey.  Turkey 
cannot be an powerful international actor unless it addresses its 
Kurdish problem." 
 
Signs the Economic Crisis Is Coming To An End 
In "The Worst Is Behind Us," mainstream Hurriyet reports Turkish 
Industrialists' and Businessmen Association (TUSIAD) chairperson 
Arzuhan Dogan Yalcindag spoke at yesterday's meeting of the Economic 
Coordination Council that convened in central Anatolian province of 
Konya.  During her speech, she said "Considering the latest news, 
the world and the Turkish economy have seen the worst," of the 
current economic crisis.  Meanwhile, Islamist-oriented Zaman reports 
Deputy Prime Minister Ali Babacan also said at the meeting, 
"Whatever has been or will be done, unfortunately, 2009 will be 
recorded as a lost year for the world's economy history."  However, 
Babacan also noted, "Turkey will be one of the countries that will 
overcome the crisis rapidly." 
 
A Torture Crisis "In The Capital of The EU" (Vatan) 
Papers report this morning that Turkey has sent a diplomatic note of 
protest to Belgium regarding the death of a Turkish citizen in a 
Belgian prison. Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports 31-year-old 
Mikail Tekin was arrested and jailed for arguing with traffic police 
last weekend, and he later died in Jamioulx prison near Charleroi. 
Initially prison officials said he died while eating, however, 
Belgian authorities said he died due to "physical violence" and 
opened an investigation into the death of Tekin after statements by 
several eyewitnesses. Three guards were interrogated but later 
released, which Yeni Safak says "led to controversies and reaction 
in Belgium and in Turkey." Mainstream Sabah reports Turkish Foreign 
Minister Ahmet Davutoglu spoke to his Belgian counterpart Yves 
Leterme over the phone regarding the death of Tekin and asked the 
incident to be investigated. In "Scandal in the Capital of The EU," 
mainstream Vatan reports, "Belgium released three prison guards who 
killed 31 year-old Mikail Tekin while he was in prison," and "The 
autopsy report of Tekin clarified that Tekin died because he was 
beaten to death, contrary to prior allegations that he died when he 
choked while eating."  In addition, Vatan notes, "The prosecutor's 
office released the guards saying they would investigate whether the 
 
ANKARA 00001194  003 OF 003 
 
 
guards used excessive force or not."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
reports, "The guards did not get any accusation or disciplinary 
penalty." 
 
Holbrooke Announces Visit to Turkey 
Anatolian News Agency reported yesterday U.S. Special Envoy for 
South Asia Richard Holbrooke announced he will visit Turkey later 
this month.  During a speech at the Center for American Progress in 
Washington earlier this week, Holbrooke announced he will depart 
Washington on Friday for an official visit to Pakistan, Afghanistan, 
and Turkey.  Holbrooke emphasized Turkey's importance to the efforts 
in Afghanistan during his speech, and noted that he is going to 
Turkey because the country is hosting a meeting of the Friends of a 
Democratic Pakistan in Istanbul.  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
carried the Anatolian News Agency report in their paper today under 
the headline, "Holbrooke Underlined Turkey's Importance." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
Q German Ambassador Eckard Cuntz says Turkey will be strengthened if 
it manages to solve its problems. 
Q In a visit to Rize, Prime Minister Erdogan issues messages about 
the democratic opening of the government, saying that the goal was 
to make 71 million Turkish people love each other. 
Q The government will spend more than three billion lira to complete 
the Southeastern Anatolia Project (GAP) which covers the mainly 
Kurdish regions of the country. 
Q Turkey's leading business gathering TUSIAD and the Turkish Union 
of Chambers (TOBB) warn the government to take steps against the 
budget deficit 
Q Nationalist party MHP launches an advertisement campaign against 
the government's Kurdish opening. 
Q Prime Minister Erdogan says his government wants no tensions while 
pressing ahead with the democratic opening. 
Q DTP activists rally in Istanbul demanding an end to security 
operations in the Southeast, and DTP deputy Pervin Buldan says 
Imrali prison island (where PKK leader Abdullah Vcalan is jailed) 
was "the address for solution." 
Q DTP deputy Selahattin Demirtas says the AKP cannot ignore PKK and 
Ocalan while working on settlement in the Kurdish issue. 
Q Former Turkish president Kenan Evran, who spearheaded the 1980 
military coup, is in good health after undergoing an intestinal 
operation at an army hospital in Ankara. 
 
World 
 
Q Two suicide bombers killed at least 20 people and wounded 30 
others in northern Iraq's Mosul province. 
Q Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Matthew Bryza says Azerbaijan 
and Armenia are close to ending their long-simmering dispute over 
Nagorno-Karabakh. 
Q An Israeli soldier is abducted by a Palestinian organization near 
the Ben Gurion International Airport. 
Q Human Rights Watch calls on Israel to investigate seven incidents 
in which it said Israeli troops shot dead Palestinian civilians who 
were flying white flags during the war in the Gaza Strip in January. 
 
Q Bulgaria's Constitutional Court will examine the legitimacy of 
voting for Bulgarian Parliamentary elections at Turkish polling 
stations. 
Q Syrian President Bashar al-Assad is to pay a state visit to Iran 
in the near future, the official IRNA news agency reports. 
 
SILLIMAN