09ANKARA535
Media Say Turkey and Azerbaijan Will Address Tensions Over
Fri Apr 10 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO5201
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0535/01 1001102
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 101102Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9387
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9591
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5610
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3745
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7224
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7099
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3679
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000535 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: Media Say Turkey and Azerbaijan Will Address Tensions Over 
Turco-Armenian Relations 
 
FRIDAY, APRIL 10, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Turkey and Azerbaijan Work to Reduce Tensions over Ankara's Armenia 
Initiative 
Media outlets report an Azerbaijani delegation comprised of 
parliamentarians and NGO representatives will visit Ankara from 
April 15-18 to discuss ways to reduce the strains over Turkey's 
Armenia initiative.  Mainstream Hurriyet reports a delegation from 
Turkey-Azerbaijan friendship group in the parliament will travel to 
Baku next week to meet with the Azerbaijani lawmakers, civic 
organizations and media members. 
 
Hurriyet claims Baku has put forth three conditions before 
consenting to the normalization of ties between Turkey and Armenia, 
all of which are related to the withdrawal of Armenian troops from 
the "occupied Azerbaijani territory Nagorno Karabakh."  Earlier this 
week, television news reports noted Prime Minister Erdogan held a 
news conference Wednesday evening and said, "The problems between 
Turkey and Armenia can be resolved after a settlement is reached on 
the Nagorno-Karabakh issue," and "We hope the UN Security Council 
names Armenia as the 'occupier' in Nagorno-Karabakh and calls for a 
withdrawal of Armenian troops.  The Minsk Group has been unable to 
succeed in this effort over the last 17 years." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-Armenia-Azerbaijan 
 
Ferai Tinc wrote in mainstream Hurriyet:  "In my earlier columns I 
had explained that the Azerbaijani people also should be told about 
the ongoing Turkey-Armenia rapprochement.  There has been secret 
diplomacy between Turkey and Armenia over the last two years, and 
while Azerbaijani officials were informed of every step taken 
towards rapprochement, the Azerbaijani people were not informed 
about these developments.  It is a complicated endeavor to 
communicate secret diplomacy successfully to the public, 
particularly when the topic is a hotly charged political topic like 
this one.  In order to initiate changes in a country, first of all , 
the public should be convinced.  Now, the Turkey-Armenia 
rapprochement process will continue.  And, as President Obama 
promised to President Aliyev on the phone, the Nagorno-Karabagh 
issue will come to the agenda as well.  Turkey's Armenian approach 
will also be able to open the dead lock on the  Karabagh issue, as 
long as it is not tackled by Azerbaijani leadership's weaknesses." 
 
Sami Kohen wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "No one in Ankara plans to 
sacrifice Azerbaijan in order to improve ties with Armenia.  Turkey 
never failed to inform Azerbaijan regarding the meetings it had with 
Armenia.  Unfortunately, the recent speculations have caused a 
crisis of trust with Azerbaijan.  Officials in Ankara say Turkey 
will not open Turkey-Armenia border before April 24.  This problem 
has many angles and it is rather complicated.  Moreover, many 
countries are involved, i.e., Turkey, U.S., Russia, Azerbaijan, 
Armenia, as well as the Armenian Diaspora.  That is why it is not an 
easy problem to resolve.  It will take time.  As long as all right 
steps are taken by all the parties, in time, this issue will be 
resolved." 
 
The AKP's Yakis: Halki Seminary Cannot be Reopened as a Private 
University 
Mainstream Haberturk reports Yasar Yakis, the head of the 
parliamentary committee for EU harmonization, said "reopening the 
Greek Orthodox Halki Seminary in Istanbul as a private university 
would pave the way for similar demands from radical religious groups 
in Turkey."  Yakis noted the constitution "does not allow private 
education institutions to train soldiers, police officers and 
clerics."  He added that "the problem could be resolved by opening 
the seminary as part of a state university, but the Greek community 
in Istanbul rejects this formula." 
 
 
ANKARA 00000535  002 OF 003 
 
 
$45 Billon Coming from the IMF (Radikal) 
Media outlets report Turkey was likely to get approximately USD 45 
billion from the IMF following a new stand by deal reached with 
Turkey to cover a period of three years.  State Minister for 
Treasury Mehmet Simsek said the IMF money "would help finance 
Turkey's foreign trade deficit."  Liberal Radikal expects Turkey and 
the IMF to complete the draft of the deal within two weeks. 
Meanwhile, businessmen from Istanbul told the Islamist-oriented 
Zaman a loan of USD 45 billion would "harm Turkey's credibility in 
the eyes of foreign investors and global business circles," adding 
that "USD 20-25 billion would be enough for Turkey." 
 
Military and Interior Ministry Warns Governors against Activities of 
the U.S. Air Force Office of Special Investigations (Aksam) 
Mainstream Aksam reports that after being notified by the Turkish 
General Staff (TGS,) the Interior Ministry has warned all governors' 
offices to "be careful to not give information to OSI agents" who 
were reportedly "asking for information from local officials prior 
the municipality elections held in late March."  The ministry waited 
until the departure of President Obama from Turkey in order to avoid 
tensions in the issue, and sent a circular on April 7 to "warn" the 
governors.  The TGS has reportedly told the Interior Ministry that 
OSI members were "paying visits to several local officials around 
the country," according to Aksam. 
 
Editorial Commentary on the Aftermath of Obama's Turkey Visit and 
Turkey-EU Relations 
 
Hasan Bulent Kahraman wrote in mainstream Sabah:  "President Obama 
is trying to establish a new world order that is based on democracy. 
 The Obama Era will be a  very democratic period and Turkey will be 
expected to show the same sensitivity to democracy.  It will be in 
Turkey's interest to improve democracy and not to oppose Obama.  The 
major benefit Turkey received from Obama's visit was Obama's 
explanation on how to develop democracy." 
 
Hikmet Cetinkaya wrote in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet:  "If it 
were former President Bush instead of President Obama who referred 
to Kurds as a minority, everyone would have reacted much more 
harshly.  However,  Obama is a sympathetic black leader so no one 
was disturbed.  As a matter of fact, Obama outlined his demands to 
Turkey in his speech, namely his calls to reopen Halki-Seminary, to 
resolve problems in ties with Armenia, to deal with the events of 
1915, and to cooperate with Kurdish leaders regarding the PKK issue, 
etc.  The Armenian lobby will never give up its efforts to have the 
1915 incidents to be recognized as genocide." 
 
Ali Bayramoglu wrote in Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak:  The EU's has 
played an enormous role on Turkey's recent democratic reforms. 
Turkey, based on the Copenhagen Criteria, has carried out many 
reforms.  A Turkey that adopts an enlightened approach on the 
Kurdish issue and that opens its border with Armenia will have 
better chance at quickly joining the EU.  This is where the positive 
effects of Obama's visit come since he encouraged Turkey on these 
paths." 
 
Opposition Takes to the Streets in Tbilisi, Gives President 24-Hour 
Warning 
Media outlets remind that the same types of demonstrations used to 
bring Georgian President Saakashvili to power in 2003 are now being 
used to call for his resignation.  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
reports in "Resignation Pressure to Saakashvili," that "17 different 
opposition parties organized tens of thousands of people to 
demonstrate and call on President Saakashvili to resign." 
Cumhuriyet also reports, "Demonstrators accuse Saakashvili of 
mistaken policies that opened the way to Abkhazia and South 
Ossetia's secession and to war with Russia."  Mainstream Hurriyet 
notes "100,000 people took to the streets of Tbilisi yesterday to 
call for Saakashvili's resignation."  In addition, Hurriyet notes 
"Dorothy Stein, a masseuse to Hollywood stars, was brought by 
 
ANKARA 00000535  003 OF 003 
 
 
private plane to work as the Georgian President's masseuse," which 
"provided a trump card to the opposition," to criticize Saakashvili. 
 Mainstream Sabah reports, "the same tactics used to bring 
Saakashvili to power six years ago are being used to call for his 
resignation."  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports "The Opposition in 
Georgia is Also Mobilized," after anti-communist demonstrations 
reached the parliament building in Moldova.  Liberal Radikal notes 
"Saakashvili Has One Foot in the Hole," as "the opposition has 
marched to parliament to call for Saakashvili's resignation," and 
former presidential candidate Leva Gacelidze declared "Our country 
has been separated, and we must throw him out of office."  CNN Turk 
reports, "The opposition has given Saakashvili 24 hours to resign." 
 
Protests Against U.S. Invasion of Iraq 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports in "Protests Against the 
Invasion," that "Tens of thousands of Iraqis took to the square 
where the statue of Saddam Hussein was toppled in Baghdad in 2003," 
in order to "protest the sixth anniversary of the U.S. invasion of 
Iraq."  Mainstream Sabah reports, "Supporters of Muqtada al Sadr 
demonstrated in the streets to demand the release of prisoners and 
the withdrawal of U.S. forces from Iraq."  Sabah also notes "In a 
symbolic effort, the protestors chanted slogans against the U.S. and 
burned posters in Firdev square, the location where the Saddam 
statue was brought down in 2003." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- A Heritage Foundation report says the AKP appears to be moving 
Turkey away from its pro-Western and pro-American orientation to a 
more Islamist one. 
 
- After 29 years, May 1 will be declared an official holiday in 
Turkey.  Labor Minister Faruk Celik said a bill was submitted to the 
cabinet of ministers for approval before it was enacted in the 
parliament.  Trade unions asked the governor's office for permission 
to hold their May Day celebrations at the Taksim Square in the heart 
of Istanbul. 
 
- Police in Eskisehir detained 30 members of the "Selefi Group" 
which has links with al-Qaeda.  Some of the suspects reportedly 
received training in Afghanistan years ago. 
 
- Yasin Hayal, one of the masterminds of the slaying of Hrant Dink, 
has been sentenced to three years for bombing the McDonald's in 
Trabzon prior to the Dink murder. 
 
- A survey by Turkey's Central Bank expects year-end inflation to 
stand at 6.57 percent. 
 
World 
 
- Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi announced the death toll from 
Monday's earthquake rose to 279, including 20 children.  Berlusconi 
said earthquake reconstruction will cost several billion Euros. 
 
- CIA director Leon Panetta says in a letter sent to agency 
employees the CIA is no longer operating secret prisons to 
interrogate terror suspects, and plans to shut all remaining "black 
sites." 
 
- Syrian PM Muhammad Naji Otri met Turkish Justice Minister Mehmet 
Ali Sahin Thursday, discussing the prospects of enhancing the 
growing cooperation between the two countries. 
 
JEFFREY