09ANKARA1554
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Tue Oct 27 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1187
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1554/01 3001256
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 271256Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1080
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0102
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6424
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4230
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7611
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7509
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4100
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001554 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
TUESDAY, OCTOBER 27, 2009 
 
Media Highlights:  PM Erdogan on Iran; US Religious Freedom Report 
Rattles; PKK Returnees Postponement Update; 
Debate over Army "Coup Document" 
 
Erdogan on Iran 
PM Erdogan's interview with The Guardian is extensively covered in 
today's papers.  Mainstream Hurriyet headline reads "PM Erdogan 
Supported Iran, Criticized Israel"; Milliyet headline reads 
"Ahmedinejad is Our Friend"; Sabah headline says "Erdogan's Reminder 
of Lieberman Annoyed Israel"; liberal Radikal "The West Should Look 
at Itself, Instead of Iran".  Hurriyet notes that, during the 
interview, PM Erdogan dismissed rumors that Iran is seeking a 
nuclear weapon and stressed that Iran's efforts for nuclear power is 
only for energy purposes.  With his remarks, Erdogan criticized 
Israel and supported Iran, the paper notes. Hurriyet notes that 
Erdogan also said "the US policy in this region is not dictated by 
Israel."  He also reminded that Israeli FM Lieberman had threatened 
Gaza in the past to use nuclear weapons against it.  Nationalist 
Tercuman predicts that Erdogan's harsh criticism of Israel will 
trigger a deeper turmoil than the crisis in Davos.  As a summary, 
The Guardian wrote at the end of the interview that "Friendly toward 
a religious theocratic Iran, covetous and increasingly resentful of 
a secular but maddeningly dismissive Europe: it seems the perfect 
summary of Turkey's east-west dichotomy." 
 
Commentary.  In "Erdogan Is not Iran's Defense Lawyer" Milliyet 
columnist Semih Idiz agrees with PM Erdogan's effort "to balance the 
nukes rhetoric by forcing Israel to be part of NPT."  He wrote in 
mainstream Milliyet: "Turkey is certainly disturbed about nuclear 
armament as expressed by PM Erdogan in many occasions.  However, PM 
Erdogan is also trying to draw international attention toward 
Israeli nuclear arsenal and considers as another factor for regional 
tension along with Iran."  Mr. Idiz says this approach may be seen 
as "Turkey has become Iran's defense lawyer" but the main goal is 
"to put the nukes issue in a balanced frame." 
 
US Religious Freedoms Report Rattles 
Mainstream and conservative media carry early assessments of the 
report but emphasize different aspects.  In "Serious Violations," 
mainstream Milliyet claims that the report says Turkey respects 
religious freedom but in order to protect the secular state, it puts 
limitations on religious groups.  Conservative Samanyoluhaber, the 
wire service for the Islamic-leaning media in Turkey, headlines in a 
lengthy report titled "US Says: Islamic Restrictions in Turkey" that 
secularism is an obstacle against religious freedom.  Meanwhile, 
mainstream Hurriyet in "US Warns Turkey on Secular State" carries 
excerpts from the report and also notes that restrictions continued 
for Islamist expressions in state institutions and the universities, 
as well as the wide prohibition of the Islamic-style headscarf.  All 
papers note that, according to the report, some Muslims, Christians 
and Bahais have been subjected to restrictions and sometimes, 
harassment.  Additionally, that the report noted that the Turkish 
state does not accept conscientious objection to military service, 
which is compulsory in Turkey.  Media report that the Religions 
Freedom Report observes that Islamic sects and communities, which 
were banned in the 1920s, were still "active and widespread." 
Reports also emphasized that Turkish authorities placed important 
restrictions on the administration of the Greek Orthodox churches, 
and refrains from recognizing the Ecumenical status of the 
Istanbul-based Greek Orthodox Patriarch.  All media noted that the 
report underlines the fact that "nationalist sentiments in Turkey 
sometimes adopt anti-Christian and anti-Semitic tones," and quotes 
the members of the Jewish community in Turkey that they saw 
anti-Semitic feelings going up after the Israeli operations on Gaza. 
 More commentary is expected on Wednesday. 
 
Turkey's Search Continues for Return of the PKK (Cumhuriyet) 
Under the headline, "Iraq Formula for the Return of the PKK," 
leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet says the AKP government would 
continue the returns, but wants it to happen "without problems." 
According to a formula discussed with the Iraqis, the PKK members 
 
ANKARA 00001554  002 OF 003 
 
 
who were not involved in crimes against Turkey will be given Iraqi 
citizenship and stay in Iraq.  An "understanding" was signed with 
the Iraqi government and the government in northern Iraq on the 
matter.  The militants who were not involved in crimes will be 
allowed to return to Turkey.  Concerning the PKK leadership, talks 
will be held with third countries to send the leaders out of Iraq. 
Some figures among the PKK leadership, however, might want to 
continue politics by joining the Kurdish political parties in Turkey 
or Iraq, says Cumhuriyet. 
Meanwhile, papers also report a statement from DTP leader Ahmet Turk 
as promising more sensitivity with upcoming returnees.  The DTP 
leader Ahmet Turk, speaking at a press conference on Monday, said 
his party will act more sensitively when it comes to the return of 
groups affiliated with the PKK. 
 
Turkish Armed Forces Initiates New Investigation for Alleged 
Military Document 
Mainstream Sabah reports that the Turkish General Staff (TGS) 
initiated a new investigation on Monday after certain news stories 
in Turkish media speculated about an original document on the fight 
against fundamentalism.  The news stories argued that the signature 
on the relevant document was real.  Mainstream Hurriyet headline 
reads "The Investigation Initiated at 13.30 on Monday" and reports 
that the TGS finds the timing of the recent release of an alleged 
military document suspicious and meaningful.  The TGS also says it 
still has doubts over the authenticity of the document.  Sabah 
headline says "The Prosecutor is After Colonel Cicek and Five 
Privates"; liberal Radikal quotes PM Erdogan as saying regarding the 
document "I hope that the allegations are not true.  Turkish 
Republic could not digest such things.  I will discuss the issue 
with TGS Chief General Basbug at our regular weekly briefing." 
Leftist Taraf gives extensive front-page coverage to the words of 
Deputy Prime Minister B|lent Aring that is was time to take action 
against the members of the military junta plotting a coup against 
the government. Mainstream Milliyet quotes MHP deputy chair Oktay 
Vural as saying on the issue "If there is a power to end the AKP 
government,that will be either us or the people at the elections.  I 
want the truth, is this issue being used by the AKP government to 
change the agenda, and divert everyone's attention from their 
democratic opening fiasco?!" 
 
Commentary.  The alleged coup document of the army dominates the 
columns for Turkish pundits.  Islamist leaning and conservative 
writers call for the Chief of General Staff's "retirement or 
resignation" while moderate writers mostly express trust that the 
top rank command "will do whatever necessary to punish the 
responsible ones." 
 
Islamist oriented Yeni Safak writers, Tamer Korkmaz and Ali 
Bayramoglu hold chief of general staff responsible for this, and 
mainstream Sabah's Nazli Ilicak joins their approach by saying: "At 
this point what will happen to General Basbug is very important.  He 
seems to have two options; retirement or resignation." 
 
In "Basbug Will Do Whatever Necessary" columnist Fikret Bila 
expresses trust in General Basbug and army's loyalty to democracy. 
In mainstream Milliyet he states: "Given General Basbug's earlier 
statements as he was repeatedly pledging loyalty to democracy and 
rule of law, he will undoubtedly go till the bitter end and find out 
who is behind this document and what is all this about." 
 
In "Worth Thinking Results for the Army" columnist Sedat Ergin notes 
that there are credible facts to believe the document is genuine. 
Given this fact, he calls the army to focus on its military duties 
only.  In mainstream Hurriyet he suggests: "It is not pleasant to 
see that there are still out-of-democracy advocates within the 
Turkish General Staff and the army is incapable of preventing them 
from arranging coup plans."  However Mr. Ergin remains hopeful 
because of General Basbug's approach "to investigate the issue till 
the bitter end." 
 
 
ANKARA 00001554  003 OF 003 
 
 
Upcoming events: 
 
Q October 27: A delegation of the Turkish Parliament's foreign 
affairs committee visits Azerbaijan. 
Q October 27: Chief EU negotiator Egemen Bagis visits Finland. 
Q October 27: Turkey-EU joint parliamentary commission holds a 
meeting. 
Q November 8: CHP leader Deniz Baykal will go to Iraq to meet Iraqi 
President Talabani. 
Q December 7: Prime Minister Erdogan will visit the US, according to 
widespread press and TV reports 
 
TV News (NTV) 
 
Domestic 
 
Q Municipalities in Ankara, Istanbul and Izmir are disinfecting 
schools and means of public transportation to contain the swine flu 
outbreak. 
Q The Health Ministry says 1095 swine flu cases have been reported 
in Turkey since May 15. 
Q A group of relatives of martyred soldiers has filed a legal 
complaint against the PM and Interior Minister for launching the 
democratic initiative that led to the return of 34 PKK militants to 
Turkey. 
Q Turkish Tourism Research Association says the sale of property to 
foreigners declined by 38 percent in August in comparison to the 
same month of the previous year. 
Q A regulation for the sale of genetically modified food is 
published in the Official Gazette. 
 
World 
 
Q President Gul visits Serbia on an official visit for the first 
time in 23 years. 
Q 14 American soldiers were killed when a helicopter crashed and two 
others collided in south of Afghanistan. 
Q The trial of Radovan Karadzic is adjourned for a day by a UN court 
after the former Bosnian Serb leader refused to attend the opening. 
 
 
JEFFREY