09ANKARA871
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Tue Jun 23 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6603
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0871/01 1741055
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 231055Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9986
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0119
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5902
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3940
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7379
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7268
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3848
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000871 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
TUESDAY, JUNE 23, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Erdogan: There is No Decline In Turkey's EU Enthusiasm 
Media outlets report Prime Minister Erdogan hosted a luncheon with 
the ambassadors of EU countries and said there has not been a 
decline in Turkey's enthusiasm or momentum towards its EU bid.  "The 
attitudes of some EU countries, however, paved the way for the 
erosion of public enthusiasm for Turkey's EU bid," said Erdogan. 
 
Papers also report that in the meeting with the EU ambassadors, 
Prime Minister Erdogan said the state was distributing free 
schoolbooks to primary and secondary school students, and added this 
arrangement would be expanded to embrace also minority schools. 
Liberal Radikal says the decision to give free books to minority 
schools was adopted in line with a complaint filed by Varujan Turac, 
a Turkish Armenian. 
 
Basbug: NATO Members Should Assume Common Stance against Terror 
Media outlets report General Ilker Basbug, the chief of the military 
General Staff (TGS), told the Silk Road Generals-Admirals Seminar 
held in Istanbul there was no guarantee that nations which had not 
suffered from terrorism so far would never suffer.  "This problem 
can only be solved by a collective effort of all nations, 
particularly allied ones," said Basbug.  Basbug stressed he believed 
NATO member countries should eliminate the differences in their 
positions and policies, assuming a "common stance against 
terrorism."  The top general defined terrorism as the most serious 
threat against the international community and the security of NATO. 
  "Terrorism not only targets at lives of innocent people but also 
threatens common humanitarian values such as democracy, freedom and 
human rights," emphasized Basbug.  Basbug added it would be "a 
mistake to believe terrorism can be eliminated solely by taking 
economic and socio-cultural measures when terrorist organizations 
maintain their armed forces."  Basbug underlined that the Turkish 
military was determined to fight against terrorism until the 
terrorist organization "dissolves and disarms."  Basbug said he 
believed NATO's enlargement would help strengthen confidence and 
stability in all Euro-Atlantic area, and accession of new members 
would help fulfill a free and united Europe and NATO target. 
 
FM Davutoglu Speaks on Political Climate in Iran 
Papers report that, after his meeting with the UAE's Foreign 
Minister Sheikh Abdallah bin Zayid al-Nuhayyan, Turkish Foreign 
Minister Ahmet Davutoglu spoke to press on a range of issues, 
including the current political situation in Iran.  Davutoglu said 
that Iran was an important neighboring country and a friend and 
sibling to Turkey.  He said Iran's stability was of great importance 
for Turkey and the region.   "We hope that the developments in Iran 
are concluded in the most proper way and through internal 
mechanisms. We also hope that the recent elections in the country, 
which were held in a dynamic atmosphere and with a high 
participation rate, are not overshadowed," Davutoglu said. 
 
Bryza: Nagorno-Karabakh Deal Possible Mid-July 
Mainstream Sabah reports Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Matthew 
Bryza told Reuters that international mediators hope to reach a 
"framework agreement" between Azerbaijan and Armenia regarding 
Nagorno-Karabakh at talks tentatively planned for mid-July in 
Russia.  Sabah also says the Azeri Trend News Agency reported 
President Obama would raise Nagorno-Karabakh when he visits Moscow 
July 4-6. 
 
In a related story, CNN Turk reports Armenian FM Nalbandiyan said 
during a press conference in Yerevan yesterday, "Despite the 
preconditions placed (on the Turkey-Armenia normalization process) 
by Turkish leaders regarding Nagorno-Karabakh," Nalbaniyan is 
"hopeful" regarding Turkey and Armenia's normalization process. 
 
Gul: A Free Press Makes Countries More Transparent (Milliyet) 
Mainstreams Milliyet and Hurriyet report that at Monday's 
anniversary celebration of the Photo Reporters' Association in 
 
ANKARA 00000871  002 OF 003 
 
 
Ankara, President Abdullah Gul said, "A free press makes countries 
more transparent and helps democracy take root."  Gul also noted, 
"If a free press is absent in a country, there are many other things 
that are lacking.  If the truth and wrongdoing in a country are not 
freely reported, there will be a major tendency in that country 
toward wrong things," said Gul. 
 
Neda, The Global Symbol (Milliyet) 
The main international story today is Iran, and the story is making 
the front pages.  Media note that Neda has become a rallying call to 
demonstrators to defy the threats from Religious Leader Khameney and 
the Revolutionary Guard.  Mainstream Vatan headlines, "The New 
Slogan in Iran: We Are All Neda," and the paper notes, "Yesterday 
Iranians demonstrated in several countries throughout the world, 
including Turkey, and they used Neda's photograph and chanted 'We 
are all Neda.'"  Mainstream Hurriyet's front-page headline reads, 
"Neda Lights the Fire of Revolution" and the article reports, 
"demonstrations start today to honor the martyred girl." 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports, "Iranians Are Mourning 
Neda," as "The voice of Iran."  The paper also calls the 
Revolutionary Guard, "the country's most effective military force," 
and notes, "this distinguished force has stated that they will start 
a revolutionary struggle against the opposition protestors." 
Leftist Taraf reports "Despite the threats from the Revolutionary 
Guard," "The opposition filled the streets yesterday for slain 
Neda." Liberal Radikal headlines, "An Ultimatum from The Regime," 
and reports, "Mousavi won't back down in Iran as he calls for 
peaceful demonstrations," but "following Khamaney, the Revolutionary 
Guard also issued an ultimatum 'We are ready to fight a revolution 
against the conspirators.'" 
 
In a related article, Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports, "Mousavi 
Could Be Tried," as "The tensions in Iran continue," and "The 
streets are being turned into a war zone by the protestors," and 
"Parliament's Justice Commission Director Sahruki said Mousavi could 
be tried for inciting activities against national security."  Next 
to a photo of a weeping woman who is holding a photo of Ahmadinejad, 
the paper's caption reads, "In Iran it is the women who are shedding 
the most tears," as "Iranian women are crying out 'Finish this 
sibling quarrel.'" 
 
Editorials on Iran 
 
Rusen Cakir wrote in mainstream Vatan: "It becomes a manifestation 
of demise for any revolution when the regime starts lying to its 
people.  This is exactly what is happening in today's Iran.  The 
regime has significantly lost its legitimacy and sooner or later we 
will start discussing the new directions in which Iran is about to 
be heading." 
 
Sami Kohen wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "Iran is still like a 
boiler and there is no sign for calmness from the rulers or the 
protestors.  More harsh measures by the regime are expected while 
Iran moves toward a more chaotic situation." 
 
Ibrahim Karagul wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "Despite the 
beliefs of some American neo-cons and others, the ongoing street 
riots will not lead to a change of regime.  The regime, on the other 
hand, will likely get tougher on protestors as well as more radical 
on regional and international policies.  It is possible that in 
order to divert the attention, Iran is creating new tension in some 
other parts of the region, such as in Lebanon." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) Domestic 
 
- The Wall Street Journal (WSJ) writes both the Turkish government 
and the PKK are ready for compromise, and that the U.S. can help 
demobilize the PKK by acting as a trusted go-between. 
 
- Prime Minister Erdogan says the parliament will not go into summer 
recess before the parliament passes 17-18 reforms drafted within the 
 
ANKARA 00000871  003 OF 003 
 
 
framework of EU harmonization. 
 
- Defense Minister Vecdi Gonul visits Spain to attend a meeting of 
defense ministers of A-400M cargo plane program countries included 
in Seville. 
 
- The National Security Council (MGK) will hold a meeting June 30. 
 
 
- The World Bank says Turkey's economy may shrink 5.5 percent this 
year.  The bank forecasts a return to growth in 2010 of 1.5 percent, 
and projects 3 percent in 2011. 
 
- As of August 1, ferry service will start between Haifa and 
Famagusta (Gazimagusa) in Turkish Cyprus. 
 
World 
 
- Iran begins three-day airforce exercises in the Gulf and the Sea 
of Oman to raise operational and support capability. 
 
- The World Health Organization (WHO) says the global tally of 
deaths from swine flu has increased by 51 to 231. 
 
- Britain's Foreign Office says it is evacuating the families of 
staff based in Iran amid continued violence in the wake of the 
country's disputed election. 
 
- A senior al-Qaeda operative says the terrorist organization would 
use Pakistan's nuclear weapons to strike the United States if it had 
the chance to do so. 
 
JEFFREY