09ANKARA1406
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Mon Sep 28 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO5789
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1406/01 2711147
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 281147Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0842
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0055
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6293
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4170
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7568
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7460
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4048
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001406 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 28, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Leave Iran Aside and Look at Israel (Radikal) 
Media note that Turkish Prime Minister Erdogan has publically 
extended support to Iran and criticized Israel, despite President 
Obama's public announcement in Pittsburg that Iran has kept its Qum 
nuclear facility hidden from the international community. Mainstream 
Hurriyet notes, "The Prime Minister said in New York, 'There are 
countries in the Middle East which have nuclear weapons, for example 
Israel. Moreover, phosphorus bombs were used in Gaza. What is this 
called? A weapon of mass destruction. Nobody talks about those. 
Instead we are talking about Iran over and over again." Mainstream 
Milliyet reports in, "Look at Israel First," that Erdogan noted 
"Israel possesses nuclear weapons but does not receive the same 
reactions as Tehran's nuclear program."  Mainstream pro-government 
Sabah reports in "We Don't Want Nuclear Weapons," that, "Erdogan 
made important statements at his arrival in Istanbul. Replying to a 
question, Erdogan said that they did not receive a proposal on 
mediation in regard to Iran's nuclear program." However, the paper 
notes Erdogan said, "We are against nuclear weapons. But there is a 
country in the Middle East which has nuclear weapons as well and it 
is Israel. But this issue is not on the table."  Mainstream Vatan 
headlines, "The Turkish Premier: An Attack on Iran is Insanity," and 
the paper notes the PM said, "launching a military attack on Iran 
would be a crazy move given the situation in Iraq after the U.S. 
invasion," and an attack "would be very very wrong. Iraq should have 
taught us a lesson. We need to ask ourselves: 'What did we achieve 
in Iraq?' The answer is that a civilization has collapsed and over a 
million people have been killed in the country."  Conservative 
nationalist Turkiye headlines, "Iraq Should Be a Lesson," in 
reference to the possibility of military intervention in Iran, which 
the paper reports, "Erdogan said attack on Iran's nuclear facilities 
would lead to a new nightmare in the world." 
 
Editorial Opinion on Iran and G-20 
 
Mehmet Yilmaz wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "PM Erdogan tried to 
clarify rumors regarding Turkey's purchase of missiles.  However he 
made things even more confusing by noting the short range missile 
launchers possessed by Greece.  In that case, we should assume that 
this missile purchase will be targeting Greece which brings an odd 
picture since we are also trying to join the EU club and Athens is 
already in it." 
 
Ceyda Karan wrote in liberal Radikal: "As President Obama's UNGA 
speech showed, Washington has given up hope on Israeli changing or 
softening its position on Palestine.  It looks like, Washington once 
again will try to convince Arabs and will try to change their 
attitude." 
 
Hakan Albayrak wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "It was a good 
relief that Turkey stood by Iran on the nuclear issue despite all 
kinds of international pressure.  Prime Minister Erdogan made 
wonderfully courageous remarks by highlighting the injustice and 
unfairness against Iran.  It is very true that entire world is 
talking about Iran's nuclear weapons while others, like Israel, are 
not even mentioned." 
 
Omer Taspinar wrote in mainstream Sabah: "Given the recent 
developments, Iran has to be transparent and be persuasive vis-`-vis 
the international community for aiming peaceful means.  Otherwise, 
within the next three months, the international community i.e. UNSC 
is going to discuss serious sanctions against Iran.  Unlike previous 
times, Russia is closer to the idea of sanctions.  In this regard, 
Turkey's position will be critically important.  Let's hope that 
Ankara's strategic stance does not go side by side with China." 
 
Ali Aslan wrote in Islamist oriented Zaman: "Iran's enrichment 
program has set the scene in the G-20 and the upcoming 5+1 meeting 
is now more critical than ever.  Iran's recent effort toward uranium 
enrichment diminishes President Obama's hope for more dialogue for 
 
ANKARA 00001406  002 OF 003 
 
 
the nuclear problem.  At the same time, Turkey's position on this 
issue has become more important because Turkey is playing in the 
first league of politics, and is part of the UNSC.  Ankara's main 
policy line desires integration both to Western system as well as to 
Islamic world.  When UNSC starts debating sanctions against Iran, 
Turkey will have to make a policy choice.  That is a natural risk 
when a country becomes a player of the first league." 
 
Erdogan-Obama Meet on the Sidelines of G-20 Summit in Pittsburgh 
Weekend papers give extensive front-page coverage to a brief meeting 
between Prime Minister Erdogan and President Obama at the end of the 
G-20 summit in Pittsburgh.  Sunday's mainstream Hurriyet says that 
at the end of the meeting, Obama asked Erdogan to stay, and for 15 
minutes, the two discussed "regional issues of importance for 
Turkey," including the dispute between Armenia and Azerbaijan. 
Erdogan asked the Minsk Group to take a more active role to 
facilitate the process.  Obama said he was aware of the importance 
of Nagorno Karabakh in solving disagreements between the two 
countries.  Liberal Radikal says that in a "brief, but substantial" 
meeting, the situation between Israel and Palestine as well as 
between Syria and Iraq were taken up.  Radikal says the meeting took 
place on the eve of Erdogan's planned trip to Tehran in October or 
early November.  Mainstream Aksam claims the discussions focused not 
on the problems between Armenia and Azerbaijan, but on Iran's 
nuclear ambitions.  Before the meeting with Obama, Erdogan held a 
meeting with Russian President Medvedev, notes Aksam. 
 
Talabani: Iraq Won't Open Its Airspace to Attacks on Iran 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports Iraq's President Jalal 
Talabani said Iraq would not allow "Israel or another country" to 
use the Iraqi airspace or territories in attacks on Iran.  Talabani 
also defended new sanctions to be imposed by the UN would not change 
the attitude of Tehran.  Cumhuriyet also reports Secretary Clinton 
has welcomed Tehran's decision that a new nuclear site in Iran would 
be open to inspection. 
 
Turkey-Armenia Protocols to be Signed October 10 (Sabah) 
Mainstream Sabah reported Saturday that the protocols for the 
normalization of Turkey-Armenia ties would be signed October 10 in 
Zurich or Bern, with the participation of Turkish Foreign Minister 
Ahmet Davutoglu, Armenian Foreign Minister Eduard Nalbandian and 
Swiss Foreign Minister Micheline Calmy-Rey.  The Turkish Foreign 
Ministry (MFA) will send the documents to the parliament for 
ratification without delay before the Turkish and Armenian soccer 
teams meet for a World Cup qualifier in Bursa on October 14.  Sabah 
expects the ratification of the protocols to be raised in parliament 
after the game in Bursa. 
 
Monday's mainstream Aksam carries an Agence France-Presse (AFP) 
report in which an unnamed source in Ankara said the "agreement for 
normalization" will be signed in Zurich on October 10. 
 
The German Election Results Are Not Good News for Turkey 
Media note that the Turkey will continue to face opposition to its 
EU bid now that Merkel has been reelected in Germany.  Mainstream 
Hurriyet writes "Angela Merkel, who is against Turkey's EU bid, was 
able to maintain her seat despite the economic crisis." 
Islamist-oriented Zaman called the outcome of the German elections, 
"Risky for Turkey." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
Q Prime Minister Erdogan is expected to visit Iraq in October to 
join the second meeting of Turkey-Iraq Strategic Cooperation 
Council. 
Q The Chief of the military General Staff (TGS), General Ilker 
Basbug, visits Madrid to meet Spanish counterpart Jose Julio 
Rodriguez Fernandez. 
Q Energy Minister Taner Yildiz said Turkey and Russian natural gas 
 
ANKARA 00001406  003 OF 003 
 
 
company Gazprom were going to cooperate in gas exploration in 
northern Iraq. 
Q Istanbul's Sisli Mayor Mustafa Sarigul chaired Sunday the first 
meeting of his newly founded party, Turkey Change Movement, and 
addressed a crowd of supporters. 
Q 12 suspects are taken into custody for preparing fake medical 
reports for exemption from compulsory military service. 
 
World 
 
Q Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu met with his Russian counterpart 
Sergey Lavrov in New York to discuss the normalization process 
between Turkey and Armenia.  The two foreign ministers will come 
together in Moscow on October 8. 
Q Ali Asghar Soltaniyeh, Iran's representative in the IAEA, says 
Western reactions to Iran's nuclear facility would adversely affect 
their talks with the 5+1, slated for October 1. 
Q Iran test-fires three short-range ground-to-ground missiles 
shortly after the UN nuclear watchdog disclosed it was building a 
second uranium enrichment plant. 
Q Libyan leader Gaddafi has canceled a planned visit to Canada this 
week. 
Q 19,000 people working in the automotive sector in the Czech 
Republic lose their jobs over the last one year. 
 
JEFFREY