09ANKARA1574
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Mon Nov 02 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6108
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1574/01 3061138
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 021138Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1116
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0112
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6443
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4236
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7617
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7521
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4115
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001574 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
MONDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 2009 
 
Media Highlights:  Secretary Clinton in Israel; Ahmadinejad to Visit 
Turkey; Davutoglu Visits Northern Iraq; Erdogan to Visit the US; 
Afghanistan Elections 
 
Hillary Blow to Palestinians (Radikal) 
Under an inside-pages headline, "Patience Has a Limit," mainstream 
Hurriyet reports Secretary Clinton made a "tough statement" on 
Iran's nuclear program in Israel.  "We prefer solutions such as 
processing low enriched uranium outside Iran.  But we will not wait 
forever -- patience has a limit," said Clinton.  In "The US Retracts 
Settlement Condition," Islamist-oriented Zaman reports that at 
Saturday's joint press conference with Israeli Prime Minister 
Netanyahu, Clinton said Israel is putting significant limits on 
settlement activity.  Clinton has lauded Israel for making 
"unprecedented concessions" for re-launching peace talks with the 
Palestinians, says Zaman.  In "Hillary Blow to Palestinians," 
liberal Radikal says Clinton, while pressing Abbas, claimed that 
Israel brought "unprecedented limitations" on new settlements. 
 
 
Ahmadinejad to Visit Istanbul November 8-9 
All papers report Iranian President Ahmadinejad will visit Istanbul 
on November 8-9 to attend the 25th session of the Standing Committee 
for Economic and Commercial Cooperation (COMCEC) of the Organization 
of the Islamic Conference to be held in Istanbul from November 5-9. 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak says Ahmadinejad would visit Turkey 
right after Prime Minister Erdogan's visit to Tehran.  In "Iranian 
Leader to Visit Turkey Again," mainstream Milliyet says Ahmadinejad 
would meet President Gul and ask for Turkish support on Tehran's 
nuclear program.  Liberal Radikal says prior to his travel to 
Turkey, Ahmadinejad commented the West cannot be trusted in nuclear 
negotiations, and said that the power of Iran's adversaries amounts 
to that of a "mosquito." 
 
Editorials on Iran 
 
Omer Taspinar commented in mainstream Sabah under the headline 
"Honeymoon between Turkey and Iran Concerns the West":  "If the 
diplomatic negotiations between the US and Iran fails, because of 
its intense political and economic relations with Iran, Turkey might 
fall into a difficult situation.  Potentially, this situation is 
more important than the Turkey-Israel crisis.  Because, being 
concerned themselves about Israel and Netanyahu's stance, the West 
can understand the problems Turkey has with Israel.  However, when 
it comes to Iran, the US and the EU will not have the same 
understanding.  If Russia also decides to join the side of the West, 
Turkey might find itself lonely in the UN and in the Western 
platforms because the US and the EU have exhibited a joint stance 
against Iran since 2005.  When the Iran issue comes to the UN level, 
all eyes will turn to temporary member Turkey.  If Turkey doesn't 
support the West at this level, then the beliefs of the West about 
Turkey moving towards the Middle East will get stronger.  Therefore, 
the AKP government should watch its steps carefully.  Turkey's ties 
with Iran desperately need fine tuning.  Hopefully, Ankara will 
assess its position prior to PM Erdogan's US visit on December 7." 
 
Erdal Saglam assessed in mainstream Hurriyet under the headline 
"Getting Iran Gas is not as Easy as It is Said":  "Turkey signed a 
gas agreement with Iran under more difficult conditions than the 
previous ones.  We had held the same hopes in the past as well and 
all our hopes had failed at the end.  To start with, huge amounts of 
money is needed for this kind of business.  Moreover, many 
international companies are searching for gas in the 29 blocks of 
the Pars region.  Even though the government says the US is not 
reacting to the gas agreement, as happened in the past, the US is 
not showing its reaction openly.  Turkey might be able to transfer 
Iranian gas to Europe through Nabucco only after it gets full EU 
membership.  Meanwhile, giving wrong information to the public and 
pretending that everything is running smoothly will bring more harm 
than the good." 
 
 
ANKARA 00001574  002 OF 003 
 
 
Davutoglu Pays 'Historic Visit' to Northern Iraq 
Weekend papers report Foreign Minister Davutoglu, who visited 
northern Iraq over the weekend, opened Turkish consulates in Basra 
and Mosul.  On Friday, Davutoglu met with Massoud Barzani, the 
president of the Kurdish Regional Government (KRG) in northern Iraq. 
 The visit of the Turkish Foreign Minister has been perceived by 
some observers as recognition of the autonomous government of 
northern Iraq.  Davutoglu, however, said Turkey recognizes Iraq and 
that Iraq, like the US, had a federal structure.  "Do you think that 
a visit to Texas would mean recognition of Texas?," asked Davutoglu. 
 Saturday's Aksam comments that with Davutoglu's visit, northern 
Iraq became a new neighbor, emphasizing that Turkey has abandoned 
its former policy of ignoring northern Iraq.  Papers report 
Davutoglu described the visit as an "historic turning point," and 
note that this was Turkey's first official contact with northern 
Iraq following the "unofficial" contacts of intelligence officials, 
diplomats and military officials with the representatives of the 
KRG.  Turkish papers expect the pressure exerted on the PKK to 
increase as a result of the new developments.  Papers comment 
Davutoglu went to northern Iraq to demand the elimination of the PKK 
and the evacuation of the refugees in Makhmur Camp. 
 
Editorial on Northern Iraq-PKK 
 
Ferai Tinc supports FM Davutoglu's visit to Northern Iraq in 
Hurriyet under the headline "Getting PKK Out of the Way":  "At last, 
the Turkish Foreign Minister shook hands with the Kurdistan 
Administration.  This was a very positive development.  This meeting 
was received very positively in Irbil also.  The reason for 
continuously escalating the relationship between Turkey and Iraq is 
the presence of the PKK in the region.  And this situation will not 
change as long as the relations are based on the PKK presence. 
Because the PKK is not an isolated group which lives at the top of 
the mountain but is a part of the regional public.  Whether we like 
it or not, the PKK became a component of the politics in Northern 
Iraq.  In order to have improved relations with our neighbors we 
should stop expecting a solution to the PKK issue from Iraqi Kurds. 
We should center energy cooperation in our relations instead of the 
PKK.  Moreover, we should strengthen the infrastructure of the 
economic cooperation, support the ties between NGOs, and diversify 
the projects in the fields of culture and education.  The ties 
between Turkey and Iraqi Kurds will be stronger only after these 
things are realized.  In short, the PKK should be kept out of the 
way in our ties with the Iraqi Kurdistan Administration." 
 
Turkey's Role in Its Region Will be Discussed in Erdogan's US Visit 
(Cumhuriyet) 
The deputy chairman of the ruling Ak Party, Kursad Tuzmen, commented 
on Prime Minister Erdogan's forthcoming visit to the US in a 
front-page report in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet under the 
headline "We'll Discuss Turkey's Ties with its Neighbors in the US." 
 "The issues of Turkey-Armenia, Turkey-Israel ties, and the US' Iraq 
exit policy will be raised during Erdogan's visit to the US," said 
Tuzmen.  He added Turkey's position and role in the region would 
also be discussed.  "This visit is indicative of a period in which 
we will do important work.  I see it as an important invitation for 
leaving behind the ups and downs in ties between the two countries," 
emphasized Tuzmen.  He also noted that the US was a "huge economy," 
but lamented the fact that Turkey cannot take enough share from it. 
 
 
Afghan Rival Drops Out of Election 
Media outlets today observe Afghan presidential challenger Abdullah 
Abdullah quit the election run-off after accusing the government of 
not meeting his demand for a fair vote.  In "Abdullah Quits, But 
Afghan Run-Off Will Go Ahead," liberal Radikal notes "Abdullah said 
he made his decision after Karzai turned down his demands for 
changes in the Independent Election Commission and other measures 
that he said would prevent massive fraud."  A leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet headline reads, "Election Turmoil in Afghanistan," and 
notes, "the decision of former Afghan FM Abdullah leaves doubts over 
 
ANKARA 00001574  003 OF 003 
 
 
the legitimacy of the next government."  In "Abdullah Withdraws, 
Karzai is the Only Candidate," Islamist-oriented Zaman speculates 
that "a weakened Afghan government under President Karzai would be a 
blow for the US administration as it decides whether to send more US 
troops to fight the Taliban in Afghanistan." 
 
Upcoming events: 
 
Q November 2: President Gul pays an official visit to Slovakia. 
Q November 2: The Council of Ministers will hold a meeting to be 
chaired by Prime Minister Erdogan. 
Q November 2: Foreign Minister Davutoglu visits Malaysia for the 
Islamic countries' D-8 meeting. 
Q November 8: CHP leader Deniz Baykal will go to Iraq to meet Iraqi 
President Talabani. 
 
TV News (NTV) 
 
Domestic 
 
Q The Turkish Health Ministry announced swine flu killed six in 
Turkey, with three patients dying on Sunday because of the virus.  A 
mass swine flu vaccination will start Monday. 
Q One baby and three children are killed in flashfloods caused by 
torrential rains in Yalova and Mardin. 
Q Former US President Bill Clinton and former German Chancellor 
Gerhard Schroder are in Istanbul for a conference on "Leadership for 
Sustainable Success." 
Q Entrepreneurs in the Kurdish city of Diyarbakir have staged 
protests against banks that decline to give them loans. 
 
World 
 
Q Syrian Head of State Assad says the rapprochement between Turkey 
and Iran has been continuing for long time. 
Q Israeli demonstrators protest against the arrival in the country 
of a Swedish journalist who accused Israel of stealing organs from 
dead Palestinians. 
Q A Hamas lawmaker jailed in 2007 has been set free by Israel. 
Q The former leaders of the Soviet Union, West Germany, and the US 
meet in Berlin to remember the fall of the Berlin Wall 20 years ago. 
 
 
JEFFREY