09ANKARA1811
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Mon Dec 21 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO2003
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1811/01 3551508
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 211508Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1525
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0201
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6671
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4341
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7698
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7605
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4202
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001811 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
MONDAY, DECEMBER 21, 2009 
 
US Embassy Ankara Media Reaction 
Prepared by Public Affairs Information Office on a daily basis 
 
Media Highlights: 
 
How the US is Playing 
US-Turkey-Iraq Trilateral 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports in "Three Countries Call from 
Baghdad: PKK Will Definitely Be Dissolved," that "the trilateral 
mechanism which started in Baghdad in November 2008 by senior Iraqi, 
Turkish and US officials to combat the PKK, held a meeting in 
Baghdad.  The meeting focused on elimination of the PKK presence and 
the evacuation of the Makhmur Camp.  Turkish Interior Minister Besir 
Atalay announced that new and concrete decisions were taken and a 
roadmap was outlined for dealing with the PKK issue.  Mainstream 
Hurriyet reports, "Following the second leg of the trilateral 
meeting in Erbil today, Atalay will meet the Kurdish leader 
Barzani."  Turkish TV also quote Iraqi State Minister Waili 
confirming that "evacuation of Makhmur camp" has been the emphasis 
of all discussions. 
 
Missile Shield: US Asks Turkey to Become a Radar Center (Hurriyet) 
Hurriyet writer Metehan Demir today reports in a "behind the scenes" 
story that "Undersecretary Ellen Tauscher offered Turkey to become a 
radar center for the Missile Shield program during her visit last 
November."  Tauscher reportedly told officials in Ankara "Turkey can 
be a host for radar and missiles can be stationed in the 
neighborhood.  In this case, any "first threat" warnings would come 
through Turkey."  The writer adds, however, that the process 
deadlocked when Turkey raised questions regarding locations and 
number of radar sites and expressed concern about Iran and Russia's 
perceptions. 
 
Jeffrey Calls DTP 
In a flashy "First Call from Jeffrey," headline story, Sunday's 
mainstream Aksam says, "The US is pleased with the decision of DTP 
officials not to resign.  Ambassador Jeffrey called DTP leader Ahmet 
Turk congratulating him for his party's positive decision." 
 
Copenhagen: The Worst Agreement in History:  Leading Turkish Sunday 
newspapers labeled the Copenhagen climate conference a failure of 
world leaders to cut carbon emissions, provide financial aid to poor 
nations, determine temperature caps for the environment, and for not 
establishing global climate change government.  Mainstream Vatan 
(12/20) carried the front page headline, "The Worst Agreement," and 
described the meeting as "a historic climate summit, for the extent 
of its failure."  In "They Pollute and Then They Leave," mainstream 
Milliyet (12/20) blamed "the rich nations for being the world's 
biggest polluters" and "poor countries are furious over the 
nonbinding deal."  Mainstream Hurriyet (12/20) headline read "Is The 
Summit A Victory or A Fiasco?," noting "while Obama and the world 
leaders declared victory, developing countries harshly criticized 
the nonbinding agreement."  In "Obama is Very Happy," liberal 
Radikal highlights "although environmentalists called the summit a 
"fiasco," President Obama called the climate change agreement an 
'important breakthrough.'" 
 
Foreign Policy on Erdogan's Performance.  US-based Foreign Policy 
magazine has named Turkish Prime Minister Erdogan as "Rookie of the 
Year," noting that Erdogan has "turned his country into a diplomatic 
powerhouse after decades of regional marginality." 
 
 
In the Headlines 
 
Crucifixion Stirs Debate: "Crisis Over Me Stavronis" (Milliyet) 
Turkish press gave extensive coverage to Greek Patriarch Bartholomew 
CBS "60 Minutes" interview, focusing on the "I feel crucified" and 
"like a second class citizen" remarks. FM Davutoglu called 
Bartholomew's remarks "unfortunate" adding that he hoped the 
comments were "a slip of tongue."  Media played up PM Arinc's 
 
ANKARA 00001811  002 OF 003 
 
 
comments that the Patriarch's statement was "humiliating" and 
opposition CHP's Onur Oymen call that the remarks were  "improper 
and unnecessary."   NTV quotes a lawyer for the Patriarch that "a 
statement will later be issued to clarify Patriarch's remarks." 
Meanwhile a story in Milliyet notes that "you crucified me" or "me 
stavronis" is a typical expression in Greek society and quotes an 
official from the Patriarchate who says the expression was not 
against the government.  In mainstream Hurriyet, Mehmet Yilmaz has 
advice to those criticizing the Patriarch, "don't get upset just 
face with mirror" and notes there is a solid basis for minorities to 
feel like second-class citizens and that "Turkey should deal with 
the problem rather than just reacting."  Mainstream, pro-government 
HaberTurk's Yigit Bulut has a different approach: "Bartholomew is 
giving the wrong information.  The closure of Halki seminary was a 
result of Patriarch's insistence on disobeying Turkish laws and 
claims to treat the seminary with ecumenical status."  Similarly 
liberal Radikal's Akif Beki finds the CBS interview as "threatening" 
and concludes: "by making such statements, the Patriarchate cannot 
gain anything positive for his cause." 
 
Turkey-Armenia Normalization 
Armenian PM: Karabakh Insistence Will Bring Genocide Precondition 
(Hurriyet) 
Turkish media gave prominent play to remarks by Armenian leaders 
over the weekend that indicated their continuing uneasiness about 
Turkey's linking the Karabakh issue with the normalization 
protocols.  In an interview with mainstream daily Hurriyet, Armenian 
PM Tigran Sarkisian said if the Turkish parliament puts Karabakh as 
a condition then Armenia will do the same thing on genocide -- 
bringing "the ongoing process to an end."  Tigran also noted that 
"during his visit to Washington, PM Erdogan acknowledged that 
protocols have no Karabakh precondition.  Despite this fact, if 
Turkey imposes preconditions on protocol ratification, then Armenia 
will be doing the same."  Similarly, Armenian Foreign Minister 
Nalbandian talked to mainstream Aksam and accused Ankara for 
"delaying the process."  Nalbandian was quoted as saying, "this 
process started as well as was signed with no preconditions.  If 
Turkey genuinely wants a solution in Karabakh, better not to 
interfere.  Protocols were sent to parliament but it seems that the 
Turkish parliament is sleeping on it."  Aksam reports that Armenia 
will wait until March 2010 to see if Turkey ratifies without any 
conditions and if it doesn't happen, "it will withdraw from the 
process completely."  In mainstream Hurriyet, Cuneyt Ulsever has a 
different approach: "When signing the protocols, Armenian FM knew 
very well that Turkish parliament will never ratify it without 
seeing a settlement in Karabakh."  From now on, the writer foresees 
only diplomatic tricks from Armenia: "it is possible that Armenia 
deliberately will take no action on Karabakh settlement and wait for 
April 24 in order to force Obama to publicly recognize genocide." 
Mainstream Milliyet's Kadri Gursel, however, contends that the 
"Turkish government made a series of mistakes in this process by 
creating a link between normalization and Karabakh." Noting that 
Armenian officials have begun talking loudly about Yerevan's 
uneasiness, Gursel opines that the US Congress passing a genocide 
resolution in 2010 is likely. 
 
Ergenekon Twist:  Media continue extensive coverage today of the 
weekend death of Lt. Col. Ali Tatar, who allegedly committed suicide 
upon being recalled to face Ergenekon investigators.  Mainstream 
Sabah headlined "Tatar Dies Together with His Secrets" while liberal 
Radikal characterizes the news as a "suspicious development." 
Turkish TV channels played scenes from the funeral and showcased 
family members who charged "witch hunt." 
 
 
TV Spotlight 
 
- Trilateral meeting continues today in Erbil and Minister Atalay 
talks about concrete steps to eliminate PKK's presence for good. 
 
- 3 Parliament Members from former DTP will visit Makhmur Camp in 
 
ANKARA 00001811  003 OF 003 
 
 
Iraq. 
 
- Taraf newspaper hosted a meeting between former DTP members and a 
group of opinion makers.  The meeting was characterized as "brain 
storm" for dealing with the Kurdish issue. 
 
SILLIMAN