09ANKARA583
Media Summary
Tue Apr 21 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO5027
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0583/01 1111144
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 211144Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9469
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9617
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5649
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3776
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7249
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7127
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3705
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000583 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: Media Summary 
 
TUESDAY, APRIL 21, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Deputy Prime Minister Cicek: Turkey Will Not Take Action with 
Armenia That Could Hurt Azerbaijan 
Hurriyet, Turkiye, Yeni Safak:  After a meeting of the Council of 
Ministers yesterday evening, Deputy Prime Minister Cemil Cicek told 
reporters, "Turkey will not take any step in talks with Armenia that 
could hurt Azerbaijan.  The goal of Turkey's foreign policy is to 
boost peace and prosperity in the Caucasus.  In dealings with 
Armenia or any other country, it is not possible for us to take any 
steps to hurt Azerbaijan.  Turkey has a clear policy on the 
Upper-Karabagh issue and that view has not changed.  Our ties with 
Azerbaijan are based on brotherhood." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-Armenia-Azerbaijan 
 
Ihsan Dagi observes in the Islamist-oriented Zaman: "Armenia is at a 
turning point -- it's under pressure to normalize ties with Turkey 
and at the same time, to withdraw from the Azerbaijani territories 
as well.  Some, however, are trying to block the process between 
Turkey and Armenia by inciting nationalism in Azerbaijan and Turkey. 
 President Aliyev first threatened to cut the natural gas flow to 
Turkey, and then went to Russia, which was an apparent warning to 
Ankara.  From 1992-94, it was Russia that backed Armenia's 
occupation of Nagorno-Karabakh.  Russia is the only country which 
has a joint defense agreement with Armenia.  Russia also keeps 
military bases in Armenia against Azerbaijan and Turkey.  Today, 
Turkey is working, albeit gradually, to open the border with Armenia 
and to establish diplomatic ties.  Aliyev, in return, sent a warning 
from its 'strategic partner' Russia that he will cut the flow of gas 
to Turkey.  Do you think Aliyev's attitude can be called 
'friendly?'" 
 
Okay Gonensin warns in the mass-appeal Vatan: "An Azerbaijani 
official recently warned Turkey that an Armenian can never be a 
friend to the Turks.  In the city of Kayseri last year, a Turkish 
businessman had distributed sweets to 'remember the spirit of Adolf 
Hitler' during the Israeli attacks on Gaza.  The same person now 
staged a signature campaign against the scheduling of a soccer game 
between Turkey and Armenia in a new arena built in Kayseri. 
Opposition CHP deputy Canan Aritman implied last year that President 
Gul has 'Armenian roots.'  The examples are many.  It must be kept 
in mind that those who claim an Armenian will never be a friend can 
say the same thing for the Kurds as well.  Allowing such racist 
remarks and actions is a crime against humanity." 
 
DTP Leader Ahmet Turk in London 
Hurriyet, Sabah, Milliyet, Vatan, Tercuman:  Today's papers report 
that the largely pro-Kurdish opposition DTP leader Ahmet Turk went 
to London to meet with British parliamentarians and other senior 
government officials.  Speaking at Kurdish Society Center in 
Haringey, Turk criticized Turkey's recent operations against the DTP 
in Turkey.  Mainstream Vatan reports "Turk delivered his speech in 
front of a map of Kurdistan" and the paper quotes him as saying "We 
will continue to pursue a democratic policy, if we can.  If the 
doors to politics are closed for us, then, we will go to the streets 
of Diyarbakir, Mardin or Nusaybin and talk with our people there. 
If we are not allowed to do that either, then, we will be ready even 
for jail.  I survived through regimes that imposed martial law. 
Even during the times of martial law, 70 percent of those who were 
detained were later freed.  Unfortunately, now 70 percent of the 
detained people during the operations against the DTP, are arrested. 
 We are going through a dangerous process and we will not remain 
quiet during this process." 
 
In a related story, mainstream Milliyet reports that, following the 
arrests of 51 DTP members, the DTP assembly convened an 
extraordinary session in Ankara and decided to take certain actions 
including sit-in protests, against recent operations against the 
 
ANKARA 00000583  002 OF 004 
 
 
DTP. 
 
Editorial Commentary on the Crackdown on the DTP Offices Across 
Turkey 
 
Rusen Cakir writes in the mass-appeal Vatan: "On April 14, more than 
50 DTP members were detained in the so-called security operations 
against the outlawed PKK in 12 provinces across Turkey.  The 
detentions are seen as the AKP taking revenge for their losses in 
the March 29 local election in the region.  The heavy crackdown can 
push the DTP towards becoming more like the PKK, and not the other 
way around.  In southeast Turkey, we also have two other social and 
political actors, the Fettullah Gulen group and Hezbollah. 
Hezbollah has recovered, and is fast becoming an effective force the 
region.  Likewise, the Gulen community has been continuing its 
intense activities both in southeast Turkey and in northern Iraq. 
The tensions between these two groups have intensified in recent 
days.  Strange things have been happening in southeast Turkey, which 
must be followed carefully." 
 
The Ahmadinejad Wave Hits The UN Racism Conference  (Hurriyet) 
Media outlets are split in their characterizations of the incidents 
yesterday during Iranian President Ahmadinejad's speech at the UN's 
Conference on Racism.  Islamist outlets express concern over the way 
Ahmadinejad was treated by delegations who walked out on his speech 
and by protestors who threw clown noses at him, while liberal and 
mainstream secularist papers noted the international outrage he 
caused by calling Israel 'racist' during the UN conference. 
Islamist oriented Yeni Safak headlines "This Time at The Racism 
Conference There Was An Iran crisis" as "protestors dressed as 
clowns threw clown noses at Iranian President Ahmadinejad." 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports "After Western diplomats walked out 
on Ahmadinejad's speech, other countries' delegations applauded the 
Iranian leader" despite the fact that "demonstrators threw clown 
noses at the Iranian leader."  Leftist Taraf reports "As Soon As The 
Conference Began, It Was Over," as "Delegations left the room when 
the Iranian leader called Israel racist."  Mainstream Milliyet makes 
a reference to Prime Minister Erdogan's actions in Davos (dubbed 
"the one minute" response) by saying, "The Delegations Said 'One 
Minute' to Ahmadinejad."  Liberal Radikal notes "The EU Delegations 
Walked Out."  Mainstream Hurriyet reports in "A Clown Protest" that 
"The Ahmadinejad wave crashed the UN conference." Mainstream 
HaberTurk reports in "A Circus Protest to Ahmadinejad," that "The UN 
condemned" the speech as Secretary General Ban Ki Moon said "This 
has caused my dreams to be broken."  Leftist nationalist Cumhuriyet 
headlines "Ahmadinejad Ruined the Summit." 
 
A Letter Calls on Obama to Recognize Genocide Claims 
In "April 24 Pressure," Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak notes "400 
people from 22 different European countries signed a letter to Obama 
that asked him to recognize claims to Armenian genocide" and the 
letter emphasized "European Armenians as well as the large 
democratic mainstream of Europe's civil society will continue to 
strongly oppose Turkey's membership in the EU as long as the Turkish 
state denies the Armenian Genocide, promotes racism and pursues a 
policy of discrimination towards its minorities."  Mainstream Sabah 
reports "Armenian National Radio announced that the European 
Armenian Federation sent the letter to Obama." (Note: The petition 
the story refers to was sent to the White House on April 3rd and was 
reported in Armenian press this past weekend.) 
 
In a related report, CNN Turk's website is reporting "The US Vice 
President Met with Sargsian" and notes "According to Armenian 
sources, yesterday VP Joe Biden talked to the Armenian President on 
the phone about discussions between the Armenians and the Turks 
during the meeting of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation," which 
recently took place in Yerevan.  CNN Turk notes "until now, the 
White House has not commented on the telephone conversation." 
 
The CIA's Torture Crimes, Documented (Taraf) 
Mainstream Hurriyet headlines "In Two Months the CIA Tortured 266 
 
ANKARA 00000583  003 OF 004 
 
 
'Times,'" and reports "US President Barack Obama has stated that he 
will not prosecute the CIA agents who carried out torture against 
terror suspects during the Bush administration," but "it has been 
revealed that 9/11 suspect Khalid Sheikh Mohammed and Abu Zubeydi 
were tortured at least 266 times in a two month period."  Liberal 
Radikal reports in "The CIA Tortured 266 Times," that "in August 
2002 Abu Zubaydi was water boarded at least 83 times" after which 
"he told everything he knew" and "in May 2003 Khalid Sheikh Mohammed 
was water boarded 183 times."  Leftist Taraf reports "After the 
Obama administration designated water boarding a crime, the Justice 
Department has published information about how torture was used on 
suspects" in CIA custody during the Bush administration. 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet headlines "Two Suspects Were Water 
Boarded 266 Times." 
 
Ergenekon and Danistay Attack Cases to be Combined 
All papers:  Ankara's 11th Heavy Criminal Court has decided to 
consolidate the attack on the Council of State (Danistay) case with 
the Ergenekon case.  Formerly, the Supreme Court of Appeals ruled 
that it was obligatory to combine the two cases.  If the Istanbul 
13th Criminal Court, which is hearing the Ergenekon case, finds it 
appropriate to consolidate the cases, the Danistay file will be 
transferred to Istanbul. 
 
The Aftermath of Elections in Cyprus 
In an interview with mainstream Milliyet , UBP leader Dervis Eroglu 
told the paper, "President Talat will continue negotiations with the 
Greek Cypriots.  My party supports the EU accession of Turkey and 
Turkish Cyprus after a compromise is reached on the divided island. 
Greek Cypriots are taking advantage of their EU membership to 
deadlock Cyprus talks.  We will not bow to Greek Cypriot pressures." 
 Mainstream Vatan says the elections have "changed the balances in 
northern Cyprus" as "President Talat's party CTP suffered a heavy 
defeat" and "the UBP's victory resulted from public reactions to the 
ruling CTP's efforts to manipulate the Ergenekon investigation 
against the UBP." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkish Cyprus Election Results 
 
Murat Yetkin notes in liberal Radikal: "The UBP leader Dervis Eroglu 
won Sunday's parliamentary elections in Turkish Cyprus.  Up to now, 
Mehmet Ali Talat had the support of the governing party, the CTP, in 
reunification talks with the Greek Cypriot side.  Progress, however, 
has not been made in these talks.  Talks continue on the basis of a 
bi-zonal, bi-communal federation whereas the UBP leader Eroglu wants 
a two-state solution on the island.  Now, Turkish Cyprus has a 
president and a prime minister with two different political 
platforms.  In order to see 'progress' in the reunification talks, 
the international actors will have to urge the Greek Cypriots to 
adopt a more compromising attitude towards negotiations." 
 
Turkish Business World React to Finance Ministry's Black Tax List 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports that the business world voiced strong 
reactions to reports that the Finance Ministry prepared a 'black 
list' of companies involved in alleged tax irregularities.  Hurriyet 
says that some of the companies on the black list, entitled the 
"Code 5 List," have been cleared of any irregularities, yet they 
still remain on the list. 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
-  PM Erdogan returns to Ankara after nine days holiday. 
 
- The Council of Ministers held its first meeting after the 
municipal elections.  Speculations regarding a cabinet shuffle 
continue. 
 
- The High Electoral Board rejects objections to the results of the 
municipality elections in Adana. 
 
ANKARA 00000583  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
 
World 
 
-  Saudi Arabia has decided to recognize the independence of 
Kosovo. 
 
- Italian authorities bring ashore 140 migrants who were stranded on 
a ship in the Mediterranean. 
 
- China announces that it intends to build at least five nuclear 
plants. 
 
 
JEFFREY