09ANKARA1464
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Thu Oct 08 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO5509
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1464/01 2811436
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 081436Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0919
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0078
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6334
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4196
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7591
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7483
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4072
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001464 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 8, 2009 
 
Media Highlights:  Armenian Diaspora and Turkey-Armenia 
Normalization; Israel and Anatolian Eagle Exercise: Cancelled 
or Postponed?; President Gul on the EU; Iran and P5+1; Afghanistan; 
Banned Internet Sites Reach 1,209 
 
Armenian Diaspora: "Sarksian will either postpone the signing of the 
protocols or reject it" 
All media outlets continue to give prominent coverage on 
Turkey-Armenia normalization process and issues related to it. 
Mainstream Hurriyet draws attention to the claims of Armenian 
Diaspora regarding the protocol signing between Turkey and Armenia. 
Holding a press conference in Yerevan, Yerevan representative of the 
"US Armenian Assembly" Arpi Vartanyan claimed that following the 
conclusion of his meetings with Diaspora, President Sarksian will 
either postpone the date to sign the protocol with Turkey or will 
reject the full text.  Mainstream Sabah notes that visiting Lebanon 
to calm concerns among members of Armenian Diaspora over 
Turkish-Armenian efforts to normalize relations, President Sargsyan 
faced a hostile reception in Beirut as well.  Addressing the 
Armenian community in Beirut, Sargsyan said "continuation of the 
status quo will have negative impact on Turkey and Armenia. 
Following the improved diplomatic ties with Turkey, a positive 
atmosphere will be established at our bilateral meetings.  I believe 
that the Diaspora's concerns are very objective, however, they 
should not prevent improved relations with Turkey.  Diaspora had 
given similar reactions when Armenia had declared independence.  Our 
belief is full that we will reach a solution."  Meanwhile, speaking 
to Wall Street Journal, PM Erdogan urged Sargsyan government to 
stand strong against Diaspora's reactions and not to allow Diaspora 
to determine Armenian policies instead of Armenian government." 
Erdogan added that Turkey is ready to sign the protocol in its 
current form. 
 
"The Diaspora Does not Have a Single Voice." In mainstream Milliyet, 
Semih Idiz observes two groups within the Diaspora; hardliners and 
relatively moderate ones and expects a positive phase regardless of 
the protests that Sarksian has been facing: "Despite all types of 
opposition, those who support normalization with Turkey are strong 
enough to proceed. In the end, protocols are expected to be passed 
by the Armenian parliament."  A similar positive expectation comes 
from Taha Akyol in the same paper: "Even though no official 
announcement is available, there will be a protocol signing in 
Zurich on October 10.  It may be kept as a low profile event in 
order not to provoke the Diaspora."  The writer adds however "what 
is more important is whether or not Sarksian will come for the 
match." 
 
In mainstream Sabah, Erdal Safak observes a major difference between 
state-to-state and people-to-people rapprochement in an article 
"States and Peoples": "When the two states make up, it does not mean 
their people will automatically do the same.  The Turkish and 
Armenian administrations should work on a comprehensive public 
education and awareness strategy otherwise Turkish-Armenia 
normalization does not go beyond the Egypt-Israel peace." 
 
'Anatolian Eagle' military exercises cancelled or postponed 
Papers report the international part of the Anatolian Eagle military 
exercises scheduled to take place this month in Konya was either 
"canceled" or "postponed."  First reported on mainstream Hurriyet's 
website on October 7, today's mainstream Milliyet says the annulment 
came as an expression of Turkish reactions to the Israeli attacks on 
Gaza and in deference to its neighbors.  The paper points out also 
that Prime Minister Erdogan was expected to visit Iran this month 
and that Turkey and Syria were working on an agreement for lifting 
mutual visa requirements for visitors.  The annulment of the 
exercises has been perceived as a Turkish message for the two 
countries, comments Milliyet.  Mainstream Aksam, however, says the 
cancellation came as a "surprise."  The paper claims that Israel who 
told  Turkey that it would not participate in the exercises this 
year.  The other countries followed suit, and said they would not 
participate either, says Aksam. 
 
ANKARA 00001464  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
Meanwhile Turkish General Staff posted an official announcement in 
its web site at 6:00 am saying that international participation is 
postponed: "International participation being postponed as a result 
of the contacts between related countries through the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs." 
 
President Gul to EU: "Perhaps we will not want EU as Norway did" 
Today's papers highlighted the message of President Gul to the EU, 
prior to his departure for France.  Milliyet quotes Gul as saying 
"some countries preparing to hold referendum on Turkey's EU 
accession.  Turkey is ready to show respect for the outcome of the 
referendum.  Perhaps when that day comes, Turkey and Turkish people 
will not prefer full membership and follow Norway's decision 
regarding the EU membership."  Responding to a question whether 
Sargsyan would attend the football game in Bursa on October 14, Gul 
said "You all know that I went to the game in Armenia without any 
conditions, I hope that Sargsyan will do the same thing.  I invited 
him and want to show him our hospitality, as he kindly hosted us 
there," notes Sabah. 
 
"Iran Plays a Game" 
Turkish pundit Kadri Gursel observes "Negotiation Game in Geneva" by 
Iran.  In mainstream Milliyet, he worries: "The Geneva negotiation 
process received appreciation but the fact of the matter is the two 
negotiating sides have entirely different game plans as if they 
speak on two different languages.  The ultimate goal for the P5+1 is 
to have Iran stop its nuclear program while Iran is using this 
platform as a time-gainer until it finalizes the nuclear strategy." 
 
Afghanistan's Destiny Tied To Two Books. (Hurriyet) 
Mainstream Hurriyet says, "the two bestsellers, 'Lessons in 
Disaster' and 'A Better War', play a significant role on the debate 
on the US strategy in Afghanistan.  The paper reports, "the two 
books cite Vietnamese War and takes different lessons from the war." 
According to the paper, President Obama's favorite 'Lessons in 
Disaster' tells how army drags politicians to a war 'that can't be 
won' and how the White House can't see this danger.  Whereas, in 
McCain's favorite 'A Better War', army finds a way to win and the 
final is different than the reality. 
 
1,209 websites banned in Turkey (Milliyet) 
According to the Turkish Telecommunications Board, the state entity 
for providing the internet, access to 1,209 websites were banned in 
Turkey during the November 2007-January 2009 period.  Some 317 
websites were banned over sexual exploitation of children, 77 over 
gambling, 54 over placement of bets, 553 over obscenity, 28 over 
offenses that had been committed against Ataturk, and 164 over 
"catalogue crimes," reports Milliyet. 
 
"If You Don't Like It, Just Close It Down": In mainstream HaberTurk, 
columnist Dogan Satmis criticized the ongoing internet bans and 
noted they are mostly administrative actions instead of a court 
ruling: "Closing down a web site due to court decision has a logic 
in it because at least the site owner can try every judicial step to 
reverse the decision.  However in Turkey's case, 5 out of 6 banned 
internet sites are administrative action which means, you can only 
defend yourself against the bureaucracy if you dare.  It seems 
Turkey, at the end of day, will neither be a member of EU nor be a 
full democratic country." 
 
 
Upcoming events: 
 
Q October 9: French President Sarkozy will host a working lunch for 
Visiting Turkish President Gul. 
Q October 10-11: The 12th International Balkan Conference, attended 
by 40 Balkan leaders, will be held in Istanbul to discuss Turkey-EU 
relations. 
Q October 14: The EU will release its "progress report" on Turkey. 
Some Turkish papers predict that the report will extensively cover 
 
ANKARA 00001464  003 OF 003 
 
 
the current tax challenges to the Dogan Media Group and its 
implications for a free press in Turkey. 
 
JEFFREY