09ANKARA308
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Feb 26 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3175
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0308/01 0571142
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 261142Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8916
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9500
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5436
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3638
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7144
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7008
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3595
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000308 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 26, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Turkish Airliner Crashes when Landing at Amsterdam's Schiphol 
Airport 
Media outlets report that on Wednesday, a Turkish Airlines (THY) 
Boeing 737-800 passenger plane crash-landed at Amsterdam's Schiphol 
Airport, killing nine people, including three pilots, and injuring 
50 others.  A Dutch official said aboard the plane were 135 
passengers including one baby and seven crew members.  Six of the 
injured are in critical condition, while 24 were slightly injured. 
The plane flew over the highway and crashed into a muddy field and 
not the highway, which would have been a huge disaster, report 
papers.  Experts hailed the pilot Hasan Tahsin Arisan and the 
co-pilot Murat Sezer, for the toll could have been much higher if 
the plane had not landed in mud, which reduced the impact and helped 
avert a fire from breaking out in the fuel tanks.  A high-level THY 
official told Hurriyet, "It cost his and his friends' lives, but 
pilot Arikan saved dozens of people.  Few pilots in the world can 
land a plane traveling at a speed of 200 km/hour on such ground." 
Hurriyet says on its front page "He Prevented a Disaster" below 
Arisan's picture.  Aksam daily's headline is "They Died As They 
Saved Others' Lives."  Kieran Daly of Air Transport Intelligence 
said, "The Turkish aviation industry has a pretty good record of 
safety."  "THY is rated a four star airline by Skytrax, the same 
rating as Virgin Airways and British Airways," say industry research 
advisors to the world airline and air transport industry. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkish Plane Crash 
 
Oktay Eksi wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "Eventually, we will find 
out the cause of the plane crash.  But this unfortunate event should 
make us all realize once again the importance of first aid training 
and of being organized and prepared for emergencies.  Unless we 
improve on these areas, we may have to feel sorry many more times in 
the future." 
 
Melih Asik wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "While thinking about the 
crash, let's also remember the warning from the Union of Airplane 
Laborers.  Well before this sad event, the Union has advocated for 
the importance of having licensed technical personnel.  Turkish 
airlines has increased its fleet by 30 percent, but the number of 
licensed technical staff has remained the same in number." 
 
U.S. 2008 Human Rights Report Covers the Pressure on Media in Turkey 
 
Milliyet, Hurriyet, Cumhuriyet:  Mainstream Milliyet reports that 
the government pressure exerted on the Turkish media was covered in 
the U.S. 2008 Human Rights Report.  The report drew attention to the 
prime minister's harsh criticism of the outlets who reported on the 
Deniz Feneri charity fraud case, "The PM harshly criticized the 
media organizations who alleged connections between the ruling AKP 
and Deniz Feneri in Germany.  Several businessmen who own holdings 
as well as media organizations are scared to criticize the AKP 
government with a concern that they will lose their businesses if 
they do so."  The report also drew attention to the Ergenekon Case 
and said that many media members, businessmen and military personnel 
were arrested without any indictment."  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet noted that the report said "freedoms in Turkey are 
getting curtailed while torture is on the rise." 
 
Erdogan to The Guardian: "Iran Is Asking for Turkey's Help to Mend 
Ties with the U.S." 
Media outlets report Prime Minister Erdogan told the Guardian 
Iranian officials asked Turkey to mediate between Tehran and 
Washington while George Bush was in office, and that he delivered 
the message to the White House.  Speaking to the British daily 
aboard his plane, Erdogan said he was considering raising the matter 
with President Obama, who has said he wants to engage with Iran at a 
G-20 summit in London in April.  "If the U.S. also wants and asks us 
to play this role, we are ready to do it," Erdogan said.  In the 
 
ANKARA 00000308  002 OF 003 
 
 
interview, Erdogan also renewed his criticism of Israel's Gaza 
offensive and challenged Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to 
recognize the Palestinians' right to have their own state.  "We are 
for a two-state solution: Palestine and Israel.  Not only Hamas, but 
Israel has to accept this as well," said Erdogan.  He said an 
Israeli-Palestinian settlement had to include Hamas, which he calls 
"the party of change and reform."  Erdogan said his walkout at Davos 
was inspired by his "conscience" and a desire to be the "voice for 
the voiceless, and the protector of the people who cannot protect 
themselves."  On the Armenian diaspora's claims of genocide, Erdogan 
said he did not believe the U.S. Congress would make a decision 
"based on emotions." 
 
Babacan: Turkey Ready to Help the U.S. Withdraw from Iraq 
Media outlets report Foreign Minister Ali Babacan told a Wednesday 
luncheon held by the Foreign Economic Relations Council in Istanbul 
that Turkey was "ready to talk about possible requests" on the issue 
of a U.S. troop pullout from Iraq.  "We have to help and provide 
assistance," said Babacan.  On whether a troop withdrawal through 
Turkey would require parliamentary consent, he said the legalities 
would be discussed when a request came from Washington.  As to 
Washington's call on its NATO allies to send more troops to 
Afghanistan, Babacan indicated the reluctance of Turkey to 
contribute more troops, stressing instead the need to win "the 
hearts and minds of the Afghan people."  On a question on the return 
of France into NATO's military structure, Babacan said the details 
of the return were still "unclear."  "We want all member countries 
to participate in all NATO activities," he said, adding, "When the 
details are discussed, there will be a give-and-take between NATO 
and France." 
 
U.S. Special Envoy for the Middle East George Mitchell in Ankara 
Sabah, Cumhuriyet, Yeni Safak, Milliyet:  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet reports that U.S. Special Envoy to the Mid East George 
Mitchell had meetings with Gul and Babacan as he wanted to check 
Ankara's pulse on Turkey's role in the region.  It was learned that 
Mitchell told Gul, "The U.S. needs Turkey's views and support on the 
Middle East."  Ambassador Jeffrey attended the meetings.  Mainstream 
Sabah reports that during the Gul-Mitchell meeting yesterday Gul 
told Mitchell, "We are meeting with all parties in order to reach an 
agreement in Palestine.  That was the reason I hosted Palestine 
leader Abbas in Ankara recently. "  Gul added that "Turkey supports 
Egypt's peace efforts" and he had "met with Hamas officials in 
Ankara" when he was the FM.  Sabah quotes President Gul as saying "I 
told Hamas then that they won the elections and from now on they 
should fulfill their political responsibilities and contribute to 
peace efforts within the framework of democracy."  According to 
papers, FM Babacan told Mitchell Turkey is the U.S.' strategic 
partner and Turkey wants a continuation of this, Turkey is deeply 
interested in the Mid East, the ME Peace Process should be 
accelerated but first of all the cease fire between Hamas and Israel 
should be established, a peaceful agreement should be established 
between the Palestinian leaders, and Gaza borders should be opened 
not only with Egypt but also with Israel. 
 
In a related story, Sabah reported that Amb. Jeffrey met with 
Turkey's Chief EU negotiator Egemen Bagis yesterday.  Sabah and 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak report Jeffrey told Bagis, "The U.S. 
supports Turkey's EU process.  Turkey's future is very important for 
us and the West also will have an important role in its future." 
 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- Opposition far right MHP leader Devlet Bahceli says the DTP leader 
Ahmet Turk's address in Kurdish in the parliament was "treachery" 
and should not be left unpunished. 
 
 
ANKARA 00000308  003 OF 003 
 
 
- Ergenekon suspect Tuncay Ozkan filed a complaint to the European 
Court of Human Rights over violations of his rights in his detention 
procedures. 
 
- On Friday, Deputy Prime Minister Nazim Ekren will hold a meeting 
with ambassadors to Turkey from the EU. 
 
- The Financial Times reports Turkish tourism officials hope that 
currency advantage will tempt holidaymakers to Turkey. 
 
World 
 
- President Obama will reportedly announce later this week that he 
will order all U.S. combat troops out of Iraq by August 2010. 
 
- Iran tests its first nuclear power plant using "dummy" fuel rods, 
loaded with lead in place of enriched uranium to simulate nuclear 
fuel. 
 
- Radio Netherlands Worldwide says "if Turkish businessmen no longer 
need a visa to enter Europe, there will be soon 70 million 
businessmen in Turkey." 
 
- Russian President Dmitry Medvedev orders a crackdown on extremist 
groups sowing unrest during Russia's economic crisis. 
JEFFREY