09ANKARA1294
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Wed Sep 02 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6882
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1294/01 2451213
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 021213Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0690
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0012
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6224
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4133
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7535
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7423
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4007
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001294 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 2, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Turkey and Armenia Begin Steps to Normalize Relations 
All papers:  Today's papers give extensive front-page coverage to 
the steps to be taken between Turkey and Armenia to normalize 
relations.  Coverage is mostly hopeful and upbeat, but many are 
noting the process is taking place under the shadow of the frozen 
conflict over Nagorno Karabakh.  Mainstream Sabah headlines, "The 
Armenian Opening is a Strategic Attack," and the paper reports 
Turkey and Armenia have officially announced "the Alican road and 
Akyaka Border Train Station could be opened to traffic and then the 
two countries could open embassies in their respective capitals," 
and, "The two countries also announced that the allegations of 
genocide could be jointly investigated." Mainstream Milliyet carries 
the headline, "A Journey into History for Peace," and the article 
notes, "Under the protocol to be signed between Turkey and Armenia, 
a committee of Turkish, Armenian and international experts will 
conduct research on archives and historical documents and discuss 
allegations of genocide."  Islamist-oriented Zaman claims that 
Turkey has three conditions to be met before establishing diplomatic 
ties with Armenia - the "recognition of Turkey's territorial 
integrity," ending "Armenian occupation of Azeri soil," and a 
"change in Yerevan's characterization of the events of 1915 as 
genocide." 
 
Meanwhile, media also point out the Nagorno-Karabakh frozen conflict 
as a potential road block to the road map for normalization. 
Milliyet reports in "Baku: Erdogan Gave His Word," that, "The 
biggest question mark in rapprochement between Turkey and Armenia is 
the Karabakh problem," as, "In the past,  Armenian President 
Sargsian said, "There is no precondition to the Turkey-Armenia 
rapprochement regarding Karabakh." However, Milliyet notes 
Azerbaijan's Foreign Ministry spokesman reminded yesterday that, 
"Turkish Prime Minister Erdogan pledged not to open the border (with 
Armenia) until the occupation (of Nagorno-Karabakh) is over." 
Mainstream Vatan headlines, "The World is Pleased, but Baku is 
Concerned," and the paper notes, "World leaders welcomed the 
agreement," as, "The protocol to develop bilateral relations between 
Turkey and Armenia is considered by the West as a step to end the 
enmity of a hundred years, but it has caused concerns in 
Azerbaijan."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports, "The agreement 
with Yerevan has pleased the West but it made Azerbaijan and Turkish 
political opposition parties angry."  Liberal Radikal reports, "The 
protocol will not come to a vote in the Turkish parliament unless 
there is progress made in the Nagorno-Karabakh issue."  In "Armenia 
Will Withdraw Its Soldiers from Azerbaijan," Islamist-oriented Yeni 
Safak reports, "The hidden side of the protocol signed between 
Turkey and Armenia is that Yerevan will withdraw its troops from 
Karabakh before the protocol can be approved by the parliaments," 
as, "Prime Minister Erdogan gave assurances to Azerbaijan that 
Armenia would withdraw its troops." Conservative-nationalist Turkiye 
reports Erdogan said, "The nod of the parliament is needed for the 
implementation of the protocol for tackling problems with Armenia," 
which the paper calls "a guarantee for Azerbaijan." 
Islamist-oriented Zaman headlines, "A Guarantee to Baku: No Process 
Is More Than Our Friendship," and the paper notes Foreign Minister 
Davutoglu emphasized the importance of Turkey-Azerbaijani relations 
in a television interview with NTV. Mainstream Aksam comments, "The 
fate of the protocol depends upon how the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict 
is settled." 
 
Islamist-oriented Zaman, mainstreams Hurriyet, Sabah, Milliyet and 
Vatan report that the protocol between Turkey and Armenia was 
welcomed by the US and the EU.  US State Department spokesman Ian 
Kelly, in a statement said "we urge Turkey and Armenia to proceed 
expeditiously, according to the agreed framework as described in 
today's statement."  The EU sources said that the developments will 
have positive impact on the ties of Turkey and Armenia with the EU. 
Mainstream Hurriyet notes opposition party CHP issued a "harsh 
response" to the protocol by saying, "The decision to announce this 
protocol was not independently made by Turkey," and the opposition 
 
ANKARA 00001294  002 OF 003 
 
 
MHP said, "since Obama's visit to Turkey there has been pressure on 
Turkey to proceed with this initiative." 
 
 
Editorial Comments on Turkey-Armenia 
 
Sami Kohen wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "The process contains both 
valuable opportunities as well as significant risks.  Normalization 
between Turkey and Armenia will bring very important chances for 
both countries.  There is however some undeniable risks ahead of the 
process.  It remains to be seen if the Yerevan administration, which 
stands on a fragile ground, can move on despite strong nationalist 
opposition and the Diaspora.  The Turkish government on the other 
hand does not have the opposition's support either.  At this point 
the process can move forward only if no high expectations are set 
and no provocative statements are made." 
 
Abdulhamit Bilici wrote in Islamist oriented Zaman: "Imposing a 
strong precondition on the Karabakh issue fails to benefit Turkey or 
Azerbaijan.  Therefore Ankara is now pursuing a different approach 
by not closing the negotiation door with Armenia at the beginning. 
This method will pave the way for creating reconciliation between 
Baku and Yerevan as well." 
 
Fehmi Koru wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "Ankara and 
Yerevan are taking very important diplomatic steps which will help 
resolve the conflict between Baku and Yerevan eventually.  Thus the 
Baku administration has to be more supportive for the process than 
ever before." 
 
Gungor Mengi wrote in mainstream Vatan: "Turkey certainly has to go 
ahead and use any chance to solve problems with Armenia.  However 
this does not necessarily mean to take steps at the expense of 
Baku-Ankara relations." 
 
Oktay Eksi wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "When PM Erdogan went to 
Baku in May he made a strongly binding statement - unless the 
Karabakh occupation ends, the border gates will not be opened. 
Apparently these strong words were crossed over after the Western 
powers' pressure.  The recent protocol clearly indicates that 
solution to Karabakh problem is no longer a precondition for 
Turkey-Armenia relations." 
 
Murat Yetkin wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "There is a 
message between the lines which Yerevan knows as well.  The Turkish 
government will not take the protocol to the parliamentary approval 
process unless there is a progress on the Karabakh problem." 
 
 
DTP Rally for the World Peace Day 
All papers and TV channels extensively cover the pro-Kurdish 
opposition party DTP's rally in Diyarbakir yesterday to commemorate 
World Peace Day.  Sabah reported that one million people were 
expected to attend the rally, however, there were around hundred 
thousand people there and the crowds chanted pro-PKK and pro-Ocalan 
slogans.  Diyarbakir Mayor Osman Baydemir delivered a speech at the 
rally and said "A ceasefire cannot be applied unilaterally and 
killing does not solve problems."  Mainstream Vatan headlines "A 
Threat During The Peace Demonstration" and reports that only hours 
before the rally DTP deputy Aysel Tugluk "issued threatening 
messages" and said "a division of Turkey could come to table for 
discussions if the government's democratic opening fails." 
 
Tensions During Caglayan's Visit To Urumqi 
Turkiye, Vatan, Hurriyet, Sabah report on a "scandalous" development 
that unfolded during the visit of State Minister Zafer Caglayan to 
China.  Caglayan was visiting China as the special envoy of Prime 
Minister Erdogan to convey the PM's messages to the government of 
China after the escalation of tensions in China's Xinjiang 
autonomous region.  Caglayan became infuriated when Chinese security 
officials attempted to conduct searches of the members of the 
 
ANKARA 00001294  003 OF 003 
 
 
official Turkish delegation. Minister's bodyguard intervened when 
Chinese officials undertook physical steps to force the Turkish 
minister to pass through the X-ray machine.  Tensions further 
escalated when Chinese officials "assaulted "the bodyguard. 
According to conservative-nationalist Turkiye, Caglayan demanded an 
apology for the scandal and threatened that otherwise he would 
cancel the Turco-Chinese joint economic council meeting scheduled 
for September.  Turkish Ambassador Murat Esenli will submit a note 
of protest to the Chinese Foreign Ministry and will demand an 
apology, papers note. 
 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
Q Health Minister Recep Akdag said that they expected swine flu 
cases to increase in Turkey in the fall season.  27 million Turks 
will receive vaccination against swine flu in the upcoming days. 
 
Q Security forces find ammunitions in Adana and Trabzon. 
 
Q Turkish Exports drop 29.8 percent year-on-year to $7.6 billion. 
 
 
World 
 
 
Q Deputy PM Bulent Arinc and the wife of PM Erdogan, Emine Erdogan 
went to Libya to attend the celebrations for Gaddafi's 40 years in 
power. 
 
Q Turkish FM Davutoglu said Cyprus will always remain top priority 
in Turkish foreign policy. 
 
Q Slovakia adopts a new language law which restricts the use of all 
languages in the country other than Slovak. 
 
JEFFREY