09ANKARA1511
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Tue Oct 20 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO4684
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1511/01 2931354
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 201354Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1009
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0089
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6379
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4213
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7599
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7491
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4081
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001511 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
TUESDAY, OCTOBER 20, 2009 
 
Media Highlights:  PKK Returnees; PM Erdogan on Foreign Policy; 
Wexler on Turkey-Israel Tensions; Turkey-Israel 
Dispute Deepens; Davutoglu on Turkey-Azerbaijan; Iran Nukes 
 
PKK's 'Peace Group' Returns to Turkey 
Following the dramatic Oct. 19th border crossing of 34 PKK 
affiliated individuals, Minister of Interior Besir Atalay today gave 
details about the event and told the press that it was only the 
beginning of a process and that more - "around 100 to 150" - are 
expected to return Turkey in the near future.  At a morning press 
conference, which followed a breakfast for all Ankara-based TV and 
print outlets, Atalay said the Turkish government "was ready and 
prepared to end terrorism" and that "we will hear more good news in 
the upcoming days." The Minister explained that the "homecoming" 
from the mountains by these terrorists is only a first phase of the 
democratic initiative, noting that those who return know that their 
way is "a dead-end street." 
 
Milliyet also reports Undersecretary of Turkish intelligence agency 
(MIT) Emre Taner and Deputy Director of Security Mustafa Gulcu 
visited southeast of Turkey in order to evaluate possible events to 
take place after the arrival of the "peace group."  Taner met with 
civic and intelligence authorities in the region, and briefed the 
Prime Minister on his return Monday afternoon. 
 
All media outlets reported that a "Peace Group" of eight PKK 
militants from Kandil Mountains and 26 people from Makhmur refugee 
camp arrived Monday at Habur border crossing to turn themselves in. 
Papers report the "Peace Group" was welcomed by the Kurdish DTP 
officials and 50,000 other party supporters in Silopi.  The PKK 
group was welcomed with placards saluting them as "peace envoys" and 
"peace doves."  Twenty-nine of the 34 PKK members who returned were 
released.  Leftist Taraf says the return of the PKK group to Turkey 
was a "historic turning point."  The meeting in Habur has fueled 
hopes for peace, comments Taraf.  Liberal Radikal daily newspaper 
views the return of the PKK group to Turkey as a "critical 
beginning."  Mainstream Hurriyet says the "reaction" of Turkish 
officials to the return of the first PKK group would influence the 
decision of other militants planning to return.  Conservative Bugun 
says the other militants in the mountains were "hopeful" that they 
will be able to go back home.  Before crossing the border, one of 
the members of the group told mainstream Milliyet they were not 
going to Turkey to "surrender," but to take a democratic step for 
lasting peace.  Milliyet expects the government to take "radical 
steps" after the return of the first PKK group to Turkey.  The paper 
says that families living in the Makhmur refugee camp, who have not 
been involved in crimes against Turkey, were expected to return. 
Around 12,000 Turkish Kurds live in the UN-controlled Makhmur Camp 
in northern Iraq. 
 
Commentary:  While papers across the board proclaim the historic 
event, commentary is mixed.  In "Implementation Begins," mainstream 
Hurriyet's Oktay Eksi sounds a sour note by blaming the US for 
taking belated action against the PKK: "This is a result of an 
obvious collective effort by the US, Iraq and Turkey because it was 
the right time for the US to eliminate the PKK problem on the eve of 
their withdrawal from Iraq.  Otherwise no one can buy the argument 
that the US woke up after 25 years and realized that the financing 
for PKK was coming from drug trafficking."  Mainstream Vatan's 
Gungor Mengi talks about "making the most of this historic 
opportunity and the need to encourage more to return."   Liberal 
Radikal's Murat Yetkin notes "the next step is very important 
because the way the returned militants are treated will shape the 
future: it will encourage more to come or just the opposite." 
Leftist Taraf's Yasemin Congar considers the event as an indication 
of "politics winning over weapons" and similarly mainstream 
Milliyet's Hasan Cemal warns: "all should pay utmost attention to 
this process not to ruin it and be encouraging."  Islamist leaning 
Yeni Safak's Fehmi Koru notes the importance of "being smooth and 
speedy" regarding the treatment of the returnees. 
 
 
ANKARA 00001511  002 OF 003 
 
 
Erdogan at the Istanbul Forum: "No Shift in Turkey's Foreign 
Policy" 
Mainstream Sabah and liberal Radikal headlines read "There is no 
Shift in Turkey's Foreign Policy" and report that PM Erdogan 
described Turkish Foreign policy as "zero problems with neighboring 
countries" and said that Turkey wants only peace, not terror in the 
region.  Speaking at the ongoing Istanbul Forum, Erdogan said "we 
determine our foreign policy after evaluating every issue and every 
detail.  We realize that it is not possible to have peace and 
prosperity in the region until after the problems end in Palestine, 
Iraq, Iran, Syria and Lebanon."  Conservative-nationalist Turkiye 
quotes PM Erdogan saying "Terror has no religion, nation or 
homeland.  Common struggle against terrorism is a must.  We want to 
create a Middle East which is not a center of clashes but rather a 
center of peace and tranquility."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
headline reads "Nuclear Message From Erdogan" and says Erdogan 
commented on Iran's nuclear program by saying that Iran should clear 
doubts in the international arena and made an implicit reference to 
Israel's nuclear weapons and said "not just Iran but all countries 
that possess nuclear capabilities in the region should be 
discussed."  Sabah and Hurriyet's web page notes that Turkey's 
deteriorating relations with Israel have dominated talks at the 
Istanbul Forum Conference.  Participants tried to decide whether 
Turkey is losing its leverage over Israel by leveling open criticism 
against Israeli policies on Palestinians.  The participants also 
discussed whether Turkey's increasing presence in the Middle East 
and its diplomatic efforts are overestimated, as well as whether the 
current government's focus on its eastern neighborhood implies a 
shift away from Europe. 
 
US Congressman Wexler on Turkey-Israel Tension:  For U.S. 
Congressmen Robert Wexler, the current situation is the best of 
times but also the worst of times. For Wexler, Recep Tayyip Erdogan 
is to be applauded as "one of the brightest minds in the Middle 
East" due to his desire to have "zero problems" with his neighbors. 
"Turkey's close relations with Syria do not frighten me," he said. 
Yet he said there was one exception to the zero problems with 
neighbors and that is Israel; his main message suggested that Turkey 
should not improve its relations with the Arab world at the expense 
of Israel.  Wexler also accused Europe of letting Turkey look east. 
"How many speeches does the Turkish public have to endure from the 
French and the Germans that no matter what Turkey will do it will 
never become a member of the EU. It is not so bewildering an outcome 
if the Turkish public takes a different course. Stop thinking in 
five years terms, examine your own behavior, Europe," he said. 
 
Turkish-Israeli Dispute Deepens 
Media outlets focus on the rising tensions between Turkey and Israel 
following Turkey's removal of Israel from planned military exercises 
in Turkish air space.  In "Israel's Reception Boycott," liberal 
Radikal says, "Israel will show its reaction to Turkey by boycotting 
the National Day reception."  In its front page headline, 
leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet writes, "Tensions with Israel Don't 
Calm Down."  Mainstream Milliyet says, "Israel's Protest of Turkey," 
and notes, "Israeli ministers boycotted the invitation to the 
National Day reception in the Turkish Embassy in Tel Aviv on October 
29."  Mainstream Hurriyet says, "National Day Reception Splits the 
Israeli Cabinet."  Moreover, mainstream Sabah and Hurriyet's web 
page notes that Turkey's deteriorating relations with Israel have 
dominated talks at the Istanbul Forum Conference.  Participants 
tried to decide whether Turkey is losing its leverage over Israel by 
leveling open criticism against Israeli policies on Palestinians. 
The participants also discussed whether Turkey's increasing presence 
in the Middle East and its diplomatic efforts are overestimated, as 
well as whether the current government's focus on its eastern 
neighborhood implies a shift away from Europe.  For U.S. Congressmen 
Robert Wexler, the current situation is the best of times but also 
the worst of times. For Wexler, Turkish PM Tayyip Erdogan is to be 
applauded as one of the brightest minds in the Middle East due to 
his desire to have "zero problems" with his neighbors. 
 
 
ANKARA 00001511  003 OF 003 
 
 
Davutoglu sends a message to Azerbaijan 
All papers focus on the warm message Foreign Minister Davutoglu gave 
to Azerbaijan during a joint press conference with Czech counterpart 
Jan Kohout.  Sabah headline reads "Ending the occupation in Karabakh 
is one of Turkey's basic issues', Cumhuriyet, Milliyet and Hurriyet 
headlines read "Turkish Policies on Karabakh will not change even if 
the skies crumble."  Davutoglu responded a question regarding the 
removal of Turkish flags from a monument in Baku saying "Turkish and 
Azerbaijani flags are equally sacred for Turkey.  Turkey attaches 
great importance to Azerbaijan's territorial integrity.  Occupied 
territories in Karabakh is one of the top priorities of Turkey and 
Turkey's position on this issue would never change." 
Iran:  Nuclear Marathon Starts in Tension and Calls for 
Extraditions: (Radikal)  Media note the first day of talks in Vienna 
with Iranian officials aimed at reaching an agreement "to get Iran 
to send most of its enriched uranium abroad" ended inconclusively. 
In "Uranium Talks Getting Hotter," leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
says, "Iran says it will produce its own enriched uranium in case 
the talks don't meet Iranian demands."  In a related story, in "This 
Time Iran-Pakistan Tension," liberal Radikal says, "Iran accuses the 
US, Britain and neighboring Pakistan of backing Jundollah militants 
who blew up six Revolutionary Guards commanders."  The paper adds, 
"Iran closed its border asking the Jundollah leader to be 
extradited."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet writes, "Tehran Accuses 
Pakistan," and says, "Iran claims US and Britain provide equipment 
to the attackers and accuses Pakistan of training Jundollah 
militants." 
Upcoming events: 
 
Q October 21: Kazakhstan President Nazarbayev visits Turkey. 
Q October 22-23: Turkish Investment Summit in London. 
Q October 24: President Gul visits Serbia. 
Q October 24-25: Central and Eastern Europe Energy Forum in 
Istanbul. 
 
JEFFREY