09ANKARA792
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Fri Jun 05 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1432
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0792/01 1561038
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 051038Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9827
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0084
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5827
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3901
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7349
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7231
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3811
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000792 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
FRIDAY, JUNE 5, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
A Call for A New Beginning  (Milliyet) 
Media draw attention to U.S. President Barack Obama's historic 
speech from Cairo, and emphasize his positive messages to the 
Islamic world.  Mainstream Haberturk headlines, "From (Bush's) 
Crusade Campaign to (Obama's) 'Selamunaleykum,'" and notes, 
"President Obama attempted to repair the bridges that were burned 
during the Bush administration's War on Terror." 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports, "Obama began his speech with 
'Selamunaleykum' and he quoted the Koran several times throughout 
his speech."  Mainstream Milliyet reports in "A Call for A New 
Beginning," that "Obama addressed 1.5 billion Muslims and he said 
what Muslims wanted to hear on every topic," and thus the paper 
calls the speech, "a turning point."  Mainstream Vatan notes, "Even 
Hamas militants in Gaza listened with all their hearts and souls to 
Obama's comments on Israel and Palestine."  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
headlines, "Obama Made A Call for A New Beginning with The Islamic 
World," and the paper says, "Obama is trying to wipe the Bush 
administration's slate with Muslims clean."  Islamist-oriented Yeni 
Safak headlines, "He Spoke Verses of the Koran," and the paper 
reports, "Obama has made his long-awaited speech," and "Obama 
emphasized the important role of Turkey's leadership," and Obama 
also noted, "the road to peace in the Middle East passes through the 
two-state solution." 
 
Several newspapers noted Obama's emphasis on the importance of not 
denying women the right to education based on the way they dress. 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet notes Obama "gave support to the 
headscarf," and,  "Obama emphasized that women should not be 
prevented from the right to education based on what they wear," but 
the secularist paper stopped short of criticizing him for this 
statement. Haberturk did criticize him in the headline, "In Ankara 
He's Secularist, In Egypt He's A Headscarf Supporter," and notes, 
Obama said, "When I was in Ankara I said the U.S. is not at war with 
Islam," but the paper says "he gave a headscarf message by saying 
'Those who cover their heads should not be denied the right to 
education.'"  Far right Tercuman says, "Obama demands support for 
the freedom of the headscarf."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak points 
out "Obama addressed the issue of inequality between men and women" 
and also "Obama pointed out that women who wear headscarves in the 
U.S. are protected by the law." 
 
Turkish Leaders' Reactions to the Speech 
Media outlets note that Turkish leaders 'applauded' Obama's speech. 
Mainstream Sabah reports that President Gul said "With his remarks 
and promises today, Obama showed once again that he is a 
constructive leader and that partnership for peace and stability is 
possible with Islamic countries.  I found his speech sincere, honest 
and realistic.  I believe that his messages were very open and 
clear."  Prime Minister Erdogan said that he listened to some parts 
of Obama's speech and noted that he "shares the expressed views in 
these parts."  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports that Turkish Foreign 
Minister Ahmet Davutoglu said "Obama's speech in Cairo was a kind of 
a follow up to his speech in the Turkish Parliament.  We agree with 
the messages he gave in principal however, the international public, 
including the US, should take more active initiatives regarding the 
issues on the agenda, especially regarding the problems in the 
Middle East." 
 
Commentary on TVs React to the Speech 
 Kerim Balci, Ankara representative for Today's Zaman, told NTV: 
"American politics are going through a 'paradigm shift' as President 
Obama said 'We should quit living in the past, and look at the 
future."  Balci also noted, "Obama didn't put forth anything 
tangible regarding the Israel-Palestine question.  He offered no 
concrete solution on the Middle East as well.  Obama also said he 
appreciated Turkey's role as the leader of the Alliance of 
Civilizations project.  Now it's important to see which way the 
people and intellectuals in Turkey will view Obama's speech."  NTV 
 
ANKARA 00000792  002 OF 004 
 
 
pointed to the fact that President Obama quoted the Quran three 
times.  Mustafa Cagrici, the Mufti of Istanbul who served as 
President Obama's guide during his mosque visits in Istanbul, called 
in to NTV and said, "I think it's a first in history that a western 
statesman delivered a speech which wandered deep into Islamic 
references --- a religious tone dominated President Obama's speech. 
Islam is not a religion that endorses violence, it mainly directs 
people to know and to love each other.  He began his speech with the 
Muslim way of salutation, which indicates that this faith preaches 
peace between and for human beings.  Obama also cited a verse in the 
Quran, which was repeated in a hadith of the Prophet Muhammad that 
'You cannot be true believers unless you want for others what you 
want for yourself.'  I wish President Obama would deliver a speech 
at the Israeli parliament as well, and touch on the problems of the 
Israeli politics and their religion."  Hurriyet columnist Ferai Tinc 
called in to Kanal 24 TV and said, "An American president, for the 
first time, spoke openly and directly toward both the Israelis and 
the Palestinians.  Obama spoke openly against the Israeli settlement 
policy, and stressed the sufferings of Palestinians must end.  He 
gave the message that the US was on a 'fair and just' position 
regarding the Middle East.  In his speech, Obama gave the picture of 
an 'intermediator' who stands at an equal distance to both sides." 
Hurriyet webpage noted immediately following his speech, "President 
Barack Obama sought a 'new beginning' between the United States and 
the Muslim world in a historic speech on Thursday, and urged all 
sides to make compromises to end the Palestinian-Israeli conflict." 
Palestinian lawmaker Mustafa Bargouty called into NTV and said, 
"President Obama's speech was very important; it met our 
expectations to an extent.  Obama made important evaluations, and he 
objected to the Israeli settlement policy.  He talked about the 
sufferings of Palestinian people and said Palestinians must have an 
independent state.  He also said the majority of Palestinian people 
supported Hamas, and that the issue must be resolved by Palestinians 
themselves.  It remains to be seen whether Obama will be able to put 
pressure on Israel.  Overall, President Obama's speech was very 
positive, one which had not been seen coming from a US President 
before.  Now we expect President Obama to put pressure on Israel, 
otherwise, reaching peace will be impossible." 
 
Editorial Commentary on President Obama's Cairo Speech 
 
Cengiz Candar comments in liberal Radikal (6/5): "One of the most 
striking parts of President Obama's Cairo speech was when he 
stressed 'democracy,' and he criticized the regimes, including 
Egypt, which have a serious 'democracy defect.'  Leaving aside the 
political aspects of the U.S. President's speech, its most striking 
parts were the claim of 'global civilization' stemming from 
'modesty,' and in this context, the indispensable place of Islam and 
the Muslims.  What else could make Obama's speech more important, 
and perhaps, 'historic'?  President Barack Hussein Obama continues 
to be a 'chance' for the world." 
 
Yasemin Congar comments in leftist Taraf (6/5): "Several groups will 
have a hard time when a man who understands globalism so well, and 
is ready to meet the requirements of a 'brave new world,' sits at 
the White House.  For instance, the radicals who see anti-Semitism a 
profession will have a harder time today than they did during the 
Bush era, just as the Christian radicals who are anti-Islam and the 
Zionist hawks.  Likewise, tough days await the 'secularist' circles 
who are persistent in not allowing girls who cover their heads into 
the universities in Turkey.  Because they are now facing a man who 
says 'A woman who covers her head is no less equal than a woman who 
does not,' as well as 'We must not order women how to dress.  I 
respect those women who choose to live their lives in traditional 
roles, but it should be their choice.'  And this man says 'No system 
of government can or should be imposed by one nation by any other. 
But I will support everywhere people's will to detemine how they are 
governed,' and concludes by saying, 'These are not just American 
ideas; they are human rights.'  In the 'brave new world' U.S. 
President Barack Hussein Obama talks about, the enemies of democracy 
 
ANKARA 00000792  003 OF 004 
 
 
will have a hard time." 
 
Hasan Cemal observes in mainstream Milliyet (6/5): "President Obama 
said the U.S. would not be in competition with the Muslim world, and 
would not fight against Islam in any way.  He also stressed 'looking 
at the future,' saying a beautiful future cannot be built if the 
past takes us hostage.  President Obama made a good kicked off to a 
good start in Cairo yesterday, and I hope it will continue." 
 
Gungor Mengi writes in mainstream Vatan (6/5): "In Cairo yesterday, 
President Obama said, "I reject the views of some in the West that a 
woman who chooses to cover her hair is somehow less equal, but I do 
believe that a woman who is denied an education is denied equality." 
 It's not difficult to guess that the 'headscarf lobby' will jump on 
these words.  Obama paid his first visit to Turkey, a NATO member, 
Muslim country run by a secular democracy.  It's unthinkable that 
Obama did not know the debates on covering women's head has a 
determinative effect in politics.  Even if our world had been a 
confederation, and Obama the head of that confederation, he 
shouldn't have uttered his view as if he were issuing a fatwa. 
During his visit to Ankara, could Obama have taken advice from our 
politicians that the one material that would bring the maximum 
profit across the Muslim world was the exploitation of headscarf?" 
 
 
Ferai Tinc writes in mainstream Hurriyet (6/5): "In his speech in 
Ankara, President Obama did not show Turkey as a model for the 
Islamic world; he just gave an example that the U.S. could cooperate 
with Turkey.  In Ankara, Obama gave the message that if the U.S. can 
be friends with a Muslim majority country such as Turkey, it can be 
allies with the entire Islamic world.  In his Cairo speech, Obama 
addressed directly the Islamic world via an initiative the U.S. 
President made with his own voice." 
 
Ihsan Dagi writes in Islamist-oriented Zaman (6/5): "President 
Obama, even when speaking in a country like Egypt which its regime 
is not compatible with democracy, stressed that he was on the side 
of governments which reflect the will of people.  In this context, 
we must see the central and significant position of Turkey between 
Islam and the West.  Being able to carry Turkey to the center of 
global politics, however, requires the solution of Turkey's internal 
problems.  A Turkey which shows that it lives together in diversity 
and in peace and democracy can contribute to the harmony between 
Islam and the West." 
 
Fehmi Koru observes in Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak (6/5): 
"President Obama made exciting remarks which we are not used to 
hearing from a politician at his level.  Obama enhanced the opinion 
that his term as president will be different from the previous 
American administrations.  If he makes serious efforts in the 
direction of the values he defended yesterday, the Muslim world will 
not delay a positive response, which he expects.  The Muslim world 
should not delay in giving President Obama that positive response." 
 
 
Foreign Minister Davutoglu to Visit Pakistan and Afghanistan 
Islamist-oriented Zaman and liberal-intellectual  Radikal report 
that FM Davutoglu will visit Pakistan on June 8-9 and Afghanistan on 
June 10-11.  Davutoglu told the reporters that he was going to these 
countries as the Foreign Minister of a country "closely interested 
in the future of these two states" and as "term president of the UN 
Security Council."  Davutoglu noted that Turkey is ready to extend 
every necessary support to reduce the sufferings in these 
countries. 
 
New Detentions in Ergenekon Case 
Cumhuriyet, Radikal, Milliyet, Sabah, Hurriyet, Zaman and others: 
Today's papers report that under the 13th wave of the Ergenekon 
probe, police detained 20 people in Ankara, Istanbul and Izmir. 
Mainstream Sabah reports that 16 of the 20 people were military 
 
ANKARA 00000792  004 OF 004 
 
 
personnel who had ties with retired Major Levent Pektas who was 
earlier arrested in Poyrazkoy operation .  Three women civil 
servants from Gulhane Military Medical Academy in Ankara were also 
detained within the scope of Ergenekon probe. 
 
Ecevit Era Ends in DSP 
Zaman, Yeni Safak, Radikal, Vatan and others, CNN Turk:  Rahsan 
Ecevit, wife of late premier Bulent Ecevit and founder of Democratic 
Left Party (DSP), resigned from her party by saying "there is no 
longer any loyalty to Ecevit's principles in the party."  Deputies 
Emrehan Halici, Mucahit Pehlivan and Recai Birgun also resigned from 
the party following Ecevit's resignation. 
 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- One soldier died and three others injured at a mine explosion in 
Bestler-Dereler region of Sirnak.  Following this, the suspected PKK 
positions in the Bestler-Dereler region were bombed by Cobra 
helicopters. 
 
- Ergenekon suspect Prof.Erol Manisali was discharged from jail 
following cancer surgery. 
 
- 40 migrants were rescued by coastal security forces after their 
boat sank off Izmir. 
 
- The General Staff rejects reports about search in the Naval Forces 
Command yesterday, and says that yesterday a major and a 
non-commissioned officer were the only regular officers taken into 
custody in connection with Ergenekon investigation. 
 
World 
 
- EU Commissioner Olli Rehn says Turkey needs to accelerate 
reforms. 
 
- Brazilian Air Force recovered the first wreckage from Air France 
Flight 447 about 340 miles northeast of Brazil's northern Fernando 
de Noronha islands. 
 
- Romania's small military contingent ends its deployment in Iraq. 
 
- President Sargsian of Armenia and Ilham Aliyev of Azerbaijan meet 
in St. Petersburg. 
 
SILLIMAN