09ANKARA787
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Thu Jun 04 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO0307
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0787/01 1551023
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 041023Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9818
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0080
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5822
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3896
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7345
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7227
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3807
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000787 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
THURSDAY, JUNE 4, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Turkish Parliament Adopts Law to Demine Syrian Border 
All papers:  The draft law on the sweeping of land mines along the 
Syrian border, which led to tension between the ruling party and the 
opposition for weeks, was adopted in the parliament late yesterday. 
The Parliament passed the bill with 255 votes in favor and 91 
against.  According to the law, The Turkish National Defense 
Ministry will invite companies and institutions first.  If it fails, 
then the Finance Ministry will open it up a bidding process.  If the 
mine fields cannot be cleared with these two methods, the project 
will be put to a tender.  In this way, the mine fields will be used 
for agricultural purposes by the company or institution after 
de-mining the land.  The land mines in military zones in the area 
will be cleared but the zones will not be given to the contractors. 
The contractors will clear the land mines in five years after they 
win the project.  They cannot use the lands for agriculture more 
than 44 years after they clear the fields. 
 
New Stimulus Package Announced Today 
Referans, Hurriyet, Milliyet:  Economic daily Referans reports that 
the stimulus package to be announced by PM Erdogan today is 
estimated as 3.1 billion lira.  The package includes steps for 
creating new employment opportunities and incentives designed to 
encourage new investments.  The employment measures include a new 
regulation permitting companies to hire trainees.  The Unemployment 
Fund will be paying the trainees' salaries and the payment will be 
less than the minimum wage determined by the government.  At the end 
of a six-month probation period the company might decide to offer 
permanent employment.   Referans summarizes the measures in the 
employment package as follows: a six-month trainee program, 
professional education for 200,000 people, and temporary employment 
in the public sector.  Mainstream Hurriyet reports that the 
government "offers generous support for big investments in the new 
package."  Up to 45 percent support will be extended to big 
investments.  Big investments in 15 sectors where imports are high 
and exports are low, will be given support all over Turkey.  The 
East and the Southeast are the poorest of the four investment zones 
determined by the government.  In these regions, the corporate tax 
will be curbed two percent and the government will fund 25 percent 
of the new investments. 
 
In a related story, mainstream Milliyet reports that while the 
government is working on the stimulus package, Culture Minister 
Ertugrul Gunay said that the tourism sector might also benefit from 
the incentives as enterprises bring foreign currency to Turkey. 
 
All Eyes Are On Obama (Milliyet) 
Media are positive about U.S. President Barack Obama's visit to 
Saudi Arabia and Egypt, and are eagerly awaiting his speech to the 
Islamic World today, but some note the warnings in the Arab press 
that Obama carefully choose his words in order to avoid controversy. 
 Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet headlines, "A New Image Effort In 
Cairo," and reports, "Obama, whose father was Muslim, is visiting 
Riyadh and Cairo with the goal of improving the U.S. image in the 
Muslim world."  In "The First Sale in The Middle East Is with The 
Saudis," liberal Radikal reports, "Obama has begun his first Mideast 
tour, which does not include Israel, by going to Riyadh." 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports "Obama has embarked on his tour with 
the aim of starting a new chapter in relations with the Muslim 
world." Mainstream Sabah carries the front-page headline "The 
Islamic World Is Locked on Cairo," as "today Obama will deliver his 
historic speech to the 'Muslim World'," but the Arab press has 
warned him, "Don't give us lessons on democracy, don't be a 
supporter of Israel, and don't interfere with our internal 
business."  Mainstream HaberTurk reports the same warnings from the 
Arab press in, "Don't Give Us A Lesson, Obama."  In a related 
article, Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports, "This Time He Didn't 
Bow," and notes, "when Obama met the Saudi King in London, he 
disturbed the American public by bowing to the King," but "this time 
 
ANKARA 00000787  002 OF 004 
 
 
he did not bow." 
 
A Cassette Tape Threat to Obama (Hurriyet) 
 Media note Osama Bin Laden's latest taped message was broadcast to 
criticize Obama on the first day of his Middle East tour.  Leftist 
Taraf headlines, "In A New Message from Bin Laden, Obama Is 'Sowing 
The Seeds of Hate,'" and reports, "Bin Laden accused Obama of 
pressuring Pakistan to launch operations in Swat." In "A 'Welcome' 
Surprise from Laden to Obama," Islamist-oriented Zaman notes Bin 
Laden's message was broadcast on the day Obama arrived in Saudi 
Arabia.  Mainstream Sabah reports, "Laden Threatened The U.S. in A 
New Cassette Tape." 
 
Chief of General Staff General Basbug is Presented With Medal of 
Honor by the Pentagon 
Mainstreams Milliyet, Hurriyet and Sabah report that Chief of 
Turkish General Staff (TSK) General Basbug was presented with the 
medal of honor by Admiral Mullen at the Pentagon during his visit to 
the Washington DC.  Admiral Mullen welcomed General Basbug with a 
military ceremony at the Pentagon and presented him with the medal. 
Milliyet notes that General Basbug met with US Defense Secretary 
Robert Gates as well at the Pentagon.  Hurriyet daily interviewed 
General Basbug in Washington prior to his meeting with Admiral 
Mullen, regarding the elimination of the PKK and 'historic 
opportunity ' discussions.  General Basbug said "we should not lose 
our patience just because we cannot solve terrorism immediately. 
The aim and duty of the Turkish Armed Forces (TSK) is to continue 
its fight until terrorists are totally rooted out."  When he was 
asked about the latest rumors that the PKK would lay arms and extend 
its cease-fire, General Basbug said "nobody should try to give us 
advice.  I will neither stop nor wait for terrorists to come.  On 
the contrary, I will go, search, find and destroy."  When he was 
asked whether the TSK units could ignore PKK groups when they saw 
them, Basbug said "nobody should expect Turkish soldiers not to 
stage operations in the name of peace against terrorists who try to 
harm the life of our citizens and the territorial integrity of our 
country.  Nobody should expect Turkish soldiers to remain silent. 
We will give the severest response when we come across with them." 
 
Turkey increases its Activity  in Iraq 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports that Turkey started to implement its 
policy to get in touch with all groups in Iraq.  The first step was 
the marketing of northern Iraqi oil.  The Turkish Consulate-General 
in Basra had started to operate quietly last April and the official 
opening of it will take place in the following days.  In Basra, 
other than Turkey, only Britain and Iran have Consulates.  Another 
important step will be taken in Mosul.  Direct flights between 
Istanbul and Mosul will take start on June 7. 
 
Editorial Commentary on President Obama's Cairo Speech 
 
Cem Sey observes in leftist Taraf (6/4): "In his Cairo speech to be 
delivered today, President Obama will have to win the moderates in 
the region.  In order to win them, Obama will have to demand a 
milieu in which the moderates can express their joint views, get 
organized and demand power.  For this reason alone, perhaps it's 
more important that Obama's speech will be delivered in Egypt 
instead of Turkey.  Only when he expresses such views and supports 
this line with future policies, it will be clear that Obama is 
implementing a new policy.  The U.S. President's speech today could 
cause disillusionment, but Obama deserves to be given time to make 
serious changes." 
 
Nabi Yagci writes in leftist Taraf (6/4): "Prior to his travel to 
Egypt, President Obama reiterated on a French television channel 
that the clash of civilizations doctrine, which was enforced through 
the Cold War and by the Bush era, was shelved.  Obama stressed this 
point, saying 'I think there's an existing and true clash between 
those who defend that Islam was not compatible with the modern world 
and those who think Islam has always kept pace with progress.' 
 
ANKARA 00000787  003 OF 004 
 
 
Those who perceive Turkey as a Muslim country must learn something 
from this message as well as Obama's stance, which is free of any 
complex.  I have no objection to the definition that 'The Republic 
of Turkey is a secular state.'  This definition, however, lacks 
'people,' and it won't tell much to a foreigner who doesn't know 
Turkey.  To be able to say 'Turkey is a modern, secular and Muslim 
country' is different, and gives a truer picture which stands closer 
to reality." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey's Kurdish Question 
 
Rusen Cakir writes in mainstream Vatan (6/4): "Turkey's main Kurdish 
party DTP leader Ahmet Turk does not have a strong influence on the 
PKK.  Turk was excluded whenever he wanted to walk the lines set by 
the PKK in politics.  Turk and his followers, the 'doves' in the 
DTP, cannot be the main carriers of the peace process.  Hardliners 
in the party such as Emine Ayna and Selahattin Demirtas do not seem 
to have the experience and power to direct Turk whenever necessary. 
There are two Kurdish names who could be Turkey's Gerry Adams -- 
Leyla Zana and Sabri Ok, a PKK official who lives in Europe.  The 
Kurdish movement in Turkey needs a Gerry Adams who can be reached 
easily in the efforts to find a solution to the Kurdish question." 
 
 
Yasin Dogan (alias for PM Erdogan's political advisor, Yalcin 
Akdogan) writes in Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak (6/4): "The PKK, 
while asking the government to take the initiative from the 
military, should itself think of giving the initiative to Kurdish 
civilians.  Instead of blurring the picture with rounded words and 
abstract statements, the PKK must take concrete and serious forward 
steps.  The PKK must arrange its expectations according to the fact 
that it is a terror organization and an illegal organization that 
stands against democracy.  Any effort which would try to cover up 
the fact of terror would be futile." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Existing Conditions Forcing Turkey for Early 
elections 
 
 
Derya Sazak comments in mainstream Milliyet (6/4): "The outcome of 
March 29 local elections showed the CHP and MHP can form a coalition 
government.  The Islamist Felicity Party (SP) is growing stronger 
every day, and center-right parties DP and ANAP are set to merge. 
The global economic downturn has shrunk Turkey's economy, 
unemployment is soaring and exports diminished by 40 percent.  When 
the summer is over, the AKP government will be surrounded by 'real' 
problems.  The AKP, as seen in a recent bill over the sweeping of 
landmines on the border with Syria, gives a scattered picture.  The 
existing political and economic factors can push the AKP to go to 
early general elections in 2010." 
 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
-  A youth is given a two-year prison sentence for jumping and 
applauding with joy at a DTP introductory meeting. 
 
- PM Erdogan said he will show no respect for those who refer to his 
party as "AKP" instead of "Ak Party." 
 
- Tensions escalated in the Kizilay neighborhood of Ankara when two 
different student groups started to clash. 
 
- The Justice Ministry plans to recruit 13,300 new employees through 
November. 
 
- The State agrees to give back the seized assets of minority 
foundations as the European Court of Human Rights ordered Turkey to 
 
ANKARA 00000787  004 OF 004 
 
 
pay compensation of 100 million lira. 
 
 
World 
 
- The U.S. has mistakenly made public a 266 page report that gave 
detailed information on its nuclear programs. 
 
- An airline official said that Air France received a false bomb 
threat for a flight from Argentina to Paris days before a plane went 
missing. 
 
- North Korea is set to launch its most advanced missile capable of 
hitting Alaska. 
 
SILLIMAN