09BAGHDAD2536
NAJAF AIRPORT TERMINAL EXPANSION; DISSATISFACTION WITH
Tue Sep 22 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0004
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #2536/01 2650728
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 220728Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4779UNCLAS BAGHDAD 002536 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: EAIR PREL PGOV IZ
SUBJECT:  NAJAF AIRPORT TERMINAL EXPANSION; DISSATISFACTION WITH 
INVESTMENT PARTNER AL AQEEQ 
 
REF: 08 BAGHDAD 2299 
 
¶1.  This is a PRT Najaf reporting cable. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary:  Najaf airport opened its passenger terminal 
expansion on September 8, 2009.  The provincial government is very 
dissatisfied with performance of investment partner Al Aqeeq (AA), 
which has only spent US$7 million of the US$50 million the 
provincial government expected AA to spend during the past year. 
Najaf is sending a delegation to Kuwait to insist that AA live up to 
its promises.  If not the delegation may seek to terminate its 
relationship with AA.  AA is also seven million USD behind in its 
payments to airport security contractor Sabre.  The province has 
told both Sabre and the PRT that it wants Sabre to be part of Najaf 
Airport's future, whether Al Aqeeq goes or stays, and would be 
willing to pay Sabre going forward.  Najaf Airport remains the 
provincial government's top priority project in Najaf, and the 
Governor is serious when he says he wants to attract a direct flight 
between the United States and Najaf.  End summary. 
 
Terminal Expansion Opening 
 
¶3. (SBU) On September 8, the Najaf Airport opened its gleaming 
passenger terminal expansion, doubling the space of its current 
temporary passenger terminal.  Governor Adnan Zurfi (a dual 
Iraqi-American citizen) and PC Chair Sheikh Fayed al Shimmeri 
officiated at an Iftar for about five hundred, including 
considerable media coverage.  PRT members were honored guests in the 
front row at the remarks and during the Iftar.  Team Leader found 
himself sitting between the Governor and the son of Imam Qubanchi 
(Note: Although more moderate recently, Imam Qubanchi has been a 
regular critic of the U.S. in Friday sermons in Najaf. The PRT 
reports on the Imam's sermons each week in its SitRep.  End note.) 
The provincial government, and not airport investor Al Aqeeq, funded 
the terminal expansion project through a mix of local funds, and a 
special allocation from Baghdad as a result of special appeals to 
the PM and Ministry of Finance. 
 
Al Aqeeq Has Not Met Contract Obligations 
 
¶4. (SBU) According to the provincial leaders (including the Governor 
and the PC Chair), Al Aqeeq has failed to meet its obligations as 
the airport operator over the last year.  It was apparently supposed 
to spend 50 million USD during the last year, but is estimated to 
have spent only about seven million USD.  It has only paid airport 
security contractor Sabre one million USD of the eight million USD 
that it owes Sabre.  Al Aqeeq is about eight months behind in 
installing ILS (instrument landing system) equipment which will 
allow precision instrument approaches in weather conditions as 
adverse as one half mile visibility. 
 
¶5. (SBU) As a result, the airport operates only in the daytime under 
Visual Flight Rules.  The Airport has installed a Very High 
Frequency Omnidirectional Range navigation system (VOR) and 
submitted a VOR approach to the Iraq Civil Aviation Authority 
(ICAA).  Based on the history of stalled development at the Airport 
(of which the ILS is a prime example), the ICAA has not approved the 
VOR approach.  OTA reports that the ICAA views the VOR as an interim 
step for Instrumental Flight Rules (IFR) services and will not 
approve the approach until there is progress on the ILS. 
 
Crunch Time 
 
¶6. (SBU) Governor Zurfi told TL and Transportation Advisor Bentson 
that the province was presenting Al Aqeeq with an ultimatum to 
either perform in accord with the contract or withdraw.  He 
maintained that Al Aqeeq's initial response was positive.  Acting on 
that positive sign, the Governor reports that he will dispatch a 
delegation to Kuwait to carry out further negotiations imminently. 
delegation to Kuwait to carry out further negotiations imminently. 
The Governor's representative at the airport Sadiq Laban asked 
Transportation Advisor to provide a non-paper with the key points 
that should be part of any new contract.  Transportation Advisor 
commented that AA, which is really an investment company, should 
hire a professional airport management company and agreed to provide 
the non-paper.  Laban was clear that going forward the airport must 
be ICAO compliant, and that security for the airport must be world 
class. 
 
Sabre Owed Money by AA 
 
¶7. (SBU) Sabre has told PRT that Al Aqeeq owes Sabre seven million 
USD since January.  Sabre has tired of AA's stalling tactics and has 
already told AA that it cannot afford to continue operations unless 
it is paid.  Sabre's predecessor, as security contractor, Global, 
also quit last January over payment issues.  The Governor told Sabre 
that the province would like Sabre to remain the security contractor 
at the airport even if AA goes.   The province has told Sabre and us 
that it would be ready to step in and pay Sabre going forward. 
However, in one conversation, Laban mentioned that Sabre would have 
to go after AA to receive unpaid fees from its contract with AA.  It 
is unclear whether Sabre could/would be willing to continue 
operations if it is not compensated for its work over the past six 
months.  Sabre currently employs more than two hundred at the 
airport and would already be augmenting its staff and training for 
the future if it had received its fees.  The province says making 
sure that Sabre is paid promptly will be an early test of AA's 
sincerity. 
 
 
Relatively Modest USG/PRT Contributions to Najaf Airport have 
Leveraged Progress 
 
¶8. (SBU) Cooperation between the USG, Najaf Province, and the GOI 
has been highly successful in moving this key project forward.  USG 
contributions have been important, on the technical and management 
coordination side, but relatively modest in financial terms.  Since 
2007, the USG facilitated a number of important activities at the 
Airport.  On a pro bono basis, Boeing visited to survey the former 
military airport and runway on the present airport site to determine 
the suitability for various classes of passenger aircraft.  The USG 
hired Stanley Engineering with US$2.5 million in ESF funding to 
prepare the Airport's master plan.  ESF/PRDC funding built the 
airport heliport for US$918,000 and a further US$300,000 provided 
for necessary work on the apron.  The FAA conducted an ICAO-based 
airport inspection in December of 2008.  OTA is considering 
providing US$1.5 million in security equipment to the airport and 
will travel to Najaf to check on the progress addressing the 
deficiencies identified in the FAA inspection. 
 
¶9. (SBU) The most important contribution has been through constant 
technical advice (on a daily basis through PRT transportation 
advisor Kirk Bentson and frequent contributions from OTA) ensuring 
understanding of what needed to be done to achieve ICAO compliance 
and international standards.  The PRT has played a vital role, 
working with OTA, to bring about coordination between Najaf 
authorities and the ICAA/Ministry of Transportation to ensure that 
air traffic controllers, customs and immigration personnel arrived 
in a timely manner for each phase of airport operations.  Almost all 
Najafis, including the marja'iyah, are well aware, and highly 
appreciative of USG support of the Najaf Airport project (reftel). 
This in turn has provided the USG with very positive IO; the PRT 
attributes increased acceptance by Najafis to the PRT's 
contributions in this area. 
 
Getting the Flights to Fly 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Neither the provincial government nor AA has been 
successful in motivating the ICAA to negotiate bilateral agreements 
to bring flights to the Airport.  Al Aqeeq's lack of experience has 
contributed to a myopic focus on getting the airport open.  Their 
naivety led them to believe that "if they built it, they would come" 
and flights from all destinations would be permitted to land.  AA 
did not devote enough attention to the marketing and bilateral 
agreements necessary to permit and stimulate international arrivals 
at the new airport. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) The ICAA is responsible for negotiating bilateral 
agreements for Iraq, and its overriding concern is to protect Iraqi 
Airways.  That protectionism will be to the detriment of Najaf 
Airport.  Mahan Airlines discontinued their flights from Iran to 
Najaf as a result of an impasse over compensation from Mahan to 
Iraqi Airways for an imbalance in the number of flights flown by 
each airline.  As a result, relations between Mahan and ICAA are 
currently very poor, which does not bode well for future flights 
from Iran to Najaf.  The province has lost, and stands to lose, 
significant tourism revenue but does not appear to be working with 
the ICAA, the MOT, or the legislature to change the policies that 
are damaging their interests. 
 
¶12.  (SBU) The province previously had a healthy relationship with 
¶12.  (SBU) The province previously had a healthy relationship with 
the ICAA.  Since the change in leadership both in the provincial 
government and in the ICAA early this year, their interaction 
appears to have ground to a halt.  AA's involvement and failure to 
deliver on promises had always made the relationship a challenging 
one, but that on-going communication was more productive than the 
current silence between the parties. 
 
¶13. (SBU) This project is at the top of Najaf's agenda, a key step 
in building its vision of the future as a modern center of learning, 
tolerance, culture, and exchange while maintaining its tradition as 
the revered center of Shi'ism.  This vision for the future is 
exemplified by the last session of the Organization of the Islamic 
Conference accepting Najaf as a "capital of Islamic culture in 
2012." 
 
¶14.  COMMENT:  The problems with Al Aqeeq are not new.  The company 
is not an experienced airport developer.  OTA and the PRT have 
advised the province of AA's deficiencies, but the province has been 
reticent to cancel the agreement with AA even in the face of 
recurring non-performance.  Najaf Airport will not reach its 
potential unless AA meets its contract obligations, relinquishes its 
management role, and hires a competent airport management company. 
Even with those challenges, there is no doubt that the provincial 
government will devote significant attention to working to get the 
 
airport right.  Sheikh Fayed and the provincial council have met to 
discuss and authorize the negotiations with Al Aqeeq.  It is 
difficult to tell whether AA's reluctance to put more money into the 
project over the last year reflects financial worries or possible 
political worries.  AA initially contracted with the prior ISCI- 
dominated provincial administration.  The airport was only a small 
part of AA's planned investment in the province.  Their plans also 
included a large residential real estate project out by Bahar Najaf, 
but that development has stalled as well. 
 
¶15.  The Najafi vision for the future is re-enforced by an uptick in 
interest in English studies, the Governor's strong support for 
Najaf's first sister city relationship with Minneapolis, calls from 
Najaf elites for a U.S. consulate to be established, and the 
Governor's interest direct flights between the U.S. and Najaf 
(however unlikely that may be), and to Europe.