09BAGHDAD3201
SECOND TECHDEL BOOTS UP BAGHDAD
Mon Dec 14 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0003
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #3201 3481455
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 141455Z DEC 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5718
INFO RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 2307
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO 0042UNCLAS BAGHDAD 003201 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
TAGS: EINT KPAO SCUL TINT PGOV ECPS IZ
 
SUBJECT: SECOND TECHDEL BOOTS UP BAGHDAD 
 
REF: BAGHDAD 3074 
 
 
¶1.  Summary: S/P's Jared Cohen led a technology delegation to 
Baghdad from November 22-24 featuring Google CEO Eric Schmidt along 
with Silicon Valley venture capitalist Don Dixon, former Chairman of 
the Joint Chiefs of Staff Peter Pace, and YouTube videographer 
Sophie Schmidt.  The delegation came to Iraq to meet key Iraqi 
interlocutors and to laud the efforts made by Google and other 
companies to support the Strategic Framework Agreement (SFA) 
Sections IV and VII.  Google and others have worked with USG and GOI 
over the past months to explore innovative ways to use technology to 
help preserve Iraq's rich cultural heritage, improve transparency in 
government, and help develop the IT sector in Iraq.  End Summary. 
 
 
¶2.  The delegation of S/P Jared Cohen, Google CEO Eric Schmidt, 
Trident Capital CEO Don Dixon, former JCS Chair Peter Pace and Ms. 
Schmidt met with Foreign Minister Zebari (reftel), Deputy Prime 
Minister Eissawi, the Minister of Communications and General Odierno 
on November 22 to exchange views on how to improve Iraq's internet 
and technology industry.  On November 23, the delegation met with 
troops on Camp Prosperity, participated in a roundtable with Iraq 
Technology Task Force (ITTF) members and finalists for the Iraq IT 
Interns program and attended a reception featuring 60 leading 
contacts from the business, cultural and political spheres. 
 
¶3.  On the final day of their visit, the delegation visited the Iraq 
National Museum.  During short remarks at the museum, Google CEO 
Schmidt announced that Google had imaged all of the artifacts in the 
museum and that the images would be available to all browsers in 
early 2010.  The USG-led effort to make the Iraq National Museum's 
artifacts available to all is in direct support of SFA Section IV to 
encourage cultural exchanges and cultural preservation. 
 
¶4.  The Google delegation's visit received wide attention in the 
Western and Arabic press. Almost all major television networks 
including the pan-Arab al Arabiya highlighted Google's collaboration 
with the Iraqi National Museum in an effort to help preserve Iraqi 
heritage using modern internet technology. The state-run al Iraqiya 
TV underscored the Museum Director's gratitude for the efforts of 
this collaboration, Ambassador Hill's statement that the visit was a 
sign of the U.S commitment to Iraqi cultural heritage and history, 
and the uniqueness of this project in the region. 
 
Internet's "Virtuous Cycle" 
 
¶5.  Schmidt's repeated message to GOI interlocutors, students, and 
embassy officials was that internet access should be increased in 
urban areas where potential knowledge workers lived.  If an urban 
university, with thousands of students and coffee shops nearby, were 
wired, a self-perpetuating "virtuous cycle" could be created.  The 
cycle would begin when Iraqis created a business using tools readily 
available on the internet and perpetuated when others joined in as 
the potential for social and economic benefit became more and more 
apparent. 
 
¶6.  Comment: The fact that Google CEO Eric Schmidt visited Iraq is 
in itself a significant step forward toward attracting involvement 
from U.S. firms and underlines the effectiveness of USG efforts to 
engage IT companies.  Next steps include capitalizing on this 
involvement through subsequent TechDels and continued outreach to 
the business community.  On the cultural heritage front, the release 
of the thousands of images Google engineers took in early 2010 could 
spark heightened interest in Iraq's rich cultural treasures and 
boost the chances for further public-private partnership in support 
Qboost the chances for further public-private partnership in support 
of USG goals as laid out in the SFA. End Comment. 
 
HILL