09BEIJING1804
JUNE 30 MFA PRESS BREIFING: ASEAN+3, FIVE PARTY TALKS,
Tue Jun 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO2914
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHTRO RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1804/01 1812307
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 302307Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4908
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RUEHBK/AMEMBASSY BANGKOK 6713
RUEHGO/AMEMBASSY RANGOON 4767
RUEHTG/AMEMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA 0078
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 001804 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM MARR PHSA AO BM CH JA IR KN KS SW
TW 
 
SUBJECT: JUNE 30 MFA PRESS BREIFING: ASEAN+3, FIVE PARTY TALKS, 
GREEN DAM, HONDURAS 
 
¶1. Key points at the June 30 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- Ministry of Foreign Affairs Spokesperson Qin Gang stated that 
China would continue to "play a constructive role" through the 
ASEAN+3 and Regional Security Forum and, given that the 
international security and economic situation was "changing 
rapidly," urged relevant countries to "cooperate and work 
together." 
 
-- China maintained that all should "adhere to dialogue and 
consultation," as well as the Six-Party Talks to realize 
denuclearization on the Korean Peninsula. 
 
-- China was "unaware" of the planned July 1 Internet boycott and 
referred all questions about Green Dam to "competent authorities." 
 
-- China "expressed concern" over the situation in Honduras and 
hoped that stability could be "restored shortly." 
 
ASEAN+3 and Regional Forum 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Chinese leaders, including the Foreign Minister, planned to 
attend the ASEAN Regional Forum and ASEAN+3 leaders meeting, said 
Foreign Ministry Spokesman Qin Gang at the June 30 regularly 
scheduled press briefing.  Specific dates and agenda topics were 
still uncertain, but Qin noted participants would give "positive 
consideration" to the financial crisis.  Qin added that China would 
continue to "play a constructive role," adding that due to the 
international security and economic situation "changing rapidly," 
China urged relevant countries to "cooperate and work together" to 
jointly address the financial crisis and other global challenges. 
 
Five-Party Proposal 
------------------- 
 
¶3. In response to a question on proposals for the creation of a 
Five-Party Talks mechanism to discuss recent events in the DPRK, Qin 
said that China believed all should "adhere to dialogue and 
consultation," as well as the Six-Party Talks to realize 
denuclearization on the Korean Peninsula.  China would, "as always," 
maintain communication and consultation with other parties on how to 
"push forward" the Six-Party Talks, Qin maintained. 
 
Internet Boycott of Green Dam 
----------------------------- 
 
¶4.  Qin claimed he was "unaware" of the planned July 1 mass boycott 
of the Internet in response to the mandatory installation of Green 
Dam software on computers sold in China after that date.   Qin 
suggested that questions about the boycott, about the recent letter 
to Prime Minister Wen Jiabao from Chambers of Commerce and business 
groups that urged China to drop the plan to implement Green Dam, and 
as well as queries regarding which authorities could confirm Wen's 
receipt of the aforementioned letter should be referred to 
"competent authorities." 
 
Honduras Coup 
------------- 
 
¶5.  China "expressed concern" over the situation in Honduras and 
hoped that stability could be "restored shortly," said Qin.  Asked 
whether China would have relations with Honduras and its new 
president, Roberto Micheletti, Qin stated, China stood ready to work 
according to the One China Principle, the UN Charter and relevant UN 
resolutions, and the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence to 
develop normal relations with other countries. 
 
G-8 Meeting 
----------- 
 
¶6. Competent Chinese officials, including Ministers, planned to 
accompany President Hu Jintao to Italy to attend the G-8 meeting, 
Qin announced.  Qin told the journalists assembled that the MFA 
would hold a background briefing for Chinese and foreign journalists 
with more details -- releasing a relevant notice "shortly". 
 
China-Russia Joint Military Exercise 
--------------------------------------- 
 
 
BEIJING 00001804  002 OF 003 
 
 
¶7.  China and Russia planned to conduct a joint military exercise, 
Peace Mission 2009 to "strengthen antiterrorism cooperation."  This 
"important part" of their "strategic partnership" would also 
contribute to peace and tranquility for two countries and the 
region, said Qin.  The exercise scenario would be an anti-terror 
drill, and military authorities were in "close coordination and 
cooperation."  Qin referred questions about modalities for the 
exercise to the Ministry of National Defense. 
 
Russia Detains Chinese Cargo 
------------------------------ 
 
¶8.  Qin had "only just read" a media report suggesting that Russia 
had impounded Chinese cargo in Russia (NFI), and needed to check the 
story.  China and Russia should maintain and develop normal trade 
relations, which was in the interest of "both countries," said Qin. 
Issues that crop up with people to people and trade exchanges should 
be solved in a "peaceful and friendly manner," said Qin.  Qin 
"urged" Chinese engaged with Russia to observe local laws and "do 
more to promote friendship" between the two countries.  Issues of 
customs declarations should be solved to safeguard the legitimate 
interests of Chinese citizens and their interests in Russia. 
 
CCP 88th Anniversary 
---------------------- 
 
¶9.  Asked about the July 1 anniversary of the CCP founding, Qin 
noted that "remarkable changes" had taken place in China since the 
founding of the Party in 1921, adding that it was "all attributed to 
the CCP leadership."  Each country should "choose their own path of 
development" based on national and international conditions, he 
explained.  Qin went on to add that China hoped the DPRK would 
"continue to make progress" in development, but maintained the 
principle of non-interference in other countries' internal affairs 
and commitment to conduct exchanges on the basis of "equality and 
mutual benefit." 
 
Report of Kim Jung-un Visit 
----------------------------- 
 
¶10.  Qin told reporters that media speculation suggesting that DPRK 
heir apparent Kim Jung-un had recently visited China were  "totally 
groundless," complaining that the media was "just obsessed," with 
the story. 
 
Yemen Airlines Plane Crash 
---------------------------- 
 
¶11.  Upon learning of the crash of a Yemeni airliner off the 
Comoros, the Chinese government expressed condolences to the 
families of victims.  The MFA had instructed Chinese diplomatic 
missions overseas to check with the airline -- initial checks showed 
there were no Chinese citizens on board. 
 
Ma Ying-Jeou Canceled Visit to Honduras 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  In response to reports that President Ma Ying-Jeou's trip to 
South America was canceled, Qin reiterated that the One China 
Principle was the basis for China to develop friendly relations with 
other countries and was a "universal consensus" in the international 
community.  China always dealt with Taiwan related issues on the 
basis of the One China Principle, he suggested. 
 
Visits 
------ 
 
¶13.  Qin confirmed that Ambassador Phillip Goldberg, President 
Obama's Special Coordinator for DPRK UNSCR 1874 sanctions was on his 
way to visit China for July 2 meetings in Beijing with officials 
from the Foreign Ministry and other authorities.  China always 
implemented UNSCR sanctions with a "responsible attitude" and was 
ready to have communication with other countries on the 
implementation of UNSCR 1874, he added. 
 
¶14.  Asked about meetings in Washington between China, Japan, and 
the U.S. at the Director General level, Qin noted that many dialogue 
mechanisms among relevant countries existed and the "passage for 
communication was clear."  Qin opined that similar consultative 
mechanisms could also play a role in "strengthening communication" 
 
BEIJING 00001804  003 OF 003 
 
 
among relevant countries. 
 
GOLDBERG