09BERLIN784
MEDIA REACTION:
Tue Jun 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
R 301312Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4478
INFO WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
DIA WASHINGTON DC
CIA WASHINGTON DC
DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
FRG COLLECTIVE
AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 
AMEMBASSY LONDON 
AMEMBASSY PARIS 
AMEMBASSY ROME 
USMISSION USNATO 
USMISSION USOSCE 
HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS BERLIN 000784 
 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/AGS, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO GM US IZ IR HO AR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
¶2.   Withdrawal of U.S. Forces from Iraqi Cities 
¶3.   Partial Recount of Iranian Votes 
¶4.   Honduras Coup 
¶5.   Outcome of Argentinean Elections 
¶6.   IRENA 
¶7.   Madoff Trial 
 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
 
ZDF-TV's and ARD-TV's early evening newscast opened with stories on 
the presentation of the CDU/CSU election platform.  Most newspapers 
led with stories saying that swindler Bernard Madoff was sentenced 
to 150 years in prison.  Frankfurter Allgemeine led with a report on 
the tentative identification of the remains of St. Paul the Apostle, 
Frankfurter Rundschau opened with a story on carmaker Porsche, and 
Tageszeitung focused on the U.S. withdrawal from Iraqi towns and 
cities.  Broadcast and online media led this morning with the crash 
of a Yemenia airplane with 150 passengers in the Indian Ocean. 
Editorials focused on various topics. 
 
¶2.   Withdrawal of U.S. Forces from Iraqi Cities 
 
Many German media reported that "the withdrawal of U.S. forces from 
Iraqi is getting real as the U.S. army now begins pulling out of 
Iraqi towns and cities" (ARD-TV's primetime Tagesschau).  Mass 
tabloid Bild's intro declared: "This is the beginning of the end of 
the Iraq war!  U.S. troops began to withdraw from Baghdad and Mosul 
yesterday."  Many media cast doubt over whether Iraqi forces would 
be capable of bearing responsibility for the country's security. 
"The views on whether the 262,000 Iraqi soldiers are equal to the 
task differ," Die Welt remarked in a lengthy feature. 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine commented: "Experts are divided over the 
question of whether Iraqi security forces will get the conflict 
under control without foreign help...  At the end of the day, it 
will depend on the policies of the Iraqi government.  The new spate 
of violence spreading throughout the country in recent weeks cannot 
be seen as evidence that Iraq will plunge into civil war after the 
withdrawal of the Americans.  This will primarily depend on 
political developments in Iraq-whether it will be possible to find 
an acceptable compromise to share power between the Shiites majority 
and the Sunnis, who were the ruling elite under Saddam, and whether 
a solution can be found for the dispute over oil fields of Kirkuk 
between the Kurdish authorities in the north and the central 
government....  Now, the question will be answered of whether the 
war, which ousted a tyrant and cost the lives of many people, also 
laid the foundation for a better society and a democratic country. 
Those who were against the war must also hope the best for Iraq." 
 
Under the headline "Occupiers go, protectors stay," FT Deutschland 
reported: "When Prime Minister Maliki celebrates the end of the U.S. 
occupation of Iraq, he is exaggerating because 133,000 U.S. soldiers 
will remain in the country-although they won't be visible...  The 
real triumph of the Baghdad government is that it will determine the 
U.S. operation in the future-this was the other way around for six 
years....  The recent bomb attacks demonstrate how precarious the 
security situation still is." 
 
Tageszeitung remarked in a front-page editorial: "This is an orderly 
withdrawal that leaves behind anything else but an orderly 
situation.  No security, hardly any reconstruction or government 
services, no real reconciliation and a dozen of unresolved political 
conflicts.  The occupiers leave behind a legacy hardly any Iraqi 
wants to accept-although they are happy that the foreign troops will 
finally disappear from their doorsteps.  The withdrawal desired by 
the majority of Iraqis cannot be celebrated.  The bitter taste of 
what might come is too great....  The bloody attacks in recent weeks 
show that there are militant groups who want to fill the emerging 
vacuum." 
 
¶3.  Partial Recount of Iranian Votes 
 
Many papers carried reports on Iran.  Sueddeutsche Zeitung carried 
an article under the headline: "Ahmadinejad's Victory is Validated," 
noting that the Guardian Council confirmed the election results. 
Under the headline: "Ahmadinejad Wants to Examine Neda's Death," Die 
Welt reported on the president's order that the killing of student 
Neda Agha-Soltani be investigated.  But the daily also reported on 
new demonstrations against the regime. "According to eye witnesses, 
clashes between 3,000 protesters and police forces happened in 
Tehran on Sunday."  Der Tagesspiegel reported on new repression in 
Tehran under the headline "Imprisoned in Iran," and wrote that 
"Iran's regime wants to force opposition politicians to make 
confessions.  We can only imagine what is currently happening behind 
prison walls in Iran.  According to the Paris-based International 
Federation for Human Rights, the regime has arrested more than 2,000 
people." 
 
Sueddeutsche Zeitung dealt with President Ahmadinejad's order to 
investigate the death of Neda Agha Soltani and opined: "The justice 
authorities are under firm control of the conservatives.  For 
Iranian media loyal to the regime, it has been clear for a long time 
that foreign media instigated the killers.  A partisan examination 
fits the anti-western invective of religious leader Ali Khamenei and 
the president.  But for Ahmadinejad, a second goal is even more 
important.  For Iranians who did not take to the streets to protest 
but who only stood on the sidewalk, the pictures of the dying woman 
were horrifying and disgusting.  The majority of Iranians distrust 
the brutality of the suppressors.  If the president wants to 
continue to govern as before, he can not live with this truth for 
another four years.  What the Iranians think is more important for 
him than the opinion of foreign countries." 
 
According to Frankfurter Allgemeine, "the two defeated presidential 
candidates Moussavi and Mehdi-Karrubi do not want to accept the 
recount of ten percent of the votes.  But the partial recount shows 
that the critical words of Ayatollah Montazeri and the statements of 
other leaders have had an effect...and even President Ahmadinejad 
has now ordered an investigation of the death of student Neda.  The 
view that the Iranian leadership team is a monolithic block has 
always been wrong.  Behind the scenes, the leaders are likely to 
have discussed many things that were supposed to be kept secret but 
have to do with questions of power." 
 
¶4.   Honduras Coup 
 
Under the subtitle: "The Military ousts a Left-Wing President - and 
not Even America Likes This," Sueddeutsche Zeitung argued: "The 
ousting of elected President Zelaya reminds us of the darkest hours 
and has nothing to do with the principles of the rule of law.  There 
is no civilized government or organization that accepts this...  No 
one has the right ... to throw the legitimate president out of the 
country and to determine overnight who is to succeed him.  Under 
Barack Obama, even the United States has understood this and in the 
White House such activities do not find any support.  It is good 
that the international rejection is unanimous.  The international 
community should now use all diplomatic possibilities to exert 
pressure on the self-appointed rulers in Honduras.  A coup should no 
longer set a precedent." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine noted: "A coup took place in Honduras over 
the weekend and reminded us of an era which we thought had been 
overcome.  Obviously the Honduran military had the mandate of the 
country's judicial and legislative branches to prevent a de-facto 
coup by the president.  But since the end does not justify the 
means, it is the duty of the international community, including the 
United States, to unanimously protest this move.  But the West 
should not simply sing to the tune of Zelaya's political friends 
ranging from Chvez to Ortega and Morales.  Their policies have much 
more in common with the disastrous old times than with the new era 
of perfect democrats that has by no means dawned yet." 
 
Under the headline: "America Without Backyard," Tagesspiegel argued: 
"This time something is different in Honduras.  This time, the 
United States does not seem to have played any role in this coup. 
Seven years ago, the CIA vigorously helped oust Hugo Chvez and 
former President Bush explicitly welcomed the coup.  But 48 hours 
later, Chvez returned under pressure from the masses and the United 
States again proved that Latin America is for the U.S. nothing but 
the well-known backyard in which it can do whatever it likes.  But 
Barack Obama seems to have learned his lesson from the chauvinist 
activities of his predecessor.  It did not take long before he 
described the coup as 'anti-democratic.'  The fact that the elites 
in Honduras used the question of the term of an incumbent for a coup 
shows that the relationship between the many poor and the few 
wealthy has not changed.  In Honduras, the elites are still living 
in the 20th century.  Obviously, they have not yet felt the fresh 
breeze that is blowing in Washington." 
 
die tageszeitung noted: "In America the Cold War is over, the 
democratic left-wing is forming again.  Even if Manual Zelaya cannot 
count on any support from Washington: if destabilization is to 
succeed, it must be orchestrated in a more discrete way today, for 
instance, through economic and media pressure.  The right wing in 
Honduras and its supporters, the military, which grew up under wings 
of the Untied States, have not yet realized this." 
 
In view of Handelsblatt, "What has happened in Honduras is a relapse 
into dark times that we thought had been overcome long ago.  Those 
who defend the coup as a step to save democracy must allow questions 
regarding their definition of democracy, a definition that obviously 
allows the kidnapping of a president at gun point.  The 
international community reacted quickly and correctly.  It does not 
recognize Interim President Micheletti and is calling for a return 
of Zelaya." 
 
¶5.   Outcome of Argentinean Elections 
 
Under the headline: "A Dynasty is Stumbling," Sueddeutsche Zeitung 
observed: "The defeat in the parliamentary elections is so harsh 
because the Kirchners and their supporters lost not only in the 
countryside but also in Buenos Aires Province, where the majority of 
Argentineans live, among them the urban bourgeoisie.  They had 
already forfeited their reputation among the farmers and the 
agricultural barons in the Pampas.  It was the Kirchners' arrogance 
that contributed to their downfall.  Instead of explaining to the 
Argentineans the need for public spirit, they tried to decree 
solidarity.  But this is bad in a country in which activities for 
the common good is a foreign concept.  In the midst of a global 
financial crisis, which is consuming the country's modest wealth, 
Argentina wants to see new saviors." 
 
Die Welt opined: "This is the greatest defeat in Nstor Kirchner's 
political career.  It demonstrates that he has suffered a total loss 
of reputation among the Argentinean population.  However, the 
victorious opposition is totally fragmented.  As a close ally of 
Venezuela, Argentina has increasingly lost its reputation, and as 
far as global politics is concerned, the agricultural state no 
longer plays a role.  Kirchners' extreme economic nationalism has 
turned out to be a dead end street.  There are forces in the country 
who want to change this because they know that something must 
change.  But they will succeed only if they forge a broadly based 
alliance.  The Kirchners are weakened but still in government." 
 
Regional daily Mdrkische Oderzeitung of Frankfurt on the Oder 
observed: "The Kirchner era is coming to an end in Argentina.  The 
most recent election defeat is only a continuation of the downward 
trend of former President Nstor Kirchner and his wife Cristina.  It 
is true that they have led their country out of the deep economic 
crisis to relative stability, but their social populist course did 
not meet with support everywhere, not even in their own party.  With 
the president garnering support from only 30 percent of the voters, 
the race for Kirchner's succession will now begin.  It will be two 
stormy years for Argentina's Peronists." 
 
¶6.   IRENA 
 
Regional daily Klnische Rundschau judged: "What looks like a bad 
compromise is basically an understandable choice.  Of course, it is 
a pity that Bonn will not get the seat of the International 
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA).  There were enough good arguments 
in favor of Bonn, not at least the fact that it was Germany that 
initiated the foundation of IRENA.   But the decision for Abu Dhabi 
sends an important signal.  Developing and threshold countries have 
now had the experience that they no longer play second fiddle in the 
international concert....  Of course, the successful application of 
the UAE is also a sign that the Gulf state has recognized the signs 
of the times.  The era of crude oil is coming to its end and those 
who want to build their wealth on it for another 100 years will 
fail." 
 
¶6.   G-20 Follow-Up 
 
Handelsblatt opined that "it happened 100 days ago that, at its 
meeting in London, the G-20 agreed on joint efforts to support the 
global economy and to build up a new financial order.  But many 
governments are so busy with their crisis management that they have 
trouble thinking beyond the present moment.  The economic emergency 
assistance of central banks and governments will take effect in the 
coming months.  The question is whether this will initiate a lasting 
economic boom or only an economic flash in the pan.  It is still too 
early to release the ailing global economy from the hospital, but 
the time when the economy will be able to stand on its own feet 
again is coming sooner rather than later.  That is why it is right 
that the finance ministers and central bank chiefs not only prepare 
their exit strategy but also undertake the first steps back to a new 
normality.  They should now begin to close the money taps they have 
opened to save the economy.  But a return to normality can succeed 
only if the finance system is undergoing a complete overhaul...and 
in this respect, questions remain." 
 
¶7.   Madoff Trial 
 
Many German papers led with the story on the "150 years of prison 
for the multi-billion dollar swindler Madoff" (S|ddeutsche 
headline).  Editorials noted that the verdict is correct but also 
emphasized that it would not resolve the financial crisis. 
 
A front-page editorial in FT Deutschland remarked: "It is 
indispensible for the health of the financial system that the 
inventor of a pyramid investment scam is punished severely.  The 
court's verdict is right and important.  However, those who now 
believe that such financial criminality is history as of today are 
wrong.  The deterrent impact of punishment is limited and it is 
likely that authorities will fail to identify a clever swindler in a 
few years.  The U.S. government will certainly disagree with this 
assessment as President Obama just called for the greatest overhaul 
of the American financial regulation since the Great Depression. 
However, Madoff's swindle remained unnoticed not because the rules 
were too soft, but rather because the SEC watchdogs simply ignored 
the warning signals.  Obama's overhaul of the authorities will 
therefore have only little impact on the quality of the oversight, 
which might in the medium term actually suffer from the 
restructuring and redistribution of competences because the 
watchdogs are busy navel-gazing.  In the end, it is not clear who is 
responsible for what." 
 
A front-page editorial in Die Welt noted that "greed on both sides" 
led to the Madoff case, explaining that "investors who gave Madoff 
their money were not ordinary savers.  They were people who expected 
profits of ten percent even in times of a crisis."  Under the 
headline "The scapegoat," Tagesspiegel commented: "The world needs 
somebody to blame and the financial crisis now seems to have a face 
with Bernard Madoff....  What a mistake.  Madoff is the wrong one to 
blame for the financial crisis.  He built up a pyramid investment 
scam that guaranteed profits that were higher than conservative 
investments.  His system was so successful that it took the collapse 
of the financial system to bring it down.  The verdict comes at a 
time in which banks are already beginning to gamble with poisonous 
investments that caused the financial crisis and money that 
governments are printing. While the public is satisfied, those who 
are actually responsible for the crisis are still at large." 
 
  KOENIG