09BERLIN184
MEDIA REACTION: Afghanistan, Obama, Economic Pakistan-India
Fri Feb 13 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
R 131157Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 3302
INFO WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
DIA WASHINGTON DC
CIA WASHINGTON DC
DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
FRG COLLECTIVE
AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 
AMEMBASSY LONDON 
AMEMBASSY PARIS 
AMEMBASSY ROME 
USMISSION USNATO 
USMISSION USOSCE 
HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS BERLIN 000184 
 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/AGS, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO GM
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: Afghanistan, Obama, Economic Pakistan-India 
Protectionism, Clinton, EU-Turkey 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
 
Editorials focused on today's Bundestag meeting on the government's 
economic stimulus package, on protectionist tendencies in the EU, 
and on reports that people use drugs to improve their performance on 
the job.  ZDF-TV's early evening newscast Heute opened with the 
Congress's approval of President Obama's economic stimulus package, 
while ARD-TV's early evening newscast Tagesschau opened with a story 
on the Bundestag debate over claims for old age pensions after a 
divorce. 
 
¶2.   (Afghanistan)   Holbrooke Trip 
 
According to Handelsblatt, "the contours of a new U.S. policy 
towards Afghanistan are not even visible, but there is no panacea 
for more security in the Hindu Kush.  That is why U.S. special envoy 
Richard Holbrooke is travelling empty-handed to Kabul.  Washington 
the entire West must now turn to the complicated Afghanistan problem 
with all their might. The main focus should be civilian 
reconstruction and to enter into a more intense dialogue with the 
Afghans.  They must witness economic progress that will no longer 
cast any doubt about the West's capabilities to set up a social 
structure in the downtrodden country.  This includes infrastructure 
and education but also healthcare and security.  If this new 
development concept shows consideration for the needs of the people, 
it will cut the ground from under the terrorists' feet and the 
downward spiral will be broken." 
 
¶3.   (U.S.)   Obama Administration 
 
Under the headline: "Welcome To The World!" Tagesspiegel judged: 
"Irrespective of whether it is Israel, Iran, Afghanistan or the 
economic crisis, reality has caught up with Barack Obama.  The 
President cannot dedicate his full attention to other conflicts 
[because of the financial crisis].  They continue to smolder and 
could develop a dangerous dynamic of their own.  He will get a free 
hand in foreign policy only if an economic recovery is visible.  But 
it is not up to him alone to make that happen.  The power of the 
U.S. president is limited.  Under Bush, many would have considered 
this view as reassuring.  Does the longing for a stronger America 
rise in times of misery?" 
 
Berliner Zeitung observed: "The charismatic politician who entered 
office to achieve bipartisanship in Washington must realize after 
three weeks that reality is stronger than his idealism. Obama has 
tried not to create false hopes and warned against possible 
setbacks.  Even though Barack Obama only achieved a compromise with 
his stimulus, the president can stand before Congress again tomorrow 
and raise new demands.  He has the time and the will to correct his 
policies.  And he has even more: Obama has a strong ally on his 
side: the great majority of Americans.  This, too, distinguishes him 
from his predecessor." 
 
¶4.   (U.S.)   Economic Stimulus Package 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine argued under the headline: "The Big Waste," 
"The rhetoric of the U.S. president can hardly be excelled in its 
dramatic tone.  Hardly a day passes, in which he does not warn 
against an 'economic disaster.'  But it is regrettable that the 
actors in Washington now seem to get a feeling of panic.  For 
instance, what Treasury Secretary Geithner has now presented is only 
an unclear sketch of various measures...and the Secretary left too 
many questions open.  On Capitol Hill, senators and members of 
Congress also have difficulty keeping a cool head.  But one thing is 
certain:  America will now accumulate a large mountain of debt which 
will have to be reduced with higher taxes.  We hope that President 
Obama succeeds in stabilizing the financial system as quickly as 
possible.  But in the sectors where the economic stimulus package 
goes beyond tax cut measures, it is tantamount to a big waste at the 
expense of the taxpayer." 
 
Financial Times Deutschland editorialized: "There is a dangerous gap 
between the rhetoric and the substance of the U.S. economic stimulus 
package.  While President Obama and his economic team are announcing 
the biggest possible state-run tour de force package, the concrete 
measures remain blunt and vague.  The bipartisan compromise that the 
president has now achieved could be expected: it is a stimulus 
package that no longer follows any coherent strategy.  Congress has 
approved a stimulus that offers something for each side - thus 
minimizing the political but also the economic risks, and the 
president must be blamed for the dilution of responsibilities. 
Obama deliberately gave up a plan to refer to his fresh, new mandate 
and assert a package with the Congressional Democratic majority 
according to his own views.  Those who announce a 'big bang,' but 
then only deliver a loud tinkling, do not create, but rather 
jeopardize, confidence." 
 
Berliner Zeitung noted under the headline: "the Turbo President," 
that the 789 billion dollar economic bailout package is a compromise 
but it no longer prefers the rich with tax cuts and it clearly shows 
that the state will play a significant role in the future 
economy.... And the times are over for the Bush principle that tax 
cuts for the rich will result in more jobs and more money for the 
middle class and the poor.  But Obama is right.  The United States 
must act quickly, even though not everyone likes the package." 
 
¶5.   (Pakistan/India)   Aftermath Of Mumbai Attack 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine commented: "Immediately after the attacks in 
Mumbai, Indian authorities were convinced that the masterminds come 
from Pakistan.  If the Indians really know this for sure, why wasn't 
there an opportunity to stop the bloodshed?  Pakistan denied any 
involvement right after the attack.  It is now clear that this was 
premature.  The Pakistani government's admission on Thursday 
basically confirmed the Indian investigation results.  The real 
question is now what follows?  Maybe it was a coincidence that the 
announcement came on the day U.S. envoy Holbooke ended his visit in 
Pakistan.  However, in the past Pakistan often announced 
window-dressing success stories in the fight against terrorism 
without any further results.  Doubts remain." 
 
A report in S|ddeutsche headlined: "Pakistan catches the masterminds 
of the Mumbai attacks," and remarked that the "government in 
Islamabad admits for the first time that the attacks were prepared 
on its territory."  The paper added: "Tensions will not subside 
quickly.  Malik requests further details from India.  The catalogue 
of 30 questions also refers to telephone cards with connections to 
Europe.  The attacks were apparently financed with money from Spain 
and Italy." 
 
¶6.   (Economic)   French Car Bailout, Protectionism 
 
In the view of Handelsblatt, "Sarkozy's bailout package for the 
French car industry is not the only in Europe, but, in reality, it 
is the most worrying one.  The principle that 
'our-taxpayers'-money-stays-in-the-country' is meeting with 
increasing popularity in this crisis, and there is no one in the EU 
who could stop these activities.  It is a basic idea of the EU that 
the common internal market should offer great advantages to all 
sides.  This idea continues to remain correct and that is why [EU] 
governments must accept that, in an EU-wide coordinated program, 
companies cut jobs where they consider it right, for, in the end, 
they cannot prevent it." 
 
Sueddeutsche criticized that "Europe's leaders met almost on a 
weekly basis last fall to save Europe from the economic crisis...but 
at home, where the implications of the crisis are felt, their 
decisions are hardly worth the paper on which they were written.  At 
home, they have now launched a flurry of hectic activities and do 
not give a damn about the holy oath they gave in Brussels.  An 
economic nationalism is spreading in Europe which we thought had 
been overcome: protectionism.  It has the potential to blow up the 
European Union." 
 
Die Welt editorialized: "Chancellor Merkel now has the choice: She 
either withstands protectionist temptations, or the chancellor will 
also join the race for subsidies, which would add to the damage of 
the global economy, and which could turn the economic crisis into a 
crisis of European and international policies." 
 
Frankfurter Rundschau opined: "globalization to and fro, national 
egotism, parochialism, and protectionism are thriving.  Instead of a 
renaissance of multilateralism, modern currency and trade wars are 
surfacing on the horizon in which every one fights for himself of 
against the others for his existence.  Half a year of a global 
economic downturn was enough, and now economic nationalism no longer 
knows any borders." 
 
Tagesspiegel judged: "If the United States protects its Wall Street, 
and France assists its car industry, we will help Opel.  But in this 
context, one pushes aside the view that globalization cannot be 
abolished.  Protectionism will separate markets and consumers. 
Those who would spare banks from the costs of their actions will 
give them a carte blanche for new escapades.  Those who favor car 
producers from the past will shield them from the competition for 
the cars of the future." 
 
Regional daily Badische Zeitung of Freiburg opined: "Again and again 
Sarkozy is kicking his European partners in the shin.  What is even 
worse: he makes himself not credible.  Only a while ago, he called 
for a European Economic Government to strengthen the EU's position 
in the world.  But he should know one thing: the 
close-your-eyes-and-hope-for-the best strategy did not resolve, but 
only worsened, economic problems in the past.  And since then, the 
world has grown together even more." 
 
¶7.   (U.S.-Asia)   Clinton in Asia 
 
Several papers carried reports of Clinton's travel plans. 
S|ddeutsche headlined: "U.S. Courts Asia" and said in its intro: 
"When Hillary Clinton arrives in Tokyo on Monday evening, it will be 
the U.S. Secretary of State's first visit abroad.  The Japanese 
government sees this as a confirmation of the significance of 
U.S.-Japanese relations....  U.S.-Japanese relations are cordial but 
also deadlocked and therefore fragile.  Washington is demanding more 
military engagement by Japan, e.g. in Afghanistan." 
 
¶8.   (EU)   Turkey, Romania, Bulgaria 
 
"Turkey is increasingly causing a headache in the EU," Sueddeutsche 
Zeitung wrote, and added: "The sobering view is now spreading in 
Brussels that Ankara has now chosen setbacks, not moves forward, as 
the preferred means of locomotion.  It is a bitter truth that the 
temptation of an accession has only a limited effect on Turkey's 
domestic movement towards greater democracy and the rule of law. 
Europe has to make up its mind on what to do with Turkey.  And it 
should not feel irritated by the Turkish inclination to react with 
an offended national pride or to consider itself as the victim of 
European arrogance.  It is Turkey that wants to join the EU, and the 
EU does not raise unfair demands." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung opined: "Since Bulgaria and Romania 
have been accepted in the EU, their efforts to introduce and 
implement standards according to the rule of law have declined. 
 
They are still miles away from European standards.  The European 
Commission is now threatening Romania with a stop of funds, a move 
which it implemented recently against Bulgaria.  All indications are 
that the European transfer of funds has been the reason for an 
increase in corruption.  The conclusion is that closing the tap 
could not only have a political effect in Sofia and Bucharest but 
could also help dry up the swamps in these countries.  Such 
punishment should be a lesson for other accession candidates: The EU 
membership is not for free."