09BEIJING1495
JUNE 4 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SECRETARY CLINTON'S TIANANMEN
Thu Jun 04 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO1012
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1495/01 1552327
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 042327Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4304
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 0498
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 001495 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM EFIN ETRD SENV CH KN KS JP BR IN
RS 
 
SUBJECT: JUNE 4 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SECRETARY CLINTON'S TIANANMEN 
MESSAGE, TIANANMEN MASSACRE ANNIVERSARY, STRATEGIC AND ECONOMIC 
DIALOGUE, VISIT OF TODD STERN 
 
¶1. Key points at the June 4 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- China calls Secretary Clinton's message on the twentieth 
anniversary of the June 4, 1989, Tiananmen Square massacre 
"groundless accusations" in contravention of the U.S.-China Joint 
Communiqus and international norms.  China believes the Secretary's 
statement is a "gross interference" into China's internal affairs 
and is indicative of "political prejudice," and requests that the 
United States immediately "correct" this "wrongdoing" to avoid 
"undermining" bilateral relations. 
 
-- Asked to explain why there was an increased presence of police in 
and around Tiananmen Square today, and why foreign journalists were 
being barred from entering the square without prior notice, the 
spokesperson asked all journalists to abide by China's laws and 
regulations while reporting on developments, and said that the 
situation at Tiananmen today was "stable, as usual." 
 
-- China believes the Strategic and Economic Dialogue, to be held in 
late July in Washington, D.C., is "an important step in the 
development of U.S.-China relations in a new era." 
 
-- The upcoming visit of Special Envoy for Climate Change Todd Stern 
represents another opportunity to "expand communication and 
exchange" on the increasingly important issue of climate change, an 
issue which represents a "new area for boosting cooperation" between 
the United States and China. 
 
Anniversary of Tiananmen Massacre 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶2. Asked about the twentieth anniversary of the June 4, 1989, 
Tiananmen Square massacre at the June 4 regularly scheduled MFA 
press briefing, spokesperson Qin Gang said that he had "expounded 
many times" that the Chinese Communist Party and government had 
"already reached an unequivocal conclusion" on the "political 
incident of the late 1980s and related issues."  He added that the 
past three decades had witnessed the "remarkable success" of 
socialism with Chinese characteristics.  This development was the 
will of the Chinese people and "in their fundamental interest." 
 
Secretary Clinton's Statement 
----------------------------- 
 
¶3. When pressed to comment on Secretary Clinton's statement to mark 
the anniversary, Qin said that the Secretary's remarks represent 
"groundless accusations" and are in contravention of the U.S.-China 
Joint Communiqus and international norms.  He stressed that her 
statement is a "gross interference" into China's internal affairs 
and is indicative of "political prejudice."  He added that China 
hoped the United States would immediately "correct" this 
"wrongdoing" to avoid "undermining" bilateral relations.  When asked 
why the Secretary's message is considered "political prejudice," Qin 
said that China's position is "clear and persistent" and that China 
"opposed double standards," adding that the remarks contravene 
"international law and norms" governing international relations 
enshrined in "UN conventions." 
 
Restricted Access to Tiananmen 
------------------------------ 
 
¶4. Asked to explain why there was an increased presence of police in 
and around Tiananmen Square today, and why foreign journalists were 
being barred from entering the square without prior notice, Qin 
asked all journalists to abide by China's laws and regulations while 
reporting on developments, and asked that they obtain permission 
through the "relevant authorities" to cover any news relating to 
Tiananmen Square.  When pressed as to what those specific 
regulations were, Qin said he had already addressed that issue.  He 
added that the situation at Tiananmen today was "stable, as usual." 
 
Tiananmen "Wording" Incorrect 
----------------------------- 
 
¶5. Foreign journalists should be careful with the words they use to 
describe the "political incident of the late 1980s and related 
issues," added Qin. When a journalist asked how he should refer to 
the "Tiananmen killings" after having been berated by Qin for using 
"wrong" words to phrase his question, Qin said he had already 
addressed that issue, and that the answer could be gleaned from his 
previous remarks.  Later, when pressed again about the death toll 
from the Tiananmen Square Massacre, Qin replied again that he had 
already addressed this issue. His response was the same when asked 
about the fate of the unknown man whose picture was taken on June 5, 
1989, as he stepped in front of tanks near Tiananmen Square. 
 
 
BEIJING 00001495  002 OF 003 
 
 
Deportation of Wu'er Kaixi 
-------------------------- 
 
¶6. Qin referred journalists to local authorities in Macau when asked 
about the reportedly "forced deportation" of former student leader 
Wu'er Kaixi from Macau to Taiwan. 
 
Strategic and Economic Dialogue 
------------------------------- 
 
¶7. President Hu and President Obama agreed to the Strategic and 
Economic Dialogue mechanism in April in London which will involve 
Vice Premier Wang Qishan and State Councilor Dai Bingguo on the 
Chinese side, and Secretary Clinton and Secretary Geithner on the 
U.S. side, explained Qin. The first round of talks are scheduled to 
take place in late July in Washington, D.C., and will be an 
opportunity for both sides to exchange views from a "strategic 
perspective," as well as to boost cooperation between the two 
countries, added Qin.  The mechanism is "an important step in the 
development of U.S.-China relations in a new era," he said. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hu and Obama's Telephone Conversation 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. President Hu and President Obama exchanged views on bilateral 
relations, as well as on North Korea in their most recent telephone 
conversation, confirmed Qin.  Both agreed to keep in close touch on 
the issue, and to "coordinate and cooperate" with the other relevant 
parties to work towards peace and stability on the Korean 
Peninsula. 
 
North Korea 
----------- 
 
¶9. China's policy on North Korea is "clear," said Qin, when asked to 
comment on two recently published editorials in the Washington Post 
and the New York Times claiming that North Korea's actions were at 
the behest of China, and that North Korea's true intent is to send a 
strong message to the United States.  He added that China continues 
to call on all relevant parties to remain "cool-headed and 
restrained," and to work towards a peaceful resolution of the issue 
through "dialogue and consultation."  Qin had no additional 
information to add when asked to comment on reports that Kim 
Jong-il's third son, Kim Jong-un, had been named as the next leader 
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK). 
 
¶10. When asked to comment about the trial of two American 
journalists detained in the DPRK, Qin replied that this question 
"should not be referred to the MFA." 
 
Visit of Todd Stern 
------------------ 
 
¶11. Special Envoy for Climate Change Todd Stern will visit China 
soon, confirmed Qin, and will address the increasingly important 
issue of climate change during his visit.  China is keen to "expand 
communication and exchange" on this issue, added Qin, which 
represents a "new area for boosting cooperation" between the United 
States and China. When asked to comment on whether or not China 
would commit to a stringent reduction in emissions, Qin referred the 
journalist to "competent authorities." 
 
BRIC Summit 
----------- 
 
¶12. China, India, Brazil and Russia are playing a "greater role" on 
the international stage, and share "common interests and concerns," 
said Qin when asked about the upcoming Brazil, Russia, India, China 
(BRIC) summit to be held in Russia in June.  When asked why China 
has not confirmed the date, proposed by Russia, of June 16 for the 
summit, Qin replied that details about the summit "will be released 
in due course." 
 
Malaysia Visit 
-------------- 
 
¶13. Prime Minister Najib Tun Razak of Malaysia visited China 
yesterday and met with Premier Wen Jiabao, said Qin.  Four 
cooperative agreements were signed, the most important of which is a 
plan for strategic cooperation between China and Malaysia, a plan 
which charts the course for wide-ranging "mutual benefit" between 
 
BEIJING 00001495  003 OF 003 
 
 
the two countries, added Qin.  When asked whether China and Malaysia 
were considering using the Renminbi (RMB) and Ringgit to conduct 
bilateral trade, Qin said that given the global financial crisis, 
China believes that it should "join hands" with Malaysia to "jointly 
fend off" the negative impact of the crisis.  He added that China is 
willing to promote this currency initiative and has "an open 
attitude." 
 
Afghan Foreign Minister to Visit 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶14. Foreign Minister Rangin Dadfar Spanta of Afghanistan will visit 
China at the invitation of Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi June 9-12, 
2009, announced Qin. China expects to exchange views on bilateral 
and regional issues with Foreign Minister Spanta, as well as to 
further promote the development of Afghanistan's reconstruction 
efforts, he added. 
 
Economic Dialogue with Japan 
---------------------------- 
 
¶15. The second round of the China-Japan high-level economic dialogue 
will be held soon, said Qin, and represents "an important step 
towards building strategic and regional relations."  China hopes the 
dialogue will "enhance understanding and boost cooperation" between 
China and Japan on a range of issues including the global financial 
crisis and protection of the environment. 
 
Air France 447 
-------------- 
 
¶16. Qin expressed "deep condolences" to all victims, family and 
friends of those affected by the recent Air France 447 crash, and 
confirmed that nine Chinese citizens were among the passengers on 
the flight.  Upon learning of the event, the MFA "immediately 
instructed" its embassies in France and Brazil to contact relevant 
authorities and ascertain relevant details, as well as to inform 
families of the victims.  The MFA and Chinese missions will stay in 
close contact with the governments of Brazil and France and have set 
up a consular protection emergency hotline, added the spokesperson. 
 
 
PICCUTA