09BERLIN1629
MEDIA REACTION: U.S., IRAN, U.S.-RUSSIA, CHINA-UK,
Thu Dec 31 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
VZCZCXRO8990
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHLZ
DE RUEHRL #1629/01 3651336
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 311336Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6151
INFO RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVE
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 1868
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0590
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 1106
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 2611
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 1633
RUEHVEN/USMISSION USOSCE 0796
RHMFIUU/HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
RHMFISS/HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
RHMFISS/CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
RUKAAKC/UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 BERLIN 001629 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/CE, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR US IR RS UK AF
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S., IRAN, U.S.-RUSSIA, CHINA-UK, 
GERMANY- 
AFGHANISTAN;BERLIN 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
¶2.   (U.S.)   Aftermath of Failed Terrorist Attack, Debate in 
Germany 
¶3.   (Iran)   Protests, Ahmadinejad Remarks 
¶4.   (U.S.-Russia)   START talks, Putin Remarks 
¶5.   (China)   Execution of British National 
¶6.   (Germany-Afghanistan)   Afghanistan Conference 
 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
 
Print media led with reports on the debate in Germany over the 
introduction of full-body scanners at German airports.  Other 
stories 
include China's execution of a British national and falling hotel 
prices.  Editorials focused on the same issues.  ZDF-TV's early 
evening newscast heute and ARD-TV's early evening newscast 
Tagesschau 
opened with reports on tougher security measures at German airports 
 
following the failed attack in Detroit. 
 
¶2.   (U.S.)   Aftermath of Failed Terrorist Attack, Debate in 
Germany 
 
All papers (12/30) continue to discuss the impact of the failed 
terrorist attack in Detroit.  The discussion in Germany is now 
focusing on whether the introduction of full-body scanners would 
violate the privacy rights of passengers and whether they are safe. 
 
Sueddeutsche Zeitung, however, criticized President Obama's reaction 
 
to the attack: "President Obama hesitated three days before he 
reassured the U.S. public.  This period was clearly too long.  A 
nation that can easily be alarmed in the era of a constant exposure 
to 
news simply needs the reassurance of their president that everything 
 
is under control.  But Obama and his advisors have underestimated 
this 
need.  The consequence is that [opposition politicians] can now 
ridicule this government in such a highly sensitive issue....  But 
it 
was the predecessor government that introduced the current system. 
 
The annoying thing is that the laudable calm in dealing with the 
terror danger is now being used to assail the president and his 
government.   Now he must reject the false view that he is too soft 
in 
the fight against terror.  Obama could hardly look worse in this 
affair." 
 
Die Welt (12/30) judged in a front-page editorial: "Privacy finds 
its 
limits when the life of others is at risk, and that is the case in 
this matter.  People who are worried and put their privacy above the 
 
lives of others should not underestimate the extent to which Germans 
 
would like to stay alive.  Those who are more afraid of a full body 
 
scanner than of an air crash live in a world that is not a real." 
 
National radio station Deutschlandfunk (12/29) commented: "This 
failed 
terrorist attempt showed one thing: Al-Qaida continues to be a great 
 
 
BERLIN 00001629  002 OF 006 
 
 
danger; its fighters continue to look for new ways and tricks on how 
 
to hit the hated western world.  It is a race that the western 
community of nations is about to lose if security gaps are not 
finally 
closed with first-rate technology.  All sides involved must be aware 
 
of the fact that the privacy rights of individuals must always be on 
 
the agenda.  And it must also be clear that the facts of 
international 
terrorism are not affected by these security considerations." 
 
In an editorial Sueddeutsche Zeitung (12/30) had this to say: "The 
excitement in politics about the scanning of people is only half as 
 
great as it was a year ago.  The uniform rejection has turned into a 
 
'let's look-how-it-works.'  Security experts increasingly avoid the 
 
term 'naked' [full body scanners are called 'naked scanners in 
Germany].  The naked scanning is now called body scanning.  We hear 
 
the message but still do not believe in what the experts say.  With 
 
such announcements, this scanning is being minimized.  In security 
policy we are witnessing a gross generalization of things that were 
 
unthinkable a while ago." 
 
Berliner Zeitung (12/30) is critical of the new scanners and judged: 
 
"Experts are threatening that, without "naked" scanners, 
embarrassing 
body searches would be necessary, and that is why the scanner would 
be 
a clean, acceptable alternative.  And those who react to these 
arguments...with abstract terms such as basic rights and human 
dignity 
are considered naQve dreamers.  Long ago, the majority of people 
also 
accepted restrictions of their individual freedoms and rights in the 
 
name of security.   It is certainly right that all decisions be 
based 
on laws. But we should be allowed to remind everyone of the fact 
that 
the perception of such steps has changed.  Only a while ago, such 
practices were considered excesses of dictatorships and their craze 
to 
control and monitor everything and everyone." 
 
Regional daily Neue Osnabrcker Zeitung (12/30) argued: "In the 
political jargon, the naked scanner has turned into a full body 
scanner. The new wording shows the future direction.  [Even the FDP] 
 
is now arguing that the scanner gives no reason for concern as long 
as 
human dignity is preserved.  But the FDP or the supporters of this 
technology do not say how this can happen. That is why it would be 
good if they concentrated on the things that are feasible.  We want 
to 
remind everyone that the attacker from Amsterdam would have been 
discovered if he had been intensely searched - without a naked 
scanner. The vigilance of everyone at the security gates counts.... 
If 
this technology really allowed controls without degradation, it may 
 
BERLIN 00001629  003 OF 006 
 
 
be 
used as a supplementary measure.  But today's naked scanners are not 
 
compatible with human dignity and the change of terminology cannot 
obscure this fact." 
 
¶3.   (Iran)   Protests, Ahmadinejad Remarks 
 
In an editorial, Frankfurter Allgemeine (12/30) argued: "Unimpressed 
 
by international protests, the regime in Tehran intensifies the 
repression against supporters of the opposition.  The increasingly 
brutal response against regime critics shows the gravity of the 
threat 
the ruling caste perceives in the protests.  Such a process can 
hardly 
be influenced from abroad, but western policy is not condemned to 
idly 
watch events either.  The head of the Foreign Affairs Committee of 
the 
Bundestag, Ruprecht Polenz, made a proposal that should be 
introduced 
into talks to coordinate an international reaction: restrict the 
travel possibilities of members of the Iranian security apparatus. 
 
This should not be the only restriction, but it would be a necessary 
 
step to isolate the Tehran regime." 
 
Sueddeutsche Zeitung (12/30) observed: "Sanctions must primarily 
serve 
as a replacement for a military strike which Europe and America are 
 
not seriously considering, because it would destabilize the Gulf 
states and jeopardize the recovery of the global economy.  Iran's 
economy is not well off.  It is hard to say to what extent the 
current 
sanctions contributed to this, since Ahmadinejad's botched policy 
also 
contributed to this misery.  At least the boycott has made many 
goods 
more expensive.  It is uncertain whether future boycotts will have a 
 
greater effect.  Russia and China must also support it.  Travel 
restrictions would have only minor effects, since military officials 
 
and arms technicians only visit neighboring countries." 
 
In the opinion of Financial Times Deutschland (12/30), "It is self 
evident that President Obama, Foreign Secretary Miliband, and 
Chancellor Merkel have criticized the brute moves of Iran's security 
 
forces.  The words of western politicians are a signal to the 
reformers in Iran that the major part of the West is on its side. 
But 
they are no more than words.  What will now happen in Iran is in the 
 
hands of the Iranian leadership and the opposition reformist forces, 
 
not in Obama and Merkel's hands.  Still, the West should not stop 
supporting the reformers and the larger their base the better. 
Americans and Europeans should try to prompt Russia and non-Western 
 
states to condemn the violence of the Iranian regime.  This would 
take 
away a central argument of the regime that the protests are 
controlled 
 
BERLIN 00001629  004 OF 006 
 
 
by the West. In addition, the West should approve clearly targeted 
sanctions. Travel bans and a freeze of business relations could be 
reasonable." 
 
Weekly Die Zeit had this to say: "The Iranian regime is also able to 
 
take advantage of Twitter and Cloud computing...but nevertheless it 
was 
unable to suppress the second Iranian revolution.  It is surviving 
on 
the most powerful revolution since the industrial revolution: that 
of 
information." 
 
¶4.   (U.S.-Russia)   START talks, Putin Remarks 
 
According to Frankfurter Allgemeine (12/30), "Russia continues to 
pin 
its hopes on a strategic parity with the United States.  The START 
talks have progressed to such a degree that they could be concluded 
 
soon.  But obviously, Moscow does not follow President Obama's 
reasoning, that this agreement serve primarily as the beginning of 
further disarmament steps and as a strengthening of the NPT regime. 
 
Russia now wants to develop new offensive weapons.  But it would be 
 
better if both sides continued to negotiate.  And this all the more 
 
so, because Obama and Putin agreed before to address the problems of 
 
both offensive and defensive systems." 
 
¶5.   (China)   Execution of British National 
 
All papers (12/30) carried extensive coverage of the execution of 
British national Akhmal Shaikh.  Frankfurter Allgemeine led with the 
 
headline: "China Allows Execution of British National," while 
Sueddeutsche Zeitung headlined: "Shock at Fatal Injection For 
British 
National."  The daily wrote that it is the "first time since 1951 
that 
China executed a foreigner.  The execution again cast a light on 
China's execution practices.  According to Amnesty International in 
 
2007 alone, China allegedly executed 7003 people.  The majority of 
trials against these people took place behind closed doors." 
Financial Times Deutschland reported under the headline: "Execution 
in 
China Angers the British," and wrote that the execution of a British 
 
national has caused serious diplomatic tensions between China and 
the 
UK.  PM Gordon Brown condemned the execution and said he was 
appalled 
that calls for mercy went unheard." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine (12/30) opined: "China likes to ignore 
Western 
wishes and requests.  At COP15 it acted as a climate saboteur; a 
dissident received a long prison sentence, and now a Briton was 
executed.  Obviously, the powers-that-be are unable to walk because 
 
they fell so strong.  Americans and Europeans are now finding out 
what 
this is like.  And if they dare to protest, they are beaten with the 
 
BERLIN 00001629  005 OF 006 
 
 
 
'respect-of-our-sovereignty' stick.  This execution reveals the vast 
 
difference in the legal systems - and China's contempt of the 
West." 
 
Sueddeutsche Zeitung (12/30) editorialized under the headline: "The 
 
Injured Vast Empire," that "China does not know any balance in 
international relations.  The leadership often lacks diplomatic 
pliancy.  Honor and pride are all of a sudden important, even though 
 
they are unsuited standards for political success.  China refuses to 
 
tolerate any criticism if an opposition politician is sentenced to a 
 
long jail term.  A spokeswoman complains about interference if the 
circumstances of an execution should be investigated.  The political 
 
leadership is boycotting others who receive the Dalai Lama.  But the 
 
outrage will not go away.  On the contrary, China is now rapidly 
experiencing what it means to be an unloved hegemon." 
 
Bild-Zeitung (12/30) judged: "Again, the Chinese regime showed its 
ugly, brutal face...and again the outrage is only mild.  Why? 
Because 
no one wants to burden relations with China?  China has been 
convinced 
for a long time that it can dictate its conditions to the West, 
ranging from climate protection to the treatment of the Dalai Lama. 
 
But every day, more than 100 people are executed in China...human 
rights 
are trampled on.  But we need not simply accept this!  China needs 
many more lessons in democracy.  But it will get this only if the 
international community cohesively exerts pressure on China - 
politically and economically." 
 
Regional daily Braunschweiger Zeitung (12/30) argued: "The Chinese 
Foreign Ministry calls accusations from London unfounded and calls 
upon the British to correct their abnormal behavior to avoid a 
danger 
to Anglo-Chinese relations.  This is the usual approach that the 
Asian 
power always uses if does not like the response from another nation. 
 
The case of the Briton must draw the attention to the fact that 
China 
executes hundreds of people every year and that Chinese justice 
authorities consider themselves the tough arm of the state power. 
It 
is a mockery that western experts again and again point to great 
progress in the new global power, as long as human rights are 
violated 
and as long as it is part of every day life that [justice 
authorities] 
make short work of people." 
 
According to Westdeutsche Zeitung of Dsseldorf (12/30), "it would 
be 
naQve to think that the protests of human rights organizations would 
 
change the situation in China.  The Chinese reaction is only a cold 
 
smile.  The regime acts in a much too self-confident way on the 
global 
 
BERLIN 00001629  006 OF 006 
 
 
stage, and the COP15 demonstrated this again.  China will by no 
means 
turn into a state according to the western understanding of 
democracy 
only because it once signed a UN Convention on Civil Rights. 
Unfortunately, this is reality." 
 
¶6.   (Germany-Afghanistan)   Afghanistan Conference 
 
Sueddeutsche Zeitung (12/30) deals in a lengthy editorial with 
Germany's loyalty to its alliances and noted: "No one is accusing 
Germany of not being tormenting with the question of whether and 
when 
it would be willing to use military force after the events in 
Kunduz. 
But this naval-gazing is now irritating Germany's partners in the EU 
 
and in NATO, and we hear voices saying that one cannot count on 
Germany once the going gets tough; that Germany likes to enjoy the 
protection of NATO but will not be a reliable partner if other 
members 
ask for support.  There are growing doubts about Germany's loyalty 
to 
the alliance.  If it was the goal of the Berlin government to 
confuse 
its partners, then it was Foreign Minister Westerwelle, who 
defiantly 
and childishly threatened to boycott the Afghanistan conference in 
London.   But the Social Democrats also contribute to this because 
they look at Afghanistan primarily from a domestic point of view.... 
 In 
the future, the EU will be asked to play a more important role in 
foreign and security policy whether it wants to or not.  For 
Germany, 
it is not an alternative to focus on itself.  If it does not want to 
 
react but wants to act, it must be proactive, using everything that 
is 
necessary.  Such self-contemplation may be important for a 
parliamentary fact finding committee looking into the events in 
Kunduz, but as far as international matters are concerned, it is 
much 
more important for the Berlin government not only to show up at the 
 
conference in London but also to present its strategic 
considerations. 
And, of course, the number of German troops matters.  The security 
situation in Afghanistan requires this.  And this is what the allies 
 
and partners expect Germany to do.  They want clarity about whether 
 
Germany is a reliable partner in this difficult situation." 
 
DELAWIE