09BEIJING1196
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS, CHINA'S INFORMATION
Tue May 05 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO6180
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1196 1250827
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 050827Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3813
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS BEIJING 001196 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH PREL ECON
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS, CHINA'S INFORMATION 
TRANSPARENCY 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS 
 
a. "China won't worry a smarter U.S." 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(05/05): "During the first 100 days of Obama's 
administration, the diplomacy of the U.S. has become smarter.  This 
is the 'smart power' emphasized by the Obama administration. 
Smiling, listening, and handshaking have begun to change the 
previously negative images of the U.S. such as unilateral, bellicose 
and arrogant.  It is questionable whether the increasing influence 
of the U.S. equals the falling influence of China.  China should 
look at this issue from the perspective of peaceful development, and 
not from a competitive angle.  The U.S. is not exactly China's 
enemy.  A stable U.S. is good for China.  A good international 
environment is beneficial for China's development and is the most 
important thing for China. China's increasing international 
influence depends on its peaceful development. China is not worried 
that other countries are becoming smarter. However, the diplomatic 
changes in the U.S. will absolutely impact China's interests, 
bringing new challenges to China." 
 
b. "Bring an end to the west's hegemonic point of view" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(05/05)"Western civilization has advantages 
and disadvantages.  The biggest shortcoming is egoism. Some 
westerners believe that the end of human kind, the final stages of 
our development, is the western model. However, any ideology or 
religion, in its extreme form, will become fundamentalism.  Iceland 
going bankrupt and the serious financial crisis taking place in the 
U.S. are examples proving that the western system still has room for 
improvement. The Chinese advocate the concept of 'harmony and 
neutrality.' This is not simple compromise, but 'a search for common 
ground while accepting existing difference.' This concept has helped 
China avoid long religious wars common to Europe.  For the last 30 
years, China has been rapidly rising because they have been less 
extreme, reasonable, and neutral.  The west believes in a philosophy 
of confrontation, while China likes a philosophy of harmony.  As 
globalization spreads, issues requiring global coordination are 
increasing. However, divisions between rich countries and poor 
countries, powerful countries and weak countries, different 
religions and different civilizations haven't yet disappeared. It is 
western democratic fundamentalism that has caused these divisions. 
China needs to influence the world with its concept of 'harmony and 
neutrality' and 'a search for common ground while accepting existing 
differences' so that divisions can be removed and peace and 
prosperity can be achieved in the world." 
 
¶2. CHINA'S INFORMATION TRANSPARENCY 
 
"The government owes the public more information" 
 
Global Times English (English-language daily published by the 
People's Daily)(05/05): "On May 1 of last year, the government 
released the Regulation of the People's Republic of China on Open 
Government Information, which intends to grant media more rights to 
publicize formerly 'sensitive' government news. This regulation 
unfortunately is vaguer than it should be. The restriction has 
resulted in the bizarre phenomenon of 'importing' domestic news: 
Chinese media picks up national news broken by overseas 
organizations first. To be informed by foreign news media of what is 
happening on our own soil is disgraceful and sad. Foreign media, 
either because of prejudice or the limited information available to 
them, often churn out unbalanced coverage, or even distort the facts 
to fuel public interest. Government restriction over information 
flow has also sent a troubling signal to media so that media outlets 
often impose strict self-censorship on sensitive topics. Chinese 
media hasn't been given the chance to fully play its role. Hiding 
information is impossible in today's world. It only leads to rumor 
and speculation, a result that the government wants to see least. 
Chinese media should be granted wider access to government 
information as it faces much more sophisticated foreign competitors. 
Let the media do its job." 
 
PICCUTA