09BERLIN1371
MEDIA REACTION: MIDDLE EAST, AFGHANISTAN, IRAN, EU,
Fri Oct 30 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
VZCZCXRO4802
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHLZ
DE RUEHRL #1371/01 3031433
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 301433Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5626
INFO RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVE
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 1687
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0399
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 0916
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 2427
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 1442
RUEHVEN/USMISSION USOSCE 0619
RHMFIUU/HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
RHMFISS/HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
RHMFISS/CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
RUKAAKC/UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 BERLIN 001371 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/CE, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO XF AK IR EU US
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: MIDDLE EAST, AFGHANISTAN, IRAN, EU, 
U.S.;BERLIN 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
¶2.   (Middle East)   Secretary Clinton's Visit 
¶3.   (Afghanistan)    U.S. Strategy, NATO Report on Air Strikes 
¶4.   (Iran)   Nuclear Program 
¶5.   (EU)   Summit Meeting, EU President 
¶6.   (U.S.)   Economic Recovery 
 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
 
Die Welt and Tagesspiegel opened with reports that the U.S. economy 
is 
recovering. Sueddeutsche headlined: "Pensioners must Expect No 
Increase in Their Pensions Next Year," while Frankfurter Allgemeine 
 
opened with a story on the NATO report dealing with the air strikes 
 
against two fuel trucks near Kunduz on Sept. 4.  Editorials centered 
 
on the most recent unemployment rate and on the NATO report on the 
air 
strike near Kunduz.  ZDF-TV's early evening newscast heute opened 
with 
a report on the new ministers taking office, while ARD-TV's early 
evening newscast Tagesschau opened with a report on the EU summit in 
 
Brussels. 
 
¶2.   (Middle East)   Secretary Clinton's Visit 
 
Under the headline "In the circle of standstill," Sddeutsche 
editorializes that " Secretary Clinton will not be able to change 
the 
fact that peace is not on the agenda in the Mideast at the 
moment.... 
The mistrust between Israel and the Palestinians has reached a level 
 
which will require more than a U.S. secretary, who discovered the 
Mideast conflict nine months after she took office." 
 
¶3.   (Afghanistan)    U.S. Strategy, NATO Report on Air Strikes 
 
Financial Times Deutschland (10/30) dealt with the future U.S. 
Afghanistan strategy and opined under the headline: "From a Magician 
 
To a Hesitator," that "Barack Obama keeps putting off a final 
decision 
on the future Afghanistan strategy.  His indecisiveness is dangerous 
 
because it strengthens the Taliban and discourages the allies.  For 
 
more than eight years, the United States has waged a war in 
Afghanistan - and is about to lose it.  In this respect, Barack 
Obama's deliberateness is wrong.  He must make up his mind.  It is 
true that he inherited the difficult situation in Afghanistan from 
his 
predecessor but he is responsible for his hesitation.  Thus far, the 
 
allies have tried to achieve much with too little.  Irrespective of 
 
what Barack Obama will decide:  He must bring means and purpose into 
 
accordance and clearly say what he wants.  But primarily he must do 
 
one thing: make up his mind." 
 
ARD-TV's Tagesthemen (10/29) broadcast the following commentary: "A 
 
 
BERLIN 00001371  002 OF 007 
 
 
touch of Vietnam has covered Afghanistan.  It will not be that easy 
to 
show the Taliban their limits.  And it is becoming increasingly 
questionable whether the Taliban can be defeated militarily at all. 
 
The international debate over the air strikes the Bundeswehr 
requested 
near Kunduz, demonstrates how questionable military activities 
against 
the Taliban have become.  The United States has at least begun to 
develop new strategies.  Political and economic initiatives are 
being 
given greater weight in Washington, too.  This is good.  But it is 
high time that Germany and Europe take part in finding a political 
solution to the conflicts; we should not leave this to the United 
States alone.  For the new German government this issue must be on 
the 
top of the agenda.  Mr. Westerwelle, Mr. zu Guttenberg, please take 
 
over!" 
 
Regional daily Landeszeitung of Lneburg (10/30) judged: "The 
military 
salute that President Obama paid to the coffin of a fallen U.S. 
soldier in Afghanistan is honorable.  With this gesture, the U.S. 
president is ending his predecessor's degrading hide-and-seek game 
about the costs of the war.  But Obama's salute does not replace a 
real policy.  Despite the latest bloodshed in Afghanistan and 
Pakistan, Obama is content with a policy of symbols instead of 
approving a new Afghanistan strategy.  The change of strategies in 
Afghanistan demanded by General McChrystal is warranted: maximum 
protection of the population from the Taliban, which, however, can 
only be achieved by an increase in forces.  If, at the same time, 
the 
Pakistani army is able to crush the Taliban in the country instead 
of 
dispersing them, the region could be stabilized." 
 
Under the headline: "General McChrystal Must Go," Die Welt (10/30) 
opined: "Colonel Georg Klein, who ordered an air strike against two 
 
kidnapped fuel tankers near Kunduz two months ago, acted militarily 
 
correctly.   Klein's commander, General Schneiderhan, said that this 
 
is what the confidential report of the ISAF said.  But among those 
who 
jumped to conclusions is General Stanley McChrystal.  His supreme 
commander, President Obama, will meet Chancellor Merkel on Monday. 
 
Then the chancellor will have the opportunity to tell Obama that an 
 
ISAF commander has to be loyal to his forces.  McChrystal missed his 
 
chance to show this loyalty.  The ISAF report now seems to emphasize 
 
which consequences such an attitude could have.  The Bundeswehr 
needs 
a new boss in Afghanistan.  General McChrystal should go.  He is 
ready 
to step down." 
 
According to Frankfurter Allgemeine (10/30), "General Schneiderhan 
comes to the conclusion that the air strikes against the two fuel 
trucks were appropriate in view of the situation that day.  At least 
 
he understands that the Bundeswehr in Afghanistan is not in a 
computer 
 
BERLIN 00001371  003 OF 007 
 
 
simulation but in an undeclared war which its opponents want to make 
 
as dirty as possible.  If Germany wants to rule out the possibility 
of 
civilians being killed, then it must discontinue its involvement. 
There has never been a war without accidents, misconceptions, 
civilian 
and military victims." 
 
Mass-tabloid Bild Zeitung of Hamburg (10/30) opined: "Those who want 
 
to know what the leadership of the Bundeswehr thinks, need only 
listen 
to the Bundeswehr's chief of staff, General Schneiderhan.  His 
bureaucratic lingo is a mockery to the 68 NATO soldiers who lost 
their 
lives in Afghanistan this month.   It was one of the bloodiest 
months 
for NATO since the beginning of the war.  The Afghan government - 
our 
partner - uninhibitedly falsified elections, and Taliban terrorist 
bombs went off all over the country.  In the United States and in 
the 
UK, people heatedly argue about the escalation, but only here in 
Germany do we talk about this war as if it were an administrative 
problem.  New Defense Minister zu Guttenberg has a lot to do. 
Afghanistan needs a plan, a vision.  But first of all, zu Guttenberg 
 
should demand that his staff speak in clear language, and use words 
 
that explain instead of hushing things up." 
 
Regional daily Heilbronner Stimme (10/30) noted: "Even the newest 
details of the NATO investigative report do not disperse the fog of 
 
war.  Bundeswehr chief of Staff, General Schneiderhan, has presented 
 
partial results to the public, which - and it is no surprise - 
exonerate Colonel Klein.  Other facts of the confidential report 
remain secret.  Is that a coincidence?  The majority of people who 
are 
now raising their voices only know minute details of the report. 
But 
one thing is clear: the new Defense Minister zu Guttenberg would be 
 
well-advised to quickly end his predecessor's camouflage tactics." 
 
 
KQlner Stadt-Anzeiger (10/30) observed: "Yesterday's appearance of 
Bundeswehr Chief of Staff, General Schneiderhan was at best, 
bizarre. 
Germany's highest-ranking soldier talked about a NATO report without 
 
saying what was in the report.  And he drew a conclusion which, 
according to what we know, could hardly have led to his conclusion. 
 
It is honorable that Schneiderhan backs his fellow soldier.  Some 
say 
he should have done so much earlier. In the first week after the 
incident, he remained silent probably under pressure from former 
Defense Minister Jung.  But it will be of no use if assessments 
replace facts." 
 
Regional daily Augsburger Allgemeine (10/30) had this to say: "Since 
 
the report is secret there is still too much room for 
interpretation. 
That is why it would be welcome if the great doubters of the 
 
BERLIN 00001371  004 OF 007 
 
 
Alliance 
would put everything they have on the table.  Only then will all the 
 
unfounded and malicious suspicions come to an end." 
 
¶4.   (Iran)   Nuclear Program 
 
Under the headline "Iranian riddle," Frankfurter Allgemeine (10/30) 
 
editorialized: "At worst, Iran wants to provoke the world by 
refusing 
to compromise and enriching uranium itself-and moving closer to a 
nuclear bomb.  A more hopeful thesis is that the regime is looking 
for 
a way out of the nuclear dispute without losing its face.  The 
notoriously disunited group of six must now make a decision as to 
which interpretation is right as Iran continues to make demands. 
Optimists will say that the Iranian leadership had to respond to 
internal critics.  Skeptics only need to refer to the fact that Iran 
 
has pretended to reach out many times before." 
 
Frankfurter Rundschau (10/30) opined: "A compromise was arduously 
reached.  Tehran now agrees to search for a compromise on that 
basis. 
At least, Iran made a move on the matter.  The matter is gambling 
for 
time, working against UN embargos on importing fissile material. 
And 
an internal power struggle.  However, the P5 plus one are also 
involved in power struggles.  This does not make it easier." 
Stuttgarter Zeitung editorialized: "The West and Iran are dependent 
on 
each other.  That is why one has to accept Tehran's basic right to 
enrich uranium, and, at the same time, make offers for the 
construction of advanced refineries in order to help the country. 
In 
addition, President Obama must link his dream of a nuclear-free 
world 
with the concrete goal of a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East by 
 
giving all countries in the region U.S. security guarantees.  Then 
peace would be closer." 
 
¶5.   (EU)   Summit Meeting, EU President 
 
All media (10/30) carry lengthy reports on the EU summit in 
Brussels, 
highlighting that the "EU rejects Tony Blair as president," 
(Sddeutsche headline) and that "Europeans fight over money for 
climate protection" (FT Deutschland).  Other headlines noted: "Left 
 
dupes Blair" (Spiegel Online), "Socialists stop Blair" (FT 
Deutschland), and "Blair fails because of the Socialists" 
(Frankfurter 
Rundschau). 
 
Under the headline "Blair's short dream," Sddeutsche (10/30) 
editorialized: "It was foreseeable that Tony Blair would fail at his 
 
 
ambition to become EU Council president....  It has always been an 
odd 
idea to promote someone to the chair of the EU Council whose country 
 
is opposed to the core projects of the EU. He has also obstructed 
the 
EU reform efforts whenever possible.  This disqualified Blair right 
 
BERLIN 00001371  005 OF 007 
 
 
 
from the start for an office that is supposed to promote 
integration. 
Making Blair the president would have meant setting the fox to keep 
 
the geese.   Europe's Social Democrats have also realized this and 
stopped their party ally from London." 
 
Deutschlandfunk (10/29) radio remarked: "It could have been a summit 
 
of relief at which the necessary personnel decisions were made and 
the 
years-long battle over a more efficient EU and the institutional 
navel-gazing came to an end.  However, we are not yet there....  The 
 
spirit of Czech President Klaus is looming over Brussels, hopefully 
 
for only one last time...  It is indeed too early to make decisions 
on 
the future leading personnel.  No serious candidate would put his 
hat 
in the ring as long as the Czechs have not ratified the Lisbon 
Treaty 
and reform of the EU has not become reality." 
 
Under the headline "Climate Chancellor on collision path," Spiegel 
Online (10/30) editorialized: "Merkel blocks financial promises on 
climate protection at the EU summit in Brussels.  The chancellor is 
 
gaming away a great opportunity and risks allowing the failure of 
the 
world climate summit in Copenhagen that scientists and 
environmentalists have all their hopes pinned on.  She was once 
celebrated as climate chancellor and an important advocate for 
climate 
policies.  Now, it could be Merkel, above all, who delivers the 
deathblow to the global climate negotiations by way of a 
shortsighted 
EU policy...  If even the Europeans, who always praise themselves as 
 
pioneers in climate policy, hesitate, the U.S. and China will not 
make 
a move at all.  The Copenhagen summit threatens to fail because rich 
 
and poor countries are blocking each other.  This failure could set 
 
back global climate protection efforts by years.  Merkel could play 
an 
important role in the decision-making of the EU council.  If the EU 
 
fails to make financial commitments because of her, it would 
increase 
the notion that the West is not ready to go forward in climate 
protection.  It may be that the Chancellor was tired from the 
coalition negotiations in which every euro was fought over.   She 
might be thinking about the billions she has to come up with for tax 
 
cuts.  And she is probably still busy with the giant stimulus 
packages 
to help banks and big companies. 
Perhaps there is now no money left over to save the world?  ...  The 
 
German chancellor has an enormous opportunity to show greatness 
compared with President Obama.  She could show him how to leave 
behind 
national small-mindedness and make decisions that need to be 
explained 
at home.  Merkel still has the opportunity to do something for all 
 
BERLIN 00001371  006 OF 007 
 
 
people....  Obama gathered a fabulous environmental team around him 
and 
incorporated environmentally-friendly elements in the economic 
stimulus programs.   But as a global player he must now make sure 
that 
the whole world embarks on a green course.  The U.S. has been asked 
to 
become a leading nation, but the country does not deliver." 
 
SchwQbische Zeitung (10/30) commented: "Will EU leaders have the 
courage to nominate a strong candidate like Tony Blair who can 
negotiate in their name with the powerful people in the world?  Or 
will they install a pleasant clown as president, who will not be 
able 
to compete?  These questions are important concerning Europe's 
power. 
Only if the leaders are prepared to stand back and allow somebody to 
 
coordinate their efforts will the community reach a more united 
position." 
 
¶6.   (U.S.)   Economic Recovery 
 
All papers (10/30) reported that the U.S. economy has recovered from 
 
the recession and cited President Obama's Chief Economic Advisor 
Christina Romer, as having said: "We are seeing a turnaround." 
Several papers reported that this is also good news because Germany, 
 
as an export-driven economy, can also profit from this recovery. 
Financial Times Deutschland headlined: "United States Escapes From 
the 
Recession," while Die Welt said: "United States leaving Recession 
Behind."  Sueddeutsche headlined: "Recession In the United States is 
 
Over," and wrote that the U.S. GDP "has surprisingly increased by 
3.5 
percent in the third quarter." 
 
Financial Times Deutschland (10/30) judged in an editorial: 
"Reservation, despite the good economic data, is justified.  As nice 
 
as it is that the U.S. economy has overcome its trough, we should 
all 
be aware of the danger of a new setback.  The strong economic growth 
 
in the third quarter is partly due to the economic stimulus program 
 
launched by the government, including the cash-for-clunkers program, 
 
which the U.S. copied from Germany.  In view of the uncertain 
prospects, however, it would not unwise to prepare a new economic 
stimulus program to be able to react quickly if the economy begins 
to 
fall into recession again." 
 
Under the headline: "Increased Growth Does Not Mean Normalcy," 
Sueddeutsche Zeitung (10/30) argued: "This is good news from 
America...and foremost a success for President Barack Obama.  His 
courageous decision to launch a giant economic stimulus program and 
to 
accept a record deficit has paid off.  But there is also bad news. 
 
This recovery is everything but sustainable, and those who pretend 
that the world has returned to normalcy are living dangerously. 
Currently nothing is normal.  The economy is on the drip of the 
state. 
It is indispensable that U.S. households make greater savings in the 
 
BERLIN 00001371  007 OF 007 
 
 
 
future.  This will dampen the growth of consumption. That is why it 
is 
unclear when the central banks and governments will be able to phase 
 
out their life saving measures for the global economy." 
 
"Risk Patient' is the headline in Handelsblatt (10/30), which 
opined: 
"The U.S. economy is growing again.  But it is much too early to be 
 
euphoric.  Doped up to its neck with cheap money fresh off the 
printing press of the U.S. central bank and economic stimulus 
programs 
of the White House, the U.S. economy achieved considerable economic 
 
growth in the third quarter.  Unfortunately, there are a few drops 
of 
bitterness: "The U.S. economy will be unable to keep this pace.  The 
 
labor market, financial system and real estate problems have not yet 
 
been resolved.  The prospects, however, are clearly better than they 
 
were six months ago.  Much will now depend on how much the Fed will 
be 
willing to throttle the permanent infusion with cheap money.  Trade 
 
and industry will need cheap money for a long time to come, to clear 
 
the debris from the crisis.   But if the turnaround comes too late 
or 
is too vehement, a new recession will be looming.  In this 
situation, 
Europe cannot expect the Untied States to become a stable economic 
engine again." 
 
According to Berliner Zeitung (10/30), "the recession in the United 
 
States has ended and gives the world reason for hope.  But the 
Americans will not be able to continue the economic recovery 
because, 
first, the cash-for-clunkers program will expire; second, 
unemployment 
is on the rise, and, third, the Americans are still so indebted that 
 
they must increase their savings.  All this will slow down 
consumption 
in the coming months.  Nevertheless, the U.S. economy will not 
collapse again because stocks are almost empty and companies will 
try 
to fill them again.  This will drive production.  But this will not 
be 
enough to create a boom for the rest of the world.  It is up to 
other 
countries to organize this themselves." 
 
MURPHY