09BEIJING1199
MAY 5 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: FLU, QUARANTINES, VISA POLICY,
Tue May 05 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7003
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1199/01 1252246
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 052246Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3818
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO 0599
RUEHLM/AMEMBASSY COLOMBO 0868
RUEHKU/AMEMBASSY KUWAIT 0633
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001199 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV AMED MCAP CH MX CE CA AS KU JP
 
SUBJECT: MAY 5 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: FLU, QUARANTINES, VISA POLICY, 
MILITARY DEVELOPMENT 
 
¶1. Key points at the May 5 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- China has taken "urgent and temporary" measures to "protect the 
safety of the animal husbandry industry and the people" from the 
threat of H1N1 Influenza. 
 
-- The spokesperson had no information about reports that four 
American citizens have been quarantined or on total numbers of 
foreigners who have been quarantined, but said that "local 
governments" are responsible for taking measures to combat the 
spread of the virus. 
 
-- Recent adjustments in China's visa policy were made "in 
accordance with domestic law." 
 
-- China's military policy is "defensive" in nature and China is a 
"positive force for world peace." 
 
H1N1 Influenza 
-------------- 
 
¶2. China has taken "urgent and temporary" measures to "protect the 
safety of the animal husbandry industry and the people" from the 
threat of H1N1 influenza, said spokesman Ma Zhaoxu at the May 5 
regularly scheduled MFA press conference.  China's ban on pork 
products from parts of the United States and Mexico "is consistent 
with international practice," guidelines set out by the World 
Organization for Animal Health, and World Trade Organization rules 
regarding minimizing impact on trade, said Ma.  Ma noted that the 
World Health Organization (WHO) described the flu "from the 
beginning" as "swine flu" and that the virus was related to a "swine 
virus."  Ma also said that the WHO has written that the virus was a 
"public health event of international concern."  The "source and 
methods of the flu are unclear," said Ma, so China must take these 
measures. 
 
Quarantine of Foreigners and those Entering China 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶3. On May 2, 22 Canadian citizens were quarantined in Changchun, 
Jilin Province by provincial authorities acting in accordance with 
relevant laws, said Ma.  The Canadians are being monitored in their 
hotel for seven days but their body temperatures and emotional 
well-being are currently "stable," said Ma.  The local Foreign 
Affairs Office has informed the Canadian Embassy of the situation 
and has made accommodations for lodging and food for the Canadians. 
Ma claimed that the Canadians "approved" the measures.  Ma had no 
information about reports that four American citizens have been 
quarantined or on total numbers of foreigners who have been 
quarantined, but said that "local governments" were responsible for 
taking measures to combat the spread of the virus and that 
information was being collected and would be released at a later 
time. 
 
¶4.  A chartered China Southern Airlines plane is due to arrive in 
Mexico on May 6 to pick up Chinese citizens there, said Ma.  A 
chartered flight from Mexico has arrived in Shanghai and will 
continue on to Guangzhou and Hong Kong before returning to Mexico. 
Asked whether Chinese citizens would be subject to quarantine on 
their return to China, Ma referred the question to the airline 
authorities.  China and Mexico have been in "close communication" on 
this issue and attach great importance to the bilateral "strategic 
partnership." 
 
Visa Policy Adjustments 
----------------------- 
 
¶5. When asked about increased wait times for Chinese visas processed 
by the Chinese mission in the United States, Ma said recent 
adjustments in China's visa policy were made "in accordance with 
domestic law."  The policy is "not discriminatory" and will not 
affect normal exchanges with other countries, said Ma. 
 
Chinese Military Development 
---------------------------- 
 
¶6. China "follows a path of peaceful development," said Ma when 
asked for China's reaction to a recent Australian defense white 
paper that discussed China.  China's military policy is "defensive" 
in nature and China is a "positive force for world peace."  China's 
development "does not pose a threat" to other countries and relevant 
countries should be "unbiased." 
 
Sri Lanka Humanitarian Situation 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶7. China will offer 1 million RMB in "urgent humanitarian 
 
BEIJING 00001199  002 OF 002 
 
 
assistance" for displaced civilians in northern Sri Lanka, said Ma. 
Attaining social stability and national reconciliation is in the 
fundamental interest of the Sri Lankan People and the world.  China 
hopes that Sri Lanka will realize peace stability and economic 
development, said Ma. 
 
Visits 
------ 
 
¶8. Kuwait's Amir Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah will visit 
China from May 10-13.  During his stay, he will meet with Chinese 
President Hu Jintao and Prime Minister Wen Jiabao to discuss 
bilateral and international issues.  China and Kuwait have 
"complementary" energy cooperation and the two sides have been 
discussing ways to "strengthen cooperation."  Canadian Foreign 
Minister Lawrence Cannon will visit China from May 9-13. 
 
New Department at Chinese MFA 
----------------------------- 
 
¶9. The newly created MFA Department for Border and Ocean Affairs is 
charged with "developing diplomatic policies related to the oceans 
and border affairs," said Ma.  This will include managing border 
demarcation and "cases involving oceans."  The function of the 
department is not new, said Ma.  Asked whether the department would 
be involved in discussions with Japan over disputed territories, Ma 
said that one could "infer this department's function" based on his 
previous description. 
 
PICCUTA