09BEIJING938
MEDIA REACTION: Global financial crisis, Obama in Turkey,
Wed Apr 08 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO2332
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0938/01 0980901
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 080901Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3347
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000938 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: Global financial crisis, Obama in Turkey, 
"Unhappy China" 
-------------------- 
Editorial Quotes 
 
¶1. Global financial crisis 
a. "West moots China-U.S. 'co-governance' concept to woo China" 
The China Radio International-sponsored newspaper World News Journal 
(Shijie Xinwenbao)(04/08) opined: Hu Jintao's meeting with President 
Obama in London caused another G-2 rush.  In fact, the G-2 concept 
was first mentioned in American political and economic circles.  A 
G-2 neither fits into China's strategic interests nor the position 
in which China wants to locate itself. It is only another form of 
hegemony.  At the same time, the U.S. will not accept the G-2 idea 
as ideological and political differences mean that mutual trust is 
not yet sufficient for such a concept. The priority for the U.S. and 
China is to avoid antagonizing each other, rather than jointly 
leading the world.  If the U.S. and China set up the G-2, most of 
the developing countries and the EU, Russia, Canada, Japan, and 
Australia will be against it.  Moreover, the purpose of putting 
forward the G-2 concept is to push China towards its obligations of 
cooperating with U.S. and offering capital support to reduce 
negative impact on the U.S. economy.  The "G-2" suggestion is thus 
just a phrase to court China's favor. 
 
b. "Landmines hinder route to economic stability" 
 
The official English-language newspaper China Daily (circ 200,000) 
carried an article by China Everbright Group senior analyst Zhou 
Bajun: "Though government bailouts have mitigated the crisis to 
avoid a doomsday catastrophe, economic restructuring has actually 
been delayed.  This may exacerbate conflicts among all stakeholders. 
 Chairman of the Federal Reserve Chair Ben Bernancke was interviewed 
by 60 Minutes because he wanted to 'directly talk' to the American 
people in this 'special moment in history.'  He warned that the 
U.S.'s biggest risk now is the dearth of 'political will' to 
reconstruct the financial system.  He was wary that the political 
leadership and the public might abandon efforts to shore up the 
banking system.  It was a pity the AIG scandal eclipsed Bernanke's 
positive message. Bernanke is aware of the burdens on his shoulders 
to maintain stability of the financial system and promote the 
recovery of the U.S. economy.  The financial crisis and economic 
recession in the U.S. and elsewhere can only be overcome through the 
market.  If the irresponsible deeds like those of AIG bonuses 
continue, Bernanke's optimism may finally turn sour." 
 
¶2. Obama in Turkey 
"A meaningful visit (to Turkey)" 
The official Communist Party mouthpiece People's Daily (Renmin 
Ribao, circ 2.2 million)(04/08) commented: 
This visit shows that Obama is committed to improving U.S. relations 
with Islamic countries.  These relations were damaged by the Iraq 
war and by U.S. support for Israel.  Turkey has a key position in 
connecting Europe with Asia and the Middle East.  It occupies a 
critical location for oil transportation to Europe.  Moreover, 
America's new Afghanistan policy requires support from Turkey. The 
Obama Administration's support for Turkey's bid to join the EU is 
aimed at winning Turkey over.  A stable and pro-Western Turkey that 
becomes an EU member is in America's interest.  It is critical for 
America's Middle East policy and for the energy security of Western 
countries.  An anti-West Turkey would be a disaster for both U.S. 
and Europe. 
 
 
¶3. "Unhappy China" 
"Make China feel how 'I' feel; Book selling nationalistic malaise" 
The official Communist Youth League publication China Youth Daily 
(Zhongguo Qingnian Bao, circ 400,000)(04/08) carried a full-page 
spread on the book:  This book is like a virus, infecting people -- 
especially youth, who are the future of the country.  They shouldn't 
be fooled.  Some people have the impulse to exaggerate and sanctify 
their own feelings.  They are unhappy because the U.S. wants to trap 
China.  The book "China can say no," published in 1996, reflected 
liberalized nationalism.  That book contained no core concept or 
theory.  Rather, it let off unhappy emotions explicitly indicated in 
its index, such as "pro-American mentality," "why has pro-American 
mentality increased?", and "burn Hollywood," among others.  "Unhappy 
China," however, reflects a more serious malaise.  This is no longer 
venting of emotion; it is a call to action.  The book's core theory 
is that China's destiny is to lead the world.  Its goal is to rival 
other powers to be No.1 in the world.  Such nationalism has four 
characteristics: 1) wear wound as badge of honor; 2) indulge in 
narcissism and exclude others; 3) make conclusions from the biased 
analysis of past history; 4) be bellicose. 
 
To promote such nationalism, the writers of "Unhappy China" describe 
Western countries as devils, especially the U.S., and see as evil 
Chinese political, economic, and well-educated elites, especially 
liberal elites. In fact, most liberals do not preach nationalism. 
They may criticize inadequacies in Chinese regulations, but they are 
not against China's national interests.  They can clearly 
 
BEIJING 00000938  002 OF 002 
 
Editorial Quotes 
 
distinguish Western values and interests, as well as domestic and 
international rules of the game. 
 
Nationalist malaise comes from the sick mentality of a nation. A 
great country should not use its people's negative mentality for its 
unrealistic plan.  Instead, it should cure the sickness and recover 
confidence, tolerance, and the capacity to love. That's the reason 
we should refuse this unhappy virus. 
 
Weinstein