09BEIJING1814
MEDIA REACTION: U.S. - CHINA RELATIONS, INTERNET
Wed Jul 01 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO3175
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1814 1820847
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 010847Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4920
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS BEIJING 001814 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH PREL ECON
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S. - CHINA RELATIONS, INTERNET 
CENSORSHIP 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS 
 
"Why the West puts 'spy' tag on China?" 
 
English-language daily published by Global Times/Huanqiu Shibao, the 
international edition of the People's Daily (07/01): "For years some 
Western politicians and media have accused China of spying with the 
goal of gaining advanced technology secrets.  U.S. Representative 
Mark Kirk said the Chinese sought to legitimize 'the stealing of an 
intellectual property' related to energy efficiency and climate 
change.  Such an accusation is completely ungrounded.  The 
accusation of 'stealing' as well as other charges of China's 
'espionage activities,' reflects the West's anxiety toward China's 
rising status.  In a time when developed countries have been 
severely weakened by the financial crisis, the steady growth of 
China and other emerging economies has stimulated fear in western 
politicians and media." 
 
¶2. INTERNET CENSORSHIP 
 
a."China postpones installing Green Dam" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(07/01): " 
"The Chinese Ministry of Industry and Information has declared that 
the installation of the Green Dam software will be postponed. They 
did this because some manufacturers expressed that this large-scale 
installation requires a lot of extra work.  Their time is very tight 
and they are not yet ready.   The software was originally designed 
with the good intention to protect juveniles from pornographic 
content on the internet.  However, installing the software was 
instantly politicized by foreign media and opinions.  The ministry 
responded to the criticisms saying that the software does not 
monitor netizens and citizens are not forced to install it. Chinese 
experts indicate that the freedom that netizens enjoy on the 
internet also increases the difficulties in internet control.  The 
west also experiences controversies concerning issues arising from 
the control of the internet.  The west's opposition to Green Dam is 
a test to see if they can influence China through their opposition 
to internet censorship. 
The west has internationalized China's internet censorship." 
 
 
b."The politicization of the network becomes a global topic" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(07/01): 
"It seems that internet conflicts have intensified and that the 
ideological advantages of the U.S. have been fully played.  During 
each conflict, developing countries take a passive position.  A 
Chinese expert said that this time, the U.S. has found a battlefield 
where it has the advantage.  However, playing up certain issues over 
the internet won't arouse any hostility when it directly interferes 
in the affairs of other countries. The internet is still a new thing 
in many developing countries.  The west's standard for freedom of 
speech on the internet creates a gap with the transformational 
characteristics of these countries while they were developing.  The 
west is trying to use the measure to pressure developing countries' 
politics.  Chinese experts further indicate that the conflict 
concerning the internet is a conflict concerning the national 
interests between countries.  The internet's influence can be just 
as well as destructive.  Different strengths are equal in front of 
the internet.  The west has an advanced political civilization, 
therefore it less vulnerable to attack.  In this field, the 
consequences of the internet's influence are not equal.  Besides, it 
is very difficult for the governments of developing countries 
directly transition from physical isolation to a very open internet. 
The internet isn't yet safe enough, there is not guaranteed safety 
on the internet." 
 
GOLDBERG