09BEIJING2657
MEDIA REACTION: U.S. TARIFFS ON CHINESE TIRE IMPORTS
Wed Sep 16 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO6765
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2657 2590915
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 160915Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6094
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS BEIJING 002657 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ECON KMDR OPRC CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S. TARIFFS ON CHINESE TIRE IMPORTS 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
a: "Obama claims the U.S. does not challenge China" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(09/16)(pg 16): "Chinese Ministry of Commerce 
Spokesperson Yao Jian said that the U.S. sent the wrong message to 
the world.  At the G20 summit, China will continue to oppose 
protectionism but does not want this issue to damage U.S.-China 
relations.  There are two opinion camps in the U.S.  The Chairman of 
the American Iron and Steel Workers' Union implied that the union 
would urge the government to continue its campaigns to resist 
products made in China, while CNN issued an article named 'it is a 
bad idea to have a trade war with China.'  Zhou Shijian, a 
researcher at the U.S.-China Relations Study Center at Qinghua 
University, argues that this trade dispute is normal and it will not 
cause a trade war.  As the world's factory, China is often treated 
as a scapegoat by other countries.  China should actively respond to 
this case and fight vigorously against it, but the fight should be 
within certain parameters; because neither the U.S. nor China wants 
the fight to expand into other areas.  Jiang Yong, Director at the 
Economic Security Center at China Institute of Contemporary 
International Relations (CICIR) believes that the U.S. will not 
continue down this path since the safeguard measures concern U.S. 
domestic interests.  At present, U.S. economic recovery is not 
optimistic.  Moreover, China quickly responded to the U.S. tariffs, 
which shows that China has prepared and warns the U.S. that it 
should not enlarge this trade dispute." 
 
b: "Hu Jintao will express China's views at four summits in the 
U.S." 
 
The Shanghai-based Shanghai Media Group (SMG) publication, China 
Business News (Diyi Caijing)(02/03) (pg A1): "The coming Pittsburg 
summit opens while the crisis has almost reached its bottom and 
financial recovery is having difficulties.  All the participating 
countries have a vague idea of the present situation and are arguing 
about how to deal with it.  Ma Xiaolin, an expert on international 
issues, has said that, at the summit, China's views will become the 
views of the main stream. China will be supportive of the remedy 
policies of other countries.  Withdrawing from the economic recovery 
plans, which is considered by many countries to be the main topic at 
the summit, may not be practical.  A large scale of withdraw from 
economic rescue plans is impossible.  The G20 summit in Pittsburgh, 
in light of the recent Sino-U.S. tire dispute and the countervailing 
and anti-dumping investigations on U.S. poultry and auto imports, 
may give rise to a protectionism debate.  In order to responsibly 
promote global economic recovery, China will continue to emphasize, 
together with the other participants, the agreements agreed upon 
during the last two summits, which express firm opposition to 
protectionism and agree that trade safeguard measures are best not 
used at all, used less often." 
 
c:"Chinese bean market should not be limited by the U.S." 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(09/16)(pg 15): "China, which accounts for 
fifty percent of the global bean trade, is losing control of bean 
prices.  U.S. bean subsidies have significantly impacted China's 
bean market and seriously threatened China's bean production. 
Because of the impact of imported American beans, China's bean 
market, bean workers' employment and ordinary people's living 
standards have all been influenced.  For China, giving up certain 
bean production chain industries will lose them huge economic 
interests, a great deal of employment opportunity and food security 
for China.  China, possesses obvious advantages in natural bean 
resources, and has realized less than one third of the 
self-generated bean products industry.  This shows that China has 
not paid enough attention to maintaining the supply-demand balance 
for food production.  China urgently needs to conduct anti-dumping 
and countervailing investigations and protect domestic bean 
producers from imported U.S. beans in order to fight against the 
U.S.'s abusive use of special protectionist measures.  China wants 
to tell the U.S. that it will not always be a juvenile in 
'anti-dumping, countervailing and trade safeguards measures,' but 
that it has an obligation to maintain free global trade by using 
these measures." 
 
HUNTSMAN