09BEIJING1474
MEDIA REACTION: NORTH KOREA
Wed Jun 03 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO9178
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1474 1540931
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 030931Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4266
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS BEIJING 001474 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH PREL ECON
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: NORTH KOREA 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
NORTH KOREA 
 
a. "North Korea creates dilemma for China and Russia" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(06/03): "China and Russia, traditional 
protectors of North Korea have been placed in a sticky situation. 
North Korea has moved their intercontinental missiles to their 
launch site.  This move deteriorates their relationship with China. 
A Russian newspaper commented that if China does not successfully 
persuade North Korea to abandon this plan, it will show that China's 
influence in the region is limited.  However, if China exerts 
excessive pressure, North Korea may fall apart.  North Korea has 
also put pressure on China.  The North Korean foreign affairs 
ministry criticized the Security Council as a hypocrite. In their 
criticism of the Security Council, they are actually implying a 
criticism towards China and Russia. Chinese experts indicate that 
the world overestimates China's influence on North Korea.  Western 
media predicts several of China's concerns should North Korea's 
regime collapse.  Russian experts indicated that the situation in 
North Korea has broken Russia and China's 'bottom line'. The two 
countries' 'bottom line' is the denuclearization of the peninsula. 
Chinese experts point out further that China is experiencing a 
dilemma because it can't take further actions against North Korea, 
nor can North Korea be allowed to further endanger Eastern Asia. 
The U.S. and other countries don't have any practical measures other 
than to deal with the DPRK rather 'coldly' and bringing China to the 
frontline of the issue.  If North Korea continues testing missiles, 
the Chinese government's attitude should become tougher and clearer. 
This clarity and toughness will be alleviated if the DPRK returns to 
the Six-Party Talks." 
 
b. "There is no winner in the North Korean crisis" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(06/03): "Many people point to China's role 
and influence in the recent situation in North Korea.  Some comment 
that North Korea's second nuclear test, after its so-called 
permanent abandonment of the Six Party Talks, proves China's 
diplomatic failure.  China's efforts to promote the Six Party Talks 
are aimed at maintaining peace in the region, not showing the 
influence of China or seeking a single diplomatic victory.  Only 
through negotiation between all parties can there be a long-term 
resolution to the North Korea issue. Unilateral or bilateral actions 
will not solve the issue.  China has its influence, but with the 
precondition of not interfering in other countries' internal 
affairs.  China has possessed nuclear weapons for self-defense 
purposes to deal with historical 'nuclear blackmail'. Once it 
successfully conducted a nuclear test, China announced instantly 
that it would not use nuclear weapons first. The most current and 
urgent issue is what life will be like with the failure of the Six 
Party Talks.  We have to stop talking about winners and losers.  The 
primary victims will be the North Korean people.  The Six-Party 
Talks are still the best way to solve the North Korea issue.  Time 
will tell." 
 
c. "North Korea should not offend the ordinary Chinese" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(06/03): "Currently, the general impression of 
the Chinese public about North Korea has fallen to an extraordinary 
low. This shows that the positive image, built by North Korea among 
the Chinese people for the last few decades, has been harmed.  The 
North Korean government should pay attention to the change in the 
feelings of the Chinese people.  This change will influence 
Sino-North Korean relations.  Many Chinese people think that North 
Korea is destroying the peace in Northeast Asia and worry that North 
Korea may drag China into a war.  North Korea's nuclear move has 
absolutely disobeyed the China-North Korea relationship. If Chinese 
people are offended, the base of China-North Korea relations will be 
shaken and damaged.  North Korea's strategic space will also shrink 
if China changes its North Korea policy.  Once the relationship is 
damaged, North Korea with its current strength, can hardly maintain 
a strategic survival in international society.  North Korea can only 
show respect to the international society by respecting the Chinese 
people's feelings, and respecting its own interests." 
 
PICCUTA