09BEIJING3234
MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENTIAL AFGHANISTAN SPEECH
Thu Dec 03 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO6177
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3234 3370913
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 030913Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7051
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS BEIJING 003234 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON KMDR OPRC CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENTIAL AFGHANISTAN SPEECH 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
PRESIDENTIAL AFGHANISTAN SPEECH 
 
a. "Obama's increase of troops in Afghanistan sparks controversy" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(12/03)(pg 2): "Although the United States' 
allies expressed support for the increased U.S. troops in 
Afghanistan, criticism of the plan was more numerous.  Meanwhile, 
the Taliban announced that it would fight to the end.  Support for 
the war in the United States continues to fall.  One important 
reason for the falling support is the enormous expense of the war. 
Afghans were apathetic about the announced increased in U.S. troops. 
 One Afghan said that the local situation would not stabilize even 
if the U.S. sent all its troops to the country.  Some Afghans also 
think that the U.S. troops are using the name of anti-terror war to 
cover their prolonged stay in Afghanistan." 
 
b. "Obama's new Afghanistan strategy: attitude is clear but details 
are needed" 
 
The official popular newspaper Beijing Youth Daily (Beijing 
Qingnianbao)(12/03)(pg B1): "In announcing his decision to increase 
the number of U.S. troops in Afghanistan, Obama did not forget to 
mention and promote economic reconstruction, eliminating corruption, 
and enhancing cooperation with Pakistan.  However, the new policy 
seems to lack details on specific implementation measures. 
Therefore, many experts think the policy is not persuasive.  Reuters 
said that the new strategy seems to overly rely on military means 
and is quite vague about specific strategic goals.  Most of the aid 
funding for Afghan development, about $100 billion in 2010 being 
provided by the U.S., has been pocketed by Western contractors and 
corrupt Afghan officials who were a part of the Afghan 
reconstruction.  In his speech, in order to respond to their 
pursuits and concerns, Obama did not fail to please any interests 
groups.  Obama's speech was meant to have everything going the 'U.S. 
way.'" 
 
c. "New Afghanistan policy cannot avoid old problems" 
 
The official Xinhua Daily Telegraph (Xinhua Meiri Dianxun)(12/03)(pg 
5): "The United States' difficulties in the War on Terror are 
directly related to its over-reliance on the military.  The U.S. 
strategy of 'fighting against terrorism through war' did not 
effectively eliminate the threat of terrorism.  Although Obama has 
attempted to improve the United States' image in the War on Terror 
by implementing a comprehensive counterterrorism strategy, he has 
still used war as his primary tool in his counterterrorism strategy 
in Afghanistan.  In fact the U.S. military presence in Iraq and 
Afghanistan will only bring more chaos, not peace.  Furthermore, 
driven by political motives, the United States has adopted 
questionable standards concerning terrorist organizations.  At 
present, the U.S. War on Terror is still a serious situation.  The 
U.S. should reflect more on its policies outside the battlefield, 
instead of the war itself." 
 
d. "Obama's Afghanistan quagmire" 
 
The official Xinhua News Agency international news publication 
International Herald Leader (Guoji Xianqu Daobao)(12/03)(pg 5): 
"Chinese expert Yuan Peng at the China Institute of Contemporary 
International Relations said that after the thorough contemplation 
first increasing troops and then withdrawing them has been Obama's 
plan, which is the result of wrestling and balancing between 
different groups.  The U.S. emphasis on withdrawal indicates that it 
does not want to see the Afghanistan war become the second Viet Nam 
war.  Increasing troops also shows that the Obama administration 
agrees that the war in Afghanistan will be militarily similar to 
Iraq.  In the face of unpredictable political risks, Obama is 
helpless and has to send more troops to Afghanistan.  If the United 
States refuses to send more troops to Afghanistan, it will anger 
European countries, widening the cracks in the strategic partnership 
between the United States and Europe and eventually leading to the 
disintegration of the Western world.  There are still many 
unpredictable factors for the implementation of the new strategy. 
Biden, the Vice President, firmly opposes increasing troops. 
Undoubtedly Obama's decision will trigger contradictions among 
high-level government officials.   The Democrats, who are firmly 
against the war, may refuse to elect Obama as their next 
presidential candidate during the mid-term election in 2010 or 
presidential election in 2012, which will become Obama's political 
quagmire.  All Obama can do now is pray that the situation in 
Afghanistan will improve in the next year." 
 
HUNTSMAN