09BEIJING499
February 26 MFA Press Briefing: Human Rights Report,
Thu Feb 26 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO3030
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0499/01 0570948
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 260948Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2531
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 4501
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 2387
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 1067UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000499 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM KS KN EU RS JA SW PK IN CH
SUBJECT: February 26 MFA Press Briefing: Human Rights Report, 
"Jubilant" Tibet, Wangfujing Self-Immolation Incident 
 
¶1. Key points at the February 26 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- Responding to a question on the U.S. Department of State Human 
Rights Report, the MFA spokesman said China "attached great 
importance" to human rights, had made "constant progress" on human 
rights and "fully protected religious freedom."  China recommended 
the United States "focus on its own human rights issues," stop 
acting like a "human rights god" and "stop interfering" in other 
nations' "internal affairs." 
 
-- The spokesman had "no specific information" on South Korean media 
reports that Chinese President Hu Jintao had invited North Korean 
leader Kim Jong-Il to visit China. 
 
-- The Chinese and South Korean Foreign Ministers met on February 24 
in Beijing and expressed continued support for the Six-Party Talks. 
 
 
-- PRC Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi invited Japanese Foreign 
Minister Nakasone Hirofumi to visit China February 28 to March 1. 
 
-- Tibet "enjoyed a stable situation" and "good social order." 
Tibetan people were preparing to celebrate the Tibetan New Year, and 
the Tibetan people were "jubilant and radiant" about the 
celebration.  No agency in Tibet had been instructed to "restrict 
foreigners' travel in Tibet." 
 
-- The spokesperson had "no specific information" on the February 25 
incident in which three people reportedly had set themselves on fire 
in the Wangfujing area of Beijing. 
 
Department of State Human Rights Report 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. At the regularly scheduled February 26 MFA press briefing, MFA 
spokesperson Ma Zhaoxu answered a question about China's reaction to 
the annual U.S. Department of State Human Rights Report by saying 
that China "attaches great importance" to human rights and has 
worked to "improve and respect" human rights.  Over the past three 
decades, China "has made constant progress" on human rights and 
"fully protects religious freedom."  "Various ethnic groups enjoy 
great freedom" based on "equality and mutual respect," and China 
"worked to build a dialogue" on human rights to "build consensus" 
and "reduce differences."  The PRC "firmly opposes" interference in 
China's internal affairs and recommends the United States "focus on 
its own human rights issues," stop acting like a "human rights god" 
and "stop interfering" in other nations "internal affairs." 
 
"Jubilant" Tibet 
---------------- 
 
¶3. In response to a question about the potential for unrest in 
Tibet, Ma replied that Tibet "enjoys a stable situation" and "good 
social order."  Tibetan people are preparing to celebrate the 
Tibetan New Year, and "as you can see on television" the Tibetan 
people are "jubilant and radiant" about the celebration.  Ma 
conveyed to the Tibetan people his "best wishes for their festival" 
and, speaking in the Tibetan language, wished the people of Tibet an 
"auspicious new year." 
 
¶4. While answering a related question about reports that travel 
agencies were instructed that foreigners could not receive travel 
permits to enter Tibet, Ma said "to date no agency" in Tibet had 
"been instructed" to "restrict foreigners' travel in Tibet." 
 
Wangfujing Self-Immolation Incident 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶5. Ma received multiple questions about an incident on February 25 
in which three people reportedly set themselves on fire in the 
Wangfujing area of Beijing.  Ma said he had no specific information 
on the issue, that Beijing Authorities had already issued 
information and that journalists should refer to the "competent 
authorities" if they sought additional details. 
 
Hu Jintao Invitation to Kim Jong-Il 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶6. When asked about South Korean media reports that Chinese 
President Hu Jintao had invited North Korean leader Kim Jong-Il to 
visit China, Ma answered that the Chinese Communist Party and the 
Workers Party of Korea enjoyed a "tradition of high-level 
exchanges."  Ma expected this tradition to continue but said he did 
not have any specific info on this issue. 
 
South Korean Foreign Minister Visit to China 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. In response to a question about the content of Chinese Foreign 
 
BEIJING 00000499  002 OF 002 
 
 
Minister Yang Jiechi's February 24 meeting with South Korean Foreign 
Minister Yu Myung-hwan, Ma said the two had "exchanged views" on 
bilateral issues of "common interest" and expressed their continued 
support for the Six-Party Talks.  Both sides remained "committed to 
safeguard peace and stability in the region." 
 
Japanese Foreign Minister to Visit China 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. Ma confirmed that Foreign Minister Yang invited Japanese Foreign 
Minister Nakasone Hirofumi to visit China from February 28 to March 
1 to "exchange views" on bilateral issues and "other international 
and regional issues of concern."  Ma said China "attaches great 
importance" to Nakasone's first visit to China as Foreign Minister 
and that it was "important to promote a mutually beneficial 
strategic relationship." 
 
EU-China Summit 
--------------- 
 
¶9. When asked about press reports that the EU-China summit would be 
held in May, Ma responded that Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao "agreed to 
restore" the eleventh EU-China summit when he visited the European 
Union Headquarters in January.  The "specific details," however, 
"required further diplomatic efforts." 
 
Auction of Chinese Relics in France 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶10. Ma deflected questions on the auction in Paris of Chinese 
artifacts by saying China had repeatedly stated its position on the 
issue, referring journalists to a statement by the State 
Administration of Cultural Heritage, and stating that he had no 
further information on the issue. 
 
U.S. Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense Visit 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶11. Ma said he did not have any specific information on the 
scheduled visit to China of U.S. Deputy Assistant Secretary of 
Defense for East Asia David Sedney and referred journalists to the 
Chinese Ministry of National Defense for further information. 
 
PICCUTA