09BERLIN1481
MEDIA REACTION: AFGHANISTAN, CLIMATE, MIDEAST, GUANTANAMO,
Mon Nov 23 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
VZCZCXRO5517
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHLZ
DE RUEHRL #1481/01 3270710
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 230710Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5844
INFO RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVE
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 1744
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0461
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 0980
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 2487
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 1503
RUEHVEN/USMISSION USOSCE 0673
RHMFIUU/HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
RHMFISS/HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
RHMFISS/CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
RUKAAKC/UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 BERLIN 001481 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/CE, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO AF KGHG XF US IR US EU ETRD
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: AFGHANISTAN, CLIMATE, MIDEAST, GUANTANAMO, 
 
IRAN, U.S.-ASIA, EU, WTO;BERLIN 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
¶2.   (Afghanistan)   Karzai's Inauguration 
¶3.   (Environment)   Copenhagen Summit 
¶4.   (Mideast)   Israeli Settlements 
¶5.   (U.S.)   Closure of Guant namo 
¶6.   (Iran)   Nuclear Conflict 
¶7.   (U.S.-Asia)   Future Relations 
¶8.   (EU)   Top Jobs 
¶9.   (Economic)   WTO 
 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
 
ZDF-TV's primetime newscast Heute opened with a story on the recall 
of 
100,000 credit cards after allegations of data fraud; ARD-TV's 
primetime newscast Tagesschau opened with a story on the coalition 
government's retreat at Meseberg Castle.  Newspapers led with 
diverse 
economic and political stories, ranging from the opposition against 
 
the school reform in the state of Hamburg (FAZ) to the increase of 
electricity costs (Sueddeutsche).  Die Welt carried a front page 
photo 
of President Obama walking on top of the Great Wall of China. 
Editorials focused on the government's retreat at Meseberg, the 
Mideast conflict and other topics. 
 
¶2.   (Afghanistan)   Karzai's Inauguration 
 
Electronic media led this morning with reports saying that President 
 
Karzai was inaugurated for a second term as Afghan president in 
front 
of hundreds of guests, including Secretary Clinton and German 
Foreign 
Minister Westerwelle.  "In his inauguration speech, Karzai held out 
 
the prospect that Afghanistan could take over the responsibility for 
 
the country's security in five years time.  He promised to fight 
corruption," ZDF-TV's Heute newscast reports. 
 
The ZDF-TV's correspondent Uli Gack said in Kabul (11/19): "Kabul is 
a 
ghost city right now.  The entire government center is cordoned of 
by 
nervous soldiers.  During the swearing-in ceremony, there were many 
 
Western leaders but also old familiar faces of warlords whom we 
would 
rather put in front of a war tribunal and not in such a ceremony. 
Karzai has not said much new, but reiterated old policies.  His 
speech 
was once interrupted by applause when he spoke of increasing the 
fight 
against corruption....  Action must now follow his words.  Western 
foreign ministers met this morning. They want to see Karzai take 
action." 
 
Sddeutsche (11/19) briefly reported under the headline "Clinton in 
 
Afghanistan" that "prior to the inauguration of President Karzai, 
U.S. 
Secretary of State Clinton arrived in Kabul for her first visit... 
In 
fear of attacks, security measures were increased." Spiegel Online 
 
BERLIN 00001481  002 OF 007 
 
 
led 
with the headline "Surprise Visit in Afghanistan-Foreign Minister 
Westerwelle urges Karzai to launch reforms."  The webzine adds that 
 
Westerwelle faces a "tricky mission: he must connect congratulations 
 
with tough demands." 
 
¶3.   (Environment)   Copenhagen Summit 
 
Several papers (11/19) carried factual news reports according to 
which 
the EU adopted new rules for the construction of houses and that 
Russia wants to meet EU climate protection goals.  Financial Times 
Deutschland reported that "the EU has now stipulated new energy 
standards for homeowners.  As of 2020, privately-built new houses 
must 
use as little energy as possible.  The remaining consumption of 
energy 
must be generated from solar energy and biomass.  For public 
buildings, these rules take effect at the end of 2018.  With these 
new 
rules, the EU is imposing tough standards for its ambitious climate 
 
protection goals.  Shortly before the Copenhagen summit, the 
Europeans 
are sending a political signal." 
 
Sueddeutsche (11/19) headlined: "Russia Wants to Adopt EU Climate 
Protection Goals," and wrote: "Russia wants to commit itself to 
accepting ambitious climate protection goals, thus giving the 
sluggish 
talks on a new international climate protection agreement a new 
impetus.  According to sources at the EU-Russia summit negotiations, 
 
Moscow is examining whether to adopt European climate protection 
goals.  With an ambitious Russian commitment, pressure on the other 
 
big polluters in the United States (globally the second biggest 
emitter of carbon dioxide emissions) and China (the biggest 
polluter) 
will increase.  Both countries have thus far not accepted any 
commitment.  At the margins of the special EU summit, Chancellor 
Merkel again wants to get support for her view that the European 
envoys enter the Copenhagen talks with ambitious goals.  She said in 
 
Berlin: "As Europeans we should not give in.  Copenhagen must become 
a 
success.'"  Tagesspiegel (11/19) headlined: "Tired New Beginning," 
and 
reported that "Russian President Medvedev avoided mentioning 
concrete 
targets and percentage points and left it open to what extent the 
Russian promise would be binding.  Medvedev added that Russia and 
the 
EU must now convince others of the need for quick action until the 
beginning of the Copenhagen conference." 
 
Financial Times Deutschland (11/19) headlined: "Russia is Fooling 
The 
EU with a Climate Stunt," and reported: "With its new climate goals, 
 
Russia caused euphoria in the EU.  Following the EU-Russia summit in 
 
Stockholm, European Commission President Barroso said: 'This was a 
successful day for our climate talks with Russia.'  But it is 
questionable whether the new Russian CO2 reduction goals really mean 
 
that Russia must change its policies.  Stephan Singer, head of the 
 
BERLIN 00001481  003 OF 007 
 
 
global climate protection policy of the WWF environmental 
organization, told FTD: 'This 20-percent target is a laughing stock. 
 
It would mean that Russia would be allowed to emit even more [CO2].' 
 
He added that Russia has enormous possibilities to reduce emissions. 
 
The energy intensity per dollar of its economic output is still 
considerably higher in Russia than in China or the United States, he 
 
said. 
 
Frankfurter Rundschau (10/19) observed: "Russia as a protector of 
the 
climate.  Thus far we have thought those two words would not fit 
together.  But all of a sudden, Moscow is creating new excitement 
for 
the Copenhagen global climate summit.  President Medvedev's 
announced 
that he wants to support the EU emission targets by 2020, thus 
putting 
pressure on Washington and Beijing.  And this is good.  It is easy 
for 
Russia to achieve its climate goals because the collapse of the 
Soviet 
industry still has a favorable effect on its carbon dioxide 
emissions 
budget.  Nevertheless, this signal should not be underestimated. 
Russia could now sell unused carbon dioxide rights to other nations. 
 
Maybe Russia has realized how important climate protection is.  This 
 
would be a sensation." 
 
Under the headline: "Tightrope Act," weekly Die Zeit (11/19) 
editorialized: "On the margins of the APEC summit, which includes 
the 
greatest climate sinners of all nations such as the United States, 
China, Russia, and Japan, there was an official announcement that 
there will be no climate protection agreement for the time being. 
It 
would now be possible to identify those who must be blamed for the 
failure of the Copenhagen summit, but it would be to no avail. 
Obviously, the world is not yet ready to protect the climate. 
Instead 
of trying to wrap up bad climate protection in nice words in 
Copenhagen, it is, according to the current situation better, to 
keep 
talking - provided the Copenhagen Declaration establishes the right 
 
framework conditions.  First, it must agree on global targets; 
second, 
the declaration must make clear who is to shoulder which burden; and 
 
third, the Copenhagen Declaration should leave no doubt that climate 
 
sinners have to pay.  Climate policy has already produced enough hot 
 
air.  In Copenhagen, politicians must be honest and finally approve 
 
concrete goals." 
 
¶4.   (Mideast)   Israeli Settlements 
 
Sddeutsche (11/19) editorialized:  "The building plans for Gilo 
face 
serious opposition.  They seem to lead to a power struggle between 
Prime Minister Netanyahu's government and President Obama, which is 
 
 
BERLIN 00001481  004 OF 007 
 
 
long overdue.  The harsh criticism from Washington shows how much 
this 
project provokes Washington.  Only last week was Netanyahu in the 
White House and everything suggested that Obama urged the prime 
minister to cooperate and warned him against going it alone.  It did 
 
not help much.  Israeli bulldozers are the last thing Obama needs to 
 
pave the way for new peace talks with the Palestinians....  However, 
the 
U.S. government must blame itself for the deadlocked U.S. diplomacy 
on 
the Mideast.  In recent weeks, Secretary Clinton suggested to 
Netanyahu that Washington is no longer so serious about an immediate 
 
settlement freeze.  This zigzag course has caused much damage.  The 
 
Palestinians feel discouraged and betrayed.  The Israelis feel 
encouraged to sit out demands from the White House.  If Obama does 
not 
want others to make a fool out of him, he must exert pressure in the 
 
question of Gilo.  He would be backed by UN Sectary General Ban Ki- 
moon and Europeans.  This would not be a bad starting point. 
However, 
the U.S. President must prepare himself for a tough fight." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine (11/19) opined: "It is indeed whitewash to 
claim that the extension of already existing settlements is not an 
expansion of the settlement activities....  Particularly in eastern 
 
Jerusalem, the demographic changes are significant.   Washington as 
 
well as Ban Ki-moon fear that a two-state solution would no longer 
be 
possible if this goes on.  The efforts for new peace talks would 
also 
be impeded." 
 
Under the headline "Dangerous provocation in Mideast," Handelsblatt 
 
(11/19) argued: "Israel remains unimpressed and advances settlement 
 
construction in the West Bank.  Peace in the Middle East will be 
even 
further away if the U.S. does not vigorously interfere....  After 
his 
sobering trip to Asia, the President will now have to take care of 
the 
Mideast.  If he fails to get the parties at one table again, the 
U.S. 
is threatened with an enormous loss of reputation abroad.  The 
impression that Obama is just bluffing in his approach to Israel 
would 
solidify.  Given the complexity of the problems in Afghanistan Iraq, 
 
the Mideast and China, Washington is obviously reaching the limits 
of 
its political capability." 
 
¶5.   (U.S.)   Closure of Guant namo 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine (11/19) headlined: "Obama admits delay" and 
Sddeutsche headlined on its front-page: "Guantanamo will remain for 
 
the time being - U.S. President cannot close camp as promised." 
 
Sddeutsche (11/19) editorialized: "The admission was inevitable. 
Obama had to admit that he could not keep his promise to close the 
 
BERLIN 00001481  005 OF 007 
 
 
shameful camp of Guantanamo by January 20, 2010, the anniversary of 
 
his inauguration.  The announcement made in the euphoria of the 
inauguration, which sounded naQve and wrong at the time, has now 
been 
cancelled.  It was wrong because it seemed to be clear a year ago 
that 
it would be difficult to close and guarantee the inmates a lawful 
procedure.  Still today it is not clear what to do with some 100 
detainees who are apparently so dangerous that one cannot release 
them.  However, there is also not sufficient evidence against them 
to 
take them to court.  And the announcement was naQve because Obama 
believed he only had to create enough public pressure to reach his 
goals.  This was the way to win the election, but leading a 
government 
works differently.  The President has greatly underestimated 
political 
opposition and the persistence of the apparatus.  However, Obama is 
a 
long-term strategist and believes in small steps....  He will close 
 
Guantanamo in the end, but not by January 20, 2010." 
 
¶6.   (Iran)   Nuclear Conflict 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine (11/19) editorialized:   "U.S. President 
Obama 
claims he is not disappointed that the detention camp in Guantanamo 
 
would not be closed by January next year as announced.  It would be 
 
interesting to know whether he is also not disappointed about Iran's 
 
rejection of the compromise proposal to send abroad its uranium for 
 
enrichment.  It is clear that the hand Obama reached out has not 
been 
taken by the Tehran leadership even after months.  The agreements 
made 
in Geneva disappeared into thin air.  Iran does not even think about 
 
making a move towards dtente - not as long as it can expect Russia 
 
and particularly China to act in Tehran's interest concerning 
sanctions.  The Iranian leadership knows how to gamble for time. 
Western powers should have understood this by now.  One day the game 
 
will be over.  The question is: who will win?" 
 
¶7.   (U.S.-Asia)   Future Relations 
 
Under the headline: "The Bride is Hesitating," Die Welt (11/19) 
argued: "While Europe again does not seem to take advantage of its 
possibilities when it comes to selecting the candidates for its top 
 
jobs and continues to suffer from the illusion that the model of a 
transatlantic expert governs in the White House, the United States 
is 
turning to Asia.  Europe has never looked as old as during President 
 
Obama's trip to Asia.  And that is why his absence at the 20th 
anniversary of the fall of the Wall was only consistent.  Those who 
 
want to win the future, prefer to travel to Asia rather than to 
Europe.  And unlike what many Europeans think, Obama is not an 
idealist but a pragmatic realist in foreign policy.  He seeks those 
as 
partners with whom he thinks he can solve problems the best.  And 
 
BERLIN 00001481  006 OF 007 
 
 
this 
is increasingly China, not Europe.  This week, the world has got a 
pretaste of how the future global directorate made up of the U.S. 
and 
China might look.  If the G-20 format is too complicated to find a 
solution, the two big colossi of global politics will meet for an 
informal G-2.  The only problem for Obama is that the Asian bride is 
 
still coy.  The Americans are increasingly realizing that Europe 
lacks 
global policy ambitions and determination in order to share global 
leadership tasks in cooperation with the U.S.   At the same time, 
China is still a power that is becoming more influential and is 
still 
taking out loans on the future.  Obama offered the Chinese a 
strategic 
partnership, but they do not want to accept it.  For Europe this 
means 
it is not yet too late to present itself as a natural partner in 
leadership for the U.S.  With respect to his biography, Obama is 
really the first Pacific U.S. president.  That is why Europe must 
offer more than a nostalgic transfiguration of the transatlantic 
past." 
 
¶8.   (EU)   Top Jobs 
 
Under the headline: "European Province," Sueddeutsche Zeitung 
(11/19) 
editorialized: "The miserable wrestling over EU top positions is a 
mockery towards the EU's claim to be taken seriously in the world. 
 
Only political dreamers consider the back and forth about the EU's 
top 
positions as evidence of democratic maturity.  In reality this 
discord 
is evidence of the unwillingness of EU members to look beyond the 
horizon of their national and partisan interests.  Today's EU summit 
 
will fail if it does not do away with one shortcoming: first, the 
future task of the people in these top jobs must be studied and then 
 
they must examine who could best meet all the requirements, 
irrespective of his/her origin, gender and partisan orientation. 
This 
is the only way out of the confusion." 
 
In a front-page editorial Frankfurter Allgemeine (11/19) judged: "If 
 
next year, for instance, the G-20 leaders convene, the EU 
delegation, 
in addition to the national delegations, will be even bigger than 
today, with even more actors...  The increase in Europe's 
representation 
abroad could create confusion and add fuel to the complaint that the 
 
Europeans appear with too many people in international bodies.  It 
is 
not without its irony that America, China, Brazil, and others are 
calling upon the Europeans to concentrate their forces, but they in 
 
turn create even more positions.  The situation is not getting 
better. 
The intention to streamline positions leads to an extension.  Can 
the 
EU leadership be optimized? Maybe.  Since this position has now been 
 
created, the first president of the European Council must be ready 
to 
lead and the member states must support him in their own national 
 
BERLIN 00001481  007 OF 007 
 
 
interests." 
 
"European Dream Team," is the headline of an editorial in Financial 
 
Times Deutschland (11/19), which noted: "The EU leaders can appoint 
 
whomever they like tonight at their summit meeting, but if Merkel 
and 
her colleagues do not show the courage and the will to really 
handover 
the representation of European interests in decisive moments to 
their 
representative, the EU will continue to lose power and influence." 
 
Weekly Die Zeit (11/19) sub-headlined: "Europe can Remain a Factor 
of 
Power in Global Politics only if it Speaks with one Voice."  The 
paper 
opined: "As of next year, the Europeans can send their president to 
 
international conferences, or their foreign minister....  It would 
be 
the first time that he would be able to speak for the 500 million 
Europeans.  For this reason alone, this Thursday is a good day for 
the 
European Union. But to speak with one voice does not mean to speak 
with the one voice of the European Council president or the foreign 
 
minister.  Both can achieve little on their own; only if the 27 EU 
leaders support them, will Europe speak as a continent with 500 
million people.  Only then will Europe be heard.  No continent is 
more 
innovative, more social, and fairer - and up until today more 
prosperous.  Nowhere in the world are living conditions better than 
 
here.  With its soft power, Europe must seek its splendor not only 
in 
the past.  On the contrary, it can be a model for the world." 
 
¶9.   (Economic)   WTO 
 
According to an editorial in Sueddeutsche Zeitung (11/19), "The 
European Commission has now declared its willingness to soften the 
restrictions for the import of bananas, mangos, and other tropical 
fruit.  It is good news in many respects that these nonsensical EU 
subsidies will soon be terminated.  The banana agreement will 
primarily cause confidence in Geneva because the WTO envoys, who 
have 
their seat there, have been trying for years to conclude a global 
free 
trade agreement.  Thus far, the Doha talks have dragged along 
without 
producing any results.  But if now Americans, Europeans, and 
Africans 
bury the longest lasting dispute in the WTO's history, they will 
also 
make a great step forward to successfully conclude the WTO talks." 
 
MURPHY