09BEIJING1094
APRIL 23 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: Yasukuni Shrine, Dalai Lama,
Thu Apr 23 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7008
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1094/01 1130935
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 230935Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3626
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 2558
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 4545
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001094 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM KIRF CH JA FR KN KS
 
SUBJECT: APRIL 23 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: Yasukuni Shrine, Dalai Lama, 
Falun Gong, Chinese Hackers 
 
¶1. Key points at the April 23 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- A "correct and proper handling" of historic issues is the bedrock 
of Sino-Japanese relations, and Japan should take appropriate steps 
to safeguard the relationship following Prime Minister Taro Aso's 
sending an offering to the Yasukuni Shrine. 
 
-- Falun Gong is an illegal cult that was outlawed ten years ago. 
People should help those who have been "taken in" by Falun Gong. 
 
-- China opposes and cracks down on cyber-crimes, including hacking. 
 Some people have "made up" stories about Chinese hackers attacking 
the U.S. Department of Defense.  Accusing China unfairly is 
irresponsible. 
 
-- As a friend to both the ROK and the DPRK, China hopes for the 
improvement of relations between the two countries. 
 
-- President of the French National Assembly Bernard Accoyer signed 
a memorandum on increased exchanges between the National People's 
Congress and French National Assembly, which should further enhance 
cooperation between the two bodies. 
 
-- China's position regarding the Dalai Lama has been clear: China 
firmly opposes his separatist activities in any country and under 
any name. 
 
Yasukuni Shrine 
--------------- 
 
¶2. A "correct and proper handling" of historic issues is the bedrock 
of Sino-Japanese relations, MFA spokesperson Jiang Yu said at the 
April 23 regularly-scheduled MFA press briefing in response to 
questions on Japanese Prime Minister Taro Aso's sending an offering 
to the Yasukuni Shrine.  As such, China urges Japan to take 
appropriate steps to safeguard the relationship.  Asked whether PM 
Aso's visit to China would be cancelled, Jiang responded that 
details about Aso's visit will be released shortly.  A follow-up 
question on China's response to the Yasukuni shrine offering was 
directed to the MFA website. 
 
Falun Gong 
---------- 
 
¶3. Asked about reports that Falun Gong practitioners may organize a 
sit-in and surround the Chinese leadership compound at Zhongnanhai, 
Jiang responded that addressing Falun Gong activities is a legal 
issue, because China outlawed the "Falun Gong cult" ten years ago, a 
measure that demonstrates China's concern for its people, especially 
those must vulnerable.  In response to a question alleging illegal 
detention, torture and harassment of Falun Gong practitioners, Jiang 
said that the "Falun Gong cult" controls people's minds, and as such 
has caused death and disability to many innocent people.  Falun Gong 
was thus outlawed and its leaders punished.  People should help 
those who have been "taken in" by Falun Gong, a posture, Jiang 
reiterated, that reflects China's concern for its people, 
particularly those most vulnerable. 
 
Hacking the DoD 
--------------- 
 
¶4. Asked about reports that Chinese hackers obtained access to U.S. 
Department of Defense plans for a fighter jet, the spokesperson 
responded that China opposes and cracks down on cyber-crimes, 
including hacking.  However, some people have made up stories about 
Chinese hackers, she said.  China has more "netizens" than any other 
country, but China also faces the threat of hackers, with as many as 
eight out of ten Chinese computers controlled by hackers and 
"botnets."  The PRC Ministry of Public Security is working with 
other countries to fight the problem, and accusing China unfairly is 
irresponsible. 
 
ROK-DPRK Relations 
------------------ 
 
¶5. Asked about a meeting between representatives of the ROK and the 
DPRK at the Kaesong Complex, Jiang responded that as a friend to 
both countries, China hopes for the improvement of relations between 
the two.  Reconciliation will help promote regional stability, and 
as such, China supports continued dialogue on the basis of mutual 
equality. 
 
Sino-French Relations 
--------------------- 
 
¶6. President of the French National Assembly Bernard Accoyer is 
currently visiting China, making this the second visit of a 
 
BEIJING 00001094  002 OF 002 
 
 
President of the National Assembly in 45 years, the spokesperson 
said.  During a meeting with Chairman of the Standing Committee of 
the National People's Congress Wu Bangguo, the two signed a 
memorandum regarding increased exchanges between the National 
People's Congress and French National Assembly, which should further 
enhance cooperation between the two bodies.  China is ready to have 
further cooperation with France for the mutual benefit of the two 
countries.  Asked if Chinese President Hu Jintao would accept French 
President Nicolas Sarkozy's invitation to visit France, Jiang said 
that no such invitation has been received. 
 
Black Jails 
----------- 
 
¶7. Asked if "black jails" exist in China, the spokesperson responded 
that she did not know the source of such reports but stated that 
there are no "black jails" in China.  China is a country with the 
rule of law, and all cases are handled in accordance with the law. 
 
The Dalai Lama: Obama, Public Statements 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. Asked about a potential meeting between President Barack Obama 
and the Dalai Lama, the spokesperson said she had not heard of such 
plans.  However, China's position regarding the "Dalai" has been 
clear, she said: China firmly opposes his separatist activities in 
any country and under any name.  China has made representations 
urging the United States not to allow the Dalai Lama to conduct 
separatist activities on its territory, she said.  Asked about the 
Dalai Lama's statements that the lengthy sentences given to people 
convicted of arson in conjunction with the May 14th, 2008 riots were 
politically motivated, Jiang responded that "the Dalai's statements 
show what kind of person he is."  He has told many lies regarding 
the May 14th incident, she said. Competent authorities have handled 
the cases in keeping with Chinese law, in public and open trials. 
The Chinese government safeguarded the dignity and right of 
representation of the defendants, each of whom had a lawyer or was 
provided with one.  It is clear, Jiang said, that the People's Court 
has tempered justice with mercy and been prudent in its use of the 
death penalty. 
 
Rules for Foreign Journalists 
----------------------------- 
 
¶9.  Asked if rules for foreign journalists have changed, as some 
journalists have reported "problems" in Sichuan province and 
elsewhere, the spokesperson responded that the rules have not 
changed.  If journalists have problems, they can contact the 
relevant department in the MFA.  She noted that she does not know 
the specifics of the problems, but that there may be local issues, 
such as traffic problems near the earthquake zone in Sichuan, which 
are causing problems for journalists.  As such, journalists who wish 
to visit are encouraged to contact the local government.  The 
Chinese government facilitates the work of foreign journalists in 
China, and this attitude has not changed, she said. 
 
Fleet Review 
------------ 
 
¶10. Regarding the fleet review in Qingdao to mark the 60th 
anniversary of the founding of the PLA Navy, the spokesperson 
directed the questioner to the PLA Navy. 
 
Visit 
----- 
 
¶11. At the invitation of Chinese Vice President Xi Jinping, Peruvian 
First Vice President Luis Giampietri will visit China April 27-May 
2, during which time he will meet with Chinese leaders to exchange 
views on issues of mutual interest and sign a Free Trade Agreement 
(FTA).  The FTA is a strategic decision of the two governments, and 
will further promote trade and investment to help address the 
current global financial crisis. 
 
PICCUTA