09BEIJING1310
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS, H1N1, U.S. POLICY
Fri May 15 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO5150
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1310/01 1350839
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 150839Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3996
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001310 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH PREL ECON
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS, H1N1, U.S. POLICY 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS 
 
"The U.S. radical voice offends China" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(05/15): "Is it possible that the Chinese 
Intelligence Institute is better than the CIA?  It must be the case 
because, yesterday the U.S. released the news that Pentagon 
officials sold information to China.  It seems that the world rarely 
hears about the U.S. conducting any intelligence activities in 
China.  The real reason for this is that China doesn't speak up when 
it arrests U.S. or Western spies. However, even if China doesn't 
arrest any spies, the U.S. and the west have fabricated stories for 
the media to report indicating that the Chinese have arrested 
individuals.  Obama has implemented a more practical China policy. 
Unfortunately he has received continuous criticism from inside the 
U.S.  It is worrisome that U.S.-China policy could be influenced in 
the future.  The spokesperson of the Chinese Foreign Ministry stated 
that the U.S.' accusation is completely baseless and suggests that 
they have ulterior goals.  Chinese experts indicate that 
conservatives in the U.S. have always been diplomatically 
anti-communist.  Their offensive behaviors towards China will 
continue, but these behaviors will not influence bilateral 
relations." 
 
¶2. H1N1 
 
a. "The U.S. should not ignore other countries when fighting against 
the flu" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(05/15): "Ten days ago, the U.S. became the 
country with the highest rate of affected people.  The numbers 
affected have exceeded that of Mexico. This brings doubts to the 
U.S. flu containment system.  The U.S. has the most international 
people coming and going than all other countries.  A large number of 
Americans are visiting other countries, which may not have medical 
facilities as advanced as the U.S. does.  The U.S needs to think 
more about the situations in other countries and adjust their 
prevention measures.  They need to take the necessary actions to 
prevent the affected person from leaving their borders. This is the 
best time to test the Obama administration's determination to become 
a responsible model for the world." 
 
b. "Halt virus at its epicenter" 
 
Global Times English (English-language daily published by the 
People's Daily)(05/15): "North America's three countries - Canada, 
the U.S. and Mexico - have the largest number of confirmed cases of 
swine flu in the world, raising concerns about the effectiveness of 
their containment efforts.  The U.S. in particular has a lot to do, 
with the virus spreading rapidly.  The number of people being 
infected has soared quickly and three people have died.  Compared 
with other countries, which are in high gear to combat the swine 
flu, the U.S. public seems indifferent to the danger.  The American 
government and media have taken a low-key approach to dealing with 
the flu.  Considering its global business interactions, the U.S. in 
particular is at risk of spreading the virus to other countries, 
including many that have only poor healthcare systems.  At the 
moment, life in the U.S. is continuing much as before, with 
Americans traveling as widely and often as usual.  But the impact of 
swine flu can be disastrous for countries without proper 
preventative systems.  Few countries can afford the expensive 
healthcare system the U.S. enjoys.  China has taken exhaustive 
measures to track down all of the people who traveled with the two 
swine flu victims.  A few are still missing, posing a risk to the 
rest of the population.  Pandemics have no boundaries.  The U.S. 
should not ignore warnings the WHO has issued for the entire 
world." 
 
¶3. U.S. POLICY 
 
"The unchanged core concept" 
 
The official Communist Party People's Daily (Renmin Ribao)(05/15): 
"The U.S. Department of State recently issued a report listing Cuba, 
Iran, Syria and the Sudan as countries that support terrorism. When 
comparing the mild and practical changes on other issues, this 
report, which is different from the theme of 'change' that Obama 
advocated earlier, reflects that the U.S.' diplomatic core concepts 
remain unchanged.  The U.S. has changed the way it realizes its 
goals, without changing its strategy.  It is the working style of 
the U.S. that has changed, but diplomatically and traditionally, the 
U.S. has not changed.  The concepts and guideline of the two U.S. 
governing parties have changed little.  The core concepts of U.S. 
 
BEIJING 00001310  002 OF 002 
 
 
diplomacy will not change simply because the U.S. adjusts its 
tactics." 
 
WASHINGTON