09BERLIN1593
MEDIA REACTION: ENVIRONMENT, IRAN, NATO-RUSSIA,
Thu Dec 17 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
VZCZCXRO9085
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHLZ
DE RUEHRL #1593/01 3511136
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 171136Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6076
INFO RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVE
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 1836
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0556
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 1074
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 2579
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 1601
RUEHVEN/USMISSION USOSCE 0764
RHMFIUU/HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
RHMFISS/HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
RHMFISS/CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
RUKAAKC/UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 BERLIN 001593 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/CE, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KGHG IR AF AF GMUS GR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: ENVIRONMENT, IRAN, NATO-RUSSIA, 
AFGHANISTAN, 
GERMANY-AFGHANISTAN, U.S., GREECE;BERLIN 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
¶2.   (Environment)   COP 15 
¶3.   (Iran)   Missile Test 
¶4.   (NATO-Russia)   Rasmussen in Moscow 
¶5.   (Afghanistan)   Holbrooke 
¶6.   (Germany-Afghanistan)   Impact of September 4 Airstrikes 
¶7.   (U.S.)   Closure of Guant namo Prison Camp 
¶8.   (Greece)   Economic Problems 
 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
 
ARD-TV's and ZDF-TV's primetime newscasts opened with stories on the 
 
Bundestag debate over the September 4 airstrikes.  Newspapers led 
with 
stories on former Inspector General Scheiderhan's accusation that 
Defense Minister zu Guttenberg has not told the truth about the 
dismissal of the general.  Editorials focused on the September 4 
airstrikes, the education "summit" and the 2010 budget. 
 
¶2.   (Environment)   COP 15 
 
All media carried reports on the final phase of the Copenhagen 
climate 
conference, noting that climate activists are increasingly angry as 
 
the talks are faltering.  Frankfurter Rundschau (12/17) fronted a 
photo of an angry protester facing a police officer under the 
headline: "The summit of anger."  Frankfurter Allgemeine (12/17) 
headlined: "Complaints and protests in Copenhagen."  Sddeutsche 
(12/17) showed a front-page photo of the protests under the headline 
 
"Riots in Copenhagen."  The paper added: "Negotiators have hardly 
made 
any progress.  Environmentalists already warn against a standstill 
on 
the fight against global warming.  The credibility of politicians is 
 
at stake." 
 
Handelsblatt (12/17) opined: "Friday night will be long, because 
many 
obstacles must still be removed before the end of the Copenhagen 
climate summit.  This becomes clear by looking at the Danish draft 
of 
the conclusions: key statements are put in brackets, which means 
they 
are still controversial.  However, there are many hints that there 
will be a clear agreement that will lead to a binding international 
 
treaty next year.  It is hardly conceivable that President Obama 
will 
travel to Copenhagen on Friday without being certain that the summit 
 
will end with a presentable result.  The EU is playing a 
constructive 
role and made clear once more yesterday that it stands by its goal 
to 
cut not just 20 but 30 percent of greenhouse gas emissions by 2020 
compared with 1990.  With this, it already played its best card, but 
 
this tactic may work." 
 
Westdeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung (12/17) editorializes:  "It was 
supposed to be a pioneering and landmark climate conference 
culminating 15 years of UN negotiations.  However, the attempt to 
 
BERLIN 00001593  002 OF 006 
 
 
force the 40,000 participants, 190 ministers and over 100 state and 
 
government leaders to reach a binding agreement has so far achieved 
 
the opposite.  Hopelessly incompetent personnel and overbooked halls 
 
are causing anger....  Also diplomats in Copenhagen are frustrated. 
 
Nothing is currently working in the climate poker game....  A tragic 
end 
to an overblown conference that is about to lose the race against 
time.  Because state and government leaders cannot return without a 
 
result, they will celebrate weak wording and loopholes as the 
Copenhagen agreement." 
 
MQrkische Oderzeitung of Potsdam (12/17) notes in an editorial: 
"Europe has already backed away from the 30 percent reduction goal 
because the U.S. and China are not in the boat.  The U.S. offers 
four 
percent and China wants to reduce emissions but does not want to 
give 
numbers.  Its economic interests are too large.  It is not a 
surprise 
that demonstrators are getting angry.  Given that the industrial 
countries are not on the same page, it is also not a surprise that 
developing countries are threatening to cause the conference to 
fail. 
It is becoming clear that the success of the 1997 Kyoto Protocol 
cannot be repeated in the times of an economic crisis." 
 
¶3.   (Iran)   Missile Test 
 
All papers (12/17) reported that the U.S. Congress approved tougher 
 
sanctions on Iran and that Iran's most recent test of a new medium- 
range missile, which can reach Israel, has raised concern about 
Iran's 
nuclear activities and prompted the 3+3 nations to meet to discuss 
tougher sanctions on Iran.  Sueddeutsche (12/17) reported on its 
front-page under the headline: "Missile Test Provoking the United 
States," and wrote that "the U.S. government communicated that [the 
 
test of a Sejil 2 missile] is giving the lie to Iranian assurances 
that its nuclear program only serves peaceful purposes." 
 
Under the headline: "U.S. is Preparing stricter Sanctions On Iran," 
 
Sueddeutsche Zeitung (12/17) reported "In the nuclear conflict with 
 
Iran, the West's patience is coming to an end."  In view of the most 
 
recent escalation, preparations are being made in order to tighten 
up 
sanctions on Iran in the first quarter of next year.  Secretary of 
State, Hillary Clinton, said that no one can dispute the fact that 
"one year of diplomatic efforts has result in very little" with 
respect to a positive Iranian reaction.  The Iran negotiating group 
 
...will meet this week to discuss further moves.  This will include 
a 
telephone conference of the political directors for a meeting in 
Brussels that failed due to scheduling problems of China...." 
 
In a lengthy report under the headline: U.S. Demonstrates Toughness, 
 
Iran Follows," Frankfurter Rundschau (12/17) said: "In domestic and 
 
BERLIN 00001593  003 OF 006 
 
 
 
foreign policy, Iran has now embarked upon a confrontational course. 
 
Following the most recent missile test, a further hardening of the 
situation is surfacing in the tense relations with the West.  In the 
 
conflict about Iran's nuclear program, the U.S. House of 
Representatives wants to increase pressure by adopting tougher 
sanctions." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine (12/17) argued in an editorial under the 
headline: "On a Confrontational Course," that "the Iranian regime is 
 
not even thinking about accepting the offer for dialogue presented 
by 
the U.S. President.  It answers with a confrontational behavior to 
the 
outside and is applying the confrontational screws at home.  The 
most 
recent missile test is alarming...and should be reason for concern. 
 In 
this situation, there is no way around imposing radical 
sanctions.... 
Iran must be foot the bill for its arms modernization." 
 
¶4.   (NATO-Russia)   Rasmussen in Moscow 
 
Almost all papers (12/17) reported on NATO Secretary-General 
Rasmussen's trip to Moscow, but said that that his trip was in vain 
 
because Moscow did not meet his request for greater assistance in 
Afghanistan.  Sueddeutsche (12/17) headlined: "Hardly any Assistance 
 
for NATO - Russia hesitates to Offer Support in Afghanistan," and 
wrote that "despite NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen's 
request, Russia is only slightly increasing its engagement in 
Afghanistan." 
 
Tagesspiegel reported under the headline: "NATO is Courting the 
Kremlin," and said: "Quite often politicians on both sides smile. 
In 
this respect, NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen's visit 
to 
Moscow resembles Barack Obama's inaugural visit to Moscow when he 
agreed on a new start of bilateral relations.  On Wednesday, when 
Russia's President Medvedev received Rasmussen, Medvedev said Russia 
 
and NATO would be partners, not rivals." 
 
In a report under the headline: "NATO and U.S. Intensify their 
Military Cooperation with Russia," Handelsblatt (12/17) wrote: "NATO 
 
but also the U.S. government are intensifying their military 
cooperation with Russia  During his visit to Moscow, NATO Secretary 
 
General Rasmussen announced close cooperation especially in 
Afghanistan.  News agencies reported that Rasmussen said after a 
meeting with Russia's Foreign Minister Lavrov that Russia should 
take 
part in the international mission with helicopters and possibly also 
 
with trainers.  At the same time, the U.S. government is putting out 
 
its feelers. It is true that both governments dismissed reports that 
a 
START follow on agreement could be signed at the margins of COP 15, 
 
 
BERLIN 00001593  004 OF 006 
 
 
but at the same time, both sides stressed that they are on a good 
path 
[to conclude the talks] on a follow on agreement." 
 
In an editorial under the headline: "Brushed Off In the Kremlin," 
Sueddeutsche (12/17) argued: "The Kremlin is not Santa Clause, and 
it 
does not have a holiday season either.  And if the NATO secretary 
general of all leaders presents a list of wishes, then this is 
rather 
brazen....  The Georgian conflict, which brought NATO and Russia to 
the 
brink of a military confrontation, has not been forgotten.  The 
Russian draft of a new European security architecture is evidence of 
 
this.  If Rasmussen had thought that he could pick up a few 
Kalashnikovs [for Afghanistan] without making any concessions to 
Moscow, then he probably believes in the Easter bunny." 
 
¶5.   (Afghanistan)   Holbrooke 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine (12/17) analyzed: "We must not take the tough 
 
words of the American special envoy on Afghanistan and Pakistan, 
Richard Holbrooke, that we are starting in Afghanistan from square 
one 
again literally.  However, the main criticism of the 'uncoordinated' 
 
action and the lost time should be taken seriously if we want to 
achieve the change to the better, which President Obama promised.... 
 
American and allied experts on Afghanistan have expressed skepticism 
 
in particular on the gradual withdrawal that is supposed to begin in 
 
2011/2012, which seems to be too short....  In the final fight of 
the 
coming two years, no ISAF contingent can afford to simply protect 
itself and go on patrols nearby.  Without actively fighting, no ISAF 
 
contingent can defeat the insurgents.  To allow them to fire at 
one's 
camp and only to respond to aggression is no longer an option. 
Those 
who will win must go for an offensive combat action." 
 
¶6.   (Germany-Afghanistan)   Impact of September 4 Airstrikes 
 
Regional Hannoversche Allgemeine Zeitung (12/17) criticized the 
information policy of the German government: "German politics failed 
 
to inform the people that the situation has changed [in 
Afghanistan]. 
Nobody was sufficiently prepared for a veritable war in which 142 
people were killed.  The time of half-heartedness is over.  The 
government will have to explain the Afghanistan mission anew in the 
 
coming months." 
 
Sddeutsche (12/17) editorialized: "Defense Minister zu Guttenberg 
has 
made a mistake.  His previous assessment of the airstrikes based on 
 
the ISAF report and the advice of his senior staff, was 
undifferentiated.  The ISAF report does not make a judgment but 
speaks 
of serious mistakes.  The motive of zu Guttenberg's first verdict 
 
BERLIN 00001593  005 OF 006 
 
 
remains unclear." 
 
Mnchener Merkur (12/17) editorialized on the dismissal of senior 
Defense Ministry staff and the young Defense Minister zu Guttenberg: 
 
"The complete civilian and military leadership of the Bundeswehr was 
 
captivated and the greatest political hope of the country is 
fighting 
for his survival.  The fact that Germany does not deal with anything 
 
but trying to blame commander Klein for his martial behavior spokes 
 
volumes about the moral conflict Germany has as a peace-loving 
republic plunged into war in Afghanistan.  If the government does 
not 
stand by its soldiers, it should withdraw." 
 
Under the headline "Getting closer to a taboo: the Germans and war," 
 
Die Welt (12/17) commented on its front-page: "We are currently 
pursuing a debate that is absolutely necessary.  However, we also 
ignore another debate, which would be similarly important.  What 
happened near Kunduz in the night to September 4 must be 
investigated. 
There must be clarity about what it means that the Bundeswehr is 
basically at war in Afghanistan.  The airstrikes Colonel Klein 
requested led to the most serious incident in the 50 years of the 
Bundeswehr.  It raises many questions that must be answered in a 
society that has a parliamentary army." 
 
¶7.   (U.S.)   Closure of Guant namo Prison Camp 
 
Under the headline: New Zip Code for Guant namo," Berliner Zeitung 
(12/17) analyzed the current state of events and reported: "Thomson, 
a 
600-inhabitant-hamlet in Illinois, is a strategic choice.  President 
 
Obama is hoping for maximum seclusion and minimum resistance. In 
Thomson, which is dogged by the recession, delight at jobs [is 
overwhelming concerns].   As far as politics is concerned Obama's 
home 
state of Illinois is firmly standing by the president.  However, it 
 
remains more than questionable whether President Obama will succeed 
in 
closing the blot of Guant namo...in a legally clean way.  The Obama 
 
government is threatening to get entangled in a mess of complicated 
 
legal questions and political considerations....  But if Guant namo 
 
prisoners are only transferred to Thomson without their fate being 
changed, then the scandal will only have a new name." 
 
¶8.   (Greece)   Economic Problems 
 
Weekly Die Zeit (12/17) said in a lengthy report: "What is really 
shaking the Europeans these days is not so much the bad news that 
keeps coming from Greece.  First of all, there are the finances 
and...then there is nepotism.  And many people wonder whether this 
is 
European.  But many aspects of the problems that are piling up in 
Greece have to do with a lack of a public spirit.  Despite the 
devastating fires last year, Greece has no voluntary fire brigade; 
parliamentarians, who are closely connected with building tycoons, 
are 
 
BERLIN 00001593  006 OF 006 
 
 
torpedoing bills that try to ban the construction of new buildings 
on 
torched earth.  Everyone is criticizing the bad universities but 
instead of resolving the problems, children are being sent abroad. 
 
The stage in Athens shows the Europeans to what extent states can 
fall, states where politicians do not dare mentioning unpleasant 
truths, in which people retire from public life and criticize that 
the 
state does not function, states in which governments drown future 
generations in debt because it would cost votes to announce cost- 
saving measures.  Western Europeans will also learn this, not only 
in 
Italy.  Greece is part of Europe - and currently it is our merciless 
 
mirror."