09BEIJING2934
OCTOBER 22 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: PIRATES, CHINA-INDIA, REBIYA
Thu Oct 22 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7720
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2934/01 2950054
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 220054Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6548
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 0087
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL 0673
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI 4960
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0716UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 002934 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM PARM CH IR IS AF IN JA
 
SUBJECT: OCTOBER 22 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: PIRATES, CHINA-INDIA, REBIYA 
KADEER, IRAN AND AFGHAN ELECTIONS 
 
¶1. Key points at the October 22 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- The Chinese Government remained concerned about the security of 
the 25 member crew of the De Xin Hai and an "all-out rescue effort" 
was ongoing. 
 
-- China and India were both emerging countries and had common 
interests that would benefit from the climate change agreement 
signed on October 21. 
 
-- China welcomed gradual implementation of the Geneva Consensus and 
supported the use of dialogue and negotiation with Iran. 
 
-- China respected the decision of the Afghanistan people and hoped 
for a peaceful and successful election that would lead Afghanistan 
onto the road to peace, stability and development. 
 
-- China voted for the Goldstone Report and was committed to working 
with the rest of the international community to achieve peace and 
stability in the Middle East. 
 
Pirates 
------- 
 
¶2. The Chinese government had already made clear its position on the 
hijacked cargo ship De Xin Hai during the previous press briefing 
and had nothing to add, said MFA spokesperson Ma Zhaoxu at the 
October 22 MFA regularly scheduled press briefing.  The Chinese 
Government remained concerned about the safety of the 25 member crew 
of the De Xin Hai and an "all-out rescue effort" was ongoing.  Ma 
refused to provide further details on the rescue efforts. 
 
Japan: Kadeer Visit 
------------------- 
 
¶3. Asked whether China's protest of Rebiya Kadeer's visit to Japan 
was consistent with China's policy of noninterference in other 
countries' internal policies, Ma told the journalist to look into 
the meaning of "non-interference" in other countries' affairs. 
People should not just listen to "lop-sided" remarks and should know 
what kind of person Kadeer was, Ma added.  China had expressed its 
dissatisfaction over the fact that Kadeer planned to spread her 
anti-Chinese separatist activities in Japan.  The PRC's position on 
China's unity was clear and Kadeer was "doomed for failure." 
 
Missing Uighurs 
--------------- 
 
¶4. Asked about the Human Rights Watch (HRW) report on Uighurs 
missing in Xinjiang, Ma replied that HRW had no grounds to attack 
China with "rumors."  The July 5 incident was a serious "criminal 
event" premeditated by three oversea forces and the relevant 
judicial authorities would handle the "criminals" accordingly. 
 
China-India Sign Climate Deal 
----------------------------- 
 
¶5. On October 21, China and India signed an agreement to cooperate 
on climate change negotiations.  The agreement was signed in New 
Delhi by China's National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) 
Vice-Chairman Xie Zhenhua and Indian Minister of State for 
Environment and Forests Jairam Ramesh.  The new accord would build a 
climate change partnership between the two countries and create 
working groups that would meet annually to exchange views.   As 
emerging countries, China and India had common interests that would 
benefit from the agreement, which would also improve bilateral 
cooperation, said Ma. 
 
Iran 
---- 
 
¶6. The IAEA and representatives from France, Iran, Russia and the 
United States had met on October 19-21 and had held an expert level 
consultation on Iran's uranium enrichment program.   Ma said that 
the discussions had focused on proposals to provide nuclear fuel 
needed for the sustained operation of the Tehran Research Reactor. 
China welcomed gradual implementation of the Geneva Consensus and 
supported the use of dialogue and negotiation with Iran, said Ma. 
 
Afghan Elections 
---------------- 
 
¶7. China had taken note of the latest developments in the Afghan 
election.  The election was an internal political affair of 
Afghanistan.  China respected the decision of the Afghanistan people 
and hoped for a peaceful and successful election that would lead 
Afghanistan onto the road to peace, stability and development, said 
 
BEIJING 00002934  002 OF 002 
 
 
Ma. 
 
Goldstone Report 
---------------- 
 
¶8. China had voted for the Goldstone Report in the UN Human Rights 
Council and was committed to the peace process between Palestine and 
Israel.  China was committed to working with the rest of the 
international community to achieve peace and stability in the Middle 
East, said Ma. 
 
JCCT 
----- 
 
¶9. Asked for China's expectations and goals for the upcoming 20th 
U.S.-China Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade (JCCT) to be held 
in Hangzhou on October 29, Ma referred interested parties to check 
the MFA's website for relevant updates. 
 
 
President Obama and Hu Phone Call 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶10. Presidents Obama and Hu spoke on the telephone on October 21 and 
discussed U.S.-China bilateral relations and climate change issues. 
President Hu had told President Obama that Copenhagen was an 
important effort on climate change, and Hu recognized that the two 
countries shared common but differentiated interests.  President Hu 
said as long as interested parties can work together, he was hopeful 
that Copenhagen would have a positive outcome.  Presidents Obama and 
Hu agreed to maintain close contact on Copenhagen and climate 
change, concluded Ma. 
 
Wen and Singh ASEAN Bilateral Meeting 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. Premier Wen Jiabao and Indian Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh 
would hold bilateral discussions on the sidelines of the upcoming 
ASEAN meeting to discuss bilateral relations and international 
issues of common interest. 
 
Xu Caihou's U.S. Visit 
---------------------- 
 
¶12. Concerning media reports that the Vice Chairman of the Central 
Military Commission Xu Caihou was expected to visit the United 
States, Ma referred inquiries to the relevant spokesperson for the 
Ministry of National Defense. 
 
 
 
HUNTSMAN