09CASABLANCA21
MEETING WITH CASABLANCA POLICE PREFECT
Fri Feb 06 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Casablanca
R 061700Z FEB 09
FM AMCONSUL CASABLANCA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 8283
INFO AMEMBASSY RABAT 
AMEMBASSY TEL AVIVUNCLAS CASABLANCA 000021 
 
 
RABAT FOR RSO, DS/IP/NEA, FOR STATE NEA/MAG AND DRL/SEAS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC EAGR KIRF MO PGOV SNAR
SUBJECT: MEETING WITH CASABLANCA POLICE PREFECT 
 
¶1.  (U) On February 5th, 2009 Consul General and RSO 
Casablanca met with Police Prefect Mustapha Mazouni at 
Casablanca's Prefecture to discuss the security situation in 
Casablanca.  Prefect Mazouni, who requested the meeting, 
began by outlining his view of the current security climate 
in Casablanca, stating that the Moroccan security services 
were unaware of any specific threats against the US Consulate 
General.  Mazouni reassured us that the Consulate General's 
security was of the highest priority.  He discussed the 
recent events in Gaza and how he did not  see any ongoing, 
real hostility against Americans or Jews in Casablanca.  He 
recalled a recent visit of several hundred religious American 
Jews to Casablanca during the height of the recent conflict 
in Gaza.  He stated that these tourists were able to roam 
freely around Casablanca wearing their religious head wear 
(Kipa) without any adverse reaction from the Moroccan 
populace.  He further stated that though there were 
demonstrations against the Israeli actions in Gaza, these 
demonstrations only provided an outlet for Moroccans to 
express their opinions but at no time was there any actual 
danger to American interests. He quipped that several of the 
protesters were seen at the US Consulate, the following day, 
requesting visas to the US. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Mr. Mazouni also talked about the current police 
deployment around the Consulate and the future plans (within 
one year) to deploy an additional 20 plain clothes police 
officers to the Consulate.  He explained that the deployment 
of these plain clothes officers, with their unhindered 
surveillance capabilities, would be more effective in 
combating both terrorists and criminals, who could 
potentially target the Consulate and its employees. RSO 
conveyed Post's concerns that the police currently assigned 
to the Consulate had become somewhat complacent and not fully 
attentive to their assignments.  Mr. Mazouni acknowledged 
that his policy of permanently assigned officers at the 
Consulate had its positives and negatives but that he would 
revise the policy so that police officers are rotated monthly 
amongst the numerous Consulates in Casablanca in order to 
break the monotony that sometimes causes complacency and 
nonchalance. 
 
¶3.  (U)  On the issue of crime, Mr. Mazouni noted a slight 
decrease in criminal acts but did also note the increase in 
the trafficking (by sub-Saharan Africans) and consumption of 
drugs, mainly cocaine.  He explained that some Foreign and 
Moroccan administered local high schools (i.e. Lycee Lyautey) 
were experiencing a surge in cocaine use, which had not been 
seen earlier.  He added that police assets were being 
deployed at these schools to combat the phenomenon.  He 
clarified that police had not detected this problem at any of 
the U.S. Mission affiliated schools in Casablanca. 
 
¶4.  (U)  Mazouni also noted that there has been an increase 
in the number of migrants returning to the countryside  from 
Casablanca because of abundant rainfall and hence improved 
agricultural opportunities.  At the request of our Overseas 
Security Advisory Council members, the CG extended an 
invitation to Mr. Mazouni for the next OSAC meeting in March. 
 In a prior meeting, OSAC members had expressed their desire 
to hear a Moroccan security official's assessment of 
Morocco's security situation and to foster a deeper 
relationship with Moroccan law enforcement.  Mr. Mazouni 
welcomed the invitation and advised us that either he or a 
representative from his office would attend. 
 
¶5.  (U) The meeting concluded with the CG and RSO thanking 
Mr. Mazouni for his office's continued support of and 
commitment to the Consulate General's security. 
 
 
MILLARD