09CAIRO124
EGYPT: COUNTRY TEAM ASSESSMENT FOR THE PROCUREMENT
Sun Jan 25 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
P 251116Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1448
INFO HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
SECDEF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
CDRUSASAC FT BELVOIR VA PRIORITYUNCLAS CAIRO 000124 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MASS MARR EG
 
SUBJECT: EGYPT: COUNTRY TEAM ASSESSMENT FOR THE PROCUREMENT 
OF SIX (6) REDUCED PRICE CH-47D HELICOPTERS TO SUPPORT THE GOVERNMENT OF EGYPT,S (GOE) SECURITY AND HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE MISSIONS. REF: A. EGYPTIAN MINISTRY OF DEFENSE LETTER OF REQUEST (LOR) 08-134 FOR LETTER OF OFFER AND ACCEPTANCE (LOA) DATED 13 JUL 08. B. ATTACHMENT 1 TO LOR 08-134 TOTAL PACKAGE REQUIREMENTS FOR CASE DEVELOPMENT DATED 15 OCT 08.
1.(SBU) Description. In REF A, The GOE submitted a request to procure six (6) reduced price CH-47D Helicopters utilizing the U.S. Army Cargo Helicopter Alternative Procurement Strategy (CHAPS). These aircraft will perform a myriad of Security and Humanitarian Assistance missions for the EAF, as well as support several of the Ministry of Defense (MOD) Services. These aircraft will perform tasks associated with the Airborne Landing of Forces, Medical Evacuation (MEDEVAC) and Disaster Relief missions. All missions will be in compliance with the standards and regulations outlined within current international and regional agreements. Additional information is available at www.mmc.gov.eg.

2.(SBU) Reason the purchaser desires the articles or services. Recent events throughout Egypt and the region with regard to disaster relief, humanitarian assistance and medical evacuation support the GOE initiative to increase its rotary-wing capability to perform critical tasks associated with these missions. The CH-47D (Chinook) helicopter with additional search and rescue mission equipment was identified by the U.S. Army and Chinook Program Manager more than a year ago, as a suitable rotary-wing platform to support the GOE specific Mission Requirements. This action will greatly increase the overall capability of the EAF to support cargo helicopter operations across multiple mission profiles. An increase in aircraft availability will enhance the overall readiness of the fleet and individual aviator proficiency.

3.(SBU) How the articles or services would affect the recipient,s force structure. The EAF originally procured 19 CH-47 Helicopters (15 x C, 4 x D Models) in 1981 and has had one incident since then that resulted in the total loss of the aircraft. The EAF completed the upgrade of the 15 C Model aircraft in 2007 and currently operate and maintain 18 CH-47D aircraft. There will be no change to the existing mission and primary roles of the CH-47D. The addition of six (6) aircraft would substantially assist the MOD and EAF with allocating additional resources to the various missions.

4.(SBU) How the articles or services would contribute to both the U.S. and the recipient,s defense/security goals. Aircraft sales are consistent with DOD's Security Cooperation Guidance as it enhances the territorial security and crisis response capabilities of regional states. It assists the U.S. in enabling allies and partners, while also protecting U.S. and partner interests. It supports the modernization and transformation of allies or partners to reduce their vulnerability to external military sales. Finally, it improves their ability to operate independently without significant reliance on U.S. or coalition Forces. These additional aircraft will significantly increase the amount of US-based training, joint training exercises and possibly impact the frequency of coalition operations with the US and its other allies.

5.(SBU) Justification for the type and quantity of articles or services requested. A detailed analysis and review of several suitable airframes was completed by EAF with input from the Utility Cargo Helicopter Office (UPHO) and Cargo Helicopter Program Manager. Their findings revealed that the CH-47D Chinook Helicopter with optional medical and search and rescue equipment would be an excellent airframe to support the various GOE missions. The procurement of these aircraft is a natural progression to modernize assets and significantly improve an existing capability.

6.(SBU) Combatant Commander's concurrence to the introduction of a new warfighting capability to the nation or region. Combatant Commander's concurrence will be provided separately.

7.(SBU) Anticipated reactions of the neighboring nations. The procurement of these additional cargo helicopters should not influence the regional balance of power or cause negative reactions from any of Egypt's neighbors. This procurement introduces an increase in capability for Egypt, but does not introduce new technology to the country or region. Several regional allies have recently purchased similar airframes through the Foreign Military Sales (FMS) or Direct Commercial Sales (DCS) programs, with U.S. concurrence. These assets will greatly enhance Egypt,s ability to participate in combined regional training exercises, as well as disaster relief missions. This procurement will not impact Israel's qualitative military edge.

8.(SBU) Assessment of the nation's ability to account for, safeguard, operate, maintain, and support the articles. The GOE has demonstrated the intent and ability to protect sensitive, classified military technology over an extended period. Egypt signed a General Security of Information Agreement with the U.S. and as a customer, has purchased and protected the sensitive technology of other U.S. weapons systems. Egypt has procured similar rotary-wing aircraft in the past to include eighteen (18) CH-47 Chinook Helicopters that currently provide support to the EAF, MOD services and the Search and Rescue Operations Center at Al Maza Air Base. The EAF has met all previous security and End Use monitoring (EUM) requirements.

9.(SBU) Training required either in-country or in the United States and anticipated reactions resulting from the presence of U.S. trainers in country. The EAF already maintains a squadron of eighteen (18) CH-47D Helicopters. The EAF pilots and maintenance personnel currently complete all CH-47 Chinook Aviator Qualification Courses (AQC), Instructor Pilot Courses (IPC), Maintenance Test Pilot (MTP) Courses, Flight Engineer and maintenance related courses in the U.S. The addition of six (6) aircraft will increase the EAF,s stateside training requirements by a minimum of twelve (12) AQCs, two (2) IPCs, two (2) MTP courses and eight (8) flight engineer courses. There is no requirement for an additional Mobile Training Team (MTT). The continued presence of the Chinook Technical Assistance and Fielding Team (TAFT) is required to support the fleet throughout the duration of aircraft delivery. The presence of U.S. trainers in country will have little anticipated reaction because of the long-term existence of Security Assistance Teams (SATs) already assigned in country.

10.(SBU) Possible impact of any in-country U.S. presence that might be required as a result of providing the article. U.S. Government civilian personnel and U.S. contractors are permanently assigned to Egypt to support the current EAF CH-47D program. Those US positions have been filled for over six years. There is an expected increase of US personnel in-country that would be necessary to support the arrival, bed-down and sustainment of the additional aircraft resulting from this procurement. A majority of the personnel will be on temporary duty status and very few positions will require additional personnel to remain in Egypt for more than one year. Additionally, U.S. Government teams and U.S. contractor teams routinely travel to Egypt to support the various weapon systems procured through the U.S. FMS programs. There is no anticipated negative impact that would result from the continued presence of these Americans in Egypt.

11.(SBU) Source of financing and the economic impact of the proposed acquisition. Egypt plans to procure these six (6) aircraft utilizing Foreign Military Financing and has already allocated sufficient funds within their FY09-FY13 budget. This acquisition is essential for the GOE to conduct airborne landing of forces, humanitarian assistance and search and rescue missions. This requirement is on both the FY09 JAVITS Report and the Egyptian Armament Authority (EAA) Priority List. Egypt is not planning to use national funds to pay for any portion of this procurement. The economic impact of the proposed acquisition will generate more than $200 million dollars for the U.S. Army,s Cargo Helicopter Program and the U.S. economy. The sale of these reduced price aircraft is critical to offset the costs of the U.S. Army,s CH-47D, total fleet conversion to F Model aircraft over the next six years.

12.(SBU) Human rights considerations relevant to the proposed acquisition. None.

13.(SBU) A plan for end-use monitoring for sensitive and advanced warfighting technology and the SAO,s plan for compliance verification. The Office of Military Cooperation (OMC) Egypt has a robust Golden Sentry Program. The Golden Sentry Program representative and Security Assistance Officer (SAO) responsible for the program, will coordinate for the review and maintenance of required documentation. All parties will maintain serial number lists of all components within the inventory or transferred, and will conduct the mandated inspections as required. This coordination will ensure that historical copies of all EUM Inspection results and customer,s physical security and accountability control plans remain on file. The Egyptian military currently has over 100 helicopters (FMS) of various configurations in country. Egypt has maintained accountability and security of these aircraft without unauthorized loss, theft, or access to date. The GOE has indicated a willingness to meet U.S. guidelines for accountability and security of these advanced aircraft, and the Office of Military Cooperation will conduct End Use Monitoring (EUM) of all required components if this request is approved.

14.(SBU) Recommendation whether the USG should approve transfer of the article and justification. The country team supports USG approval of the GOE procurement of up to six (6) Reduced Price CH-47D helicopters for the airborne transport of troops, humanitarian assistance, medical evacuation and search and rescue missions. The purchase of additional airframes should in no way diminish the amount of follow-on support for the current fleet. Also, there will be funding lines in the Letter of Acceptance for training, to include pilot and English language and infrastructure for overall base improvements. Particulars for the infrastructure and training are contained as an attachment to the Letter of Request. This is a coordinated mission position. SCOBEY