09GUANGZHOU325
Guangzhou Consuls General and Fujian Authorities Hold
Fri May 29 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Guangzhou
VZCZCXRO5697
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHGZ #0325/01 1490929
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 290929Z MAY 09
FM AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0609
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0451
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 0107
RUEHGH/AMCONSUL SHANGHAI 0110
RUEHSH/AMCONSUL SHENYANG 0114
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0151
RUEHIN/AIT TAIPEI 0127
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC 0013
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC 0015UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUANGZHOU 000325 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E/O 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CFIS KTIP KFRD ASEC PGOV CH CMGT CVIS
SUBJECT: Guangzhou Consuls General and Fujian Authorities Hold 
Second Working Group Meeting on Illegal Migration 
 
REF: Guangzhou  0176 
 
¶1.   (U) Summary and Comment.  Fujian government officials appear to 
have received our message about the need to work together to address 
fraud and illegal migration issues.  At a May 26 meeting in 
Guangzhou, six Guangzhou-based consuls general and their staff met 
with Fujian officials to discuss document verification, law 
enforcement and public outreach to individuals who wish to travel to 
the U.S., Australia, Canada, France Germany and the United Kingdom. 
Unlike the first meeting of the working group in February (Reftel), 
this meeting focused on coordination among working-level experts, 
with the CGs only participating in the opening and closing plenary 
sessions.  The Fujian reps acknowledged serious problems but several 
of their suggestions, such as authorizing 96 agencies to handle all 
visa applications province-wide, were not acceptable to the 
consulates.  Fujian is also hopeful of bringing economic, trade and 
cultural issues into the working group, though Consuls General 
believe this will lessen the focus on migration issues.  A third 
working group session is planned in the Fall in Fujian.  End Summary 
and Comment. 
 
SAME BED, DIFFERENT REMEDIES 
 
¶2.   (U)  The opening plenary session featured remarks by British 
Consul General Brian Davidson on behalf of the six CGs and by Madame 
Chu Yanli, the Deputy Director General of the Fujian FAO.  Davidson 
suggested that we work to establish streamlined procedures for 
verifying official documents from Fujian; further, he called for the 
development of multilateral cooperation mechanisms for coordinating 
how our law enforcement officials pursue fraud-related 
investigations.  Madame Chu acknowledged serious problems on 
document fraud and illegal migration, but said that Fujian has been 
dealing harshly with violators, especially criminal rings and 
snakeheads.  She said that Fujian was prepared to provide a list of 
96 agencies that would be approved for handling applications to 
consulates in the Guangzhou consular district.  (The same list would 
be sent to Shanghai as some consulates cover Fujian out of 
Shanghai.)  Madame Chu invited us to post the list on our websites. 
In response, throughout the day, consulate officials pointed out 
that we do not presently nor will we require applicants to work 
through intermediaries or endorse any group of visa agents. 
 
¶3.  (U) Madame Chu also mentioned that the Fujian FAO is prepared to 
verify Chinese documents presented to Consulates for visa 
applications, though the number of documents which it can currently 
handle is extremely small.  Most of the documents originate in 
Fuqing, Changle and Lianjiang, as well as Fuzhou city, all of which 
are difficult areas to monitor in terms of fraud.  Participants also 
discussed how we might assist Fujian in verifying foreign-Consulate 
issued visas and passports.  Note: The U.S. Consulate Fraud 
Prevention Unit has in the past found that document verification 
requests routed through the FAO have faced delays of up to several 
months.  We have had much better success dealing directly with the 
People's Security Bureau or other government agencies to verify 
documents and have decided that a single point of contact for 
verification would create a bottleneck insofar as our efforts are 
concerned.  End Note. 
 
PUBLIC OUTREACH - LOTS OF IDEAS 
 
¶4.  (U) Madame Chu also promised greater access to Fujian media for 
consulates to tell their stories regarding legal migration, noting 
that the Fuzhou Daily had recently published interviews with the 
British and German Consuls General.  At the working group meeting on 
outreach following the plenary, consulates noted their concerns on 
limited access to Chinese students.  FAO representative Li Ling said 
we should give at least a two-week notice in advance of a proposed 
visit so university authorities could consider our requests.  Note: 
The consulate already provides this notice; there are other factors 
- not based on time - that lead to denials. End Note.  Consulate 
officers proposed several new forms of outreach including newspaper 
question-and-answer columns and web chats on well-known Chinese web 
sites.  Li Ling said he would follow up with the FAO Information 
Office.  He also said that it might be possible to display consulate 
brochures or information about lawful methods to travel or immigrate 
at the Exit-Entry Bureau offices, where Chinese citizens go to apply 
for passports.  He added that this would require approval from the 
People's Security Bureau. 
 
ORGANIZED IMMIGRATION FRAUD - THE ELEPHANT IN THE ROOM 
 
¶5.  (U) No problem in Fujian will be harder to deal with than 
organized immigration fraud. The work group reviewed Public Security 
Bureau procedures relating to organized migration fraud 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000325  002 OF 002 
 
 
investigations, mechanisms for case referral, evidence needed for 
host-country prosecutions and timeliness of the provision of 
information.  PSB Deputy Director Xiao Yuan Hong cited recent 
collaborative efforts between the US Consulate's ARSO/I and his 
Bureau in disrupting a substantial organized fraud network as an 
example of joint cooperation, but was non-committal about any formal 
agreements or procedures without Central Government approval.  The 
Consulate delegations again rejected the idea of training or working 
with local visa "agents" to facilitate legitimate visa applications. 
 One area in which participants did agree would be beneficial was on 
reciprocal training on Chinese and foreign documents.  The FAO's Li 
Lin suggested that some applicants for U.S. visas were frustrated by 
a "lack of transparency" as to why student visa applications are 
refused or put in for additional administrative processing.  The 
U.S. Consulate assured him that student visa applications are given 
top priority by the Consulate and when administrative processing is 
necessary, it is usually resolved within a few weeks. 
 
LOOKING AHEAD - PLANS TO MEET AGAIN 
 
¶6.  (U) Deputy Director Chu and the Consuls General expressed found 
the discussions useful and agreed to meet again in September or 
October at Wuyi Mountain in Fujian province.  Madame Chu suggested 
that those discussions also touch on investment in Fujian, tourism, 
education and cultural affairs - a suggestion that clearly would 
dilute the focus of the working group. 
 
 
GOLDBERG