09HARARE923

Fri Nov 27 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
VZCZCXRO1410
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSB #0923/01 3310956
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 270956Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY HARARE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5160
INFO RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HARARE 000923 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR G/IWI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWMN PHUM PREL KPAO ZW
SUBJ: NOMINATION FOR THE SECRETARY OF STATE'S AWARD FOR 
INTERNATIONAL WOMEN OF COURAGE 
 
REF:  STATE 111471 
 
¶1. (U) The following is Embassy Harare's nomination for the 
Secretary of State's Award for International Women of Courage. 
 
NAME: Jestina Mungarewa Mukoko 
TITLE: National Director 
INSTITUTION: Zimbabwe Peace Project (ZPP) 
DOB: 22-MAR-1967 
POB: Zimbabwe 
Citizenship: Zimbabwean 
Contact: 17425 Flanagan Crescent, Hillside, Harare, Zimbabwe 
TEL: 263-912-414-334 
EMAIL: directorzpp@africaonline.co.zw 
PASSPORT NUMBER: BN206684 
 
¶2. Since 2007, Ms. Mukoko has served as the Executive Director of 
the Zimbabwe Peace Project (ZPP), an NGO made up of approximately 
400 brave Zimbabweans who monitor human rights abuses throughout 
Zimbabwe.  ZPP's reports have helped provide the international 
community with accurate assessments of human rights abuses, 
including violence against women and politically-slanted 
distribution of food, in communities across Zimbabwe, particularly 
during the violent 2008 election period.  Even before joining ZPP, 
Ms. Mukoko was a well-known leader in the human rights and activist 
communities in Zimbabwe through her work with other NGOs after a 
successful career as a journalist.  Ms. Mukoko first made a name for 
herself as a broadcaster for Zimbabwe Broadcasting Corporation where 
she delivered the news to Zimbabweans in English, Shona, and 
Ndebele.  She was a pioneering role model for professional women in 
journalism, which had traditionally been dominated by men.  Her many 
years as a radio and television journalist introduced her as a 
friendly and familiar face to Zimbabweans in every corner of the 
country.  After leaving television and radio, Ms. Mukoko moved to 
civil society where she has used her journalism and publicity skills 
to further promote civic education and human rights. 
 
¶3. After years of documenting and speaking out on human rights, Ms. 
Mukoko herself became a victim of a state-sponsored attack last 
year.  An active figure in Zimbabwe's civil society, she was 
abducted by state security agents from her home on December 3, just 
hours after giving a speech to a civil society group calling on 
Zimbabweans to take action during the 16 Days of Activism Against 
Gender Violence.  During her abduction, she was tortured by agents 
who beat her, subjected her to falanga (beating on the soles of the 
feet), and forced her to confess to an alleged plot to mount a 
terrorist incursion from neighboring Botswana.  Ms. Mukoko appeared 
in a Zimbabwean police station suddenly on December 23, and was 
subsequently held at the notorious Chikurubi Maximum Security prison 
until a court finally granted her bail on February 27. 
 
 
¶4. Throughout her incarceration at Chikurubi, and despite several 
court orders calling on officials to allow her to be treated at a 
private medical facility, she was repeatedly denied adequate medical 
care for injuries and medical conditions that went untreated during 
her detention.  After she appealed through the courts, the 
Zimbabwean Supreme Court finally ruled on September 28 that state 
security forces had violated her human rights to such an extent as 
to warrant a permanent stay of prosecution in the case against her. 
Although she has secured this significant legal victory, Ms. Mukoko 
is continuing her fight against the security agents who abducted and 
tortured her by suing them in Zimbabwe's courts for over US$1 
million.  Regime violence and intimidation has often silenced its 
opponents.  Ms. Mukoko's ongoing legal case is an important 
statement against violence and oppression.  Her bravery in calling 
those responsible for her abduction and torture to account, as well 
as her continuing role as head of ZPP has only reinforced her 
position as a leading human rights defender in one of the most 
oppressive countries in the world. 
 
¶5.  In the election-related violence that blanketed Zimbabwe in 
mid-2008, women often suffered particularly harsh abuse at the hands 
of security agents and ZANU-PF youths.  Ms. Mukoko's abduction and 
subsequent court case brought the subject of politically-motivated 
violence -- particularly violence against women -- and human rights 
abuses home to all Zimbabweans.  Across the country, people in 
villages discussed "what happened to Jestina" and debated on whether 
the government, even if it had a legitimate case against her, was 
justified in abducting her in such a violent fashion. 
 
¶6. Despite the horrors she has endured, Ms. Mukoko continues to 
serve as ZPP's Executive Director and as a role model for 
Zimbabweans.  Zimbabwean security forces returned her passport to 
her on September 30, and she has already traveled overseas to 
continue her work crusading for human rights in Zimbabwe.  Although 
Ms. Mukoko has always been an easily recognized figure since her 
days as a TV newswoman, her abduction has further raised her profile 
and the sensitive issue of women as victims of political violence. 
Her actions and story already inspire women, young and old, in 
Zimbabwe to courageously pick up the pieces of their shattered 
lives, to fight human rights abusers in the courts, and to speak the 
truth -- however painful it might be.  Since winning her case in the 
Supreme Court, Ms. Mukoko has spoken openly of the counseling she 
and her family have received and how it has helped them.  Already, 
other victims are coming forward to request counseling as they seek 
to follow Ms. Mukoko's example. 
 
¶7. Before her abduction, Ms. Mukoko was already widely respected as 
a courageous woman thanks to her important work at ZPP in 
documenting human rights abuses.  Ms. Mukoko's tragic ordeal and her 
brave response give even greater strength to her nomination. 
Conferring her with the International Woman of Courage Award would 
further encourage other Zimbabwean women who bear the scars of 
political violence and fighting the male-dominated professional 
establishment to follow her lead in defending human rights in word 
and deed. It would also encourage survivors of violence and 
repression to seek the important emotional support that can help 
them move forward. 
 
¶8. Ms. Mukoko was informed of Post's submission of this nomination. 
 
¶9. Embassy Officers working on women's issues: 
NAME: Ms. Amanda Porter (POL Section), U.S. Embassy Harare, TEL: 
263-4-250593/4 
NAME: Ms. Priscillah Kapungu, (Public Affairs Section) U.S. Embassy 
Harare, TEL: 263-4-758800/1 
 
RAY