09HALIFAX58
ATLANTIC CANADA ENERGY UPDATE:  ENERGY EXPORTS TO THE U.S.
Mon Sep 28 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Halifax
VZCZCXRO5874
PP RUEHGA RUEHMT RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHHA #0058/01 2711320
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P R 281320Z SEP 09
FM AMCONSUL HALIFAX
TO RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA PRIORITY 0633
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1425
INFO RHMFISS/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHHA/AMCONSUL HALIFAX 1518UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 HALIFAX 000058 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/CAN 
DOE FOR IA (DEUTSCH) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG EPET ECON ELAB PGOV PBTS PREL SENV CA
SUBJECT: ATLANTIC CANADA ENERGY UPDATE:  ENERGY EXPORTS TO THE U.S. 
NOW A MAJOR FACTOR IN THE REGIONAL ECONOMY 
 
REF: HALIFAX 0025 AND PREVIOUS 
 
HALIFAX 00000058  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
INTRODUCTION/SUMMARY 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. The Atlantic Provinces Economic Council (APEC), a 
well-respected regional think tank, focused its latest 
analytical report on the importance of the energy sector in 
Atlantic Canada.  APEC economists concluded that the sector has 
grown to become the most important group of industries in 
Atlantic Canada, spurred on by strong demand in U.S. markets, 
particularly in the northeast.  Atlantic Canada's energy exports 
to the United States in 2008 were over C$37 billion, 
approximately 89 percent of the region's total.  The energy 
industry continues to make a significant contribution to the 
regional economy, especially in Newfoundland-Labrador where 
energy developments have brought about the biggest economic 
turnaround in Canadian history. 
 
¶2.  For all this activity the APEC economists also see many 
challenges in the months and years ahead.  Of immediate concern 
has been the drop in demand for energy products as a result of 
the North American economic downturn.  A more serious situation 
could develop if potential mega-projects are delayed or 
cancelled due to market conditions illustrated already by 
Irving's recent announcement that it was shelving its plans to 
build a second oil refinery in Saint John, New Brunswick. 
Nonetheless, there could be a silver lining ahead in that the 
demand for clean energy could spur growth in the region's 
renewable energy sector, where wind generated power is taking 
the lead.  END INTRODUCTION/SUMMARY 
 
¶3.  Following are highlights of the APEC Report entitled, 
"Energy Production and Projects in Atlantic Canada." 
 
Energy - Now the Region's Most Important Industry 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶4.  Until recently, fishing and forestry were the main 
industries that dominated economic activity in the four 
provinces of Atlantic Canada:  New Brunswick, 
Newfoundland-Labrador, Nova Scotia and Prince Edward Island. 
There have been sharp declines in those industries over the 
years due to the collapse of fish stocks, competition from 
low-wage countries and shifts in demand.  Since the mid-1990s, 
energy industries have gradually taken over and have now become 
the dominant sector in the regional economy.  For example, in 
2009, energy developments in APEC's regional project inventory, 
including those in the proposal stage and those already 
underway, total nearly C$42 billon, or approximately 55% of the 
total list. 
 
The Economic Impact:  A Massive Turnaround for N-L 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶5. In term of direct employment, the impact of the energy 
industry is actually quite small - just over 18,000 jobs or 1.6% 
of total employment in Atlantic Canada.  However, its economic 
influence is much greater as 8% percent of Atlantic Canada's GDP 
now comes from the energy sector.  Newfoundland-Labrador has 
seen the most drastic impact as energy now accounts for 21% of 
the province's GDP, compared to Nova Scotia with 4%.  In fact, 
Newfoundland-Labrador has had the fastest growing economy in 
Canada since 2000, with an estimated 70% of this growth 
attributed to the mining and oil and gas sectors.  To 
illustrate, Newfoundland-Labrador's GDP per capita in 2008 was 
C$61,938 compared to a Canada-wide average of C$48,106.  This 
growth has meant that the province has gone from being the 
poorest province in Canada to one of the richest, representing 
the biggest economic turnaround in Canadian history. 
 
Energy Exports - the Importance of the U.S. Market 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶6. In terms of exports, energy products are critically 
important, accounting for approximately C$42 billon in 2008 or 
about 63% of the region's total merchandise exports.  Of these 
energy exports, 89% are destined for the United States.  Crude 
and refined oil accounts for 80% of marine tonnage into and out 
of seaports in the Atlantic region. 
 
Newfoundland-Labrador Offshore Oil:  Where It's All At 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶7.  The overall investment trend continues to be driven by mega 
energy projects, those over C$250 million, with offshore oil 
developments in Newfoundland-Labrador the major contributor to 
energy investment in Atlantic Canada.  There are now three oil 
 
HALIFAX 00000058  002.2 OF 004 
 
 
fields in production off Newfoundland-Labrador which make up 25% 
of Canada's crude oil and 12.5% of all oil:  Hibernia (1,244 
million barrels) where production will be increased and 
sustained by development of the Hibernia South field (223 
million barrels), Terra Nova (354 million barrels) and White 
Rose (305 million barrels).  Currently, the expansion of the 
White Rose project (an investment of C$3.5 billion) and other 
exploration activity (C$1.1. billion) will support growth in the 
Newfoundland-Labrador economy until the end of 2011, at which 
point construction of the province's fourth offshore oil 
project, Hebron, (581 million barrels when completed in 2017) is 
anticipated to ramp up at a total cost of C$5 billion.  There is 
robust exploration activity underway in Newfoundland-Labrador as 
well, although there is an ongoing problem with a lack of 
deepwater drilling rigs. 
 
Natural Gas:  Nova Scotia the Major Player 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶8.  Investment in Nova Scotia's offshore natural gas sector 
remains strong which includes the upgrading of the existing 
Sable natural gas project (85 billion cubic meters) and 
development of the second natural gas project, Deep Panuke, (18 
billion cubic meters) which will come on stream in 2010. 
Currently Nova Scotia produces approximately 2.5% of all natural 
gas in Canada.  However, there are questions about the sector's 
long-term future.  There is no active exploration underway and 
the last exploration well in Nova Scotia's offshore was begun in 
¶2005.  The result is that gas production could begin its decline 
by 2024 when the two projects start to wind down. 
Newfoundland-Labrador has significant offshore natural gas 
potential with an estimated 306 billion cubic meters for future 
development.  (FYI:  Exploitation of these reserves is not 
commercially viable at present because of harsh environmental 
conditions and a lack of transportation options.  END FYI.) 
There is also a producing onshore natural gas project in New 
Brunswick - the McCully field - which has an estimated 9 billion 
cubic meters of gas.  Some is used for local consumption, some 
for export to the United States. 
 
LNG:  The New Guy on the Block 
------------------------------ 
 
¶9.  The Canaport LNG regassification plant in Saint John, New 
Brunswick, (owners are Irving Oil and Repsol of Spain) began 
shipping gas to the U.S. market in July 2009.  The plant has a 
capacity of 1.2 billion cubic feet per day, equal to 
approximately 20% of demand in the U.S. northeast.  Gas supplies 
are currently coming from Trinidad and Tobago but long term 
plans include utilizing offshore natural gas from 
Newfoundland-Labrador.  Canaport appears to be the only LNG 
project that will actually reach production in the near future. 
There are other LNG projects under consideration in Atlantic 
Canada, but low prices and weak demand for natural gas have 
slowed the progress on these proposals.  Also there is strong 
competition from new sources of energy such as shale gas. 
 
Natural Gas Pipelines:  New and Old 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  The Maritimes and Northeast Pipeline (M&NP) transports 
Sable natural gas from Nova Scotia's offshore to landfall in 
Nova Scotia, over New Brunswick and then across the U.S.-Canada 
border to New England.  The Canadian portion has a capacity of 
440 million cubic feet per day, the U.S. portion, 800 million 
cubic feet per day.  Tied into the M&NP is the 
recently-completed Brunswick Pipeline which provides 
connectivity between the Canaport LNG plant in Saint John and 
the M&NP.  It has a capacity of 850 million cubic feet per day. 
 
Refineries:  Expansion Stymied by Economic Forces 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶11.  There are three operating refineries in Atlantic Canada: 
Come-by-Chance, Newfoundland-Labrador (Harvest Energy) producing 
115,000 barrels per day; Dartmouth, Nova Scotia (Imperial Oil) 
producing 89,000 barrels per day; and, Saint John, New Brunswick 
(Irving Oil) with daily production of 300,000 barrels of oil per 
day, making it Canada's largest refinery.  Up until the spring 
of 2009, Irving had contemplated building a second refinery at 
its Saint John site, but the company recently shelved the plan 
because of the current economic downturn in the North American 
economy.  That development will have an immediate impact on 
investment in New Brunswick and comes as a major setback for 
those working towards making Saint John an energy hub for the 
northeast. 
 
 
HALIFAX 00000058  003.2 OF 004 
 
 
Hydroelectricity:  Labrador's potential 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  Newfoundland-Labrador's Upper Churchill Falls hydro project 
is the second largest in Canada and the ninth largest in the 
world, producing 5,428 MW.  The province, through its energy 
corporation Nalcor, is now targeting the development of the 
Lower Churchill River which would see development of two 
components:  Gull Island (2250 MW) and Muskrat Falls (824 MW). 
Construction could begin as early as late 2010 with first 
delivery by 2015.  Nalcor's proposal is to provide a portion of 
the power to the Island of Newfoundland to reduce its dependence 
on thermal power generation.  However, it would require the 
construction of an expensive power line across Labrador and 
under the Strait of Belle Island.  An equally important focus 
will be on selling the power outside the province, which would 
require new transmission arrangements either through the 
province of Quebec or through an undersea transmission line to 
Nova Scotia and New Brunswick. 
 
Renewables:  Wind and Other Ideas under Consideration 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶13. While most of the region's energy success has focused on oil 
and gas, a new area of interest is on the renewable energy side, 
spurred on by the demand for cleaner fuels and the desire for 
reduced emissions of greenhouse gases.  Wind power in particular 
is highly popular in all four provinces, with nine wind farms in 
production and two slated to come on stream.  One of the largest 
projects is in Prince Edward Island where the C$220 million West 
Cape Wind Park will eventually produce 99 MW of power, partly 
for local consumption, partly for export into New England. 
However, several other wind projects have been delayed due to 
financing and profitability concerns:  five in Nova Scotia and 
two in New Brunswick.  Tidal power is also a possibility as 
there are sites along the shores of the Bay of Fundy in Nova 
Scotia and New Brunswick that appear promising.  To add to the 
mix, there are biomass power projects under consideration. 
 
Nuclear Power:  Concern over an Expensive Refurbishment 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶14.  Nuclear power is also an important component in the 
region's energy sector, although the delay in completing the C$1 
billion project to refurbish the Point Lepreau nuclear plant in 
New Brunswick is causing much concern.  While not mentioned in 
the APEC report, the province's energy minister recently said 
that the project is 16 months behind schedule.  The costs 
associated with the delay could cripple the provincially-owned 
utility and casts doubt on whether the province could proceed 
with a much-anticipated second reactor at the site.  Half of the 
intended 1085 MW from the new reactor could replace coal and oil 
fired generation within New Brunswick, Nova Scotia and Prince 
Edward Island, so there could be an additional environmental 
impact should these plans be shelved. 
 
Electrical Transmission/Energy Corridors 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶15. Transmission capacity has been recently expanded between New 
Brunswick and Maine with 345 kV added in 2007 to handle more 
electricity exports.  However, additional transmission capacity 
will be required throughout the Atlantic region to accommodate 
the export of renewables especially from Prince Edward Island. 
Meanwhile the New Brunswick and Maine governments and Irving Oil 
are examining the feasibility of developing an energy corridor 
which would include up to 1,500 MW of electrical transmission 
capability, new wind power and a 500 MW natural-gas-fired 
co-generation plant.  However, there have been no new recent 
developments in this project. 
 
Future Developments: The Impact of Recessionary Forces 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶16. For all this activity, the APEC economists noted there are 
definite challenges surrounding future growth in the energy 
sector.  First and foremost has been the drop in demand for 
energy products as the recession has taken hold, and the 
corresponding influence on the price of various energy products. 
 Already there is evidence that the recession is hampering 
future development as illustrated by the decision to shelve a 
second refinery in Saint John and delay new LNG plants.  APEC 
noted that there could be serious challenges emerging if other 
potential mega-projects are delayed or cancelled due to a 
re-evaluation of market potential.  A second challenge to the 
industry lies in attracting and retaining highly-skilled 
workers.  The failure to do so would have a drastic impact for 
 
HALIFAX 00000058  004.2 OF 004 
 
 
some future developments, especially when a concentration of new 
project construction comes along in 2015-16. 
 
¶17.  As the economists noted there are positive signs in the 
industry outside the traditional oil and gas sector, the most 
promising coming from the need to address climate change. 
Ending the region's reliance on coal-fired electricity 
generation and a greater focus in the U.S. on renewable energy 
is prompting all provincial governments to look at new cleaner 
energy sources.  This new focus could open up considerable new 
growth in the region's energy sector and would help in easing 
some of the effects of a prolonged negative economic climate. 
 
HILL