09HARARE146
HARARE: ANNUAL OVERSEAS ADVISORY COUNCIL (OSAC)
Tue Feb 24 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
R 241131Z FEB 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY HARARE
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4085UNCLAS HARARE 000146 
 
 
DS/IP/AF 
DS/DSS/OSAC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT APER ZI
SUBJECT: HARARE: ANNUAL OVERSEAS ADVISORY COUNCIL (OSAC) 
CRIME AND SAFETY REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 132056 
 
--------------------------------------- 
¶I. Overall Crime and Safety Situation: 
--------------------------------------- 
 
Crime is a serious problem in Zimbabwe and is driven by the 
country,s deteriorating economy.  Thieves act with virtual 
impunity and little fear of police apprehension.  Street 
crime in Zimbabwe is a serious problem.  Americans and other 
foreigners are perceived to be wealthy and are frequently 
targeted by criminals who operate in the vicinity of hotels, 
restaurants and shopping areas of the major cities and 
tourist areas such as Victoria Falls.  Although the majority 
of crimes in Zimbabwe are non-violent, perpetrators are 
generally armed with weapons that can include firearms.  The 
downtown sector of Harare and its high density residential 
suburbs are particularly high-crime areas. 
 
------------------------ 
II. Political Violence: 
------------------------ 
 
The political, social, economic, and security situations in 
Zimbabwe are volatile and could deteriorate quickly without 
warning.  During the presidential elections is 2008, the 
Zimbabwe government authorized its security forces to 
suppress all dissent by whatever means it deemed necessary. 
In the past year, political leaders at the highest levels of 
the Zimbabwe government have condoned the security forces, 
use of violence against opponents of the government.  Despite 
the formation of a government of national unity on February 
11, more than 30 political activists * MDC officials and 
civil society members * remain in State custody. 
 
Resident and visiting Americans have been arrested, detained 
and threatened with expulsion for activities that would not 
be considered crimes in the U.S., including expressing 
opinions regarding the current political regime.  Visitors 
should insure they have working communication devices and 
evidence of their citizenship, such as a photocopy of the 
face page of their passport.  They should also notify a 
trusted business associate or family member of their 
itinerary and expected arrival and departure times. 
 
The streets around State House, the official residence of the 
President, and the Botanical Gardens are particularly 
sensitive.  A number of pedestrians and motorists have been 
assaulted by local security forces when walking or driving in 
that area.  The president and other senior government 
officials travel within Harare accompanied by large and 
aggressive motorcades that have been known to run motorists 
off the road.  Security personnel have also been known to 
beat and harass drivers who fall to yield quickly enough. 
 
American visitors have been detained in the past under 
suspicion of operating as journalists without accreditation 
and for photographing cultural sites and areas that may not 
immediately appear to be sensitive.  Visitors may also be 
subject to harassment or arrest for photographing police, 
roadblocks, occupied commercial farms, government buildings 
or military installations, and official residences or 
embassies.  Visitors are encouraged to be very aware of their 
surroundings before taking any pictures outside game parks 
and known tourist areas. 
 
----------------------------- 
III. Post-Specific Concerns: 
----------------------------- 
 
Tourists and visitors are considered lucrative targets by 
Harare's criminal element.  Instances of "smash and grabs" 
and carjackings continue, especially in downtown traffic and 
at night.  Situational awareness remains the key to avoiding 
these incidents or extracting one's self from them. 
 
Residential break-ins and home invasions are a continuing 
concern with perpetrators frequently carrying edged weapons 
Qconcern with perpetrators frequently carrying edged weapons 
or firearms.  Many Harare residents utilize guards, centrally 
monitored alarms with reaction teams, grillwork, electrical 
fencing, barbed wire, dogs and/or personally owned firearms 
to combat residential crime. 
 
The condition of roads and traffic control devices is poor. 
This, along with increases in improperly maintained vehicles, 
lack of street lighting and almost non-existent traffic 
enforcement, creates an environment highly conducive to 
traffic accidents.  Drivers should exercise caution and drive 
defensively, especially at night.  U.S. Embassy policy 
strictly prohibits U.S. Government employees from driving at 
night outside of Harare. 
 
 
-------------------- 
IV. Police Response: 
-------------------- 
 
The Zimbabwe Republic Police's (ZRP) law enforcement 
capabilities have dramatically deteriorated in recent years. 
The police lack sufficient funding to maintain and operate 
equipment, or to train and equip personnel.  They have 
virtually no ability to respond to emergencies, a situation 
made worse by their overt politicization.  Rather than 
combating crime, the primary police function has become 
suppressing activity opposing the government.  In the case of 
criminal activity, the police usually need to be provided 
transportation to perform any investigative function. 
Criminal incidents must be reported in person to the nearest 
police station. 
 
------------------------ 
¶V. Medical Emergencies: 
------------------------ 
The public medical infrastructure has effectively crumbled 
and medical facilities are extremely limited.  There have 
been several instances where visitors facing life-threatening 
illnesses or injuries have been turned away from hospitals 
because they were unable to pay in cash in advance or there 
were insufficient medical supplies available.  Most serious 
illnesses or injuries will require medical evacuation to 
South Africa.  All visitors are strongly encouraged to have 
medical travel and evacuation insurance prior to arriving in 
Zimbabwe, otherwise fees for these services are extremely 
high and payable immediately in cash. 
 
For non-emergency and walk-in medical care, it is recommended 
that visitors initially contact the Avenues Clinic in Harare: 
Emergency Room: 251.144 or 251.180 or 251.190 
 
For emergency medical transportation it is highly recommended 
that individuals contact Medical Air Rescue Service (MARS) or 
Emergency Medical Rescue Ambulance Service (EMRAS).  Both are 
open 24-hours a day and provide capable emergency medical 
services, including ambulance service and evacuation. 
 
Mobile Air Rescue Service (MARS): 
727.540 
 
Emergency Medical Rescue Ambulance Service (EMRAS) 
250.011 or 250.012 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
VI. Tips On How to Avoid Becoming a Victim: 
-------------------------------------------- 
In the event an American Citizen becomes a victim of a crime, 
he/she should immediately report the incident to the nearest 
police station.  If it is an emergency and the police are not 
in the vicinity, they can be contacted by calling 995; the 
central police station's telephone number is 777 777. 
 
The loss or theft of a U.S. Passport should be reported to 
the U.S. Embassy.  The Embassy can be contacted 24 hours a 
day at 250 593. 
 
General: 
¶1. Always remain aware of your surroundings and the activity 
around you.  A typical mugging in Harare involves a group of 
young males who surround and overwhelm their victim in a 
public area.  An alert individual can often see this 
developing and initiate an appropriate evasive action. 
 
¶2. Travel in groups of 3 to 4 persons is highly recommended, 
especially at night. 
 
¶3. Be alert to distractions.  Purse-snatchers will often work 
in teams of two with one man acting as a diversion.  One man 
may engage the target in conversation or bump him/her on the 
street while the other grabs hand-carried valuables and flees. 
 
¶4. Do not display or carry unnecessary valuables in public. 
Jewelry, cell phones and other electronic items are of 
particular interest to local thieves. 
 
¶5.  Always secure items such as passports, money, jewelry and 
credit cards in hotel safety deposit boxes or safes when not 
being used. 
 
¶5. Don't resist if robbed or car-jacked. 
 
¶6. Avoid any and all political rallies or demonstrations.  Be 
sure to read the Country Specific Information on Zimbabwe (at 
Qsure to read the Country Specific Information on Zimbabwe (at 
www.travel.state.gov) prior to travel for updated information 
and advice. 
 
While in the Car: 
 
¶1. Avoid driving at night outside the low-density uburban 
areas.  Rural and suburban areas alike are ill lit and pose 
additional safety hazards due to pedestrians and animals 
crossing the roads.  Many vehicles are poorly maintained and 
often lack headlights or other warning devices. 
 
¶2. Keep automobile doors locked at all times and windows up. 
While stopped in urban traffic, scan the side and rearview 
mirrors to identify potential trouble.  While idling at a 
light or stop sign, leave adequate room to maneuver between 
your vehicle and the one in front.  When driving or when the 
vehicle is unoccupied, secure all items out of view by either 
placing them in the trunk or under the seat.  In the case of 
vehicular robberies (i.e. "smash and grabs") and carjackings, 
a group of street criminals wait for vehicles to stop in 
traffic.  They then attempt to open the doors of their 
target's vehicle.  If all doors are locked and the driver 
fails to take immediate action, the group will then attempt 
to break a window to access the vehicle and violently gain 
control.  These incidents occurred mostly at night, but can 
also in heavy mid-day traffic from which it is difficult to 
escape.  The road from the Harare International Airport is 
particularly targeted. 
 
¶3. Avoid travel to farms, properties, and areas occupied by 
war veterans. 
 
----------------------------- 
VII. For Further Information: 
----------------------------- 
The American Embassy can be contacted 24-hours a day by 
calling the Embassy's primary telephone number: 250 593. 
 
 
MCGEE