09HONGKONG638
MEDIA REACTION: NORTH KOREA; G-20; NATO
Mon Apr 06 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Hong Kong
P 060928Z APR 09
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7346
INFO WHITE HOUSE WASHDC
USDOC WASHDC
AMEMBASSY BEIJING 
AMCONSUL SHANGHAI
AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU 
AIT TAIPEI 0259
CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS HONG KONG 000638 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR, INR/IC/CD, I/FW 
DEPT FOR EAP/PD, EAP/CM, EAP/P 
DEPT FOR VOA/BRF, TV-WPA 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
PRC POSTS FOR PA 
AIT 
USPACOM FOR FOR CIS PD ADVISER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: NORTH KOREA; G-20; NATO 
 
TOPICS: 
¶1. North Korea 
¶2. G-20 
¶3. NATO 
 
HEADLINES AND EXCERPTS: 
 
¶1. North Korea 
 
"Rocket launch demands renewed six-party push" 
 
The independent English-language South China Morning Post said in an 
editorial (4/6):  "A nation's launch of a communications satellite 
should not normally warrant condemnation.  North Korea is no 
ordinary country, though, so its firing yesterday of a rocket must 
be denounced in the strongest possible terms.  The action was taken 
despite UN Security Council resolutions forbidding it and against 
the wishes of its allies and rivals.  Disapproving words are 
worthless without action; every effort must now be made to pull the 
regime back into talks to eliminate its threat to global peace and 
stability....  The missile launch has been cleverly timed. 
Internationally, it comes as the world grapples with economic 
turmoil.  Mr. Obama is reshaping the foreign policy of his 
predecessor, George W. Bush, and so far has centered on Afghanistan 
and Pakistan.  Domestically, North Korean leader Kim Jong-il is 
trying to shore up his position after a reported stroke late last 
year.  On Thursday, he will be confirmed for the third time as the 
chairman of the National Defense Commission, the country's highest 
governing body.  Efforts to curb North Korea's nuclear proliferation 
have been waning.  Attention is now firmly back on the issue and it 
must remain there regardless of the other challenges the world 
faces.  China again has to take the lead, but this time a more 
robust effort has to be taken by all involved in the nuclear talks. 
We must move away from the dangerous juncture that has been arrived 
at." 
 
"Satellite has fallen into the sea but the desire to show one's 
strength has not yet subsided" 
 
The center-left Chinese-language Sing Tao Daily News said in an 
editorial (4/6):  "...North Korea's rocket launch has prompted a 
tense situation in Northeast Asia.  The UN Security Council has to 
call an urgent meeting with regard to this.  The missile crisis is 
eventually submerged in the Pacific Ocean.  North Korea is trying to 
deal a head-on blow to U.S. President Obama, who just took office, 
and it is attempting to increase its bargaining chips by 
intensifying its military threat.  However, North Korea's wishful 
thinking will not work....  North Korea claimed that it launched a 
satellite.  It can defend that every country has the right to 
peaceful space development.  In addition, China and Russia called on 
all sides to be restrained in the Security Council.  It is expected 
that the Security Council will not impose severe sanctions over 
North Korea, but it will bring down the arrogance of North Korea. 
The satellite fell into the sea.  The world is happy that the crisis 
has been defused, because North Korea's long-range rocket technology 
has not yet matured.  However, it is disturbing that North Korea's 
desire to show its strength has not yet subsided.  In addition, 
there are still doubts about Kim Jong-il's health and the leadership 
succession.  Thus, the situation in Northeast Asia is still at an 
uncertain stage." 
 
¶2. G-20 
 
"How G20 recognized the new economic order" 
 
The independent English-language South China Morning Post said in an 
editorial (4/4):  "There may be no quick fix to the global financial 
crisis, but there are a number of co-ordinated measures that could 
help lead the world out of recession.  As expected, leaders at the 
G20 summit could not agree on all of them.  But there are some steps 
that must be taken now to avert looming calamity in the most 
vulnerable countries.  On these, thankfully, the leaders did agree 
to act.  In that respect, the first economic summit that reflects 
the new world order can be counted a success.  Only time will tell 
whether it has laid the foundations for future international 
co-operation and a return to global economic growth....  History 
will judge whether, as some claim, the summit was a turning point. 
It papered over differences between the U.S. and China, which both 
favor fiscal stimulus to boost demand, and Europe, which prefers to 
wait and see before taking on more debt.  The creation of a new 
agency to monitor the international financial situation for signs of 
risks stops short of meeting calls for global regulation, which is 
resisted by the U.S.  Most worrying was the absence of detail about 
a common approach to ridding the banks of toxic assets that still 
cripple them.  It was, after all, the banking crisis that sparked 
the recession.  There is, therefore, a pressing need for follow-up 
action if the world is to emerge from it any time soon." 
 
"G20 has changed the world order, China's big power status is 
established" 
 
The working-class Chinese-language Hong Kong Daily News wrote in an 
editorial (4/4):  "The two-day G20 finance summit is London is over. 
 Participating countries have reached a six-point agreement to 
expand the capital of IMF, to assist poor countries, and to 
strengthen the financial regulatory system.  The summit has created 
an everybody wins situation.  Every country got what they wanted. 
This summit also highlights the status and influence of China in the 
international political arena....  China has showed its influence 
and manners as a big power in the G20 summit.  China is, 
nevertheless, a developing country.  It is also affected by the 
financial tsunami.  Its economic growth in the fourth quarter 
dropped to 6.8 percent.  The Asian Development Bank anticipated on 
Tuesday that China will face difficulties in 'maintain 8 percent 
growth'....   Hence, China should do what it is capable of when 
fulfilling its international responsibility." 
 
¶3. NATO 
 
"Two big issues are waiting to be settled in the NATO summit" 
 
The pro-PRC Chinese-language Macau Daily News remarked in an 
editorial (4/5):  "...NATO's actions in Afghanistan, its relations 
with Russia and its future strategic positioning are the important 
topics in this summit....  Obama called for, in Strasbourg, a more 
effective use of NATO troops in Afghanistan, and he stressed the 
threat of radical groups. He said, Al Qaida may launch an attack 
against Europe because it is geographically closer to the area. 
Thus, combating radical groups in Afghanistan is not only the task 
of the U.S. but also the task of NATO and the international 
community.  In response, British Prime Minister Gordon Brown agreed 
to temporarily increase British troops in Afghanistan.  France and 
Germany also support the U.S. to increase troops in Afghanistan. 
But all these remain as moral support, actual action remains to be 
seen....  With the driving force of the U.S., NATO's foreign 
ministers meeting last month decided to resume formal contact with 
Russia, following suit of the meeting of U.S. and Russian foreign 
ministers in Geneva, which is an important signal of restarting 
relations.  In the just concluded financial summit in London, Obama 
and Russian President Medvedev held their first meeting.  They both 
agreed to reach a new agreement on cutting strategic weapons by the 
end of this year....  However, if the U.S. does not give up its 
eastward expansion and anti-missile defense system, Russia's 
relations with NATO will still have hidden worries." 
 
DONOVAN