09JAKARTA606
STAFFDEL BLANK VISIT TO INDONESIA COUNTRY
Fri Apr 03 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXRO8582
PP RUEHJS
DE RUEHJA #0606/01 0930903
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 030903Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2025
INFO RUEHJS/AMCONSUL SURABAYA PRIORITY 2429UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 JAKARTA 000606 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR H, RM/F/DFS/FO/AA/CAA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AFIN AMGT ASEC FR ID OREP
SUBJECT: STAFFDEL BLANK VISIT TO INDONESIA COUNTRY 
CLEARANCE APPROVAL (APRIL 4-19) 
 
REF: STATE 32276 
 
¶1. Embassy Jakarta welcomes Professional Staff Member, 
Mr.Jonah Blank Professional Staff Member (PSM) to travel to 
Indonesia from April 4-19, 2009.  The only member of the 
delegation is as follows: 
 
Mr. Jonah Blank, PSM, Committee on Foreign Relations, United 
States Senate. 
 
¶2. Point of contact for this visit is Economic Officer Pablo 
Valdez.  He can be contacted at: 
 
- Office tel:  (62-21) 3435-9070 
- Office fax:  (62-21) 3435-9971 
- Home tel:    (62-21) 7179-0653 
- Email:       valdezpm2@state.gov 
- Cell phone:  (62) 811 1155 0106 
 
¶3. Hotel reservations have been made at several hotels 
including the Novotel in Balikpapan (April 5) with 
confirmation number 904050523 and hotel telephone number 
(62-542) 820 820; Lesan Research Station (April 6-7) with 
Emboff contact Ted Saeger (62-21) 811-811-5849; Hotel Bumi 
Sega (April 10) in Tanjung Redeb with Emboff contact Ted 
Saeger (62-21) 811-811-5849; Grand Hyatt hotel (April 9) in 
Jakarta and the confirmation number is: 24632301 and hotel 
telephone number: (62-21)390-1234; Sintesa Hotel in Manadao 
April 14-17 with hotel telephone number (62-431) 855 008. 
Some of these hotels may change based on input from Mr. 
Blank.  Per Mr. Blank's specific request, no travel 
arrangements are being made for his itinerary in Aceh (Apr 
10-13).  Post remains prepared to provide any support Mr. 
Blank needs while in Aceh.  Medan Principal Officer Sean 
Stein is prepared to provide any necessary assistance on the 
ground. 
 
¶4. All official travelers to Indonesia are encouraged to 
travel on a diplomatic or official passport (with at least 
six months validity remaining) and must be in possession of a 
valid visa issued at an Indonesian embassy or consulate 
abroad.  Indonesia does not allow American citizens whose 
passports, regardless of type, have less than six months 
validity on the day of entry.  There are no exceptions to 
this policy.  Travelers arriving without a valid visa may 
purchase a Visa on Arrival at major international airports 
for USD 10.00 for a seven-day validity or USD 25.00 for a 
thirty-day validity.  Payment must be made with the exact fee 
in U.S. dollars and there are no currency exchange facilities 
at the visa counters. Holders of diplomatic and official 
passports are not exempt from Visa on Arrival fees. 
Indonesian regulations state that upon expiration of the 
7-day or 30-day visa, travelers must/must depart Indonesia; 
the visa cannot be renewed.  Post strongly encourages all TDY 
travelers to obtain visas in advance to avoid problems in 
case travel plans change unexpectedly.  There are no Visa on 
Arrival facilities at any land border entry points. 
 
¶5. All air travelers from Jakarta are subject to a departure 
tax of Rupiah 30,000 (approx. USD 3.00) for domestic flights 
and Rupiah 100,000 (approximately USD 10.00) for 
international flights.  This must be paid in local currency 
at the check-in desk.  It may not be paid in U.S. dollars. 
 
¶6. For transportation from the airport into Jakarta, Embassy 
motorpool services will be avaialble.  If a taxi is used the 
Embassy recommends the use of Silver or Blue Bird taxis. 
Currency exchange facilities are available near the baggage 
claim area.  Silver Bird taxis queue outside both the 
domestic and international arrival halls; the metered fare, 
including airport fees and tolls, from the airport to central 
Jakarta is approximately Rupiah 100,000-160,000 (approx. USD 
10.00-16.00). 
 
¶7. Threat Assessment: Security Threat Information 
 
Several terrorist attacks have occurred in Indonesia, 
including the most recent bombing at two beachfront 
restaurants in Bali in October 2005 that resulted in the 
deaths of 20 people.  Since 2005, the Indonesian police and 
security forces have disrupted a number of cells and arrested 
approximately 400 suspects linked with Jemaah Islamiyah (JI), 
a U.S. Department of State-designated terrorist organization. 
 While Indonesia's counterterrorism efforts have had 
significant results, the threat remains. As with most parts 
of the world, a terrorist attack could occur with little or 
no warning. JI networks and cells may remain intact and could 
have the capacity to go operational with little warning. 
 
Even though the Department recently lifted the Travel 
 
JAKARTA 00000606  002 OF 003 
 
 
Warning, there remains a continued threat of terrorist 
attacks, demonstrations and other violent actions that may 
affect U.S. citizens in Indonesia. Extremists may target both 
official and private interests. Examples of such targets 
include high-profile sporting events, residential areas, 
business offices, hotels, clubs, restaurants, places of 
worship, schools, public areas, and locales where Americans 
or foreigners gather in large numbers. The Department of 
State urges Americans in Indonesia to avoid crowds, maintain 
a low profile, and be vigilant about security at all times. 
Americans are advised to monitor local news broadcasts, vary 
their routes and times in carrying out daily activities, and 
consider the level of preventive security when visiting 
public places in Indonesia. Americans vacationing in 
Indonesia are advised to consider the level of preventive 
security when choosing hotels, restaurants, beaches, 
entertainment venues, and recreation sites. 
 
The U.S. Mission in Indonesia must approve U.S. government 
employees' travel to the province of Papua, and travelers to 
that region must also obtain the approval of the Indonesian 
government. Based on recent conversations with Mr. Blank, he 
does not plan to travel to Papua Even though other areas of 
Indonesia are not under official U.S. government travel 
restrictions, the U.S. Mission requests that official U.S. 
government employees inform the Regional Security Officer of 
their intent to travel to the provinces of Banda Aceh, 
Central Sulawesi, Maluku and Papua. 
 
CRIME:  Crime can be a problem in some major metropolitan 
areas in Indonesia.  Crimes of opportunity such as 
pick-pocketing and theft occur throughout the country. 
Americans in Jakarta and Surabaya are advised to hire a taxi 
either from a major hotel queue or by calling a reputable 
taxi company such as Silver Bird or Blue Bird, rather than 
hailing one on the street.  Americans arriving at 
Soekarno-Hatta Airport in Jakarta should only use Silver Bird 
or Blue Bird taxis obtained at a designated taxi queue. 
Airport touts should not be used.  Criminals in Jakarta 
regularly rob customers in taxis painted to look like taxis 
from reputable companies; booking taxis by telephone directly 
from the company is the best way to avoid falling victim to 
this crime. 
 
Claiming to act in the name of religious or moral standards, 
certain extremist groups have, on occasion, attacked 
nightspots and places of entertainment. Most of these attacks 
have sought to destroy property rather than to injure 
individuals. International news events can sometimes trigger 
anti-American or anti-Western demonstrations. 
 
Credit card fraud and theft is a serious and growing problem 
in Indonesia, particularly for Westerners. Travelers should 
minimize use of credit cards or use cash. If used, credit 
card numbers should be closely safeguarded at all times. 
There have been many reports of shop, restaurant and hotel 
staff writing down the credit card numbers of customers and 
then making purchases using the credit card number after the 
consumer has departed the retail location. Travelers who 
decide to use credit cards should monitor their credit card 
activity carefully and immediately report any unauthorized 
use to their financial institution. 
 
U.S. citizens are encouraged to carry a copy of their U.S. 
passports with them at all times, so that if questioned by 
local officials, proof of identity and proof of U.S. 
citizenship are readily available. When U.S. citizens are 
arrested or detained, formal notfication of the arrest is 
normally provided to te U.S. Embassy in Jakarta in writing, 
a process hat can take several weeks". If detained, U.S. 
ciizens should telephone the nearest U.S.consular ofice 
immediately. 
 
"Drink-spiking" incidents hav been of increasing concern in 
the past months, argeting males in clubs and nightspots. The 
effets of this drug, believed to be an animal tranquilzer, 
are extremely powerful. Besides putting thevictim in an 
unconscious state for a long period f time, the side effects 
include memory loss, nasea,headaches and vomiting. Although 
these incidnts involve male victims it is important to 
remeber that females have been victimized in the past ith 
"Date-Rape" drugs. 
 
¶8. The Embassy strictlycontrols the entry of laptop 
computers, personaldigital assistants (PDAs), and other 
electronic evices into Embassy facilities. ease advise 
the make/model, n*d serial number or other control number to 
yourssponsoring office at post so they may alert the Rei(onal 
Security Office.  Personally owned or unapproved USG 
 
JAKARTA 00000606  003 OF 003 
 
 
equipment may not enter the controlled access areas. 
 
 
¶9.  ICASS Policy: Each visitor, regardless of length of stay, 
must bring/forward fiscal data to pay for direct costs of the 
visit. Each agency, organization, or visiting delegation will 
be charged for the actual costs attributed to their visit. 
For TDYers over thirty (30) days, there is a charge for ICASS 
support services.  If your sponsoring agency is not signed up 
for ICASS services at post, please be prepared to sign an MOU 
for ICASS support services upon arrival.  The agency should 
provide post with a written communication, generated by the 
traveler's headquarters, thatconfirms the agency will pay 
ICASS charges for the TDYer, provides the agency ICASS 
billing code that TDY support charges should be applied to, 
and authorizes the traveler to sign the ICASS invoice 
generated by the TDY module.  To request use of Mission 
services upon arrival at post, TDY personnel must complete 
and sign the form "Application and Approval for Use of U.S. 
Mission Services," attach their travel orders, and submit it 
to the Management Counselor for approval.  TDY visitors will 
not have access to Mission services, including the 
Commissary, until the form is Completed. 
 
¶10. Medical: 
 
¶A. The Embassy in Jakarta operates a Health Unit that is 
accessible to personnel who have a current Class 1 or 2 
medical clearance issued by State MED. Military personnel 
whose agencies have signed an ICASS agreement also have 
access. 
 
¶B. TDYers who are federal employees and who have been on TDY 
travel outside of CONUS for less than 60 days in a calendar 
year may use the health unit for up to 60 days without a 
medical clearance. Those traveling on government orders for 
more than 60 days per year should obtain medical clearance 
before coming to post.  Without a clearance, health unit 
access will be denied. 
 
¶C. All visitors should have adequate medical insurance and 
especially Medical Evacuation Insurance.  Direct-hire State 
Department employees are already covered for medical 
evacuation. Contractors should make sure that their private 
medical insurance covers medical evacuation costs.  Medical 
care in Indonesia is such that employees are frequently 
evacuated to Singapore for care. 
 
¶D. Bring copies of all medical and immunization records and 
update immunizations prior to arrival, including Typhoid, 
Hepatitis A and Hepatitis B.  Bring an adequate supply of 
prescription medications.  For travel to some areas outside 
Jakarta, malaria prophylaxis should be started before 
arrival. 
HUME