09JAKARTA1321
INDONESIA SEEKS U.S. SUPPORT AT UNGA FOR RE-ELECTION TO
Tue Aug 11 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXRO9195
RR RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHJA #1321/01 2230415
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 110415Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3029
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1058
INFO RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JAKARTA 001321 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EAP/MTS, OES, SECC, IO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV AORC PREL ID
 
SUBJECT:  INDONESIA SEEKS U.S. SUPPORT AT UNGA FOR RE-ELECTION TO 
UNEP GOVERNING COUNCIL 
 
¶1. Embassy received a diplomatic note dated July 30, 2009 from the 
Department of Foreign Affairs requesting USG support towards the 
candidacy of Indonesia to the Governing Council of United Nations 
Environment Program (GC UNEP), an unofficial translation of which is 
provided below. 
 
Begin text. 
 
Unofficial Translation 
 
The Department of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia 
presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States of 
America and has the honour to inform the latter that the Government 
of the Republic of Indonesia has decided to present its candidature 
for re-election to the Governing Council of United Nations 
Environment Programme (GC UNEP) for the period of 2010-2013, the 
election of which will be held during the 64th General Assembly of 
the United Nations in New York on September 2009. 
 
As a member of the UNEP, Indonesia has played a significant role and 
demonstrated the highest interest and commitment in the promotion of 
the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of 
environment. One of Indonesia's commitments was shown at the 25th 
UNEP GC/GMEF meeting held in Nairobi, on February 2009, where the 
Indonesian Delegation initiated decisions on waste management within 
the South-South cooperation and negotiated for those decisions to be 
adopted. Aside from that, during the 25th GC/GMEF meeting, Indonesia 
was also entrusted to be member of the Bureau of the GC/GMEF 
representing the Asian Group for the Period of 2009,-2011. The 
Government of the Republic of Indonesia believes that through its 
continued participation, Indonesia can play a more constructive role 
and make valuable contributions to the promotion environmental 
protection. 
 
In view of the above, the Government of the Republic of Indonesia 
would like to request the support of the Government of the United 
States of America towards the candidature of Indonesia to the GC 
UNEP. Attached herewith is an Aide Memoire regarding Indonesia's 
candidature. 
The Department of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia 
avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the Embassy of the 
United States of America the assurances of its highest 
consideration. 
 
Jakarta, 30 July 2009 
 
End text. 
 
¶2. The text of the aide memoire follows below. 
 
Begin text. 
 
Indonesia's Candidature for Re-election to Membership of the 
Governing Council of United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) 
for the Period of 2010 - 2013 
 
Aide Memoire 
 
¶1. The Government of the Republic of Indonesia is seeking support 
for re-election as member of the Governing Council of the United 
Nations Environment Programme (GC-UNEP) for the period of 2010 - 
2013, at elections that will be held during the 64th Session of the 
United Nations General Assembly in New York, September 2009. 
 
¶2. In order to respond effectively to the environmental challenges, 
UNEP needs to be strengthened at the global, regional and national 
levels in order to enhance its significant role in the achievement 
for a better and prosperous world. In this regards, the support from 
adequate resources are essential prerequisites for the strengthening 
of its capacity and functions and making UNEP a more science-base 
organization. This way, UNEP will continue to be able to promote the 
coherent implementation of environmental dimension of sustainable 
development within the UN system and to serve as an authoritative 
advocate for the global environment. 
 
¶3. Indonesia is of the view that achieving sustainable development 
through UNEP's three pillars, namely economics development, social 
equity and environment protection, is essential in the attainment of 
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). It is therefore critical 
for the UNEP to further continue the full implementation of the Bali 
Strategic Plan for Technology Support and capacity Building (BSP) 
for developing countries and countries with economies in 
transition. 
 
¶4. Indonesia is committed to the international environmental and 
 
JAKARTA 00001321  002 OF 002 
 
 
other related internationally agreed development goals. Indonesia 
has been actively promoting environment cooperation in various 
bilateral, regional and multilateral fora. Indonesia is also active 
in strengthening the South-South Cooperation for technical 
cooperation including in the field of environment, which complements 
the South-North Cooperation. 
 
¶5. Indonesia will continue to play an active role at the Committee 
of Permanent Representatives (CPR) in Nairobi. The Government of 
Indonesia has always engaged constructively at the regular and 
special sessions of UNEP Governing Council/Global Ministerial 
Environment Forum (GC/GMEF) as well as other UNEP and environment 
related meetings. In 2007, Indonesia became Chair of the G77 and 
China, Nairobi Chapter. Indonesia has always played an active role 
in representing the Group in those meetings. 
 
¶6. At the 25th UNEP GC/GMEF on February 2009 held in Nairobi, 
Indonesia was entrusted to be member of the Bureau of the GC/GMEF 
representing the Asian Group for the period of 2009-2011. During 
that GC/GMEF meeting, the delegation of Indonesia initiated 
decisions on waste management within the South-South cooperation and 
negotiated for those decisions to be adopted. Indonesia had also 
served as President of the 23rd GC from 2005-2007. 
 
¶7. Indonesia has initiated numerous important activities, 
resolutions and decisions at various environmental related meetings. 
Climate change, forestry, waste management, biodiversity, oceans, 
renewable energy, clean energy, clean air etc. are among issues that 
the Government of Indonesia is continuing to invest and mainstream 
with its national development objectives. 
 
¶8. The government of the Republic of Indonesia has offered to host 
the 11thSpecial Session of the UNEP GC/GMEF. This has been confirmed 
by the President of the GC/GMEF and welcomed by the regional groups. 
The 11th Special Session of the UNEP GC/GMEF will be held in Bali, 
Indonesia, from 24 to 26 February 2010. It is also scheduled that a 
simultaneous extra ordinary meeting of the conference of the Parties 
(known as "Super COP') for the 3 conventions of Basel, Rotterdam and 
Stockholm will be held on 22-23 February 2010, back-to-back with the 
11th Special Session UNEP GC/GMEF in Bali. 
 
¶9. In its desire to continue its work in the GC-UNEP and given its 
strong commitment to the realization of UNEP purposes, goals and 
objectives, the Government of the Republic of Indonesia would highly 
appreciate the valuable support of the esteemed Government of the 
Member States of the United Nations for the candidature of Indonesia 
to the Governing Council of the UNEP for the 2010-2013 period. 
 
End text. 
 
HUME