09JAKARTA1715
MGEAP1:  INDONESIA EARTHQUAKE HUMANITARIAN UPDATE #6:
Tue Oct 13 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXRO8347
OO RUEHDT RUEHPB
DE RUEHJA #1715/01 2861033
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 131033Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3562
INFO RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 7982
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1086
RUEHBK/AMEMBASSY BANGKOK 8837
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HI
RUCNARF/ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 JAKARTA 001715 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP, CA 
STATE FOR USAID 
USAID FOR DCHA/OFDA CCHAN, ACONVERY, RTHAYER, AND RMT 
USAID FOR ANE KROSEN 
BANGKOK FOR ADWYER 
NSC FOR CPRATT 
USUN FOR DMERCADO 
GENEVA FOR NKYLOH 
PACOM POLAD/J3/J5 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV CASC ECON EAID SENV ID PHUM AEMR ASEC CASC
MARR, PREL, PINR, AMGT, EAID, AQ, LA, RP, TN, VM, WS 
 
SUBJECT:  MGEAP1:  INDONESIA EARTHQUAKE HUMANITARIAN UPDATE #6: 
PRELIMINARY HUMANITARIAN NEEDS ASSESSMENT 
 
REF:  JAKARTA 01712 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  Since arriving in Padang, West Sumatra, the USAID Disaster 
Assistance Response Team (USAID/DART) has conducted assessments of 
areas affected by the September 30 earthquake to determine priority 
humanitarian needs.  Preliminary assessment results indicate a 
widespread need for shelter interventions to assist individuals to 
rebuild damaged or destroyed houses.  The USAID/DART is following up 
with reports of other needs, including agriculture, livelihoods, 
food, and water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH), in pocket areas. 
In addition to assistance from the humanitarian community, social 
capital, volunteerism, and charitable giving are helping affected 
populations meet immediate humanitarian needs.  A more definitive 
humanitarian needs assessment will be issued via cable septel.  End 
summary. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Preliminary Assessment of Humanitarian Needs 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Since arriving in Padang, the USAID/DART has conducted 
assessments of earthquake-affected areas in the districts of Agam, 
Padang Pariaman, and Pariaman to determine priority humanitarian 
needs.  The areas to the north and west of Padang city are 
reportedly the hardest hit -- with the three assessed districts 
reportedly the most heavily affected in the region.  Preliminary 
assessments indicate widespread needs for shelter interventions 
throughout earthquake-affected areas and possible needs for 
agriculture, livelihoods, food, and WASH assistance in select areas. 
 Field assessments conducted by the USAID/DART from October 8 
through 12 inform this preliminary humanitarian needs report. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
USAID/DART Assessments Indicate Needs for Shelter, 
Shelter, Agriculture/Livelihoods, WASH, and Food 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
-- Shelter and Agriculture/Livelihoods Needs in Sicincin -- 
 
¶3.  On October 11, the USAID/DART field officer and information 
officer conducted assessments in and around Sicincin town, which is 
located approximately 20 miles east of Pariaman town in Padang 
Pariaman District.  Effects of the earthquake are striking in and 
around Sicincin, where the quake reduced a large proportion of 
houses to rubble and caused significant structural damage to many of 
the remaining buildings.  The USAID/DART interviewed individuals 
whose homes were destroyed, Indonesian volunteers assisting to 
repair infrastructure, a local government official, a business 
owner, and a threshing worker.  Preliminary assessment results 
indicate that many individuals need shelter assistance, and some 
individuals may need agriculture and/or livelihoods assistance, now 
or in the coming months. 
 
¶4.   Houses in and around Sicincin town sustained significant 
damage.  Many of the houses that were not totally destroyed are 
uninhabitable.  Families have erected temporary shelter -- in the 
form of simple tents constructed from one or more tarpaulins -- and 
have moved furniture and other salvaged belongings to yards 
surrounding houses.  Individuals reported sleeping in these 
temporary shelters.  All individuals indicated that a new permanent 
shelter was their top priority. 
 
¶5.  Individuals in and around Sicincin town reported continued 
access to water sources before and after the earthquake. 
Individuals whose water sources were destroyed stated that neighbors 
are allowing them to fetch water from neighbors' water sources. 
Affected populations in Sicincin appear to be able to continue to 
follow cultural practices of boiling water to ensure that water is 
 
JAKARTA 00001715  002 OF 004 
 
 
potable, using wood collected from nearby areas as fuel to boil 
water. 
 
¶6.  Earthquake-affected populations in Sicincin may require 
agriculture and/or livelihoods assistance.  Many individuals in this 
area are farmers who own either irrigated or rain-fed rice paddies. 
Anecdotal reports indicate that some irrigation systems sustained 
significant damage, to the extent that some farmers' paddies have 
dried up and rice crops have been lost in the days since the 
earthquake.  Individuals who spoke with the USAID/DART did not 
report the need for tools or seeds.  Further investigation is needed 
to ascertain the extent to which populations in and around Sicincin 
require agriculture and/or livelihoods assistance. 
 
¶7.  In the immediate term, individuals in Sicincin do not require 
significant food assistance.  Families reported having received food 
from local charities and were not concerned that charities would 
cease the provision of food in the near term.  The USAID/DART notes 
that food insecurity may increase in the coming months, depending on 
the extent of the damage to irrigation systems and the consequent 
effect that this damage inflicts on the next rice harvest. 
 
-- WASH, Health, and Food Needs in Padang Pariaman -- 
 
¶8.  On October 10, the Consular General from Medan and the 
USAID/DART field officer traveled to Nagari Tandikat village in 
Patamuan Sub-District of Padang Pariaman District.  The earthquake 
triggered a landslide which killed 350 people and destroyed 70 
houses in the village.  The quake also blocked the river that 
provided the main source of irrigation and drinking water for the 
village. 
 
¶9.  The team met with local villagers and the Indonesian Military 
(TNI) to determine priority needs.  Villagers stated their priority 
need as water for drinking and irrigating.  Drinking water is 
available, but villagers must walk half a kilometer to fetch water 
in community wells.  All villagers reported that they continue to 
boil water. 
 
¶10.  The TNI remarked that excavation equipment that could assist to 
unblock the river will tentatively arrive in Pariaman in the coming 
week, subject to approval by the local Government of Indonesia (GoI) 
office, which sets priorities for heavy equipment use.  (Comment: 
The fact that GoI officials set priorities for heavy equipment use 
is indicative of an insufficient amount of heavy equipment to clear 
roads or unblock rivers.  End comment.) 
 
¶11.  In Padang Pariaman District, the USAID/DART spoke with 
villagers who reported having sustained injuries during the 
earthquake that have to date remained untreated.  Villagers remarked 
that neither the local government nor international organizations 
have offered medical assistance.  Upon receiving this report, the 
USAID/DART relayed the need for medical assistance to the 
International Medical Corps (IMC).  IMC plans to send mobile medical 
clinics to the area within the coming days. 
 
¶12.  Villagers expressed concern about a possible loss of the rice 
crop due to blockage in the river that is stopping irrigation. 
While some rice paddies appeared to be dry, the USAID/DART cannot 
yet ascertain whether the rice harvest can be salvaged for this 
season.  The possible failure of this season's rice harvest could 
result in significant food insecurity.  Potential interventions 
include continued food distribution through the U.N. World Food 
Program (WFP) or the GoI, or cash-based interventions increasing 
access to food in area markets. 
 
-- WASH and Food Needs in Agam and Padang Pariaman -- 
 
¶13.  On October 8, members of the USAID/DART visited a spontaneous 
displaced person camp near Lake Maninjau in Agam District, as 
reported reftel.  Individuals in the camp were ordered by police to 
evacuate four villages that police deemed unsafe due to potential 
 
JAKARTA 00001715  003 OF 004 
 
 
landslides following the earthquake.  The International Organization 
for Migration (IOM) is providing humanitarian assistance for the 
1,987 individuals sheltering in the camp.  However, unmet needs 
persist, including the need for safe drinking water, as some 
individuals living in the camp are collecting water from the nearby 
lake.  Sanitation facilities at a neighboring mosque were 
insufficient to sustain the population's sanitation needs.  IOM told 
USAID/DART representatives that individuals might only remain in the 
camp for two additional weeks.  The extent of sanitation needs will 
depend on the length of time that IDPs remain in the camp. 
 
¶14.  The USAID/DART interviewed other individuals elsewhere in Agam 
and Padang Pariaman districts.  Except for individuals in the IDP 
camp near Lake Maninjau, all families were residing at places of 
origin under makeshift shelters on their own land where they had 
cleared rubble from the damaged or destroyed houses.  Families 
reported their biggest needs as help rebuilding houses and food. 
While the shelter cluster reported GoI plans to provide financial 
assistance to families with destroyed or damaged homes, none of the 
interviewed families were aware of such plans. 
 
¶15.  On October 8, the USAID/DART did not observe signs that the 
earthquake interrupted the agricultural season but did note that 
many households' food stocks were buried in collapsed houses, 
causing people to rely on market purchases or charitable giving to 
meet household demand for food.  Food insecurity, due to a lack of 
access and not a lack of availability, may result for affected 
populations. 
 
¶16.  The USAID/DART also assessed conditions in local markets, 
interviewing rice traders, lumber traders, and store merchants on 
October 8.  Markets appeared to be functioning well, and supply 
chains were intact.  The price of rice in markets visited in these 
areas had increased more than 30 percent since the earthquake, 
likely due to the loss of households' stocks of rice and resulting 
increased purchases of rice from market sources.  (Comment:  If 
prices continue to rise, food insecurity will likely increase as 
food becomes increasingly difficult for families to access.  End 
comment.) 
 
¶17.  Water has also become more expensive in areas assessed on 
October 8.  The USAID/DART found that the cost of 19-liter bottles 
of water in assessed markets had increased more than 40 percent. 
However, the majority of families interviewed fetch water from wells 
rather than purchasing water from the market.  Typically, more 
wealthy families purchase water from vendors.  At present, the 
USAID/DART is not concerned with this increase in the price of 
water, given that most families continue to access water from local 
water sources and boil it prior to consumption. 
 
¶18.  In markets assessed on October 8, the price of fuel for cooking 
or boiling water had not increased since the earthquake.  The price 
of fuel used for cooking is critically important as many families 
rely on market purchase of fuel to boil water.  If the price of fuel 
rises, a problem of access may result, resulting in families halting 
the boiling practice, thereby giving rise to considerable public 
health concerns.  The price of lumber had likewise remained stable, 
perhaps because affected populations have not yet begun to purchase 
lumber for rebuilding or because populations will rebuild houses 
with materials other than lumber. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Humanitarian Needs Reported through Cluster System 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶19.  The USAID/DART is continuing to share information about needs 
with other members of the humanitarian community.  Participants in 
the October 12 general coordination meeting remarked that the 
earthquake may have particularly affected individuals whose 
livelihoods are brick-making and farming.  Reports indicate that the 
quake destroyed all kilns.  As families begin rebuilding and the 
demand for bricks rises, delays in reconstruction will likely occur. 
 
JAKARTA 00001715  004 OF 004 
 
 
 (Comment:  The USAID/DART has observed individuals salvaging bricks 
from rubble.  Programs that further incentivize salvaging bricks 
could mitigate a potential brick shortage.  The U.N. Development 
Program is planning to implement programs to assist individuals to 
salvage rubble, including bricks.  End comment.)  Cluster members 
also reported that damaged irrigation systems will cause an 
unconfirmed amount of land to go without irrigation, which may 
affect farmers in the current and upcoming agricultural seasons. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Volunteerism, Charitable Giving, and Social Capital 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶20.  Many of the individuals with whom the USAID/DART spoke on 
October 11 reported receiving food, water, and secondhand clothing 
through unspecified charities.  In Padang Pariaman and Agam 
districts on October 11 and 12, members of the USAID/DART observed 
groups of Indonesian volunteers, who reported having come to 
earthquake-affected areas for up to one month.  Volunteers were 
engaged in repairing irrigation infrastructure and delivering food 
in areas that are currently difficult to access. 
 
¶21.  In addition, in Padang Pariaman District, the USAID/DART 
observed that affected populations' social capital is serving to 
mitigate shocks and help meet immediate humanitarian needs after the 
earthquake.  Affected families rely on neighbors to meet needs for 
water, charities to obtain food, and extended family to meet needs 
ranging from emergency shelter to food. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Needs Assessment Reported Septel 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶22.  The USAID/DART continues to conduct additional field 
assessments in order to ascertain humanitarian needs in affected 
areas.  The team plans to update this preliminary needs assessments 
septel in the coming week. 
 
 
Osius#