09JAKARTA379
EDUCATION #2 - FOLLOW-UP TO THE SECRETARY'S INDONESIA
Wed Mar 04 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXRO8889
RR RUEHJS
DE RUEHJA #0379/01 0630926
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 040926Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1724
INFO RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEHJS/AMCONSUL SURABAYA 2395UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JAKARTA 000379 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR S/P - AMSlaughter, EAP, ECA, CA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO SCUL OEXC CVIS ID
SUBJECT: EDUCATION #2 - FOLLOW-UP TO THE SECRETARY'S INDONESIA 
VISIT:  INCREASING INDONESIAN STUDENTS IN THE U.S. 
 
REF:  a. 08 JAKARTA 2279 b. Jakarta 373 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  In Jakarta, Secretary Clinton announced her objective 
of doubling the number of Indonesian students going to the U.S., 
increasing university linkages, and pursuing education as a 
cornerstone of a comprehensive U.S. - Indonesia partnership.  The 
Secretary's comments resonated with both Indonesian officials and 
civil society.  Mission is casting its net far and wide for the best 
ideas, programs, resources, and projects to carry out the 
Secretary's objectives.  This cable, on doubling the number of 
Indonesian students in the U.S., is the second in a series over the 
next weeks outlining some of those ideas and seeking support for 
these important objectives.  END SUMMARY. 
¶2.  The goal is simple, as stated by the Secretary:  double the 
number of Indonesian students studying in the U.S.  USG 
scholarships, such as Fulbright, as well as GOI or private 
scholarships, can never reach the level needed to attain this goal. 
Attracting full tuition-paying students is key.  Competition from 
Australia, the U.K., Singapore and Malaysia is intense, and growing 
stronger.  At a minimum, we need to revamp our student recruitment 
mechanism, expand Mission officers' education outreach and our use 
of U.S. alumni associations, and improve EducationUSA's advising 
services, public relations and recruitment strategy.  On the 
Consular front, we plan to more actively explain visa policy and 
procedures and seek out more quality Indonesian students.  On the 
commercial front, we must assess the role of brokers/agents to 
determine how they might be utilized to our benefit. 
¶3.  In addition, we are exploring other ideas, such as public 
service film spots, expanded English language programming, distance 
learning, creative use of specialty programs (film, tourism and 
fashion), and increased collaboration with private foundations and 
other stake-holders. 
SNAPSHOT OF CURRENT STUDENT POPULATION 
¶4.  The current Indonesian student population in the U.S. of 7,692 
offers valuable guidance in our efforts.  IIE "Open Doors" 
statistics for 2007-2008 show that 4,894 or 64% of the current 
Indonesian students in the U.S. are undergraduate students.  Our own 
student visa statistics show that nine of the top ten schools 
receiving Indonesian students are community colleges on the West 
Coast.  These community colleges serve as "feeder" institutions from 
which a majority of the Indonesian students go on to four-year 
universities for a Bachelor's degree. 
¶5.  Indonesian students go to community colleges for a variety of 
reasons, the most obvious being cost - it is simply much less 
expensive to do two years at a community college.  These schools 
also allow the students to improve sometimes shaky English skills 
and learn the new study and writing habits and research skills that 
make for a successful U.S. university experience.  College officials 
at recent job fairs here report that Indonesian students perform 
extremely well in the U.S. 
¶6.  According to IIE "Open Doors," the top five fields of study in 
2007/08 for international students were business, engineering, 
physical and life sciences, social sciences, and mathematics/IT. 
This tracks with our observations of Indonesian students' areas of 
interest.  "Open Doors" also reports that, on average, students pay 
between $16,000 and $46,500 for tuition and living expenses for an 
academic year in the U.S. 
WHAT WE CAN DO 
¶6.  Based on the above statistics, we have to recruit more students 
at the undergraduate level, particularly offering the community 
college experience.  Targeting affluent, urban high school students 
studying in "international standard" schools with better English 
language skills should be paramount. 
¶7.  Our current outreach efforts tend to target disadvantaged 
students in needier schools.  For more affluent students, we have 
relied largely on students finding us, rather than us recruiting 
them.  The Secretary's visit is changing that.  EducationUSA, which 
is based in AMINEF (Fulbright commission), has an Indonesia-only 
Outreach Coordinator, who is helping us map out a strategy for 
active recruitment. 
¶8.  We are also redoubling our efforts to enlist Indonesian alumni 
of U.S. schools as allies in this effort. CG Surabaya, APP Medan and 
Jakarta are stepping up our efforts to more systematically use 
alumni clubs, and we are adding staff to this effort.  A number of 
U.S. institutions actively recruit here, and we need to better 
partner with them.  We will also work to convince other schools 
which are not recruiting that it is in their interest to tap this 
huge, emerging market. 
¶9.  Mission officers must more actively promote U.S. schools to 
potential students.  Consular officers will be especially important 
in this endeavor.  Despite the fact that 78% of students receive 
visas, there is still a misperception that visas to the U.S. are 
difficult to obtain.  Mission has sent in several cables with 
recommended improvements in the security advisory opinion (SAO) 
process, which still needlessly delays good students with no hint of 
a security problem.  We are also looking at the possibility of 
collaborating with agents to streamline the student visa process 
from the applicant's point of view, much in the way the Indonesian 
seafarers program is run.  Also, we need to look at the use of new 
media, as well as radio and television, to reach the youth market. 
THE COMPETITION 
 
JAKARTA 00000379  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶10.  A number of elements of our plan are already funded and 
underway.  However, to ensure we reach the Secretary's goal, more 
needs to be done.  It is instructive to look at what Australia, our 
major competitor, does in this area.  Not only does the Australian 
government robustly fund educational advising and recruitment 
services, it uses other broadcasting, promotion and outreach 
techniques that we could emulate.  For example, more and larger 
recruiting events, alumni events, special awards for Australian 
alumni, and better use of the press in getting out the news on 
students, scholarships and alumni. 
¶11.  To reach our goal will require additional resources, both 
staffing and financial.  We are developing a comprehensive marketing 
plan, and will include a specific request for additional support in 
the near future. 
¶12.  We are committed to a comprehensive partnership. 
People-to-people ties are crucial to the success of that 
partnership, and education is the key to building these 
relationships.  We are already moving ahead, but need more 
Washington support. 
 
HUME