09JERUSALEM1742
JERUSALEM MEDIA REACTION (09/29): Palestinians hope for
Wed Sep 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Jerusalem
VZCZCXRO7603
OO RUEHROV
DE RUEHJM #1742/01 2730556
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 300556Z SEP 09
FM AMCONSUL JERUSALEM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6165
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEADWD/DA WASHINGTON DC//DAS-ZD/DACS-ZK//
RUEAHQA/CSAF WASHINGTON DC//POLAD//
RHMFIUU/CMC WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC//POLAD//
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS 7871
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 4843
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 4693
RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6184
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 4610
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3197UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 JERUSALEM 001742 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS BBG 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC 
CMC WASHINGTON DC FOR POLAD 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON FOR HKANONA AND POL - TSOU 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KMDR KPAL KWBG KPAO IS
 
SUBJECT: JERUSALEM MEDIA REACTION (09/29): Palestinians hope for 
positive movement on national reconciliation in the next few days 
 
------------- 
Main Stories: 
------------- 
News on the Palestinian factions reacting to the Egyptian plan for 
national reconciliation receives prominent coverage in the local 
press. Al-Quds leads with the head of the Hamas Political Bureau 
Khaled Misha'l noting from Cairo yesterday that the gaps in the 
Egyptian proposal have been bridged. Misha'l said that Egypt will 
invite all the Palestinian factions to finalize and sign the 
reconciliation paper in October, and stressed that Hamas is positive 
about and seriously committed to reaching a reconciliation agreement 
that will end the conflict. Misha'l condemned the incursions by 
extremist Jewish groups on the Al Aqsa Mosque compound and called on 
Arab and Muslim countries to defend the Mosque and to ignore the US 
calls for normalizing relations with Israel. Misha'l also noted that 
Hamas will not approve of holding the Presidential and legislative 
elections in January unless national reconciliation is achieved. 
 
The local press continues to report on the Arab states and 
Palestinians condemning the incursions on the Al Aqsa Mosque 
compound in the observance of Yom Kippur by extremist Jewish groups. 
The Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO) and the Palestinian 
national council issued statements calling on Arab and Muslim 
countries to save the Mosque from the Israeli attacks. The PLO 
called on the UN and Middle East Quartet to intervene and stop the 
Israeli actions. Additionally, Al-Quds front pages news on the 
Palestinian Authority (PA) ministerial cabinet condemning the 
attacks. Prime Minister Salam Fayyad noted that such attacks will 
cultivate tension in the region and called on the international 
community to force Israel to respect international laws. Morocco and 
Jordan have also condemned the attack and said it is an obstacle to 
achieving peace in the region. 
 
In related news, Al Quds front pages news from government and 
nongovernmental organizations in Hebron condemning the attack of 
Al-Ibrahimi Mosque in the Old city of Hebron by Israeli settlers, 
and warning the Israeli government against pursuing such attacks, 
saying they are "playing with fire." 
 
Monday, September 28: 
 
The local press highlights the incursions on the Al Aqsa Mosque 
compound in observance of Yom Kippur by extremist Jewish groups. 
Bloody confrontations took place that resulted in more than 20 
Palestinians injured and 10 arrests. The reports note that the 
Israelis were not allowed to get into the Mosque itself, but rather 
the compound. The attack was condemned by all Palestinian factions 
who called on the international community to intervene and stop 
these provocative actions. 
 
Weekend stories: 
 
Sunday, September 27: 
 
Al Quds, Al Ayyam, and Al-Hayat Al-Jadida run front page stories on 
the White House refuting statements that described the trilateral 
meeting between President Obama, PA President Mahmoud Abbas and 
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu as "a photo-opportunity 
without any real content." The reports notes that President Obama's 
Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel told a group of American Jewish leaders 
 
JERUSALEM 00001742  002 OF 003 
 
 
that the meeting was an important launching point during which it 
was agreed to finalize procedural issues as quickly as possible to 
allow the start of core negotiations. Mr. Emanuel also stated that 
the US did not change its position on the question of settlements 
and considered continuation of settlement activities an obstacle to 
the peace process. Mr. Emanuel added that President Obama told 
President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu during their meeting 
that he will grant the cause of peace in the Middle East all the 
time and effort it needs, provided that they have the genuine 
intention to move forward to achieve peace. 
 
In related news, all three dailies highlight remarks by Jeffery 
Feltman, the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs, 
saying that "we want to see tangible steps that indicate the 
seriousness with which the Arab states view the peace process." 
Feltman added that the US hopes that Arab states will find the means 
to support President Abbas and his team when they engage in 
negotiations, particularly financial support from Gulf Cooperation 
Council countries. Feltman concluded by saying that the US believes 
that everyone has the responsibility to create a positive climate 
for negotiations." 
 
Al Ayyam and Al-Hayat Al-Jadida run front page stories on General 
Dan Harel, the Deputy Chief of the General Staff of the Israeli 
Army, saying that he expects Israel to launch new attacks against 
Hamas in the Gaza Strip. The general said in an interview with 
Israel's Channel 2 TV station that the Israel's actions in December 
2008 and January 2009 were only "one round among others in the war 
against Hamas." The general added that "these operations will take 
various forms and may or may not involve the occupation of lands." 
 
Al Quds and Al-Hayat Al-Jadida carry front page news on Jewish 
extremists plan to enter Al Aqsa Mosque today. While warnings were 
made against such actions, reports note that Palestinians are being 
asked to come to Al Aqsa Mosque to defend it. 
 
Saturday, September 26: 
 
All three dailies run front page stories on President Abbas' speech 
to the UN General Assembly on September 25. He reiterated that 
everyone agrees on the need for peace in the Middle East, to fight 
extremism, and to have a Middle East free of nuclear weapons, but 
added "the greatest tragedy is what our people have been facing 
since the 'Nakbah' that started sixty years ago." President Abbas 
noted that the Palestinian people are suffering from continued 
settlement activities and occupation, saying that "we are facing a 
particular situation whereby settlement policies will completely 
undermine the aim of establishing a Palestinian state that enjoys 
geographical congruity" and called upon the international community 
to "uphold international law and international legitimacy and exert 
pressure on Israel to stop its settlement activities, to abide by 
signed agreements, to give up the occupation, and to release 
Palestinian prisoners and detainees." He also stressed that 
presidential and legislative elections will take place on time under 
Arab, international, and UN supervision to establish democracy as a 
constant way of life. 
 
Senior Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat denied that bilateral 
talks with Israel have begun. Erekat said that US Special Envoy 
George Mitchell started separate bilateral talks with Palestinian 
and Israeli delegations in New York and that these bilateral talks 
will continue in Washington starting next month. Palestinian sources 
told Al Quds that Erekat will lead the Palestinian delegation and 
 
JERUSALEM 00001742  003 OF 003 
 
 
Itzhak Molkho will lead the Israeli delegation. 
 
Al-Hayat Al-Jadida runs a front page story on a new opinion poll 
revealing that most Palestinians who want a Palestinian state want 
to achieve it through a peace agreement with Israel. The poll was 
conducted by New York based Charney Research for the International 
Peace Institute. The International Peace Institute said that the 
poll "revealed big changes in public opinion since 2000, when 
Palestinians rejected the proposals made at Camp David." The report 
continues to say that a clear majority of Palestinians (55%) prefer 
a Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza, while only 11% 
preferred one of the two alternatives proposed by the poll, a 
bi-national state or a confederation with Jordan or Egypt, according 
to coverage. 
------------- 
BLOCK QUOTES: 
------------- 
 
1) Al-Quds independent daily runs an editorial under the title "It 
is hard to be optimistic about the national reconciliation" (09/29): 
"All of the Palestinian factions have submitted their responses to 
the Egyptian proposal for ending the inter-Palestinian conflict. 
Every Arab and Muslim wishes to see the division end so that we can 
concentrate on the new challenges that we are facing ... We won't be 
very optimistic or pessimistic, we will wait to see if national 
interests will now come first. We hope to see a real change in the 
coming few days." 
 
 
2) Hani Al-Masri opines in Al-Ayyam independent daily under the 
title "After the trilateral meeting: Supporting the national 
dialogue is the necessary action" (09/29):"Giving priority to ending 
the division is the only logical response to the US and 
international negligence of Palestinians' rights ... The 
Palestinians have to agree on a strategy that enables them to pursue 
their national goals apart from the factional selfishness." 
 
RUBINSTEIN