09JERUSALEM506
JERUSALEM MEDIA REACTION (03/23):  PALESTINIANS
Mon Mar 23 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Jerusalem
VZCZCXRO7990
OO RUEHROV
DE RUEHJM #0506/01 0821129
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 231129Z MAR 09 ZDK
FM AMCONSUL JERUSALEM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4430
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEADWD/DA WASHINGTON DC//DAS-ZD/DACS-ZK//
RUEAHQA/CSAF WASHINGTON DC//POLAD//
RHMFIUU/CMC WASHINGTON DC
RUENAAA/CNO WASHINGTON DC//POLAD//
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS 7596
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 4581
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 4430
RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 5923
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 4345
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2919UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 JERUSALEM 000506 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS BBG 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC 
CMC WASHINGTON DC FOR POLAD 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON FOR HKANONA AND POL - TSOU 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KMDR KPAL KWBG KPAO IS
SUBJECT: JERUSALEM MEDIA REACTION (03/23):  PALESTINIANS 
DISAPPOINTED WITH OUTCOME OF UNITY TALKS 
 
JERUSALEM 00000506  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
------------- 
Main Stories: 
------------- 
Al Quds leads with the ruling of the Israeli High Court that the 
"confiscation" of 30 acres of Palestinian land and demolition of 
retail stores to permit the expansion of the Shufat refugee camp 
crossing in Jerusalem is legal.  All front pages report that a 
second objective of the court decision is to exclude the densely 
populated Shufat refugee camp from Jerusalem municipal borders.  Al 
Quds' lead photo shows the camp and the nearby crossing that would, 
according to the caption, "exclude 40.000 Palestinians from 
municipal Jerusalem."  Reporting adds that a temporary stay was 
issued by an Israeli court on demolition orders for more than 90 
Palestinian houses in Jerusalem. 
Al Ayyam leads with statements by Palestinian Authority President 
Abbas stating, in a meeting with Fatah officials in Ramallah on 
March 22, that timely Palestinian legislative and presidential 
elections are necessary to preserving the integrity and legitimacy 
of the government.  He added that holding presidential and 
legislative elections before January 24 is necessary to avoid a 
constitutional vacuum.  The report garners front page coverage in Al 
Hayat Al Jadida and inside reporting in Al Quds.  Abbas is also 
quoted speaking on the importance of achieving internal Palestinian 
unity. 
Al Hayat Al Jadida leads with statements by Palestinian Authority 
Premier Fayyad expressing appreciation for the work of the 
Palestinian Civil Resistance Committees, who regularly protest the 
Israeli separation barrier.  Fayyad's statements were made during a 
March 22 ceremony in Ramallah, where he described the committees as 
the Palestinians most "innovative success stories." 
All papers cite Israeli daily Haaretz in reporting the finding of a 
hand-written note by an Israeli army unit from the recent Gaza 
conflict.  The note dated January 16, 2009 titled, "situational 
report" was reportedly found "in the piles of rubble left behind by 
the Israeli soldiers" in a Palestinian house in Jabal Al Rayis in 
Gaza.  It details orders to unit soldiers to open fire and, "kill 
anyone using Salah Eddin street, even medical or humanitarian staff, 
regardless of age, nationality or gender."  A retired Israeli 
military officer comments on the note that the orders would have 
come from higher in the chain of command and could not have been the 
personal initiative of the officer.  The note also details that the 
note ends with orders to "defecate around the house," as the papers 
report that soldiers piled clothes found in the house together and 
used them for that purpose. 
Al Hayat Al Jadida and Al Ayyam, also inside Al Quds, cite Italian 
daily "La Republica", in quoting Hamas Chief Khalid Misha'al stating 
that the superpowers need Hamas to solve the Israeli-Palestinian 
conflict and that he appreciates the "new language" used by 
President Obama that indicates a real change towards dealing with 
his movement.  He is also quoted as hoping that European countries 
will remove Hamas from any terrorist organization lists. 
Al Quds' and Al Ayyam's front pages cite Israeli daily Haaretz in 
reporting on "U.S. anger" over Israeli policy regarding the 
demolition of Palestinian houses in Jerusalem.  The report quotes 
Israeli sources expecting that U.S.-Israeli "differences" will last 
for a long time, during which time, Israel will seek to return the 
issue to its "former marginalization" where the U.S. will cease 
raising the issue each time a Palestinian house in Jerusalem is 
demolished.  The report also highlights statements by Secretary 
Clinton from her first visit to Israel as Secretary of Stte, in 
which she described the demolition policy as, "not helpful to the 
peace process."  The papers also note that the Jerusalem Mayor later 
criticized Clinton for the statements. 
Al Quds' front page cites DPA in quoting the Israeli Deputy Defense 
 
JERUSALEM 00000506  002.3 OF 003 
 
 
Minister calling for a new military offensive in Gaza to stop 
Palestinian rocket attacks.  The paper notes that his call 
contradicts statements by Defense Minister Barak who supports a 
truce agreement with Hamas. 
Al Quds reports on an inside page about a foiled car bomb attack in 
Haifa, which exploded but caused no damage.  The report quotes 
Israeli Premier Olmert stating that the car may have come from the 
West Bank. 
Al Ayyam and Al Quds report that Egypt is putting pressure on 
Palestinian factions to reach a unity agreement.  According to 
reports, Egypt has invited groups to again send delegations to Cairo 
to resolve remaining differences, mainly the policy platform of any 
new Palestinian Authority government and PLO reform.  The papers 
report that no new talks are scheduled.  Weekend reporting noted 
that Chief of Egyptian Intelligence Sulayman, immediately called for 
a meeting with Palestinian groups to brief them about his Washington 
meetings. 
 
Al Ayyam's front page reports that negotiations between Hamas and 
Israel on a prisoner exchange deal could "pick up steam" and perhaps 
be successful if the U.S. accepts the proposed Palestinian Authority 
(PA) government platform (unity government with Hamas), "instead of 
imposing their own program on the Palestinians."  The reporting 
reacts to State Department statements reported over the weekend 
about U.S. insistence that a PA government accept Middle East 
Quartet principles.  In related news, Al Ayyam's and Al Hayat Al 
Jadida's front pages report jailed Hamas leaders met with Israeli 
prison authorities to discuss an exchange deal and voiced their 
opposition to their suffering being used, "as a pressure tactic on 
the Palestinian resistance."  Weekend reporting noted that French 
President Sarkozy will "launch a new initiative to gain the release 
of Israeli soldier Shalit from Gaza 
 
--------------- 
WEEKEND STORIES 
--------------- 
Sunday, March 22 
 
All front pages headlined, "Launch of [Arab League designated] 
Jerusalem - Capital of Arab Culture 2009 celebrations despite 
Israeli restrictions" The papers noted that Palestinian Authority 
President Abbas launched the celebrations in an, "extraordinary 
ceremony from the heart of Bethlehem city, amidst a remarkable 
presence of Arab and foreign officials and representatives."  The 
audience watched celebrations in Mar Elias refugee camp in Lebanon, 
via digital video conference (DVC) and listened to a DVC speech by 
the Mayor of Nazareth where, papers noted, Israeli authorities had 
prohibited celebrations.  Papers added that Israeli authorities in 
Jerusalem deployed thousands of, "troops throughout the city in an 
attempt to prevent celebrations."  Israeli soldiers chased students, 
women, and men, "down allies, streets, schools, and into 
organizations, churches, and mosques."  However, papers note, the 
large number of activities made it impossible for "the Israeli 
forces" to prevent them all. 
 
All front pages carried lengthy excerpts of Palestinian Authority 
President Abbas' speech at the March 22 opening of Jerusalem - 
Capital of Arab Culture 2009 events in Bethlehem.  Abbas stressed 
that Jerusalem, "is the key to peace for all humanity, the hope of 
all Palestinians and Arabs, and the point of reference for justice 
and peace needed in the Holy Land."  He criticized the, 
"Judaization" of Jerusalem, stating, "in the name of a world that 
respects openness and pluralism, the following must stop:  policies 
of discrimination and oppression, the demolition of neighborhoods 
 
JERUSALEM 00000506  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
and houses, policies of falsifying the past, destroying the present 
and the future."  Abbas reiterated that the PLO is the sole 
legitimate representative of the Palestinian people and called on 
any new Israeli government to accept the two-state solution, the 
Road Map, and all previous commitments.  He also stated that without 
a complete end to settlement activities in Jerusalem and all 
occupied territories, there can be no serious negotiations. 
Regarding Palestinian reconciliation, Abbas concluded that reaching 
a "genuine solution" is among his top objectives, which include 
holding free, legislative and presidential elections. 
 
Saturday, March 21 
 
All front pages headline, "Foreign and local delegations express 
solidarity with families threatened by eviction in Al Bustan and Ras 
Khamis [Jerusalem] neighborhoods- Scores of Palestinians and foreign 
solidarity activists injured during anti-wall protests in Bil'in and 
Al Ma'sara."  The papers noted that representatives of several 
European embassies and diplomatic missions, as well as human rights 
and media organizations visited the affected Jerusalem 
neighborhoods.  Meanwhile, the Mayor of Jerusalem is quoted 
insisting that he will reach an agreement on resettling Palestinian 
residents of Al Bustan neighborhood elsewhere so that a national 
park near the Old City of Jerusalem wall can be built.  Offers to 
trade land for financial compensation were immediately rejected by 
Al Bustan residents.  In other news, "scores" of Palestinians 
suffered from tear gas suffocation at "anti-wall" protests in the 
West Bank villages of Bil'in, Ni'lin, and Al Ma'sara.  In Bi'lin, 
two American "solidarity activists" and one Palestinian were also 
injured, according to reporting. 
 
"Europe will present the Obama administration with its vision for a 
solution [to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict] and cancel exemptions 
granted to Israeli settlement products," according to a front page 
headline in Al Ayyam.  A spokesperson for the British government, 
said in an interview with Al Ayyam, that Britain will soon submit a 
report to the American administration about Israeli actions in 
Jerusalem, particularly in the Old City.  The spokesman added that 
the European Union will also present its "vision for a solution of 
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict."   Finally, Britain is working to 
convince EU partners to cancel preferential import conditions for 
Israeli settlement products. 
-------------- 
BLOCK QUOTES: 
-------------- 
 
1)  Talal Okal opines in independent daily Al Ayyam under the title, 
"No more dialogue, we need decisions"(03/23): "It seems all the 
optimistic statements about almost reaching an agreement, made by 
[Palestinian] factions, were nothing more than a tactic to allow 
them to later blame each other [for the failure of talks]... so far 
it seems that what has been achieved is nothing more than wishful 
thinking or, if you want to be generous, that the ten-day dialogue 
in Cairo has achieved about 60% of what was needed..." 
 
WALLES