09KABUL766
AFGHAN MEDIA, OFFICALS PRAISE NEW U.S. STRATEGY
Sun Mar 29 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO3082
PP RUEHDBU RUEHPW
DE RUEHBUL #0766/01 0881250
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 291250Z MAR 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7970
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 000766 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR SCA/PPD, SCA/A 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO AF
SUBJECT: AFGHAN MEDIA, OFFICALS PRAISE NEW U.S. STRATEGY 
 
¶1. Summary: Afghan media coverage of the new U.S. Afghan-Pak 
strategy has been uniformly very positive, and even typically 
anti-government newspapers and TV channels have been optimistic in 
their initial coverage. Criticism has been limited to calling for 
additions to the strategy, such as support for Afghan infrastructure 
and democracy, rather than critiquing the substance of the plan. 
Media leaders note that Afghans will be following implementation of 
the plan closely.  President Karzai strongly supported the strategy 
at his March 28 press conference. 
 
---------------------------- 
Afghan Radio Coverage Upbeat 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2. Coverage on BBC Persian Radio, Radio Killid and Radio Azadi was 
upbeat.  All reports highlighted that the Afghan government has 
publicly welcomed the strategy.  Radio reporting also mentioned that 
this is the first U.S. strategy released in seven years and that it 
proves that the Al Qaeda terrorist network's roots are in Pakistan, 
not Afghanistan.  News stories supported the inclusion of 
Afghanistan's neighbors in the strategy's regional focus.  Radio 
Azadi said that this strategy shows that the U.S. commitment is 
accountable, and its effectiveness will be measured.  Radio Azadi 
also noted two shortcomings of the strategy: that it does not 
specifically mention the importance of democratic government in 
Afghanistan, and does not mention under what conditions aid will be 
given to Pakistan.  Radio Killid reported that "The neighbors of 
Afghanistan are worried about the U.S. presence in Afghanistan, but 
the announcement by President Obama that the U.S. will not be in 
Afghanistan permanently put them at ease." The Killid reporter also 
argued that increasing troops and equipping the Pakistan army would 
be less effective than implementing the economic and reconstruction 
parts of the strategy. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Editorials: Coordination with Government is Key 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶3. The two state-run dailies, Hewad (circulation 3,000)and Anis 
(circulation 12,000), welcomed the strategy and their editorials 
emphasized that by cooperating with the Afghan government, the new 
strategy will empower Afghanistan to stand on its own feet. Hewad in 
a March 28 article noted that, "We hope that the U.S. will implement 
its strategy in close coordination and cooperation with the Afghan 
government. The main objective of the strategy should be making 
Afghanistan economically self-reliant and capable of maintaining 
better security and ensuring peace and stability." 
 
¶4. Independent newspaper Weesa, (circulation 6,000) reports that a 
number of Afghan experts believe that the U.S. strategy review 
directly benefits Afghanistan but that it lacks adequate focus on 
rebuilding Afghanistan's infrastructure. The writer stated that 
economic growth in Afghanistan will encourage individuals who have 
joined armed opposition groups to renounce violence and join the 
peace process. The author added that coordination with the 
government is needed to ensure successful implementation of the 
strategy. 
 
¶5. Arman-e- Milli (circulation 4,600) and Hasht-e-sobh (circulation 
3,000) newspapers are independent and anti-government, and although 
their coverage was positive in tone, they each raised some doubts 
about the strategy. Arman-e-Milli raised questions about 
implementation, and how aid would be delivered to Pakistan. 
Hasht-e-sobh's editorial said that the present Afghan government 
does not have the capacity to implement the strategy. 
------------------------------------------- 
Media leaders:  The Devil is in the Details 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. The managing director of Radio Azadi, Amin Mudaqiq, said, "So far 
all reactions both from the press and ordinary people are positive. 
The only point people make is, whether or not the strategy will be 
followed in practice and implemented.  We all know that people heard 
a lot of words in the past, they now want to see deeds."  Similarly, 
Salam Watandar Radio News Director Masood Farivar, stated, "So far 
the reaction has been positive, and the idea itself sounds good, but 
- the devil is in the details." 
 
¶7. Nasim Fazel, Vice President of Shamshad TV, praised the 
anti-corruption focus of the strategy and said; "It seems to be a 
comprehensive strategy which will change the hearts and minds of the 
people if it is implemented in the way it was drafted." Fazel 
emphasized that Afghan expectations were high; "Audience members we 
interviewed were very optimistic about this new strategy, they think 
it opens a new door to reconciliation, economic growth, security and 
good governance where all Afghans can live in a more safe and secure 
manner."  Shamshad TV is a primarily Pashto TV station that 
broadcasts in Kabul, Kandahar and Nangarhar. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Karzai Strongly Support the Strategy 
 
KABUL 00000766  002 OF 002 
 
 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶8. At President Hamid Karzai's March 28 press conference he welcomed 
President Obama's review of strategy on Afghanistan, terming it 
"realistic" and based on the demands of the Afghan people. President 
Karzai was widely quoted in news reports as saying that the strategy 
reflects the will of the Afghan people, and exceeds his 
expectations. Tolo TV and state-run National TV Afghanistan noted 
President Hamid Karzai's statement that the strategy covers almost 
all aspects of success. 
 
¶9. Conclusion: Initial media coverage, in radio, print and broadcast 
is positive and supportive of the new U.S. strategy towards 
Afghanistan and Pakistan. Audience expectations are high. The 
Taliban's assessment of the review has yet to reach the mainstream 
media, but is likely to follow the negative comments of Mawlawi 
Wakil Ahmad Motawakkil, former Taleban foreign minister, namely, 
that the U.S. strategy is a "blow to peace."  The common Afghan 
refrain:  a call for close coordination with the Afghan government 
in implementing the strategy. 
 
WOOD