09KABUL1199
DEBUNKING THE MYTH - PD WORK REALLY IS POSSIBLE IN
Mon May 11 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO0747
PP RUEHDBU RUEHPW
DE RUEHBUL #1199/01 1310408
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 110408Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8820
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KABUL 001199 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR SCA/PPD, SCA/A 
STATE FOR ECA 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO KIRC SCUL AF
SUBJECT: DEBUNKING THE MYTH - PD WORK REALLY IS POSSIBLE IN 
AFGHANISTAN! 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: Contrary to popular belief that American diplomats 
remain isolated behind compound walls, PD officers in Kabul 
routinely travel around the city and throughout the country.  Too 
much emphasis has been placed on "messaging," too little on building 
personal relationship that allow the message to take root.  Putting 
the 'public' back into public diplomacy was high on our list of 
objectives this past year, and has paid some handsome dividends. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
UNIVERSITY OUTREACH 
¶2. University students have been one of our key target audiences 
this year.  Kabul University, the largest, oldest, and nearest 
university to the embassy, has been the logical nexus of our 
activities.  Although we were told before our arrival in the summer 
of 2008 that cultural programming would be impossible in 
Afghanistan, Fine Arts students at Kabul University participated 
with great enthusiasm in workshops involving American musicians, 
dancing for the first time.  The Journalism Faculty received special 
attention, thanks to the Chancellor's plea.  Working with our 
Military Information Support Team (MIST), we will train and equip 
the faculty so that students can begin producing moderate messages. 
This summer, professors will depart to the United States for an 
International Visitor's program on journalism education. 
 
¶3. During this past winter break, ECA/A offered the first-ever Study 
of the U.S. Institute for Afghans.  A dozen English-speaking senior 
students, chosen from the top of their classes, spent five weeks in 
the United States.  They have returned for their final university 
year with extremely positive impressions that they share with their 
peers.  The students emphasized how impressed they were that their 
Christian coordinator showed such sensitivity that he reserved time 
on Fridays for the group to go to mosque; the female students noted 
that their first time to a mosque was in the United States! 
 
¶4. Most recently, Ambassador Ricciardone visited Kabul University - 
a two hour visit, that stretched to four, that easily could have 
been six hours long!  This was the first time that any Chief of 
Mission had been to Kabul University in several years, to the 
delight of the Chancellor, the faculty, and the students of the 
Journalism Faculty, with whom he met at an event in honor of World 
Press Freedom Day.  As he walked to the tomb of Sayyid Jamal-al-Din, 
he responded to questions from international and local press on 
civilian causalities and the U.S. position on upcoming Afghan 
elections.  Once there, he paid his respects to "Al-Afghani," one of 
the founders of Islamic modernism, a gesture greatly appreciated by 
the Afghans present. 
 
THEMATIC PROGRAMMING 
¶5. With outreach a priority, the cultural section embarked upon a 
series of thematic programming initiatives, beginning with 
celebrations of Ramadan in September, followed by the U.S. 
Elections, International Women's Day, and other special events or 
days. 
 
¶6. The Public Affairs Section's multi-pronged Ramadan programming 
conveyed the message that the U.S. respects Islam, a critical point 
in a country where most people identify themselves first by 
religion.  We emphasized that the War on Terror was not a war on 
Islam and highlighted our shared values.  We launched our 
programming with the Ambassador giving an exclusive media tour of a 
mosque being restored through the Ambassador's Fund for Cultural 
Preservation.  We organized Iftaars, distributed "Mosques of 
America" booklets in local languages, and arranged broadcast of the 
Dari and Pashto language video "Islam in America," which reached 
more than 10 million viewers nation-wide and elicited significant 
positive feedback.  We sent out Eid holiday cards and arranged an 
Eid party at the Embassy for orphans attending Access English 
programs. 
 
¶7. In the run-up to the U.S. elections, we hosted journalists and 
journalism students for two webcasts from the Democratic and 
Republican National Conventions.  PD-Kabul then organized four 
webchats and two DVCs to capitalize on local interest.  Speakers 
from other sections, including the Pol Chief, Pol-Mil Chief, 
visiting Information Resource Officer, and poloffs, joined PD 
officers in giving election presentations at universities, schools 
where English instruction is subsidized by the USG, and in the 
regions.  Throughout the country, 15 election speaker events reached 
more than 500 people, mostly students.  Programming culminated in a 
morning event at Kabul's Serena Hotel celebrating the power of 
democracy as election results came in.  For the first time in thirty 
years, Afghans and Americans witnessed the peaceful transfer of 
power together. 
 
CULTURAL PROGRAMMING 
¶8. We used cultural programming in Afghanistan to demonstrate that 
the future, with its vibrant music and dance offerings, stands in 
stark contrast to the darkness of its Taliban past.  After a lull of 
several years, we once again offered cultural programming.  In 
 
KABUL 00001199  002 OF 003 
 
 
October 2008, the group 'American Voices' held workshops, performed 
to enthusiastic crowds, and made media appearances in Kabul.  In the 
spring, for the Persian New Year, we worked with ECA to sponsor 
'Alvin Atkinson & the Sound Merchants,' first to Mazar-e-Sharif to 
participate in the single most significant Afghan cultural event of 
the year, the "Red Tulip International Music Festival" and then back 
to Kabul for student workshops and performances.  Playing live for 
more than 1,500 people (with broadcasts reaching more than 10 
million), these musicians presented a non-military face of the U.S. 
to Afghans, demonstrating that a common language in music 
transcends barriers. 
 
¶9. Convinced that Afghans needed to see positive representations of 
their country and culture, we arranged a photography exhibition of 
Steve McCurry's work in order to balance the hard images dominating 
the media.  Every Friday, 2,500+ Afghans viewed portraits, stunning 
landscapes, and images of Afghans hard at work.  More than 2,000 
students have visited the exhibition on field trips, guided by 
PD-trained Kabul University students.  Custom-made wooden frames 
launched a small business, and revenue from the space rental 
contributes to the sustainability of Babur Gardens (and increased 
demand for the space for future exhibitions).  Steve McCurry held 
workshops for students and photojournalists during his 48 hours in 
Kabul - the first IIP Speaker program in several years. 
 
PD AT THE PRTs 
¶10. Everything that we've accomplished in Kabul has been effectively 
transferred to our work in the regions and at Provincial 
Reconstruction Teams (PRTs).  This year was the first year we had a 
PD officer specifically dedicated to working with PRTs - in effect, 
serving as PAO for 26 'consulates,' providing each of them with 
advice and guidance on all things related to media, education, and 
outreach.  Since PRTs include more than just State Department 
representatives, she shared her PD efforts with other agency 
representatives, U.S. military public affairs and information 
officers, and even civilian PAOs from other countries such as Canada 
and the Czech Republic.  As a result, the PRTs now have expanded 
outreach capabilities. 
 
LINCOLN CENTERS (LCs) 
¶11. During this fiscal year we will triple the number of Lincoln 
Centers supported by post.  Three existing Lincoln Centers in 
Jalalabad, Kabul University and Mazar-e-Sharif were founded in 2005 
and 2006.  LCs were launched this past year in Herat, Bamyan, and 
Khost, with three more slated to open in Gardez, Kunduz and one at 
the Kabul Women's Garden. 
 
¶12. Both in Kabul and through our PRTers, we have used these 
'outposts' as an effective tool for reaching Afghan audiences. 
Because LC events are part of our PD efforts, we include in each 
Weekly Report highlights of their activities, ranging from 
roundtable discussions, English classes, or programs highlighting 
special days or events.  LCs reached more than 62,000 visitors this 
past year, over a third of the total for all of SCA.  In February 
2009, there were 12,000 visitors at the Lincoln Centers, a 340 
percent increase over February 2008.  We currently have requests to 
open more LCs in practically every province of Afghanistan! 
 
ENGLISH LANGUAGE INITIATIVES 
¶13. For the first time ever, we've expanded Access English programs 
to include the Shia minority population in Kabul.  We have also 
extended our efforts to regional cities.  Working through the 
orphanage system, our program now runs in Jawzjan, Kunduz, and 
Mazar-e-Sharif.  By working with the English Teacher's Association 
for Afghans, we will reach low-income students in the insecure 
cities of Kandahar, Khost, and Jalalabad.  We also offer Access 
English programs in Bamyan and Herat. 
 
¶14. We've also taken new initiatives to support English teachers in 
Afghanistan.  In addition to the first visit of an English Teaching 
Specialist to Kabul and Herat, a PD grant supported six week-long 
English teaching workshops in three provinces (Herat, Ghor, and 
Bamyan). 
 
PUBLICATIONS 
¶15. We established a library of PD giveaways, including publications 
in Farsi, Dari, and Pashto produced by State, USAID, the United 
Nations Assistance Mission to Afghanistan, and MIST.  We share 
products on key mission priorities such as democracy, 
anti-narcotics, and media freedom.  Finding that pre-printed 
materials insufficiently addressed our needs, we regularly created 
electronic handouts and Powerpoints in local languages that support 
thematic programming. 
 
¶16. While waiting to meet the district governor, Paktika's PRT 
representatives distributed PD's 'Mosques of America' booklets, 
copies of the constitution, and 'Mosques of America' wall calendar 
to residents.  The district governor, a 2007 IVLP alumnus, held up a 
wall calendar and explained, "The U.S. has many mosques and respects 
 
KABUL 00001199  003 OF 003 
 
 
Islam."  He asked for additional wall calendars.  After residents 
left, the district governor explained to the PRT team that it was a 
great service to have given the PD materials to them.  He noted that 
they came from parts of the district under Taliban influence, and 
these materials would help them understand that the U.S. is not as 
Taliban propaganda describes it.  This shows again the great value 
of these Pashto-language materials, and the lasting value of the IV 
program. 
 
MITIGATING SECURITY RISKS 
¶17. Cooperation and coordination with our Regional Security Office 
was key to conducting public diplomacy.  They issued the section its 
own tracking devices so they could monitor our movements and ensure 
our safety; equipped with emergency call buttons, we were confident 
in their ability to monitor, find and extract us if need be 
(fortunately, it never was.)  They developed and provided special 
intel briefings on common routes and venues used by PD personnel. 
Although not a requirement, RSO also worked with PD and provided 
body armor to PD FSO's, which we use when traveling to each venue. 
Only in rare circumstances, and based upon credible threats, were 
our travel requests denied, and we truly are thankful to RSO's 
office for their partnership and support in helping us accomplish 
our mission. 
 
¶18.  CONCLUSION: Looking back on the highlights over this past year, 
we realize that we have been fortunate to have had staff and funds 
to support these activities.  Over the course of the past year, PD 
Kabul has gone 'the last three feet' to reach more Afghans than 
ever.  Some of our most valuable memories come from our frequent 
contact with regular Afghans.  Our advice to those who will take on 
public diplomacy responsibilities in future years to come: Challenge 
your assumptions.  More is possible in Afghanistan than one might 
imagine! 
 
RICCIARDONE