09KABUL47
ANNUAL OSAC CRIME & SAFETY REPORT - AFGHANISTAN
Sat Jan 10 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
P 101118Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6645UNCLAS KABUL 000047 
 
 
DEPT FOR DSS/OSAC and DS/IP/SCA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC KSAC KCRM CASC AF
SUBJECT: ANNUAL OSAC CRIME & SAFETY REPORT - AFGHANISTAN 
 
REF: A) 08 STATE 133533 
     B) 08 STATE 132056 
 
¶1. Post, in accordance with REF B, submits its annual Overseas 
Security Advisory Council (OSAC) crime and safety report for 2008. 
Responses are keyed to REF B. 
 
¶2.  2008 OSAC Crime & Safety Report: 
 
¶I. OVERALL CRIME/SAFETY SITUATION - 
Criminal and terrorist activity in Kabul, the capital of 
Afghanistan, remains high and critical, respectively, as rated by 
the most recent SETL (REF A).  The overall crime and safety 
situation is both volatile and unstable throughout much of 
Afghanistan.  A lack of basic infrastructure, government services 
and emergency health facilities makes it an exceptionally hazardous 
country in which to reside or visit. 
 
It is often difficult to differentiate between politically motivated 
criminal behavior, terrorism and/or traditional illegal activity. 
While narcotics trafficking accounts for a large portion of 
Afghanistan's crime problems, the country is challenged by a myriad 
of criminal and terrorists threats, many of which target foreigners. 
 These threats are no longer solely aimed at Coalition Forces (CF). 
All westerners and Afghans associated with westerners are targets, 
to include NGOs, local medical staff, aid and rehabilitation workers 
and many others.  Visitors and residents of Afghanistan must be on 
guard against assault, kidnapping and all forms of theft, from 
simple pick pocketing to extortion. 
 
Americans are strongly urged to refrain from any travel to 
Afghanistan as their safety and security cannot be guaranteed. 
Travelers should be advised that the U.S. Embassy's ability to 
provide emergency consular services to citizens in Afghanistan is 
limited, especially for those residing outside of the capital. 
Americans who come to Afghanistan should register with the Consular 
Section at the U.S. Embassy in Kabul, preferably online at 
travel.state.gov, or in person.  The Consular Section can be reached 
at: 
 
U.S. Embassy Consular Section 
Great Massoud Road Kabul, Afghanistan 
USConsulKabul@state.gov 
Emergency Telephone: 0700-201-908 
 
 
Local Law Enforcement 
--------------------- 
Police and emergency services in Afghanistan vary from marginally 
competent, in the areas where regular and direct foreign assistance 
is ongoing, to ineffective or downright corrupt.  Many Afghan 
citizens in need of assistance from local law enforcement do not 
trust the ability of the Afghan National Police (ANP) to assist them 
unless they have the money to bribe the official for assistance. 
Foreigners visiting Afghanistan are urged to ensure they maintain 
current contact information with their respective embassy for use in 
emergency situations.  Foreigners should also carry a copy of their 
passport with them at all times. 
 
In recent months, Afghan government officials have been confiscating 
equipment from western private security companies (PSC).  The 
equipment that has been confiscated has included armored vehicles, 
body armor, weapons, radios, GPS systems and personal items.  All 
persons conducting business in Afghanistan under the protection of a 
PSC, to include the PSC, are warned that they may be stopped and 
have their protective and personal items confiscated, potentially 
putting the protectee at greater risk. 
 
 
II. POLITICAL VIOLENCE - 
Afghanistan remains a critical threat post for political violence. 
Such violence ranges from spontaneous mob attacks to calculated 
kidnappings and executions.  The principle method of attack during 
recent months has been Improvised Explosive Devices (IED), with the 
second most common form of attack being small arms fire. 
 
Anti-government elements frequently attack foreigners.  While 
attacks in recent years had largely been confined to the south and 
along the Pakistani border, 2008 saw an increase in areas not 
traditionally targeted by insurgent groups, to include the west and 
the vicinity of Kabul.  Nationwide, the number of IED's in 2008 
(approximately 2000) was roughly double the number from 2007, while 
kidnappings (many of businessmen for ransom) also doubled to roughly 
300 in 2008.  Rocket attacks (aka indirect fire or "IDF") also 
impacted near the U.S. Embassy in mid-August 2008 and again in 
September 2008, while in late November 2008 a suicide vehicle-borne 
improvised explosive device (SVBIED) detonated within roughly 200 
meters of the U.S. Embassy. 
 
Historical Perspective 
---------------------- 
Violence has traditionally been used as an instrument of politics in 
Afghanistan.  Assassinations, the targeting of civilians and general 
insurgent attacks grab headlines more than advances in Afghan 
security forces or the proactive introduction of western methods of 
political and economic strategy. 
 
Traditionally, Afghanistan has had weak central government, and the 
current government under President Hamid Karzai has limited reach in 
some regions outside Kabul.  Violence continues to occur largely in 
about 10 percent of the 363 districts, with the tactics of the 
anti-government elements shifting from insurgency to terrorism. 
Ordinary Afghans feel less safe as a result of this switch and as a 
result of rising criminality, especially kidnappings.  Some turn to 
tribes, the local strong man or anti-government elements for 
security and stability in the absence of the government. 
 
Transnational Terrorism 
----------------------- 
A history of disorder, warfare, tribalism, and a weak central 
government has made Afghanistan fertile territory for international 
terrorism.  During the rule of the Taliban, Afghanistan was utilized 
as a safe haven for several organizations which benefited from the 
regime's tolerance of international terrorism.  The collapse of the 
Taliban's governance of Afghanistan led to the overt disappearance 
of these groups, but reconstituted elements are still active 
throughout the country.  An environment of a weak central 
government, corruption, poverty, social exhaustion and illicit power 
centers allows these groups to operate in Afghanistan, despite U.S. 
and International Security Assistance Force's (ISAF) efforts to 
eliminate them.  Some or most of these groups have turned their 
focus inward, seeking to expel western and other foreign elements 
from Afghanistan, while still promoting terror in other countries. 
The most prominent of these groups are the Taliban, Al-Qaida and the 
Haqqani network, which works in conjunction with the Taliban. 
 
Civil Unrest 
------------ 
Visitors to Afghanistan must remain alert for the possibility of 
civil unrest.  While the Government of the Islamic Republic of 
Afghanistan (GIRoA) has formalized and implemented a system for 
legal and orderly protests, spontaneous and potentially dangerous 
demonstrations do occur. 
 
Recent months have seen incidents where large, sometimes violent 
crowds have formed in the aftermath of motor vehicle accidents 
involving coalition force (CF) convoys.  Some of these accidents 
have resulted in deaths, spawning the rapid formation of large, 
unpredictable crowds.  Often, westerners receive the brunt of 
violence when they arrive at a public venue to assist in an 
emergency situation. 
 
Travelers should note that disputes between government 
representatives and regional leaders may lead to localized protests 
over land, funding and other such issues. While these arguments do 
not always descend into violent conflict, such an outcome is 
possible. 
 
As a general rule, foreigners in Afghanistan should make every 
effort to avoid large groups of any kind, particularly political or 
other protests. 
 
 
III. POST-SPECIFIC CONCERNS 
 
The Drug Trade 
-------------- 
The growth of opium and the associated smuggling industry constitute 
a major threat to the rule of law in Afghanistan.  The illegal 
narcotics trade undermines the integrity of Afghan law enforcement 
and funds terrorist activity.  An informal but complex system, 
intertwined with local political motivations, governs which group or 
individuals profit from poppy cultivation in each region.  Travelers 
should be aware that this chaotic environment fuels conflict between 
drug traffickers, often resulting in large-scale fighting between 
opposing groups. Additionally, protective and anxious opium growers 
may guard their territory by employing violent, sometimes murderous, 
militia members. 
 
Kidnapping 
---------- 
Like many developing countries, Afghanistan struggles with 
kidnapping-for-ransom schemes.  Virtually every foreigner in 
Afghanistan is wealthy - relative to local standards - and is 
therefore a potential kidnapping victim.  The motivation for these 
attacks is primarily financial, but visitors should be aware of the 
potential that apolitical kidnappers might sell their captives to 
political groups, with whom there is a definite threat of execution 
for political purposes.  2008 saw the kidnapping of four (4) 
American citizens in Afghanistan. 
 
Crimes Involving Vehicles 
------------------------- 
Foreigners in vehicles are at risk for carjacking.  While uncommon 
relative to other forms of violent crime, carjacking remains a 
possibility. 
 
Theft 
----- 
Theft is rampant in Afghanistan.  Foreigners are vulnerable to 
standard pick pocketing schemes and armed robberies alike.  Home 
invasions and attacks involving multiple assailants have also 
occurred.  The lawlessness which pervades Afghan society can quickly 
escalate even the most minor of crimes to a potentially 
life-threatening situation. 
 
Safety 
------ 
Road conditions in Afghanistan vary greatly from province to 
province.  Generally speaking, roads are of an inferior quality and 
travelers should exercise great caution while driving.  While some 
roads in the capital and other large cities accommodate normal 
sedans, outside of major cities a four-wheel drive vehicle is 
essential. 
 
Depending on the method used, traversing Afghan rivers can be 
hazardous.  Many bridges are dilapidated and of inferior 
construction.  Even the most pacific creek or river can be 
deceptively dangerous.  Commercial transportation services are as 
varied as road conditions and should be carefully scrutinized before 
being used. 
 
Mines 
----- 
Visitors must remain vigilant to the threat of unexploded ordinance 
in Afghanistan.  While many demining operations are currently 
underway, several decades of almost continuous warfare makes travel 
extremely hazardous. Colored flags or rocks are used to indicate 
whether or not an area has been cleared of mines: 
 
Red - indicates a field has been identified but not yet cleared. 
 
White - indicates a field has been swept, although this is not an 
assurance that the field has been entirely cleared. White flagged 
fields are generally 90% cleared. 
 
Avalanches 
---------- 
During colder months, mountain roads and passes can quickly become 
impassable due to snow.  Avalanches are common throughout these 
areas and travelers need to be aware of the high risk of eroding 
roads along precipitous thoroughfares.  The Salang Pass between 
Jabal-Sarag and Mazar-e Sharif is one of the most commonly snowed-in 
passes. 
 
Earthquakes 
----------- 
Afghanistan is in a high-risk earthquake area, with significant 
quakes and tremors common.  The most significant earthquake in 
Afghanistan was a 7.4 magnitude earthquake on March 3, 2003; 
earthquakes and aftershocks with magnitudes of 6.0 are not uncommon. 
 The rudimentary construction techniques common throughout 
Afghanistan also contribute to the possibility of severe injury or 
death due to earthquakes. 
 
Ongoing Combat Operations 
------------------------- 
As the GIRoA seeks to strengthen its rule, it openly battles 
anti-government forces throughout the country.  This struggle 
frequently includes the participation of coalition forces.  Combat 
operations can occur at any time in any region of the country, 
employing air support, artillery fire, and small or large unit 
operations.  GIRoA and coalition partners make great efforts to act 
with precision during these campaigns and to avoid civilian 
casualties, nonetheless, any combat engagement with insurgent forces 
poses a significant danger to those in the vicinity. 
 
Local Crime Anomalies 
--------------------- 
The degree of sophistication displayed by Afghan criminal elements 
is evolving.  While the country still suffers from the most basic 
criminal acts such as pick-pocketing and home invasion, in recent 
years a variety of scams and organized schemes have been noted. 
Burglary of private residences has become increasingly common in 
Kabul. 
 
Travelers should be aware that while exchanging money or engaging in 
large financial transactions, there is the potential of surveillance 
for possible targeting at a later time. 
 
Areas to Avoid 
-------------- 
The U.S. Embassy underscores its recommendation that private 
Americans avoid travel to Afghanistan.  Afghanistan is unsafe 
vis-`-vis American standards, with insurgent, criminal, and 
terrorist activities occurring throughout the country. 
 
Cultural Sensitivity 
 
-------------------- 
Afghanistan is an Islamic country; the majority of the nation's 
population, its legal system and its customs are Muslim.  Americans 
visiting Afghanistan should be aware and respectful of this. 
 
Travelers should ask their host before taking photographs, 
particularly of women.  Travelers should also be mindful of local 
attire and dress modestly in public. 
 
IV. POLICE RESPONSE - 
Most police are underpaid, as they have been for a long time. 
"Shakedowns" remain common, as those with money receive a more 
positive response from local law enforcement.  As previously 
mentioned, corruption is rampant in Afghanistan and law enforcement 
assistance is often provided to those who have social status. 
Whenever possible, foreigners are advised to go to their local 
embassy for police assistance. 
 
¶V. MEDICAL EMERGENCIES - 
Medical services in Afghanistan are extraordinarily challenged, 
often lacking basic diagnostic and treatment equipment, as well as 
the most common medications. 
 
Foreigners are urged to seek emergency medical care on a U.S. 
military base.  In order to facilitate military medical attention 
foreigners should contact their respective embassy. 
 
The major regional hospitals in Afghanistan are: 
 
ISAF Clinic 
Contact: Duty Doctor 079-774-6653 
 
Camp Warehouse Hospital 
Contact: 079-514-122 (Rescue Control) 
     079-826-2544 (Rescue Control) 
     070-288-598 (Doctor's #) 
 
Bagram Airfield Hospital 
Contact: 070-113-2000 
 
 
Camp Phoenix Hospital 
Contact: 070-044-502 
     070-484-654 
         079-817-4571 
         079-321-576 
 
Camp Eggers Clinic 
Contact:070-837-4583 
 
Camp Souter 
Contact: 0799-859-895 
 
US Embassy Medical Officers 
Contact: Jack Sibal 0797-771-168 
     Herve Poulard 0797-165-092 
 
VI. HOW TO AVOID BECOMING A VICTIM - 
Westerners are strongly urged to avoid travel to Afghanistan.  For 
those who travel to this region, ensure that your housing 
accommodations are heavily fortified with barriers and armed guards. 
 Register with your respective embassy and, if possible, maintain an 
extremely low profile.  Westerners are advised to travel in armored 
vehicles with personal body armor and a protective security team. 
Also, avoid public markets and bazaars as they are often a target 
for westerners. 
 
 
VII. EMBASSY CONTACT INFORMATION - 
 
U.S. Embassy 
Great Massoud Road Kabul, Afghanistan 
Regional Security Officer: 0799-245-456 
Embassy Operator: 0700-108-001 
Medical Unit: 070-073-655 
Consular Affairs: 0700-201-908 
Marine Guard Post One: 070-301-490-1042 x8250 
 
VIII. OSAC PRESENCE IN KABUL - 
The OSAC community remains highly active in Afghanistan, totaling 
approximately 65 constituents from various PSCs, non-government 
organizations (NGO) and other entities and exchanging information on 
a daily basis.  Kabul OSAC has monthly meetings that provide broader 
security information of a critical nature to the entire OSAC 
community.  If a company is operating within Afghanistan and is 
headquartered in the U.S., they may become a member by visiting the 
OSAC website at www.osac.gov. 
 
 
WOOD