09KYIV96
2009 ANNUAL OVERSEAS SECURITY ADVISORY COUNCIL (OSAC)
Fri Jan 16 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kyiv
R 161400Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY KYIV
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 7041UNCLAS KYIV 000096 
 
 
DEPT FOR DS/OSAC, DS/IP, DS/TIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC UA
SUBJECT:  2009 ANNUAL OVERSEAS SECURITY ADVISORY COUNCIL (OSAC) 
CRIME AND SAFETY REPORT, UKRAINE 
 
REF: 08 STATE 132056 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  The following information is provided in response to 
REF: 
 
--------------------------------------- 
¶I.  Overall Crime and Safety Situation: 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. Crime Threat: 
 
Crime remains a concern in Ukraine.  Ukraine's expatriate community 
- including American citizens - continues to be the target of street 
crimes of opportunity and property crimes.  Street crime consists 
primarily of pick-pocketing, purse snatching, and confidence scams 
(see The Wallet Scam below).  Many of these reported incidents occur 
while the victims are using public transport (particularly the Kyiv 
metro system) or in locations frequented by large numbers of people, 
i.e., markets, tourist attractions in the center of Kyiv, etc. 
These incidents tend to be non-violent, although there have been a 
number of violent muggings, physical assaults, and sexual assaults 
over the past year.  In particular, hate crimes - including assaults 
resulting in serious injuries or death - directed against non-Slavic 
ethnic and religious minorities (including the Orthodox Jewish 
community) remain a significant concern (see Hate Crimes below). 
Yet outside of hate crimes, violent crime directed against 
foreigners is not common as long as the victim does not resist. 
 
Short-term visitors - for example, tourists who may not be entirely 
familiar with local customs or fluent in Ukrainian or Russian - are 
more susceptible to street crime and confidence scams, although 
foreigners resident in Ukraine have also been victimized.  Marriage 
and dating scams have also been reported.  Identity theft involving 
ATM, credit card, and Internet fraud, are issues too.  The U.S. 
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) considers Ukraine a hotbed of 
cyber crime activity.  U.S. law enforcement - the FBI and U.S. 
Secret Service (USSS) - have several large and ongoing joint cyber 
crime/identify theft investigations with Ukrainian law enforcement 
authorities.  American citizens visiting or resident in Ukraine 
should take the same precautions against street crime and identity 
theft that they would in any large city in the United States or 
Europe. 
 
The main targets for property crime are longer-term foreign 
residents including diplomats, business people, and persons with 
missionary groups and private voluntary organizations.  Both violent 
and non-violent property crimes have been reported.  The most common 
types of non-violent property crime affecting the resident 
expatriate community are vandalism, vehicle theft, theft of personal 
property from parked vehicles, and residential burglaries.  Violent 
property crimes, including armed residential break-ins, attacks in 
apartment building hallways or elevators, occur less frequently. 
 
The worsening financial crisis in Ukraine - the Ukrainian Hryvna has 
depreciated almost 50 percent against the U.S. dollar over the past 
six months, and analysts are expecting zero or even negative real 
GDP growth in 2009; there is widespread and growing unemployment and 
continued high inflation rates - and recent political crises are 
creating conditions more favorable to the criminal element, as well 
as creating a larger pool of individuals who may resort to criminal 
activity out of desperation.  As an example, in early December 2008, 
the chief of Kyiv city police noted that residential break-ins and 
robberies had increased 100% over the previous month, from ten 
reported incidents per day to twenty incidents per day.  Anecdotal 
evidence reported to the Embassy to date tends to support this 
reported increase. 
 
1)  The Wallet Scam 
 
A common confidence scam employed in Kyiv is the "Wallet Scam". 
There are many variations but all involve an attempt to get the 
victim to pick up a wallet or parcel of money in a plastic (i.e., 
ziplock) bag.  The typical scam involves a person (read - crook) who 
drops a wallet or a packet of money in front of a potential victim. 
The crook then asks the victim if the wallet/packet belongs to 
him/her; or the victim picks the wallet/packet up and returns it the 
person.  The criminal will then try to get the victim to handle the 
money in the wallet/packet, or handle the wallet/packet itself. 
 
A second individual will then approach the victim and claim that the 
wallet/money belongs to him, and will accuse the victim of trying to 
steal the money (in some variants, it will be the first individual 
who will accuse the victim of theft).  A third person may be 
involved, posing as an off-duty police officer who briefly shows 
"police identification" to the victim.  This individual is not a 
police officer, of course, but is part of the criminal scam.  The 
con artists will threaten to call the police and try to get the 
victim to pay them not to call; or the "police officer" will ask the 
victim to produce his or her wallet to ensure the victim did not 
take the money and put it in his or her wallet.  The "police 
officer" may even offer to count the money in front of the victim to 
gain his/her confidence.  If the wallet is shown, the criminal(s) 
will grab it and flee; or through sleight of hand, steal a large 
portion of the cash they are "counting." 
 
If presented with the above scenario, simply walk away and do not 
engage the perpetrators in conversation.  Foreigners are more likely 
to be confronted with this confidence scam since they do not know 
local laws, and may not speak Ukrainian or Russian fluently. 
American citizens have reported losing hundreds of dollars in this 
confidence scam. 
 
2)  Hate Crimes 
 
While most foreigners do not encounter problems with violent crime 
in Ukraine, there is significant concern with racially-motivated 
attacks carried out by individuals associated with neo-Nazi groups 
and extreme nationalist groups.  Over the past few years, hate 
crimes directed against non-Slavic and religious minorities (esp. 
members of the Orthodox Jewish community) have increased.  Victims 
have reported verbal harassment and discrimination as well as 
physical assaults resulting in serious injuries and sometimes death. 
 Many reported attacks have occurred in well-known areas in downtown 
Kyiv commonly frequented by tourists. 
 
Although a majority of the victims are males from sub-Sahara African 
nations, past victims have included males and females from Asia, the 
Middle East, and Hispanic countries.  Victims have also included 
members of the diplomatic community.  Regardless of racial or ethnic 
background, all foreigners visiting or resident in Ukraine should 
exercise caution. 
 
Additionally, incidents of non-violent police harassment and 
discrimination of minorities has also been reported.  In one very 
serious incident, plainclothes Ukrainian police officers assaulted 
and detained an American citizen simply because he was of African 
heritage.  Asian-Americans have also reported police harassment. 
Americans who are the subjects of official or other 
violent/nonviolent harassment should report such incidents to the 
American Citizen Services section of the U.S. Embassy. 
 
¶B. Safety, Road Conditions and Road Hazards: 
 
Vehicles in Ukraine are left-hand drive and drive on the right-hand 
side of the road, the same as in the United States.  Traffic in Kyiv 
is heavy on weekdays during commute hours, and routine travel within 
the city during workdays is often delayed due to heavy, unexpected 
(and often, inexplicable) traffic patterns.  In Kyiv, main 
thoroughfares are usually well-lit and maintained, but side streets 
and less commonly used avenues are often poorly illuminated, narrow, 
and less well maintained. 
 
Driving in Kyiv can be a challenge to foreigners.  Traffic laws are 
routinely disregarded by local drivers, i.e., driving the wrong way 
on one-way streets, driving in oncoming lanes to maneuver around 
blocked traffic, and driving on sidewalks.  Using sidewalks for 
parking is an accepted practice and pedestrians should exercise 
caution.  Ukrainian drivers will also stop in traffic lanes to 
frequent roadside kiosks or to pick-up or drop off passengers; 
pedestrians often cross busy streets without hesitation.  Drivers 
should be prepared to stop on short notice.  Defensive driving is a 
fundamental rule that should always be observed. 
 
Road conditions deteriorate rapidly outside Kyiv.  Although there 
are some modern highways which connect main cities (for example, the 
highway from Kyiv to Odesa), a number of these roads are in poor 
condition.  Most highways and roads in smaller towns are not 
illuminated and emergency services are not reliable or prompt. 
Therefore, it is recommended to drive outside of Kyiv only during 
daylight hours.  Visitors should plan any driving trips 
accordingly. 
 
------------------------ 
II.  Political Violence: 
------------------------ 
 
¶A.  Recent Historical Perspective: 
 
The fraudulent conduct of the 2004 presidential elections resulted 
in massive but peaceful demonstrations - referred to commonly as the 
Orange Revolution - which brought Viktor Yushchenko to the 
Presidency.  The March 2006 parliamentary elections were the freest 
and fairest in the country's history.  The Party of Regions, led by 
former Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych, garnered a plurality of 
votes and formed a majority coalition with the Socialist and 
Communist parties in the Rada (parliament), which allowed Yanukovych 
to become Prime Minister once again.  However, accusations of 
vote-buying led Yushchenko to dismiss the parliament in April 2007. 
This was followed by more than two months of political stalemate, 
including large scale but peaceful demonstrations and rallies in 
Kyiv, and disagreement over the legal status of the Rada. 
 
The President and then-Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych reached a 
political compromise to hold pre-term parliamentary elections in 
September 2007.  These elections were judged to be free and fair by 
international standards.  Although Party of Regions once again won a 
plurality, Bloc Yuliya Tymoshenko (BYuT) and the pro-Yushchenko Our 
Ukraine-People's Self-Defense bloc (OU-PSD) garnered enough seats in 
the Rada to form a narrow majority, bringing the main players in the 
government that took office in 2005 immediately after the Orange 
Revolution back to power, including Tymoshenko as Prime Minister. 
 
Mutual recriminations between the President and Prime Minister 
quickly surfaced again in 2008.  On September 2, a majority of 
OU-PSD MPs voted to leave the coalition with BYuT, charging that 
BYuT was actively working with Party of Regions to weaken the 
presidency.  On October 8, the President disbanded the Rada and 
called for pre-term Rada elections blaming BYuT for the collapse of 
the coalition.  PM Tymoshenko opposed pre-term elections, citing the 
unfolding domestic economic crisis as requiring political continuity 
and stability.  The Rada did not pass necessary legislation to fund 
pre-term elections.  In late November, Yushchenko rescinded his 
decree dissolving the Rada.  On December 16, 2008, a new coalition 
was formed between BYuT, a majority of OU-PSD and Volodymyr Lytvyn's 
bloc, with Lytvyn as Rada Speaker. 
 
¶B.  Corruption, Organized Crime, and Cyber Crime: 
 
Corruption is a significant problem.  The Ukrainian Government 
openly acknowledges that corruption remains a major issue in 
society.  Their efforts to fight corruption effectively are hampered 
by the general public's widespread tolerance and apathetic response 
to it; its systemic characteristics within the government and 
business community; inadequate enforcement; and lack of appropriate 
legislation to investigate and prosecute it. 
 
As a measure, Transparency International's (TI) 2008 Corruption 
Perceptions Index (CPI) rating for Ukraine was 2.5 (on a scale of 
10) or 134th place out of 180 countries - tied with Pakistan and 
rated lower than Nigeria.  In 2007, Ukraine's CPI rating was 2.7 and 
was ranked 118th place. 
 
In the past, harassment, extortion, protection rackets, and 
intimidation have been reported against American investors or 
business interests in Ukraine.  In some cases, it appears that 
individuals with local commercial interests, who may have had links 
to organized crime groups, were behind these incidents.  Although 
still a concern, these types of reported incidents have declined 
over the past few years.  In 2008, there were no significant 
incidents reported to the Embassy of American businesses being 
targeted by organized crime in Ukraine. 
 
American firms should continue to pay close attention to information 
protection when establishing operations in Ukraine, as a heightened 
awareness of cyber crime is essential.  As noted previously, U.S. 
law enforcement agencies are working very closely with their 
Ukrainian Government counterparts in this area.  In August 2008, the 
U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) unsealed an indictment involving 
the global theft and sale of more than 40 million credit card 
numbers from nine major U.S. commercial firms.  The indictment 
charged eleven perpetrators including three Ukrainian citizens. 
This is the largest hacking and identity theft case ever prosecuted 
by the U.S. DOJ.  One of the Ukrainian suspects - now in custody in 
Turkey awaiting extradition to the United States - is considered to 
be a major figure in transnational cyber crime enterprises.  This 
individual operated entirely on-line from Ukraine. 
 
¶C.  Domestic, Regional and Transnational Terrorism: 
 
Domestic, regional or transnational terrorism are not currently 
considered to be major threats in Ukraine.  This assessment takes 
into account historical data relevant to terrorist activities in 
Ukraine, and current and projected Ukrainian law enforcement and 
security service anti-terrorist activities.  Nevertheless, travelers 
should be aware of the State Department's periodic Worldwide Caution 
Public announcement reemphasizing the continued threat of terrorist 
actions and violence against Americans and interests overseas. 
Public announcements and the Consular Information Sheet for Ukraine 
are available on the Department of State website at 
http://www.travel.state.gov. 
 
Ukraine did not suffer from domestic, regional, or transnational 
terrorism incidents in 2008.  Furthermore, there have been no 
recorded acts of transnational terrorism committed on Ukrainian 
territory to date.  Admittedly, Ukraine's borders are porous which 
transnational terrorist groups potentially could take advantage of. 
To counter this, the Ukrainian Government is taking steps, with U.S. 
and Allied assistance, to improve border security. 
 
¶D.  Civil Unrest: 
 
Ukraine has been largely free of significant civil unrest or 
disorder, with the significant exception of the November-December 
2004 Orange Revolution.  After President Yushchenko dissolved the 
Ukrainian Parliament in April 2007, there were large but peaceful 
street demonstrations which lasted for several months.  President 
Yushchenko's decision to again dissolve the parliament in October 
2008, resulted in scattered and much smaller (but peaceful) 
demonstrations. 
 
In general, most demonstrations directed against the U.S. Embassy 
have been small (less than 100 individuals), peaceful, and cursory. 
The largest demonstrations in recent memory at the Embassy occurred 
immediately prior to President Bush's visit to Kyiv in April 2008. 
These demonstrations involved thousands of people and were 
peaceful. 
 
There are very few organized anti-American and/or anti-Western 
groups in Ukraine that have a significant or widespread 
constituency.  But as in any foreign country, it is advisable for 
American citizens to avoid all demonstrations regardless. 
 
---------------------------- 
III. Post Specific Concerns: 
---------------------------- 
 
¶A. Earthquakes and Floods: 
 
Ukraine does not suffer from earthquakes.  Flooding routinely occurs 
in the Spring in western Ukraine, particularly in the Carpathian 
mountains during the Winter thaw.  However, there was serious and 
widespread flooding in Ukraine in Summer 2008 that resulted in 
significant damage and loss of life.  There are no other major 
natural disasters that routinely occur in Ukraine. 
 
¶B. Industrial and Transportation Accidents: 
 
a) Radiation and Nuclear Safety: 
 
The Chornobyl Nuclear Power Plant's last operating reactor closed 
officially on December 15, 2000.  In 1986, the Chornobyl Nuclear 
Power Plant (unit no. 4), located ninety kilometers northwest of 
Kyiv, experienced an explosion and fire, followed by an uncontrolled 
release of radiation.  The accident resulted in the largest 
short-term, accidental release of radioactive materials in the 
atmosphere ever recorded.  The highest areas of radioactive ground 
contamination occurred within thirty kilometers of the Chornobyl 
station.  A favorable wind direction kept most of the contamination 
away from Kyiv, although the capital city was not spared 
completely. 
 
Ukraine has fifteen operating commercial nuclear reactors, but none 
are of the Chornobyl design.  The United States has provided 
extensive assistance to enhance nuclear and operational safety of 
these reactors.  All identified stabilization measures on the 
existing sarcophagus are complete, and preparatory work to start 
construction of the new shelter is almost complete.  Construction of 
the new structure around the existing sarcophagus will start in 2009 
and is expected to be completed in 2012. 
 
Food that exceeds European norms for radiation is confiscated and 
destroyed.  The Ukrainian government has an effective program of 
monitoring fresh foods and meats sold in local markets.  Street 
purchase of produce should be avoided.  Wild berries, mushrooms, and 
wild fowl and game should be avoided, as these have been found to 
retain higher than average levels of radiation.  Background levels 
of radiation are monitored regularly by the U.S. Embassy and other 
organizations and to date have not exceeded levels found on the 
Eastern seaboard of the United States. 
 
In the event of any accident at a nuclear power station, the U.S. 
Embassy has the capability to confirm local government reporting of 
background radiation levels and food contamination.  The Embassy 
continuously monitors the radiological and operational conditions at 
Ukrainian nuclear facilities.  Radiation measurements at all U.S. 
Embassies in Eastern Europe following the 1986 Chornobyl accident 
did not warrant the evacuation of U.S. Government employees or their 
dependents, including pregnant women and children.  Flying and other 
modes of transportation used to evacuate people when nuclear 
material may be in the air can present a greater hazard than staying 
in place.  If external radiation levels are high enough to require 
evacuation, the U.S. Embassy will notify the American community via 
the Embassy's warden system.  On-line registration is available at 
https://travelregistration.state.gov/ibrs. 
 
b) Transportation Accidents: 
 
As noted previously, due to heavy traffic and local driving habits, 
vehicle accidents are common.  In Ukraine, motorists involved in 
vehicle accidents are not permitted to move the vehicles, unless it 
presents a clear safety concern.  Police must be notified and will 
go to the accident location to conduct the investigation.  Persons 
should be prepared to wait until the police arrive and complete 
their report.  Due to traffic and slow police response, it may take 
up to several hours for police to arrive, especially outside of 
Kyiv.  When police arrive, they will ascertain responsibility, take 
the drivers' personal information, and file a report of the 
accident. 
 
There were no significant aviation or rail accidents in Ukraine 
reported in 2008. 
 
 
¶C. Kidnappings: 
 
Kidnapping is not a common occurrence in Ukraine, and is not 
considered a major crime or security issue.  There are no notable 
instances of kidnapping which occurred in 2008. 
 
¶D. Drugs and Narcoterrorism: 
 
Combating narcotics trafficking is a national priority, but limited 
budget resources hamper Ukraine's ability to effectively counter 
this threat.  In addition, coordination between law enforcement 
agencies responsible for counter-narcotics continues to be stilted 
due to regulatory and jurisdictional constraints as well as 
bureaucratic intransigence. 
 
Ukraine is not a major drug producing country; however, it is 
located astride several important drug trafficking routes into 
Europe.  Ukraine's ports on the Black and Azov Seas, its extensive 
river transportation routes, its porous northern and eastern 
borders, and its inadequately financed Border and Customs Agencies 
make Ukraine an attractive route for drug traffickers.  In 2008, 
Ukrainian Government law enforcement and security agencies, working 
with the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), seized hundreds 
of pounds of heroin being smuggled from Afghanistan to Europe via 
Ukraine's Black Sea ports.  With increasing heroin seizures, DEA 
believes that Ukraine is now a major transit country. 
 
There are no known links between transnational terrorist and 
narcotics organizations in Ukraine; and in 2008, there were no 
charges or allegations of corruption of senior public officials 
relating to drugs or drug trafficking. 
 
--------------------- 
IV.  Police Response: 
--------------------- 
 
¶A. General Evaluation of Police Support for Foreigners Who Are Crime 
Victims: 
 
Although criminal activity in Ukraine directed against foreigners is 
likely comparable with similar Eastern European countries, the 
underlying issue of why criminal activity remains a concern is due 
to the lack of adequate Ukrainian police enforcement and response. 
Generally, Ukrainian law enforcement agencies do not meet U.S. 
standards, and their ability to deter street-level criminal activity 
is low, as is their ability to adequately investigate criminal 
incidents.  Street criminals will have the initiative and advantage. 
 Rather than relying on "the beat cop," foreigners instead should 
maintain an increased level of security awareness and rely upon 
their intuition and use common sense. 
 
As noted previously, corruption is a serious problem in Ukraine and 
Ukrainian law enforcement agencies are often part of the problem 
rather than a part of the solution.  Low salaries, inadequate 
training, poor working conditions, and shortages of basic equipment 
contribute greatly to systemic internal corruption and general 
ineffectiveness.  As previously noted, police ineffectiveness and 
negligence in response to countering or investigating hate crimes is 
especially troubling.  Police units also rarely have 
English-language capability, even among officials working in units 
designated to combat crimes against foreigner nationals.  As a 
result, reporting a crime to the police is often a difficult and 
lengthy process.  Subsequent follow-up to determine the status of a 
case often requires lengthy visits to police stations. 
 
Despite this, the Embassy recommends that Americans report crimes to 
the police, as well as to the Embassy.  In the event that Ukrainian 
police will not accept a crime report, the Consulate's American 
Citizen Services can forward the complaint to the police.  Reporting 
a crime is also advisable even if time has elapsed since the crime 
occurred, as criminals often repeat the same crime within the same 
general locale.  Finally, a police report also is strongly 
recommended when an American passport has been lost or stolen. 
 
¶B. How to Handle Incidents of Police Detention or Harassment: 
 
Under Ukrainian law, individuals are required to carry personal 
identification documents at all times, and it is common for local 
law enforcement to stop persons on the street to conduct 
identification checks.  Unlike the United States, no "probable 
cause" is required.  Therefore, the Embassy recommends that you 
carry your passport at all times.  For foreigners, often these 
police identification checks are simply an excuse to elicit bribes 
or extort money. 
 
Harassment or detention by police should be reported to the Embassy 
at 490-4454 or to the Embassy's Consulate at 490-4445 as soon as 
possible.  Ukrainian authorities are required to notify the U.S. 
Embassy within 72 hours of the detention of a U.S. citizen.  If 
detained by police, it is strongly recommended that you ask (and 
continue to ask) for access to the U.S. Embassy as soon as 
possible. 
 
¶C. Where to Turn for Assistance if you Become a Victim of a Crime 
and Local Police Telephone Numbers: 
 
If you become a victim of a crime in Ukraine, you may contact the 
U.S. Embassy for assistance at the following numbers: 
 
Embassy:  490-4454 (24 hours/7 days per week) 
Embassy (Consulate):  490-4445 (0830-1730, Monday to Friday) 
 
Although there is no comparable "911" service in Ukraine, the 
general fire emergency telephone number is "01"; the police 
emergency number is "02,"; the ambulance/emergency medical services 
number is "03."  These numbers can be used in Kyiv and in major 
cities. 
 
------------------------ 
¶V.  Medical Emergencies: 
------------------------ 
 
¶A. Contact Information for Local Hospitals and Clinics: 
 
American Medical Center Phone: 490-7600 
Medikom Clinic Phone:          0-55 or 432-8888 
Boris Clinic Phone:            238-0000 
City Emergency Hospital Phone: 518-0629 
 
There are no hospitals in Ukraine that provide a level of medical 
care equal to that found in American hospitals, or which accept 
American health insurance plans for payment.  Travelers to Ukraine 
are recommended to purchase insurance which covers air ambulance 
evacuation services from Ukraine.  In addition, travelers who have 
chronic medical conditions which require medication should bring 
enough medicine to Ukraine since medicine may not be readily 
available in country.  Travelers may wish to review further medical 
advice for conditions in Ukraine at www.cdc.gov. 
 
In Kyiv, the American Medical Center (AMC) is a private clinic that 
offers its own health care insurance plan and, on a fee basis, 
provides basic Western-quality outpatient and diagnostic services. 
AMC provides direct billing only with the following insurance 
companies:  Good Health, Buppa, Cigna International, Alliance, Etna, 
and Axa PPP. 
 
For emergency services such as mass or multi-trauma, major disaster, 
and mass casualty, City Emergency Hospital located at Bratislavska 
#3 on the Left Bank of Kyiv would be used.  City Hospital is a 
government facility, and there are no English speakers. 
 
Two private clinics, Boris Clinic and Medikom Clinic, are available 
24/7 for life-threatening emergencies or if an individual needs 
immediate medical assistance.  Both clinics have English-speaking 
receptionists on call at all times.  Boris and Medikom also offer 
24-hour ambulance service.  For general emergency ambulance 
assistance, dial "03", however, there are no English speaking 
receptionists.  Contact information for additional hospitals and 
clinics can be found at the Embassy's Consular website at 
http://kyiv.usembassy.gov/amcit_medical_eng.h tml. 
 
The fastest way to secure Western medical care remains medical 
evacuation to Western Europe.  This is a very expensive option, and 
assistance may not arrive until several hours after the need for 
care arises.  Again, travelers should purchase medical evacuation 
insurance prior to travel or have access to substantial lines of 
credit to cover the cost of medical evacuation. 
 
¶B. Air Ambulance Service: 
 
SOS:  8-10-7-495-937-6477 (24/7 phone) 
EURO FLITE:  8-10-358-20-510-1911 or 358-20-510-1900 
(24/7 phone) 
MEDEX Assistance Corporation:  8-10-1-410-453-6330 
(24/7 phone) 
TRICARE/SOS (for military personnel):  8-10-44-20-8762-8133 
 
There are several European firms that provide private jet 
evacuations, and the AMC and Boris Clinic in Kyiv can organize and 
assist with evacuation for a fee.  Aero medical evacuation companies 
that service Ukraine include: SOS, EURO FLITE, MEDEX Assistance 
Corporation, as well as TRICARE/SOS (for military personnel).  Boris 
Clinic has a limited agreement with Tricare.  Contact information 
for additional insurance and medevac companies can be found at the 
Embassy's Consular website at 
http://kyiv.usembassy.gov/amcit_medical_eng.h tml. 
 
----------------------- 
VI. Travel Precautions: 
----------------------- 
 
¶A. Local Crimes/Scams: 
 
As noted previously, "The Wallet Scam" remains the most common 
confidence scam perpetuated on American citizens in Ukraine.  The 
number of reported hate crimes against non-Slavic and religious 
minorities has increased over the past few years. 
 
¶B. Areas of Kyiv/Ukraine to be Avoided and Best Security Practices: 
 
There are no "off-limits" areas in Kyiv or in any other part of 
Ukraine due to security concerns.  It should be noted, however, that 
many reported petty criminal incidents occur on public transport in 
Kyiv, especially the metro system.  In addition, many pick-pocketing 
incidents are also reported in those areas frequented by large 
groups of people or tourists. 
 
For Kyiv and throughout Ukraine, common sense security precautions 
anyone would take in any large city or Eastern European country are 
appropriate.  To avoid becoming a victim of routine street crime, be 
alert and aware of your surroundings at all times.  When riding 
public transportation, where pick-pocketing and snatch thefts are a 
concern, keep purses, shoulder bags and backpacks closed, in front 
of you, and tucked under your arm to prevent theft.  Men are advised 
to place wallets in a front pocket while on public transportation to 
prevent pick-pocketing.  It is recommended to maintain a low profile 
and to not carry large sums of cash.  If possible, leave wallets or 
purses secured at your residence and carry only necessary cash and 
identification in a front pocket.  Refrain from carrying unnecessary 
items in your wallet or purse, such as credit cards, that you will 
not use.  It is further recommended that you do not establish 
routine travel patterns or habits by varying your departure/arrival 
times and routes as much as possible between frequented locations. 
 
--------------------------------- 
VII. Embassy Contact Information: 
--------------------------------- 
 
Country Code: 380 
Kyiv City Code: 44 
 
Regional Security Office:  490-4048 
Embassy Kyiv General Number:  490-4000 
Embassy Marine Post One:  490-4454 
 
Embassy Kyiv Website: http://kyiv.usembassy.gov 
 
--------------------------- 
VIII. OSAC Country Council: 
--------------------------- 
 
There is an OSAC Country Council in Kyiv, which is a subcommittee of 
the U.S. Chamber of Commerce in Ukraine.  The Kyiv OSAC can be 
contacted through the U.S. Embassy's Regional Security Officer. 
 
¶2.  (U)  No further information follows.  Best regards from 
Kyiv. 
 
Taylor