09LONDON2676
IMO: 14TH SESSION OF THE DANGEROUS GOODS, SOLID
Tue Dec 01 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy London
VZCZCXRO4304
RR RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDIR RUEHKUK RUEHTRO
DE RUEHLO #2676/01 3351703
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 011703Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY LONDON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4124
INFO RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RUWDQAC/COMDT COGARD WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 LONDON 002676 
 
SIPDIS 
 
COMMERCE FOR MARITIME ADMINISTRATION 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EWWT IMO IR PHSA SENV UK
SUBJECT: IMO: 14TH SESSION OF THE DANGEROUS GOODS, SOLID 
CARGOES AND CONTAINERS (DSC) SUBCOMMITTEE, LONDON 21-25 
SEPTEMBER 2009 
 
¶1. Summary: The fourteenth session of the IMO Dangerous 
Goods, Solid Cargoes and Containers (DSC) Sub Committee (S/C) 
met in London from 21-25 September 2009, under the 
chairmanship of Mrs. Olga Pestel-Lefevre (France). The 
session was attended by delegations from fifty-nine member 
states, one associate member, two representatives from United 
Nations specialized agencies, three intergovernmental 
organizations and twenty-three non-governmental organizations 
in consultative status. Working groups (WGs) and drafting 
groups (DGs) were formed to address several of the agenda 
items. USDEL objectives were achieved. Outcomes of particular 
interest include the following: 
a. The S/C continued its work on installation of equipment 
for detection of radioactive objects in port based on a 
proposal from Iran. See paragraph 17 for further details. 
b. The S/C continued its work on Amendments to the 
International Maritime Solid Bulk Cargoes (IMSBC) Code. These 
amendments should be finalized at DSC 15 and submitted to the 
May 2011 session of the Committee and would come into force 
on 1 January 2012 on a voluntary basis, and from 1 January 
2013 on a mandatory basis. See paragraph 3 for further 
details. 
c. The S/C completed its work on amendments to the Code of 
Safe Practice for Stowage and Securing (CSS). See paragraph 4 
for further details. 
d. The S/C completed its work on Amendment 35-10 to the 
International Maritime Dangerous Goods (IMDG) Code. The 
amendments will be submitted to Maritime Safety Committee 
(MSC) meeting #87 (MSC 87) for consideration and subsequent 
adoption. Amendment 35-10 will be published fall 2010 and 
will attain voluntary status on 1 January 2011 and mandatory 
status on 1 January 2012. End summary. 
 
Amendments to the IMDG Code (Dangerous Goods) 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  The S/C considered 15 separate proposals under this 
agenda item. The S/C agreed to proposals for inclusion in 
Amendment 35-10 to the IMDG Code for consideration and 
expected adoption by MSC 87. Other proposals were either 
rejected or deferred for further consideration at DSC 15 
contingent on submission of revised proposals. The S/C 
re-established the correspondence group under the 
coordination of the United Kingdom for revision of Chapters 
7.1, 7.2, and 7.4 of the IMDG Code. 
 
Amendments to the IMSBC Code (Solid Bulk Cargoes) 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶3. The S/C agreed in principle with Sweden's proposal to add 
pulp wood and timber to the IMSBC Code and instructed the 
IMSBC WG to further deliberate the issue. The S/C also agreed 
with a proposal to add a schedule for granular ferrous 
sulphate monohydrate in Group C in the IMSBC Code. The S/C 
agreed to remove the schedule for wood pulp pellets as these 
do not exist in practice and the schedule could easily be 
mistaken for the schedule for wood pellets. As presented by 
the United States  and Brazil, the S/C agreed, in principle, 
that citrus pulp pellets could be exempt from the schedules 
for seedcake (b), UN 1386, and seedcake, UN 2217. The WG 
prepared a draft MSC Circular on the interpretation of 
stowage and segregation requirements for brown coal 
briquettes and coal related to "hot areas". The WG agreed 
that fuel oil storage tanks should not be considered as "hot 
areas" when appropriate procedures are taken for the fuel 
heating. The S/C did not agree with a Venezuelan proposal to 
increase from 0.3% the allowable moisture content of direct 
reduced iron (C). 
 
Amendments to the CSS Code (Stowage and Securing) 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶4. A majority of delegations did not support amending the 
unified instructions on safe packing of cargo transport units 
at this time. The S/C did agree on a width of 750 mm for 
permanent lashing bridges on new construction vessels (keels 
of which are laid or which are at a similar stage of 
construction on or after 1 January 2015). This requirement 
would not apply to existing vessels due to the exorbitant 
costs and structural issues of refitting. Several other 
issues were discussed regarding the securing of containers 
including application of the draft new annex to existing 
containerships, amendments to resolution A.533 (13), and 
amendments to resolution A. 571 (14) all of which will be 
reviewed for approval by MSC 87. 
 
Casualty and Incidents Reports and Analysis 
 
LONDON 00002676  002 OF 005 
 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  The S/C considered an incident report from Secretariat 
wherein a container loaded with standard commercial nickel 
metal hydride rechargeable batteries exploded onboard the 
container vessel PUNJAB SENATOR. The crew brought the fire 
under control with massive use of CO2 and intensive cooling 
and eventually put the fire out. Provisions for a new entry 
of nickel metal hydride batteries were considered under 
agenda item 3 and agreed to in principle by the S/C. The S/C 
also reviewed the reports from eleven member governments and 
from the Secretariat summarizing container inspection 
programs that had been carried out in various countries and 
further agreed to urge all member governments to submit such 
reports in the future in accordance with MSC.1/Circ.1201. It 
should be noted that, given the large number of inspections 
in the United States and the maturity of the U.S. domestic 
program, the U.S. documented rate of container deficiencies, 
about 25%, is likely more representative of the shipping 
industry as a whole than the lower rates documented by 
countries with many fewer inspections. 
 
Safe Loading and Unloading for Bulk Carriers (BLU Code) 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶6.  At DSC 13 the S/C established an intersessional 
correspondence group under the chairmanship of the United 
States to progress this work and prepare a written report to 
DSC 14. The S/C approved the report in general. The report 
included amendments to the BLU Code, the Manual on Loading 
and Unloading of Solid Bulk Cargoes for Terminal 
Representatives MSC/Circ.1160 and the footnotes in Safety of 
Life at Sea (SOLAS) Convention chapter VI in light of the 
recommended form for cargo information contained in MSC/Circ. 
¶663. The S/C also agreed to a draft MSC circular on 
additional considerations for the safe loading of bulk 
carriers and will forward it to MSC 87 for approval. Having 
noted that the work on the agenda item had concluded, the S/C 
invited the Committee to delete the item from the work 
program on the S/C. 
 
 
Recommendations for the Safe use of Pesticides in Ships 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶7. The S/C established a drafting group at DSC 12 to develop 
two draft MSC circulars, which were subsequently approved at 
MSC 84, as applicable to the safe use of pesticides for cargo 
holds (MSC/Circ.689) and for cargo transport units 
(MSC.Circ.746). The S/C noted that one issue remained 
outstanding, namely the control of rodents on ships. Noting 
that no documents were submitted to DSC 13 on this issue, the 
S/C invited member governments to submit proposals to DSC 14 
for consideration. One proposal was made by Germany to DSC 14 
to update the text of MSC/Circ.612 on Recommendations on safe 
use of pesticides in ships. The S/C established a drafting 
group at DSC 14 to update the text of MSC/Circ.612 for its 
use as a supplement to the IMDG Code, IMBSC Code, and the 
Grain Code. The DG also updated the text of MSC/Circ. 1264 on 
Recommendations on the safe use of pesticides in ships 
applicable to the fumigation of cargo transport units. The 
S/C approved the report in general.  After being finalized by 
the E&T Group, it will be submitted to MSC 87 for approval. 
 
Guidance on Protective Clothing 
------------------------------- 
 
¶8. The S/C recalled an amendment to the 2000 HSC Code and 
SOLAS 11-2, as prepared by FP 49, to include a requirement to 
carry chemical protective clothing on board taking into 
account the danger of the chemicals to be carried. At DSC 13, 
the S/C expressed a view that, if the relevant amendments 
were approved by the MSC, the S/C should develop associated 
guidance on protective clothing selection. On this basis, the 
S/C considered a proposal by Sweden to refer to EN 943-2 as a 
suitable standard for the selection of protective clothing. 
However, the S/C/ was of the opinion that this standard 
provides too little protection and that there were other 
standards that should be considered. On this basis, the S/C 
established a DG at DSC 13 to develop guidance on protective 
clothing. The DG agreed that the protective equipment is 
intended to deal with emergency incidents, including spills 
for packaged dangerous goods only, and is not intended for 
working with chemicals. The WG also suggested that the 
ISO-TC8 S/C should assist with standards development. At DSC 
14, the S/C considered a proposal from Sweden to establish a 
correspondence group, in cooperation with ISO, to develop a 
 
LONDON 00002676  003 OF 005 
 
 
corresponding standard, taking into account provisions in 
SOLAS regulation II-2/19.3.6.1, for guidance on protective 
clothing as well as the comments and outcomes of DSC 13 and 
DSC 14. 
 
Code of Safe Practice for Ships Carrying Timber Deck Cargoes 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
¶9. The S/C considered papers submitted by Sweden, the United 
States, Canada, and Finland on this topic. A WG was 
established and recommend several changes to the draft 
revised Code. The S/C considered the report of the WG and 
approved the report in general and established a 
correspondence group under the coordination of Sweden. 
 
Stowage of water reactive materials 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶10.  The S/C noted a proposal by Germany to review the cargo 
stowage, segregation, and packing requirements for water 
reactive substances covered by the IMDG Code and agreed to 
include this agenda item in the work program of the S/C with 
a target completion date of 2009.  In the proposal, Germany 
observed that there are some water-reactive substances that 
could react dangerously with carbon dioxide and therefore 
would render conventional fire-fighting mediums useless or 
even dangerous in an emergency situation.  The S/C, noting 
that no documents were submitted under this agenda item, 
invited the Germany and other interested member governments 
to continue research in this area and to submit proposals to 
DSC 15. 
 
International Convention for Safe Containers, 1972 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶11.  The S/C recalled that DSC 12 considered proposals to 
standardize the scope, principles, and requirements of the 
continuous examination programmes in light of a recent 
incident involving a deficient container and agreed to 
include this agenda item in the work program of the S/C with 
a target completion date of 2009.  Under this agenda item, 
the S/C took decisions on a number of proposals and decided 
to establish an intersessional correspondence group under the 
chairmanship of the International Standards Organization 
(ISO) to further this work and prepare a written report to 
DSC 14.  The S/C considered the report of the Correspondence 
Group and established a WG under the chairmanship of the 
United States.  The S/C endorsed the recommendation that the 
International Standards Organization (ISO) should be invited 
to develop the appropriate standard and include specific 
marking criteria to denote containers with limited racking 
and stacking capacities.  The S/C endorsed the group's 
recommendation to invite the Committee to extend the target 
completion date to 2010. 
 
Guidelines for Packing Cargo Transport Units 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶12. The S/C recalled that DSC 12 considered a proposal by 
Germany, noting that Guidelines on Packing of Cargo Transport 
Units have not been amended since the adoption of Amendment 
31-02 to the IMDG Code and that the Guidelines may benefit 
from improvements.  The S/C agreed to include this agenda 
item in the work program of the S/C with a target completion 
date of 2009.  The S/C further recalled that DSC 13, having 
considered the proposal by Germany which observed that when 
the Guidelines were included in the 2006 Edition of the 
Supplement to the IMDG Code, the Guidelines were not updated 
to reflect the changes to labels, placards, marks, and signs. 
 DCS 13 instructed the E&T Group to identify amendments in 
the future as they become necessary and report them to the 
S/C for approval.  DSC 13 also noted that there may be a need 
to consider developing an ongoing procedure to update 
instruments to reflect revisions to the IMDG Code.  The S/C 
requested E&T 14 to prepare draft revision guidelines for 
consideration at DSC 15. 
 
Documentation for Dangerous Goods in Packaged Form 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶13. The S/C recalled a proposal by the Untied States to 
review documentation requirements for dangerous goods in 
packaged form and, if necessary, to prepare amendments to 
SOLAS VII regulation 4 and the IMDG Code.  The S/C agreed to 
include this agenda item in the work program of the S/C with 
a target completion date of 2009.  In the proposal, the 
United States observed SOLAS needed to be amended.  The S/C 
 
LONDON 00002676  004 OF 005 
 
 
supported the proposal in principle and, noting the 
documentation requirements contained in MARPOL Annex III, 
agreed to forward the proposal to the E&T 13 for 
finalization.  The S/C considered the draft amendment to 
regulation VII/4 of SOLAS prepared by the E&T Group, made 
modifications, and approved it for submission to MSC 87 for 
approval with the view to adoption at MSC 88.  The envisioned 
entry-into-force date is 1 January 2014, in order to align 
with amendment 36-12 to the IMDG Code.  Having noted that 
work on this item has been concluded, the S/C invited the 
Committee to delete it from the work program of the S/C. 
 
Amendments to MARPOL Annex III 
------------------------------ 
 
¶14.  The S/C recalled that DSC 13 had considered the outcome 
of the E&T Group's discussion and a related document 
submitted by the Netherlands concerning the issue of markings 
for marine pollutants.  Since the IMDG Code should not 
contain regulations that deviate from MARPOL, the S/C 
concluded that for marine pollutants in tanks, the correct 
technical name need not be shown on the tanks. This decision 
would require an amendment to MARPOL Annex III and the S/C 
requested MEPC 59 to consider the justification for inclusion 
of a new item on "Amendments to MARPOL Annex III." The S/C 
also established a DG to consider the incorporation of the 
new GHS (Globally Harmonized System) criteria to Annex III of 
MARPOL, revise documentation requirements in order to align 
MARPOL Annex III with the agreed amendments to SOLAS 
regulation VII/4, review marking and labeling provisions of 
harmful substances in packaged form, and prepare a draft MEPC 
resolution incorporating consequential draft amendments to 
MARPOL Annex III.  The S/C agreed to the text of the revised 
MARPOL Annex III for approval by MEPC 60 with the view to 
subsequent adoption by MEPC 61. The S/C also noted that with 
the revision to MARPOL Annex III there will be a need for 
subsequent amendments to the IMDG Code. 
 
Recommendations for Entering Enclosed Spaces Aboard Ships 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶15.  The S/C recalled that at DSC 13 Sweden submitted 
documents on the transport of wood pellets and other wood 
products and a report on a fatal accident in an oxygen 
deficient atmosphere on a bulk carrier discharging wood 
pellets.  The S/C agreed on the need for review of the 
Recommendations for entering enclosed spaces aboard ships and 
prepared a justification for a new work program item.  MSC 85 
agreed to include this item in the work program of the BLG 
(Bulk Liquids and Gases), DSC (Dangerous Goods, Solid Cargoes 
and Containers), FP (Fire Prevention), and STCW (Standards of 
Training and Watch-Keeping) S/Cs as a high priority item with 
a target completion date of 2010, assigning the DSC S/C as a 
coordinator.  The S/C considered proposals for Amendments to 
the Recommendations and to SOLAS regulation III/9 to mandate 
enclosed space entry and rescue procedure drills.  The S/C 
agreed to establish a Correspondence Group on revision of the 
Recommendations under the coordination of the Bahamas, to 
make progress on the issues taking into account the outcome 
of BLG, FP, and STCW S/Cs, and submit a written report to DSC 
¶15. 
 
Efficacy of the Container Inspection Program 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶16.  The S/C recalled that MSC 84 had considered a document 
proposing to consider the efficacy of the Container 
Inspection Program (CIP) in order to encourage Member 
Governments to submit CIP reports and to develop strategies 
on how best to utilize the information submitted to reduce 
marine incidents with dangerous goods.  The Committee agreed 
to include this in the work program of DSC 14 with a target 
completion date of 2010.  The S/C considered two proposals 
from the Republic of Korea and agreed in principle to develop 
guidance for conducting container inspections.  The S/C 
invited interested delegates to submit proposals to DSC 15. 
 
Detection of Radioactive Objects in Port - Iranian Proposal 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶17. Iran proposed the installation of fixed or portable 
radiation detection equipment and proper training.  The S/C 
recalled that DSC 13 (IMO's Dangerous Goods Subcommittee), 
having considered the Iranian document, submitted 
justification for a new work program item to MSC 86 (IMO's 
Maritime Safety Committee).  MSC 86 agreed to include the 
proposal in the subcommittee's work program and the 
 
LONDON 00002676  005 OF 005 
 
 
provisional agenda for DSC 14 as a high-priority item with a 
target completion date of 2011.  During the S/C meeting, IAEA 
(International Atomic Energy Agency) intervened to state that 
they have already developed guidelines on the detection of 
radioactive material (RAM) and that the IAEA regretted not 
being at the MSC meeting that tasked DSC with this agenda in 
order to lend their expertise.  The IAEA expressed a desire 
to provide the guidelines for detection equipment and Iran 
offered to coordinate with the IAEA to further this issue. 
On this basis, the S/C requested that IAEA submit a report 
back to DSC 15. 
 
Other Business 
-------------- 
 
¶18. The S/C agreed that there should be a standard spectrum 
frequency requirement for identification and security (RFIDs) 
of cargo containers entering and leaving international ports 
and ships. 
 
Chair and Next Meeting 
---------------------- 
 
¶19. The S/C unanimously re-elected Mrs. Olga Pestel-Lefevre 
(France) as chairman and Mr. Arsenio A. Dominguez (Panama) as 
vice chairman for 2010.  The date of the fifteenth session of 
the DSC S/C is tentatively scheduled for 13-17 September 2010. 
 
Visit London's Classified Website: 
http://www.intelink.sgov.gov/wiki/Portal:Unit ed_Kingdom 
 
Susman