09MANAMA646
2010 NATIONAL TRADE ESTIMATE REPORT - BAHRAIN
Thu Nov 05 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMK #0646/01 3091253
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 051253Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY MANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9001
INFO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDCUNCLAS MANAMA 000646 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PASS TO USTR/GBLUE 
STATE FOR EB/TPP/BTA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EFIN ETRD BA
SUBJECT: 2010 NATIONAL TRADE ESTIMATE REPORT - BAHRAIN 
 
REF: STATE 105978 
 
¶1. Summary: The following is Post's submission of its National Trade 
Estimate for 2010 including reports on Sanitary and Phytosanitary 
and Standards-Related Foreign Trade Barriers. End Summary. 
 
-------------- 
TRADE SUMMARY 
-------------- 
¶2. The U.S. goods trade balance with Bahrain went from a deficit of 
$33 million in 2007, to a surplus of $291 million in 2008.  U.S. 
exports in 2008 were $829.5 million, up 40.3 percent from the 
previous year.  Through August 2009, U.S. exports to Bahrain reached 
$432 million, while U.S. imports from Bahrain totaled $292.6 
million.  As of August 2009, Bahrain is the 81st largest export 
market for U.S. goods. Final statistics for 2009 are not yet 
available. 
 
¶3. The stock of U.S. foreign direct investment (FDI) in Bahrain was 
$178 million in 2008 (latest data available), up from $160 million 
in 2007. 
 
--------------- 
IMPORT POLICIES 
--------------- 
¶4. Upon entry into force of the United States-Bahrain Free Trade 
Agreement (FTA) in August 2006, 100 percent of bilateral trade in 
consumer and industrial products became duty free.  Bahrain will 
phase out tariffs on the remaining handful of agricultural product 
lines by 2015.  Textiles and apparel trade is duty free, promoting 
new opportunities for U.S. and Bahraini fiber, yarn, fabric and 
apparel manufacturing. 
 
¶5. As a member of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), Bahrain 
applies the GCC common external tariff of 5 percent for most 
non-U.S. products, with a limited number of GCC-approved 
country-specific exceptions.  Bahrain's exceptions include alcohol 
(125 percent) and tobacco (120 percent).  Some 434 food and medical 
items are exempted from customs duties entirely. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
STANDARDS, TESTING, LABELING, AND CERTIFICATION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
Standards 
---------- 
¶6. Bahrain generally follows international or GCC standards, and the 
development of standards in Bahrain is based on the following 
principles: no unique Bahraini standard is to be developed if there 
is an identical draft GCC standard in existence or in the process of 
being developed; and developing new Bahraini standards must not 
create trade barriers.  As part of the GCC Customs Union, the six 
Member States are working toward unifying their standards and 
conformity assessment systems.  However, each Member State currently 
continues to apply either its own standard or a GCC standard, 
resulting in a complicated situation for U.S. businesses.  GCC 
Member States do not consistently send notification of new measures 
to WTO Members and the WTO Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade 
(TBT) or allow WTO Members an opportunity to provide comments. 
 
¶7. In June 2007, the Gulf Standards Organization (GSO) approved two 
new standards for the labeling and expiration periods of food 
products.  The new standards have subsequently been adopted by the 
member states and eliminate the long standing requirement that at 
least one-half of a product's shelf life be valid when a product 
reaches a port of entry in GCC Member States.  Officials from the 
GSO have stated that GCC Member States will accept use of the terms 
"best by" and "best before" as meeting the date labeling requirement 
for shelf-stable products.  The United States has requested written 
confirmation of this situation.  GCC members continue to require 
that food products include both  expiration and production dates, a 
requirement that is inconsistent with Codex guidelines. 
 
GCC Member States have notified the WTO of a number new or revised 
food standards in recent years.  For the most part, members have 
included guidelines from international reference organizations. 
However, a number of standards include provisions that could disrupt 
exports of certain U.S. food products if adopted and enforced.  The 
United States has commented extensively on many of these 
notifications. 
 
¶8. The total number of GCC standards adopted as Bahraini standards 
currently stands at 1,020.  Bahrain mandates compliance with 320 of 
those standards, whereas the rest remain voluntary.  There are also 
approximately 434 draft GCC standards under development, including a 
revised vehicle identification number location requirement that has 
elicited concern from at least one U.S. manufacturer; the Bahraini 
Ministry of Industry and Commerce has been responsive and has 
pledged to carefully weigh these concerns. 
Conformity Assessment 
--------------------- 
¶9. The GCC Standards Committee is currently developing a conformity 
assessment scheme to be adopted ultimately by each of the six Member 
States and has set 2010 as a deadline for full implementation by 
each Member State.  The United States is working to establish a 
dialogue between U.S. and GCC technical experts to discuss this 
proposed scheme with the goal of helping to ensure that it is 
developed, adopted, and applied in accordance with WTO rules. 
 
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures 
------------------------------------ 
¶10. In May 2007, Bahrain notified WTO Members of proposed procedures 
meant to harmonize food safety import requirements for all GCC 
Member States.  The United States and other WTO Members provided 
comments outlining significant concerns with the procedures, which 
did not appear to have a clear scientific basis and would 
substantially disrupt food exports to GCC Member States from their 
trading partners.  The GCC Member States have indicated that they 
have modified key provisions based on trading partner comments and 
are continuing work on revised set of import procedures.  The United 
States has established a dialogue with GCC technical experts and 
continues to monitor the situation and suggest alternate 
requirements that are consistent with international guidelines. 
 
¶11. Bahrain banned imports of pork in MONTH due to H1N1 concerns and 
has not yet issued a directive lifting the ban.  The United States 
has asked Bahrain to lift the ban on several occasions. 
 
¶12. Bahrain requires that all imported foods be accompanied by a 
health certificate.  In cases where foods are not federally 
regulated, obtaining a certificate can be a costly and 
time-consuming process for exporters.  Bahrain also requires that 
all Halal certificates be legalized by the Embassy of Bahrain or the 
Embassy of any other Arab country.  The process can be time 
consuming and costly for exporters. 
 
---------------------- 
GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT 
---------------------- 
¶13. The Tender Board plays an important role in ensuring a 
transparent bidding process, which the government of Bahrain 
recognizes as vital to attracting foreign investment.  The Tender 
Board awarded tenders worth $914 million in 2008, an increase of 4.6 
percent over 2007.  The FTA requires procuring entities in Bahrain 
to conduct procurements covered by the FTA in a fair, transparent, 
and nondiscriminatory manner. 
 
¶14. In 2002, Bahrain implemented a new government procurement law to 
ensure transparency and reduce bureaucracy in government tenders and 
purchases.  The law specifies procurements on which international 
suppliers are allowed to bid.  The Tender Board is chaired by a 
Minister of State who oversees all tenders and purchases with a 
value of BD10,000 ($26,525) or more. 
 
¶15. Bahrain is not a signatory to the WTO Agreement on Government 
Procurement, but it became an observer to the WTO Committee on 
Government Procurement in December 2008. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS (IPR) PROTECTION 
--------------------------------------------- 
¶16. In the FTA, Bahrain committed to provide strong IPR protection 
and enforcement.  Bahrain passed IPR legislation and regulations to 
implement these commitments in the areas of copyrights, trademarks, 
patents, and enforcement, among others. 
 
¶17. As part of the GCC Customs Union, the six Member States are 
working toward unifying their IPR regimes. In this respect, the GCC 
is preparing a draft common trademark law.  All six Member States 
are expected to adopt this law as national legislation in order to 
implement it.  The United States has outlined specific concerns with 
the trademark law and has established a dialogue between U.S. and 
GCC technical experts to ensure that the law complies with the 
Member States' international and bilateral obligations. 
 
------------------- 
INVESTMENT BARRIERS 
------------------- 
¶18. Bahrain permits 100 percent foreign ownership of new industrial 
entities and the establishment of representative offices or branches 
of foreign companies without local sponsors.  Wholly foreign owned 
companies may be established for regional distribution services and 
may operate within the domestic market as long as they do not 
exclusively pursue domestic commercial sales.  Foreign companies 
established before 1975 may be exempt from this rule under special 
circumstances. 
 
¶19. Since January 2001, foreign firms and GCC nationals have been 
permitted to own land in Bahrain.  Non-GCC nationals may own 
high-rise commercial and residential properties, as well as property 
in tourism, banking, financial and health projects, and training 
centers, in specific geographic areas. 
 
¶20. In 2006, the Cabinet passed an edict opening ownership of "free 
hold" properties now being constructed throughout the Kingdom.  The 
edict was specific that all nationalities may own commercial or 
investment properties.  Only high-rise residences, and a few 
specific residential properties in large projects, may be owned free 
hold. 
 
¶21. In an attempt to streamline licensing and approval procedures, 
the Ministry of Commerce opened the Bahrain Investors Center (BIC) 
in October 2004 for both local and foreign companies seeking to 
register in Bahrain.  According to Ministry of Commerce officials, 
80 percent of all licenses can be processed and verified within 
approximately 24 hours, an additional 10 percent within five working 
days, and the remaining 10 percent, involved in environmental, 
power, health and other important utilities, and services, are 
processed separately and issued on a case-by-case basis. 
 
#ERELI