09PHNOMPENH554
COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR CODEL WEBB
Wed Aug 05 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO5031
RR RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #0554 2170930
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 050930Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1019
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVEUNCLAS PHNOM PENH 000554 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP AMGT ASEC AFIN CB
SUBJECT:  COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR CODEL WEBB 
 
¶1.  Embassy Phnom Penh warmly welcomes and hereby grants Country 
Clearance to Senator James Webb and Mr. David Bonine to visit 
Cambodia August 18, 2009. 
 
¶2.  The Control Officer for this visit is Economic Officer Melissa 
Sweeney. 
Office: (855) 23 728 401 
Cell: (855) 12 501 276 
Home: (855) 23 214 555 
Fax: (855) 23 728 888 
Email: sweeneyma@state.gov 
 
¶3.  Visas:  All visitors must have a Cambodian visa.  The Mission 
recommends that travelers entering the country on official or 
diplomatic passports obtain a visa prior to traveling to Cambodia. 
If this is not possible, visas may be obtained in the airport.  An 
Embassy expeditor will facilitate obtaining a visa upon arrival for 
members of the Congressional delegation.  The traveler should bring 
a visa-sized photograph with him/her for inclusion with the visa 
application.  The immigration authorities will generally waive the 
US $20.00 fee for travelers on official and diplomatic passports; 
however, the traveler should be prepared to pay the fee.  Regular 
(tourist) passport holders will be required to pay the fee. 
 
¶4.  Airport Departure Tax:  Travelers departing Cambodia for an 
international destination must pay a $25.00 airport tax before 
clearing passport control. 
 
¶5.  Security:  Street crime remains a concern in Cambodia.  Military 
weapons and explosives remain readily available to criminals despite 
efforts by authorities to collect and destroy such weapons.  Armed 
robberies occur frequently in Phnom Penh, and while not specifically 
targeted, foreign residents and visitors are among the victims. 
Victims of armed robberies are reminded that they should not resist 
and should surrender their valuables as any perceived resistance may 
be met with physical violence to include lethal force.  Armed 
individuals or their bodyguards may discharge small arms at any time 
during the day or night at the smallest provocation, mainly in the 
vicinity of bars, nightclubs and snooker establishments, but 
sometimes in tourist areas.  Bystanders may be accidentally wounded. 
 Pickpockets and beggars are also present in the markets and at the 
tourist sites.  Persons visiting Cambodia should practice sound 
personal security awareness by varying their routes and routines, 
maintaining a low profile, not carrying or displaying large amounts 
of cash, not wearing flashy or expensive jewelry, and not walking 
the streets alone after dark.  In addition, we recommend that 
Americans travel by automobile and not use local moto-taxies or 
cyclos for transportation.  These vehicles are more vulnerable to 
armed robberies, purse snatching and offer no protection against 
injury when involved in traffic accidents.  The Embassy continues to 
receive reports of purse snatchings.  If you are the victim of a 
purse snatching, it is imperative that you release your purse 
immediately and do not struggle with the thief.  The Heart of 
Darkness nightclub in Phnom Penh has been placed off limits to all 
persons under the authority of the Chief of Mission due to a number 
of safety and security incidents that have occurred there.  American 
citizens are also advised not to visit that establishment. 
Political and labor related public demonstrations occur on a fairly 
regular basis in the capital city, are generally peaceful and 
conducted without notable incident.  Nonetheless, these gatherings 
have turned violent on occasion and the Embassy continues to advise 
American citizens to avoid political rallies, demonstrations, and 
political party offices where crowds may gather.  Precautions should 
also be taken not to discuss sensitive or classified matters outside 
secure environments or over unsecured and/or cellular telephones, 
and to securely safeguard classified or sensitive materials at the 
Chancery and not at hotels or residences. 
 
¶6.  Currency/Credit Cards:  Cambodia is a U.S. dollar cash economy. 
While the local currency - the Cambodia Riel - is in use, dollars 
are accepted for all transactions.  Therefore, there is no need to 
exchange currency.  The Embassy Cashier will cash traveler checks 
and personal checks of TDY personnel provided their social security 
number and a photocopy of their passport are presented.  A limited 
number of establishments (including most hotels) accept credit 
cards.  A few banks will provide cash against credit cards but they 
charge a hefty fee.  Post recommends that visitors plan on using 
cash for transactions outside their hotels. 
 
¶7.  Post looks forward to your visit. 
 
RODLEY