09PRETORIA1078
SOUTH AFRICA FY07 SPECIAL SELF HELP (SSH) STATUS REPORT
Fri May 29 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO5685
PP RUEHDU RUEHJO
DE RUEHSA #1078/01 1490943
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 290943Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8629
INFO RUEHTN/AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN PRIORITY 6901
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN PRIORITY 1014
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG PRIORITY 9251UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PRETORIA 001078 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/EPS T. DAVIDSON 
DEPT PASS TO USAID/AFR/SD K. SCHUERMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID ECON SF
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICA FY07 SPECIAL SELF HELP (SSH) STATUS REPORT 
 
REF: STATE 92626 
 
¶1. Summary: In FY07, Embassy Pretoria selected ten projects for the 
Ambassador's Special Self-Help Program with total allocations of USD 
100,000.  Nine of the projects are ongoing and performing 
satisfactorily in providing social and economic services to the 
vulnerable populations of the affected communities.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. Project(s) summary and status as follows: 
 
¶A. Grantee Name: University of KwaZulu Natal/Happy Valley 
Clinic Project 
Agreement Number: SSH-07-674-D-01 
Project Title: Happy Valley Clinic Project 
Amount of Grant: $12,000 
Total Amount Advance Unliquidated: $4,296.74 
Description of Activity: Build toilets for patients at primary 
healthcare clinic run by medical students of the Nelson Mandela 
School of Medicine. 
Estimated Number of Beneficiaries: 3,640 per year (70 per week) 
Status of Project: Grantee received first installment.  Grantee and 
Self-Help Coordinator consulted with engineers at the University of 
KwaZulu-Natal who confirmed that planned toilet facilities would 
comply with applicable environmental regulations, codes, and 
procedures.  Costs have increased, and the building plan and quote 
had to be amended.  Construction is expected to be completed within 
the time allowed by the extension of the grant agreement. 
Fiscal Year Funds: FY 2007 
 
¶B. Grantee Name: University of KwaZulu Natal/Happy Valley 
Clinic Project 
Agreement Number: SSH-07-674-D-02 
Project Title: Kuyasa Development Organization 
Amount of Grant: $10,000 
Total Amount Advance Unliquidated: $5,150.78 
Description of Activity: Purchase sewing machines for income 
generation project. 
Estimated Number of Beneficiaries: 261 principal beneficiaries 
(members of cooperative "mini factory") 
Status of Project: Grantee provided invoices for the first 
installment and simultaneously requested the second installment. 
Self-Help Coordinator recently visited grantee and saw the funded 
equipment which had been purchased.  Grantee happily reported that 
the equipment (especially a domestic embroidery machine) has helped 
them to increase productivity and quality of work to such an extent 
that the Department of Trade & Industry has promised to fund an 
industrial embroidery machine for the organization to allow them to 
increase substantially the work and worth of the organization's 
products.  Once the second installment has been received, completion 
of spending and liquidation is expected within the time allowed by 
the grant extension. 
Fiscal Year Funds: FY 2007 
 
¶C. Grantee Name: Place of Refuge 
Agreement Number: SSH-07-674-D-03 
Project Title: Place of Refuge 
Amount of Grant: $8,000 
Total Amount Advance Unliquidated: $3,228.09 
Description of Activity: Convert two rooms in shelter to bathroom 
facilities.  Shelter provides rehabilitation and skills training for 
men addicted to drugs and alcohol. 
Estimated Number of Beneficiaries: 224 per year (56 per quarter) 
Status of Project: Grantee received first installment.  The service 
provider has completed all work on room conversions.  Unfortunately, 
the Grantee organization's coordinator, a pastor, died during the 
grant cycle.  The coordinator's wife, who was very involved with the 
project, was too distraught to continue the work herself, and 
referred all related work to the church that owned the building. 
They decided that though the location was good for its proximity to 
the needy, drug addicts, and homeless people, it was not conducive 
Qthe needy, drug addicts, and homeless people, it was not conducive 
to "rehabilitation" because it was situated in an area where drug 
usage is rampant.  For this reason, the organization has ceased to 
function at the original location; however the work has continued 
successfully on a farm outside Durban.  Self-Help Coordinator is 
awaiting final invoices to submit for final grant payment to the 
service provider as all work has been completed per the grant 
agreement. 
Fiscal Year Funds: FY 2007 
 
¶D. Grantee Name: Dryharts Village Gardens Project 
Agreement Number: SSH-07-674-J-01 
Project Title: Dryharts Village Gardens Project 
Amount of Grant: $10,000 
Total Amount Advance Unliquidated: $7,053.60 
Description of Activity: Drill bore-holes and equip community garden 
with tools and supplies. 
Estimated Number of Beneficiaries: 1,000 
Status of Funds: Dryharts Village used the first advance of 
 
PRETORIA 00001078  002 OF 003 
 
 
$7,053.60 to install a perimeter fence to secure the area and to 
test for and dig a borehole.  Dryharts Village had anticipated 
digging two boreholes, but the location of the second bore hole 
would not produce water.  Liquidation of the first tranche has been 
submitted, as well as a request for a second tranche to purchase 
gardening equipment.  After the borehole project was complete, 
Dryharts Village had a water supply to service a community garden. 
This garden will be run by community members to provide fresh 
produce to the orphans and vulnerable children attending the two 
schools surrounding the borehole.  The North West Provincial 
Government awarded the Dryharts Village borehole project the bronze 
medal in the competition for "North West Project of the Year."  The 
community credited the U.S. Government for its financial support. 
Fiscal Year Funds: FY 2007 
 
¶E. Grantee Name: Lechabile Special Needs Center 
Agreement Number: SSH-07-674-J-02 
Project Title: Lechabile Special Needs Center 
Amount of Grant: $10,000 
Total Amount Advance Unliquidated: $3,534.55 
Description of Activity: Erect fencing, install household 
appliances, bathroom fixtures, and furniture, and create an offiQkqQQQ)E @ld Number of Beneficiaries: 22 children with special needs 
who reside at Lechabile 
Status of Project: Lechabile has received two installments of 
funding.  They used the first tranche to purchase a refrigerator, 
washing machine, vacuum cleaner, table and chairs and small kitchen 
appliances and items.  The first installment of funding has been 
successfully liquidated and the second advance was released. 
Lechabile has installed fencing surrounding the current site and 
created an office at the centre, equipped with a laptop computer and 
new furnishings.  Lechabile is currently in the process of 
submitting receipts to liquidate the second installment. 
Fiscal Year Funds: FY 2007 
 
¶F. Grantee Name: Taung Clinic 
Agreement Number: SSH-07-674-J-03 
Project Title: Taung Clinic 
Amount of Grant: $5,000 
Total Amount Advance Unliquidated: $912.79 
Description of Activity: Build a structure for ARV patients to use 
while waiting for appointments and transportation in order to avoid 
standing in undesirable weather and heat. 
Estimated Number of Beneficiaries: 2,600 
Status of Project: The grantee used the first advance to erect a 
pavilion-like shelter to protect the clinic's patients.  The clinic 
provides ARV treatment (as well as other medical services) to 120 
patients daily.  In the past, these patients waited outside before 
and after their appointments, as the clinic is very small.  Often 
sick patients were forced to endure rain or scorching sun for hours. 
 The project has submitted liquidation paperwork for the first 
tranche of funding.  They are currently in the process of gathering 
quotations for the second tranche.  With these funds the clinic 
plans to create a "Kids' Korner" of the shelter to entertain 
children while they wait. 
Fiscal Year Funds: FY 2007 
 
¶G.  Grantee Name: Diabashe Day Care Centre 
Agreement Number: SSH-07-674-C-01 
Project Title: Diabashe Day Care Centre 
Amount of Grant: $12,000 
Total Amount Advance Unliquidated: $725.31 
 
 
Description of Activity:  Construction of bedrooms for orphans and 
expansion of day care centre 
Estimated Number of Beneficiaries: 200 children and orphans 
Status of Project: The grantee has used the first advance to 
purchase building materials.  Liquidation of first installment and 
Qpurchase building materials.  Liquidation of first installment and 
advance request for second installment were sent to USAID in 
September 2008.  The grantee has used the second and final advance 
to purchase construction, electrical, and plumbing materials and 
windows to complete the building of the new bedrooms and day care 
centre. 
Fiscal Year Funds: FY 2007 
 
¶H. Grantee Name: Church Foundation Ministry in Bongolethu 
Agreement Number: SSH-07-674-C-02 
Project Title: Church Foundation Ministry in Bongolethu 
Amount of Grant: $10,000 
Total Amount Advance Unliquidated: $4,523.53 
Description of Activity:  Purchase brick-making equipment for 
project in area with 75% unemployment and 9,000 families on a 
waiting list for homes. 
Estimated Number of Beneficiaries: 24 community members will train 
in brick making and 500 families will receive houses 
Status of Project: The grantee used the first advance to purchase 
 
PRETORIA 00001078  003 OF 003 
 
 
fencing material, a cement mixer, wheel barrows, spades, and 
hosepipes, and put down a deposit towards a Doubell machine, a stock 
brick maker, and block molds.  SGC is in contact with the company, 
Quick Brick, who confirmed that the Doubell machine along with stock 
brick maker and block molds will be ready for collection on October 
¶3.  Liquidation of first installment and advance request for second 
installment were sent to USAID.  The grantee used the second and 
final advance to pay the outstanding sum for the brick-making 
machine, delivery of the same, and to purchase construction 
materials such as sand and cement. 
Fiscal Year Funds: FY 2007 
 
¶I. Grantee Name: Alfa Pre-School 
Agreement Number: SSH-07-674-P-01 
Project Title: Alfa Pre-School 
Amount of Grant: $13,000.00 
Total Amount Advance Unliquidated: $0 
Description of Activity: Build new building for pre-school which 
provides a valuable education to rural children. 
Beneficiaries: 185 members of the community (children and their 
families as well as school staff and their families). 
Status of Project: Alfa Pre-School is situated at Klipgat in North 
West Province.  The grant from SSH was mainly for a building - 
materials and labor.  The project has liquidated the entire grant. 
The last advance was liquidated on October 9, 2008.  The structure 
built by SSH funds allowed Alfa Pre-School to provide three 
classrooms, a storage room, an administration office, and a health 
room for ill children.  As the result of the structural 
improvements, Alfa Pre-School accommodates more children and has 
introduced a new afterschool program to the community for 
unsupervised street children, offering a place of safety and one hot 
meal per day. 
Fiscal Year Funds: FY 2007 
 
¶J. Grantee Name: Marang A Setshaba 
Agreement Number: SSH-07-674-P-02 
Project Title: Marang A Setshaba 
Amount of Grant: $10,000.00 
Total Amount Advance Unliquidated: $5,243.05 
Description of Activity: Purchase equipment for income generation 
recycling project. 
Estimated Number of Beneficiaries: 0 
Status of Funds: Marang A Setshaba is situated in Soshanguve 
Township in the North West Province.  The grant provided for eight 
community members in Soshanguve and surrounding areas to collect 
recyclables (plastic, glass, paper, etc.) and sell the recyclable 
materials to different recycling companies.  The project received an 
advance of $5,000 to buy an industrial scale and two steel bottle 
crushers.  Project has not yet liquidated the advance.  After 
multiple unsuccessful attempts to obtain receipts, Coordinators have 
ceased all future funding to this project.  The Regional Security 
Offices at Embassy Pretoria and USAID are currently investigating 
the missing funds, as well as the project manager's allegations of 
embezzlement against other members of the project. 
Fiscal Year Funds: FY 2007 
 
¶3. Post appreciates the continued support of AF/EPS and USAID/AFR in 
securing funds for these valuable programs. 
 
LA LIME