09SANJOSE283
Reaction: Vice-President Biden in Costa Rica
Mon Apr 06 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy San Jose
R 061746Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 0728UNCLAS SAN JOSE 000283 
 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/PDA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PAO KMDR KPAO PGOV ECON PREL SNAR EFIN CI
SUBJECT: Reaction: Vice-President Biden in Costa Rica 
 
¶1. Summary:  Vice President Joseph R. Biden traveled to Costa Rica 
March 29-30 to meet with Central American leaders following a trip 
to Chile where he attended a Progressive Governance Summit in Via 
del Mar.  There was an overwhelming interest in covering the 
Vice-Presidential trip to Costa Rica even before the official 
announcement was made on March 12, 2009.  In an editorial that 
appeared in leading daily, La Nacion, the overall positive tone of 
the media was captured indicating, "the Vice-President's presence in 
Costa Rica must be interpreted as part of a purpose that does not 
mean that we have to agree all the time, but that we have to develop 
a more horizontal and pragmatic nexus without losing track of the 
aspirations of development, democracy, security and peace."  To 
date, over seventy articles have appeared in the local daily papers 
and wires, in addition to numerous television reports that have 
appeared in national and international news programs.  End summary. 
 
Bilateral and Multilateral Expectations from a Media Perspective 
 
¶2. When President Arias announced that he would be hosting a 
bilateral meeting between Costa Rica and the United States as well 
as a multilateral meeting between Central American leaders and 
Vice-President Biden on March 30, the media began analyzing the 
significance of the visit.  In an opinion article that appeared in 
daily, Al Dia, the Vice-President's visit to Costa Rica was 
described as symbolic in nature signifying that the visit could be 
indicative of a stronger alliance between Costa Rica and the United 
States.  Also noted was that Costa Rica stands alone in a swarm of 
populist, Bolivarian and leftists within the region. 
 
Local media made several references to the significance the Vice 
Presidential visit had in a regional context concluding that the 
trip could have a special meaning for the region's foreign policy. 
La Nacion published the Vice-President's OpEd, "A New Day for the 
Partnership of the America's" on March 27 which outlined the 
Vice-President's objective in his travels to Latin America. "I am 
traveling to Central and South America to consult with Latin 
American leaders gathered in Chile and Costa Rica about the Summit 
and the challenges faced by the people of the Americas.  These 
meetings are an important first step toward a new day in relations 
and building partnerships with and among the countries and people of 
the Hemisphere," said VP Biden. 
 
Vice President Biden's Arrival in Costa Rica 
 
¶3. Vice President Biden and his wife Dr. Jill Biden arrived in Costa 
Rica at 4:07 p.m. on March 29. U.S. Ambassador Peter Cianchette and 
his family met the Vice-President at the airport.  In a written 
statement issued to the press upon his arrival, VP Biden 
highlighted, "Costa Rica and the United States not only have a 
strong partnership, but share a long-standing friendship with common 
values, including respect for democracy, state of law and human 
rights.  This visit is an opportunity to meet with the leaders of 
the region and to strengthen already existing ties between the 
United States and Central America."  Working with the White House 
Advance Team, the PAO and IO issued an arrival statement to the 
large media covering the arrival. 
 
Press Coverage at the Presidential Office 
 
¶4. The Public Affairs Section at the Embassy worked closely with 
staff at the Ministry of Communications to coordinate media coverage 
that took place at the Presidential Office including a photo spray 
of President Oscar Arias greeting Vice-President Biden, an official 
photo of the Vice-President with Central American leaders and a 40 
minute press conference where over seventy journalists gathered from 
local, regional and international media outlets. 
 
VP Biden in Costa Rican Media Spotlight 
 
¶5. Emphasizing the Obama Administration's "listening mode" and 
desire to strengthen relationships with the countries of Central 
America, Vice President Joseph Biden participated in a 40 minute 
press conference, following a meeting with Central American leaders 
that took place at the Presidential Office. After opening remarks by 
host and Costa Rican President Oscar Arias, VP Biden offered his own 
remarks, thanking the leaders for taking time out of busy schedules 
to come to the meeting, and emphasizing the White House interest in 
crafting policy with Central America, not for Central America. 
 
Journalists were asked to prepare five questions which covered 
topics related to multi-lateral relations between the US and Central 
American countries, the global financial crisis, diplomatic 
relations with Cuba, drug-trafficking and immigration.  All five 
questions were directed at VP Biden, who emphasized the importance 
of US interest in having a direct, face-to-face, transparent 
relationship with each President of the region.  Requesting patience 
and commitment by the assembled leaders, Biden reiterated the need 
to work together for common progress on economic and other issues. 
 
Dr. Biden Receives Rock Star Welcome with Costa Rican School 
Children 
 
¶6. Dr. Jill Biden also received positive press coverage during her 
visit to local elementary school, Escuela Ciudadela de Pavas, 
located in one of the poorest neighborhoods of San Jose.  Local 
daily, Tico Times reported, "as her husband and U.S. Vice President 
Joe Biden spent the morning speaking with Central American heads of 
state, Jill Biden opted for third graders."  Emphasizing the 
importance of education and demonstrating the strength of ties 
between the United States and Costa Rica, Dr. Biden participated in 
an English class with third grade students.  An English teacher 
herself, Dr. Biden immediately engaged with the students, observing 
and commenting on their work. 
 
Wrap-up to a Successful VP Visit 
 
¶7. Positive reports on the VP visit continue to be published by 
local media indicating that the visit was an overall success.  The 
Tico Times reports, "U.S. Vice-President Joe Biden made few 
promises, but did seem to win some hearts and minds, during a 
much-watched, two-stop trip to Latin America." 
 
¶8. Comment: Public Affairs staff worked around the clock with the WH 
advance team in the lead up and during the visit to ensure that 
information was accurately and prominently communicated to the 
widest possible audience.  Utilizing new media,information about the 
visit was disseminated to the public on the Embassy website, 
Facebook page and through twitter.   Photos and links to all media 
coverage are available upon request. 
 
WILSON