09SANAA813
YEMEN: WILD, BUT STILL NOT WET
Wed Apr 29 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
VZCZCXRO2098
RR RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHDIR
DE RUEHYN #0813/01 1191417
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 291417Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY SANAA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1799
INFO RUEHZM/GULF COOPERATION COUNCIL COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 000813 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/RA FOR CONSTANCE ARVIS 
OES FOR AARON SALZBURG 
USAID FOR CHRISTOPHER KISCO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR EAID MASS PGOV SENV SOCI YM
SUBJECT: YEMEN: WILD, BUT STILL NOT WET 
 
REF: 08 SANAA 1176 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY.  A water-scarcity crisis continues to loom over 
Yemen.  Both urban and rural areas remain at risk from water 
scarcity, water contamination and untreated waste water, and 
a mismanaged water policy is generally to blame.  Yet, recent 
increased coordination between the ROYG and donor community 
as well as private sector interest in investment indicate 
that the ROYG is taking small steps toward recognizing the 
issue of water scarcity.  END SUMMARY. 
 
NOT A DROP TO DRINK? 
-------------------- 
 
¶2.  As the demand for water outstrips renewable resources, a 
water-scarcity crisis continues to loom over Yemen (reftel). 
In a February 2009 World Bank study, Yemen was identified as 
having one of the lowest rates of per capita freshwater in 
the world (135 cubic meters per year), about 10 percent of 
the world average (1250 cubic meters).  The World Bank 
estimates a water deficiency of one billion cubic meters in 
Yemen, which is 100 percent of renewable resources.  Water 
scarcity is also a major issue in rural areas, where at least 
75 percent of the Yemeni population lives.  Fuad Dhaif Allah, 
Chairman of the National Water and Sanitation Authority 
(NWASA), told EconOff on March 30 that Amran, Dhamar, Ibb, 
Saada, and Taiz are areas particularly at risk. 
 
¶3. Across the 17 water basins in Yemen, the extent of water 
scarcity varies greatly.  In Ibb and Taiz, water levels have 
been drawn down to 500 meters, in contrast to Sanaa (1000 
meters).  Estimates on when the water will run out vary, but 
point to a future crisis.  The German Organization for 
Technical Cooperation (GTZ) currently predicts that shortages 
will become increasingly severe over the next 20 years. 
Salem Hassan Bashuaib, Chairman of the National Water 
Resources Authority (NWRA) told EconOff on March 29 that 
shallow aquifers used around Sanaa 20 years ago are now dry. 
(Comment: In Sanaa, well water is drawn from depths up to 
1000 meters.  After 200-300 meters, diesel pumps are 
required, an additional drain on declining oil resources. 
End Comment.) 
 
¶4. Clean water is also difficult to come by, and waste water 
is often left untreated.  According to Fuad Allah, water 
contamination is widespread.  The World Bank reports that 56 
percent of the population in urban areas has access to safe 
water and 31 percent to sewage disposal and treatment.  In 
rural areas, 45 percent of the population has access to safe 
water, and only 21 percent has access to adequate sanitation. 
 Modern water and sewage treatment plants are few in number 
and have only recently begun operating in Sanaa.  Although 
more such facilities are being built, coverage remains 
inadequate.  Lack of clean water and sanitation has led to 
high levels of illness.  According to an unpublished 2005 
report from Parliament, 75 percent of the population is 
threatened by water-borne diseases. 
 
COMPETING CURRENTS CONTROL WATER POLICY 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  Although the Ministry of Water and Environment serves as 
the umbrella organization, water policy is made and managed 
through a number of smaller bodies, including the NWRA, 
NWASA, and the General Authority for Rural Water Supply 
Projects.  Water management is divided into rural and urban 
areas, which, according to Fuad Allah, do not communicate 
effectively.  Management of supply and demand is sporadic and 
incomplete.  Sanaa,s water supply, for example, continues to 
be depleted due to illegal wells.  Ever-increasing water 
demand has led to the unsuccessful rationing of supply in 
some rural areas.  According to GTZ, about 90 percent of 
water resources are used in agriculture.  (Note: Forty 
percent of agricultural activity goes into the production of 
the narcotic drug qat. End Note.) 
 
WILL IT ALL COME OUT IN THE WASH? 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  While the ROYG has not yet implemented a comprehensive 
policy to approach the issue of water scarcity, Ali Mohammed 
Al-Suremi, Chairman of the General Authority for Rural Water 
Supply Projects, told EconOff on March 9 that the ROYG is 
updating its National Water Sector Strategy and Investment 
Plan (NWSSIP) for addressing water scarcity.  This plan will 
help the ROYG identify core partners and coordinate sectors. 
Additionally, the Water Sector Support Program (WSSP), a 
World Bank-led effort, is bringing together members of the 
donor community who are working on water scarcity issues. 
 
SANAA 00000813  002 OF 002 
 
 
Led by the Germans and the Dutch, donor efforts attempt to 
harmonize donor community contributions (80 percent) with 
ROYG funding (20 percent). 
 
¶7.  Private sector assistance may provide innovative, if 
partial, solutions to the impending water scarcity crisis. 
Representatives from U.S. company Air2Water told EconOff on 
April 22 that an intended atmospheric water generation plant 
in Manakha could produce one million gallons of pure water 
per day from moisture in the air.  (Comment: Because of the 
relative expense of the initiative and the fact that it 
produces only drinking water, Air2water is unlikely to make 
an impact on water supply.  End Comment.)  Other plans 
include water desalination in coastal areas and water 
harvesting through dams in the wadis (water-filled valleys). 
An additional plan involves pumping water from tribal areas 
in Marib from an untapped aquifer.  These plans, however, are 
only partial solutions.  Desalination is costly, and pumping 
water across the mountains would not be cost-effective. 
Water harvesting works only in mountainous regions and 
outside periods of drought.  Pumping water from tribal 
regions would also require the compliance of the tribes, who 
have a tenuous relationship with the central government. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶8.  Water is a cross-cutting issue that has political, 
economic, and social implications.  In Yemen, water scarcity 
contributes to instability.  In urban areas, the restricted 
availability of clean water has created divisions between the 
rich and the poor, while in rural areas, water rationing has 
been connected to riots and tribal conflict as recently as 
March 2009.  New efforts on the part of the ROYG and the 
donor community to centralize and coordinate water policy 
offer hope that the water-scarcity crisis will be addressed 
before remaining resources are exhausted.  Ultimately, Yemen 
needs a ROYG-led, comprehensive, long-term solution to the 
issue of water scarcity.  END COMMENT. 
SECHE