09STATE33075
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS, FACT SHEETS ON PRESIDENTIAL
Sun Apr 05 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO0013
OO RUEHAP RUEHBC RUEHDBU RUEHDT RUEHGI RUEHGR RUEHKN RUEHKR RUEHMJ
RUEHMR RUEHPA RUEHPB RUEHPOD RUEHRN RUEHROV RUEHSK RUEHTRO RUEHYG
DE RUEHC #3075/01 0952310
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 052246Z APR 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO ALL DIPLOMATIC POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHTRO/AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI IMMEDIATE 6612UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 11 STATE 033075 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PARM KACT KNNP MARR MNUCPTEREZ US RS CH
SUBJECT: QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS, FACT SHEETS ON PRESIDENTIAL 
SPEECH ON NONPROLIFERATION AND SECURITY ISSUES 
 
¶1.  These materials have been approved by the National 
Security Council for use by Posts in response to press and 
host government queries regarding President Obama's April 5 
speech on nonproliferation in Prague. 
 
¶2. Posts are authorized to use the points and fact sheets 
below in addressing questions that may arise after the April 5 
nonproliferation speech.  Please note that background 
information is solely for Posts' information and should 
not/not be used with press. 
 
¶3. Questions and Answers follow in paragraphs 3-18, fact 
sheets on several of these issues are located in paragraphs 
19-21. 
 
¶3. NATO Enlargement: 
 
Question:  What is the administration's position on the future 
enlargement of NATO; should it continue?  What are the limits 
of "Europe"? 
 
-- We just affirmed at the NATO Summit that NATO's door 
remains open.  The United States remains committed to NATO 
enlargement.  We welcome the accession of Albania and 
Croatia. 
 
-- Current and future aspirants must demonstrate a 
commitment to NATO's values and meet the Alliance's 
performance-based standards before becoming members; there 
are no shortcuts to the process. 
 
Background: NATO's performance-based enlargement process has 
been an historic success in strengthening the Alliance, 
promoting peace and security, and advancing freedom and 
democracy in Central and Eastern Europe.  At the Strasbourg- 
Kehl Summit, Allies welcomed Albania and Croatia as NATO's 
newest members, increasing the total numbers to twenty-eight 
Allies.  At the same time, many Allies are starting to evince 
an anti-enlargement sentiment.  The countries currently 
seeking NATO membership are Bosnia-Herzegovina, Georgia, 
Macedonia, Montenegro, and Ukraine.  Although Allies were 
prepared to invite Macedonia to join NATO at the 2008 
Bucharest Summit, Greece blocked the invitation over the 
ongoing dispute over Macedonia's name. Allies agreed that 
Macedonia would join NATO as soon as the name issue was 
resolved.  Allies did not grant Georgia's and Ukraine's 
requests to start the Membership Action Plan (MAP) process at 
Bucharest; however, Allies agreed at the 2008 NATO Summit in 
Bucharest that Ukraine and Georgia "will become members of 
NATO."  NATO Foreign Ministers decided in December 2008 that 
the NATO-Ukraine and NATO-Georgia Commissions should take 
forward the necessary work that those countries will need to 
undertake to prepare for NATO membership. 
 
¶4. NATO's Mission in Afghanistan (Role of Czech Republic) 
 
Question:  How does the U.S. assess the Czech contribution in 
Afghanistan? 
 
-- The Czech Republic has made vital contributions and 
sacrifices in Afghanistan. 
 
-- The Czech Republic's leadership of the Provincial 
Reconstruction Team in Logar Province is evidence of its 
commitment to Alliance goals in Afghanistan and its valuable 
role in fulfilling those goals. 
 
-- Both at the March 31 International Conference on 
Afghanistan in The Hague and at the April 3-4 NATO Summit, 
the U.S. and the Czech Republic affirmed a shared strategy 
in Afghanistan. 
 
-- The Czech Republic, as current President of the European 
Union, has also taken on a strong leadership role and moved 
to strengthen the EU's efforts in providing observers for 
the upcoming Afghan elections, supporting the rule of law 
and police development, and providing development 
assistance. 
 
If raised:  Should the Czech Republic be doing more? 
 
-- Every Ally must make its own decisions on the resources 
it can commit.  The Czech Republic plays a vital role in 
Logar Province that directly benefits the Afghan population. 
 
Background:  In March 2008, the Czechs established a new 
Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) in Logar Province in 
 
STATE 00033075  002 OF 011 
 
 
U.S.-led Regional Command-East (RC-E).  In addition to the 
civilian personnel at the PRT, there are 580 Czech troops in 
Afghanistan (13 Mar ISAF placemat).  The Czechs have donated 
six helicopters, refurbished with NATO funds, to the Afghan 
National Army.  In March 2009, RC-E Deputy Commanding General 
in charge of support for troops Brigadier General James 
McConville told the Czech press their contribution to PRT 
Logar was adequate and appropriate.  Czech military personnel 
have suffered three deaths in Afghanistan.  Parliament has 
authorized the Czech military to maintain troops in 
Afghanistan through the end of 2009.  The fall of the Czech 
government last month makes any additional Czech contributions 
to Afghanistan in the near future unlikely.  The Czech 
Republic sets an example for larger Allies in maintaining 
approximately four percent of its total forces on deployment 
at any given time. 
 
¶5. NATO-Russia Council 
 
Question:  What goals and expectations do you have regarding 
NATO-Russia re-engagement, as called for by NATO Foreign 
Ministers? 
 
-- We are determined to use the NATO-Russia relationship to 
enhance European security by engaging in candid political 
dialogue, both where we agree and disagree, and through 
focused cooperation in areas of common interest, such as 
Afghanistan and counter-terrorism. 
 
-- We encourage Russia and NATO Allies to work together to 
transform this relationship into a real partnership that can 
achieve concrete results.  Real cooperation between NATO and 
Russia can contribute significantly to security in Europe 
and indeed globally. 
 
-- We believe this is possible even as we hold firm to our 
values and principles. 
 
Background:  In 2002, NATO and Russia established the NATO- 
Russia Council (NRC) - a forum designed for consultation, 
consensus-building, and cooperation.  It was conceived as a 
greatly enhanced successor to the NATO-Russia Permanent Joint 
Council, set up under the 1997 NATO-Russia Founding Act to 
assuage Russian concerns about the first post-Cold War round 
of NATO enlargement.  But the NRC has not lived up to its 
potential.  Most projects barely developed or were 
politicized.  Russian opposition to NATO membership for 
Georgia and Ukraine, and to U.S. missile defense plans, 
coupled with Russia's "suspension" of the CFE Treaty (i.e, 
decision not to perform its obligations under the treaty), 
further reduced common ground.  Russia's military action in 
Georgia in August 2008 led Allies to suspend formal high-level 
meetings of the NRC.  On March 5, NATO Foreign Ministers 
agreed to formally resume the NRC, including at the 
Ministerial level, after the April Summit.  Allies seek to use 
the NRC as a forum for dialogue, where we agree and disagree, 
and for cooperation in areas of common interest.  Still, 
Allies are divided regarding Russia's intentions and the value 
of cooperation.  We hope to use the NATO Summit to find a 
balance for NATO-Russia that advances positive engagement 
where interests overlap, while remaining realistic about 
Russia's intentions and defending our principles. 
 
¶6. START and Follow-on Agreement 
 
Question: Can you comment on the Joint Statement issued by 
Presidents Obama and Medvedev regarding the negotiation of a 
START follow-on agreement? 
 
-- The Presidents agreed that bilateral negotiations would 
be initiated with the intention of reaching a new, 
comprehensive, legally binding agreement on reducing and 
limiting strategic offensive arms to replace the START 
Treaty, which is set to expire on December 5, 2009. 
 
-- The Presidents have instructed that the subject of the 
new agreement be the reduction and limitation of strategic 
offensive arms, that the U.S. and Russia seek to record in 
the new agreement levels of reductions that will be lower 
than those in existing arms control agreements, and that the 
new agreement include effective verification measures drawn 
from the experience of the Parties in implementing START. 
 
-- In addition, the Presidents stated that the new agreement 
should mutually enhance the security of the Parties, and 
predictability and stability in strategic offensive forces. 
 
-- The Presidents further charged their negotiators to 
report, by July, on their progress in working out a new 
agreement. 
 
Question:  Is there sufficient time available to negotiate a 
 
STATE 00033075  003 OF 011 
 
 
new follow-on agreement before the START Treaty expires in 
December? 
 
-- Negotiating a new agreement before December will be a 
challenge; the Administration is committed to the effort to 
ensure that an agreement that serves U.S. security interests 
and enhances stability is achieved by then. 
 
Question:  There have been press reports that the 
Administration may consider going as low as 1000 nuclear 
warheads.  Is this true? 
 
-- The Obama Administration is committed to seeking deep, 
verifiable reductions in all U.S. and Russian strategic 
nuclear weapons.  As a first step, the Administration is 
committed to seeking a legally binding agreement to replace 
the current START Treaty. 
 
-- As long as nuclear weapons exist in the world, the United 
States must maintain a strong deterrent in support of U.S. 
national security and that of our friends and allies.  The 
Department of Defense is about to initiate a Nuclear Posture 
Review in accordance with the 2008 National Defense 
Authorization Act that will assess U.S. deterrence needs and 
recommend strategy, policy and force levels for the coming 
decade. 
 
Question:  When will negotiations begin? 
 
-- The Presidents have directed that the talks begin 
immediately.  The U.S. negotiating team will be headed by the 
Assistant Secretary of State for Verification, Compliance and 
Implementation. 
 
Background:  Media coverage of the meeting between Presidents 
Obama and Medvedev in London, and the joint statement by the 
Presidents, have raised interest world-wide regarding the 
efforts by the United States and Russia to negotiate a START 
follow-on agreement.  There has also been widespread 
speculation regarding the level of reductions that would be 
achieved in the new treaty.  Thus far the U.S. and Russia have 
discussed broad policy objectives that would guide the 
negotiations.  The negotiations will deal with the specific 
elements of an agreement, including the level of reductions. 
 
¶7. Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) 
 
Question:  Please elaborate on plans to ratify the CTBT. 
 
--The United States recognizes the importance of the 
Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty as a nonproliferation 
and disarmament measure. 
 
--We believe that it is in the U.S. interest to ratify the 
Treaty.  The Administration will work closely with the U.S. 
Senate to win its advice and consent to ratification of the 
CTBT. 
 
Background:  The United States and the Russian Federation both 
signed the CTBT on September 24, 1996.  While the Russian 
Federation ratified the CTBT on June 30, 2000, the U.S. Senate 
declined to give its consent by a vote 48 in favor of 
ratification and 51 against in 1999.  The United States and 
the Russian Federation are two of the 44 countries required to 
ratify the Treaty in order for it to enter into force.  For 
CTBT to enter into force, the United States, China, Egypt, 
Indonesia, Iran, and Israel must ratify it and India, 
Pakistan, and the DPRK must both sign and ratify it.  Vice 
President Biden will guide the Administration effort to pursue 
ratification of the CTBT. 
 
¶8. Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty (FMCT) 
 
Question:  For the past decade, the Conference on Disarmament 
has been unable to begin work on negotiating a Fissile 
Material Cutoff Treaty.  One obstacle to this has been U.S. 
insistence on an FMCT without international verification 
provisions.  Will the United States support the negotiation of 
a verifiable Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty in the Conference 
on Disarmament? 
 
-- The negotiation of a verifiable FMCT is the top U.S. 
priority at the Conference on Disarmament (CD). 
 
-- The United States hopes that its renewed flexibility on 
this issue will enable negotiations to start soon in Geneva. 
 
-- The United States looks forward to working with the 
Russian Federation and other CD members to overcome any 
obstacles preventing the commencement of FMCT negotiations 
in the CD. 
 
 
STATE 00033075  004 OF 011 
 
 
Background: A Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty (FMCT) would ban 
the production of fissile material for use in nuclear weapons 
or other nuclear explosive devices.  The Geneva-based 
Conference on Disarmament (CD) briefly held negotiations on an 
FMCT in 1998, with the objective of producing a verifiable 
treaty.  However, the CD was unable to agree to resume work in 
the years following.  In 2004, the United States, after an 
internal review, announced its conclusion that an effectively 
verifiable FMCT was not achievable.  In 2006, the United 
States proposed the negotiation of an FMCT without 
international verification provisions, and tabled a draft FMCT 
text and a draft negotiating mandate.  Although the principal 
reason for the continued failure of the CD to move forward on 
FMCT negotiations may be the belief by some states that they 
need to continue fissile material production for weapons 
programs, some other states use the U.S. position against 
including international verification provisions in an FMCT as 
a supposed reason for their opposition.  During her 
confirmation hearings, the Secretary of State said that the 
United States will work to revive negotiations on an 
effectively verifiable FMCT. 
 
¶9. Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty 
 
Question:  What importance do you attach to the 2010 Review 
Conference, and what steps will you take in order to avoid a 
repeat of the failure of the 2005 Review Conference? 
 
-- The United States places the utmost importance on the 
NPT, which is the cornerstone of the nuclear 
nonproliferation regime.  The review process affords Parties 
the opportunity to examine the operation of the Treaty to 
help ensure that its purposes and provisions are being 
realized. 
 
--We hope that the 2010 RevCon will demonstrate that the 
Treaty will continue to be an effective legal and political 
barrier to nuclear proliferation.  We will strive for a 
recommitment by Parties to the objectives of the NPT and to 
their basic shared interest in preventing proliferation. 
 
-- We will also seek a Conference that helps set a new 
course in the direction of the greater fulfillment of the 
vital goals of the Treaty - stemming proliferation, working 
toward a nuclear-free world, and sharing the benefits of 
peaceful nuclear energy. 
 
Background:  Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT) Parties 
meet to review the operation of the Treaty every five years. 
These meetings are viewed as important reflections of the 
strength of the NPT and the nonproliferation regime in 
general.  The last such meeting in 2005 was filled with 
acrimony over key issues such as disarmament, non-compliance, 
and nonproliferation in the Middle East and failed to reach 
agreement on a consensus document.  Increasing attention is 
being given to the 2010 Review Conference as a key milestone 
in the process of repairing and strengthening the regime. 
 
¶10. Nuclear Fuel Cycle (International Fuel Bank) 
 
Question: Has the U.S. already taken steps toward creation of 
an international fuel bank? 
 
-- The United States believes that providing reliable 
access to nuclear fuel is a way to allow countries to 
benefit from the peaceful uses of nuclear energy without 
increasing the risks of nuclear proliferation through the 
spread of enrichment and reprocessing technologies. 
 
-- The United States has already been working through the 
IAEA and other multilateral forums toward this end and a 
number of complimentary proposals have been developed. 
 
-- One near term goal is to have the IAEA Board of 
Governors begin debate this June on concrete plans for 
providing reliable access to nuclear fuel, including one 
for a Russian fuel bank in Angarsk and one for 
implementation of an IAEA operated fuel bank as proposed 
by the Nuclear Threat Initiative.  We hope that 
mechanisms can be approved in September. 
 
Background:  The United States has worked cooperatively with a 
number of western countries on developing proposals for 
reliable access to nuclear fuel (RANF) as a means of providing 
countries a viable alternative to developing sensitive nuclear 
technologies.  We were part of a six country concept in 2006 
(also involving France, Germany, the Netherlands, Russia and 
the UK) that proposed to establish a mechanism at the IAEA 
that could be used in the event that commercial supply 
arrangements are interrupted for reasons other than 
nonproliferation obligations, and cannot be restored through 
normal commercial processes.  The U.S. is establishing a 
 
STATE 00033075  005 OF 011 
 
 
national fuel reserve with uranium downblended from excess 
defense material.  We expect the June meeting of the IAEA's 
Board of Governors to consider a Russian proposal to establish 
a reserve of low-enriched uranium (LEU) to be held at Angarsk 
and released at the direction of the IAEA.  We also support 
the Nuclear Threat Initiative's proposal to match funds for 
the establishment of an IAEA fuel bank. President Obama voted 
for a $50 million appropriation to DOE for the U.S. 
contribution to such a bank when he was in the Senate.  Now 
that the IAEA has received pledges for over $150 million, we 
expect the June Board meeting to consider specific mechanisms 
to implement an IAEA fuel bank. 
 
¶11. North Korea 
 
Question:  What is our response to reports that North Korea 
[will launch/has launched] a TD-2 missile? 
 
-- (If North Korea has launched)  On xx, North Korea 
launched [a Taepo Dong (TD-20] missile.  The launch resulted 
in [delivery of a payload to orbit] [failure to deliver a 
payload to orbit][failure of launch vehicle 
 
-- We have long expressed our concerns regarding North Korea's 
ballistic missile programs. 
 
-- North Korea's development, deployment, and proliferation of 
ballistic missiles, missile-related materials, equipment, and 
technologies pose a serious threat to the region and to the 
international community. 
 
-- This launch is a violation of United Nations Security 
Council Resolution (UNSCR) 1718, [even though the DPRK has 
characterized this as a [satellite] [space launch vehicle] 
launch]. 
 
-- The United States believes that any launch by the DPRK that 
uses ballistic missile technology violates UNSCR 1718, even if 
the DPRK seeks to characterize it as a satellite launch. 
 
-- UNSCR 1718 requires that North Korea suspend all activities 
related to its ballistic missile program and that it abandon 
its ballistic missile program in a complete, verifiable and 
irreversible manner. 
 
-- The equipment and technology necessary to launch a 
satellite into orbit are virtually identical to and 
interchangeable with the equipment and technology necessary to 
launch a ballistic missile weapons payload.  A rocket capable 
of putting a satellite in orbit, such as the TD-2 missile, is 
inherently capable of delivering WMD. 
 
-- Thus, this launch clearly falls within the UNSC decision 
that the DPRK must suspend "all activities related to its 
ballistic missile program." 
 
-- North Korea's action will only further isolate it from the 
international community and work against the interests of the 
North Korean people. 
 
-- We call on the DPRK to refrain from further provocative 
actions, and to cease immediately the development and 
proliferation of ballistic missiles, as required by UNSCR 
¶1718.  The DPRK should also reestablish its moratorium on 
missile launching, as required by UNSCR 1718. 
 
Q:  How does this launch affect the Six Party Talks? 
-- We call on North Korea to continue to uphold its 
commitments under the Six-Party Talks and to work with the 
other parties to implement the September 19, 2005 Joint 
Statement. 
 
-- Our goal remains the verifiable denuclearization of the 
Korean peninsula. 
 
Background:  North Korea has announced its intention to launch 
an "experimental communications satellite" between April 4-8, 
¶2009.  The United States believes that this action would 
violate UNSCR 1718, which obligates the DPRK to suspend all 
ballistic missile-related activities and re-establish its pre- 
existing commitments to a moratorium on missile launching. 
 
¶12. Iran 
 
Question:  What is your new policy on Iran and how will Russia 
fit in? 
 
-- As the President stated in his March 20 remarks during 
Nowruz to the Iranian people and leadership, we are committed 
to diplomacy that addresses the full range of issues, and to 
pursuing constructive ties among the United States, Iran and 
the international community. 
 
STATE 00033075  006 OF 011 
 
 
-- We are engaging our friends and partners to chart an 
effective path, notably last week in London by the President 
and his top advisors. 
 
-- We are committed to diplomacy to engage the Islamic 
Republic in a constructive, honest dialogue to resolve our 
differences. 
 
--But this does not mean that Iran's violations of its 
international nuclear obligations cease to have consequences. 
 
-- There are five UN Security Council resolutions that reflect 
the international community's continuing serious concerns 
about Iran's nuclear program. 
 
-- We have publicly stated that we want Iran to take its 
rightful place in the community of nations and we mean that. 
Iran has rights, but with rights come responsibilities. 
 
-- We are prepared to take real steps toward a very different 
and positive future.  But Iran must take steps too.  We hope 
Iran does not miss an opportunity. 
 
Background:  Iran continues to pursue a nuclear weapons 
capability through both uranium enrichment and a heavy water 
reactor.  The UN Security Council has adopted five resolutions 
(1696, 1737, 1747, 1803, and 1835), three of which include 
legally binding sanctions.  The IAEA has reported as recently 
as March 2009 that Iran has not cooperated to resolve the 
outstanding questions, including those about past activities 
on weaponization. 
 
¶13. UNSCR 1540 
 
Question:  What is the United States doing to support UNSCR 
1540 implementation? 
 
-- UNSCR 1540 is a vital element in global efforts to 
prevent the proliferation of WMD and to keep these horrific 
weapons out of the hands of terrorists. 
 
-- Implementation of UNSCR 1540 by all UN Member States will 
help ensure that no state or non-state actor is a source or 
beneficiary of WMD proliferation. 
 
-- Both U.S. and Russia intend to give new impetus to the 
implementation of UNSCR 1540.  As permanent Member States of 
the UN Security Council, both our countries work actively to 
promote and assist with UNSCR 1540 implementation. 
 
Background:  UN Security Council Resolution 1540 (2004) 
established an obligation for all UN Member States to take and 
enforce effective measures to establish domestic controls to 
prevent WMD proliferation and their means of delivery.  The 
UN's 1540 Committee works to facilitate states' compliance 
with the Resolution and to report back to the Security Council 
on progress on its implementation.  The U.S. works within and 
in coordination with the 1540 Committee, sponsoring many 1540 
workshops, training events, and assistance programs designed 
to help all states strengthen their capabilities to prevent 
WMD proliferation.  Russia also sits on the 1540 Committee. 
Plans are underway for all UN Member States to participate in 
a Comprehensive Review of UNSCR 1540 implementation at the end 
of 2009. 
 
¶14. G8 Global Partnership 
 
Question: What is the U.S. doing to support implementation of 
the G-8 Global Partnership, including efforts to expand the 
geographic scope beyond Russia/FSU? 
 
-- We have made great progress in reducing the threat posed 
by proliferation and terrorism through the G-8 Global 
Partnership. 
 
-- The threat is global.  We want to make tangible progress 
to expand the scope of the G-8 Global Partnership, while 
maintaining current commitments in Russia/FSU. 
 
-- We also want to make progress in securing new GP 
Partners. 
 
Background:  The G-8 Global Partnership against the Spread of 
Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction (GP) was created in 
2002 at the G-8 Summit in Kananaskis, Canada, to improve 
international security by preventing WMD proliferation and 
terrorism. Envisioned as a $20 billion commitment over 10 
years - with the U.S. committing $10 billion of the total 
pledge -concrete projects were initially funded in Russia and 
the former Soviet Union (FSU).  The GP now consists of all G-8 
nations plus 13 additional nations and the European Union. 
 
STATE 00033075  007 OF 011 
 
 
While pledged GP activities continue in Russia/FSU, the U.S. 
has worked since 2004 to expand GP assistance beyond 
Russia/FSU to address emerging WMD threats. 
 
¶15. Enhancing Nuclear Security/Material Reduction 
 
 
Question: What is the content of the new initiative, how will 
the goal me achieves and are more resources going to be 
committed. 
 
--The United States has been making progress in securing 
nuclear materials in Russia and in other countries, but more 
can and must be done and more quickly. 
 
--We will expand our partnership with other countries, 
increase the capabilities of the IAEA, and hold a Global 
Nuclear Security Summit within the next year. 
 
--We will examine existing programs and look for ways to 
accelerate our efforts and increase efficiency. 
 
Background:  The President has said that the threat of nuclear 
terrorism is the greatest threat facing the American people 
and has announced an ambitious goal of securing sensitive 
nuclear materials around the world in four years.  He has 
asked the Vice President to lead the administration's efforts 
to achieve this goal. 
 
¶16. Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism 
 
Question:  How does the U.S. envision the Global Initiative 
being strengthened in 2009-2010, and what role does the U.S. 
envision Russia, as co-chair to the Global Initiative, to play 
in strengthening the Global Initiative? 
 
-- In keeping with priorities agreed on in 2008 among 
partners, the U.S. envisions an active partner nation focus 
on denying terrorist safe havens, preventing terrorist 
financing, and strengthening nuclear detection and forensics 
during the 2009-2010 period. 
 
-- The U.S. and Russia also co-chair the Exercise Planning 
Group, which promotes use of exercises to test capabilities 
and enhance overall preparedness through a multi-year 
exercise program. 
 
Background:   The Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear 
Terrorism, which is co-chaired by the U.S. and Russian 
Federation, is recognized as a key component of U.S.-Russian 
strategic nuclear security relations both within the USG and 
internationally, and is an important symbol of commitment 
within the Global Initiative community.  Working together, the 
U.S. and Russia have mobilized over 70 nations to improve 
national and regional capabilities to combat nuclear 
terrorism.  The U.S. and Russia often conduct joint demarches 
to encourage Global Initiative partners to host or participate 
in Global Initiative events, thus strengthening cooperation 
and collaboration among partner nations in building and 
exercising capabilities to combat the global threat of nuclear 
terrorism.  The Netherlands will host the June 2009 Plenary 
Meeting, where senior level officials will discuss past Global 
Initiative activity successes and determine future objectives 
for the Global Initiative. 
 
¶17. Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) 
 
 
Question:  What are President Obama's views on the PSI? 
 
--The President strongly supports the PSI.  The 
Administration's goal is to strengthen and expand the PSI, 
ensuring that it remains an effective tool in helping 
responsible governments cooperate to stop WMD proliferation. 
 
Background:  The PSI is an informal and voluntary effort by 
countries (currently 94) that have committed to cooperate in 
halting transfers of WMD, their delivery systems, and related 
materials to and from states and non-state actors of 
proliferation concern.  The Administration wants to ensure the 
effectiveness and sustainability of the PSI.  Efforts are 
underway to broaden participation by all PSI endorsing states 
in PSI capacity-building activities (exercises, workshops, 
training, experts' meetings, etc.).  We are also continuing 
outreach to encourage additional states to endorse the PSI. 
 
¶18. Missile Defense Cooperation 
 
Question:  What are the current U.S. plans for missile defense 
deployments in Europe? 
 
-- The Administration currently is studying missile defense 
 
STATE 00033075  008 OF 011 
 
 
policy.  We will continue to consult closely with the Czech 
and Polish governments, and our other NATO allies, on U.S. 
plans. 
 
-- As the United States and our allies together pursue the 
issue of missile defense in Europe, we will take into 
account a number of factors:  whether the system works, 
whether it is cost effective, and the nature of the threat 
from Iran. 
 
-- If, by working with our allies, Russia, and other 
countries, we succeed in eliminating the threat, then the 
driving force behind a missile defense construction in 
Europe will be removed. 
 
-- We remain ready to consult with our NATO allies, and with 
Russia, to see if we can develop new cooperative approaches 
to missile defense which protect all of us. 
 
Question:  What effect will the March 26 resignation of the 
Czech government have on the missile defense agreement with 
the Czech Republic? 
 
-- It is premature to comment on the impact to our bilateral 
missile defense cooperation.  We will work with any Czech 
government to continue to strengthen the security of Europe 
against new threats. 
 
Background:  The Administration will support MD, but ensure 
that its development is pragmatic and cost effective.  Iran is 
steadily developing and testing ballistic missiles of 
increasingly greater ranges, payloads, and sophistication. 
Senior U.S. officials have said that if the Iranian threat is 
eliminated, then the driving force behind the U.S. MD 
deployments to Europe will be removed.  Senior Administration 
officials also have said that the United States hopes to 
continue to work closely with NATO and Russia on MD in a 
cooperative and transparent manner, and to develop and deploy 
MD assets capable of defending the United States, NATO, and 
Russia against 21st century threats. 
 
¶19. Fact Sheet:  START and Follow-on Agreement 
 
Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START) 
The START Treaty was signed by the United States and the 
Soviet Union in Moscow on July 31, 1991.  Five months later, 
the Soviet Union dissolved and four independent states with 
strategic nuclear weapons on their territory came into 
existence -- Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russia, and Ukraine.  On May 
23, 1992, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russia, and Ukraine assumed the 
obligations of the former Soviet Union under the START Treaty 
as successor states of the former Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics.  Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Ukraine also committed in 
the Lisbon Protocol and its associated documents to accede to 
the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) as non-nuclear 
weapon states. 
Central Limits: START required reductions in strategic 
offensive arms to be carried out in three phases over seven 
years from the date the Treaty entered into force.  All Treaty 
Parties met the December 5, 2001, implementation deadline. 
The central limits include: 
--1,600 strategic nuclear delivery vehicles (ICBMs, SLBMs, 
and heavy bombers) 
--6,000 accountable warheads on ICBMs, SLBMs, and heavy 
bombers 
--4,900 warheads on ICBMs and SLBMs 
--1,540 warheads on 154 heavy ICBMs 
--1,100 warheads on mobile ICBMs 
--Ballistic missile throw-weight limited to 3,600 metric 
tons on each side 
Counting Rules:  U.S. heavy bombers may carry no more than 20 
long range air-launched cruise missiles (ALCMs) each.  The 
first 150 of these bombers count as carrying only 10 ALCMs 
each.  Russian heavy bombers may carry no more than 16 ALCMs 
each.  The first 180 of these bombers count as carrying only 
eight ALCMs each.  Each ALCM-equipped heavy bombers in excess 
of 150 for the U.S. and 180 for Russia would count as actually 
equipped.  Heavy bombers equipped only with bombs or short- 
range attack missiles (SRAMs) are counted as carrying one 
warhead each. 
Verification:  START contains detailed, mutually-reinforcing 
verification provisions that were intended to supplement 
National Technical Means, including: data exchanges and 
notifications on strategic systems, facilities, and flight 
tests; exchanges of telemetry data from missile flight tests; 
restrictions on the encryption of telemetry data; twelve types 
of on-site inspections and exhibitions; and continuous 
monitoring at mobile ICBM final assembly plants. 
Implementation:  The Joint Compliance and Inspection 
Commission (JCIC) was established by START to oversee the 
Treaty's implementation.  The JCIC has met more than 30 times 
and has completed numerous agreements on detailed procedures 
 
STATE 00033075  009 OF 011 
 
 
for specific implementation activities, including resolving 
questions arising from the initial data exchanges and 
exhibitions of strategic offensive arms. 
Duration:  START is scheduled to expire on December 5, 2009, 
unless superseded by another arms reduction agreement, or 
extended by agreement of the Parties. 
Follow-on Agreement 
On April 1, Presidents Obama and Medvedev agreed in London 
that bilateral negotiations would be initiated with the 
intention of reaching a new, comprehensive, legally binding 
agreement on reducing and limiting strategic offensive arms to 
replace the START Treaty by the end of 2009. 
 
The Presidents have instructed that the subject of the new 
agreement be the reduction and limitation of strategic 
offensive arms, that the U.S. and Russia seek to record in the 
new agreement levels of reductions that will be lower than 
those in existing arms control agreements, and that the new 
agreement include effective verification measures drawn from 
the experience of the Parties in implementing START. 
 
In addition, the Presidents stated that the new agreement 
should mutually enhance the security of the Parties, and 
predictability and stability in strategic offensive forces. 
 
The Presidents further charged their negotiators to report, by 
July, on their progress in working out a new agreement and 
have directed that the talks begin immediately. 
 
The U.S. negotiating team will be headed by the Assistant 
Secretary of State for Verification, Compliance, and 
Implementation. 
 
¶20. Fact Sheet: Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) 
 
President Obama has stated that his Administration will 
aggressively pursue U.S. ratification of the Comprehensive 
Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), after a thorough review of the 
technical, military and diplomatic issues surrounding the 
treaty. 
 
The CTBT was submitted to the U.S. Senate for advice and 
consent to ratification on September 23, 1997 along with an 
article-by-article analysis, an assessment of its 
verifiability, and other required supporting documentation. 
In 1999, the U.S. Senate declined to give its advice and 
consent to the CTBT by a vote of 48 favoring ratification to 
51 against.  The CTBT remains pending before the Senate 
Foreign Relations Committee and can be taken up by the 
Committee at any time. 
 
Over the decade since the Senate last considered the CTBT, new 
developments have occurred in both monitoring technology and 
verification techniques, as well as assessments of the ability 
of the United States to maintain the safety and reliability of 
its nuclear stockpile without nuclear testing.  The 
Administration will conduct a full review of these 
developments before it decides how best to pursue ratification 
of the CTBT. 
The CTBT was negotiated in the Geneva Conference on 
Disarmament (CD) between January 1994 and August 1996.  The 
United Nations General Assembly voted on September 10, 1996, 
to adopt the Treaty by a tally of 158 in favor, 3 opposed, and 
5 abstentions.  Since September 24, 1996, the Treaty has been 
open to all states for signature and ratification before its 
entry into force.  One hundred eighty (180) nations have now 
signed it, and 148 have ratified it.  Of the 44 nations whose 
ratifications are specifically required by the CTBT for its 
entry into force, 41 have signed and 35 have ratified.  Any 
nation can accede to the Treaty at any time after its entry 
into force, enabling its participation to be universal. 
CTBT's Central Features 
Basic obligations.  The CTBT would ban any nuclear weapon test 
explosion or any other nuclear explosion. 
Organization.  The Treaty establishes an organization - the 
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO) -- 
to ensure implementation of the Treaty's provisions, including 
the provisions for international verification measures.  The 
organization includes a Conference of States Parties, an 
Executive Council, and a Technical Secretariat, which includes 
the International Data Centre. 
Structure.  The Treaty includes two Annexes, a Protocol, and 
two Annexes to the Protocol, all of which form integral parts 
of the Treaty.  Annex 1 to the Treaty assigns each state to 
one of six geographical regions for the purpose of determining 
Executive Council composition; Annex 2 contains the criteria 
used to identify the states required to have deposited their 
instruments of ratification before the Treaty may enter into 
force, as well as a list of those states. The Protocol 
consists of three parts: Part I details on the International 
Monitoring System (IMS); Part II on On-Site Inspections (OSI); 
and Part III on Confidence Building Measures.  Annex 1 to the 
 
STATE 00033075  010 OF 011 
 
 
Protocol details the location of treaty monitoring assets 
associated with the IMS; and Annex 2 details parameters for 
screening events. 
Verification and inspections.  The Treaty's verification 
regime consists of  an International Monitoring System 
composed of seismological, radionuclide, hydroacoustic, and 
infrasound monitoring; consultation and clarification; on-site 
inspections; and confidence-building measures.  The use of 
national technical means, vital for the Treaty's verification 
regime, is explicitly provided for.  Requests for on-site 
inspections must be approved by at least 30 affirmative votes 
of the members of the Treaty's 51-member Executive Council, 
which must act within 96 hours of receiving a request for an 
inspection.  At the present time, 273 of the 337 monitoring 
facilities comprising the IMS have been built, and 246 have 
been certified as meeting all requirements. 
Treaty compliance and sanctions.  The Treaty provides for 
measures to redress a situation of concern, to ensure 
compliance with the Treaty (including the ability to recommend 
sanctions), and for the settlement of disputes.  If the 
Conference of States Parties or the Executive Council 
determines that a case is of particular gravity, it can bring 
the issue to the attention of the United Nations. 
Amendments.  Any State Party to the Treaty may propose an 
amendment to the Treaty, the Protocol, or the Annexes to the 
Protocol.  Amendments are considered by an Amendment 
Conference and are adopted by a positive vote of a majority of 
the States Parties with no State Party casting a negative 
vote.  Amendments enter into force for all States parties 
after deposit of the instruments of ratification  or 
acceptance by all those States parties casting a positive vote 
at the Amendment Conference. 
Entry into force.  The CTBT will enter into force 180 days 
after the date of deposit of the instruments of ratification 
by all States listed in Annex 2 to the Treaty.  Annex 2 lists 
the 44 states that are members of the Conference on 
Disarmament (CD) as of June 18, 1996, with nuclear power 
and/or research reactors.  If the Treaty has not entered into 
force three years after the date of the anniversary of its 
opening for signature (i.e., three years after September 24, 
1996), a conference of the States which already have deposited 
their instruments of ratification may convene annually to 
consider and decide by consensus what measures consistent with 
international law may be undertaken to accelerate the 
ratification process in order to facilitate the Treaty's early 
entry into force. 
Review.  Ten years after entry into force, a Conference of the 
States Parties will be held to review the operation and 
effectiveness of the CTBT unless a majority of the States 
Parties decides otherwise. 
Duration.  The CTBT is of unlimited duration.  Each State 
Party has the right to withdraw from the CTBT if it decides 
that extraordinary events related to its subject matter of the 
CTBT have jeopardized its supreme interests. 
Depositary.  The Secretary General of the United Nations is 
the Depositary for this Treaty and receives signatures, 
instruments of ratification and instruments of accession. 
CTBTO Preparatory Commission 
The Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO) 
Preparatory Commission is based in Vienna, Austria, and is 
responsible for carrying out the necessary preparations for 
the effective implementation of the CTBT and for preparing for 
the first session of the Conference of the States Parties to 
the CTBT.  All countries which have signed the CTBT are 
considered to be members of the Preparatory Commission.  In 
addition to these members, the Commission includes a 
Provisional Technical Secretariat, which has the following 
duties: (1) it is responsible for the overall installation, 
operations, and maintenance of the IMS; (2) it operates the 
International Data Centre, which receives data from IMS 
stations and produces monitoring data products; (3) it 
supports the on-site inspection function; and (4) it provides 
other support to the members of the Commission.  Information 
about the Preparatory Commission can be found on its website 
www.ctbto.org. 
 
¶21. Fact Sheet:  Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty 
 
The United States has not produced highly enriched uranium for 
nuclear weapons since 1964 and halted the production of 
plutonium for nuclear weapons in 1988.  The United States 
strongly believes that achieving a legally binding ban on the 
production of fissile material for use in nuclear weapons is 
an important goal.  A Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty (FMCT) 
would ban the production of fissile material for use in 
nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices. 
 
During the 1990's, many saw an FMCT as the next logical step 
on nuclear disarmament after the Comprehensive Nuclear Test 
Ban-Treaty, which was completed in the Conference on 
Disarmament (CD) in Geneva in 1996.  After considerable 
effort, the CD began negotiations on an FMCT toward the end of 
 
STATE 00033075  011 OF 011 
 
 
its 1998 session.  In 1999, the CD proved unable to reach 
agreement for continuing FMCT negotiations, a condition that 
has persisted to the present time. 
 
In late 2002, the Bush Administration issued its "National 
Strategy to Combat Weapons of Mass Destruction," which 
affirmed U.S. support for the "negotiation of a Fissile 
Material Cutoff Treaty (FMCT) that advances U.S. security 
interests."  On July 29, 2004, then-U.S. Ambassador to the CD 
Jackie Wolcott Sanders delivered a statement to the CD 
reporting that a U.S. policy review had concluded that an 
effectively verifiable FMCT was not achievable.  During late 
August/early September 2004, U.S. experts traveled to Geneva 
to brief CD delegations on the reasoning behind these 
conclusions, and to emphasize that an FMCT having no 
international verification provisions would be preferable to 
one with less than effective verification. 
 
On May 19, 2006, the U.S. tabled at the CD a draft text of an 
FMCT, as well as a draft mandate for FMCT negotiations which 
omitted any requirement that an FMCT resulting from the 
negotiations be "effectively verifiable.  Prior to tabling 
these texts, the United States had consulted with key CD 
member governments to preview the U.S. proposals. 
 
Subsequently, the U.S. continued to press the case for its 
draft text as a basis for negotiations in the CD, stressing 
that the proposed mandate did not preclude others from raising 
the issue of verification and expressing a willingness to 
further explain its position.  However, the insistence by a 
small number of CD members on linking FMCT negotiations with 
other, unrelated issues which do not enjoy a consensus in 
Geneva continues to stymie action in the CD on FMCT. 
 
President Obama has stated his administration's support for 
international negotiations for a verifiable treaty to end the 
production of fissile materials for nuclear weapons or other 
nuclear explosive devices.  He also has stressed the 
importance of cutting off the building blocks needed for 
nuclear weapons, stating, "if we are serious about stopping 
the spread of these weapons, then we should complete a treaty 
to end the production of materials to create them." 
 
 
¶22. Minimize considered. 
CLINTON