09STATE57281
UNSC CONSULTATION ON ICTR/ICTY -- JUNE 4
Wed Jun 03 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
O P 032049Z JUN 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO PAGE 02        STATE   057281  032101Z 
USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 
INFO AMEMBASSY DAR ES SALAAM PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY THE HAGUE PRIORITYUNCLAS STATE 057281 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC XA ZF ZL RW
SUBJECT: UNSC CONSULTATION ON ICTR/ICTY -- JUNE 4 
 

¶1.  (U) The Department requests that USUN draw on the 
following points for use during the Security Council,s June 
4 consultations on the Completion Strategies for the 
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and 
Rwanda (ICTY and ICTR). 
 
Begin Points: 
 
¶2. (U) The United States thanks the Prosecutors and 
Presidents for their assessments, and we would like to 
commend the Tribunals, judges and staff for their dedication 
to justice.  We note the value of the Tribunals, work and 
recognize the importance of a smooth, efficient drawdown.  We 
welcome the new ICTY registrar, John Hocking, and we note our 
appreciation for the efforts of ICTR Prosecutor Hassan Jallow 
and ICTY Prosecutor Serge Brammertz.  We would also like to 
take this opportunity to recognize the many years of 
dedicated service by former ICTY Registrar Hans Holthuis, as 
well as the work of his colleague at the ICTR, Adama Dieng. 
 
¶3.  (U) The United States highlights the importance of the 
Tribunals, work; the legacy of the Tribunals will only be 
strengthened by the creation of a durable and appropriate 
residual mechanism and we applaud the work the Tribunals have 
done to advance that goal thus far.  We urge both Tribunals 
to continue to strive to complete their work at the earliest 
possible date.  We note in this regard that the 2008 goal for 
completion of trials has not been met, but we recognize that 
efforts are being made to increase efficiency and to wrap up 
work through the use of ad litem judges, extensions, and 
redeployment of trial judges to the appeals chamber.  We 
support these initiatives and believe that the Tribunals, 
requests to extend the terms of judges should be honored by 
the Security Council at a minimum through the upcoming 
biennium. 
 
¶4.  (U) Individuals indicted by the Tribunals for committing 
some of history,s worst crimes should not be allowed to 
escape justice.  The United States stresses the importance of 
maintaining a vigilant, continued search for the 15 
individuals indicted by the ICTY and ICTR who remain at 
large.  We call on all States to fulfill their legal 
obligations to cooperate fully with the Tribunals. 
 
¶5.  (U) The United States wishes to highlight reports that 
ICTR fugitive Felicien Kabuga is in Kenya.  Kabuga must face 
justice.  We note with particular concern the ICTR 
Prosecutor,s assessment that the Government of Kenya has not 
complied with requests set out in March 2009, including 
requests for certain government records relating to Kabuga,s 
assets and details of  the government,s claim that Kabuga 
has left Kenya.  The United States calls on Kenya to act 
immediately on the Tribunal,s recommendations and take 
additional steps to deny Kabuga access to his networks of 
support. 
 
¶6.  (U) The United States understands Rwanda,s desire to 
receive transfer cases from the ICTR, and commends the 
Prosecutor,s support for that effort, as well as Rwanda's 
and others, work to build capacity in the Rwandan legal 
system to make transfers possible.  The United States calls 
on member States to assist and support Rwanda in its efforts 
to increase capacity in the Rwandan judicial system in the 
hopes that it will soon be able to receive transfers.  The 
ability of the ICTR to transfer cases to Rwanda and other 
states as appropriate is an important step towards meeting 
the Tribunal,s completion strategy.  The United States notes 
that the ICTR transferred information on some of its Rwandan 
Patriotic Front investigations to Rwanda,s domestic courts 
in June 2008, and that four RPF officers faced trial.  We ask 
the ICTR to share their expectations as to any possible 
further cases that deal with the RPF. 
 
¶7.  (U) Concerning ICTY cooperation, the United States once 
again calls on all States to cooperate fully with the ICTY. 
We commend the Government of Serbia for its efforts to 
apprehend and transfer persons indicted by the ICTY, and 
particularly applaud the efforts that led to the capture of 
Radovan Karadzic last July.  We call on Serbia to do 
everything in its power to locate, arrest and transfer the 
two remaining fugitives, Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic.  The 
arrest of these last two fugitives is crucial for the 
Security Council as it seeks to ensure a successful 
completion of the Tribunal,s mandate. 
 
We also recognize Croatia,s efforts to fulfill its 
obligations to cooperate with the ICTY.  The Government of 
Croatia has facilitated the arrests of all Croatian suspects 
and has established a solid record of cooperation with the 
ICTY.  We urge continued Croatian cooperation and are hopeful 
that there can be a satisfactory and rapid resolution of the 
issue of the documents sought by the ICTY prosecutor in the 
Gotovina case.  We encourage Croatia to work with ICTY 
officials to accomplish this. 
 
We urge that the countries of the region continue to 
facilitate and improve cooperation among themselves. 
Specifically, they must improve information sharing, allow 
the transfer of war crimes proceedings between states as 
appropriate, and break down barriers that obstruct 
extradition of those accused of perpetrating war crimes. 
Regional cooperation is a critical element to bringing those 
that have committed crimes to justice. 
 
¶8.  (U) The United States notes the importance of the UN 
Working Group on Criminal Tribunals, and we commend the work 
of the Austrian chair.  We also would like to thank the UN 
Office of the Legal Counselor for its help in evaluating 
options for a residual mechanism.  The United States remains 
committed to an efficient, cost-effective residual mechanism 
that ensures that war criminals cannot escape justice. 
 
¶9.  (U) We again thank the Presidents, Prosecutors, 
Registrars, and their staffs for their work to fight impunity 
and to create a record for the world of the crimes that 
occurred. 
 
 
End points. 
 
 
CLINTON