09STATE115230
VOTING INSTRUCTION: UNGA RESOLUTION ON THE
Fri Nov 06 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0003
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #5230 3102307
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 062303Z NOV 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 8545
INFO RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL PRIORITY 4360UNCLAS STATE 115230 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNGA PREL AF
SUBJECT: VOTING INSTRUCTION: UNGA RESOLUTION ON THE 
SITUATION IN AFGHANISTAN 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request.  The Department 
instructs USUN to vote in favor of the UN General Assembly 
resolution currently "in blue" on "The situation in 
Afghanistan" on November 9, 2009.  USUN is authorized to 
provide U.S. co-sponsorship of the resolution.  Post 
should seek additional guidance from the Department if 
there are any additional substantive changes to the 
resolution text.  USUN is also instructed to draw from the 
points in paragraph two in delivering the U.S. Explanation 
of Vote. 
 
¶2. (U) Begin discussion points: 
 
-- The United States is pleased to join the other member 
states who have co-sponsored this resolution on the 
situation in Afghanistan.  This resolution recognizes the 
progress that the Afghan people have made in rebuilding 
their country, but acknowledges that more work needs to be 
done.  We join in recognizing the Afghan government and 
security forces for their continuing efforts to address the 
challenges in the areas of security, governance, human 
rights, and rule of law. 
 
-- We also join in recognizing the Secretary-General, his 
Special 
Representative, the staff of UNAMA and other UN personnel, 
and the forces 
participating in the International Security Assistance 
Force and Operation Enduring Freedom.  Their efforts are 
an essential part of our shared commitment to the people 
of Afghanistan. 
 
-- This resolution also underlines the challenges posed by 
those who seek to disrupt Afghan efforts to build a 
prosperous, stable country.  Violent attacks by the 
Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremist and criminal groups 
undermine efforts to bring stability, security and a 
representative government to Afghanistan, and this resolution 
rightly denounces them.  The brutal attack on October 28 on 
the guesthouse in Kabul demonstrated again - - and tragically 
- - the need to stand firm against such violent efforts to 
undermine the peace and stability that the Afghan people are 
working so hard to establish. 
 
-- Afghanistan has now reached a conclusion to its 
Presidential election process.  We congratulate 
President Karzai on his victory and we congratulate all 
the candidates who stood in Afghanistan's second 
Presidential election, in particular Dr. Abdullah.  This 
first ever, Afghan-led Afghan election was held in 
challenging circumstances, but the result was in line with 
Afghanistan's laws and constitution. 
 
-- As we move beyond the election, the credibility and 
success of the new President and his government 
will rest on its ability to deliver better security, 
governance, justice and progress to the Afghan people.  We 
stand ready to support the new government in this regard. 
We call on all member states to redouble their own efforts 
to work with the new Afghan government to promote 
stability and prosperity for the Afghan people and peace 
and security for the region. 
 
End discussion points. 
CLINTON