09STATE116271
BUILDING BLOCKS FOR NOVEMBER 16 UNSC
Wed Nov 11 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0005
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #6271 3150103
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 110058Z NOV 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHKU/AMEMBASSY KUWAIT IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 116271 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC IZ
SUBJECT: BUILDING BLOCKS FOR NOVEMBER 16 UNSC 
CONSULTATIONS ON UNAMI 
 
1.(U) This is an action request. USUN should draw from the 
points in para 2 during the closed consultations on the 
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in the 
Security Council on November 16. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Begin Points: 
 
--Mr. President, I would like to thank the Secretary-General 
for his report and UNAMI for its tireless work and commitment 
to support a more peaceful and prosperous Iraq. 
 
--Mr. President, the United States would like to acknowledge 
the critical role that the United Nations continues to play 
in Iraq.  Under the leadership of Special Representative Ad 
Melkert and at the invitation of the Government of Iraq, 
UNAMI continues to expand the presence and capacity of the UN 
throughout Iraq.  From addressing disputed internal 
boundaries to supporting free and fair elections - from 
promoting national unity to assisting refugees and internally 
displaced persons - UNAMI plays a critical role in support of 
the Government of Iraq as it pursues the long-term peace, 
security, and prosperity of Iraq. 
--On behalf of the United States, I am proud to offer our 
full support for UNAMI,s mandate.  We particularly would 
like to recognize the work of SRSG Ad Melkert and his staff, 
and congratulate departing Deputy SRSG Andrew Gilmour on his 
record of service.  The United States is greatly appreciative 
of your service. 
--In the days and months ahead, UNAMI,s work will continue 
to be especially significant. 
 
--Building upon the success of January,s provincial 
elections and Kurdistan Regional Government elections in 
July, the people and Government of Iraq are preparing for 
critical parliamentary elections in January 2010.  UNAMI 
successfully supported the efforts of Iraq's Council of 
Representatives to secure a national election law, as well as 
to provide technical assistance and advice to Iraq,s 
Independent High Electoral Commission.  These actions are 
essential to ensure the success of the upcoming January 
elections.  Holding legitimate and transparent national 
elections which encompass the peaceful transfer of power is 
important for Iraq to move forward as a sovereign nation. 
 
--Mr. President, the United States is strongly encouraged by 
Iraq's Council of Representatives' action to adopt a national 
election law that maximizes participation of all Iraqis ) 
including displaced Iraqis ) and provides for transparency 
in the conduct of the electoral process.  Enacting a 
hybrid-open list system - previously used during Iraq's 
January 2009 provincial council elections - is another 
important step towards national unity and reflects the will 
of the Iraqi people.  We further encourage continued efforts 
to ensure that out-of-country and IDP voters have the 
opportunity to have their voices heard through the ballot 
box.  This process will advance the Iraqi citizenry's 
engagement with their government and bring together groups to 
inclusively function in a democratic environment. 
 
--Mr. President, the United States also strongly supports 
UNAMI's work to facilitate the sustainable and voluntary 
return and reintegration of Iraqi refugees and internally 
displaced persons.  With as many as 225,000 returns in 2008 
and nearly 155,000 returns so far in 2009, the U.S. 
recognizes that this process is essential for the long-term 
stability of Iraq.  We  welcome additional efforts on this 
issue by the Government of Iraq. 
 
--The United States is also acting to address Iraq,s 
displacement issues by supporting returns and reintegration, 
assisting those in displacement both inside and outside Iraq, 
and resettling in the United States some of the most 
vulnerable refugees.  To this end, we recently allocated $100 
million in new funding to support the return and 
reintegration of displaced Iraqis.  These funds will be used 
to meet the needs of vulnerable families at the community 
level through activities such as rebuilding homes, creating 
jobs, and improving basic services.  We also recently 
announced that Samantha Power will coordinate USG efforts for 
Iraqi refugees and IDPs and welcome Prime Minister Maliki's 
Senior Political Advisor Sadiq Rikabi as the GOI's 
counterpart on this very important issue. 
 
--The United States also supports UNAMI's important role in 
addressing Iraq,s disputed internal boundaries, 
particularly, UNAMI's facilitated High Level Task Force.  The 
U.S. encourages the continued engagement of senior officials 
from both the Government of Iraq (GOI) and the Kurdistan 
Regional Government (KRG) to use this important mechanism to 
increase dialogue and foster cooperation as they work toward 
a just and fair solution ) a key step in creating stability 
for all of Iraq.  We stand ready to assist in this effort and 
call on all relevant parties to advance this process. 
 
--Mr. President, last month, I traveled to Iraq to meet with 
senior Government of Iraq, Kurdistan Regional Government, and 
United Nations officials.  On October 24, I stood with Iraqi 
Foreign Minister Zebari at the site of the August 19 bombing 
at the Iraqi Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  A day later, 
another act of violence aimed to disrupt and undermine Iraq's 
government institutions.  In the strongest terms, the U.S. 
condemns the series of terrorist attacks that occurred on 
August 19 and October 25 in Baghdad, which caused numerous 
deaths, injuries and damage.  We reaffirm our deepest 
condolences for these tragic attacks and our solidarity with 
the people of Iraq as they build a secure, stable, sovereign 
and democratic nation. 
 
--We also stand with the people and government of Iraq 
against those who use terror and violence in a vain attempt 
to slow progress towards achieving a free and secure future. 
As a friend and strategic partner, the United States firmly 
supports Iraq,s continuing development as a sovereign, 
democratic nation in which all communities can freely 
participate in political, social and economic life, and whose 
human and civil rights are protected.  To this end, we fully 
support the Government of Iraq in their investigation to 
bring perpetrators, organizers, financiers and sponsors of 
these reprehensible acts of terrorism to justice, and the 
on-going efforts of UN Secretary-General Ban's 
representative, Assistant Secretary-General Oscar 
Fernandez-Taranco, related to Iraq's security and 
sovereignty.  We also call on the international community to 
cooperate actively with Iraqi authorities in this regard and 
support the Iraqi people to thrive and prosper in peace. 
 
--Mr. President, in closing, all of us here can be proud of 
UNAMI,s effort and outstanding record of accomplishments to 
date.  The United States deeply appreciates your work and 
expanded footprint in Iraq - and stands ready to assist as 
necessary in accordance with the U.S.-UN Security Agreement. 
We encourage all countries to do the same.  We look forward 
to your continued success. 
 
--Thank you, Mr. President. 
 
END POINTS 
CLINTON