09STATE39760
UNMIS CONSULTATIONS TALKING POINTS
Tue Apr 21 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO5546
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHC #9760 1112148
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 212129Z APR 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 5758
INFO DARFUR COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS STATE 039760 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PREF KPKO SU UNSC
SUBJECT: UNMIS CONSULTATIONS TALKING POINTS 
 
¶1.  This is an action request.  USUN may draw from the points 
in paragraph 2 during consultations in the Security Council 
on the UN Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) scheduled for April 
23, 2009. 
 
  ¶2.  Begin Points 
 
We would like to thank SRSG Ashraf Qazi for his work and the 
efforts of his team during a difficult period.  We also 
express our appreciation for the work of UNMIS and those 
troop and police contributing countries participating in an 
admittedly difficult environment.  The United States fully 
supports a continuation of the UNMIS mandate and looks 
forward to having UNMIS continue its mission in Sudan by 
assisting and supporting the full implementation of the 
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), providing elections 
assistance, and working with regional and international 
partners to bring a permanent peace to Sudan and the region. 
 
The United States continues to be troubled by the delays and 
impediments preventing implementation of the CPA, thereby 
leaving critical issues unresolved.  The structure and 
operations to conduct national elections must be built; 
census results are still pending; Abyei continues to be a 
flash point with the border still in dispute and the Abyei 
Interim Administration unable to carry out its duties due to 
lack of funding; oil revenue wealth sharing remains 
problematic; crucial legislation called for by the CPA such 
as the Security Law, Referendum Law, and Media Act has not 
been passed; the North-South boundary dispute is yet to be 
resolved; and increasing violence accompanied by the 
prevalence of arms in southern Sudan argues forcefully for an 
effective disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration 
program throughout southern Sudan.  We believe the CPA is the 
foundation upon which a durable peace can be reached between 
the North and South and is the means to avoid the devastating 
violence that existed prior to the agreement.  Renewed 
efforts are required to resolve the issues noted above and to 
avoid a return to violent conflict. 
 
While the United States is pleased the National Electoral 
Commission (NEC) has recommended a date for elections, we 
also recognize much remains to be done in order to have 
peaceful and credible elections.  The Needs Assessment 
Mission requested of UNMIS by the NEC, and being organized by 
DPKO and the UN's Electoral Assistance Division, must quickly 
identify the planning, organization, and support needed to 
conduct national elections. We hope the work of the 
assessment mission will be completed as soon as possible. 
Until the assessment is complete, UNMIS should continue to 
work with the NEC  within existing capabilities to ensure 
that the elections will be credible and transparent.  We also 
believe DPKO should assess the degree of security UNMIS can 
provide during elections.  UNMIS should provide the Council a 
detailed report of all election assistance provided and 
contemplated in the next Secretary-General's report on UNMIS. 
 
The disappointing expulsion and closure of humanitarian 
agencies in Sudan on March 4 created conditions ripe for a 
humanitarian crisis.  We strongly encourage the UN to 
continue working with the Government of Sudan (GOS) to 
establish conditions to meet 100% of humanitarian needs.  We 
urge UNMIS and other UN entities to develop contingency plans 
and work with non-governmental organizations to assist 
vulnerable civilians throughout Sudan.  The United States 
believes UNMIS should engage with its UN partners, the GOS, 
the Government of Southern Sudan, and the international 
community on how to best meet these assistance needs.  In 
sum, UNMIS must be prepared for a worst-case scenario and 
have in place all mechanisms to employ a rapid and effective 
response to any developing humanitarian crisis. 
 
Finally, we are deeply concerned about the significant 
inter-ethnic and LRA-related violence occurring in southern 
Sudan, and urge UNMIS to work cooperatively and in 
coordination with the CPA partners in improving the security 
environment and implementing conflict prevention mechanisms 
to reduce and avoid violent conflicts between and against 
local residents, particularly in the violence-prone border 
areas. 
 
Thank You 
CLINTON