09STATE11320
SOMALIA: LETTER TO THE SECRETARIAT ON USG EFFORTS
Fri Feb 06 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0012
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #1320 0372353
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 062338Z FEB 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 4756UNCLAS STATE 011320 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL PHUM PHSA EWWT KCRM SO XA XW
SUBJECT: SOMALIA: LETTER TO THE SECRETARIAT ON USG EFFORTS 
TO STEM SOMALIA PIRACY 
 
¶1.  USUN is instructed to deliver the following letter to the 
Department of Political Affairs in response to their 
inquiry of January 28 asking for additional information 
concerning USG anti-piracy activities off the coast of 
Somalia.  The Department understands an earlier letter 
containing the communique issued by the Contact Group on 
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia has yet to be approved by 
USUN/FO.  Once this is sent to the Security Council 
President and becomes a Security Council document, please 
fill in the corresponding document number in paragraph 4 
of the below document.  USUN should determine which principal 
is most appropriate to sign the letter. 
 
Begin letter: 
 
Dear Assistant Secretary General Menkerios: 
 
I have the honor to refer to your facsimile of January 28, 
2008 (DPKO/ADII/2009/098) where you requested more 
information about Combined Task Force 151 and any additional 
information concerning anti-piracy activities the United 
States Government has conducted since September 16, 2008. 
 
The United States continues to be deeply concerned about the 
threat posed by acts of piracy and armed robbery at 
sea off the coast of Somalia.  We are committed to working 
with the Transitional Federal Government and the 
international community to counter the scourge of piracy off 
Somalia's coast. 
 
The United States has worked closely with our partners on the 
Security Council in unanimously 
adopting resolutions 1838, 1846, and 1851, all related to 
fighting piracy in Somalia and off its coast. 
 
Resolution 1851 encouraged all states and regional 
organizations fighting piracy and armed robbery at sea off 
the coast of Somalia to establish an international 
cooperation mechanism to act as a common point of contact. 
On January 15, in response to this call from the Security 
Council, the United States hosted the inaugural meeting of 
the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia (CGPCS) 
in New York.  The first meeting of the CGPCS was attended by 
24 states and five international and regional organizations. 
The CGPCS issued a joint communiqu at the successful 
conclusion to the meeting that further explains the group and 
its objectives.  This communiqu was distributed as a 
Security Council document on        (SC document #).  The 
United States has volunteered to chair the CGPCS' working 
group on strengthening shipping industries' self-awareness 
and other capabilities.  On January 16, the United States and 
the Republic of Kenya signed a Memorandum of Understanding 
that will facilitate the prosecution and incarceration in 
Kenya of pirate suspects that have been interdicted by U.S. 
forces.  The United States is extremely grateful to Kenya for 
its efforts to ensure suspected pirates are brought to 
justice, and is exploring the possibility of reaching 
similar arrangements with other states in the region. 
 
Operationally, the United States continues to act to fight 
piracy off the coast of Somalia.  On January 13, 2009, the 
Combined Maritime Forces (CMF) established Combined Task 
Force (CTF) 151.  This task force was created specifically 
to deter and disrupt piracy off the Somali coast.  CTF 151 
continues to patrol the Maritime Security Patrol Area 
(MSPA) referred to in Ambassador Khalilzad's letter to the 
Security Council President of September 16.  CTF 151 is 
currently comprised of U.S. and UK naval assets; and we have 
indications that several other international partners will 
provide naval assets upon gaining the national authority to 
do so.  CTF 151 is prepared to coordinate and de-conflict 
coalition and international ships and aircraft in the region 
to deter and disrupt piracy. 
 
I hope this information is useful to you.  We look forward to 
the Secretary General's report on ways to ensure the 
long-term security of international navigation off the coast 
of Somalia. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Ambassador Rice/Wolff/DiCarlo 
 
End letter 
CLINTON