09TELAVIV371
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Thu Feb 12 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #0371/01 0431126
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 121126Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0479
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 5002
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 1599
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 5466
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 5807
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 5036
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 3511
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 5829
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 2663
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 0876
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 9589
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 7086
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 2039
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 6092
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 8125
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH PRIORITY 0920
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 1387
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 000371 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Aftermath of Israeli Elections 
 
¶2.  Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Major media reported that yesterday President Obama congratulated 
President Shimon Peres on the successful election process in Israel. 
 Peres explained the Israeli system of government to President 
Obama.  The media reported that the U.S. administration is taking a 
cautious approach to the election results.  The Jerusalem Post 
reported that U.S. officials are publicly taking a wait-and-see 
approach to the formation of the new government, but that privately 
many have expressed concern that Netanyahu might preside over a 
right-wing coalition.  Yediot quoted a senior White House source as 
saying that the United StatesQ hope is the formation of government 
that is devoted to a peace agreement with the Palestinians. 
 
All media led with the aftermath of the Israeli elections and 
initial coalition talks -- from various perspectives.  HaQaretz 
quoted Kadima leader Tzipi Livni as saying yesterday that, despite 
her slim chance of forming a government, she will make every effort 
to do so Qfor my voters.Q  However, she said she would not pay an 
Qexorbitant priceQ for other partiesQ agreement to join her.  The 
media reported that the final results of the elections will be 
published this evening. 
 
According to Yediot and Maariv, Yisrael Beiteinu leader Avigdor 
Lieberman, who met separately yesterday with Livni and Likud 
Chairman Benjamin Netanyahu, holds the key to the formation of the 
next government.  Speaking on Israel Radio this morning, Lieberman 
said that he already knows who he will recommend to President Peres 
as the shaper of the next coalition. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted senior officials in Likud and Kadima as 
saying yesterday that both parties will be able to form a government 
together under NetanyahuQs leadership, on the basis of equality 
between the two parties.  Israel Radio quoted senior Likud sources 
as saying that Netanyahu is very interested in forming a government 
with Kadima and that he is willing to hand over to it two of the 
three key portfolios -Q defense, foreign affairs, and finance. 
 
The media reported that the Labor Party is likely to quit government 
activity.  Media quoted party chairman Ehud Barak as saying so 
privately. 
 
Leading media noted that today is the anniversary of the 
assassination of senior Hizbullah member Imad Mughniyah and that 
Israeli and foreign security forces are on high alert in the country 
and abroad. 
 
HaQaretz reported that PA Chairman Mahmoud Abbas has conducted an 
international campaign in recent weeks aimed at the diplomatic 
isolation of a right-wing government headed by Netanyahu.  Abbas has 
been trying to convince the international community that such an 
Israeli government must face conditions similar to those faced by 
the Hamas government.  HaQaretz quoted a senior political source in 
Jerusalem as saying yesterday that the leaders of France, Britain, 
and Italy have promised Abbas that they would not allow any new 
Israeli government to delay or freeze the peace process.  The same 
source said that Netanyahu's statements on continuing the peace 
process and on "economic peace" are perceived by Abbas and his aides 
as "empty promises."  Senior Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat was 
quoted as saying in an interview with The Jerusalem Post that an 
Israeli government that rejects the two-state solution and 
agreements signed with the PLO and PA and will not stop settlement 
activities would be considered a Qnon-partner.Q  However, Maariv and 
Makor Rishon-Hatzofe quoted Abbas as saying in an interview with the 
Italian daily La Repubblica that the PA is not worried about the 
strengthening of the right in the Israeli elections. 
 
Israel Radio quoted sources in Cairo as saying that Egypt-Hamas 
talks will produce an 18-month truce with Israel today. 
 
Leading media reported that incoming National Union Knesset Member 
Michael Ben-Ari was an associate of the late far-right leader Rabbi 
Meir Kahane. 
 
Makor Rishon-Hatzofe reported that yesterday the military junta 
ruling in Mauritania decided to close down the countryQs embassy in 
Israel. 
 
----------------------------------- 
¶1.  Aftermath of Israeli Elections: 
----------------------------------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Herb Keinon wrote in the conservative, 
independent Jerusalem Post: QGoing on the assumption that Netanyahu 
will form the next government, it will be easier to politely turn 
down the Americans if the coalition is not a narrow, right-wing one 
 but rather a wide government. 
 
The Jerusalem Post editorialized: QA unity government  would 
indicate Israeli readiness to encourage any genuine shift toward 
Palestinian moderation and viable accommodation. 
 
Uri Savir, Oslo Accords architect and President of the Peres Center 
for Peace, wrote in the popular, pluralist Maariv: QIt is proposed 
that [a unity] government adopt a bold policy, in coordination with 
the Obama administration. 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: Q[The Labor 
Party and Meretz] must rehabilitate and rebuild themselves in the 
opposition as a serious left alternative to the right-wing bloc that 
won the election.  Their leaders are responsible for this failure -- 
Barak and Oron must move aside. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "The Coalition Calculus of Saying QNoQ to America" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Herb Keinon wrote in the conservative, 
independent Jerusalem Post (2/12): QWith a new administration in the 
U.S. already pursuing a new Middle East agenda, there is bound to be 
a degree of friction between the U.S. and Israel.... But, going on 
the assumption that Netanyahu will form the next government, it will 
be easier to politely turn down the Americans if the coalition is 
not a narrow, right-wing one with a shaky five-seat majority, but 
rather a wide government of 93 Knesset members (Likud, Kadima, 
Israel Beiteinu, Shas, United Torah Judaism, the National Union and 
Habayit Hayehudi [i.e. the Jewish Home]).  For instance, a message 
coming from Israel that it will not be willing to cede any part of 
Jerusalem to a foreign government would pack a more convincing punch 
were it to come from the head of a government of 93, than were it to 
come from the head of a wobbly government of 65.... Considering the 
coalition math, the only way it seems the U.S. will be able to deal 
with Livni in any capacity is if she joins a Netanyahu government. 
And by joining Netanyahu, she could be helping put together a 
government that could be less susceptible to U.S. pressure, less 
pliable, than if she were to opt for the opposition. 
 
II.  "Unity, Now" 
 
The Jerusalem Post editorialized (2/12): QIsrael does not have the 
luxury of squandering precious time on coalition bargaining.  The 
existential threat posed by Iran, as well as lesser -- by comparison 
-- security and foreign policy challenges, combined with the need to 
competently address the local impact of the global economic crisis, 
demands leadership of the highest caliber.... Given that the 
QmoderateQ Mahmoud Abbas could not, or would not, cut a deal with 
Ehud Olmert, notwithstanding the latter's generosity of spirit (and 
desperation to end his tenure on a high note), it is self-evident 
that, for now, Jerusalem has no partner for peace.  A unity 
government, however, would indicate Israeli readiness to encourage 
any genuine shift toward Palestinian moderation and viable 
accommodation.   Netanyahu could form a short-lived, narrow 
right-wing government, while Livni does not appear to have an option 
of heading a government without the Likud -- a reality that means 
Netanyahu holds the upper hand in coalition building, and would 
require Livni accepting the deputy leader's position in a unity 
alliance. Avigdor Lieberman could play a constructive role as 
minister of the interior and member of the security cabinet. 
Admittedly, such a scenario requires Livni and Lieberman to put 
country first.  Given the Jewish state's need for four years of 
stable government under capable stewardship, this is not too much to 
ask. 
 
III.  "The 100-Day Plan" 
 
Uri Savir, Oslo Accords architect and President of the Peres Center 
for Peace, wrote in the popular, pluralist Maariv (2/12): QWe appear 
to be advancing towards a national unity government, under the 
leadership of the Likud and Kadima.  In order for us not to become a 
national paralysis government, a discussion of substance is more 
important than a discussion of personal roles.  Therefore, what 
follows is a proposal for government action in the first 100 days. 
The government should act to stabilize the cease-fire and the 
arrangement [with Hamas].  The government should pay the necessary 
price for securing the return of Gilad Shalit, if he is not returned 
before it is formed.  Coordination of peace and security policy with 
the Obama administration, its representatives and its envoys.... The 
most important issue relates to stabilizing the peace and security 
process, including policy vis-`-vis Iran and its fundamentalist 
satellites.  It is proposed that the government adopt a bold policy, 
in coordination with the Obama administration, on the following 
topics: Convening a regional conference, in order to discuss general 
matters concerning the peace process, on the basis of the Saudi 
initiative and the Madrid Conference.  Launching negotiations with 
the Palestinians.... As for Jerusalem, implementation of the Clinton 
plan, i.e., one united city that is a capital for two states.... As 
for Syria, Israel should check with the United States whether Bashar 
Assad is indeed a serious partner.... In the regional context, the 
new government should prepare for comprehensive normalization, as 
stated by the Saudi initiative.... This is a brave formula for a new 
national unity government, but if our new-old leaders want to lead 
us to stability, prosperity, and peace, this is the only way, and 
the direction will already be examined in the first 100 days of its 
tenure. 
 
IV.  "Soul-Searching on the Left" 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (2/12): 
QDespite the lack of clarity about the next government, one thing is 
becoming painfully clear -- the entire left-wing bloc has suffered a 
crushing defeat in the election.... Both left-wing parties have 
suffered a crisis and their leaders -- Ehud Barak and Haim Oron -- 
failed to read the deep changes in the Israeli political map and led 
their parties to a dead-end.  Labor's identity crisis has been known 
for many years.  Ever since Yitzhak Rabin's murder, the differences 
between this party and Likud have been indiscernible.... Meretz has 
other problems.  From the moment it was formed, as a merger of 
Mapam, the Citizens' Rights Movement, and Shinui, its ideology has 
been dissolving. Its gifted, inspired, and courageous leaders have 
retired, leaving the party without a leadership to keep it from 
sinking.  Oron was wrong when he made Yossi Beilin Meretz's previous 
leader.  Beilin symbolized a peace policy, but alienated the party 
from large interest groups.  Oron erred again when he presented 
himself in the election campaign as a man Qeverybody loves.Q  Both 
parties failed to provide a convincing alternative.  They must 
rehabilitate and rebuild themselves in the opposition as a serious 
left alternative to the right-wing bloc that won the election. 
Their leaders are responsible for this failure -- Barak and Oron 
must move aside. 
 
------------ 
¶2.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Steven J. Rosen, a former senior AIPAC official and a defendant in 
the AIPAC case, wrote in the conservative, independent Jerusalem 
Post: QObama is assembling a team of intelligent centrists with a 
realistic, pragmatic approach.  Many of them have experience in the 
tough environment of the Middle East, where the use of force is 
sometimes required. 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"Assessing the Obama Mideast Team" 
 
Steven J. Rosen, a former senior AIPAC official and a defendant in 
the AIPAC case, wrote in the conservative, independent Jerusalem 
Post (2/12): QThe Left is not happy with most of Obama's core 
Mideast team, with the possible exception of [George] Mitchell.... 
For those of us who feared that an inexperienced president so 
enthusiastically embraced by the left wing of the Democratic Party 
might fill the roster with its favorites, there is scant evidence so 
far that our worst fears are being realized.  Instead, Obama is 
assembling a team of intelligent centrists with a realistic, 
pragmatic approach.  Many of them have experience in the tough 
environment of the Middle East, where the use of force is sometimes 
required.  None is starry-eyed and romantic about the Arabs.  Many 
have extensive experience with Israel and some understanding of its 
strategic position.  On the other hand, nowhere on the list so far 
is there a true hawk either, an Elliott Abrams or a Doug Feith or a 
John Bolton or a Paul Wolfowitz.... Some of the enthusiasts in the 
Qpeace campQ are urging Obama to produce an American plan for the 
solution, one that by their definition would diverge from the terms 
Israel considers vital to its national interests, lest we are seen 
as QIsrael's lawyer.Q  If Obama takes all this bad advice, it won't 
bring peace to the Middle East, but it will bring tension between 
Israel and its most important ally.... It is too soon to know 
whether the new administration will make any of these or other 
mistakes.  We had plenty of reasons to be anxious about George Bush 
the day he took over, influenced as he was by big oil, the Saudis, 
and some of his father's bad advisers.  The fears many of us had 
about Obama during the campaign as to the people he might appoint to 
run Mideast policy are not being realized.  Maybe the potential 
mistakes listed above also won't happen. 
 
CUNNINGHAM