09TELAVIV1115
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Tue May 19 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #1115/01 1391037
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 191037Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1883
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 5442
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 2022
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 5973
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 6252
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 5482
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 4037
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 6305
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 3115
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 1319
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 0012
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 7521
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 2499
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 6514
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 8563
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH PRIORITY 1341
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 2059
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 001115 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Aftermath of Obama-Netanyahu Meeting 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
All media, except Israel Hayom, reported that, at their White House 
meeting yesterday, President Barack Obama and PM Benjamin Netanyahu 
Qagreed to disagreeQ (Yediot).  The media reported that Obama told 
Netanyahu that Israel must cease settlement activity, that he 
supports a two-state solution, and that he will not set a deadline 
for the talks with Iran.  Media reported that Obama told Netanyahu 
that the U.S. will soon present a new peace initiative to include 
Arab nations alongside Israel and the PA in peace negotiations. 
(Israel Hayom says that Netanyahu views this development 
positively.)  As part of the new initiative, the U.S. administration 
will encourage Arab states to take steps to normalize their 
relations with Israel immediately and not wait until the end of the 
peace process, as the Arab peace initiative proposes.  Netanyahu was 
quoted as saying at a press conference that he expects the Arab 
world to make a substantial contribution in exchange for Israeli 
concessions. Netanyahu expressed his satisfaction over the 
PresidentQs commitment to prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear 
weapons.  Maariv said that the PresidentQs messages on Iran were 
contradictory.  The Jerusalem Post quoted a source close to 
Netanyahu as saying that Obama is wrong to link the issue of Iranian 
nuclear weapons to the Palestinian track.  The source was quoted as 
saying: QThe Arab states themselves donQt want this link, it doesnQt 
serve their interests. 
 
The media quoted the Lebanese newspaper Al-Akhbar as saying 
yesterday that Lebanese authorities have arrested Ziad al-Homsy, the 
deputy mayor of a village in the countryQs Bekaa Valley, whoQs 
suspected of belonging to an Israeli spy network. 
 
HaQaretz and Israel Radio quoted the Association for Civil Rights in 
Israel (ACRI) as saying in a report published yesterday that 
Jerusalem authorities have stepped up demolitions of illegally built 
Arab homes in the eastern part of the city since the election of 
Mayor Nir Barkat last year. ACRI lambasted Barkat for failing to 
fulfill his pre-election promise to uphold the Arab residents' civil 
rights. The media cited the MunicipalityQs denial of the 
allegations.  HaQaretz also cited a report presented to the Knesset 
yesterday according to which Arab and Jewish populations in 
Jerusalem will be of equal numbers in 2035. 
 
 
 
 
The Jerusalem Post cited denial by GOI sources and the Jordan Valley 
Regional Council yesterday of media reports that final approval had 
been given to construct 20 new homes in the Maskiyot settlement in 
the Jordan Valley. 
 
HaQaretz reported that Yashar Lachayal, an organization belonging to 
the Moskowitz Foundation, headed by far right American millionaire 
Irwin Moskowitz, gives money directly to IDF units. 
 
The media reported that Shin Bet has warned Israeli citizens to 
beware of attempts by terrorist groups to recruit them as agents via 
Facebook and other social networking sites.  Shin Bet has advised 
Israelis not to broadcast personal information on their network 
profiles, including phone numbers, areas of residence, and e-mail 
addresses.  Some media singled out Hizbullah as being active in such 
an endeavor. 
 
Makor Rishon-Hatzofe and other media cited HamasQs denial that it 
reached a security agreement with Fatah.  The Jerusalem Post quoted 
Lt. Gen. Keith Dayton, U.S. Security Coordinator in Israel and the 
Palestinian Territories, as saying recently at Harvard University 
that there are plans to add three more battalions to the PAQs 
paramilitary security force, which is charged with keeping order in 
the West Bank. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that sources close to Knesset Speaker 
Reuven Rivlin (Likud) told the newspaper that he is working 
intensively to bring about a visit by the Speaker of the Egyptian 
PeopleQs Assembly, Ahmed Fathi Sorour.  Sorour would be the first 
elected Egyptian official to visit Israel since Sadat. 
 
Leading media reported that two members of the Jewish community in 
Buenos Aires were injured on Sunday when dozens of pro-Palestinian 
protesters rioted at an event organized by the city to celebrate 
IsraelQs 61st birthday. 
 
The media quoted the Industry, Trade, and Labor Ministry as saying 
yesterday there will be 14 people vying for every available job by 
the end of this year, compared to only four people for each position 
during the economic boom in 2007 and 2008, as the rate of 
unemployment is expected to rise to 5%. 
 
Yediot reported that 12th-grader Shira Ahisar from Rehovot won 
second prize at an international competition for young scientists in 
Nevada. 
 
All media reported that police have found the remains of Danna 
Bennett, an American-Israeli teenager who disappeared without a 
trace nearly six years ago. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Aftermath of Obama-Netanyahu Meeting: 
------------------------------------- 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "Obama DidnQt Discover America" 
 
Senior op-ed writer Akiva Eldar commented in the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz (5/19): QNot only have the Arab peace 
initiative and Muslim support for its principles become the 
cornerstone of the Obama administrationQs policy in the relatively 
narrow circle of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict; the approach to 
regional peace also creates a new horizon for Syria and the demand 
that it restrain Hamas in order to proceed on the Palestinian track. 
 Obama heard from Jordanian King Abdullah about the QShiQite 
CrescentQ that threatens to ignite the region -- radiating towards 
Iraq and from there to Jordan.  Syria and Lebanon already are under 
Iranian influence.  Obama apparently believes that regional peace 
may pave the way for the exit of U.S. troops from Iraq and reduce 
the risk that their departure may bring the Iranians closer to 
Baghdad. 
 
II.  "We Agreed to Disagree" 
 
Senior columnist Nahum Barnea wrote on page one of the 
mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (5/19): QObama conveyed 
the disparity between himself and Netanyahu when he spoke about an 
equation that was reminiscent of Ben-Gurion's famous statement about 
the White Paper [which restricted Zionist immigration and 
nation-building] (QWe will oppose the White Papers as if there were 
no war in Germany, and we will enlist for the war in Germany as if 
there were no White PaperQ).  Obama said: we will act to prevent 
Iran's armament irrespective of progress on the Palestinian issue, 
and we will act to promote the Palestinian issue even if Iran has 
nuclear weapons.  For Netanyahu, preventing Iran from obtaining 
nuclear weapons is everything. He was encouraged by the emphasis 
that Obama placed on regional peace.  Obama expects the Arab states 
to take steps towards normalizing relations with Israel in tandem 
with progress in the negotiations with the Palestinians.  In an 
ideal world, that formula would be a wonderful basis for a solution: 
the Saudis would sell us oil, the Kuwaitis would buy high-tech from 
us, and we would remove roadblocks and discuss Jerusalem and the 
right of return with Abu Mazen.  In the real world, I'm afraid, that 
is a recipe for deadlock.  The Saudis aren't going to sell us oil, 
the Kuwaitis aren't going to buy high-tech from us, and we will be 
liberated from the need to cope with the question of the 
territories.  And we will continue to squabble with the U.S. 
administration over the settlement issue.  No American 
administration has been pleased by Israel's conduct on that issue. 
The Obama administration is different from its predecessors only 
insofar as it perceives this issue to be a real problem.  The only 
explanation that Netanyahu has to offer the administration on that 
issue is political: if he freezes settlements, he'll be voted out of 
office. 
 
III.  "With Mixed Feelings" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote on page one of the 
popular, pluralist Maariv (5/19): QThere were those close to 
Netanyahu who promised him in recent weeks that Obama would not 
embarrass him on his first visit to Washington and would try to make 
light of their differences.  Obama never heard that promise.  He 
deluged Netanyahu with Qtwo statesQ at least three times, he spoke 
about the Roadmap, and even QAnnapolis,Q thanks to Avigdor 
Lieberman, got mentioned twice. He spoke about freezing settlements, 
of past commitments of the parties and the need to treat them 
seriously, about the humanitarian situation in Gaza, about 
everything.  There wasn't a single blister that Obama didn't step 
on, and it didn't seem to bother him.  He left no stone unturned 
with Netanyahu sitting by his side and listening attentively.  On 
the other hand, it was apparent that they had made a good 
connection.  Obama's main gesture was the fact that he began his 
statements with the Iranian issue, and not the other way around. 
True, he saw no point in creating an artificial deadline for future 
negotiations with the Iranians but, on the other hand, he indicated 
that by the end of the year it would be possible to know whether the 
Iranians were serious or not.  In other words, America would not let 
Iran exhaust it with talk forever.  In the end, action will also be 
necessary.  Netanyahu can leave this first meeting with mixed 
feelings.  Just like us.  True, he was given a shower, but he 
survived to talk about it. 
 
IV.  "Let Us Neither Celebrate Nor Be in Mourning" 
 
Veteran journalist and anchor Dan Margalit wrote on page one of the 
independent Israel Hayom (5/19): QThere were no surprises [in the 
Obama-Netanyahu meeting].  The interlocutors dug in to their 
positions.... The Israeli government went into the dispute with its 
eyes open.  Even if some day America changes its stance on the 
Palestinian issue, it cannot be expected to do so at once.  As far 
as this is concerned there is no cause for disappointment.... There 
was slight surprise mixed with disappointment on the issue that is 
of particular interest to the Prime Minister.... [ObamaQs refusal to 
set a deadline for his talks with Iran] is an invitation for Iranian 
foot-dragging against global interests.... The American position 
regarding the Iranian nuclear project is problematic -Q not because 
of the Israeli government and not despite its position, but per 
se. 
 
¶V.  QThe Clock Is Ticking on Tehran 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz (5/19): QNetanyahu agreed to give Obama until 
the end of the year.  Then, if Iran's nuclear program is still 
proceeding, Israel will consider Qother options.Q  Netanyahu spoke 
about preventing Iran from getting Qmilitary nuclear capability, 
leaving open the possibility of it retaining a civilian nuclear 
capability.  That opens a crack to a possible deal between the U.S. 
and Tehran. The differences on the Palestinian issue remain.... 
Obama intends to launch a new American peace plan in his speech in 
Cairo on June 4.  It will no doubt contain all the elements 
Netanyahu is uncomfortable with -- two states, halting settlement 
construction, and removing outposts. 
 
VI.  QMaking a Smart Connection 
 
Oded Eran, Director of the Institute for National Security Studies, 
and Emily B. Landau, a senior research associate at the Institute, 
wrote in the conservative, independent Jerusalem Post (5/17): QThe 
emerging U.S. linkage [between the Iranian and Palestinian issues] 
is not only misguided, but potentially dangerous for the entire 
region.  First of all, the key to successful negotiations between 
Israel and the Palestinians is obviously not simply a function of 
change in Israel's approach. Secondly, most of the Arab states in 
the Persian Gulf as well as Egypt have demonstrated of late that 
their concern with Iran's hegemonic impulses has reached new and 
unprecedented heights, and that Iran is today much higher on their 
immediate agenda than the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.... The U.S. 
must recognize that the number one threat to stability in the Middle 
East and to the security of many states in the region, as well as a 
contributing threat to the success of Israeli-Palestinian talks 
themselves, due to its ability to disrupt them, is Iran.  As such, 
curtailing its nuclear and regional ambitions is the major issue 
that must be resolved in the first place.   And in this regard, 
Netanyahu's equation that says Iran first, and then the 
Palestinians, rests on solid ground as far as its basic strategic 
logic.  The problem is that the Obama administration has taken 
Netanyahu's words to mean that while he wants to see progress on the 
Iranian issue, with regard to the Palestinians, well, we'll see.... 
A bridging formula is possible.  Two essential components are 
necessary, one short term and one long term.  For the long term, 
Netanyahu must seriously commit himself to the following: If the 
U.S. is successful in containing Iran's nuclear activities and 
cutting its military ties with Hamas and Hizbullah, Israel will be 
willing to enter negotiations with the PA on the basis of past 
understandings and agreements approved by previous governments.  In 
the short term, it should take concrete steps in the coming months 
to freeze further settlements in the West Bank and remove illegal 
outposts, to dismantle roadblocks not necessary for security and to 
reduce activities in certain cities and give the PA more 
responsibility in the security realm. If Netanyahu adopted this 
stance, there is reason to believe that it would satisfy the U.S. 
administration.Most importantly, the US would have no excuse not to 
move ahead with determination in confronting Iran. 
 
VII.  QA Faustian Bargain 
 
Former Ambassador to the U.S., former Minister of Foreign Affairs, 
and former Minister of Defense Moshe Arens wrote in Ha'aretz (5/19): 
QSooner or later it was bound to happen.  The strident insistence by 
Israeli leaders that nuclear weapons in the hands of Iran 
represented the threat of another Holocaust, and that anything and 
everything would have to be done to prevent them from attaining a 
nuclear capability, brought forth what should have been expected. 
America presented the new Israeli leadership with an offer they 
could not refuse: Agree to the two-state solution and America will 
take care of the Iranian threat.  It sounds crazy, and it is crazy, 
but there it is.  The gullible swallow it hook, line and sinker, as 
do those who want to believe that unless a Palestinian state is 
established, Israel will go under.  Here is the answer to their 
dreams: a secure Israel and a Palestinian state all in one.... The 
reality is that the two-state solution is a fantasy, impossible to 
implement now or in the foreseeable future.  It will be impossible 
until Palestinian terror has been defeated, and until then, there 
can be no progress toward peace in the area.  On the other hand, 
Israeli spokesmen's persistent emphasis on the Iranian nuclear 
threat is of little use and may even be counterproductive.... Israel 
has nothing to gain and much to lose if the impression is created in 
the United States that Israel is trying to drag America into a 
military QadventureQ in Iran.  That is liable to cause long-term 
damage to the relationship between the U.S. and Israel.  In any 
case, the White House's decision will not depend on arguments voiced 
by Israeli spokesmen, so it is best to leave that subject alone, 
unless our opinion is solicited. 
 
VIII.  QWashington Summit 
 
The Jerusalem Post editorialized (5/19): QRegardless of what was 
said publicly yesterday, the question is whether Obama appreciates 
the distinction between a Netanyahu who is reluctant to foster the 
establishment of what could quickly devolve into Hamas-led 
QPalestineQ on the West Bank, and a Netanyahu who is an Qobstacle to 
peace. Q The two are not synonymous.  Most Israelis do not have to 
be convinced that the establishment of a demilitarized Palestinian 
state (initially with limited sovereignty) is a clear Israeli 
interest.... Obama emphasized making progress on the Palestinian 
track, but in no way played down the looming menace from Iran. 
Netanyahu emphasized the threat from Tehran, but also said he was 
ready to QimmediatelyQ resume talks with the Palestinians.  What was 
perhaps most surprising was the firmness with which Obama stressed a 
sequence -- progress on the Palestinian front on the route to 
stopping Iran -- so at odds with Netanyahu's view.  In the coming 
weeks, the president will be meeting in Washington with Abbas and 
President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt.  After that, he will deliver a 
special address to the Muslim world from Cairo.  Then we will we 
have a clearer picture of where the new administration is heading. 
 
MORENO