09TELAVIV966
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Fri May 01 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #0966/01 1211115
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 011115Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1597
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 5351
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 1940
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 5873
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 6161
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 5390
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 3927
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 6211
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 3020
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 1227
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 9929
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 7434
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 2404
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 6432
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 8476
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH PRIORITY 1259
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 1934
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 000966 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Iran 
 
¶3.  U.S.-Israel Relations 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
HaQaretz cited the concern of PM Benjamin Netanyahu's aides that 
President Obama will "surprise" the Prime Minister with 
unanticipated ideas and demands at the leaders' upcoming meeting in 
Washington on May 18.  A political source in Jerusalem was quoted as 
saying that Netanyahu's associates have been recently discussing a 
scenario in which Obama makes unequivocal demands on issues like 
West Bank settlement construction, illegal outposts, and 
negotiations with the Palestinians.  The aides also reportedly fear 
a public clash between the two leaders, such as during a news 
conference or in comments the pair make, in which their differences 
will be aired.  A number of Netanyahu's aides are set to head to 
Washington and Europe next week for meetings with senior White House 
officials to prepare the ground for the PMQs visit.  Netanyahu's 
strategic adviser Ron Dermer will meet with senior White House and 
State Department officials when he is in the U.S. next week for the 
annual AIPAC conference.  The source's comments came after officials 
in Jerusalem were themselves surprised by a report in the Los 
Angeles Times on Monday that the Obama administration has asked 
Congress to amend U.S. law to enable the Palestinian Authority to 
receive federal aid even if Hamas joins a unity coalition. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that yesterday Defense Secretary Robert 
Gates told the Senate Appropriations Committee that use of the 
military option to force Iran to halt its nuclear program would only 
yield temporary and ineffective results, and that sanctions make 
more sense.  The Jerusalem Post reported that the Iranian nuclear 
program will be a major topic of discussion at the upcoming AIPAC 
conference. 
 
Leading media reported that Netanyahu will meet with Egyptian 
President Hosni Mubarak in a week. 
 
Maariv led with private comments by PM Benjamin Netanyahu praising 
Mossad Director Meir Dagan, mostly for his efforts to counter the 
Iranian nuclear threat.  The newspaper reported that Dagan has been 
asked to stay at his post for an eighth year. 
 
The media reported that seven Israeli Arabs, including two minors, 
were indicted yesterday for planning terror attacks and attempting 
to kidnap IDF soldiers.  HaQaretz cited a claim of responsibility 
for the groupQs actions by a QmysteriousQ organization -- QAhrar Al 
JaleelQ [Free People of the Galilee]. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that today the IDF will begin to 
sanction Palestinian workers who stay in Israel beyond the time 
allotted to them by military-issued permits. 
 
Major media reported that House of Representatives Speaker Nancy 
Pelosi pledged to continue to fight for the release of Gilad Shalit, 
welcoming his father, Noam, to Congress as part of efforts to help 
his cause. 
 
HaQaretz reported that the UNQs Office for the Coordination of 
Humanitarian Affairs demands that Israel freeze all pending 
demolition orders against Palestinian homes in East Jerusalem. 
Maariv and The Jerusalem Post cited a 2008 report issued by the 
Civil Administration in Judea and Samaria (the West Bank) stating 
that the state has carried out more demolition orders of illegal 
buildings in Jewish settlements in the territories than in 
Palestinian communities.  The Jerusalem Post quoted Hagit Ofran of 
Peace Now as saying that the numbers in the report were misleading 
and that if those demolitions were significant, the settlers would 
have complained and protested over each one. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that the Foreign Ministry has blasted 
the World BankQs report on the alleged water shortage in the West 
Bank and Gaza which held Israel party responsible.  The Ministry 
said the author QignoredQ IsraelQs position.  The newspaper also 
reported that UN Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace 
Process Robert Serry called the situation in Gaza QalarmingQ after 
he visited the area yesterday. 
 
Maariv reported that the United Israel Appeal, the strongest 
fundraising organization in the U.S., is opposed to the appointment 
to chairman of the Jewish Agency of former minister Natan Sharansky, 
who is NetanyahuQs candidate.  The daily quoted a source involved in 
the nomination process as saying that Sharansky has accumulated too 
much strength and that institutions are afraid of him. 
 
The Jerusalem Post cited AFP as saying yesterday that Turkey dropped 
its genocide claims against Israel. 
 
A Yediot reporter who visited Iraq said that the American troops 
Qare having funQ between the bombings and Qdo not really want to go 
home. 
 
All media continued to focus on the swine flu epidemic: The Health 
Ministry has opened a health clinic at Ben-Gurion International 
Airport to test travelers returning from Mexico -- one of several 
steps the government decided on yesterday to counter the swine flu 
outbreak. The government acted as two additional suspected cases of 
the disease came to light.  Two 3rd-grade classes were shut down in 
RaQanana because a student who returned from Mexico is suspected of 
having come down with symptoms of the virus. 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: QThough 
Fatah and Hamas continue squabbling, they agree on two things: a 
rejection of Israel as a Jewish state, and a refusal to share this 
land with non-Muslims.  If any plan presented by Netanyahu to Obama 
is going to matter, those attitudes have to change. 
 
Military correspondent Alex Fishman wrote in the mass-circulation, 
pluralist Yediot Aharonot: QThe Americans and the Egyptians are even 
willing to warmly embrace NetanyahuQs Qeconomic peace.Q  The main 
thing is for there to be a sense of relief on the ground, for the PA 
to gain strength, and for the calm to be maintained both in the West 
Bank and in Gaza. 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote in the popular, pluralist 
Maariv: QAmong top Israeli security officials, some believe that 
Obama, unlike his predecessors, will go for broke.   He will set a 
timetable and will try to meet it. 
 
Meretz founder and former Education Minister Shulamit Aloni wrote in 
the independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: QWhen a major general and a 
philosopher justify -- out of a sense of moral superiority -- our 
acts of injustice toward the other ... they cast a very heavy shadow 
on all ... hopes. 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "Waiting for Netanyahu" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized (5/1): 
QThe plan Netanyahu will be taking to the White House next month 
needs to offer a sensible way forward on the Palestinian track, even 
if truly substantive progress may be difficult until the Iranian 
crisis is contained.  He will garner the support of Israel's 
majority -- and of the pro-Israel community worldwide -- if he 
broadly enunciates the country's Qred linesQ on defensible 
boundaries, strategic settlement blocs, the parameters of 
Palestinian sovereignty in the West Bank and Gaza, [and] the issue 
of Jerusalem and Arab refugees.  Furthermore, his government's 
credibility would be immeasurably enhanced by the dismantling of 
unauthorized settlement outposts, demonstrating that the West Bank 
is not the Wild West.  The Palestinians have just shown how Qlaw 
works in the territory under their jurisdiction: On Wednesday, a 
Hebron court sentenced a man to be hanged for selling a parcel of 
land to a Jew.  Though Fatah and Hamas continue squabbling, they 
agree on two things: a rejection of Israel as a Jewish state, and a 
refusal to share this land with non-Muslims.  If any plan presented 
by Netanyahu to Obama is going to matter, those attitudes have to 
change. 
 
 
II.  "Allied Forces" 
 
Military correspondent Alex Fishman wrote in the mass-circulation, 
pluralist Yediot Aharonot (5/1): QEgypt has no illusions.  It is 
clear to it that a final status arrangement will not be signed 
between Israel and the Palestinians in the near future.  But it 
expects minor Israeli steps that will give the PA oxygen, such as a 
commitment to remove settlements within a year or two.  This oxygen, 
say the Egyptians, is vital for maintaining stability and empowering 
the emerging new coalition.  This is also what U.S. Secretary of 
State Hillary Clinton was referring to when she pointed last week in 
Congress to a direct relationship between the success of the battle 
against Iran and positive Israeli steps vis-`-vis the Palestinians. 
The Americans are also not demanding anything dramatic from Israel. 
They want symbolic measuresQeven a semblance of activityQsuch as 
dealing with illegal settlement outposts, assisting General Dayton, 
who is in charge of building the Palestinian AuthorityQs police 
force, and removing roadblocks.  The Americans and the Egyptians are 
even willing to warmly embrace NetanyahuQs Qeconomic peace.Q  The 
main thing is for there to be a sense of relief on the ground, for 
the PA to gain strength, and for the calm to be maintained both in 
the West Bank and in Gaza, which is a necessary condition for 
maintaining the Arab coalition against Iran. 
 
III.  QThere Is an Agenda 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote in the popular, pluralist 
Maariv (5/1): QAbu Mazen, who will also submit an outline for 
regional peace (in cooperation with the Arab states), will try to 
warn Obama of the greatest danger posed by Netanyahu, as he sees it: 
The time element.  Bibi, Abu Mazen will tell Obama, is a world 
champion in wasting time.  Suddenly you will discover that in order 
to remove an illegal settlement outpost in Israel, it takes many 
months, including a High Court of Justice ruling and appeals of the 
ruling, and attempts to reach a compromise with the settlers, and 
from one thing to the next, before you know what happened, your term 
of office will be over -- just as it ended for many presidents 
before you.  Obama will listen.   He has no intention of falling 
into these pitfalls.  Among top Israeli security officials, some 
believe that Obama, unlike his predecessors, will go for broke.   He 
will set a timetable and will try to meet it. 
 
 
 
IV.  "Not Just and not Really Democratic" 
 
Meretz founder and former Education Minister Shulamit Aloni wrote in 
the independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (5/1): QMaj. Gen. Amos 
Yadlin, [the head of IDF Intelligence,]  and philosopher Asa Kasher, 
two respected men around here, published an article entitled: QA 
Just War of a Democratic State,Q  (Yediot Aharonot, April 24).... 
Democracy exists in the State of Israel today only in the formal 
sense: There are parties and elections and a good judicial system. 
But there is also an omnipotent army that ignores legal decisions 
that restrict the theft of land owned and held by people who have 
been living under occupation for the past 42 years.  And since 1992, 
as we mentioned, we also have the definition QJewish state,Q which 
means an ethnocracy -- the rule of an ethnic religious community 
that strictly determines the ethnic origin of its citizens according 
to maternal lineage.... We are currently celebrating IsraelQs 61st 
anniversary.  We fought the War of Independence out of a great hope 
that we would build a Qmodel societyQ here, that we would make peace 
with our neighbors, work the land and develop the Jewish genius for 
the benefit of science, culture and the value of man -- every man. 
But when a major general and a philosopher justify -- out of a sense 
of moral superiority -- our acts of injustice toward the other in 
such a way, they cast a very heavy shadow on all those hopes. 
 
--------- 
¶2.  Iran: 
--------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz: QIts strong commitment to Israeli security 
will not allow America to forcibly prevent a military operation 
designed to prevent a second Holocaust.  That is the message 
Netanyahu will try to implant in the minds of the members of 
Congress. 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "Staving Off a QSecond HolocaustQ" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz (5/1): QIsrael will find it difficult to 
attack Iran alone without a Qgreen lightQ from America, even if it 
is only implied and if America ostensibly turns a blind eye.  But 
once the moment of truth arrives, it is doubtful Obama would give 
the order to take down the Israeli planes heading to Iran -- or for 
that matter to declare an end of aid to Israel or to sever 
relations.  Obviously, the U.S. will want to remain somewhat 
distanced from any operation that is launched, so as not to be 
vulnerable to the anticipated Iranian response.  But its strong 
commitment to Israeli security will not allow America to forcibly 
prevent a military operation designed to prevent a second Holocaust. 
 That is the message Netanyahu will try to implant in the minds of 
the members of Congress. 
 
II.  "Clear and Present Danger" 
 
The nationalist, Orthodox Makor Rishon-Hatzofe editorialized (5/1): 
QThe AmericansQ vile blackmailing vis-a-vis Israel is taken straight 
from the book of World War II: If you donQt give up everything to 
the Palestinians, it will be impossible to deal with the Iranian 
nuclear project.  On IsraelQs side, this conception has another 
layer: The strategic partnership with their Americans is so 
important that Israel must not make any move without coordination 
with them.  This means that Israel had better live with a nuclear 
Iran but not lose American security aid, and not the other way 
around, which reminds one of the Yom Kippur War surprise. 
 
-------------------------- 
¶3.  U.S.-Israel Relations: 
-------------------------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Washington correspondent Hilary Leila Krieger wrote in the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post: QIn the case of Israel, 
being jealous of other countries and insecure about U.S. interest 
only strains a relationship that needs no additional stressors.  It 
is, in short, counterproductive. 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"Justified Paranoia?" 
 
Washington correspondent Hilary Leila Krieger wrote in the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post (5/1): QHow smoothly the 
parties[Obama and Netanyahu] proceed could depend significantly on 
how much the two leaders develop the necessary personal rapport, 
i.e. trust: Does Netanyahu trust that Obama will do whatQs needed on 
Iran when push comes to shove?  Does Obama trust that Netanyahu will 
work as hard for peace as his coalition will allow?  And paranoia 
doesnQt help trust.  One Israeli official compared the situation to 
that of a suspicious boyfriend questioning his girlfriendQs 
feelings, to the point that nothing becomes something, driving the 
two apart.  In the case of Israel, being jealous of other countries 
and insecure about U.S. interest only strains a relationship that 
needs no additional stressors.  It is, in short, counterproductive. 
By way of example, one shrewd Washington observer pointed out that 
the Obama administration had no particular allegiance to the 
Annapolis process -Q a Bush-era initiative loaded with baggage - 
until Avigdor Lieberman began his tenure as foreign minister by 
declaring Annapolis had Qno validity.Q  That then compelled Obama to 
explicitly back the process, for the first time publicly referring 
to it in a high-profile speech during his address to the Turkish 
parliament. 
 
CUNNINGHAM