09TELAVIV767
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Wed Apr 01 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #0767/01 0911411
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 011411Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1257
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 5225
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 1818
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 5734
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 6033
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 5263
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 3777
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 6076
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 2891
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 1100
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 9807
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 7311
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 2276
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 6310
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 8347
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH PRIORITY 1137
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 1758
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 000767 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Israel: Swearing-In of Netanyahu Government 
 
¶2.  Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Yediot (Shimon Shiffer) quoted a senior Israeli diplomatic source as 
saying that the Americans will watch Netanyahu closely. 
 
All media led with yesterdayQs swearing in of IsraelQs 32nd 
government under PM Benjamin Netanyahu, who promised action on Iran 
and the economy and vowed to bring Gilad Shalit home.  The Jerusalem 
Post quoted Netanyahu as saying a few hours before the Knesset 
ceremony that Israel seeks peace with the entire Arab and Muslim 
world, but that it continues to be threatened by the forces of 
Islamic extremists.  Five of LaborQs 13 Knesset members did not 
endorse the new government.  A HaQaretz poll (see below under: 
Polls) found that a majority of Israelis are unhappy with the new 
government.  Yediot reported on the cabinetQs first QcrisisQ: 
LaborQs Benjamin Ben-Eliezer and LikudQs Silvan Shalom (who became 
Vice PM) and Dan Meridor have been removed from the restricted 
cabinet.  Yediot also noted that no cabinet minister has been named 
to replace Netanyahu were he to be incapacitated.  Major media 
reported that United Torah Judaism is expected to sign a coalition 
agreement with Likud after a compromise was reached on the issue of 
conversion reforms. 
 
Media quoted President Shimon Peres as saying today at the ceremony 
marking the change of government that the Olmert government had 
strengthened Israel's international standing, formed close ties with 
the United States and world leaders, and yielded great strategic 
achievements in defense. 
 
HaQaretz reported that yesterday the IDF's chief education officer 
Brig. Gen. Eli Shermeister issued a letter to a number of military 
units, commenting on T-shirts printed by soldiers, as exposed by 
HaQaretz two weeks ago.  HaQaretz found that dead babies, mothers 
weeping on their children's grave, a child in the crosshairs of a 
sniper's rifle and blown-up mosques are just a few of the images 
with which IDF soldiers decided to mark their graduation from a 
training course or tour of duty.  Shermeister's letter described 
some of the shirts depicted in the HaQaretz story and included 
pictures published in the feature.  The chief education officer 
called on commanders to "increase vigilance and rule out any such 
phenomena, which stem from group culture and might affect it." 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that new Balad (National Democratic 
Assembly) MK Haneen Zuabi, the first woman to be elected to the 
Knesset as a representative of an Arab party, has welcomed IranQs 
growing influence in Palestinian affairs and praised IranQs quest 
for a nuclear weapon as a means of offsetting IsraelQs regional 
military edge.  Having Israel as the regionQs sole nuclear power, 
she said, was Qdangerous to the world.Q  Leading media reported that 
MK Ahmed Tibi (United Arab List-TaQal) met with representatives of 
Yemen, Syria, and Libya while in Doha this week to attend the 21st 
Arab summit.  The media reported that Tibi criticized IsraelQs 
policy during the meeting. 
 
The Jerusalem Post cited the settlersQ hope that Netanyahu will 
boost housing construction in the West Bank. 
 
The media reported that yesterday the IDF foiled an attempt to lay a 
roadside bomb at the fence between Gaza and Israel, killing two 
militants.  It was the first such incident since the IDF withdrew 
from Gaza at the end of Operation Cast Lead in January.  Also 
yesterday, three Qassam rockets were fired on Israel from the Strip, 
the most in a single day since the Israeli offensive.  Hamas claimed 
that it fired 18 mortar shells at Israeli forces near the Kissufim 
crossing after the two Palestinians were killed.  The Jerusalem Post 
reported that a senior police sapper told the newspaper yesterday 
that a growing number of Chinese-made rockets are being smuggled 
into Gaza from Sinai and fired at Israel.  The Jerusalem Post 
reported that yesterday DM Ehud Barak urged silence regarding media 
reports that the IAF bombed a Gaza-bound weapons convoy in the 
Sudanese desert earlier this year. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted Ahmed Yusef, a senior Hamas official in 
Gaza as saying yesterday that Switzerland and Norway are 
spearheading European attempt to engage Hamas.  The newspaper also 
quoted Israeli defense officials as saying that Hamas plans to 
establish a staff and command school to train its military 
commanders ahead of a future conflict with Israel. 
 
Leading media quoted Czech FM Karel Schwarzenberg, whose nation 
currently holds the rotating EU presidency, as saying in an 
interview with the Czech newspaper Lidove Noviny that the EU is 
unlikely to hold a summit with Israel in the near future as planned, 
due to its dissatisfaction with Israeli construction in East 
Jerusalem and the continued blockade on Gaza.  The Jerusalem Post 
also reported that yesterday in Prague President Shimon Peres met 
with Czech PM Mirek Topolanek and warned him that Qit would be a 
mistake on the EUQs part to give Israel the cold shoulderQ and delay 
the planned upgrade of EU-Israel relations Qdue to our war on 
terror. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that senior Israeli defense officials 
have told the daily that fears are mounting in the defense 
establishment that U.S. pressure on European countries to expand 
their contribution to the war on Afghanistan could lead these 
countries to downsize their participation in UNIFIL in southern 
Lebanon. 
 
HaQaretz reported that, following an internal election within UNRWA, 
the agency's management has warned it may fire employees who 
violated the organization's nonpartisan policy by affiliating with 
political factions in Gaza -- namely Fatah and Hamas. 
 
HaQaretz reported that, for the first time, the government has 
approved the creation of an Arab college in Ibelin, northern Israel. 
 A branch of the University of Indianapolis is currently operating 
in the town. 
 
 
 
HaQaretz cited the results of a Dialog poll: 
QAre you happy with the new government?Q  No: 54%; yes: 30%; 16% 
were undecided.  While the public is dissatisfied with the 
suitability of FM Avigdor Lieberman and Finance Minister Yuval 
Steinitz, 60% approve of DM Ehud Barak. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
¶1.  Israel: Swearing-In of Netanyahu Government: 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: QIsrael's 32nd 
government, which was sworn in last night, is destined to fail.... 
Israel sent the world a message  that it is not headed for peace 
and change. 
 
The nationalist, Orthodox Makor Rishon-Hatzofe editorialized: QThe 
new government is an expression of the nationQs feelings because the 
delusional political policy led by Prime Minister Sharon and Olmert 
after him is dangerous and disconnected to reality. 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in Ha'aretz: QIsrael will 
have to try to reach an understanding with Obama centered on dealing 
with Iran.... The rise of Netanyahu to power increases the chances 
of war with Iran, but the Qpoint of no returnQ has not yet been 
crossed. 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Herb Keinon wrote on page one of the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post: QNetanyahu ascends to the 
premiership with the burden of proving an interest in peace on his 
shoulders, and not -- ironically -- on the shoulders of the 
Palestinians. 
 
Senior Fatah member and former Palestinian Authority minister Sofian 
Abu Zayde addressed Netanyahu in the mass-circulation, pluralist 
Yediot Aharonot: QWe, who truly want peace on a two-state basis, 
call upon you to accept the Arab initiative, which is supported by 
all the Arab states. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "A Failure Foretold" 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (4/1): 
QIsrael's 32nd government, which was sworn in last night, is 
destined to fail.  In putting this government together, Prime 
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has demonstrated sophisticated political 
skills and impressive tricks of wheeling and dealing, along with a 
total lack of vision, courage and practical judgment.... Not a 
single spark of hope was ignited yesterday.  The government that was 
born in sin, the sin of petty politics, is destined to spend its 
days in battles for survival, and that alone.  This is highly 
depressing news as Israel faces bold and crucial decisions; it's bad 
news for the peace process and for economic recovery, and it's bad 
news for every worried Israeli.  Israel sent the world a message 
last night that it is not headed for peace and change.  Netanyahu's 
second government is in no way better than his first, and all the 
hopes that he has changed have been proved unfounded in a single 
stroke.  All that remains is to hope that Israel's largest 
government ever -- half the Knesset members in the ruling party are 
ministers or deputy ministers -- will also be the government that 
makes way for its successor with the greatest speed. 
 
II.  "A Return to a Sane Policy" 
 
The nationalist, Orthodox Makor Rishon-Hatzofe editorialized (4/1): 
QThe new government is an expression of the nationQs feelings 
because the delusional political policy led by Prime Minister Sharon 
and Olmert after him is dangerous and disconnected from reality. 
Yesterday, from the Knesset podium, Prime Minister Netanyahu 
expressed this in a strong and unexpected way.  He said, QIt is a 
mark of disgrace to humanity that several decades after the 
Holocaust, the world responds weakly to the calls of IranQs leader 
for IsraelQs destruction, without firm condemnation, without 
decisive actions, almost as a matter of routine. There shall be no 
question mark regarding our existence, and we will let no person or 
country place such a question mark upon our existence,Q he said. 
This statement is clear, and it is certain that starting today 
officials in the United States, Europe, Tehran and Moscow will have 
to take very seriously the possibility that if no significant 
international action is taken, then Israel will take its fate into 
its own hands, with all the consequences for the region that this 
entails.  It is agreed that this is the main basis for the Labor 
PartyQs partnership in the government, which could have been a 
right-wing government that would not have been narrow at all, with 
65 seats.  NetanyahuQs wish to establish a broad government with a 
strong left foot, in the form of the Labor Party, was fulfilled, 
even if the left foot came out a little on the weak side. 
 
III.  "Will He Strike?" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in Ha'aretz (4/1): 
QNetanyahu is counting on Barack Obama, and on their meeting next 
month, where he will tell Obama that history will judge his 
presidency over the way he handles the Iranian nuclear program.  The 
question is whether Netanyahu's abilities to be convincing and his 
sophisticated English will allow him to alter Obama's agenda: 
preventing Pakistan and its nuclear arms from falling into the hands 
of the Taliban and Al-Qaida, while trying to buy quiet from Iran. 
It is doubtful whether even an Israeli proposal to pull back from 
the Golan Heights and evacuate settlements in the West Bank will 
lead Obama to bomb Iran, or let Netanyahu order an attack.  Israel 
will have to try to reach an understanding with Obama centered on 
dealing with Iran.  All this suggests that the rise of Netanyahu to 
power increases the chances of war with Iran, but the Qpoint of no 
returnQ has not yet been crossed. 
 
IV.  "Getting a Fair Hearing" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Herb Keinon wrote on page one of the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post (4/1): QThe new prime 
minister's diplomatic task is daunting, and begins immediately.  His 
most immediate challenge will be to persuade the U.S. and Europe 
that he is not the peace obstacle they imagine. For his own 
reasons, Netanyahu remains allergic to uttering the phrase Qtwo 
states for two peoples,Q even though what he has in mind seems to be 
a Palestinian entity that has all the trappings of a state, except 
for those accouterments that could threaten Israel: an army, the 
right to form defense treaties, and full control over airspace, 
water, and the electromagnetic spectrum. Because of an antipathy 
many of the Western elites had toward Netanyahu in the past, because 
of his coalition partners, because of the way he is portrayed in the 
Israeli media, Netanyahu ascends to the premiership with the burden 
of proving an interest in peace on his shoulders, and not -- 
ironically -- on the shoulders of the Palestinians.  Justified or 
not, that's the reality.  Netanyahu's first order of business needs 
to be to convince the world that he is serious about peace.  If he 
can do that, then it will be easier for him to enlist their help in 
dealing with all the other huge challenges facing him and the 
country: from Gaza, to Syria, to Iran. 
 
¶V.  QNetanyahu, You Have a Partner 
 
Senior Fatah member and former Palestinian Authority minister Sofian 
Abu Zayde addressed Netanyahu in the mass-circulation, pluralist 
Yediot Aharonot (4/1): QI did not participate in electing you or 
your government.  Nonetheless, in the complex and tangled reality of 
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, you, as IsraelQs prime minister, 
affect my everyday life, my future and my fate.  To the same degree, 
the social, political and security developments in Palestinian 
society affect Israel and could have an effect on your post. 
Whether you like it or not, we are dependent on each other.  Even 
the security fence cannot separate us.  Therefore, if you are 
thinking of ignoring the Palestinian political-national issue, you 
will find yourself in a minefield.  You speak of Qeconomic peace, 
but you know that this is an empty slogan.  Development and economic 
improvement are important to the Palestinian people, but much more 
important to it are removing the occupation and political 
independence.  For this goal, we are willing to pay a very high 
price, and even to give up the economic development that you are 
offering us.  I donQt understand how the idea of an Qeconomic peace 
will contribute to resolving the conflict.... I agree with you on 
one point, Mr. Netanyahu: The game of negotiations, meetings, 
 
exchanging ideas and more summit meetings, once in Taba, once in 
Sharm el-Sheikh or in Annapolis, has to stop.... You wonQt find a 
Palestinian partner who will be willing to continue this game.... 
We, who truly want peace on a two-state basis, call upon you to 
accept the Arab initiative, which is supported by all the Arab 
states. 
 
------------ 
¶2.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Conservative columnist and Jewish affairs writer Nadav Shragai 
opined in the independent, left-leaning HaQaretz: QIt is doubtful 
whether U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, who has called on 
Israel to refrain from demolishing houses in East Jerusalem, is 
aware of [the effects of illegal Palestinian construction]. 
 
 
 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"What They DidnQt Tell Hillary" 
 
Conservative columnist and Jewish affairs writer Nadav Shragai 
opined in the independent, left-leaning HaQaretz (4/1): QResidents 
of Arab neighborhoods have asked the [Jerusalem] Municipality to 
intervene to stop illegal [Palestinian] construction on lands that 
belong to them.  It is doubtful whether U.S. Secretary of State 
Hillary Clinton, who has called on Israel to refrain from 
demolishing houses in East Jerusalem, is aware of this aspect of the 
issue.  Clinton is fed mainly by human rights organizations and 
leftist Israeli movements.  These send her a constant stream of 
reports concerning the difficulties that Israel has piled on over 
the years against orderly construction with permits in East 
Jerusalem, as well as its actions to demolish illegal buildings. 
Clinton is apparently also not sufficiently aware that the illegal 
construction in the eastern part of the city over the years has not 
been intended only to ease the housing shortage, but rather 
systematically to close off spaces, block Israeli development plans, 
and achieve what has not been achieved through terror and/or 
diplomacy. Nevertheless, Israel is not innocent of serious mistakes 
in its attitude toward the population of East Jerusalem in general, 
and regarding the issue of illegal construction in particular. The 
separation barrier that now surrounds many parts of Jerusalem is 
also contributing to the acceleration of illegal construction, as a 
result of the increased pressure by tens of thousands of 
Palestinians who are not prepared to relinquish residency in the 
city and the benefits that derive from this. 
 
CUNNINGHAM