09TELAVIV1630
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Wed Jul 22 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0021
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #1630/01 2031102
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 221102Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2742
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 5698
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 2277
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 6262
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 6508
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 5746
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 4346
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 6581
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 3377
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 1580
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 0267
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 7776
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 2768
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 6770
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 8824
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH PRIORITY 1596
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 2434
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 001630 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Iran 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Israel Radio quoted Deputy State Department Spokesman Robert Wood as 
saying yesterday: QNo one is asking Israel to act outside its 
national security interests.  What weQre asking both parties to do 
is to fulfill the Roadmap obligations.  Both sides have committed to 
do that. We are working with the parties to try to help them fulfill 
those commitments.Q  Wood was responding to a reporterQs question 
regarding a statement by Deputy Israeli PM Dan Meridor (Likud) that 
U.S. calls for a freeze on West Bank settlement construction run 
counter to past agreement between the two nations and could 
undermine the U.S. credibility.  (The Jerusalem Post quoted Likud 
cabinet minister Dan Meridor as saying yesterday that the U.S. must 
honor its deal with Israel on the settlement issue.)  The Jerusalem 
Post and Israel Radio also quoted Wood as saying in response to a 
question whether the U.S. would be ready to exert some financial 
pressures on Israel to convince the government to stop settlements: 
QItQs premature to talk about that. What weQre trying to do, as I 
said, right now is to create an environment which makes it conducive 
for talks to go forward. And as I said, Senator Mitchell is working 
very hard on this. And what we all need to do in the international 
community is support this effort, and that means Americans, that 
means Arabs and Israelis, to do what they can to kind of foster a 
climate in which the two sides can come together and negotiate their 
differences peacefully so that we can get to that two-state 
solution.Q  Speaking on Israel Radio this morning, Housing and 
Construction Minister Ariel Atias (Shas) said that all public 
construction in East Jerusalem has been frozen since the Netanyahu 
government was sworn in.  Atias said that no democratic nation 
intervenes in private construction anywhere.  He stated that such 
building continues in East Jerusalem, but that it is not connected 
to government policy.  Israel Radio quoted incoming Israeli 
Ambassador to the U.S. Michael Oren as saying that the argument 
between the U.S. and Israel will end soon. 
E 
Major media reported that senior White House adviser Dennis Ross 
will join the list of top U.S. officials travelling to Israel next 
week, a step that The Jerusalem Post said was interpreted positively 
in Jerusalem as an attempt by the Obama administration to engage 
more constructively with Israel. 
 
Israel Hayom and HaQaretz reported that Sweden Q which currently 
holds the rotating presidency of the EU -- France, Russia, and other 
international bodies, have added their voices to the demand that 
Israel freeze Jewish construction in East Jerusalem. 
 
Yediot quoted diplomatic sources in Jerusalem as saying that the 
U.S. administration is inclined to act in the Middle East on three 
tracks in parallel: The Syrian-Israeli track, the 
Palestinian-Israeli track, and the Lebanese-Israeli track.  (Details 
in QBlock QuotesQ below.) 
 
Maariv reported that the PA has conveyed to President Obama its 
demand that Israel dismantle the West Bank security fence.  The 
Palestinians justified their claim by pointing to the quiet that has 
prevailed in the territories over the past two years. 
 
Leading media reported that Secretary of State Hillary Clinton 
warned Iran that Washington is ready to boost the defense 
capabilities of regional U.S. allies if Tehran does not back away 
from its nuclear program.  The Secretary was quoted as saying that 
"we will still hold the door open" to engagement with Iran but that 
"the nuclear clock is ticking", adding that Iran's neighbors are the 
most concerned about events.  Clinton was speaking on Thailand's 
Nation TV.  She said Washington was also prepared to "upgrade the 
defense of our partners in the region," adding that Iran must 
understand it will not be safer "if the United States extends a 
defense umbrella in the region." 
 
HaQaretz reported that Hamas political bureau chief Khaled Mashal 
told a Russian diplomat a few days ago that his group would not 
stand in the way of a peace deal brokered between PA President 
Mahmoud Abbas and Israel. The newspaper reported that Israeli 
officials have expressed skepticism about MashalQs reported 
comments.  The Jerusalem Post cited military assessments that Hamas 
has lowered its profile in the West Bank out of fear its men will be 
captured by the PA and the IDF, and that it is operating a number of 
terrorist cells in every major city that are completely 
compartmentalized to ensure survival. 
Speaking on Israel Radio this morning, Minister-without-Portfolio 
Benny Begin (Likud) said that TurkeyQs mediation between Israel and 
Syria has lost its value following SyriaQs rapprochement with 
Turkey. 
 
HaQaretz reported that the police's Shai District, which is 
responsible for the West Bank, has set up a special dedicated 
command to handle preparations for a large-scale evacuation of 
illegal settler outposts.  The new unit will be headed by Brig. Gen. 
Amitai Levy, commander of the Border Police forces in the West Bank. 
It will follow the model of the special commands set up in Gaza and 
the northern West Bank prior to the evacuation of settlements there 
during the 2005 disengagement.  Though the command was set up by the 
police, all police operations in the West Bank are formally under 
the authority of the IDF. Therefore once the government gives the 
order for preparations to start, any IDF units involved in the 
evacuations will presumably be attached to the command. 
 
Israel Hayom and Israel Radio reported that Education Minister 
Gideon SaQar has ordered the removal of references to the 
Palestinian QNakbaQ from textbooks for Israeli Arab students. 
Former education minister Yuli Tamir (Labor) had approved the 
insertion of such citations. 
 
Maariv reported that yesterday the Gazan doctor whose three 
daughters were accidentally killed by the IDF during Operation Cast 
Lead emigrated to Canada. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that yesterday the IDF denied a report 
that it plans to remove 23 illegal outposts in one day. 
 
HaQaretz reported that Elad, the nonprofit organization that runs 
the City of David in East Jerusalem and also works to settle Jews in 
that area, has asked the Jerusalem municipality to approve four new 
construction projects there.  The city is considered unlikely to say 
no.  Given the recent international uproar over Jewish construction 
in East Jerusalem, these projects, all located in the Silwan 
neighborhood, are likely to add fuel to the flames.  They are also 
likely to infuriate Palestinians, given that demolition orders were 
recently issued to dozens of Palestinian houses not far away.  Elad 
is seeking to build several apartment buildings, a 100-car-capacity 
parking lot, a synagogue, a kindergarten, roads, and additional 
tourism infrastructure.  The municipality's planning and building 
council is slated to discuss the applications in the coming months. 
HaQaretz also reported that Jerusalem Mayor Nir Barkat has withdrawn 
his municipal master plan following mounting pressure from 
right-wing activists and council members. The move comes after 
Barkat had previously authorized the plans. 
 
Leading media reported that the militar prosecution plans to render 
charges against thelieutenant-colonel and staff-sergeant involved 
i a NaQalin shooting incident more serious.  The ID soldier was 
documented firing a rubber bullet atbound, blindfolded Palestinian 
in July.  The twowere originally charged with conduct unbecoming,but IDF Judge 
Advocate General Brig.-Gen. Avi Mandlblit has decided 
to add threat to the charges aainst Lt. Col. Omri Burberg and 
illegal use of a weapon to the charges against the soldier under his 
command. 
 
Citing a State Department-issued document it received, HaQaretz 
reported that the U.S. has asked 10 uranium-rich countries that 
produce yellowcake to tighten their monitoring of sales of the 
mineral to Iran.  The move is reportedly based on an American 
estimate that Iran's uranium reserves will run out by 2010. 
 
Yediot reported that data kept in the Interior MinistryQs computers 
are unguarded, making it more difficult for the state to establish 
biometric records. 
 
The Jerusalem PostQs social column reported on Continental Airlines 
celebration of its 75th anniversary along with the 10th anniversary 
of its New York-Tel Aviv route at the U.S. AmbassadorQs residence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "Plan for Progress on Three Tracks" 
 
Associate diplomatic correspondent Itamar Eichner and correspondent 
Yossi Yehoshua wrote in the mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot (7/22): Q[Diplomatic sources in Jerusalem say that] the 
U.S. administration is inclined to act in the Middle East on three 
tracks in parallel: The Syrian-Israeli track, the 
Palestinian-Israeli track and the Lebanese-Israeli track.... One of 
the tracks in which the Americans wish to act is the 
Lebanese-Israeli track.  In their assessment, it is possible to 
reach an agreement in this track quickly, since there are Qno real 
disputesQ between the two countries.... As for the Palestinian 
track-according to information that has reached Jerusalem, the U.S. 
administration conveyed sharp messages to the PA over to its refusal 
to meet with Israelis and promote projects.  The Americans notified 
the Palestinians that it was unacceptable for [the Palestinians] to 
pose conditions for renewing the dialogue with Israel.   Information 
that has reached Israel indicates that the Americans intend to 
restart the peace process by an international conference, whose 
format has not yet been agreed on.  They are considering inviting 
leaders of Arab states to this conference, and perhaps leaders of 
Islamic states as well.  The Americans are pressuring the moderate 
Arab states to make gestures towards Israel in the area of 
normalization, so as to make it easier for Israel to be flexible on 
the settlement issue.  Until now, however, the Arab states have 
shown little willingness to accommodate Israel.  This is the reason 
that President Obama said in his meeting with Jewish leaders that 
the Arab state leaders lacked courage.  However, the Americans are 
not only disappointed with the Arabs, but also with Israel.... And 
while there is tension in the political realm between Israel and the 
U.S., in the military realm cooperation is continuing and being 
strengthened between the IDF and the U.S. military. 
II.  "Evacuate without Fear" 
 
The independent, left-leaning HaQaretz editorialized (7/22): 
QThreats by the settlers and those on the extreme right to take 
vigorous action against the evacuation plans are nothing new, and 
the political and military challenge posed by the evacuation of the 
outposts is known.  The Israel Defense Forces is accustomed to this. 
 However, this must not dissuade the government from carrying out 
its intentions.  It must set boundaries against lawbreakers -- 
immediately, without compromise and with no conditions -- and 
instruct the IDF to evacuate the outposts. 
 
III.  "Deceiving Ourselves" 
Uri Savir, Oslo Accords architect and President of the Peres Center 
for Peace, wrote in the mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot 
(7/22): QIn talks with President ObamaQs representatives, it is time 
for us to be honest with our neighbors, our allies, and mainly with 
ourselves, with regard to continuing the settlement policy.  Here is 
what I propose on this matter: First of all, construction will only 
be completed in authorized housing units, for which infrastructure 
has already been set up.  As for natural growth, only public 
construction (kindergartens and schools) will be permitted, and this 
too will only be within the built-up area (mainly high-rise 
construction).  Secondly, the government will start internal 
preparations for creating settlement blocs that will enable a final 
status arrangement and a permanent border with a land swap.  The 
settlement issue is not a matter of how many houses will be built in 
one settlement or another.  It is a strategic issue, which will also 
decide our ability to coordinate with the United States and the 
possibility of making peace with a demilitarized Palestinian 
state. 
 
IV.  "Of Truth and a Certain Lie" 
 
Zalman Shoval, a senior Likud member and former ambassador to the 
U.S., wrote in the independent Israel Hayom (7/22): QOver the 
weekend, two articles worthy of note were published in the 
Washington Post -- one by former prime minister Ehud Olmert, and the 
other by the Crown Prince of Bahrain.  Presumably, the timing was 
not accidental.  Both were aimed at influencing the discussions and 
events in the Obama administrationQs attempts to cast a new mold for 
the diplomatic processes in the Middle East.  Olmert is worthy of 
praise.  In fact, he is backing the government in the debate with 
the U.S. on the matter of construction in the settlements.  The main 
points that Olmert raised dealt with the relationship between the 
U.S. and Israel (as opposed to its relationship with the Arab and 
Muslim world), which is based on interests, but equally on a true 
moral partnership of freedom and democracy.  Therefore, both sides 
should be careful not to be harmed.... Conversely, the article 
written by Sheikh Salman bin Hamad al-Khalifa of Bahrain is a horse 
of a different color.  Whether it was written by the crown prince 
himself or someone elseQit is a psycho-political effort aimed at 
deceiving the naove reader.  According to the article, we face an 
opportunity for ideal peace between Jews and Arabs, and only a few 
ostensibly minor affairs are preventing it from being achieved.  To 
demonstrate objectivity and openness, al-Khalifa admits that there 
is need for Qfresh thinkingQ and that the Arab side has Qnot done 
enough to communicate directly with the people of Israel,Q but his 
true intention is clear.  He did not speak about having the Arab 
side initiate, for example, reciprocal visits between Israelis and 
Arab citizens and leaders, did not deal with cultural exchanges or 
stopping the horrific anti-Israeli and anti-Semitic propaganda in 
the Arab media -- and certainly did not mention willingness to 
recognize Israel as the state of the Jewish people.  What al-Khalifa 
asked for was a direct appeal to the Israeli public, over the head 
of the elected government, by means of part of the media or various 
left wing organizations.  Here are two articles that attest to the 
diplomatic situation: One aims towards the truth -- and the other 
ignores it. 
 
¶V.  QObamaQs Calculations Were Wrong 
 
Amnon Lord, Editor-in-Chief of the nationalist, Orthodox Makor 
Rishon-Hatzofe, wrote in the conservative, independent Jerusalem 
Post (7/22): QThe way Obama fixed upon Israel as an ugly vehicle for 
rapprochement with the Muslim world was simply too transparent. 
Thus Obama, who initially was much admired by many in Israel, has 
failed in his attempt to create a political crisis here and instead 
reaped a harvest of hatred.  These days he is despised in Israel, 
with his lack of moral fiber regarding Iran and the elections putsch 
there adding fuel to the fire. Both his policy toward Iran and that 
regarding Israel have exposed U.S. weaknesses.  One outcome now 
emerging is a rapprochement between Israel and Egypt.  Both 
countries are concerned about sharing a border with an Islamist 
fundamentalist regime in Gaza; both feel threatened by Iran; and 
both are disturbed by the destabilizing effect of Obama's 
initiatives in the region and elsewhere.  Thus one positive outcome 
of the developments of the past couple of months is Egypt and Israel 
hugging each other tightly in the dark. 
 
--------- 
¶2.  Iran: 
--------- 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"Robert McNamaraQs Legacy" 
 
Senior military affairs analyst Reuven Pedatzur wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (7/22): QWhat relevance does [the 
late U.S. Defense Secretary Robert] McNamara's legacy hold for us? 
If Iran attains nuclear weapons, the cost of a strike by these 
weapons penetrating Israeli defenses would be even more intolerable 
than in the American case.  There will therefore be no choice but to 
base our policy against the Iranian threat on deterrence instead of 
defense.  We will also have to learn from the American case how to 
attain stable deterrence and prevent a mistake that would lead to 
undesired launches.  Iran does not know Israel, but (if foreign 
reports are true about Israel's nuclear capability), from the moment 
the nuclear threat is mutual, it will be in Iran's interest to 
prevent nuclear war from breaking out accidently.  They will 
understand that the cost of such a war would be intolerable.  Mutual 
deterrence and mutually assured destruction would be the basis for 
strategic balance between Israel and a nuclear Iran.  Following 
McNamara's death, one of his most important diagnoses should be 
adopted: QNuclear weapons serve no military purposes whatsoever. 
They are totally useless --  except only to deter one's opponent 
from using them. 
 
CUNNINGHAM