09TORONTO24
OSAC CRIME AND SAFETY REPORT 2008 - TORONTO
Wed Jan 28 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Toronto
R 281909Z JAN 09
FM AMCONSUL TORONTO
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2732
AMEMBASSY OTTAWAUNCLAS TORONTO 000024 
 
 
DEPT FOR DS/DSS/OSAC AND DS/IP/WHA 
OTTAWA FOR RSO AND FCS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT APER
SUBJECT:  OSAC CRIME AND SAFETY REPORT 2008 - TORONTO 
 
¶I. (U) Overall Crime and Safety Situation:  The Crime and safety 
situation in Toronto is comparable to or better than in many of the 
larger cities in the United States. 
 
¶A.  Crime in the Greater Toronto Area (GTA) during 2008 mirrored 
most major U.S. cities in variety though not frequency as the crime 
rate is significantly lower than most major U.S. cities.  Further, 
violent crime in the GTA is mostly isolated to those involved in 
drug, gang and organized crime related activities.  For example, the 
GTA is made up of five regions that include; Toronto, Peel, York, 
Durham and Halton.  The current population is approximately 
5,500,000.  In the GTA during 2008 there were just 104 homicides, a 
number which has steadily declined over the past four years. 
 
¶B.  Traffic in Toronto overwhelms the streets and continues to grow. 
 Consequently, we continue to observe vehicular/ pedestrian related 
fatalities. 
 
II. (U) Political Violence: 
 
¶A.  Historical Perspective:  Toronto is an extremely diverse city 
with some fifty percent of its population being composed of foreign 
born citizens and/or third country nationals.  The diverse nature of 
the population coupled with the metro area's expanse has resulted in 
well organized ethnic communities throughout the area. 
 
¶B.  Regional Terrorism and Organized Crime: 
 
     ¶1. The number of suspects still facing charges for the "Toronto 
18" summer 2006 terror plots was reduced to 10, after an Ontario 
Superior Court justice found a Toronto-area man guilty in September, 
2008 of terrorism charges stemming from the "Toronto 18" plots. 
(Earlier, in April 2008, Canadian government prosecutors stayed 
terrorism-related charges against four suspects in order to focus 
charges on the suspects who appear to be most directly involved in 
the "Toronto 18" plots, and away from more tangential figures, 
according to law enforcement contacts.  Judges had also previously 
stayed charges against three minors in the group in July 2007.)  The 
September court ruling was Canada's first conviction under its 
Anti-Terrorism Act and makes convictions more likely for the 10 
defendants still awaiting trial.  Their trial dates have not been 
announced, and in December, the Ontario Court of Appeal rejected one 
suspect's request to review a lower court decision to deny bail. 
 
     ¶2. Organized crime is a concern.  Although not apparent, the 
GTA is directly impacted by activities that include but are not 
limited to the distribution of illegal narcotics, bank/wire fraud 
and Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) violations.  Often times, 
these crimes are the means used to raise funds for gangs or 
international terrorism. 
 
¶C.  International or Transnational Terrorism:  There are no known 
specific terrorist threats directed against official or private U.S. 
citizens in Ontario; however, many groups exist in Canada that have 
ties to, illegally raise funds for, or are sympathetic with various 
well-known international terrorist organizations. 
 
¶D.  Civil Unrest:  Although the GTA sees numerous demonstrations 
each year, most if not all were peaceful during 2008. 
 
III. (U) Post Specific Concerns:  Gun violence continues to be a 
concern in the GTA.  Although gun related crimes are not as frequent 
as in major U.S. cities and are mostly isolated to drug, gang and 
organized crime related activities, innocent bystanders have become 
victims. 
 
IV. (U)  Police Response & Medical Emergencies: 
 
The Toronto Police Service and suburban police services have been 
proactive in addressing criminal activity in the GTA.  Officers 
generally respond to the scene of crimes in a timely manner.  Police 
agencies and emergency medical services in the Toronto area have 
9-1-1 capability, which has proven highly effective in those rare 
instances when members of the U.S. Mission have called 9-1-1 for 
police or emergency services. 
 
Routine and emergency requests for police assistance from the 
Regional Security Officer in Toronto have been met with an excellent 
response by the Toronto Police Service and Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police (RCMP).  The working relationship between the RSO office, 
five resident law enforcement agencies and the Canadian law 
enforcement community is excellent. 
 
¶V. (U) Tips on How to Avoid Becoming a Victim: 
 
Residents and visitors in the Toronto area are advised to take the 
same security precautions they would in any major U.S. city.  This 
requires residents and travelers to periodically re-evaluate their 
daily activities to reduce the chance of victimization. 
 
Specific Recommendations: 
 
¶1. Keep a photocopy of your passport biographical page in a separate 
location.  This can facilitate replacement if your passport is lost 
or stolen. 
 
¶2. Keep valuables such as cash and jewelry in a secure location. 
Additionally, avoid displaying large sums of money in public. 
 
¶3. Store valuables in a lockable safe or in safety deposit boxes. 
 
¶4. Prior to traveling, register your travel plans with the U.S. 
State Department's Consular Services and/ or share your travel plans 
and contact information with a friend or colleague. 
 
VI. (U) Emergency Contact Information - GTA: 
 
    Toronto Police Service - (416) 808-2222 
 
Royal Canadian Mounted Police - (800) 387-0020 (GTA) 
 
Ontario Provincial Police - (888) 310-1122 (Ontario, outside GTA 
area) 
 
In the event of an emergency, travelers should first contact 9-1-1 
as necessary.  Otherwise, they may contact the U.S. Consulate 
General 24-hours a day at (416) 595-1700 to speak with a duty 
officer or contact the Regional Security Officer, Mark C. Malhoyt at 
(416) 595-6502 or malhoytmc@state.gov. 
 
NAY