09USUNNEWYORK587
UNDERSECRETARY-GENERAL HOLMES BRIEFS UNSC ON SUDAN
Fri Jun 12 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO7641
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0587/01 1631446
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 121446Z JUN 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6718
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHRN/USMISSION UN ROME IMMEDIATE
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA IMMEDIATE 3769
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 000587 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR IO/RHS AND PRM 
USAID FOR DCHA 
BRUSSELS FOR USAID PBROWN 
ROME FOR USUN HSPANOS 
GENEVA FOR NKYLOH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AF EAID PGOV PHUM PREF PREL SU
SUBJECT: UNDERSECRETARY-GENERAL HOLMES BRIEFS UNSC ON SUDAN 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000587  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: In his June 11 briefing to the Security 
Council, Undersecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and 
Emergency Response Coordinator John Holmes reiterated his 
assessment that the decision of the Government of Sudan (GoS) 
to expel 13 aid agencies and close 3 national 
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) on March 4 put hundreds 
of thousands of people at risk. However, he acknowledged that 
positive steps taken by the GoS along with UN agencies and 
NGOs had narrowed assistance gaps and prevented a worsening 
of the humanitarian situation for the moment. Holmes cited 
the expansion of the High Level Committee (HLC), 
reaffirmation of the 2007 Joint Communiqu and the decision 
to allow some expelled NGOs to return under affiliates as 
signs of positive progress. He cautioned that consistent and 
sustained implementation of the GoS' commitments will be 
necessary in order to prevent a deterioration in the 
humanitarian situation. Council members noted the improved 
cooperation between the GoS and UN on humanitarian matters, 
but some countries including the United States, United 
Kingdom and Japan stated that the GoS' improved engagement 
must be followed by concrete actions on the ground to fill 
remaining gaps.  Russia and China noted the importance of 
progress on the political front to solve Sudan's humanitarian 
problems.  Libya remarked that Article 16 should be invoked 
in support of the peace process.  End summary 
 
Holmes Briefs on His Visit to Sudan 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Holmes began his June 11 briefing to the Security 
Council by stating that he visited Sudan from May 6 - 10 in 
order to review the humanitarian situation in the areas most 
affected by the GoS decision on March 4 to close 3 national 
NGOs and expel 13 international aid agencies. He continued to 
describe the expulsions as wrong and unjustified and added 
that they increased risks to hundreds of thousands of people. 
Holmes remarked that efforts to create constructive dialogue, 
especially those led by Special Envoy Gration, had led to 
positive developments. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Holmes told the Council that the humanitarian 
community had worked with the GoS to fill the most critical 
gaps created by the expulsions.  He noted that there have 
been improvements in the delivery of services, thereby 
avoiding a catastrophe.  He qualified this statement by 
noting that the current delivery of humanitarian assistance 
to vulnerable populations does not meet international 
standards and is not sustainable, and thus much work remains 
to be done. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Holmes credited the GoS with cooperating with the UN 
and other aid agencies to rebuild the badly damaged 
humanitarian architecture in Sudan.  He cited the GoS 
reaffirmation of the 2007 Joint Communiqu on the 
facilitation of humanitarian assistance in Darfur and a 
number of ministerial decrees relating to technical 
agreements, travel permits and multiple entry visas as 
evidence of improved relations with the GoS on humanitarian 
matters. He noted the GoS decision to allow some of the 
expelled NGOs to return under new names and logos is a 
positive step. Holmes also welcomed the expansion of the High 
Level Committee to oversee the implementation of the Joint 
Communique and a reduction in hostile media reporting on 
international aid agencies. However, Holmes stressed that the 
value of these positive measures would be weighed against 
improvements on the ground including better security for aid 
agencies and higher quality humanitarian services. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Holmes cautioned the Council that GoS decision to 
expel aid agencies greatly reduced the capacity to deliver 
essential humanitarian services to hundreds of thousands of 
individuals and that this capacity has yet to be fully 
replaced. He noted enhanced concerns for vulnerable 
populations due to the upcoming rainy season and "hunger 
gap". Holmes stated that the following remains to be achieved 
in order to address humanitarian needs: a) a return of 
humanitarian capacity, b) full freedom of movement to 
northern Sudan, c) further loosening of bureaucratic 
impediments, and d) considerable improvement in the security 
environment. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Holmes related his concerns over lost NGO capacity 
in the Three Protocol Areas and eastern Sudan where they play 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000587  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
a large role in humanitarian, recovery and development 
assistance. He also expressed dismay over tribal violence in 
Southern Sudan that had displaced tens of thousands of 
persons. He urged the Government of Southern Sudan to take 
measures to protect civilians. Holmes also mentioned the 
renewed presence of the Lords Resistance Army (LRA) south of 
Juba and expressed hope that Joseph Kony would sign the peace 
agreement that he abandoned last summer. 
 
The Council Responds 
-------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Ambassador DiCarlo said that efforts over the past 
three months have prevented an immediate crisis, but that the 
GoS must translate its recent commitments to action on the 
ground. She noted that the US remains troubled by gaps in 
assistance to the Three Areas and the negative impact that 
this will have on the implementation of the Comprehensive 
Peace Agreement. She remarked that a deterioration in the 
security situation in Darfur, including two recent kidnapping 
events, has led to a reduction in humanitarian presence and 
service delivery in remote locations.  Amb. DiCarlo stated 
that the GoS remains responsible for improvements in the 
security environment that will lead to improved humanitarian 
access to populations in need. 
 
¶8. (SBU) The United Kingdom, France, Austria, Japan, Costa 
Rica and Mexico expressed continuing concern over the GoS 
decision to expel NGOs while noting improved cooperation 
between the GoS and aid agencies since March 4. There was 
general agreement among these countries that the initial 
improvements must be sustained and include concrete advances 
at the field level in order to overcome the gaps created by 
the NGO expulsions. 
 
¶9. Russia and China focused on the need to energize the peace 
process in order to solve Sudan's humanitarian problems. 
Russia called on the Government of Southern Sudan to take 
responsibility for the protection of civilians in its 
territory.  China noted a link between the ICC's arrest 
warrant for President Bashir of Sudan and the negative impact 
on humanitarian assistance caused by the GoS expulsion of the 
NGOs. China stated that the GoS' calm and restrained attitude 
after the ICC arrest warrant accounted for recent positive 
developments in restoring humanitarian assistance. Libya 
emphasized that the Security Council should view Darfur in a 
wider context and mentioned that Article 16 should be invoked 
in order to support the peace process in Sudan. 
 
RICE