09VLADIVOSTOK59
KHABAROVSK GOVERNOR NAMED NEW RFE POLPRED
Mon May 04 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Vladivostok
VZCZCXRO5230
RR RUEHCHI RUEHDBU RUEHFK RUEHHM RUEHKSO RUEHLN RUEHNAG RUEHPB RUEHPOD
RUEHYG
DE RUEHVK #0059 1240705
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 040705Z MAY 09
FM AMCONSUL VLADIVOSTOK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1149
INFO RUEHXD/MOSCOW POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHZU/ASIAN PACIFIC ECONOMIC COOPERATION COLLECTIVE
RUEHVK/AMCONSUL VLADIVOSTOK 1252UNCLAS VLADIVOSTOK 000059 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV RS
SUBJECT: KHABAROVSK GOVERNOR NAMED NEW RFE POLPRED 
 
¶1.  On April 30, Dmitry Medvedev accepted RFE Polpred Oleg 
Safonov's resignation and appointed Khabarovsk Governor Viktor 
Ishayev as his successor.  Though most observers had predicted a 
move for the governor who has held power since 1991, few 
predicted the move to Polpred.  The change in post is not being 
seen as a promotion, but rather an honorary position, though one 
that will oversee the Russia-European Union Summit in Khabarovsk 
later this month and preparations for the 2012 APEC summit in 
Vladivostok.  The move may be a harbinger of further shakeups in 
the Russian Far East, and Primorye Governor Sergey Darkin may be 
at the front of the line for changes. 
 
¶2.  Ishayev has a reputation as a strong manager, and was one of 
the most independent Russian governors, criticizing cutbacks in 
certain social benefits, Russian-Chinese border demarcation, and 
Kremlin economic policies.  Observers have commented that the 
move may be an effort by the Kremlin to shore up authority over 
APEC preparations with the Polpred's office, control of which 
prior Polpred Safonov 'lost' to Primorye Governor Sergey Darkin. 
  According to one observer, another task from Medvedev may be 
to find a way to replace Primorye Governor Sergey Darkin with a 
suitable successor.  Vyacheslav Shport, Khabarovsk's Acting 
Governor, will likely move to the Governor's office after the 
Kray Duma considers him for the position later this week. 
 
¶3.  Outgoing Polpred Safonov was appointed in October 2007 by 
Putin to fight corruption and crime in the RFE, but his efforts 
were hindered by bureaucratic infighting between the 
Prosecutor's Office and the Special Investigative Commission 
while pursuing cases against officials in the region. He is a 
relative of Viktor Ivanov, the Head of the Anti-Drug Department, 
and an entrenched "siloviki."  Unnamed sources in his office 
commented that they were caught unaware by the move, since 
Safonov had a busy schedule for May.  There have been no reports 
on what his next position will be. 
 
¶4.  Rumors about an end to Ishayev's leadership of the Krai 
began to circulate in late 2008 when critical coverage of the 
Governor began to emerge from government-run media outlets.  The 
criticism was reportedly initiated by Deputy Presidential 
Administration Head Vladislav Surkov, who was put off by 
Ishayev's independence and dissatisfied with his handling of 
recent protests.  Observers interpreted it as an effort to 
prepare the public for a change in leadership.  Other signs were 
seen even earlier, when Ishayev allies moved into posts 
apparently in preparation for his new appointment.  In March, 
Ishayev lured close ally Shport away from a lucrative 
private-sector job into his cabinet and pushed for another close 
ally, Aleksandr Levintal, to move into position as Deputy RFE 
Polpred under Safonov.  Only a month later Ishayev moved into 
the RFE Polpred post with one ally as his deputy and the other 
as the likely new Khabarovsk Governor. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶5.  In what appears to be a new twist, authorities announced the 
latest resignation/appointment at the end of the business week, 
giving  little chance for comment and review.  Ishayev had long 
been a mild thorn in the Kremlin's side, so the appointment is 
clearly not a reward for loyal service.  Putting him in a 
position with diminished power is an easy way of taking away 
real levers of power, while avoiding the criticism associated 
with dismissing a governor.  Ishayev is in poor health and 
reportedly not personally interested in the new position, so 
there will likely be yet another Polpred within the next couple 
of years.  Safonov held one meeting with the diplomatic corps 
and seemed open to international cooperation.  Ishayev has 
generally not courted foreign investors or cooperation, and is 
often quite critical of the U.S.  As for Primorye Governor 
Darkin, if this move is indeed part of a larger chess game then 
Darkin could indeed be vulnerable.  However, his demise has been 
predicted too many times for us to be taking any bets. 
 
ARMBRUSTER