09VLADIVOSTOK37
RESOLUTION EXPLAINS VLADIVOSTOK DEMONSTRATION AND DEMANDS
Wed Mar 18 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Vladivostok
VZCZCXRO2294
RR RUEHCHI RUEHDBU RUEHFK RUEHHM RUEHKSO RUEHLN RUEHNAG RUEHPB RUEHPOD
RUEHYG
DE RUEHVK #0037/01 0770414
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 180414Z MAR 09
FM AMCONSUL VLADIVOSTOK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1107
INFO RUEHXD/MOSCOW POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHZU/ASIAN PACIFIC ECONOMIC COOPERATION
RUEHVK/AMCONSUL VLADIVOSTOK 1209UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 VLADIVOSTOK 000037 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV ECON RS
SUBJECT: RESOLUTION EXPLAINS VLADIVOSTOK DEMONSTRATION AND DEMANDS 
RESIGNATIONS 
 
VLADIVOSTO 00000037  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (U)  Summary and comment:  Post has informally translated 
highlights of the joint resolution by members of the Intiative 
Citizens of Russia Organization, "TIGR" and the Primorye Branch 
of the Communist Party of Russia that was made public at the 
March 15 demonstration in Vladivostok.  Comment:  It is likely 
that TIGR is driving the economic points and the Communists the 
political points.  This is a marriage of convenience.  Despite 
the anti-Western tone, TIGR wants more integration with the West 
and a more liberalized trade regime.  The group was formed to 
protest high tarrifs that are cutting off imports of foreign 
cars, a source of livlihood for many Far Easterners.  The 
communists have more resources and organization experience but 
they are able to benefit from TIGR's more relevent message and 
ability to attract younger people to anti-government rallies. 
To make sense of this union in political terms would require 
some sort of material dialect reasoning that only a communist 
could understand.  The resolution calls for a return to direct 
election for Governors, a stronger safety net for the elderly 
and unemployed and it ends with a call for the resignation of 
Prime Minister Putin and Primorye Governor Darkin.  End summary 
and comment. 
 
¶2. (U)  Begin Resolution Highlights:  According to statistical 
data, all sectors of the Primorye economy are faced with a 
reduction of economic activity.  Primorye ore and timber 
processing industries are in collapse.  Port  turnover has 
declined by 30-50%.  Migration out of Primorye is a warning 
signal, as 30,000 people have left Primorye.  The general 
demographic situation is worse than in other Russian regions. 
 
Federal measures for customs fee increases for foreign cars has 
had a negative impact on the social-economic climate in 
Primorye. We foresee that only changes of the  federal economic 
course and industrial modernization in Primorye may improve the 
situation. 
 
Demands for the President and Russian Government: 
 
Protest meeting participants  demand a change from the current 
anti-public regime to a Russian national interest protection 
regime, a regime of patriots, expressing public will. 
Participants demand changing the false western democracy regime, 
anti-public democracy for rich people, bandits and bureaucrats, 
to a public power regime of justice, freedom and prosperity. 
 
We are not slaves. We do not want to play a raw-exports only 
role for the West.  We do not want  sexual maniacs, 
narco-dealers nearby our kids, the death of Russian villages, 
explosions in our residences, and dangerous old airplanes." 
Supporting a soccer team in England, Keeseville ski resorts, and 
vacations in the Bahamas for the rich is a price too high for 
the Russian nation. 
 
We demand to answer to the question where is the money of the 
Stabilization/Reserve Fund and National Prosperity Fund?  We 
demand a reply about growing falsifications and violations 
during elections. We demand a thorough inspection of the 
elections on March 1, 2009 elections.  We demand a financial 
audit of the Yedinaya Rossia Party. We demand cancellation of 
the monetization of privileges for retired people and veterans 
and to let them live calmly till the end their lives. We demand 
a return to justice for minimum wages payments. 
 
Demands for the Primorye Kray Administration and the Primorye 
Legislative Assembly: 
 
We demand  to limit housing monthly payments to ten percent of a 
month family income as it was during Soviet times.  We demand to 
know why transportation, energy, heating, and utility tariffs 
increase while oil prices go down dramatically.  We demand 
restoration of jobs for all people fired in the framework of 
"anti-crisis measures".  We demand payment of all delayed wages, 
accumulated by the end of 2008. 
 
We support demands for justice from the TIGR public movement, 
such as: a reduction of utility tariffs and oil products; 
protection of the Russian Constitution against changes; salary 
increases for budget sphere employees: teachers, doctors, 
librarians,and not for state service authorities.  We demand 
pension increases for retired people, real freedom of voice, 
cancellation of limitations for public meetings and 
demonstrations; an end to anti-public changes in the Criminal 
Code of Russia; reduction of customs tariffs for all types of 
goods, full implementation of a termless moratorium for the use 
of right hand cars; a reduction of the bureaucracy; efficient 
anti-corruption measures; a return to "Against All Candidates" 
in voting ballots; a return to the direct election of Governors; 
and end to the destruction of Army reform; and a right to recall 
deputies, governors and mayors. 
 
We demand the resignation of Prime Minister Putin and Primorye 
 
VLADIVOSTO 00000037  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
Governor Darkin. 
ARMBRUSTER