09YEKATERINBURG60
SIBERIAN OASIS BALANCES DEVELOPMENT AND PRESERVATION
Sat Sep 19 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Yekaterinburg
INFO  LOG-00   EEB-00   AID-00   CEA-01   CIAE-00  COME-00  CTME-00  
      INL-00   DODE-00  DOEE-00  ITCE-00  DOTE-00  PDI-00   DS-00    
      EAP-00   EXME-00  OIGO-00  E-00     FAAE-00  FBIE-00  UTED-00  
      VCI-00   FRB-00   H-00     TEDE-00  INR-00   IO-00    LAB-01   
      MOFM-00  MOF-00   VCIE-00  NSAE-00  ISN-00   NSCE-00  OES-00   
      OIC-00   OMB-00   NIMA-00  EPAU-00  GIWI-00  MA-00    SCT-00   
      ISNE-00  SP-00    IRM-00   SSO-00   SS-00    STR-00   TRSE-00  
      EVR-00   FMP-00   BBG-00   R-00     EPAE-00  ECA-00   IIP-00   
      DSCC-00  PRM-00   DRL-00   G-00     CARC-00  NFAT-00  SAS-00   
      FA-00    SWCI-00  SEEE-00  SECC-00  SANA-00    /002W
   
R 190815Z SEP 09
FM AMCONSUL YEKATERINBURG
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 1359
INFO AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 
AMCONSUL ST PETERSBURG 
AMCONSUL VLADIVOSTOK 
AMCONSUL YEKATERINBURGUNCLAS YEKATERINBURG 000060 
 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/RUS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EPET SENV SCUL PGOV RS
SUBJECT: SIBERIAN OASIS BALANCES DEVELOPMENT AND PRESERVATION 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified.  Not for Internet distribution. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Begin summary.  Sustainable economic development, 
environmental protection, and preservation indigenous northern 
cultures were the main themes of Consul General's visit to 
Khanty-Mansiysk September 14-16.  The city of 70,000, which is 
about 650 km northeast of Yekaterinburg and could be described 
as Dubai on the Taiga, gleams with new European-style 
construction, reflecting its status as the administrative 
capital of Western Siberia's oil and gas region.  It seeks to 
promote its image as a sporting and cultural capital with its 
annual international biathlon competition, annual ecological 
film festival and other international gatherings.  End summary. 
 
 
Riding the oil boom 
------------------------- 
¶2. (SBU) On September 15, CG met with Aleksandr Filipenko, who 
was reappointed Governor of the Khanty-Mansiysk Autonomous 
Region by then President Vladimir Putin in 2005.  Filipenko gave 
a somewhat rambling introduction to his region, praising the 
western companies that were active in the Western Siberian oil 
fields for their reliability as partners.  When asked, however, 
to describe plans the region was making to prepare for the 
eventual depletion of oil and gas reserves, Filipenko replied 
that exploitation of fisheries and forests would provide a sound 
basis for economic activity.  His reply seemed out of step with 
President Medvedev's recent calls for Russia to reduce its 
dependence on resource-based industries.  Filipenko, who at age 
59 is a decade younger than the heads of other regions in 
Yekaterinburg's consular district, seemed less focused and 
energetic than his counterparts. 
 
¶3. (SBU) In contrast, Khanty-Mansiysk Mayor Gennadiy Bukarinov, 
47, was vigorous and gregarious.  According to the mayor, 
Khanty-Mansiysk's population is growing rapidly from labor 
migration to the north, where jobs are still relatively 
plentiful, and a growing birth rate.  He said the city needs to 
rapidly develop its infrastructure and build new kindergartens 
and elementary schools to keep up with the population boom. 
Bukarinov, who was elected mayor in 2008, was obviously proud of 
his city's developing reputation as an international sports and 
cultural center.  Khantiy-Mansiysk lies 200 km west of the oil 
industry center of Surgut.  It's fresh air and clean streets 
reflect the area's lack of industrial development.  Moreover, 
parks, fountains, sports facilities, and a stunning youth art 
academy gives residents of the compact city modern amenities not 
found in such concentration in other Russian regions. 
 
Balancing Development and the Environment 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
¶4. (SBU) Concern for the northern environment was expressed by 
all of the CG's interlocutors.  Sergey Pikunov, Director of the 
region's Department for Environmental Protection and Ecological 
Safety, spoke over lunch of the importance of his work with oil 
companies to prevent, mitigate, and clean up environmental 
damage.  He said the situation has improved dramatically in 
recent years with strengthened legislation and constant 
environmental monitoring.  He praised western oil companies for 
introducing stricter environmental controls into the Russian oil 
industry.  He stated that cooperation between his department and 
industry is excellent and communication is constant.  The 
practice of gas flaring remains a major issue in the region, 
however, both because of its wastefulness and because it is a 
major source of methane released into the atmosphere.  On our 
approach to the Khanty-Mansiysk airport as dusk fell, the orange 
glow of numerous gas flares was visible on the terrain below. 
 
Environmental Protection and Cultural Preservation Meet in 
Western Siberia 
--------------------------------------------- ------------------- 
¶5. (SBU) Indigenous minorities of the Finno-Ugric group, 
including the Khanty, Mansiy, Nenets and Komi peoples, make up 
about 2.2 percent of the region's population of nearly 1.5 
million.  Over dinner with an Open World alumnus who is an 
advocate of the rights of indigenous peoples, CG explored the 
nexus of environmental protection with the preservation of 
northern cultures.  Aleksandr Novyukhov, leader of the NGO 
"Saving Ugra," concentrates his activities on strengthening 
legislation and advising villagers of their rights vis-`-vis 
both the government and oil companies.  He explained that his 
organization has been in existence since Soviet times and has 
the strong support of the regional government.  Relations with 
the industry are more problematic, because, while oil provides 
jobs for the local population, development degrades the 
environment upon which these traditionally-based societies 
depend for survival.  Nevertheless, Novyukhov, who is a lawyer 
by training, considered his relationships more cooperative than 
adversarial and gave the impression that the long-term goal of 
preserving these cultures is an accepted priority in the region. 
 
¶6. (SBU) A spirit of cooperation was also reflected in the 
comments of the young leader of the NGO "Northern Lights," which 
organizes environmental activities among students at the Ugra 
State University.  Lilya Kasatkina, who is on the faculty of the 
ecological department of the university and an alumna of a three 
month environmental program at "Sea Camp" in Florida, said that 
the government often enlists her group as a partner in raising 
environmental consciousness among the population.  She also 
noted support from local business, which donated a snow mobile 
to assist them in their activities.  An active 44-member Public 
Chamber, whose leaders described a range of programs 
concentrating on youth development, advocacy of women's rights, 
and promotion of social responsibility in business rounds out a 
relatively positive picture of civil society activity in the 
region. 
 
University Struggles to Establish Itself 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
¶7. (SBU) A visit to the university left the impression of a 
relatively new institution struggling to break out of isolation. 
 Founded in 2001, the school of about 5,000 students is well 
equipped and interested in expanding international cooperation. 
Though framework agreements are in place with a couple of 
American universities, actual programs have been limited to a 
handful of student and teacher exchanges.  According to 
university officials, lack of funding appears to be the main 
stumbling block.  On the other hand, in 2007 UNESCO established 
a center for the study of climate change and is sponsoring a 
multi-media center for indigenous populations at the university. 
 University official expressed interest in cooperating with 
American institutions in the fields of environmental studies, 
indigenous cultures, and information technology. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Comment:  The benefits of the oil boom are evident in 
both the outward appearance of the city and the attention paid 
to the environment and social programs.  Dark clouds loom on the 
horizon, however, as Russia's oil reserves are exploited.  It is 
reasonable to ask whether in a generation, this northern oasis 
will have found a sustainable alternative economic engine for 
development or face inevitable decline as the boom times end. 
End comment. 
 
 
SANDUSKY