10AITTAIPEI179
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Mon Feb 22 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0179/01 0531004
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 221004Z FEB 10
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3359
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 9699
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 1085UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000179 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/P, EAP/PD - THOMAS HAMM 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their news 
coverage February 13-22 on the island-wide celebrations of the Lunar 
New Year, on the upcoming legislative by-elections and the year-end 
five city and county magistrates' elections, and on a minor 
personnel reshuffle in the Cabinet.  Several editorial pieces -- 
including a column in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily," an op-ed 
in the pro-unification "United Daily News," an editorial in the 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" -- all discussed 
U.S. President Barack Obama's recent meeting with the Dalai Lama and 
its impact on Sino-U.S. relations.  A separate "Taipei Times" op-ed 
discussed U.S. arms sales to Taiwan and said "the US relationship 
with a democratic Taiwan is valuable in its own right and should not 
be subordinated to or become merely a function of US-China 
relations."  End summary. 
 
A) "Entr'acte by the White House" 
 
Columnist Antonio Chiang wrote in his column in the mass-circulation 
"Apple Daily" [circulation: 520,000] (2/22): 
 
"Regardless of China's firm opposition and strong protests, [U.S. 
President Barack] Obama had an over one hour closed-door meeting 
with the Dalai Lama. ... Had Obama decided not to meet with the 
Dalai Lama, his prestige would have suffered a heavy blow, both 
domestically and internationally.  He was facing difficulties over 
which he had no control, and Beijing was clearly aware of that.  The 
exchange of criticisms between the two sides was like an 'entr'acte' 
in the Beijing opera -- a short play that adds no actual value to 
the opera itself but has to be performed no matter what. ... 
 
"Beijing believes that time is on its side, so it simply watches 
just how long and how far the Dalai Lama can travel around the 
globe.  The chances are slim for the Tibet issue to be resolved 
during the lifetime of the Dalai Lama, yet his persistence and 
fortitude in pursuit of freedom and human rights have moved and 
inspired numerous souls.  The Tibet issue will never come to a stop 
with the end of the Dalai Lama's life." 
 
B) "With Two Rocks [Lying ahead], Will China and the United States 
Step out of the Doldrums?" 
 
Chen Wei-hua, Director of International Affairs, Transparency 
International's Chapter in Taiwan, opined in the pro-unification 
"United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] (2/21): 
 
"... Despite the fact that Beijing and Washington have had clashes 
recently over trade protectionism, freedom of speech on the 
Internet, and [U.S.] arms sales to Taiwan, such rows are all within 
the scope that both nations are able to manage.  The intimate trade 
relations between these two nations also make it impossible for both 
sides to suffer the pain of separating from each other.  It is 
foreseeable that in the wake of [President Barack Obama's] meeting 
with the Dalai Lama, Sino-U.S. relations will face two challenges 
successively -- 'the appreciation of the Renminbi' and 'sanctions 
against Iran'. ...  In addition, the United States is scheduled to 
hold an 'International Nuclear Safety Summit' in Washington D.C. in 
April.  Following the meeting with the Dalai Lama, the United States 
is sure to create an atmosphere of international cooperation.  It 
remains to be seen whether Sino-U.S. relations will step out of the 
doldrums because of their need for each other." 
 
C) "Beijing Needs to Turn down the Heat" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (2/22): 
 
"... There is a certain pattern of events when it comes to relations 
with China that every US president has had to face. The first phase 
is characterized by working hard to create an amicable atmosphere. 
In the second phase, frictions appear as the US president addresses 
practical issues and this is where relations become more tense. The 
third phase is where the two sides accept their differences and find 
ways to work together, feeling out their counterpart's bottom line 
and gradually moving into the fourth, more pragmatic phase.  Obama 
is already into the second year of his presidency and his inbox is 
piling up. Predictably, Sino-US relations are entering a testing 
phase. The sabers are already drawn, with recent tensions over 
economic issues, the Google hack attacks and US arms sales to 
Taiwan. Obama's decision to meet the Dalai Lama added fuel to the 
fire, giving the more hawkish elements in Beijing an excuse to push 
for a harder line against the US. This is likely to cause a cooling 
of relations that will take us into more unpredictable territory. 
... 
 
"As China's power and influence in international matters grows it is 
going to have more opportunities to compete as well as cooperate 
with the US in international affairs and trade. As it does so, it is 
going to become more difficult to sweep any differences of opinion 
or conflicts of interest under the carpet. Both sides are going to 
 
have to learn the benefits of cooperation and 'constructive 
conflict.'  If China feels the need to turn up the heat, it risks 
not only damaging bilateral relations with the US, but also of 
reversing the current trend of regional integration and replacing it 
with a polarization of international relations that would do no good 
for China, the US or the international community. Both China and the 
US are currently facing a range of domestic challenges and in future 
they are going to have to address a number of issues together, such 
as stabilizing the global economy, dealing with climate change and 
preventing weapons proliferation. These issues are going to require 
cooperation and China would do well to recognize the differences it 
has with other countries and make an effort to tone down its 
confrontational behavior." 
 
D) "Justifying US Arms Sales to Taiwan" 
 
Parris Chang, a professor emeritus of political science at 
Pennsylvania State University and former deputy secretary-general of 
Taiwan's National Security Council, opined in the pro-independence, 
English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 30,000] (2/22): 
 
"... Obama should be praised and congratulated for standing firm and 
making the right, courageous decision on arms sales and the meeting 
with the Dalai Lama, not allowing Chinese leaders to use threats to 
adversely affect US policy and the national interest. 
Taiwan-US-China relations have made great progress in 30 years. Wise 
and balanced US arms sales to Taiwan have contributed to the peace 
and stability in the Taiwan Strait and the Asia-Pacific region, and 
have made the incipient Taiwan-China detente possible.  On the other 
hand, however, China continues to build up its offensive military 
capabilities along the Taiwan Strait and Taiwan's military 
capabilities have fallen further behind those of the PRC, hence it 
is imperative that Obama should resist China's pressure and, as soon 
as possible, make available to Taiwan the advanced F-16C/D fighters 
that it needs to deter military coercion and defend itself. 
 
"There is no reason for Washington to believe that Taiwan's 
unification with China is desirable or inevitable. The three Sino-US 
Communiqus do not commit the US to Taiwan's unification with China 
-- and democratic changes in Taiwan have precluded it.  The US 
relationship with a democratic Taiwan is valuable in its own right 
and should not be subordinated to or become merely a function of 
US-China relations." 
 
STANTON