10ANKARA238
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Fri Feb 12 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO2536
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0238/01 0431345
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 121345Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2110
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0307
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6955
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4497
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7793
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7711
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4312
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000238 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 12, 2010 
 
Media Highlights 
 
US Embassy Ankara - Turkey Media Reaction - February 4, as prepared 
by the Public Affairs Information Office 
 
How the US is Playing 
 
PKK Leader Karayilan Threatens the US (NTVMSNBC website) 
NTVMSNBC reported online that PKK "terror organization chieftain" 
Murat Karayilan sent "instructions" to his militants in rural areas 
and the leaders in Europe, warning against the US "reconnaissance 
flights" in northern Iraq, and claiming that the US aims to 
eliminate the PKK cadres through assassinations.  "The US provides 
arms, ammunition and other technical and intelligence support to 
Turkey.  If the US, in addition, gives Turkey 'special assassination 
planes,' it will mean direct inclusion in the war," said Karayilan's 
statement, noting the PKK would hold the US "directly responsible" 
if these planes are used in striking at the PKK leaders and cadres. 
 
 
In the Headlines 
 
Iran - Protests and Nuclear 
In "Ahmadinejad's Power Show Fails to Stop Opposition," mainstream 
Vatan portrays Iranian president Ahmadinejad as making a 'show of 
force' on the anniversary of the Islamic revolution."  Liberal 
Radikal in "Stones to Opposition, Cynicism to the West," opines "as 
the Iranian regime smothered Tehran with Basij militia on the 31st 
anniversary of the Islamic revolution, Ahmadinejad "mocked the West 
by claiming that Iran has succeeded in enriching uranium to 20 
percent," noting that they have the capability of enriching to 80 
percent enrichment." In "We Are Now A Nuclear State," mainstream 
Sabah emphasizes "Iranian leader Ahmadinejad announced that Iran now 
is a 'nuclear state,' while leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet calls it 
"Iran is Now a Nuclear State." In a side story with "White House 
Doesn't Believe in Iran," Sabah cites WH Spokesperson Robert Gibbs 
as saying "Iranian leaders' have made a series of statements that 
are based on politics, not on physics." Mainstream Aksam in "Tehran 
in Turmoil on Revolution Anniversary," highlights how internal 
problems including growing domestic opposition put Iran in trouble. 
Aksam reports "Iran blocks the communication channels, announces 
plans to cut Gmail and create a national e-mail service. Gmail has 
confirmed users in Iran are having trouble accessing Gmail." 
 
Op-Eds on Iran-Turkey 
While papers extensively cover turmoil in Iran, pundits also advise 
Turkey to pay more attention to human rights violations in the 
country.  In "Iran Puts Turkey in Difficult Situation," columnist 
Cengiz Candar of liberal Radikal warns: "Turkey should stay its 
refrain from giving an image of turning a blind eye to human rights 
violations in Iran as if taking sides with Iran on the nuclear 
dispute."  The writer concludes negative consequences otherwise "not 
only for the region but for the entire world."  Soli Ozel in 
mainstream HaberTurk calls Ankara to be more careful on Iran: "While 
the Iranian regime faces the most serious problems inside, it is 
also making itself an unreliable player internationally.  This 
approach cannot last long.  Given the current conditions, Turkey 
will find itself forced to take a side when UNSC begin voting on the 
sanctions."   However, Islamist Yeni Safak's Tamer Korkmaz has a 
different approach as he suggests Turkey should not attach itself to 
the Western policies: "Despite Washington's pressure, Ankara is 
doing the right thing by following its own policy line on Iran, 
Afghanistan and Middle East issues.  The US-NATO formulations for 
these issues do not have any chance for success." 
 
Afghan Chief of General Staff: "We Would Welcome More Turkish 
Troops" 
Mainstreams Hurriyet and Aksam and leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
report that Afghan Chief of General Staff General Muhammedi met with 
visiting Turkish journalists yesterday.  Responding to a question 
regarding Turkish combat troops, Muhammedi said "The whole world 
 
ANKARA 00000238  002 OF 003 
 
 
knows the depth of Turkish-Afghan friendship is based on history. 
We cannot value the assistance Turkey extends us in millions of 
dollars.  To date, Turkish soldiers have never had a wrong behavior 
against the Afghan people.  We don't even need a visa to go to 
Turkey.  Turkey is like my second home.  The aim of the Coalition 
Force operations here is to clear the country's borders of enemies. 
Afghanistan's enemies are the Taliban, Al-Qaeda and Gulbettin 
Hikmetyar.  My country needs the ISAF until it stands on its own 
feet.  The Afghan national military will succeed in overcoming the 
country's challenges in two to three years.  If more Turkish troops 
are sent, that will be to Afghanistan's interest because presence of 
Turkish troops here doesn't mean that we are having foreign troops. 
They are considered locals."  Hurriyet notes that Turkish troops 
started training 600 Afghan soldiers in Kabul who will join the 
Afghan army after two months training.  Cumhuriyet notes that the 
Turkish military is planning to train over 5,000 Afghan soldiers. 
Of that number, 1440 will be trained in Isparta-Turkey and the 
remaining 3.600 will be trained in Afghanistan before they join the 
Afghan National Army. 
 
Op-Ed on Turkey-Afghanistan 
While the accomplishments of Turkish forces in Afghanistan dominate 
stories in the Turkish press, one pundit questions the reason for 
flattering words for the Turks.  In mainstream Milliyet, Melih Asik 
wonders why General McChrystal was praising Turkish soldiers: 
"American general says they are taking Turkish soldiers as good 
examples.  Didn't the same US put sacks on Turkish soldiers in Iraq? 
 That was then, this is now, because Turkish soldiers are about to 
be sent to combat zones in Afghanistan." 
 
 
President Gul Responds to Armenian President's Message 
All papers today report on President Gul's response to the good-will 
message issued by Armenian President Serj Sargsian while flying over 
Turkey.  In his message G|l stressed Turkish determination to 
advance the process of normalizing ties with Armenia and added that 
no change in the content of the protocols signed with Armenia was on 
the agenda.  Hurriyet quotes Gul as saying "Overcoming the 
long-established prejudices and nurturing mutual understanding and 
trust among our two neighboring peoples were indeed our main 
objectives when endorsing the process of normalization between our 
countries.  You should have no doubt that our determination to move 
these objectives forward is intact, provided that this resolve and 
commitment remains reciprocal."  Gul added that he will continue to 
deal with the current process personally. 
 
Erdogan: "For God's Sake, Is the European Parliament Blind?" 
(Hurriyet) 
All papers report Prime Minister Erdogan lashed out at the EU over 
its Turkey policies and criticized the EU Parliament's 2009 Progress 
Report on Turkey as "one-sided."  During a luncheon yesterday that 
he hosted for the ambassadors of the EU countries, Erdogan said 
"Regretfully, the Turkish public has become frustrated by 
anti-enlargement remarks and debates as to whether Turkey is a part 
of Europe."  Commenting on the parliament's endorsement of the 
report which criticized Turkey on the Cyprus issue, the PM said 
"It's upsetting that the report touches on what Turkey has failed to 
do but fails to mention the promises that the EU failed to meet 
regarding Cyprus." 
 
The Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA) has also expressed disappointment 
with the Cyprus chapter of the report, saying the European 
Parliament ignored Turkish efforts for settlement on the divided 
island and acted like a "spokesman of the Greek Cypriots."  In the 
statement released Thursday, the MFA said "It's thought-provoking 
that the report stressed what is expected from Turkey but ignored 
what commitments the EU has failed to carry out toward Turkey." 
 
Turkey's Armenian Daily Agos Hacked, Threatened (Hurriyet online) 
Television stations and dailies' websites report this morning that 
the website of Turkey's leading Armenian newspaper Agos was hacked 
 
ANKARA 00000238  003 OF 003 
 
 
in the early hours on Friday.  Mainstream Hurriyet online says 
hackers calling themselves "AK Hacker" hacked the Agos website and 
put up a picture of Ogun Samast, the alleged murderer of the paper's 
editor, Hrant Dink.  The note also said, "If you don't fix your 
reporting in the way we see fit, there will be new Ogun Samasts and 
new Hrant Dinks." 
 
Gay-Lesbian Organization Faces Closure in Turkey (Hurriyet online) 
Mainstream Hurriyet, NTVMSNBC and other websites report Friday 
morning that another Turkish gay-lesbian association, Black Pink 
Triangle, was facing closure due to a court case which was launched 
February 9 over a governor's office complaint that the association's 
purposes violated "Turkish moral values and family structure." 
Hurriyet says the case against the Izmir-based Black Pink Triangle 
Organization was not the first case opened against gay 
organizations, adding that the Interior Ministry has repeatedly 
attempted the closure of such organizations on similar claims -- 
Kaos-GL in 2005 and Pink Life in 2006. 
 
TV Spotlight (CNN Turk) 
 
The meeting of labor union Turk-Is leader Mustafa Kumlu with PM 
Erdogan on the situation of "Tekel" workers ended to no avail.  The 
hunger strike of 16 workers continues. 
 
During Thursday's debates in the parliament, Interior Minister Besir 
Atalay said all unresolved murders were resolved under the AK Party 
in government. 
 
Diyarbakir prosecutor ordered detention of Kurdish singer Rojda 
Senses on charges of making "terror propaganda" with a song she sang 
at a festival in Diyarbakir last year. 
 
Businessman Mehmet Kurt, the former owner of Kanal 6 TV, and two 
associates have been taken into custody for being the financial 
supporter of the 'Ergenekon' network. 
 
The government has submitted to the parliament a draft for the 
establishment of a "Directorate" for Turks living abroad. 
 
European Union leaders pledged readiness to support debt-stricken 
Greece. 
 
After four years, Syria has received a request from Washington to 
accredit a US ambassador to Damascus. 
 
The Yemeni authorities have announced a ceasefire with Shia rebels 
fighting government forces in the north. 
 
A total of 110 reporters were killed in the course of their work in 
2009, making the year the most lethal for journalists over the past 
decade. 
 
JEFFREY