10ANKARA285
MISSION TURKEY'S S/GWI PROJECT PROPOSALS
Mon Feb 22 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXYZ0002
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAK #0285/01 0530950
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 220950Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2198
INFO RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL IMMEDIATE 7010UNCLAS ANKARA 000285 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR S/GWI VVIKMANISKELLER, SGHORI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM SGWI SOCI KPAO KWMN PREL
SUBJECT: MISSION TURKEY'S S/GWI PROJECT PROPOSALS 
 
REF: A. 09 STATE 132094 
     ¶B. STATE 12531 
 
MISSION TURKEY S/GWI PROJECT PROPOSALS 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  Mission Turkey received 180 proposals for the 
Secretary's Office of Global Women's Issues Small Grants 
Initiative.  Ankara, Adana, and Istanbul POL and PAS officers 
were energized by the vast number of responses from every 
corner of Turkey and worked together to reach out and brief 
local NGOs, collect their submissions, and review the 
submitted proposals.  Mission Turkey unanimously selected the 
top six project proposals for S/GWI's consideration.   These 
proposals demonstrate the commitment of civil society to 
address the problems of women in Turkey.  We are looking 
forward to further promote the S/GWI's vision on Women's 
issues through the implementation of the following nominated 
projects. We will send the full project proposals to S/GWI 
upon request by e-mail. END SUMMARY. 
SNAPSHOT ON WOMEN'S ISSUES IN TURKEY 
------------------------------------ 
¶2.  According to a 2007 nationwide study, rates of violence 
against women in Turkey are alarming: 34 percent of Turkish 
women are subject to physical violence, and 44 percent of 
women are subject to psychological abuse. According to the 
United Nations Development Program (UNDP), Turkey ranks 101 
among 109 countries in the context of women's participation 
in economic and political life according to the Gender 
Empowerment Measure (GEM). 
 
¶3.  PROPOSAL 1: WE ARE MEETING WITH WOMEN FOR A WORLD WITH NO 
VIOLENCE 
    ------------------------------- 
-------------------------------- 
 
Identification of the Problem: 
 
In a region of Turkey characterized by a deeply conservative, 
traditional, sexist, tribal social structure, with areas 
still embroiled in a violent civil conflict, women are 
suffering from domestic violence, honor killings, and lack of 
educational and vocational opportunities.  KAMER (Women's 
Center) is an active NGO with branches in 23 of these 
provinces and serves as one of the primary civil society 
organizations dedicated to assisting and empowering women. 
The project aims to provide educational instruction, 
vocational and legal rights training to women in these 
economically depressed areas, and, with its &Stop the 
Violence8 workshop activities for boys and girls will begin 
educating the new generation.  Enlisting local government and 
municipal stakeholders will strengthen collaboration and 
create a stronger support network for these women as well. 
 
Summary of the Proposed Program: 
 
In this 12-month program implemented by KAMER (Women's 
Center), 18,000 women and 6,000 children will benefit from a 
coordinated rights-awareness campaign as well as vocational 
training programs, which will be carried out in six of 
eastern Turkey's most economically disadvantaged provinces. 
This comprehensive approach aims to 1) combat gender-based 
violence, believed to be endemic in at least 30% of 
households; 2) address the region's &honor killings8 
problem; 3) educate women about their legal rights; and 4) 
empower women economically by providing vocational training 
programs.  Town hall meetings will be a platform to educate 
women about family planning, nutrition, child care and basic 
health.  Involving and educating children in this dialogue is 
vital to transforming the way the future generation thinks 
about gender equality and human rights.  KAMER will enlist 
collaboration from stakeholder institutions in each province, 
such as Bar Associations, state-funded vocational schools, 
municipal public education centers, and social services and 
child-care institutions, to weave a tighter support network 
on gender-based violence issues and women's empowerment 
programs.  Through the questionnaire and field-work 
methodology, KAMER will also collect new sociological data 
that the government and other NGOs can use to develop new 
programs. 
 
Project Description: 
 
The project will be carried out in the provinces of Kilis, 
Bitlis, Elazig, Igdir, Bingl and Agri, and will reach 18,000 
women and 3,000 children through three primary phases:  1) 
developing questionnaires and engaging/preparing 
stakeholders; 2) field work ) neighborhood visits, house 
calls, and distribution, collection and evaluation of 
questionnaires; 3) town hall meetings and legal-rights 
awareness campaigns; 4) vocational training; and 5) &stop 
the violence8 workshops for children.  Children at the 
workshop will be invited to produce artwork, which will later 
be exhibited in each city.  Coordination of the project will 
be conducted by KAMER branch offices in each province, with 
volunteers engaged to carry out house calls in tranches of 
¶300.  A final evaluation conference will be to discuss 
outcomes; the report on information evaluated based on data 
collected from the questionnaires will be presented to the 
partners, beneficiaries of the project and the media.  The 
project will touch women in very economically depressed 
areas, and places where few women have a chance to go to 
school.  Including children in the project will have a 
multiplier effect, as most women in these provinces have five 
or more children.  Vocational training will enhance 
employment opportunities for women.  Also of vital 
importance, lines of cooperation between civil society 
organizations, and local and central government stakeholders 
will be strengthened.  This increased collaboration between 
governmental and non-governmental organizations needs to be 
developed in Turkey. 
 
Detailed Budget: 
 
TOTAL PROJECT BUDGET:  $96,606 
Stipends for project volunteers, $640 per month, for six 
provinces:  $46,080 
Printing 18,000 violence questionnaires:  $3,600 
Printing 18,000 legal handouts:  $5,760 
Posters and promotional materials:  $990 
Computers and printers for vocational training:  3 provinces: 
$3,300 
Meals and incidentals for 60 volunteers doing field work and 
house visits in six provinces, $220 per month:  $13,200 
Transportation expenses for field work in six provinces $83 
per month:  $5,976 
Six stakeholder meetings:  $1,800 
60 town hall meetings for 300 women:  $3,000 
30 &Stop the Violence8 workshops for children:  $9,900 
6 final evaluation conferences:  $3,000 
 
Description of the Recipient Organization: 
 
Founded in 1997, KAMER (Women's Center) has reached more than 
40,000 women through vigorous awareness-raising activities 
and provided support (psychological, economic, and legal) for 
more than 3,000 women facing domestic violence.  In a region 
characterized by a traditional, sexist, tribal social 
structure, and embroiled in a violent civil conflict, KAMER 
serves as one of the primary civil society organizations 
dedicated to empowering women.  Organizing in all 23 
provinces of Eastern and Southeastern Anatolia and developing 
methods to combat crimes committed against women under the 
disguise of honor, KAMER has also supported about 300 women 
facing threats of &honor8 killings since 2003.  Today KAMER 
continues to contribute to improving the status of women in 
Turkey by empowering women at the local level, building the 
grassroots that serves as a watchdog for women's human 
rights, and lobbying and advocating at the state level for 
better policies and enforcement of positive legal reforms. 
 
¶4.  PROPOSAL 2:  RAISING YOUNG WOMEN 
    -------------------------------- 
Identification of the Problem: 
The proposed project targets young women between the ages of 
15 and 30 in communities within the Diyarbakir and Istanbul 
provinces of Turkey.  Diyarbakir, in the southeastern region 
of Turkey, faces many of the problems that are typical of 
other underdeveloped regions in the world.  Compared with the 
rest of Turkey, the region has had higher fertility rates and 
lower literacy rates, as well as lower school enrollment 
rates ) especially for girls ) and lower access to 
education, health care and sanitation.  According to official 
statistics, 217,845 people in Diyarbakir are illiterate. 
About 80% of these illiterate people are women who are in the 
target group of this project (TURKSTAT- Turkey Population 
Census 2008).  61% of the population in Diyarbakir is below 
age 25. (TURKSTAT- Regional Statistics TRC2 2008) 
Istanbul, in the Marmara region of Turkey, is a highly 
industrialized and densely populated region that attracts 
rural immigrants from the eastern parts of the country.  They 
migrate from villages and become isolated in the city center 
because they do not have the necessary literacy skills. 
Urban life gives requires higher literacy skills than life in 
rural areas.  With around 15 million inhabitants, the 
Istanbul metro-region has become a mega-city, ranking eighth 
out of 78 OECD metro-regions in terms of population size and 
first for population growth since the mid-1990s (OECD Policy 
Brief 2008 in 
http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/1/62/40317916.pd f).  According 
to official statistics, 458,897 in Istanbul are illiterate: 
about 65 % of these illiterate people are women who are in 
the target group of this project (TURKSTAT- Turkey Population 
Census 2008). 
Girls' education is the most important factor associated with 
age at marriage according to demographic and health surveys 
(ICRW, 2007) and women's perceptions of gender based violence 
varies widely by levels of education:  62.1% of women in 
Turkey who have not completed primary schooling think can be 
justifiable for a husband to beat his wife Hancioglu and 
Ergocmen 2003). 
Summary of the Proposed Program: 
 
The proposed project &Raising Young Women8 targets 2,550 
young girls and women aged 15-30 who have never received 
formal basic education or are primary school drop-outs in 
Diyarbakir and Istanbul.  The project sets out to provide 
functional literacy and numeric skills, increase awareness on 
women's health and citizen rights, facilitate &back to 
school8 activities to complete primary education 
qualifications through non-formal courses and provide 
guidance on gainful employment and careers to 2,550 young 
girls and women through 75 volunteer instructors.  The 
sixteen-month project is budgeted at $94.794 USD. 
The indirect beneficiaries of the program will be the young 
girls and boys who are in the communities of these young 
women.  The future families of these young women and 
particularly their daughters will benefit from the raised 
level of awareness and empowerment on the part of the program 
participants.  (Please note that the minimum age requirement 
in Turkey that NGOs are allowed to give education services is 
age 14.  According to the legal set-up in Turkey, AEV has to 
refer any younger children between the ages 10-14 to 
government schools and ask to have these children taken back 
into the education system directly (Turkish Law on National 
Education 1973).) 
The objectives of the project will be four-fold:  The first 
objective of the project will be to impart basic literacy and 
numeric skills in young women between the ages of 15-30 and 
promote gender equality and the empowerment of women by 
integrating into the literacy course-work information on 
women's rights as citizens (civil rights, marital law, 
inheritance rights) as well as sexual reproductive health, 
family planning and available health services.  The second 
objective of the project will be to facilitate the re-entry 
of young women back into the school system, thereby allowing 
recent school-dropouts to catch up with standards in 
universal primary education.  The courses will thus serve a 
remedial function and enable transition back into the school 
system in Turkey.  In order to encourage and facilitate the 
return of these young women into schools, the program will 
invite public officials who have the responsibility in the 
region to offer &open schools8 and enroll 30% of literacy 
course graduates.  Also within the framework of the program, 
70 young girls will be awarded a tuition-free scholarship for 
the open school registrations.  The third objective of the 
project will be to increase awareness of economic 
opportunities for young women by integrating into the 
literacy coursework a 3 career guidance component 
(information about different jobs, required qualifications, 
application procedures, etc.).  The career guidance component 
will aim to impart information on the importance of being 
goal-oriented and to help young girls in career planning and 
gainful employment, through career guidance presentations and 
information on job opportunities for young girls.  The fourth 
objective of the project will be to provide safe spaces for 
young women to allow them to build girls' networks within 
their communities.  The program will empower them to take 
action on their own by facilitating activities whereby they 
design and prepare social activities according to their own 
initiative.  Thus the program will also aim to help them 
achieve the first steps of self-sufficiency and leadership 
capacity through these peer networks.  Additionally, the 
literacy and empowerment program offers practical and 
functional skills training necessary in daily life, such as 
reading an electricity bill, making a grocery list or filling 
out an application form.  These parts of the program are 
designed to increase the active participation of young girls 
in society and in their lives. 
Project Description: 
 
In this 16-month program implemented by ACEV in Istanbul and 
Diyarbakir, 2,550 young girls and women will receive 13 weeks 
of literacy training in 150 groups (each comprised of 17 
young women) and acquire the tools of basic literacy and 
numeric skills as well as awareness on the rights of women 
and citizenship.  These skills will empower these girls in 
their daily interactions and everyday life.  As young women 
gain literacy skills through this project, they become more 
independent, and learn how to take better care of themselves 
and their children.  Previous quantitative evaluations of 
ACEV's functional literacy training courses for adult women 
have shown significant improvements in women's empowerment 
level when considering empowerment proxies representing 
shared decision-making, independent behavior and social 
participation (Kagitcibasi 2000).  Secondly, course 
participants will receive information and guidance on how 
they can continue with their education.  If the program is 
successful as a remedial and transition program, we aim to 
see 30% of the girls enrolled in the literacy program (765 
young women) will continue with their education by enrolling 
in the &open primary school8 system administered by the 
state for the re-entry of school drop-outs and gain primary 
school qualifications.  The peer groups in which these young 
women are placed will also serve to support this endeavor and 
to motivate them in their personal development.  Thirdly, 
course graduates will be encouraged to continue with their 
education.  According to our previous project experiences, we 
know that the registration fees of the open school can be a 
handicap for some of the young girls.  In order to overcome 
this obstacle, if the program is successful, 70 young girls 
will be awarded a tuition-free scholarship.   As a result of 
the program, 2,550 young women in Diyarbakir and Istanbul 
will receive &career guidance presentation8 in 150 groups 
and get information about different jobs and required 
qualifications.  It is assumed that this information will 
help these girls in the girls in their career planning.  As a 
result of the project, 75 volunteer leaders, selected from 
local communities, will learn how to deliver the content of 
women's empowerment programs within their own communities. 
This local capacity will be available for future rounds of 
the program to be implemented in the region. 
Detailed Budget: 
 
Human resource 
Stipends for Master Trainers for 51 sessions from $91 per 
session =  $4,641 
Stipends for Field Training Supervisors for 50 sessions from 
$583 per session =  $29,150 
Volunteer Trainers Stipends for meals and travel for 78 
courses from $145 each =  $11,310 
 
Learning Materials 
Literacy training instructor set for 75 trainers from $46 for 
each set =  $3,450 
Literacy training participant sets for 3,150 beneficiaries 
from $4 each =  $12,600 
5 Blackboard/white-board from $123 each =  $615 
300 Informational posters from $1 each =  $300 
 
Training and Supporting Activities 
Volunteer training seminar costs (stationary/hospitality 12 
days training) for 900 sessions from $5 each =  $4,500 
Seed funds for peer group activities for 150 group from $120 
each =  $18,000 
Tuition scholarships for program graduates for 70 young girls 
from $50 each =  $3,500 
 
Travel and Accommodation 
Air travel Istanbul - Diyarbakir for 8    trips from $240 
each =  $1,920 
Accommodation and per diem for 36 people from $78 each = 
2,808 
 
Evaluation 
500 Survey questionnaire from $1 each =     $500 
Reporting costs =  $1,500 
 
GRAND TOTAL =  $94,794 
Description of the Recipient Organization: 
 
Mission Turkey worked with ACEV for over a decade on various 
programs across the country and CEO Ayla Goksel is an 
International Visitor Leadership Program alumna.  ACEV is not 
only one of the most prominent NGOs in Turkey but also one of 
the most well-respected ones in the region since ACEV also 
operates in Middle-Eastern and European countries such as 
Egypt, Jordan, Bahrain, Germany, Belgium, Netherlands, and 
France.  ACEV received substantial funding from organizations 
such as UNDP, UNICEF, and UNESCO. 
 
¶5.  PROPOSAL 3: EMPOWERING RURAL WOMEN IN TURKEY 
    ---------------------- --------------------- 
Identification of the Problem: 
 
Women in rural areas continue to live under thoroughly 
adverse conditions in Turkey.  It is estimated that more than 
70 percent of women in the rural work-force are unpaid 
workers, without any kind of social security.  Many rural 
women perform heavy labor in agricultural practices as well 
as domestic duties.  Due to conservative and patriarchal 
traditions in daily life in some areas, the participation of 
women in decision making processes both in and outside of the 
household remains exceptionally limited.  Thirty-five percent 
women residing in rural areas have not completed primary 
education.  Access to health services is also very limited in 
rural areas.  On an additional note, according to the Turkish 
Statistical Institute 2005 data, the poverty rate in Turkey 
is 12 percent in urban areas whereas this figure rises to a 
much higher 32 percent rate in rural areas.  This poverty 
mostly affects rural women as men in general can often 
migrate to find employment in urban areas.  Unfortunately, in 
spite of this unfavorable picture, neither governmental nor 
non-profit organizations are able to fully deal with these 
chronic issues as much as they should.  Hence, this picture 
and the figures prove to be much more dramatic in the Eastern 
and South-Eastern regions of Turkey. 
Through this project the gender focus of the foundations 
rural development program will be enhanced and contribute to 
the empowerment of women in the villages.  It is also 
expected that implementation of the project and knowledge 
generated will encourage others in the rural development 
field to replicate similar models. 
Summary of the Proposed Program: 
This project sets out to empower rural women in the 
impoverished region of Bitlis (Kavar Basin) and create 
sustainable economic models for income generation based on 
the strengths of the women and local production and market 
characteristics.  The project will also enhance 
entrepreneurship, leadership and networking among the target 
group with training activities and provide social capacity 
building with trainings on literacy, health, hygiene, 
child-care, and legal rights.  Finally, in order to 
demonstrate a model of sustainability, the project will 
engage public-private partnerships and disseminate knowledge 
generated through the project to policy makers and other 
stakeholders to promote learning in the field of rural 
women's empowerment.  The project budget is 120.550 USD and 
amount requested from Small Grants Initiative is 70.750 USD. 
Husnu M. Ozyegin Foundation will support the rest of the 
financial costs. 
The foremost objective of the project will be to build 
capacity among rural women in new methods of production for 
income generation through the production and marketing of 
locally viable and marketable products.  After a thorough 
analysis with local women, ornamental plants and local beans 
have been chosen as products that would yield immediate 
economic benefit and ensure sustainable development. 
Ornamental plants are used widely in urban landscape 
architecture and the local municipalities are having to 
source outside of the district since they are not produced 
locally.  Thus a market already exists, and already Bitlis 
District and Tatvan County Municipalities have committed to 
buying the production of local women through this project. 
Women will set up an ornamental plants plantation and two 
greenhouses and an informal cooperative to manage this 
operation.  Bean production is traditional in the villages 
and already undertaken by women but efficiency in production 
and conditions for marketing need to be improved.  The women 
in Kavar are responsible for all the heavy workload in all 
phases from production to marketing.  The project will 
modernize bean production including washing, standardizing 
and packaging.  A small automated facility will separate 
small stones and any other undesired substances from the 
product more efficiently than women's manual efforts and 
decrease their work load.  Standardization will also increase 
the market value of the product.  Due to lack of such 
facilities in the Basin, this endemic and characteristic 
product has been losing its value in the market over the 
years.  This facility will also function effectively in 
keeping this local product alive for the local economy. 
These targeted economic activities will increase income of 
women while decreasing their workload, thereby creating time 
for other activities. 
The second objective is to enhance leadership, 
entrepreneurship and networking of rural women.  As 
participants of the economic activities described above, they 
will formulate and direct all aspects of production, 
marketing, pricing, negotiation and organization.  This 
experience will enhance their self-reliance and provide voice 
in other social and economic interactions.  They will also 
choose spokespersons and leaders amongst themselves for 
coordination of activities which will serve as a basis for 
future formal organizational models.  Women will also be 
offered entrepreneurship training to promote other local 
economic initiatives.  Currently there is no training module 
for rural women's entrepreneurship in Turkey and a new module 
will be designed and implemented.  Finally a technical visit 
to a successful rural women's cooperative will be conducted, 
enabling women to learn from peer groups and bring back 
experiences to their own villages. 
The Third objective is to improve women's awareness and 
practices in health, child-care, environment, legal rights 
and literacy through training that will be provided by ACEV 
(Mother Child Education Foundation), a national education NGO 
that has been working across Turkey and most recently in 
rural communities. 
The fourth objective is to facilitate partnerships and 
promote stakeholder engagement for sustainability and for 
this purpose HMOF has already established commitments from 
local public and private bodies such as Tatvan Chamber of 
Commerce, Tatvan County Agricultural Directorate as well as 
national bodies like AEV (Mother Child Education Foundation) 
and the Ministry of Agriculture.  This will ensure that local 
groups will support activities of the project but also assume 
ownership and sustain project benefits after the project. 
Project Description: 
This 13-month program will be carried out in Bitlis as part 
of a process that entails both income generating and capacity 
building activities. By integrating stakeholders, women 
entrepreneurship training, fundamental entrepreneurship 
training, business plan preparation, business plan 
preparation, organizational training, business development 
training, sustainable income generation, improving social 
capacity training.  The expected project outcomes are: 
a. A model that can be replicated will have been built in the 
area of empowerment of rural women 
b. The income of women in Kavar will increase by at least 100 
percent.  This development will have a positive effect on the 
local economy, reduce the work load of women, and change the 
patriarchal nature of the community to the benefit of the 
women. 
c. The workload of women will reduce by at least 25 percent. 
This spare time will be used for training and other social 
activities.  Therefore, the reduction in the workload will 
also help women improve themselves. 
d. An endemic local bean type will have been protected.  The 
production will increase by 100 percent, from 50 tons to 100 
tons; the number of producers will increase by 75 percent, 
from 50 women to 80 women producers. 
e. The idea of forming a women's organization in Kavar will 
be discussed.  The women will thus have an opportunity to 
participate in public life. 
f. Literacy among the women in Kavar will increase by 25 
percent. 
g. Women will have increased awareness on health, hygiene, 
childcare and legal rights and improved practices. 
h. The interest of both public and private bodies in the 
Kavar Basin will increase and consequently, the public and 
private investment in the region will increase. 
i. The Husnu M. Ozyegin Foundation will adopt this model in 
other rural development projects in the future and share what 
has been learned in the project with other NGOs 
j. The Husnu M. Ozyegin Foundation will attempt at extending 
and spreading the application of this model in cooperation 
with the Ministry of Agriculture.  This way, the project will 
have much greater effects in the near future. 
 
Detailed Budget: 
Human Resources 
Stipend for the Project Coordinator for 13 moths from $1,750 
each=  $22,750 (Not requested from S/GWI) 
Stipend for the Agricultural expert for 7 moths from $1,500 
each=  $10,500 (Not requested from S/GWI) 
Stipend for the agricultural marketing expert for 3 months 
from $1,000 each=  $3,000 
Stipend for the women entrepreneurship expert/trainer for 30 
days from $150 each=  $4,500 
Stipend for the evaluation expert for 1 month from $3,000 
each =  $3,000 
 
Sustainable Income Production 
Ornamental plants support seed for 10 packets from $140 each 
=  $1,400 
Technical equipment (irrigation system, water depot, 
fertilizer) =  $3,000 
1 Greenhouse (96 m2) for two facility from $3,550 each = 
$7,100 
1 Transport for 2 facilities from $150 each = $300. Requested 
$250 from S/GWI. 
 
Beans Washing & Packing Facility 
1 Beans washing machine =  $5,000 
1 Beans selecting machine =  $8,000 
1 Beans packing machine =  $10,000 
Operating expenses for 4 moths from $200 each =  $800 
Production expenses for 5 months from $400 each =  $2000 
Allocation of land and infrastructure =  $12,000  (Not 
requested from S/GWI) 
 
Improving Social Capacity 
Trainer fees for 30 people per day from $150 for each day = 
$4,500 (Not requested from S/GWI) 
Transportation for 10 people from $200 each = $2,000 
Accommodation for 30 people for 35 days = $1,050 
 
Technical Visit 
Transportation for 1 trip =  1,000 
Accommodation for 30 days from $75 each =  $2,250 
Per diem for 30 days from $30 each =  $900 
 
Printing 
 
2 Design (Turkish/English) from $1,500 each =  $3,000 
Print (Turkish/Eng. 1000 each) for 2000 copies from $3 each = 
 $6,000 
 
Administration 
Office, stationary, communication for 13 moths from $500 each 
=  $6,500 
 
Total funding requested from S/GWI =  $70,750 
Total funding from other sources =  $49,750 
Husnu Ozyegin Foundation =  $33,250 
ACEV Mother Child Education Foundation =  $4,500 
Beneficiary group =  $12,000 
Description of the Recipient Organization: 
 
Established in 1990 by Husnu M. Ozyegin the Husnu M. Ozyegin 
Foundation aims to foster the social, cultural and economic 
development of Turkey through the creation and support of 
grants, programs and facilities in the fields of education, 
health, cultural heritage and community development. 
Investments have focused primarily on education as the 
Foundation believes the enhancement of human capital will 
contribute most to societal development.  HMOF builds schools 
and girls dormitories in impoverished communities to promote 
access to education, provides financial assistance to 
university students and implements youth empowerment 
programs.  The Foundation's health investments have 
concentrated on rehabilitation facilities and services for 
post-disaster communities, juvenile substance abusers and 
children with special needs.  The Foundation has constructed 
63 facilities serving 30,000 students annually and has 
disbursed over 10.000 scholarships for financially needy 
students.  The Foundation has 9 full-time staff and an annual 
budget in the region of $3.7m.  Post is very familiar with 
the foundation, its founder, staff and capacity to carry out 
successful projects throughout Turkey. 
 
¶6.  PROPOSAL 4: TRAINING AND NETWORK DEVELOPMENT TO DEVELOP A 
SYSTEMATIC RESPONSE TO VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN IN TURKEY 
    --------------  ------------------ 
-----------------------  ------------------------- 
-------------------------- 
Identification of the Problem: 
 
The project aims to develop a systematic response through 
training and networking in order to eventually eliminate 
violence against women in Turkey.   A nationwide study dated 
2007, indicated that 34% of women were abused by their 
husbands.  Presently (January 2010), there are 54 shelters 
operating in Turkey, a country of 72.5 million.  Shelter 
personnel and the Turkish Justice Ministry agree on the need 
for better training, and a well coordinated professional 
network of service providers to achieve effective services 
for victims of sexual crimes and other forms of abuse. 
Summary of Proposed Program: 
 
The 2-phase 18-months program aims at improving and 
strengthening a more systematic model of responding to 
violence against women.  It provides three levels of training 
for service and care providers.   During the 1st phase, 
general/family practice physicians offer appropriate 
intervention and referral to women presenting at public 
health clinics, family doctor's offices, emergency rooms and 
ambulances with signs of abuse. The 2nd phase is for the 
staff at shelter houses and women's counseling centers. 
Eventually, the 3rd phase provides intensive specialty 
training and supervision for psychotherapists, to offer 
trauma treatment psychotherapy groups for victims of sexual 
abuse and serious domestic violence. 
Project Description: 
 
The towns involved will be capital Ankara, Izmir and 
Diyarbakir.  In Izmir and Ankara, the project team already 
has well-established relationships with the workers in the 
shelter houses and women's counseling centers.  As a result 
of this project the NGO aims to achieve: 
a. To have an interagency coordination network to systematize 
the work of agencies in those three towns; 
b. Around 180 physicians will be trained to identify abused 
women and to refer them to relevant agencies; 
c. Employees of around 60 shelters will be trained for 
providing better support and services to abused women; 
d. Twelve psychotherapy professionals will provide effective 
trauma treatment for women who have been seriously affected 
by sexual or physical abuse. 
The project goals include: 
a. Initiation of a coordinated interagency network for 
agencies providing services to abused women in the three 
towns.  Phase I and II will organize and follow up on local 
round table meetings of representative service providers for 
victims of sexual and physical violence. 
b. To develop and implement a training program for 
family/general practice physicians. Level 1- for first 
responders:  Recognition and assessment of the symptoms of 
trauma in women and appropriate referrals for further 
treatment. 
c. To develop and implement training programs in shelter 
houses. Level 2 - for shelter house and counseling center 
workers: Providing appropriate levels of support and 
empowerment to women who are survivors of traumatic abuse and 
domestic violence.  Skill building and defining professional 
limits. 
d. To initiate a national training program for trauma 
therapists.  Level 3- for professional psychotherapists: 
offering specialized training and supervision in group trauma 
treatment for qualified clinicians. 
 
Detailed Budget: 
 
Phase I: 
Stipend for the full-time project director for 9 months from 
$2,800 per month =  $25,200 
Stipend for the part-time project consultant for 9 months 
from $1,600 per month =  $14,400 
Level 1, 3 trainers for 48 hours from $20 per hour =  $2880 
Level 2, 2 trainers for 288 hours from $20 per hour =  $5760 
Level 3, 3 trainers for 24 hours from $20 per hour =  $1440 
Council meetings: Air tickets for 2 trips for 2 people for 2 
cities from $200 each = $1,600 
Level 1: 3 experts for 2 cities for 1 trip from $200 each = 
$1,200 
Level 2: 2 experts for 2 cities for 2 trips from $200 each = 
$1,600 
Level 3: 3 experts for 2 cities for 1 trip from $200 each = 
$1,200 
Supplies (Stationary, copying, printing, postage) =  $200 
Communications (Telephone and internet costs) $100 per month 
=  $900 
4 Clinical office space for level 3 training form $40 each = 
$160 
6 Meeting rooms for 2 meetings for 3 distr. From $50 each = 
$300 
Project office rent for 9 months from $710 each =  $6,390 
Taxes =  $1,278 
 
Phase II: 
Stipend for the full-time project director for 6 months from 
$2,800 per month =  $16,800 
Stipend for the part-time project consultant for 6 months 
from $1,600 per month =  $9,600 
Level 1, 3 trainers for 48 hours from $20 per hour =  $2880 
Level 2, 2 trainers for 288 hours from $20 per hour =  $5760 
Level 3, 3 trainers for 24 hours from $20 per hour =  $1440 
Level 1: 3 experts for 2 cities for 1 trip from $200 each = 
$1,200 
Level 2: 2 experts for 2 cities for 2 trips from $200 each = 
$1,600 
Level 3: 3 experts for 2 cities for 1 trip from $200 each = 
$1,200 
Supplies (Stationary, copying, printing, postage) = $200 
Communications (Telephone and internet costs) $100 per month 
=  $900 
Meeting room for 1 meeting n central district =  $50 
6 Project office rents from $710 each =  $4,260 
Taxes =  $1,278 
 
Grand Total: 
Phase I: $70,030 
Phase II: $45,590 
Grand Total Project Cost: $108,620 
The grant requested is for $97,820. The applying NGO itself 
contributes $10,600 to the program. 
Recipient Organization: 
 
In November of 2008, an experienced team of two Turkish 
psychiatrists and an American psychologist established 
themselves as Individual and Societal Mental Health Research 
and Education Association to study and develop effective 
treatment methods for traumatized women living in Turkey. 
The team has been conducting cross-cultural trauma treatment 
research, consultation and training with therapists and 
shelter house workers in Ankara.  The clinical team donated 
their first 14 months of research, consultation and training 
services on a volunteer.  In January of 2010, the Finland 
Embassy provided funding to the Association for it to 
complete the trauma treatment therapy research and initial 
design for a professional training program. 
 
¶7.  PROPOSAL 5:  Producing Solar Cookers by Women's 
Collectives 
    ---------------------------- ----------------------------- 
Identification of the problem Statement 
Although unemployment rates for women in Turkey have declined 
from 34.1% in 1990 to 24.8% in 2007, female unemployment 
remains high and the rate of women without work is higher in 
rural regions (32.7%) than in urban areas (20.2%) (TurkStat 
2009) 
The main reasons of female unemployment include low levels of 
education, gender discriminative practices, and traditional 
and socially accepted perceived roles for women such as child 
care and housework.  As a result, women are more likely to 
work in low-paid, temporary jobs without social insurance or 
gain income through alternative ways in the informal economy. 
 These might include handicrafts or other vocations that 
don't meet the market needs or don't provide capacity to 
sustain a business.  Furthermore, young women from low-income 
families in urban areas graduating from technical vocational 
schools (electricity, carpentry, engine maintenance, etc.) do 
not have job or entrepreneurship opportunities due to 
discrimination of women from technical vocations 
traditionally considered specific to men. 
Rural women play critical role in tackling environmental 
challenges.  They are the most vulnerable groups to climate 
changes and other environmental challenges.  As care 
providers and with their livelihood responsibilities as small 
farmers (cooking with wood, collecting natural plants, etc.) 
they are the important users of natural resources.  In 
addition to their roles as producers and teaching and 
conveying knowledge on use of natural resources, they have a 
potentially key role in providing sustainable livelihood 
practices for the future.  However, there is a need to find 
ways in order to link climate change and environmental 
concerns to their daily practices so that they can develop 
long term awareness on climate change issues while improving 
their potential for income generation and sustainable 
employment. 
Summary of the Proposed Program: 
 
Based on the above mentioned problems, needs, and the 
potential, the Foundation for the Support of Women's Work 
(FSWW) proposes a project to increase the awareness of rural 
women of climate change issues, integrated with an economic 
empowerment model connecting environmental concerns into 
their daily practices through an innovative and environment 
that teaches cooperative business practices and leadership 
skills in the following way: 
a. Establish an enterprise for the production and sale of 
solar cookers to be run by low-income women's collectives in 
Istanbul and three regional sale/distribution units in Mardin 
(Southeast Region), Bandirma (Aegean Region) and Hatay 
(Southern Region).  The enterprise will be run by a 
grassroots women's organization (Ilk adim Women's 
Cooperative).  Twenty young women graduates of Technical 
Vocational Schools will be involved in production and 
management; 
b. Establish regional distribution/marketing units with local 
partner organizations (women's cooperatives that FSWW is 
already working with) in three cities - Bandirma Antakya and 
Mardin - where there is potential in terms of climate and 
number of small farmer households; 
c. Train 60 women to sell of solar cookers door-to-door 
selling in their cities and nearby cities, to be paid on 
commission; 
d. Provide 50 women with skills on technical production, 
entrepreneurship, business management, marketing, to provide 
increased income; 
e. Ensure that 1000 rural women begin using solar cooking in 
place of traditional cooking, reducing the use of energy 
resources such as coal contributing to climate change; 
f. Provide leadership training to at least 100 women and 
encourage them to organize community platforms towards more 
resilient communities against climate change; 
g. Increase knowledge of and provide information to 2000 
women and 100 local stakeholders in rural areas on climate 
change issues; 
h. Establish Local Advisory Boards in the cities to support 
regional distribution/sale units and community 
leader/saleswomen in their activities by providing expertise, 
resources and networking opportunities; 
i. Contribute to public awareness about climate change 
through publicizing the women's involvement in solar cooking 
as producers and users; 
j. Increase the capacity of Qe partner organizations to 
reach out and organize poor rural women  around climate 
change and related economic opportunities, to carry out 
diverse project activities, to manage an enterprise and 
distribution/marketing channels, and to strengthen 
partnerships among themselves 
 
Project Description: 
 
a. This 12 month project will be implemented by FSWW and its 
project partners:  Ilkadim Women's Cooperative in Istanbul, 
Bandirma Women's Cooperative, Ipekyolu Women's Cooperative in 
Mardin, and members of women's initative for Women's 
Cooperative in Hatay. The project will be implemented in 
Istanbul, MARDIN, Hatay, and Bandirma. 
b. The training program on solar cooker production/marketing 
will be prepared, to include topics like solar energy, its 
usage fields, products working with solar energy, solar 
cooker types, materials, workmanship, production stages, 
marketing, customer-product relations etc. 
c. FSWW will use its training program on leadership, which is 
carried out at the national level with the support of the 
Women's Learning Partnership in Washington, D.C., and 
includes training on gender issues, will be adapted to rural 
women's needs.  A manual will be prepared. 
d. Discussion seminars on climate change will be prepared on 
how to facilitate large meetings with diverse groups (women 
and local stake holders) and discussions on climate change; 
how to tackle and adapt to these changes; linking it with 
women's role in sustainable livelihood options and collective 
initiatives with the goal of creating resilient communities. 
The short-term experts will prepare a simple seminar programs 
on climate change. 
e. The enterprise will be located in Istanbul due to the 
availability of technical expertise.  The physical space will 
be provided by the Ilk Adim Women's Cooperative, which will 
be adapted specifically for this purpose.  The equipments and 
tools (hammer, rasp, bow saw, drills, etc.) for 20 women to 
be used in the training and production process during the 
project will be purchased. 
f. A job description and working schedule will be developed 
for the management and production part of the enterprise. 
The capacity of the enterprise will start small and will be 
increased gradually.  The trained women will work in shifts 
of 10 persons in order to keep them in the production and 
increase their skills.  When the marketing and sale quantity 
grows, up to 30 of the trained women will be included in the 
production altogether.  The short term technical experts will 
work in the enterprises for quality control of the products. 
 
g. The enterprise will be collectively owned by women through 
the formal ownership of Ilk Adim Women's Cooperative.  The 
women working in the enterprise will become members of the 
cooperative.  They will be paid for their labor and the 
profit as will be reinvested in the enterprise again and 
other marketing and awareness-raising activities.  Women will 
work for small fees till the enterprise makes enough profit 
for decent salaries for full time workers.  As such, the 
initial operating expenses will be covered by the project and 
the income will be used to sustain the enterprise. 
 
Announcement of the Project and building local partnerships: 
a. This activity will start in other cities by the end of 3rd 
month, when the sample solar cookers are being produced. 
Meetings will be held with local authorities, chambers, 
private sector and local universities and NGOs to identify 
local partners in the activities of awareness raising, 
training and marketing in 3 cities (Hatay, Mardin, Bandirma 
which will function as focal points for the project 
activities.  Local Advisory Bodies will be formed in each 
location to carry out the project in the rural parts of their 
cities and also to expand to neighboring towns. 
b. Setting up the regional marketing/sale distribution units: 
c. The marketing strategy will be based on door-to-door 
selling.  Buyers will be allowed to make monthly payments 
since the price of the solar cooker will be more expensive 
than what they already use.  For this, in the three cities 
selected, the partner women's cooperatives, with the support 
of local Advisory Bodies, will set up regional sale 
distribution units.  They will prepare locations for stocking 
the solar cooker and select a woman as regional sale 
coordinator and 20 saleswomen who will sell the solar 
cookers.  The saleswomen will receive stipends for their 
travel expenses and commissions based on the number of solar 
cookers they sell.  They will be provided with job 
description and performance measures. 
 
Training of sale women as community leaders on climate change: 
The women involved in the marketing activities of the project 
will also be expected to act as community leaders.  In each 
city, around 100 women, including the 20 saleswomen, 
cooperative members in charge of the project and regional 
distributors, will be provided with leadership training 
program (6 days for each group with around 10 women each), 
which also includes gender issues and climate change topics, 
in order to enable and motivate them act as community leaders 
in climate change issues and organize and facilitate 
community information meetings towards  building collective 
initiatives for more resilient  communities. 
Detailed Budget: 
 
Salaries/Fees: 
Project Coordinator for 12 months from  $1200 per month = 
$14,400 
Marketing Coordinator for 9 months from $1000 per month = 
$9,000 
Regional Distributors (3 persons x 6 months) for 18 months 
from $300 each =  $5,400 
Stipends for meals and travel for 20 saleswomen/women in 
production for 9 months from $40 each day =  $7200 
Expert trainers for solar cooker production for 60 days from 
$100 each =  $6000 
Short Term Experts (training, information meetings, 
enterprise management, marketing, leadership training, 
quality management etc.) for 60 days from $100 each =  $6,000 
Travel expenses (the project team, experts, trainers sale 
coordinators, Exchange travels and per diem, etc.) for  12 
months from $ 600 per month =  $7,200 
 
Costs of Establishing the Enterprise: 
Space arrangement, restoration, utility installation Item = 
$3800 
20 Establishment of the solar energy atelier (the equipment 
like counters, tables, mills etc., tools like rulers, tapes, 
protractors, hammers, bow saws, drills, rasps cutler, etc. 
for preparation/ production/ mounting for 20 person) from 
$500 each =  $10,000 
 
Costs of Purchasing Supply and Labor: 
The costs of materials (400 solar cookers) 500 item from $34 
each =  $17,000 
Stipends for meals and travel for 10 women to work in the 
enterprise until its profitable     for 6 months from $200 
each =   $12,000 
Visibility materials from $0,2 each = $2000 
 
TOTAL = $100,000 
Description of the Recipient Organization: 
 
Mission Turkey has worked with FSWW over a decade.  FSWW is 
one of the most well-known and successful NGOs in Turkey. 
They are the pioneer of micro-credit in Turkey.  FSWW has 
developed many projects, received substantial funding from 
Turkish, European and U.S. resources (e.g., Catholic Relief 
Services, the CitiGroup Foundation, the European Union, 
Women's Learning Partnership, etc.) and has reached out to 
women across Turkey in some of its the most disadvantaged and 
undeserved areas. 
Foundation for the Support of Women's Work (FSWW), 
established in 1986, is a non-profit, non-governmental 
organization.  It aims to support low-income women groups in 
order to improve the quality of their lives and their 
communities and their leadership.  FSWW works with around 60 
formal and informal grassroots women groups all over Turkey 
and focuses on low-income areas of Istanbul, the Marmara 
earthquake region and the East and Southeast part of Turkey. 
It received public interest organization8 status in 2001 
from the cabinet and has a tax exemption.  It has 23 
full-time and 5 part-time staff and around 20 regular 
volunteers and consultative bodies for its programs. 
 
¶8.  PROPOSAL 6: THE PROJECT OF WOMEN WHO DIRECT OUR FUTURE 
    ------------------------- ---------------------------- 
 
Southeastern Turkey's Batman province is deeply impoverished, 
with high rates of female adult literacy, high birthrates, 
forced marriages, domestic violence and honor killings. 
Batman is one of nine provinces encompassed in the GAP 
(Southeastern Anatolia Project), a regional economic and 
sociological action plan based on the concept of sustainable 
development.  The Turkish Government's GAP Action Plan 
envisions using irrigation, agribusiness, hydroelectric 
energy, and state-run community education centers called 
CATOMs to increase the standard of living in the region.  The 
NGO author of this proposal, the Batman Association for the 
Social Improvement of Women (KTGD), will capitalize on the 
existing CATOM infrastructure and facility to launch 
vocational training, health education and literacy courses 
for 1,000 women. 
 
Summary of the Proposed Program 
 
In this 12-month program implemented by Batman's KTGD, 1,000 
women between ages 16 and 45 will benefit from literacy, 
vocational, health education and legal rights counseling and 
training.  Additionally, rural women who are victims of 
violence, who have never left their villages or gone to the 
cinema, eaten at a restaurant, or entered a shopping area 
will be shuttled into urban areas for urban exposure.  This 
will enrich their lives, educate them, and aid in the 
rural/urban integration process.  This project will help 
ensure that civil society ties continue to be strengthened 
between the community, state administrators of the GAP, and 
local municipal officials.  The multiplier effect of training 
1,000 women to improve their economic circumstances will be 
considerable as it will affect large households that average 
seven-to-nine people. 
 
Project Description: 
 
Batman KTGD will use two existing CATOMs in the Petrolkent 
and Yavuzselim districts as the project site, thereby 
eliminating costs associated with rent, furnishings, and 
equipment.  The program will focus on the following: 1) basic 
education and literacy training; 2) vocational training, to 
include handicrafts such as embroidery, painting, carpentry, 
glass blowing, sewing and clothing design, child care 
training and credentialing, home economics, and computer 
skills; 3) civil rights and legal training by local Bar 
Association members; and 4) health education, to include 
person health and hygiene, family planning, mother-child 
issues, and communication.  Many ethnically Kurdish women do 
not speak Turkish, so translation services will be provided 
to those women.  Project coordinator and volunteers will 
promote the project in communities and enlist women from the 
Huzur, Yesiltepe, Iluh, Cay, Besevler, Pazaryeri, Guneykent, 
Seyyitler, Petrolkent, Karsiyaka, Hurriyet, Petrol, Bayindir, 
and Yavuzselim parishes to benefit from the training.  A 
minibus will be rented to shuttle women from homes to the 
CATOM centers.  One thousand women will receive course 
completion certificates.  Their self-esteem and employment 
opportunities will be enhanced substantially, and they will 
serve as examples to their children and communities.  Rural 
women who are victims of violence, who have never left their 
villages or gone to the cinema, eaten at a restaurant, or 
entered a shopping area will be shuttled into urban areas for 
urban exposure.  This will aid in helping mesh urban and 
rural communities with active examples of human rights, rule 
of law and gender equality.  Overall the project supports GAP 
action plan efforts to: 1) create opportunities for women to 
become aware of their problems and launch initiatives for 
their solution; 2) contribute to employment opportunities by 
empowering women; 3) encourage women to take part in the 
community; and 3) reinforce the idea of gender-balanced 
development. 
 
Detailed Budget: 
 
TOTAL PROJECT BUDGET:   $79,500 
Project Coordinator salary for 12 months = $9,000 
Civil rights trainers and human rights training, 12 months = 
$2,000 
Communication trainer (sociologist), 12 months = $1,280 
Literacy trainer, 12 months = $3,000 
Machinery trainer, 12 months = $6,000 
Sewing, design, embroidery trainer, 12 months = $6,000 
Computer skills instructor, 12 months = $3,200 
Art teacher, 12 months = $2,500 
Child care training and credentialing, 12 months = $6,000 
Legal advisors for victims of violence, 12 months = $6,000 
Social services counselor, 12 months (full time) = $7,500 
Vehicle rental for 10 months = $5,000 
Office supplies and supplies for courses (paper, pens, 
folders, etc.), 12 months = $6,000 
200 Training books = $4,000 
400 Women Rights Books = $1,200 
Translation costs = $2,000 
Town Hall meetings, beginning and end of project = $1,500 
10 Promotional materials for participation ) posters, 
banners =  $1,000 
1000 Brochures and handouts for classes = $2,000 
Social activities for 216 women victims of violence, 12 
months = $4,320 
 
Description of the Recipient Organization: 
 
KTGD was established in 2005, and has 68 active members. 
KTGD has worked on grant programs sponsored by the Government 
of Turkey, the World Bank and the European Union, including 
projects focused on societal reintegration of female victims 
of domestic violence, enhancing female employment and 
entrepreneurship, and ensuring women take part in the public 
sphere and benefit more from available services.  The 
organization has an excellent working relationship with CATOM 
and GAP administrators as well as municipal actors. 
Jeffrey 
 
           "Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at http://www.intelink.s 
gov.gov/wiki/Portal:Turkey"