10ANKARA102
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Fri Jan 22 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO4977
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0102/01 0221111
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 221111Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1805
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0257
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6808
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4419
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7745
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7658
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4256
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000102 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
FRIDAY, JANUARY 22, 2010 
 
Media Highlights: 
 
Breaking News: All-news broadcaster NTV reported 120 suspects have 
been detained in "simultaneous security operations" held early 
Friday morning targeting al-Qaeda in 16 provinces including 
Istanbul, Malatya, Mersin, Van and Sanliurfa. 
 
How the US is Playing 
 
Vice-President Biden to Iraq Prior to the Elections in March 
(Hurriyet) 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports that the Iraqi Election Commission 
"black list" forbidding 500 pro-Baas names from joining the 
elections as candidates which caused unrest in the country was 
supported by President Talabani.  US Vice President Joseph Biden 
will travel to the region in order to find a solution to the 
situation, adds Hurriyet. 
 
Clinton's Internet Freedom Speech 
NTV calls it a "US - China Verbal Duel" in one of many numerous 
on-line articles about the speech.  While reporting on the speech, 
headlines have focused more on  China's response with TRT 
highlighting "China Reacts to Clinton's Internet Comments," Haber7 
reporting "China Denounced the US Accusations on Internet" and 
Milliyet focusing on "China Responds to US Accusations."  Mainstream 
HaberTurk calls it the "International Google Crisis," and opines 
that "the internet giant Google caused a crisis between China and 
the US."  Secretary Clinton warned there would be consequences for 
hackers after a series of cyber attacks on US internet firms, 
including search giant Google. HaberTurk notes that in her speech on 
internet freedom, Secretary Clinton said "countries or individuals 
that engage in cyber attacks should face consequences and 
international condemnation." 
 
Prejudice toward Islam in the US (Sabah) 
According to the American polling company Gallup's survey, 43 
percent of the Americans are prejudice towards Islam.  Mainstream 
Sabah also reports that18 percent are prejudiced towards 
Christianity, 15 percent towards Judaism and 14 percent towards 
Buddhism. 
 
Turkey-Armenia.  "The US Intervenes in Protocol Crisis" (HaberTurk) 
Mainstream HaberTurk reports an upcoming meeting between Secretary 
Clinton and FM Davutoglu in London to discuss the problems over 
protocols.  In a follow up story about the latest on Turkey-Armenia 
normalization protocols, HaberTurk reports: "Ankara immediately 
contacted Washington and expressed its disappointment regarding the 
future phase of protocol process, and asked the US engagement in 
this issue.  Secretary Clinton is expected to check Yerevan's pulse 
and get more details about the Constitutional Court ruling.  After 
that, Clinton and Davutoglu will have a meeting next week in 
London." 
 
In the Headlines 
 
Armenia Warns of Breakdown in Turkey Reconciliation (Hurriyet, CNN 
Turk online) 
Hurriyet and CNN Turk websites report Friday morning Armenia's 
Foreign Minister Edward Nalbandian warned that historic efforts to 
establish ties with Turkey may break down, blaming Ankara for 
obstructing the process.  "If Turkey is not ready to ratify the 
protocols, if it continues to speak in ultimatums, set preconditions 
and obstruct the process, then I do not exclude that negotiations 
will break down," Nalbandian said at a press conference in Yerevan 
Friday morning. 
 
Civilian Jurisdiction over Military Personnel Cancelled (Milliyet) 
All papers and TV channels report that the Constitutional Court 
unanimously cancelled a law allowing trial of military personnel at 
civilian courts.  The Constitutional Court rejected the arrangement 
which was passed by AKP government on June 26, 2009 making an 
 
ANKARA 00000102  002 OF 003 
 
 
amendment to article 250 of the Law of Criminal Procedure.  With 
this annulment, many cases from Ergenekon to Cosmic Room, will be 
transferred to military courts, Milliyet notes. 
 
'Sledgehammer' Allegations: "Military Denied, Prosecutor Intervened" 
(Cumhuriyet) 
Turkish General Staff (TGS) issued a statement yesterday denying the 
leftist Taraf newspaper's claims that under the Balyoz 
(Sledgehammer) operation, a coup atmosphere was planned by attacks 
on mosques, and said that "such allegations would serve those who 
are trying to escalate tension in the society."  The TGS stressed in 
the statement that the mentioned plan-seminar was included in the 
General Staff's concerted maneuvers for the years of 2003-2006. 
Hurriyet and Cumhuriyet report that Istanbul prosecutors launched an 
investigation regarding the documents delivered by Taraf. 
 
Editorials on 'Sledgehammer Plan' 
Pundits across the board agree on the negative impacts of 
"Sledgehammer Plan" and find the TGS statement "unsatisfactory." 
Sedat Ergin in mainstream Hurriyet calls it "shameful if it is all 
true" while Fikret Bila of mainstream Milliyet expresses 
disappointment: "TGS statement should have been more explicit and 
more satisfactory."  Similarly, Islamist Zaman's Mustafa Unal calls 
the TGS statement "weak" and advises that "General Basbug should 
start an image-restoration plan and implement it immediately." 
Questioning military's overall responsibilities, Islamist Yeni 
Safak's Fehmi Koru wonders: "How come the military designs war-game 
plans by creating internal enemies instead of focusing on external 
threats?  In its statement, the military tried to clarify this 
argument but it was an explanation which needed to be explained." 
Mainstream Vatan's Gungor Mengi also calls the army "to be proactive 
instead of defensive" and he finds the TGS statement unsatisfactory. 
 Murat Yetkin in liberal Radikal brings up another dimension to the 
debate by saying: "This is the time to discuss and redefine the 
military's role and responsibilities including the protection of the 
Turkish Republic." 
 
Haiti.  "Happiness After the Miracle" (Radikal) 
Liberal Radikal is one of the few papers still giving prominent 
coverage to the Haiti story while highlighting the rescue after 7 
days of a 5 year old child on its front page.  In "The Name of the 
Miracle: AKUT," mainstream Milliyet gives credit to Turkish search 
and rescue team, AKUT, which pulled a woman alive from under the 
rubble of a supermarket seven days after the Haiti earthquake. 
Milliyet reports that "AKUT was working together with French and 
Haitian teams when they pulled 24 year old woman alive who was 
trapped under rubble." Liberal Radikal notes, "Turkish teams rescued 
six Haitians in nine days." Other small inside articles carry 
warnings about children's situation with leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet in "Orphans May End Up At the Hands of Human 
Traffickers," carrying the statement that "UNICEF is concerned about 
the safety of the Haiti's orphans and says, they are also targets of 
kidnappers and sex traffickers."  Mainstream Milliyet carries a 
small story reporting that the "US is sending more troops and will 
increase the number of US troops in Haiti to around 16,000."  While 
noting in the same article that "Venezuela and Bolivia harshly 
criticize the US of 'stacking' troops in the quake hit country," 
Milliyet's focus is on the rescues and the reports that were so 
prominent 2 days ago are  now mere references. 
 
Gul: "We Cannot Sweep Problems under the Carpet" (Sabah) 
Papers report President Gul delivered a speech at a gathering of the 
Ankara Chamber of Industry.  Gul said "stability" does not mean 
"authoritarian rule."  He said he took pride in the "deepening 
democracy" in Turkey, stressing Turkey still had some distance to 
cover.  "What we went through 20-30 years ago is still fresh in 
everyone's memories," emphasized Gul, and called on everyone, 
including the political parties, to adopt "constructive" positions. 
 
 
Businesswoman Boyner Elected to Lead TUSIAD 
 
ANKARA 00000102  003 OF 003 
 
 
Media outlets report Turkey's leading business organization TUSIAD 
Thursday elected a businesswoman, Umit Boyner, as its new chairman. 
Boyner told TUSIAD members in Istanbul of the group's determination 
to pursue full EU membership for Turkey.  Boyner emphasized TUSIAD 
supports "full democratization," saying Turkey did not want to be 
governed by a "Coup d'etat Constitution" anymore.  She also called 
for the annulment of the 10 percent election threshold.  "We wish to 
strengthen our democracy and elevate our wealth level," said Boyner. 
 
 
Poll: AKP Votes below 30 Percent (Cumhuriyet) 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet carries a survey held by Sonar 
company, conducted in 15 provinces from January 3-13 with 
"face-to-face" interviews with 3,000 respondents.  If parliamentary 
elections were held today, the distribution of votes would be as 
follows: AKP 29.50 percent, CHP 27.11, MHP 20.41, and BDP 6.28. 
Sonar said for the first time, the ruling AKP has fallen below 30 
percent, and stressed a "coalition government" without the AKP would 
be possible. 
 
TV Spotlight (CNN Turk) 
 
Police have detained around 60 suspects in operations in the 
provinces of Istanbul, Van Batman and Diyarbakir over accusations of 
membership and aiding of the PKK. 
 
Former state tobacco and liquor monopoly Tekel workers gave a hiatus 
to their hunger strike for three days. 
 
The Turkish Parliament approved Thursday a bill stipulating 
full-time employment of doctors working in state hospitals, ending 
their right to work in private clinics. 
 
On January 25, President Gul will bring together the presidents of 
Afghanistan and Pakistan in Istanbul. 
 
Jordanian Foreign Minister Nasser Judeh will visit Ankara on Friday 
to meet his Turkish counterpart Ahmet Davutoglu. 
 
Government Spokesman Cemil Cicek has announced the government 
adopted a four-year action plan for fighting corruption. 
 
UNSYG Ban Ki-Moon will visit Cyprus on February 2. 
 
Former British foreign secretary Jack Straw has testified before the 
Iraq inquiry set up to investigate Britain's role in the US-led 
invasion. 
 
Turkish Airlines (THY) has signed a sponsorship agreement with 
British soccer club Manchester United, weeks after signing a similar 
contract with Spain's Barcelona. 
 
JEFFREY