10BEIJING377
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS, IRAN
Fri Feb 12 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO1961
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #0377 0430700
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 120700Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8098
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS BEIJING 000377 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON SENV KGHG KMDR OPRC CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS, IRAN 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS 
 
a. "Sino-U.S. competition will see who changes its growth method 
first" 
 
The People's Daily-sponsored and internationally-focused commercial 
news publication Global Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(02/12)(pg 14): "Both 
the United States and China are seeking new advantages [solutions] 
for their respective domestic situations.  President Hu Jintao 
emphasized in his speech at the ministerial-level, main leader's 
conference the importance of stepping up the transformation of 
China's economic development method.  This policy is a prerequisite 
for China to gain new economic high ground within international 
competition and gain new advantages in the post-crisis era. 
Although Obama just announced his intent to sell arms to Taiwan, as 
his State of the Union Address said, in 2010 employment will be the 
most important task for the Obama administration.  The U.S. and 
China are both a part of each other's big international strategy. 
To a certain extent, the two countries' economic transformations are 
complementary to each other and are each other's cause and result. 
If the two do not accelerate the pace of their domestic economic 
adjustment, they will be unable to cooperate on global issues, deal 
with climate change or new energy development.  However, their 
bilateral cooperation will bring new friction and long-term 
competition.  Despite this, the possibility of a 'Sino-U.S. Cold 
War' in fact can be ruled out.  Even so, after a period of time the 
two countries always step away from sensitive issues, like Taiwan or 
Tibet.  In the long run, time will be on China's side.  This has 
been proven by a number of past rounds of the Sino-U.S. 
competition." 
 
b. "The use of RMB internationalization to fight against U.S. 
pressure" 
 
The China Radio International sponsored newspaper World News Journal 
(Shijie Xinwenbao) (02/12) (pg 2): "The biggest constraint on a 
country's capacity to act is its 'asymmetric dependence.' 
Considering China's economic weight, as well as the decline of U.S. 
economic strength, China's huge holdings of U.S dollar reserves and 
U.S. government bonds have made the U.S. rely on China to maintain 
the dollar's hegemony.  Obviously, for the United States, continuing 
to promote China's dependence on the dollar is in line with its 
interests.  The United States is trying to get China's foreign 
reserve assets to shrink, so that China's "financial nuclear weapon" 
will be automatically disarmed.  The best way to counter U.S. 
pressure against China's interests is not to fight a trade war with 
the U.S., which will cause less harm to the U.S., while costing 
China dearly.  The most effective and most likely fundamental 
solution to the issue lies in accelerating the push for RMB 
internationalization." 
 
¶2. IRAN 
 
"Iran will end up in a tragic position for being so stubbornly 
hard-line" 
 
The People's Daily-sponsored and internationally-focused commercial 
news publication Global Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(02/12)(pg 14): "In 
principle, under the necessary circumstances China does not oppose 
sanctioning Iran, but China proceeds in a very cautious manner.  The 
international community seems to think the ball on the Iran issue is 
now in China's court, but in fact, the ball has never been on 
China's side, but on Iran's side.  Iran is the major player for the 
Iran issue [its own issue].  China embraces two principles on the 
Iran issue: first, maintaining the authority of a nuclear 
nonproliferation system; and second, advocating a political 
resolution to the Iran issue and avoiding any excessive and 
unnecessary sanctions against Iran.  By now, China-Iran cooperation 
is win-win and mutually beneficial.  Because China treats Iran as a 
friend, China asked Iran to take an acceptable stance in the 
international society.  If Iran is stubbornly taking a hard-line 
stance, Iran's nuclear issue will definitely end up in a tragically. 
 China maintains friendly relationships with all the Middle East 
countries.  It hopes to maintain peaceful and normal relations with 
four main ethnic nations in the region and doesn't hope to incur any 
new conflicts.  China understands Iran's hope of possessing nuclear 
deterrence.  China's nuclear deterrence has also been developed 
under the West's pressure.  But time changes, China and Iran, who 
both sign non-nuclear proliferation treaty, should obey it." 
 
HUNTSMAN