10BEIJING230
MEDIA REACTION: INTERNET FREEDOM, CHINA POLICY
Thu Jan 28 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO0115
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #0230/01 0280850
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 280850Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7808
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000230 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON SENV KGHG KMDR OPRC CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: INTERNET FREEDOM, CHINA POLICY 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. INTERNET FREEDOM 
 
a. "The White House started the 'Internet War' to prepare for 
elections" 
 
The official Communist Youth League China Youth Daily (Zhongguo 
Qingnianbao)(01/28)(pg 2): "The Chinese people are a little confused 
by the fact that an unprecedented 'Internet War' is occurring when 
U.S.- China relations are healthy.  The United States' goal is by no 
means to save Google but to prepare for the 2010 Congressional 
elections.  President Obama and the Democratic Party have paid 
special attention to the Congressional election since they already 
lost points on a number of domestic issues.  Obama is facing a 
dilemma.  Only by switching the focus can Obama obtain the 
encouraging morale he needs to welcome in the next Congressional 
elections.  According to the United States' political tradition, 
whenever they're experiencing domestic conflict, they will always 
look for China's flaws.  Thus, when the Google incident broke out, 
it is not strange that President Obama and Secretary Clinton both 
issued such high-profile criticisms against China.  The election 
campaign is the United States' domestic affair and other countries 
should not get involved.  Also, manipulating the Internet issue and 
criticizing China is not a decent move." 
 
b. "Chinese Internet users need to be fought over" 
 
The official Xinhua News Agency international news publication 
International Herald Leader (Guoji Xianqu Daobao)(01/28)(p 17): "On 
January 22, the U.S. Embassy in China invited more than 40 famous 
Chinese bloggers, including the anti-CNN webmaster Rao Jin, for a 
discussion on Internet freedom.  As the Olympic torch relay incident 
happened in 2008, and when Western media was spreading false news on 
the Tibet issue, it was the anti-CNN, who represents the grassroots 
of Chinese Internet users and revealed the truth, which hit the 
Western media head-on.  The U.S. Embassy's seminar happened at a 
subtle time; while the Google incident is escalating.  From whatever 
point of view, it looks like a well-planned battle for the network 
public's opinion.  It is an unprecedented and networked diplomatic 
battle, which highlights the Obama administration's new foreign 
policy style.  President Obama, historically, has been the most 
successful official when battling for the network public's opinion. 
He has dominated online discourse and realized his political goals 
via the Internet.  This is not the first time that Chinese Internet 
users experienced the United States' diplomatic battle in person. 
An 'online briefing' was held concerning Obama's visit to China last 
year.  At the seminar, American diplomats were modest and sincere 
when talking to grass-root Chinese Internet users.  After the 
seminar, Rao Jin also said that, in comparison, the Chinese 
government has never once invited anti-CNN.  Chinese officials are 
supposed to put out more effort in winning over Internet users.  Of 
course, Chinese Internet users, like Rao Jin, won't easily be won 
over by a few U.S. Embassy sponsored seminars.  However, before this 
newest battle with the U.S., China's foreign departments seemed to 
lack any new thought or method to deal with this type of scuffle. 
Although the Chinese government sternly responded to Secretary 
Clinton's speech on Internet Freedom, in the process, it seems that 
the Chinese Internet and Chinese Internet users, whom the sword of 
the United States was actually aimed at, have been forgotten.  A 
non-traditional diplomatic battle, a first in the Internet era, 
should first break old diplomatic concepts.  This network diplomacy 
needs to break down the boundaries of 'official' and 'non-official,' 
'internal' and 'external,' as well as the differences among various 
departments, but fully respect Chinese individual's wisdom, becoming 
conscious of information transparency and sharing." 
 
¶2. CHINA POLICY 
 
"The impact of China's economic adjustment measures on the world" 
 
The People's Daily-sponsored and internationally-focused commercial 
news publication Global Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(01/28)(pg 1): 
"Although China's macroeconomic policies impact the world in an 
unprecedented way, the world's concern about their impact seems to 
be exaggerated.  Some Westerners accused China, suggesting that its 
adjustment polices in order to shrink its economic stimulus plan was 
'irresponsible' and 'will slow down the world's economic recovery.' 
This shows that it's difficult for China to be the 'good person.' 
Zhang Yansheng, director of Foreign Economic Research Institute at 
China National Development and Reform Commission, said that China 
has recovered from the crisis while the United States and Europe are 
still sick.  China could help them to recover by increasing China's 
imports; however it won't continue to heal along with them.  Zhou 
Shijian, the senior researcher at Qinghua University, said that 
China's macroeconomic policy is receiving increasing attention from 
the Chinese people.  More than at any time before, China's 
 
BEIJING 00000230  002 OF 002 
 
 
macroeconomic policy is attracting more attention from neighboring 
countries and the world.  However, the reaction to China's 
macroeconomic policy adjustment, in either China's stock market or 
other countries' stock market, has usually been exaggerated.  But it 
is ridiculous to say that China's economic policy is dragging the 
world down.  The West is interfering in China's macroeconomic 
policy-making.  Mr. Zhang also said that maintaining a healthy 
Chinese economy will benefit the world.  China has devoted a great 
deal in helping the world emerge from the crisis.  Being able to 
influence the world's price index and become the backbone of the 
global economy suggests that China has become a power country." 
 
HUNTSMAN