10BERLIN207
MEDIA REACTION: AFGHANISTAN-CIVILIANS,
Tue Feb 23 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
VZCZCXRO1113
RR RUEHAG RUEHLZ
DE RUEHRL #0207/01 0541636
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 231636Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6601
INFO RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVE
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 2044
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0773
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 1292
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 2790
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 1815
RUEHVEN/USMISSION USOSCE 0967
RHMFIUU/HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
RHMFISS/HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
RHMFISS/CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
RUZEADH/UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BERLIN 000207 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/CE, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR AF AF AF TK XF
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: AFGHANISTAN-CIVILIANS, 
AFGHANISTAN-NETHERLANDS, AFGHANISTAN-NATO, TURKEY, DUBAI;BERLIN 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
¶2.   (Afghanistan)  Civilian Casualties 
¶3.   (Afghanistan)   Fears of Dutch Domino Effect 
¶4.   (Afghanistan)   German, NATO Role 
¶5.   (Turkey)   Arrest of Senior Military Officers 
¶6.   (Dubai)   Israel Criticized Over Dubai Killing 
 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
 
Two stories dominate in this morning's print media:  the suspension 
of the strike by Lufthansa pilots and the sponsoring affair of the 
CDU in North Rhine-Westphalia.  Editorials focused on the Lufthansa 
strike and the dismissal of the secretary general of the CDU in 
North Rhine-Westphalia.   ZDF-TV's early evening newscast heute and 
ARD-TV's early evening newscast Tagesschau opened with a story on 
the suspension of the Lufthansa strike. 
 
¶2.   (Afghanistan)   Civilian Casualties 
 
Financial Times Deutschland (2/23) headlined: "NATO is Bombing its 
Own Afghanistan Strategy" and reported that "According to Afghan 
government sources, 27 civilians, among them four women and a child, 
were killed during an air strike by U.S. helicopters.  It was the 
worst misguided strike since the devastating air strike near Kunduz 
on September 4....  NATO Supreme Commander Stanley McChrystal 
expressed his 'apologies and regret at the tragic incident' and 
ordered an investigation.  Over the past few months, McChrystal 
tried to change operation rules to prevent inadvertent air strikes 
on civilians.  Since the beginning of the large-scale 'Mushtarak' 
offensive...more than 50 civilians have died.  Doubts are now 
growing that NATO is serious about its attempt to avoid civilian 
casualties in its operations." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine (2/23) carried a report, headlined: "In the 
Shadow of Bad News," and wrote: "Since the beginning of the 
offensive in Helmand Province, there have been increasing reports 
about civilian victims.  Not all of the victims are linked to the 
offensive but they are jeopardizing the hoped-for new beginning. 
The commander of the ISAF promised on Monday that one would 
intensify efforts to avoid the killing of civilians.  In a sad way, 
this statement sounds familiar.  For months, ISAF commander 
McChrystal has been apologizing for the mistakes of his soldiers. 
On Sunday, it was 30 civilians whose cars became the target of an 
air strike by ISAF."  Berliner Zeitung (2/23) reported under the 
headline: "Collateral Damage with 27 Civilians." 
 
In an editorial Frankfurter Allgemeine (2/23) judged: "It is right 
that each victim of a misguided missile is one victim too many, 
because such victims undermine the Afghans' confidence in ISAF and 
produce new recruits for the militant Islamists.  The conclusion is 
that the Taliban, who are pleased at this recruitment mechanism, 
will do everything so that NATO is unable to distinguish between 
fighters and civilians.  That is why it is also clear that ISAF 
commander McChrystal is in a dilemma.  In August 2009, he issued 
orders to avoid civilian victims at any cost.  But at the same time, 
he is waging an asymmetric war in which the opponent has no scruples 
taking civilians hostage.  If it is NATO's supreme goal to avoid 
civilian victims, then it cannot fight this war." 
 
Sueddeutsche Zeitung (2/23) opined under the headline: "The bombing 
of Civilians Demonstrates that NATO is its Own Enemy in 
Afghanistan." and judged: "The Taliban will be in business as long 
as they are able to promise successes.  Afghans have been 
opportunists for a long time; and this is not meant in a disparaging 
way.  The experience of years of war has taught them that the chance 
to survive will increase on the side of the stronger force.  But if 
the Taliban are weakened, then they will be unable to offer 
 
BERLIN 00000207  002 OF 004 
 
 
protection or to threaten others.  It is a mystery why NATO 
continues to ignore these principles of life in Afghanistan....  The 
offensive in the South is justified because ISAF forces will now 
occupy a territory that the Taliban have thus far controlled.  Air 
strikes are always risky because a reasonable reconnaissance on the 
ground is difficult.  That is why air strikes have become a symbol 
of arbitrariness and a blind exercise of power.  It is a sign that 
the strangers do not want to deal with the situation on the ground. 
No air strike has ever resulted in the Taliban giving up territory. 
Security in Afghanistan does not come from aircraft." 
 
Under the headline:"Dangerous Offensive in Afghanistan," Berliner 
Zeitung (2/23) editorialized: "The original plan of the offensive 
against the Taliban in Helmand Province is not bearing fruit right 
now.  ISAF had planned to expel the Taliban in fights on the ground 
and then reconstruct the country together with the civilian 
population.  But with every civilian casualty the support among the 
Afghans for the allied operation will continue to decline.  This is 
fatal since the offensive has the right goals.  If the allies fail 
in Helmand in such a blatant way as before, they can forget all 
their nice plans for reconstruction, police training, and education 
projects" 
 
¶3.   (Afghanistan)   Fears of Dutch Domino Effect 
 
Under the headline: "NATO Seeking Replacement For Dutch - Total 
Dutch Withdrawal Caught NATO Unawares" FT Deutschland (2/23) wrote: 
"The collapse of the governing coalition in The Hague is causing 
problems for NATO that are hard to resolve.  A NATO spokesman 
described the Dutch government's decision to totally withdraw its 
forces from Afghanistan as a 'crucial break.'  It is still totally 
unclear how the almost 2,000 Dutch soldiers can be replaced in 
disputed territories.  It is likely that it will be one of the most 
difficult tasks for NATO to find a replacement for the Dutch because 
the situation in Uruzgan is tense and dangerous." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine (2/23) reported: "Thus far, there is no one 
in sight who could replace the Dutch contingent; the Australians who 
are also deployed in Uruzgan Province, thwarted such hopes over the 
weekend.  Observers are now expecting the United States to jump in 
again.  And this could threaten the fragile quiet in Uruzgan because 
this is the result of the 'Dutch approach' which aims at finding an 
accommodation with all sides.  But NATO is also worried about the 
political echo of the Dutch debate.  The possible withdrawal of one 
of its most important troop contributors could also initiate similar 
considerations in other countries." 
 
Under the headline: "ISAF Is Afraid of a Disintegration of Forces," 
Handelsblatt (2/23) wrote: "The likely Dutch withdrawal will weaken 
the Afghanistan force.  Will other allies now follow The Hague's 
example?  Australia's Foreign Minister Stephen Smith said that his 
forces "are unable to take over the leadership" in Uruzgan Province 
once the Dutch have withdrawn.  This means that the Bundeswehr could 
face new demands, i.e. that the Bundeswehr could increase its 
engagement also outside of its relatively quiet operation area in 
northern Afghanistan." 
 
Sueddeutsche Zeitung (2/23) reported under the headline: "Successful 
Warriors," that "the Dutch forces in Afghanistan have more or less 
created peace in its territory - its withdrawal will now hit NATO 
hard.  The Taliban are likely to consider the Dutch withdrawal as 
their victory." 
 
¶4.   (Afghanistan)   German, NATO Role 
 
According to an editorial in Stuttgarter Nachrichten (2/23), "the 
impression is consolidating in Germany and in other European 
countries that the main issue in Afghanistan is to show loyalty to 
 
BERLIN 00000207  003 OF 004 
 
 
the United States.  Only in order to make it possible for President 
Obama to save face and to end the war some day in the future, 
additional soldiers with additional secret missions must now operate 
in Afghanistan.  If the common military victory is in the center of 
such efforts, the German government must now put the cards on the 
table.  But then it should not pretend in the ninth year of the 
mission that it is primarily interested in reconstruction, 
stabilization and a democratization of Afghanistan, however it may 
appear." 
 
Financial Times Deutschland (2/23) opined under the headline: "The 
Fairy Tale of a Clean War," that "the reality check for the new NATO 
strategy is under way....  But the attack from Sunday makes it clear 
that, despite strict rules for the use of the air force, mistakes 
can happen.  The fact that this reality check has thus far failed 
does not mean that the NATO strategy is basically wrong...but each 
killed civilian reminds us that a war is going on in Afghanistan and 
this cannot be embellished with nice words.  During an attack in 
Afghanistan, no one can be sure at whom he fires.  Our opponents do 
not wear uniform and cannot be distinguished from ordinary farmers. 
To demand soldiers to accept every risk in order to avoid 
jeopardizing innocent people would be totally out of proportion. 
There is no clean war even if politicians and their supreme 
commanders want it." 
 
¶5.  (Turkey)   Arrest of Senior Military Officers 
 
The arrest of high-ranking military officers is reported all over 
the press and one daily carried an editorial.  Sueddeutsche Zeitung 
(2/23) carried a correspondent report under the headline: 
"Ex-Commanders Arrested," and wrote: "This action is only the last 
strike in a number of police actions and activities of Istanbul's 
Prosecutor's Office against a formerly untouchable armed force.  It 
follows the revelation of several plans for a coup that date back to 
the time when Premier Erdogan and his AKP took power in 2002." 
 
Handelsblatt (2/23) carried an AFP/Reuters report under the 
headline: "Ex-Military Leaders in Turkey arrested under the 
Suspicion of Having Planned a Coup."  Tagesspiegel headlined; 
"Ex-Generals in Turkey Arrested," and wrote: "In Turkey, the 
investigations because of alleged preparations for a coup have 
reached their peak.  At the order of Istanbul's Prosecutor's Office, 
police arrested 50 active and retired soldiers." 
 
Under the headline: "Operation Sledgehammer," Financial Times 
Deutschland (2/23) carried a front-page report, saying: "The plot, 
which Turkish police is now supposed to have uncovered, was called 
'Operation Sledgehammer.'  Security agencies have now arrested a 
number of high-ranking military officials under the suspicion of 
having planned a large-sale plot.  Turkey has a long-term experience 
with military coups.  Again and again civil governments were ousted 
by the military.  The armed forces acted like a state in a state in 
which independent structures and loyalties were valid.  With its 
pro-European course and its far-reaching reform policy, the Islamic 
AKP governing party has gained support among the Turks, but, at the 
same time, it has stirred up the hostilities among the nationalists. 
 Fear remains in the liberal camp that a coup attempt could succeed 
some day in the future." 
 
In an editorial, Tagesspiegel (2/23) argued under the headline 
"Turkey's Military Under Pressure," that Turkey is about to 
reprocess one of the most difficult chapters of its most recent 
history: the intervention of the military in politics.  On Monday, 
police arrested 50 soldiers...and a few years ago, such an activity 
would have been unthinkable. But the EU process has changed the 
country.  The military must accept that the times are over when they 
were able push an unpleasant government out of power.  If Turkey is 
able to demonstrate that it is able to politically deprive the 
 
BERLIN 00000207  004 OF 004 
 
 
military of power by relying on the rule of law, democracy in Turkey 
will have made a great leap forward." 
 
Die Welt (2/23) carried a lengthy editorial under the headline: "The 
Netherlands As a Domino," and opined: "Progress in the heavily 
fought regions in Afghanistan has shown that NATO, but primarily 
U.S. forces, could succeed in turning the tables in Afghanistan. 
The greatest factor of insecurity, however, is the political public 
in the various NATO countries.  The ouster of the Dutch government 
is the most concrete example that the fight for public opinion with 
respect to Afghanistan seems to have been lost in the majority of 
European states....  If no one succeeds in stopping this populist 
trend, the allies will not only lose the campaign against the 
Taliban in Afghanistan but also at the home front.  And if the Dutch 
leave, other countries could follow like dominos.  How should the 
Belgian, Italian, British or German governments explain to their 
citizens that one has to stay in Afghanistan if other partners 
already bade farewell?  It is true that a similar war weariness 
exists in the U.S., but the political elite are willing to pursue 
strategic goals with perseverance and resolve, unlike the elites in 
Europe.  This is also the real reason why America is still a global 
power, while Europe, with a larger number of people and its economic 
power is a dwarf as far as power politics is concerned.  That is why 
it is more than a domestic affair whether the Netherlands will stay 
in Afghanistan or not.  Europe as a whole is now facing a test.  If 
The Hague leaves the coalition and others follow suit, Europe's 
suitability as a U.S. strategic partner will be in question, as will 
be the meaning of NATO." 
 
¶6.  (Dubai)   Israel Criticized Over Dubai Killing 
 
Under the headline: "Distraught Helplessness," Sueddeutsche Zeitung 
(2/23) editorialized: "Of course, the Europeans are right when they 
condemn the killing in Dubai....but, at the same time, the EU is 
demonstrating a distraught helplessness.  The reputation of their 
passports could suffer because the hit squad stole the identity of 
EU citizens. That is the only thing that comes to the mind of the EU 
foreign ministers.  Europe is now looking for a parallel war theater 
to hush up the fact that it is losing influence in the Middle East. 
Jerusalem will shelve the [EU's] declaration because it could be 
expected. The EU is divided and that is why Israel is taking 
advantage of it.  European foreign policy that was supposed to be so 
strong after the EU reform is considerably ailing in this matter. 
But the Europeans must primarily blame themselves for their lack of 
power in the Middle East.  They still have not understood that 
reconstruction assistance alone is not enough.  Only those will get 
influence in the Middle East who can offer long-term security 
guarantees." 
 
MURPHY