10BRASILIA42
Mission Brazil and Embassy Maputo Propose Trilateral
Thu Jan 14 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXYZ0007
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBR #0042/01 0141823
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 141821Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0297
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO
RUEHTO/AMEMBASSY MAPUTO 0005UNCLAS BRASILIA 000042 
 
SIPDIS 
EEB/TPP/MTAA/ABT FOR MARCELLA SZYMANSKI AND JACK BOBO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR ECON ETRD TBIO KPAO BR MZ
SUBJECT: Mission Brazil and Embassy Maputo Propose Trilateral 
Biotechnology Outreach 
 
REF: 2009 STATE 122732; 2009 MAPUTO 966; 2010 MAPUTO 51 
 
¶1.            SUMMARY:  In response to ref A, Embassy Brasilia and 
Embassy Maputo jointly request funding for a trilateral seminar on 
the benefits of agricultural biotechnology to take place in 
Mozambique, featuring speakers from the United States and Brazil. 
The United States is a world leader in the area of agricultural 
biotechnology.  Brazil has embraced the use of biotechnology and 
has world-class agricultural research facilities and scientists 
(many of whom were trained in the United States).  In addition, 
Brazil has shown a talent for adapting plants from temperate 
climates to tropical ones and, of course, its researchers speak 
Portuguese and are familiar with working in a developing country. 
As Embassy Maputo noted in ref B, Mozambique views trilateral 
cooperation efforts positively and could benefit from U.S. and 
Brazilian expertise in agricultural biotechnology.  In addition to 
promoting science-based regulation and biotech market opportunities 
in Mozambique, the proposed seminar would complement existing 
trilateral development cooperation efforts and also strengthen 
bilateral engagement between the United States and Brazil as well 
as between the United States and Mozambique in the important area 
of agricultural biotechnology.  END SUMMARY. 
 
 
 
The Time is Now for Trilateral Cooperation 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
 
 
¶2.            The governments of the United States, Brazil, and 
Mozambique have already agreed to trilateral cooperation on public 
health and food security.  The Brazilian Cooperation Agency (ABC) 
has food security projects in a variety of African nations, and the 
Brazilian Corporation for Agricultural Research (Embrapa) has an 
office in Ghana and plans for one in Mozambique.  In a January 11 
meeting with USAID Brasilia, Director of ABC Marco Farani expressed 
strong interest in the idea of a trilateral biotechnology seminar, 
perhaps as a kick-off event for the broader food security 
agreement.  Mission Brazil believes that ABC would be willing to 
contribute some funding for the proposed seminar, perhaps by 
covering travel costs for some of the Brazilian delegation. 
 
 
 
¶3.            Mission Brazil, following Washington guidance, has 
recently increased efforts as part of an overall strategy to 
strengthen biotechnology engagement with Brazil.  In March 2009, 
Embassy Brazil's Science Section delivered a biotechnology demarche 
to multiple Brazilian ministries, setting the stage for an October 
2009 visit to Brazil by Dr. Nina Fedoroff, the State Department and 
USAID Science and Technology Advisor.  During her visit, Dr. 
Fedoroff discussed with ABC the potential of joint U.S.-Brazil 
efforts to influence the development of biotechnology policies and 
acceptance in Africa. 
 
 
 
¶4.            Embassy Maputo believes that now is an excellent time 
to expand trilateral cooperation, in light of existing efforts, 
personal interest from the Brazilian ambassador in Maputo, and the 
interest generated by Mozambican President Armando Guebuza's July 
2009 visit to Brazil (ref A).  As reported in ref C, the government 
of Mozambique (GRM) has identified biotechnology as a cross-cutting 
technology in its Science, Technology, and Innovation Strategy and 
is in the process of defining national biotechnology policy.  At 
this important time in the development of biotechnology policy in 
Mozambique, the proposed seminar will encourage further research 
and capacity building, as well as the implementation of 
science-based biotechnology regulations. 
 
 
 
The Seminar 
 
--------------- 
 
 
 
¶5.            We propose a three-day seminar in Maputo, to include 
an opening ceremony, two days of presentations and panel 
 
 
discussions, opportunities for press engagement, and a site visit. 
Presentation topics could include: 
 
 
 
--Science-based biotechnology regulatory models 
 
--Biotech to improve productivity in cash and staple crops 
 
--Biotech and the environment 
 
                --Biofuels production 
 
                --Decreased pesticide use, erosion 
 
                --Land efficiency 
 
--Biotech and development 
 
                --Innovation 
 
                --Nutrition and disease prevention 
 
 
 
¶6.            A site visit to an innovative Mozambican agriculture 
or research site (such as the One World University, an agricultural 
training and research school funded by USDA through ADPP/Humana) 
would be beneficial to create opportunities for discussion of how 
to apply the issues discussed in the presentations and also to help 
foster relationships among participants. 
 
 
 
The Participants 
 
-------------------- 
 
 
 
¶7.            We propose that the delegations from the United 
States, Brazil, and Mozambique consist of a mix of scientists and 
policymakers.  We would be grateful for advice on the best U.S. 
participants.  Suggestions for the Brazilian and Mozambican 
attendees follow. 
 
 
 
Brazil: 
 
--Representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture and the biotech 
regulatory body (CTNBio) 
 
--Representatives of ABC and Embrapa 
 
--Scientists 
 
 
 
Mozambique: 
 
--Representatives of the GRM inter-agency working group on 
biotechnology 
 
--Representatives of Ministry of Agriculture 
 
--GRM Agricultural Research Service 
 
--GRM Agricultural Provincial Directorate-Maputo 
 
--Non-profit organizations involved in agricultural development, 
such as Technoserve 
 
 
 
The Funding 
 
--------------- 
 
 
 
¶8.            For administrative purposes, we propose that EEB 
grant funding for the costs related to hosting the seminar in 
Mozambique to Embassy Maputo and funding for the costs related to 
 
 
travel of the U.S. and Brazilian delegations to Embassy Brasilia. 
The two embassies would provide a joint report of spending after 
the seminar.  Approximate costs follow. 
 
 
 
Travel: 
 
--U.S. delegation 
 
USD 4,000/person x 6 participants = USD 24,000 
 
 
 
--Embassy Brasilia State Department representative 
 
USD 2,000 
 
(NOTE: USAID Brasilia anticipates sending a representative, as 
well, but is not requesting additional funding.  END NOTE.) 
 
 
 
--Brazilian delegation 
 
USD 2,000/person x 6 participants = USD 12,000 
 
(NOTE: Embassy Brasilia anticipates that some GOB representatives 
may decline the offer of travel funding.  Brazil is eager to be 
approached as a partner, rather than an aid recipient, and may 
prefer to fund its own participation.  However, we cannot know in 
advance which Brazilians will accept funding and believe it is 
appropriate to extend the offer.  END NOTE.) 
 
 
 
Per Diem: 
 
USD 216/day x 5 days x 13 participants = USD 14,040 
 
 
 
Conference Costs: 
 
Room rental USD 1,500 / day x 3 days = USD 4,500 
 
Simultaneous interpretation (English-Portuguese) USD 300/day x 3 
days = USD 900 
 
Preparation of Written Materials (and Translation) such as banners, 
office supplies and invitations = USD 6,400 
 
Transportation USD 250 / day x 3 days = USD 750 
 
 
 
TOTAL ESTIMATED COSTS: USD 64,590 
 
 
 
¶9.            Mission Brazil and Embassy Maputo hope EEB will 
favorably consider this proposal to advance food security 
cooperation goals in Africa in trilateral partnership with Brazil. 
 
 
 
¶10.          This message has been coordinated with Embassy Maputo. 
KUBISKE