10DARESSALAAM149
RWANDAN HIGH COMMISSIONER ON RAILS, EAC, ICTR
Thu Feb 18 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Dar Es Salaam
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDR #0149/01 0490617
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 180617Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY DAR ES SALAAM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9427
INFO RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI 1648
RUEHKM/AMEMBASSY KAMPALA 0175
RUEHLGB/AMEMBASSY KIGALI 1675
RUEHKI/AMEMBASSY KINSHASA 0021
RUEHJB/AMEMBASSY BUJUMBURA 3198
RUCNDT/USUN NEW YORK 0079UNCLAS DAR ES SALAAM 000149 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT AF/E FOR JTREADWELL & S/WCI RAPP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL EAID PGOV ICTR KAWC KJUS TZ RW
SUBJECT: RWANDAN HIGH COMMISSIONER ON RAILS, EAC, ICTR 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: In an introductory meeting February 10, newly 
arrived Rwandan High Commissioner Fatuma Ndangiza told 
Ambassador Lenhardt of Rwanda's priority of linking to 
the port of Dar es Salaam by rail.  She described 
progress and challenges of East African Community (EAC) 
integration and lamented the slow pace of trials at the 
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). 
Ndangiza stressed Rwanda's commitment to improving its 
business climate and moving away from aid dependency. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
East African Railways 
--------------------- 
¶2. Ambassador Ndangiza said President Kagame's initiative 
for a Kigali-Isaka-Dar es Salaam rail line had been the 
impetus for current plans for rail upgrades throughout 
East Africa.  Interest in the project intensified during 
food and fuel supply shortages in 2008 during the period 
of election violence in Kenya.  Ndangiza said Uganda's 
President Museveni was interested in connecting to the 
port at Tanga via Arusha, as well as a northern corridor 
linking Kampala and Mombasa.  Now the whole East African 
Community (EAC) is interested and trying to harmonize 
efforts.  She said the EAC expects to mobilize resources 
this year and begin construction by 2011, with completion 
expected by 2014.  Ambassador Ndangiza shared that the 
GOR worries the broader EAC project might delay their 
critical central corridor link to the port of Dar Es 
Salaam, and is proposing that section be prioritized. 
She emphasized the importance of the project in deepening 
economic integration, scaling up trade and investment, 
and providing alternatives for land-locked countries. 
Ambassador Lenhardt agreed, noting the benefits of rail 
vs. trucks in terms of cost, energy use, and 
environmental impact.  In response to Ambassador 
Ndangiza's query about whether the US is committing any 
resources to the effort, he said the GOT must take the 
lead and prioritize among their many competing 
development needs.  He added that the GOT must decide 
soon whether to repair or upgrade parts of the central 
line washed out by recent flooding. 
 
EAC 
--- 
¶3. Ndangiza observed that Rwanda and Burundi joined the 
EAC (in 2007) because they felt more connected socially 
and economically to East than to Central Africa.  She 
said the GOR's challenge is to sensitive the Rwandan 
population about what the reforms mean, in order to keep 
up with the pace of harmonization.  She said there has 
been great progress in that East Africans no longer 
require visas or work permits within the EAC, but that 
challenges remain, such as the fact that Rwandan border 
posts operate 24 hours, while many neighbors do not. 
Ambassador Lenhardt agreed harmonization would take time 
and assured Ndangiza he had recommended sustained U.S. 
support for the EAC. 
 
ICTR 
---- 
¶4. Ndangiza criticized the court for the slow pace of its 
work, especially considering its high level of donor 
funding.  While the court had set an important precedent 
for accountability of primary genocide perpetrators, 
during the time ICTR completed 46 cases ordinary courts 
in Rwanda have tried 50,000 "genocidaires," while the 
traditional "gacaca" courts have completed 700,000, with 
a fraction of the resources.  Ndangiza observed that ICTR 
officials are always asking for more time, rather than 
focusing on completing more trials in a timely fashion. 
She complained of ICTR's reluctance to transfer cases to 
Rwanda, although the GOR had invited ICTR to train local 
prosecutors, built new mode2j28W92,78%`% Q%Qh-kqRf{jD Noting that 
discussions are still ongoing about where to house the 
court's archives after its closure, she argued that a 
transfer to Kigali would provide an opportunity for 
ordinary Rwandans to access the archives and for visitors 
to learn a great lesson on accountability. 
 
Doing Business 
-------------- 
¶5. Ambassador Lenhardt complimented Rwanda for the 
dramatic improvement in its World Bank "Doing Business" 
ranking.  Ndangiza explained the GOR had set up a Rwanda 
Development Board, through which all procedures such as 
business licensing, tax registration and land titling 
were centralized such that a new business could be 
established within 24 hours.  She described the 
introduction of performance contracts at the local and 
national government level; these clearly define expected 
results, are evaluated quarterly, and have resulted in 
improved social service delivery, greater transparency 
and increased accountability. 
 
The U.S. and Africa 
------------------- 
¶6. Ambassador Lenhardt explained to Ndangiza President 
Obama's vision of Africa as important to the world and as 
a strategic partner, not a dependant.  He noted the 
President's food security and global health initiatives 
and Secretary Clinton's focus on gender issues. 
Ambassador Lenhardt expressed admiration for Rwanda's 
empowerment of women leaders, an issue he is promoting in 
Tanzania. Ndangiza stated Rwanda is looking forQ to 
moving away from aid, and that Rwandans are proud when 
people invest in their country rather than give "hand- 
outs". 
 
LENHARDT