10LONDON213
S/GWI PROJECT PROPOSAL: SOMALIA - SUPPORTING
Fri Jan 29 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy London
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHLO #0213/01 0291059
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 291059Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY LONDON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4804
INFO RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI PRIORITY 0004
RUEHDJ/AMEMBASSY DJIBOUTI PRIORITY 0099UNCLAS LONDON 000213 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/GWI 
DEPARTMENT ALSO FOR AF/E AND S/GPI 
NAIROBI FOR SOMALIA UNIT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KWMN PHUM KPAO EAID SO UK
SUBJECT: S/GWI PROJECT PROPOSAL: SOMALIA - SUPPORTING 
WOMEN'S ADVANCEMENT 
 
REF: STATE 132094 
 
¶1. With its large Somali Diaspora community and historical 
connections, the UK is home to many Somali-run 
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) that deliver 
development programs with/through/as local organizations in 
Somalia.  Harnessing the capacity of the UK's active and 
capable Somali community, Embassy London submits the 
following proposals to promote women's political, economic, 
and social advancement in Somalia.  AF/E and Embassy Nairobi 
Somalia Unit support these proposals as in line with the 
USG's policy objectives in Somalia and as a potential model 
for delivery of development programming in Somalia through 
Somali Diaspora communities. 
 
¶2. The following projects, listed in rank order, are 
summaries of the actual proposals submitted.  Full-length 
proposals are available from Embassy London POC Africa 
Watcher Peter Lord, LordPW@state.gov.  Priority list: 
 
(A) Women's Empowerment Project by Almis Welfare Association 
 
(B) Nomad International Women's Project 
 
(C) Policewomen's Training Program by Somaliland 
International Development Foundation (SIDF) 
 
(D) Somali Women's Cultural Initiative by Kayd (Somali 
Artists and Culture) 
 
(E) Egal Literacy Project by Institute for Female Education 
and Development 
 
¶3. The project details are as follow: 
 
(A) Project/Organization: Women's Empowerment Project by 
Almis Welfare Association 
 
Problem to be Addressed:  The Almis Welfare Association 
Women's Empowerment Project aims to teach basic literacy and 
self-sufficiency skills and promote gender equity and 
community development through providing women with basic 
literacy and tailoring skills.  The long-term objective is 
improved literacy and self-sufficiency among women and to 
train women to be tailors in order to increase economic and 
employment opportunities for women in Hargeisa. 
 
Summary of Proposed Program: The Women's Empowerment Project 
will train 250 adult women in basic literacy, 
self-sufficiency skills, and tailoring/sewing skills over an 
18-month period in Hargeisa.  The Almis Welfare Association 
requests $64,600 in funding and will contribute $25,000 in in 
kind contributions, for implementation of a project totaling 
approximately $89,600. 
 
Project Description (activities, outcomes, performance 
measures):  Literacy and related training will be offered to 
women in the target area over a period of 18 months. Teachers 
will conduct classes in literacy and tailoring skills on a 
daily basis, scheduled to accommodate women's daily life 
activities. Specific project activities and courses include 
the following: basic literacy skills; intermediate reading 
skills; beginning composition; reading on health care for 
women and children; basic math; leadership training; and 
tailoring skills. 
 
The direct beneficiaries of the project will be the 250 women 
participants in this project as well as the tutors and 
trainers who will receive experience. At the end of the 
period, an evaluation will be conducted to assess the 
achievements of the program and determine future goals. 
 
The general objectives of the program are (i) to increase 
literacy and vocational skills among women in Hargeisa; (ii) 
to implement literacy projects and additional vocational 
skills for women with a view toward strengthening their 
effectiveness in community development and preparing them to 
participate in income-earning activities; (iii) to ensure 
that women in the target area have the opportunity to engage 
in economic activities and acquire vocational knowledge and 
skills; and, (iv) to increase their role in the community 
leadership. 
 
The specific project objectives include (i) recruiting 
project staff - three tutors and four trainers - as 
facilitators of the literacy and vocational skills program 
(priority will be given to female teachers); (ii) 
 
incorporation of 250 women residents of Hargeisa into the 
project and achievement of literacy and vocational skills; 
(iii) assessment of participants at the end of the program. 
Those who fail the test or drop out will be given additional 
support appropriate to their needs; and (iv) incorporation of 
gender equity into all aspects of the projects. 
 
The performance measures for the project are based around the 
project's core objective of increasing literacy knowledge and 
tailoring skills.  The program also aims to achieve the 
less-measurable outcomes of increasing the self-esteem and 
confidence of participants.  Ninety percent of participants 
will be assessed at the end of the program.  The project aims 
to have 80 percent of participants (200 women) within 18 
months be considered as literate and have basic skills in 
tailoring according to criteria set by the Community 
Education Committee. 
 
From beginning to end, the project will be monitored by the 
project supervisor who will be responsible for managing the 
program and the work of the evaluators.  The supervisor will 
also give monthly progress reports to the Almis Welfare 
Association board of directors. 
 
Management of funds will be the responsibility of the project 
supervisor, under the supervision of the treasurer of Almis 
Welfare Association.  At the end of the project, an expense 
report will be made available to funders and any interested 
parties. 
 
During the period of meetings with the community groups, the 
supervisor will collect feedback from the participants and 
the facilitators (teachers), with suggestions for improving 
the project, in the monthly and final reports. 
 
To monitor the impact on the beneficiaries, Almis Welfare 
Association will take the following steps: 
 
- Keep detailed records for all teachers and participants; 
- Conduct monthly review meetings; 
- Conduct appraisals for both teachers and participants; 
- Design and print formats for monitoring the progress; 
- Interact with the community to ensure their involvement; 
- Conduct exams for the participants to check their progress 
and performance; and, 
- Verify the registers and reports from time to time. 
 
The desired outcomes are (i) increased literacy and 
vocational skills among women in the target area; (ii) 
greater confidence and self-sufficiency; and, (iii) improved 
self-esteem. 
 
Detailed Budget 
 
The project budget includes salaries for teachers/assistants, 
equipment, utility bills, tea and lunch for students, 
evaluation of program, books and supplies for the full 
18-month duration of the project.  All salary costs and some 
equipment costs included in the budget below will be provided 
through in-kind contributions by Almis Welfare Association, 
as noted below.  The project request for funding is $64,600. 
 
¶1. Direct Staff Salaries 
1.1 Project Supervisor - 5,400 In Kind 
1.2 Project Accountant - 4,500 In Kind 
1.3 Two Project Evaluators - 9,000 - In kind 
1.4 Project Worker - 2,700 
Subtotal - 21,600 - In kind 
 
¶2. Office Expendable Supplies 
2.1 Stationery (textbooks, pens and notebooks) - 2,500 
Subtotal - 2,500 
 
3.0 Nonexpendable Supplies 
3.1 Two Computers "Compact Models" - 900 - In kind 
3.2 Printer HP Laserjet 1320 - 300 - In kind 
3.3 Two Scanners HP 2410 - 200 - In kind 
3.4 Internet - 900 - In kind 
3.5 Photocopier - 1,100 - In kind 
Subtotal - 3,400 - In Kind 
 
4 Project Equipment/Materials and Labor: 
4.1 Equipment 
4.1.1 Thirty Sewing Machines - 6,900 
4.1.2 Twenty-four Cutting Scissors - 100 
4.1.3 Ten Garments for women's Rolls - 2,000 
4.1.4 Ten Garments for trousers - 1,000 
 
4.1.5 One Box of Technical Needles - 50 
4.1.6 Five Boxes of Decorative Ribbon - 50 
4.1.7 Five Woofers - 400 
Subtotal - 10,500 
 
4.2 School Equipment and Materials 
4.2.1 Ten Office Chairs - 300 
4.2.2 Ninety Forms - 1,800 
4.2.3 Four Office Tables - 400 
4.2.4 Four Shelves - 800 
4.2.5 Two Filing Cabinet (with Iron) - 600 
Subtotal - 3,900.00 
 
4.3 Teachers 
4.3.1 Three Teachers - 8,100 
4.3.2 Four Assistant Teachers - 7,200 
Subtotal - 15,300 
 
5.0 Other Direct Cost 
5.1 Lunch and tea (250 for 150 days) - 30,000 
5.2 Electricity and Water bill - 1,080 
5.3 Telephone Charge - 240 
5.4 Watchman -1,080 
Subtotal - 32,400 
 
Total Project Cost - 89,600 
Almis In-Kind Contribution - 25,000 
Total Requested Funding - 64,600 
 
Organization Description: Almis Welfare Association, 
registered as an NGO in the UK and Somaliland, is a 
Diaspora-led charitable organization based in the UK. Founded 
in May 2005, its objectives are promoting education and 
relieving poverty in Somalia/Somaliland.  All the trustees 
are originally from Somalia but live and work in the UK.  In 
the four years since, the organization has executed a variety 
of development projects. 
 
Some of its achievements include the planning and execution 
of an education project (entitled "Education is a Right, Not 
a Privilege") which pays school fees for street children and 
projects for formation of community sewing and carpentry 
businesses as well as distribution of food to needy people. 
As a charitable organization, Almis Welfare Association and 
its branch in Hargeisa, Somaliland, is governed by the 
charity law. Almis Welfare Association meets the legal and 
financial requirements for being a charity such as 
accountability, good governance, and transparency as well as 
being run for public benefit.  Management of Almis Welfare 
Association (Hargeisa Branch, Ex-National Cinema Road, 
Salaama Building Flat 201 Hargeisa, Somaliland) consists of a 
board of Somalia-based professionals and a full-time 
administrative staff of six. 
 
------------------------- 
 
(B) Project/Organization: Nomad International Women's Project 
 
Problem to be Addressed:  The Nomad International Women's 
Project aims to empower Somali women to participate in local 
decision-making processes in order to make Somali women 
informed political actors in the county's democracy.  The 
project will focus on training women to add their voice to 
local peace and conflict resolution talks, in the 
establishment and delivery of local services (particularly in 
health and justice services), and in local policy and 
decision-making processes.  The project also aims to raise 
awareness of local relevant leaders and decision-makers of 
women's participation in developing effective policies and 
services at all level of local governance. 
 
Summary of the Project Proposed: Nomad International will run 
leadership training to give Somali women the necessary skills 
and confidence to effectively represent various women's 
issues and to engage in the full-range of policy debates that 
take place in various levels of the Somaliland government, 
including local peace and reconciliation initiatives, 
establishment of public services, policy-making, shaping 
existing services and policies, advocating for women's needs 
to be addressed, and representation of women's issues.  The 
training will focus on the following skills: negotiation, 
representation, consultation, conflict resolution, 
communication, and campaigning.  The training will target 
women who are community leaders, politicians, faith group 
leaders, professionals, civil servants and other women with 
leadership aspirations. 
 
Proposed Project (activities, outcomes, and performance 
measures):  Sixty women will receive the above-mentioned 
training.  Among those trained, ten will receive additional 
train-the-trainer training so that they will be able to train 
other women in the focus skills.  The training will be 
divided into three semesters, in which twenty women will 
participate.  An additional two months of training will be 
offered to those receiving the train-the-trainers courses. 
The project will run for 13 months in Somaliland.  The 
project also includes one month of preparation and one month 
of evaluation.  In addition, the project will organize a 
three-day seminar for local leaders and policy-makers to 
increase awareness of women's issues and encourage women's 
participation in local governance. 
 
The outcome of Nomad International's project will be 
increasing women's participation and influence in front line 
decision-making processes, policy making, service delivery, 
development, planning, and conflict resolution initiatives in 
Somaliland.  Through increased women's participation, women's 
issues and needs will be more effectively addressed and more 
integrated into service-delivery decisions at all levels. 
 
Nomad International will measure the project's performance by 
evaluating the increase in the number of women who 
participate in local governance decisions, the number of 
service-delivery decisions influence by women, the number of 
issues campaigned by women, the number of decision-making 
opportunities encouraging women's participation, feedback 
from training participants, and feedback from local leaders 
and decision-makers. 
 
Detailed budget: 
 
Training cost 
Publicity cost - 3,600 
Trainers cost - 10,000 
Training venue cost - 5,000 
Training materials - 2,000 
Trainees travel and refreshments cost - 2,500 
Trainees accommodation - 5,000 
 
Trainers' training cost 
Trainers' cost - 5,000 
Training venue cost - 1,500 
Training materials - 800 
Trainees travel and refreshments cost - 2,500 
Trainees accommodation - 1,500 
 
Core cost 
Travel cost - 3,500 
Management cost - 12,000 
Telephone and communication  cost - 1,800 
Accommodation and subsistence cost - 3,000 
Insurance - 2,000 
 
TOTAL ($) - 64,400 
 
Organization description: Nomad International is a registered 
charitable organization in the UK and is part of a network of 
Somali youth organizations that share the same name and have 
offices in Holland and Somaliland.  The network of 
independently operated organizations share a common Diaspora 
identity and have a sense of transnational responsibilities 
which enables them to connect and collectively contribute to 
the development of health and education projects.  Its vision 
is to support successful and rewarding governance, health, 
and education projects that not only  address the key issues 
of concern to the Somali people but also strive to find 
solutions.  Comprised mainly of young professionals, Nomad 
international concentrates its activities mainly on education 
and health, primarily in Somaliland and the UK.  Current 
projects include health and education initiatives at Hargeisa 
Hospital, Burao Hospital, Erigaabo Health Center -- described 
in detail on the website: www.nomadinternational.org. 
 
------------------------- 
 
(C) Project/organization: Policewomen's Training Program by 
Somaliland International Development Foundation (SIDF) 
 
Problem to Be Addressed: To equalize women's access to fair 
policing and justice, promote women's rights, and increase 
awareness of issues related to gender-based violence by 
training policewomen in Somaliland in the areas of judiciary 
and law enforcement to address security and radicalization 
issues. 
 
 
Summary of Proposed Program: The project will equip 
Somaliland police women with the training to respond to 
routine policing and justice issues in order to improve 
women's access to justice, legal mechanisms, and fair 
policing.  The project also seeks to raise awareness of 
women's violence issues, such as gender-based violence, and 
to improve community safety. 
 
Project Description (activities, outcomes, performance 
measures): The project's activities and course work for 
participants is as follows: interview techniques; non-verbal 
communication awareness; incident and familial trait 
recognition; search and physical inspection procedures; 
weapon recognition and awareness; basic trauma medical 
knowledge; introduction and use of reporting and statement 
documents; statement retrieval and collation; collection, 
preservation and continuity of the exhibit/evidence process; 
and, court procedure and evidence delivery. 
 
The desired outcomes include enabling the Somaliland 
policewomen to initiate and maintain a women-based community 
and village awareness network, which equips local women with 
a sense of community empowerment, the sense of responsibility 
for the community's security and protection, and continued 
awareness for any external terrorist or criminal influence. 
 
The performance measures have been established and will be 
monitored by the Faculty of Law and Sharia Criminal Justice 
and Police Science, Gollis University.  This institution is 
currently responsible for the country's graduate-level police 
education programs and quality assurance mechanisms. 
 
The instructional expertise and syllabus content will be 
provided by Triton International Ltd., a UK-based risk and 
security management company, with expert trainers from 
international law enforcement agencies.  Triton specializes 
in public sector training programs in the security and law 
enforcement sector.  In Somaliland, Triton is currently 
partnering with the Somaliland Ministry of Interior, training 
and operationally mentoring the Coast Guard in coastal 
defense, fisheries protection and anti-piracy operations, in 
support of the International Naval Task Forces in the region. 
 
The program will be a modular format, with the skillsets 
taught on rotation and in conjunction with the current 
graduate law enforcement programs at Gollis University.  Each 
module is one week in duration.  The collective modules, when 
delivered in series, form a total of eight weeks. 
 
Detailed budget: The budget will cover the following costs: 
travel to and flights to Hargeisa; in-country transport and 
security; accommodation; food; instructor wages; and, 
training aids and resources.  The project seeks funding of 
USD 100,000, to be expended along the following lines: 
 
- Travel and Flights - 12,000 
- Transport and Security - 5,040 
- Accommodation - 11,000 
- Food - 4,480.00 
- Local and International Training Resources (International 
Trainers, Interpreters, Local Police Instructors and 
University Lecturers) Fees -  67,200 
- Training Aids & Resources - 280.00 
 
SIDF would like to hold the funding in the UK in escrow, with 
tranche release for the following accountable phases of the 
program: Initial Program Administration and Travel to 
Somaliland; In-Country Administration and Program Initiation; 
Specific Module Delivery; Verification of Delivery, QA and 
Exercise Schedule per Module Completion; and Final Program 
Completion and Departure from Somaliland. 
 
Description of the Organization:  The Somaliland 
International Development Foundation seeks to source 
international funding and identify relevant and critical 
assistance for development and humanitarian aid programs. 
The organization focuses on projects that encourage Somalis 
within the Diaspora to use their skills to develop Somalia 
economically and politically.  The organization is new and is 
in the process of registering as a charity in the UK.  The 
founders are a group of UK-based Somali Diaspora with a long 
history of experience working with and for charity and policy 
advocacy institutions. 
 
------------------------- 
 
(D) Project/Organization: Somali Women's Cultural Initiative 
by Kayd (Somali Artists and Culture) 
 
Problem to Be Addressed: Kayd's Women's Cultural Initiative 
aims to increase women's literacy and political empowerment 
by supporting female writers and cultural events focused on 
women's issues. 
 
Summary of Proposed Program: The Somali Women's Cultural 
Initiative 2010-11 seeks to promote literacy, female 
leadership, and economic opportunity while addressing 
gender-based violence (GBV) issues and women's empowerment 
issues through increasing the public space for women in the 
arts.  The proposed project will deliver one year of cultural 
activities relevant to issues facing Somali women, 
culminating in a cultural festival based in Somaliland during 
the summer of 2011.  The activities will include creative 
activities in support of women writers, publication of two 
books (a collection of stories by great Somali women writers 
and a collection of short stories and poems by new Somali 
female writers); presentations by well-known Somali female 
authors living in the Diaspora; and, a Somali Women's 
Festival in Hargeisa, Somaliland during the summer of 2011. 
 
Project Description (including specific activities, outcomes, 
and performance measures):  The project will deliver one year 
of activities relating to arts and culture relevant to the 
issues facing Somali women and will include the following 
activities: collecting stories by well-known, largely 
unpublished Somali female writers; events to encourage young 
female talent; theater presentations featuring women writers 
and actors; workshop to discuss and critique literature by 
female writers; lectures by prominent Somali Diaspora 
writers; and discussion groups on music and poetry.  The 
climax of the project will be the three-day Somali Women's 
Cultural Festival, modeled after the successful Somali 
Week/Mooge Festivals which Kayd has organized in London and 
Hargeisa.  The festival will have a broad combination of 
poetry, debates on development and social change, literature, 
music, film and other media, all of which will focus around 
the theme of gender balance and freedom of expression.  The 
festival will call on Somali intellectuals to re-engage in 
cultural works and also engage with females (youth, artists, 
writer and journalists) to re-popularize culture, theater, 
and music with ordinary people. 
 
Kayd's desired outcomes are to bring back into people's 
consciousness the importance that art and artistic 
expressions have played in Somali culture and to promote and 
encourage the role of women in the community to illustrate 
and thereby promote alleviation of the constraints they face 
in their lives. Specifically, the project aims to: 
 
- Develop intercontinental links between females in the 
Diaspora and Somalia to develop the culture of female Somalis 
living in Somali territories and in the Diaspora; 
 
- Creating a vibrant platform from which Somali women can 
come together to enjoy performance, celebrate their culture, 
learn, discuss and debate themes surrounding gender and 
artistic freedom of expression; and, 
 
- Develop literacy and an interest in reading amongst women. 
 
The project's performance measure will be as follows: reviews 
of the ten arts events to be delivered over the course of the 
project; development and presentation of the two 
publications; and the mounting of the three-day summer 
festival. 
 
Detailed budget: 
 
Salary Costs 
Project Coordinator - 8,605 
Event Organizer - 17,550 
Sub-total - 26,155 
 
Administration and Staff Costs 
Administrative Support - 5,500 
Books Design - 4,000 
Technical Crew and Operators - 800 
Editing and Review - 2,000 
Sub-total - 12,300 
 
Office Space 
Rental of Office Space - 4,500 
 
Production, Marketing, and Logistics 
Regional Events - 9,000 
Rent for festival hall space - 1,000 
Transport and accommodation for presenters - 4,410 
Gratuities and honorariums for speakers - 3,000 
Banners and decorations - 1,000 
Media cover - 1,000 
Sound system rental - 700 
Sub-total - 20,110 
 
Materials and Document Production 
Book publications - 15,000 
Photography - 500 
Filming and editing - 2,000 
Subtotal - 17,500 
 
International Speakers 
Flights for visiting writers and speakers - 5,000 
Accommodation and per diem for international visitors - 5,000 
Sub-total - 10,000 
 
Overall Total - 90,565 
 
Description of the Organization: Kayd, a registered UK 
charity (and in the process of registering in Somaliland), 
seeks to contribute to the creation of a culture of tolerance 
in Somali culture.  Kayd encourages and promotes democratic 
values and respect for others in the Somali communities by 
working to inspire liberal thoughts and values, particularly 
in promoting freedom of expression through artistic freedom. 
Kayd promotes Somali art and culture through a broad 
combination of poetry, literature, music, film and 
discussions.  It focuses largely, but not exclusively, on 
issues relating to gender equality and active citizenship, 
with particular attention paid to how they affect young 
people. In 2009 it delivered: (i) Somali Week Festival (SWF), 
an eclectic mix of events including, poetry, literature and 
music focused on censorship through a total of twelve events 
for different audiences; (ii) Somali Week Mooge Festival and 
Hargeisa International Book Fair, a six-day program designed 
to develop cultural and religious tolerance amongst some in 
Somali society in Somali territories -- the first festival to 
be held in Somaliland for 20 years, attracting over 12,000 
people; (iii) production of a magazine for the Somali Week 
Festival and for the sister festival in Somaliland (the Mooge 
Festival and Hargeisa International Book Fair).  The 
following institutions have supported Kayd's programming: BBC 
Somali section, VOA (Voice of America), the Frank Haines 
Memorial Trust, the United Nations Development Program 
(UNDP), the UK Arts Council, SOAS Somali Student Union, and 
various media Somali media houses. 
 
------------------------- 
 
(E) Project/Organization: Egal Literacy Project by the 
Institute for Female Education and Development (IFED) 
 
Problem to be Addressed: The Egal Literacy Project seeks to 
improve women's basic literacy and basic math through free 
adult education courses offered to women in Hargeisa, 
Somalia.  The literacy and math curriculum will also carry 
themes drawn from Islamic teachings about promotion of 
women's education and involvement in social, economic, and 
political life to support women's empowerment. 
 
Summary of Proposed Program: The Egal Literacy Project will 
open a literacy center in Hargeisa, Somalia, specifically and 
exclusively designed to teach women basic literacy and math 
skills. IFED plans to generate interest and awareness through 
targeted radio advertisements and through leveraging its 
already established women's groups.  A key component of the 
course will include train-the-trainers education so that 
women in the program will be in a position to transmit the 
literacy and math skills they learn to other women in their 
social and family groups. 
 
Project Description (activities, outcomes, performance 
measures):  The main activity will be literacy and basic math 
courses offered for free five mornings a week in the center. 
Two courses will run concurrently to meet the needs of basic 
and more advanced learners, offered in a facility IFED plans 
to rent. IFED plans to train 90 women on a first-come, 
first-served basis in three-month semesters.  Four semesters 
will be offered during the 12-month duration of the project. 
Upon signing up for the courses, each woman will receive an 
assessment of her individual literacy and math skills and 
will be placed in an appropriate level.  In order to assess 
 
the outcome of increased basic literacy and math skills, each 
student will undergo a final assessment.  IFED also plans to 
follow up with students after completion of the course to see 
how they use the skills learned.  Project performance 
measures will include data on demand for courses, student 
attendance, student performance on final assessments as 
compared to entry assessments, and qualitative data about 
impact on lifestyle.  The qualitative data about the impact 
on the women's lifestyle will also be used to make 
assessments on how empowered the women feel after completion 
of the program.  The curriculum will also encourage passing 
on the skills learned to other women.  IFED will survey 
successful students on the volunteer projects they undertake. 
 This funding will provide the necessary seed money for the 
initial start of the program.  IFED plans to rent out the 
facilities to other women's groups and civil organizations in 
the afternoons and evenings, as the IFED project will only 
use the instructional facilities in the mornings, in order to 
fund continuation of the program. 
 
Detailed budget: 
 
Direct Labor Cost 
 
Project Manager - 30,000 
Curriculum Developer - 14,016 
Lead Instructor - 6,600 
Instructor - 6,000 
Instructor - 6,000 
Admin Assistant - 4,800 
Three Cafeteria staff/cleaners - 3,000 
Two Security guard - 2,400 
 
Infrastructure 
Rent - 12,000 
Electricity - 2,400 
Telephone - 1,200 
Internet - 1,800 
Class and Office Furniture- 5,000 
Computer Equipment - 3,400 
Advertising - 1,404 
 
Total - 100,000 
 
Organization Description:  Founded in 2008, the Institute for 
Female Education and Development (IFED) was set up to create 
education projects that will enable the women of Somaliland 
to make contributions to the reconstruction and development 
of Somalia.  Registered as an NGO in Somaliland, IFED seeks 
to promote Islamic teachings that encourage women's 
education, by furthering women's involvement in private 
sector ventures, and by advocating for government and 
business policies that reducing the "absenteeism" of women in 
commercial and political life in Somalia.  IFED started as 
home-based women's groups and networks and is currently 
working to open a women's boarding school in Hargeisa through 
the African Education Trust, a UK-based charity.  The Egal 
Literacy Project will be an expansion of IFED's current 
programming.  Mrs. Odowa Nielsen, as project director, is 
uniquely poised to deliver on the curriculum, oversight and 
operation of this project because of her background in 
setting up female genital mutilation (FGM) clinics in the UK 
for the Somali Diaspora community and her work as a mental 
health care professional in the UK working to help Somali 
immigrants adjust to life in the UK.  Mrs. Odowa Nielsen will 
serve as the Project Director and will be based in Hargeisa 
for the duration of the project. 
 
 
Visit London's Classified Website: 
http://www.intelink.sgov.gov/wiki/Portal:Unit ed_Kingdom 
 
SUSMAN