10PARIS196
FRANCE: INPUT FOR THE 2010 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS
Fri Feb 19 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXRO4350
OO RUEHIK
DE RUEHFR #0196/01 0501516
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 191516Z FEB 10 ZDK ENTIRE CABLE DUE TO NUMEROUS SVCS
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8340
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEATRS/DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEHC/DEPARTMENT OF LABOR WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAWJA/DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 12 PARIS 000196 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP (JENNIFER DONNELLY), G (LAURA PENA), 
EUR/PGI (JODY BUCKNEBERG), INL, DRL, PRM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KTIP KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB
KMCA, FR 
SUBJECT: FRANCE: INPUT FOR THE 2010 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
REPORT (PART 1 OF 3) 
 
REF: STATE 2094 
 
PARIS 00000196  001.8 OF 012 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  During the reporting period, France 
continued to show a strong commitment to combating 
trafficking in persons by maintaining and improving upon 
active political, legal, and social mechanisms to eliminate 
human trafficking.  As demonstrated by the work of its 
inter-ministerial commission and the Office for the 
Suppression of Trafficking in Persons (OCRTEH), the 
Government of France (GOF) places a high priority on fighting 
trafficking in persons and coordinates its efforts with local 
governments, international law enforcement agencies, source 
countries, EU partners, associations, webmasters, and 
non-governmental organizations (NGOs).  During the reporting 
period, France took significant steps to dismantle 
trafficking networks, assist victims, better prosecute 
perpetrators, and prevent future trafficking with 
informational campaigns to reduce the demand for commercial 
sex acts.  The following is input from Embassy Paris for the 
tenth annual Trafficking in Persons (TIP) Report.  Post will 
provide an update via septel to incorporate any additional 
legal and judicial data made available from the Ministry of 
Interior.  END SUMMARY. 
 
FRANCE'S TIP SITUATION 
---------------------- 
¶2.  (SBU) Responses are keyed to reporting questions 
specified in paragraph 25 of reftel. 
 
What is (are) the source(s) of available information on human 
trafficking?  What plans are in place (if any) to undertake 
further documentation of human trafficking?  How reliable are 
these sources? 
-- A. The primary source of available information on human 
trafficking in France is from the Ministry of Interior's 
Central Office for the Suppression of Trafficking in Persons 
(OCRTEH), which takes the lead in anti-trafficking 
enforcement.  Under the authority of the Central Directorate 
of the Judicial Police (DCPJ) of the Director General of the 
National Police (DGPN), the OCRTEH centralizes information 
and coordinates all operations to counter human trafficking, 
while maintaining contact with local police, the gendarmerie, 
the border police, foreign and international law enforcement 
authorities, the judiciary, and NGOs.  France established an 
inter-ministerial commission to combat trafficking in 
December 2008, which meets once a month and includes the 
Ministry of Interior (MOI), the Ministry of Justice (MOJ), 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA), the Ministry of Social 
Affairs and Employment, the Ministry of Immigration, the 
OCRTEH, the Central Office for the Fight Against Undocumented 
Labor (OCLTI), international organizations, and 
non-governmental organizations (NGOs).  The OCLTI is an 
investigative body reporting to the Sub-Directorate of 
Judicial Police (SDPJ) of the Directorate General of the 
National Gendarmerie (DGGN), which investigates illegal 
employment punishable under the Labor Code.  The OCLTI 
focuses on fighting crimes related to illegal work in all 
forms, including offenses involving forced labor and working 
conditions incompatible with human dignity.  The OCRTEH and 
the OCLTI primarily coordinate with several other law 
enforcement agencies and the Ministry of Justice to counter 
forced labor and modern slavery issues in France and its 
territories.  The OCRTEH figures, the data from the OCLTI, 
and the Ministry of Justice statistics are reliable. 
However, official French data on trafficking in persons is 
not released by the Ministry of Interior until the end of 
March.  As such, parts of this reporting cable relies on 2008 
data, unless where otherwise noted. 
 
Is the country a country of origin, transit, and/or 
destination for men, women, or children subjected to 
conditions of commercial sexual exploitation, forced or 
bonded labor, or other slave-like conditions?  Are citizens 
or residents of the country subjected to such trafficking 
conditions within the country?  If so, does this internal 
trafficking occur in territory outside of the government's 
control (e.g. in a civil war situation)?  From where are 
people recruited or from where do they migrate prior to being 
subjected to these exploitative conditions?  To what other 
countries are people trafficked and for what purposes? 
Provide, where possible, numbers or estimates for each group 
of trafficking victims.  Have there been any changes in the 
TIP situation since the last TIP Report (e.g. changes in 
destinations)? 
 
PARIS 00000196  002.8 OF 012 
 
 
-- B. France remains a destination country for women, men, 
and children subjected to conditions of commercial sexual 
exploitation and forced labor.  France is not a country of 
origin for trafficking and is generally not a transit 
country.  The problem of trafficking in persons in France 
consists mainly of women trafficked for prostitution from 
Eastern Europe (Romania and Bulgaria), West Africa (Nigeria, 
Cameroon, and Ghana), to a lesser degree from the Caribbean 
and South America (Brazil), and increasingly Asia (China and 
Southeast Asia).  Men are trafficked for the purpose of 
forced labor and young girls for domestic servitude and 
commercial sex.  There are reports from NGOs that French 
Guiana is a destination for women and children trafficked 
from neighboring Brazil for sexual and labor exploitation but 
official investigations have yet to substantiate the claims. 
The OCRTEH estimates that there are approximately 18,000 
prostitutes in France, of which as many as 90 percent or 
about 16,000 are foreign nationals and likely forced into the 
sex trade by trafficking networks.  In 2008, the Government 
of France officially identified 822 victims of trafficking, 
of which 788 were women.  Over 76 percent of the female 
victims were foreign nationals, with 34 percent coming from 
Eastern Europe or the Balkans and 25 percent from Africa. 
There have been no significant changes in the TIP situation 
in trafficked persons to France since the last TIP report. 
 
To what kind of conditions are the trafficking victims 
subjected? 
-- C. The director of OCRTEH Jean-Marc Souvira reported that 
victims are subjected to conditions that vary widely in 
France, where they are trafficked onto the street, into 
private apartments, massage parlors, or into luxury brothels 
for purposes of prostitution.  Increasingly, traffickers also 
use internet websites to prostitute victims, allowing for the 
on-line reservation of services for private suites and hotel 
rooms. 
 
Vulnerability to TIP: Are certain groups of persons more at 
risk of human trafficking (e.g. women and children, boys 
versus girls, certain ethnic groups, refugees, IDPs, etc.)? 
If so, please specify the type of exploitation for which 
these groups are most at risk (e.g., girls are more at risk 
of domestic servitude than boys). 
-- D. The problem of trafficking in persons in France 
consists mainly of women trafficked for prostitution.  While 
the majority of trafficking victims in France are brought to 
work in the sex trade, clandestine forced labor consisting 
primarily of young women and girls as domestic workers also 
exists.  As victims of domestic slavery face unsuitable 
living conditions and problems of restriction of movement 
that keep them from easily being identified, the Committee 
Against Modern Slavery (CCEM) finds it difficult to estimate 
the number of victims in France.  However, 216 cases of 
modern slavery were reported to CCEM in 2009, of which 120 
victims were placed under protective custody.  Since its 
founding in 1994, CCEM has assisted over 500 victims, of 
which a majority are African, approximately 90 percent are 
women, and nearly 30 percent arrived in France as minors.  In 
cases regarding children under 16 years of age, the CCEM is 
often contacted by concerned neighbors or social services to 
alert them of the minor victims.  The CCEM also reported that 
the "employers" of forced labor have been in many cases 
diplomats serving in France and enjoying diplomatic immunity 
from prosecution.  In particular, the CCEM noted that the 
Saudi Arabian diplomatic community has often violated French 
labor laws.  In 2009, CCEM reported that ten percent of the 
cases of modern slavery involved diplomats as employers, up 
from eight percent in 2008.  According to official estimates 
from the Ministry for Family and Solidarity, between 6,000 
and 10,000 children are victims of sexual exploitation in 
France, trafficked from Romania, West Africa, and North 
Africa.  France is also a destination country for trafficked 
Romanian children, many of Romani descent that children 
traditionally have been used by their handlers as beggars and 
thieves throughout the country.  Many of these children 
increasingly turned to or were forced into prostitution. 
France has also seen cases of young men and boys crossing 
from North Africa into southern France trafficked for the 
purpose forced labor in agriculture and construction, 
according to the CCEM.  Delphine Dewailly, Ministry of 
Justice deputy director for the Office of Specialized 
Criminal Justice, reported that her office had heard of cases 
of modern slavery that were occurring in French Guiana, 
particularly at gold mining sites.  She commented that the 
 
PARIS 00000196  003.8 OF 012 
 
 
GOF would need to further investigate the reports, 
representing the first government official to publicly 
acknowledge the cases of trafficking in French Guiana.  There 
have also been increasing press reports that Chinese migrant 
workers have been trafficked as forced labor to French 
Guiana. 
 
Traffickers and Their Methods: Who are the 
traffickers/exploiters?  Are they independent business 
people?  Small or family-based crime groups?  Large 
international organized crime syndicates?  What methods are 
used to gain direct access to victims?  For example, are the 
traffickers recruiting victims through lucrative job offers? 
Are victims sold by their families, or approached by friends 
of friends?  Are victims "self-presenting" (approaching the 
exploiter without the involvement of a recruiter or 
transporter)? If recruitment or transportation is involved, 
what methods are used to recruit or transport victims (e.g., 
are false documents being used)?  Are employment, travel, and 
tourism agencies or marriage brokers involved with or 
fronting for traffickers or crime groups to traffic 
individuals? 
-- E. The majority of trafficking victims are brought into 
France illegally and are often exploited by large, 
well-organized, international criminal groups.  The OCRTEH 
described the trafficking networks in France as controlled 
primarily by Bulgarians, Nigerians, and Cameroonians, with 
very rare instances of French networks.  Traffickers used 
methods ranging from the confiscation of the victim's 
identification papers to cultural isolation to physical or 
psychological abuse.  Some victims came to France as a result 
of fraud or force, while others had worked as prostitutes in 
their home countries and were willing to continue the 
practice to pay for their immigration papers.  Some women and 
girls were kidnapped or "bought" and then sold at auction to 
prostitution networks in the Balkans before being smuggled 
into the country.  Souvira reported that victims are 
subjected to prostitution methods that vary according to the 
network and the nationality of the women involved.  He 
characterized visible examples of prostitution on the street 
as the work of Romanian and Bulgarian networks from the 
regions of Varna and Sofia, who exploit the Roma and charge 
30 or 40 euros ($41 or $55) per hour.  Souvira described most 
of the large African trafficking networks as led by 
Nigerians, who recruit young girls and send them to the 
streets of Europe to work as prostitutes.  He noted that 
Ghanaian networks are primarily run by families and young 
girls are sold by their parents in the hopes of receiving the 
profits from the prostitution.  He stated that the second and 
more discreet type of prostitution in France involves the use 
of private apartments, hotels, and luxury brothels, where 
girls are moved from town to town by Russian, Belarussian, 
Albanian, and Bulgarian pimps, who charge 300 to 400 euros 
($411 to $548) per hour.  Souvira acknowledged the rise in 
Chinese prostitution in France, describing the human 
trafficking as controlled by Chinese organized criminals that 
smuggle immigrants illegally into the country for an 
ostensible better life.  Young Chinese women work for Asian 
restaurants and workshops throughout France but are forced 
into prostitution in massage parlors to repay the debt of 
their passage into the country.  Souvira commented that the 
language barrier made it difficult for the OCRTEH to 
infiltrate Mandarin speaking networks and for Chinese victims 
to seek assistance.  According to Souvira, the third most 
common method involves the false recruitment of girls via 
modeling agencies that distribute headshot books to wealthy 
clients for the reservation of prostitution services.  In 
addition, many trafficking victims are in the country legally 
as France does not require visas for visitors from EU member 
states Romania or Bulgaria for visits of less than 90 days. 
As two of the largest source country nationals do not require 
visas and immigration and border controls can be porous under 
the Schengen Accords, it is relatively easy for traffickers 
and victims to enter France undetected.  A large part of 
metropolitan French border-monitoring has been subsumed to 
the Schengen Treaty border control, which covers all French 
land borders and some of its air traffic as well.  Persons 
arriving by air, train, or car from other Schengen member 
countries, such as Belgium, Switzerland, Spain, Italy, 
Germany, and Luxembourg, are not subject to immigration 
inspection when they enter France.  Although French 
coordination on trafficking with other EU countries is 
strong, open borders among Schengen members of the EU hinder 
France's pro-active approach. 
 
PARIS 00000196  004.14 OF 012 
 
 
 
SETTING THE SCENE FOR FRANCE'S ANTI-TIP EFFORTS 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
¶3. (SBU) Responses are keyed to reporting questions specified 
in paragraphs 26 of reftel. 
 
Does the government acknowledge that human trafficking is a 
problem in the country?  If not, why not? 
-- A. France recognizes that trafficking in persons is a 
serious problem and actively works to combat it.  In 2008, 
France ratified the EU Convention on Action Against 
Trafficking in Persons, the first legally binding 
international instrument that addresses TIP in a 
comprehensive manner, and modified the French 
anti-trafficking law to better prosecute forced labor 
violations.  The GOF has also ratified the following 
instruments: the ILO Convention No. 182 on the Worst Forms of 
Child Labor in 2001, the Convention on the Rights of the 
Child (CRC) in 1990, the Optional Protocol on the Sale of 
Children, Child Prostitution, and Child Pornography in 2003, 
and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress, and Punish Trafficking 
in Persons, Especially Women and Children in 2002.  The GOF 
also funds anti-trafficking and anti-sex trade awareness 
campaigns in association with NGOs. 
 
Which government agencies are involved in efforts to combat 
sex and labor trafficking - including forced labor - and, 
which agency, if any, has the lead in these efforts? 
-- B. France's inter-ministerial commission to combat 
trafficking in persons includes the OCRTEH and OCLTI under 
the direction of the Ministry of Interior.  Head of the 
national anti-trafficking effort, the OCRTEH coordinates its 
efforts with several government ministries, including 
Interior, Justice, Education, Tourism, Health and Solidarity, 
Foreign Affairs, and Employment/Social Cohesion/Lodging.  The 
OCRTEH also has strong ties with the anti-pimping brigade of 
the Paris police.  The OCRTEH is the operational and 
political focal point for French anti-trafficking efforts as 
police units all over the country turn their cases over to 
OCRTEH if they are found to involve trafficking.  In 
addition, OCRTEH serves as the designated clearing house for 
inquiries on trafficking issues and the head of the OCRTEH 
testifies before the legislature on trafficking questions. 
 
What are the limitations on the government's ability to 
address these problems in practice?  For example, is funding 
for police or other institutions inadequate?  Is overall 
corruption a problem?  Does the government lack the resources 
to aid victims? 
-- C. There was no evidence of governmental limitations to 
addressing trafficking in persons in France.  There were no 
reports of government corruption in this area during the 
reporting period. 
 
To what extent does the government systematically monitor its 
anti-trafficking efforts (on all fronts -- prosecution, 
victim protection, and prevention) and periodically make 
available, publicly or privately and directly or through 
regional/international organizations, its assessments of 
these anti-trafficking efforts? 
-- D. Systematic monitoring and the assessment of 
anti-trafficking efforts on all fronts to include 
prosecution, victim protection, and prevention on behalf of 
the French government are led by OCRTEH.  The OCRTEH releases 
official data on trafficking in persons and prostitution via 
restricted, internal report to the Ministry of Interior in 
late March every year.  Post anticipates that the GOF will 
provide the Embassy with a white paper providing more 
detailed information on TIP-related arrests and the number of 
trafficking victims identified during the reporting period in 
April. 
 
What measures has the government taken to establish the 
identity of local populations, including birth registration, 
citizenship, and nationality? 
-- E. The GOF does not collect ethnic data on its citizens or 
immigrants and does not officially recognize racial 
differences among the population.  As such, there is no 
national database which reflects the birth registration, 
citizenship, or national of the local population.  In 
addition, French-EU immigration laws make the 
pre-identification of victims difficult.  Government efforts 
to prevent and monitor such criminal activity were made more 
difficult by the open borders under the Schengen Accords.  As 
 
PARIS 00000196  005.8 OF 012 
 
 
EU citizens, foreign nationals from primary source countries 
like Romania and Bulgaria no longer require visas to enter 
France and enjoy the freedom of movement and the right to 
work in all other EU member states. 
 
To what extent is the government capable of gathering the 
data required for an in-depth assessment of law enforcement 
efforts?  Where are the gaps?  Are there any ways to work 
around these gaps? 
-- F. The government has shown itself to be capable of 
gathering the data required for an in-depth, internal 
assessment of law enforcement efforts.  However, since many 
prosecutors apply anti-pimping rather than anti-trafficking 
laws to prosecute traffickers, the assessment of trafficking 
from arrest data remains an exercise in inference as it is 
difficult to disaggregate data.  Recent government 
initiatives to encourage the application of anti-trafficking 
laws rather than anti-pimping statutes may allow the GOF to 
work around this gap.  In addition, Souvira described the 
official implementation of an html version of the national 
police database in 2009 as allowing for greater distribution 
and sharing of trafficking-related information among law 
enforcement agencies throughout France. 
 
INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS 
-------------------------------------------- 
¶4. (SBU) Responses are keyed to reporting questions specified 
in paragraphs 27 of reftel. 
 
Existing Laws against TIP: Does the country have a law or 
laws specifically prohibiting trafficking in persons -- both 
sexual exploitation and labor?  If so, please specifically 
cite the name of the law(s) and its date of enactment and 
provide the exact language (actual copies preferable) of the 
TIP provisions.  Please provide a full inventory of 
trafficking laws, including non-criminal statutes that allow 
for civil penalties against alleged trafficking crimes (e.g., 
civil forfeiture laws and laws against illegal debt). Does 
the law(s) cover both internal and transnational forms of 
trafficking?  If not, under what other laws can traffickers 
be prosecuted?  For example, are there laws against slavery 
or the exploitation of prostitution by means of force, fraud, 
or coercion?  Are these other laws being used in trafficking 
cases? 
-- A. Prostitution in France is legal; however, pimping and 
soliciting are illegal.  The legal minimum age for sexual 
consent is 15 years.  France has specific laws to prohibit 
trafficking in persons and other activities related to sexual 
and labor exploitation.  The GOF generally applied these laws 
in practice and laws specifically against pimping are 
strictly enforced.  Having ratified the Council of Europe 
Convention on Action Against Trafficking in Persons in 2008, 
the text obligates France to prevent trafficking, aid 
victims, and bring traffickers to justice.  France prohibits 
trafficking for both sexual and labor exploitation through a 
2003 addition, and 2007 revision, to its criminal code. 
Article 225-4-1 of the criminal and penal code is the main 
piece of legislation that penalizes trafficking in persons 
and prescribes penalties that are sufficiently stringent and 
can exceed those for rape depending on the specific human 
trafficking offense.  French prosecutors have historically 
favored the use of anti-pimping statutes (articles 225-5 
through 225-12) instead of the anti-trafficking statue due to 
a lack of experience in applying the newer, anti-trafficking 
section of the law.  The penalties under the anti-pimping 
laws are essentially identical to those prescribed under the 
anti-trafficking law.  However, on January 13, 2009, the 
Supreme Court expanded the rarely used anti-trafficking law 
or article 225-4-1 of the Penal Code to include the 
definition of "forced labor" as not exclusive to other 
qualifications (pimping, exploitation of begging, inhumane 
working and living conditions).  In so doing, the change 
provided specific rights to victims and encouraged 
prosecutors to apply and enforce the law more widely. 
 
Anti-Trafficking Law: Article 225-4-1 
------------------------------------- 
Inserted by Act no. 2003-239 on March 18, 2003, article 
225-4-1 of the law states, "Human trafficking is the 
recruitment, transport, transfer, accommodation, or reception 
of a person in exchange for remuneration or any other benefit 
or for the promise of remuneration or any other benefit, in 
order to put an individual at the disposal of a third party, 
where identified or not, so as to permit the commission 
 
PARIS 00000196  006.9 OF 012 
 
 
against that person of offenses of pimping, sexual assault or 
attack, exploitation for begging, or the imposition of living 
or working conditions inconsistent with human dignity, or to 
force this person to commit any felony or misdemeanor." 
 
Article 225-4-2 
   The offense under article 225-4-1 is punishable by up to 
10 years' imprisonment and by a fine of 1,500,000 euros 
($2,055,000) when it is committed: 
   ¶1. Against a minor; 
   ¶2. Against a person whose particular vulnerability due to 
age, sickness, infirmity, to a physical or psychological 
disability, or to pregnancy, is apparent or known to the 
perpetrator; 
   ¶3. Against two or more people; 
   ¶4. Against a person who is outside the territory of the 
French Republic or upon his arrival on the territory of the 
French Republic; 
   ¶5. When the person has been brought into contact with the 
perpetrator through the use of a telecommunications network 
for the distribution of messages to a non-specified audience; 
   ¶6. In circumstances which directly expose the person 
against whom the offense is committed to the immediate risk 
of death or of injuries of a nature to cause mutilation or a 
permanent disability; 
   ¶7. With the use of threats, constraints, violence or 
fraudulent behavior against the party concerned, his family 
or someone who has a regular relationship with him; 
   ¶8. By a legitimate, natural or adoptive ascendant of the 
victim of the offense provided for by article 225-4-1 or by a 
person holding authority over him or who misuses the 
authority conferred by his position; 
   ¶9. By a person whose post requires him to participate in 
the fight against human trafficking or to uphold public order. 
 
Article 225-4-3 
   When it is committed by an organized gang, the offense 
provided for by article 225-4-1 is punishable by up to 20 
years' imprisonment and by a fine of 3,000,000 euros 
($4,110,000). 
 
Article 225-4-4 
   The offense provided for by article 224-4-1, when 
committed with recourse to torture or acts of barbarity, is 
punishable by up to life imprisonment and by a fine of 
4,500,000 euros ($6,165,000). 
 
Article 225-4-5 
   When the felony or misdemeanor committed or to be 
committed against the victim of the offense of human 
trafficking is punishable by a custodial sentence longer than 
the prison sentence applicable under articles 225-4-1 to 
225-4-3, the human trafficking offense is punishable by 
sentences applicable to the felonies or misdemeanors of which 
the perpetrator was aware, and if this felony or misdemeanor 
is accompanied by aggravating circumstances, by the penalties 
applicable only to the aggravating circumstances of which the 
perpetrator had knowledge. 
 
Article 225-4-6 
   Legal persons can be declared criminally responsible, 
under the provisions of article 121-2, for the offenses 
provided for in the present section. The penalties incurred 
by legal persons are: 
   ¶1. A fine, subject to the terms of article 131-38; 
   ¶2. The penalties mentioned by article 131-39. 
 
Article 225-4-7 
   Attempt to commit the offenses provided for by the present 
section is punished by the same penalties. 
 
Article 225-4-8 
   Being unable to account for resources corresponding to 
one's lifestyle while being in close contact with one or more 
victims or perpetrators of the offenses provided for by 
articles 225-4-1 to 225-4-6 is punishable by up to seven 
years' imprisonment and by a fine of 750,000 euros 
($1,027,500). 
 
Article 225-4-9 
   Any person who has attempted to commit the offenses 
outlined in the present section is exempted from punishment 
if, having alerted the judicial or administrative 
authorities, he has prevented the offense from being carried 
 
PARIS 00000196  007.8 OF 012 
 
 
out, and, where relevant, has enabled the other perpetrators 
or accomplices to be identified. 
   The prison sentence incurred by the perpetrator of or the 
accomplice to the offense is reduced by half if, by alerting 
the legal or administrative authorities, he has enabled the 
offense to be stopped or has prevented the offense resulting 
in loss of life or permanent disability and, where relevant, 
has identified the other perpetrators or accomplices. Where 
the sentence incurred is imprisonment for life, this is 
reduced to twenty years' imprisonment. 
 
Anti-Pimping/Anti-Soliciting Laws 
--------------------------------- 
Article 225-5 
   Pimping is where any person, in whatsoever manner: 
   ¶1. Helps, assist or protects the prostitution of others; 
   ¶2. Makes a profit out of the prostitution of others, 
shares the proceeds of it or receives income from a person 
engaging habitually in prostitution; 
   ¶3. Hires, trains or corrupts a person with a view to 
prostitution or exercises on such a person pressure to 
practice prostitution or to continue doing so. 
   Pimping is punishable by up to 7 years' imprisonment and a 
fine of 150,000 euros ($205,500). 
 
Article 225-6 
   The following acts committed by any person and in whatever 
manner are assimilated to pimping and are punished by the 
penalties set out under article 225-5: 
   ¶1. Acting as an intermediary between two persons one of 
whom is engaged in prostitution and the other exploits or 
remunerates the prostitution of others; 
   ¶2. Facilitating the justification of a procurer's 
fictitious resources; 
   ¶3. Being unable to account for an income compatible with 
one's lifestyle while living with a person habitually engaged 
in prostitution or while entertaining a habitual relationship 
with one or more persons engaging in prostitution; 
   ¶4. Obstructing operations of prevention, control, 
assistance or re-education undertaken by institutions 
qualified to deal with persons in danger of prostitution or 
engaging in prostitution. 
 
Article 225-7 
   Pimping is punishable by up to ten years' imprisonment and 
a fine of 1,500,000 euros ($2,055,000) where it is committed: 
   ¶1. In respect of a minor; 
   ¶2. In respect of a person whose particular vulnerability, 
due to age, sickness, to a infirmity, a physical or 
psychological disability or to pregnancy, is apparent or 
known to the offender; 
   ¶3. In respect of two or more persons; 
   ¶4. In respect of a person who was incited to engage in 
prostitution either outside the territory of the French 
Republic, or upon arrival on the territory of the French 
Republic; 
   ¶5. By a legitimate, natural or adoptive ascendant of the 
person engaged in prostitution or by a person holding 
authority over him or who misuses the authority conferred on 
him by his position; 
   ¶6. By a person called upon to take part, by virtue of his 
position, in the fight against prostitution, in the 
protection of health or in the keeping of the public peace; 
   ¶7. By a person bearing a weapon; 
   ¶8. With the use of constraint, violence or fraudulent 
behavior; 
   ¶9. By two or more individuals acting as offenders or 
accomplices, although not constituting an organized gang. 
   ¶10. Through the use of a communications network for the 
distribution of messages to a non-specified audience. 
   The first two paragraphs of article 132-23 governing the 
safety period are applicable to the offenses set out under 
the present article. 
 
Article 225-7-1 
   The offense of pimping is punishable by up to fifteen 
years' imprisonment and a fine of 3,000,000 euros 
($4,110,000) where it is committed against a minor under the 
age of fifteen. 
 
Article 225-8 
   The offense of pimping defined under article 225-7 
punishable by up to twenty years' imprisonment and a fine of 
3,000,000 euros ($4,110,000) where it is committed by an 
 
PARIS 00000196  008.8 OF 012 
 
 
organized gang. 
   The first two paragraphs of article 132-23 governing the 
safety period are applicable to the offense set out under the 
present article. 
 
Article 225-9 
   The offense of pimping committed by resorting to torture 
or acts of barbarity is punishable up to life imprisonment 
and a fine of 4,500,000 euros ($6,165,000). 
   The first two paragraphs of article 132-23 governing the 
safety period are applicable to the offense provided for by 
the present article. 
 
Article 225-10 
   A penalty of up to ten years' imprisonment and a fine of 
750,000 euros ($1,027,500) is incurred by anyone who, acting 
directly or through an intermediary: 
   ¶1. Holds, manages, exploits, directs, operates, finances 
or contributes to finance a place of prostitution; 
   ¶2. Holding, managing, exploiting, directing, operating, 
financing or contributing to finance any given place open to 
the public or used by the public, accepts or habitually 
tolerates one or more persons to engage in prostitution 
within the premises or their annexes, or solicits clients in 
such premises with a view to prostitution; 
   ¶3. Sells or makes available to one or more persons any 
premises or places not open to the public, in the knowledge 
that they will there engage in prostitution; 
   ¶4. Sells, hires, or makes available in any way whatsoever 
vehicles of any type to one or more persons knowing that they 
will engage in prostitution in them. 
   The first two paragraphs of article 132-23 governing the 
safety period are applicable to the offenses set out under 
provisions 1 and 2 of the present article. 
 
Article 225-11 
   Attempt to commit the misdemeanors set out under the 
present section is subject to the same penalties. 
 
Article 225-11-1 
   Any person who has attempted to commit the offenses 
outlined in the present section is exempted from punishment 
if, having alerted the judicial or administrative 
authorities, he has prevented the offense from being carried 
out, and, where relevant, has enabled the other perpetrators 
or accomplices to be identified. 
   The prison sentence incurred by the perpetrator of or the 
accomplice to the offense is reduced by half if, by alerting 
the legal or administrative authorities, he has enabled the 
offense to be stopped or has prevented the offense resulting 
in loss of life or permanent disability and, where relevant, 
has identified the other perpetrators or accomplices.  Where 
the sentence incurred is life imprisonment, this is reduced 
to twenty years' imprisonment. 
 
Article 225-12 
   Legal persons may be convicted of the offenses defined by 
articles 225-5 to 225-10, pursuant to the conditions set out 
under article 121-2. 
   The penalties incurred by legal persons are: 
   ¶1. A fine, pursuant to the conditions set out under 
article 131-38; 
   ¶2. The penalties set out under article 131-39. 
 
Article 225-10-1 
   Publicly soliciting another person by any means, including 
passive conduct, with a view to inciting them to engage in 
sexual relations in exchange for remuneration or a promise of 
remuneration is punished by two months' imprisonment and by a 
fine of 3,750 euros ($5,137.50). 
 
Punishment of Sex Trafficking Offenses: What are the 
prescribed and imposed penalties for the trafficking of 
persons for commercial sexual exploitation, including for the 
forced prostitution of adults and the prostitution of 
children? 
-- B. Under Article 225-4-1, human trafficking is punishable 
by up to seven years' imprisonment and a fine of 150,000 euro 
($205,500) fine.  The forced prostitution of a minor is 
punishable by up to 10 years' imprisonment and a fine of 
1,500,000 euros ($2,055,000).  The penalties for pimping and 
trafficking are basically identical. 
 
Punishment of Labor Trafficking Offenses:  What are the 
 
PARIS 00000196  009.8 OF 012 
 
 
prescribed and imposed penalties for labor trafficking 
offenses, including all forms of forced labor?  If your 
country is a source country for labor migrants, do the 
government's laws provide for criminal punishment -- i.e. 
jail time -- for labor recruiters who engage in recruitment 
of workers using knowingly fraudulent or deceptive offers 
with the purpose of subjecting workers to compelled service 
in the destination country?  If your country is a destination 
for labor migrants (legal/regular or illegal/irregular), are 
there laws punishing employers or labor agents who confiscate 
workers' passports or travel documents for the purpose of 
labor trafficking, switch contracts without the worker's 
consent as a means to keep the worker in a state of compelled 
service, or withhold payment of salaries as means of keeping 
the worker in a state of compelled service? 
-- C. The penalties for trafficking for labor exploitation 
are the same as those for trafficking for sexual 
exploitation. 
 
What are the prescribed penalties for rape or forcible sexual 
assault? 
-- D. Article 222-23 of the French penal code defines "any 
act of sexual penetration, whatever its nature, committed 
against another person by violence, constraint, threat, or 
surprise" as rape.  The penalty for sexual assault is up to 
fifteen years' imprisonment and is comparable to penalties 
for aggravated offenses of human trafficking and pimping. 
 
Law Enforcement Statistics: Did the government take legal 
action against human trafficking offenders during the 
reporting period?  If so, provide numbers of investigations, 
prosecutions, convictions, and sentences imposed, including 
details on plea bargains and fines, if relevant and 
available.  Please note the number of convicted trafficking 
offenders who received suspended sentences and the number who 
received only a fine as punishment.  Please indicate which 
laws were used to investigate, prosecute, convict, and 
sentence traffickers.  Also, if possible, please disaggregate 
numbers of cases by type of TIP (labor vs. commercial sexual 
exploitation) and victims (children under 18 years of age vs. 
adults).  What were the actual punishments imposed on 
convicted trafficking offenders? Are they serving the time 
sentenced?  If not, why not? 
-- E. The Ministry of Interior reported 523 prosecutions 
under the pimping statute in 2008, consisting of 445 arrests 
for pimping and 78 for human trafficking offenses.  The 
Ministry of Justice reported that 19 sentences were handed 
out in 2008 for trafficking offenses, with 15 convictions for 
trafficking according to article 225-4-1 for single offenses 
of trafficking in human beings, three convictions for article 
225-2 and article 225-4 offenses committed against an 
individual upon entry into French territory, and one 
conviction for violation of article 225-2 and article 225-7 
for trafficking committed with threats, coercion, or 
violence.  The Ministry of Justice reported that 1178 
convictions based on other infractions for crimes related to 
modern slavery, with 966 convictions for pimping, 117 cases 
of subjecting vulnerable individuals to indecent 
accommodations and working conditions, 32 convictions for 
withholding wages of vulnerable individuals, 26 for aiding in 
the unauthorized entry of foreign nationals into France under 
inhumane conditions, 26 for the prostitution of minors, and 
11 for the exploitation of begging.  The OCRTEH also reported 
that 23 trafficking networks were dismantled in France in 
2008, of which 15 were Eastern European and Balkan networks, 
one was Nigerian, four were Latin American, and three were 
Asian.  Although official statistics on the number of 
trafficking networks in France have yet to be released for 
2009, the following examples illustrate the dismantlement of 
large prostitution rings during the reporting period: 
 
On November 26, 2009, the French police dismantled a Romanian 
prostitution ring in Beziers, following a lengthy 
investigation and a judicial inquiry dating back to January 
2009 by the prosecutor of Beziers.  A dozen alleged pimps, 
prostitutes, and 17 Romanian girls aged eighteen to 
twenty-five years, were arrested.  The international network 
operated between Romania and France.  Residing in Beziers, he 
traveled regularly between France and Romania and had seven 
accomplices (Romanian, Montenegrin, and Hungarian).  The 
alleged pimps put girls on the national highway 113, between 
Beziers and Pezenas and Beziers and Narbonne.  The alleged 
pimps were still in custody to date, while the girls were 
released. 
 
PARIS 00000196  010.8 OF 012 
 
 
 
On October 24, 2009, France dismantled an extensive 
prostitution ring, arresting 35 people and charging eight 
Nigerian nationals for aggravated human trafficking and 
pimping as well as conspiracy after vast dragnet conducted by 
local police uncovered the network, which operated in 
Bordeaux, Limoges, and Paris.  Claude Laplaud, the chief 
prosecutor in Bordeaux, called the eight suspects the 
possible "interface between (trafficking in persons) between 
France and Africa" and indicated that the case involved "very 
young women" and minors.  Laplaud reported that the young 
women were recruited in Nigeria, where they were promised 
work in France as waitresses.  Sent to Paris with fake 
documents via Abidjan, in a journey that could take over two 
years, the women were ultimately forced into prostitution in 
Bordeaux or Limoges. 
 
On September 29, 2009, 18 people were arrested in Savoie and 
charged with pimping and aggravated human trafficking by an 
organized gang.  The Chambery Inter-Regional Judicial Police 
(DIPJ) indicated that "investigations revealed a highly 
organized ring, with girls coming from Germany and oftentimes 
passing through Alsace" into France.  The young women were 
thought to be getting jobs in a bar in Germany.  The profits 
from the prostitution ring were sent back to Bulgaria. 
 
Does the government provide any specialized training for law 
enforcement and immigration officials on identifying and 
treating victims of trafficking?  Or training on 
investigating and prosecuting human trafficking crimes? 
Specify whether NGOs, international organizations, and/or the 
USG provide specialized training for host government 
officials. 
-- F. Through the OCRTEH and the Ministry of Social Affairs 
and Employment's General Directorate for Social Action 
(DGAS), the government continued to fund training programs 
for government employees and NGOs during the reporting 
period.  In cooperation with NGOs, the DGAS and the OCRTEH 
train police on identifying victims of trafficking.  The CCEM 
contacts noted that they developed a course available on DVD 
with the Ministry of Interior to help train police officers 
identify victims.  The French Ministry of Economy, Industry, 
and Employment worked with Fondation Scelles to create and 
distribute pocket-sized cards to border police and NGOs on 
how to correctly identify trafficking victims.  The OCRTEH 
also provides training for managers and employees of major 
hotel groups on suspicious activity that they should report 
to police.  The OCRTEH works in partnership with the Accor 
hotel group, organizing seminars to teach hotel personnel how 
to identify cases of trafficking and providing contact 
information with the local police.  As in previous years, the 
OCRTEH trains prosecutors and judges on the use of the 
anti-trafficking statute, which was originally written in 
2003 and revised in 2007, instead of relying on anti-pimping 
laws.  France continues to prosecute individuals who violate 
French labor practices by abusing or threatening employees or 
by withholding wages.  Local work inspection offices also 
offer advice to employees. 
 
Does the government cooperate with other governments in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases?  If 
possible, provide the number of cooperative international 
investigations on trafficking during the reporting period. 
-- G. France works closely with other EU countries and source 
countries to combat trafficking.  By the end of 2008, the 
OCRTEH successfully concluded seven bilateral accords on 
internal security with provisions on trafficking in persons 
with the following countries: Albania, Croatia, Libya, 
Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, Israel, and Mauritius.  In 2009, 
France continued working on reaching judicial agreements with 
Nigeria and Cameroon, two major source countries for 
trafficking in persons to France.  In October 2008, the 
French Ministry of Interior and its Belgium equivalent 
created a joint investigation unit to combat human 
trafficking, which was the first of its kind within the EU 
system.  A delegation comprised of senior Jordanian, 
Moroccan, and Palestinian law enforcement officials visited 
the French police service for a multi-lateral exchange on the 
Modane border on October 21, 2009.  In cooperation with the 
Italian authorities, GOF hosted the exchange on the technical 
work of the border police using forgery detection and 
identification techniques.  On July 24, 2009, the 
Franco-Romanian judicial working group was established by 
Secretary of State for European Affairs Pierre Lellouche and 
 
PARIS 00000196  011.10 OF 012 
 
 
his Romanian counterpart Bogdan Mazuru to "find effective 
solutions" and actively investigate and prosecute human 
trafficking between the two countries.  In further 
cooperation with the Government of Romania, two French 
experts in the field of fighting human trafficking worked 
with the Inspector General of the Romanian Police (IGPR) in 
Bucharest from November 9-13, 2009.  Police captain Christine 
Chassard of OCRTEH and Lieutenant Chantal Bredin of OCLTI, a 
close post contact, presented the French perspective and 
participated in exchanges with fifteen specialized 
investigators of the Directorate for the fight against 
organized crime (DCCD) of IGPR. 
 
Does the government extradite persons who are charged with 
trafficking in other countries?  If so, please provide the 
number of traffickers extradited during the reporting period, 
and the number of trafficking extraditions pending. In 
particular, please report on any pending or concluded 
extraditions of trafficking offenders to the United States. 
-- H. France extradites persons charged with trafficking to 
other countries; however, the extradition process can be long 
and cumbersome.  Within the European Union, French 
authorities prefer to use EU arrest warrants, which can take 
up to forty days to execute, do not depend on the examination 
of local law, and permit expeditious transfer of custody 
among member states.  Underscoring that the "new European 
legal tools allow for real progress," Souvira highlighted the 
advancement of the GOF joint effort with member states, 
thanks to the use of the European arrest warrant.  As an 
example of the success of the cooperation, France used the EU 
arrest warrant in October 2009 to secure the extradition of 
three Albanian nationals implicated in the smuggling of women 
into France as part of a prostitution ring.  The traffickers 
were arrested by the Spanish police and returned to French 
custody after only ten days from the initial arrest.  Souvira 
judged that the tools for police cooperation in Europe exist 
but are hindered by the different laws that exist in 
different EU countries.  In 2008, 53 individuals subject to 
the EU arrest warrant for trafficking-related offenses were 
extradited to France by foreign authorities, according to the 
OCRTEH.  France also extradites French citizens abroad to 
face trafficking charges in France. 
 
Is there evidence of government involvement in or tolerance 
of trafficking, on a local or institutional level?  If so, 
please explain in detail. 
-- I. There was no evidence of government involvement in or 
tolerance of trafficking during the reporting period. 
 
If government officials are involved in human trafficking, 
what steps has the government taken to end such complicity? 
Please indicate the number of government officials 
investigated and prosecuted for involvement in trafficking or 
trafficking-related criminal activities during the reporting 
period.  Have any been convicted?  What sentence(s) was 
imposed?  Please specify if officials received suspended 
sentences, or were given a fine, fired, or reassigned to 
another position within the government as punishment.  Please 
indicate the number of convicted officials that received 
suspended sentences or received only a fine as punishment. 
-- J. There were no reports that government officials were 
involved in human trafficking during the reporting period. 
 
For countries that contribute troops to international 
peacekeeping efforts, please indicate whether the government 
vigorously investigated, prosecuted, convicted and sentenced 
nationals of the country deployed abroad as part of a 
peacekeeping or other similar mission who engaged in or 
facilitated severe forms of trafficking or who exploited 
victims of such trafficking. 
-- K. France deploys around 13,000 to 16,000 French troops 
abroad every year to participate in international 
peacekeeping operations.  Post has no information of any 
French troops deployed abroad for the purpose of supporting 
peacekeeping missions that have engaged in or facilitated 
severe forms of trafficking. 
 
If the country has an identified problem of child sex 
tourists coming to the country, what are the countries of 
origin for sex tourists?  How many foreign pedophiles did the 
government prosecute or deport/extradite to their country of 
origin?  If your host country's nationals are perpetrators of 
child sex tourism, do the country's child sexual abuse laws 
have extraterritorial coverage (similar to the U.S. PROTECT 
 
PARIS 00000196  012.10 OF 012 
 
 
Act) to allow the prosecution of suspected sex tourists for 
crimes committed abroad?  If so, how many of the country's 
nationals were prosecuted and/or convicted during the 
reporting period under the extraterritorial provision(s) for 
traveling to other countries to engage in child sex tourism? 
-- L. France prosecutes French nationals who travel abroad to 
engage in child sexual tourism.  French police travel to 
child sex destination countries to investigate reports of 
child sexual exploitation abroad and to investigate French 
nationals suspected of this criminal activity.  Of particular 
note during the reporting period was the conviction of two 
French citizens for child sex tourism.  On March 11, 2009, 
two French nationals prosecuted for aggravated sex tourism in 
Southeast Asia were sentenced to the maximum penalty of seven 
years imprisonment by the Criminal Court of Colmar and were 
prohibited from leaving French territory for five years. 
Jean-Marc Malgarini was fined 70,000 euros ($95,900) and 
Robert Chung was fined 50,000 euros ($68,500) for "having 
solicited, accepted, or obtained" sex with prostitutes under 
15 years old as well as importing and possessing images of 
child pornography.  The two were also asked to contribute 
12,600 euros ($17,262) to the French child protection 
associations Themis and Enfance et Partage. 
 
Culture Minister Frederic Mitterrand faced criticism during 
the reporting period related to his 2005 literary work, which 
included depictions of sexual tourism in Asia.  In "The Bad 
Life," Mitterrand details the experiences of an unnamed 
protagonist with so-called "boys" in the brothels of 
Thailand.  Facing pressure to resign for engaging in sexual 
tourism before he joined the government, Minister of Culture 
Frederic Mitterrand stated during an October 8, 2009 
television interview that he had never had sex with a minor. 
"Each time I was with people who were my age, or were five 
years younger," the 62 year-old Mitterrand said, adding: "I 
condemn sexual tourism, which is a disgrace.  I condemn 
pedophilia in which I have never participated in any way." 
 
RIVKIN