10PHNOMPENH29
2010 INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT - CAMBODIA
Tue Jan 19 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO8739
PP RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #0029/01 0190041
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 190041Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1556
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE
RUEHBK/AMEMBASSY BANGKOK 2827
RUEHHI/AMEMBASSY HANOI 4118
RUEHHM/AMCONSUL HO CHI MINH 0163
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUCPCIM/CIMS NTDB WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC 0822
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 17 PHNOM PENH 000029 
 
STATE FOR EAP/MLS, EB/IFD/OIA, EB/TPP/ABT, EEB/TPP/MTA, EEB/TPP/BTA 
STATE PASS TO USTR/KLEIN AND WEISEL 
STATE PASS TO USTDA/ROSSITER 
BANGKOK FOR USAID/CARDUNER, FCS/GRIFFIN 
HANOI FOR FAS/BAILEY 
HO CHI MINH CITY FOR FAS/ REIDEL 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: ECON EFIN EINV ELAB ETRD KIPR OPIC KTDB USTR CB
SUBJECT: 2010 INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT - CAMBODIA 
 
REF: 09 STATE 124006 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000029  001.12 OF 017 
 
 
¶1.  Cambodia, a developing country, began the transformation from a 
command economy to the free market in the late 1980s.  It is now 
integrating into the regional and world trading framework.  In 1999, 
Cambodia joined the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) 
and in September 2004, became a member of the World Trade 
Organization (WTO).  On December 15, 2008 the entry into force of 
the ASEAN Charter brought Cambodia and other member states into a 
new regional legal framework.  Cambodia has shown interest in 
participating in other international trading arrangements, including 
the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum (APEC). 
 
¶2.  As part of its WTO commitments to strengthen the investment 
climate for both foreign and domestic businesses, Cambodia committed 
to enact 47 laws or regulations to address areas where existing law 
did not meet WTO requirements.  Cambodia has been behind schedule in 
fulfilling its WTO commitments to pass necessary business 
legislation concerning the general business environment, trade in 
goods, trade in services, and the protection of intellectual 
property rights.  However, the country has made progress recently, 
passing several significant laws in 2008, including a Law on Plant 
Breeder Rights and Law on Civil Aviation, and in 2009, the 
government promulgated a Law on Tourism, a Law on Insolvency, and a 
sub-decree establishing a national commercial arbitration body.  The 
government has either completed drafts of most of the remaining 
required laws or is waiting for their approval by the legislature. 
 
 
¶3.  Since the re-establishment of a constitutional monarchy in 1993, 
the economy has grown steadily.  From 2004 to 2008, the economy grew 
at an average of approximately 10 percent per year, driven largely 
by an expansion in the garment, construction, agriculture, and 
tourism sectors.  In 2005, exploitable oil and natural gas deposits 
were found beneath Cambodia's territorial waters, representing a new 
revenue stream for the government if commercial extraction begins. 
Mining also is attracting significant investor interest, 
particularly in the northern parts of the country.  However, the 
global economic crisis has adversely affected the economy's key 
pillars and economic growth was expected to contract in 2009. 
 
¶4.  Inflation decreased from its sharp rise in 2008, which peaked at 
25.7 percent in May 2008 driven largely by the global surge in oil 
and food prices.  Because the economy is heavily dollarized, a 
depreciation of the Cambodian riel and the U.S. dollar against 
trading partner currencies contributed to imported inflation, while 
rising domestic demand contributed to domestically generated 
pressures.  However, these pressures lessened in 2009 and Cambodia 
recorded an average inflation rate of an estimated 4.5 percent and a 
7.5 percent year-on-year inflation rate. 
 
¶5.  Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) approved by the Council for the 
Development of Cambodia (CDC), Cambodia's investment approval body, 
has dramatically increased in recent years, with approved proposals 
peaking at nearly USD 11 billion in 2008, compared with USD 201 
million in 2004.  However, figures for the first 10 months of 2009 
reveal that investment has slowed significantly to only USD 1.6 
billion, an 82 percent decrease compared to total investments in 
¶2008.  The CDC does not have a functional mechanism to monitor 
implementation of projects, so it is not clear how many proposed 
projects are fully implemented.  Corruption has been singled out as 
one of the most serious deterrents to private investment. 
 
¶6.  Since early 1999, the Cambodian government has intensified its 
economic reform program, a process the international financial 
institutions and donors encourage, participate in, and monitor 
closely.  In recent years the government has publicly committed 
itself on numerous occasions to fighting corruption, pursuing good 
governance, and increasing transparency and predictability.  This 
strategy is set out in phase II of the government's latest public 
reform effort called the "Rectangular Strategy for Growth, 
Employment, Equity, and Efficiency." 
 
¶7.  The government has initiated specific measures to promote 
business, especially small and medium-sized businesses, by reducing 
costs and the time required for business registration and by 
establishing a number of committees for business promotion and trade 
facilitation. 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000029  002.8 OF 017 
 
 
 
Openness to Foreign Investment 
------------------------------ 
 
¶8.  Cambodia officially welcomes foreign direct investment. 
Cambodia's 1994 Law on Investment established an open and liberal 
foreign investment regime.  All sectors of the economy are open to 
foreign investment and 100 percent foreign ownership is permitted in 
most sectors.  Article 44 of the Constitution provides that only 
Cambodian citizens and legal entities have the right to own land. 
However, a new law allowing foreign ownership of properties located 
above the ground floor is expected to be passed in 2010.  Aside from 
this, there is little or no discrimination against foreign investors 
either at the time of initial investment or after investment. 
However, some foreign businesses have reported that they are at a 
disadvantage vis-a-vis Cambodian or other foreign rivals, who engage 
in acts of corruption or tax evasion, or take advantage of 
Cambodia's poor enforcement of legal regulations. 
 
¶9.  In addition, there are a few sectors open to foreign investors 
which are subject to conditions, local equity participation, or 
prior authorization from relevant authorities.  These sectors 
include manufacture of cigarettes, movie production, rice milling, 
exploitation of gemstones, publishing and printing, radio and 
television, manufacturing wood and stone carvings, and silk weaving. 
 The government has issued a sub-decree restricting foreign 
ownership of hospitals and clinics and forbidding the employment of 
non-Cambodian doctors in any specialty in which the Ministry of 
Health considers there to be an adequate number of Cambodian 
practitioners. 
 
¶10.  Under a sub-decree dated September 2005, Cambodia prohibits 
certain investment activities, including investment in production or 
processing of psychotropic and narcotic substances, poisonous 
chemicals, agricultural pesticides and insecticides, and other goods 
that use chemical substances prohibited by international regulations 
or the World Health Organization that affect public health and the 
environment.  Production of electric power by using waste imported 
from foreign countries is prohibited, as is forestry exploitation. 
 
¶11.  The privatization of state enterprises and transactions 
involving state property has not always been carried out in a 
transparent manner.  In several instances, the public learned that 
enterprises were for sale or swap only after the government 
announced a sale or deal to a particular buyer. 
 
¶12.  Investor rights (investment guarantees) provided for in the Law 
on Investment include: 
--  Foreign investors shall not be treated in a discriminatory 
manner by reason of being a foreign entity, except in respect to 
land ownership as provided for in the Constitution of the Kingdom of 
Cambodia. 
--  The Royal Government of Cambodia shall not undertake a 
nationalization policy that adversely affects the private property 
of investors. 
--  The Royal Government of Cambodia shall not fix the price of 
products or fees for services. 
--  The Royal Government of Cambodia, in accordance with relevant 
laws and regulations, shall permit investors to purchase foreign 
currencies through the banking system and to remit abroad those 
currencies as payments for imports, repayments on loans, payments of 
royalties and management fees, profit remittances and repatriation 
of capital. 
 
¶13. The following is a summary of Cambodia's rankings in 
international indexes and the Millennium Challenge Corporation score 
card. 
 
Measure                    Year        Index/Ranking 
TI Corruption Index        2009        2/158 
Heritage Economic Freedom  2009        56.6/106 
World Bank Doing Business  2010        145/145 
MCC Govnt Effectiveness    2009        0.00/05 percent 
MCC Rule of Law            2009       -0.20/33 percent 
MCC Control Corruption     2009       -0.30/12 
MCC Fiscal Policy          2009       -2.4/35 percent 
MCC Trade Policy           2009        63.4/36 percent 
MCC Regulatory Quality     2009        0.21/65 percent 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000029  003.8 OF 017 
 
 
MCC Business Start Up      2009        0.765/16 percent 
MCC Land Rights Access     2009        0.769/88 percent 
MCC Natural Resource Mgmt  2009        68.75/61 percent 
 
Conversion and Transfer Policies 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶14.  There are no restrictions on the conversion of capital for 
investors.  The Foreign Exchange Law allows the National Bank of 
Cambodia (the central bank) to implement exchange controls in the 
event of a crisis; the law does not define what would constitute a 
crisis.  The U.S. Embassy is not aware of any cases in which 
investors have encountered obstacles in converting local to foreign 
currency or in sending capital out of the country. 
 
¶15.  The U.S. dollar is widely used and circulated in the economy. 
The 2009 exchange rate was stable, although slightly depreciated 
compared to 2008.  As of December 2009, the exchange rate was USD 1 
= 4,164 riel.  The government is committed to maintaining exchange 
rate stability. 
 
Expropriation and Compensation 
------------------------------ 
 
¶16.  Article 44 of the Cambodian Constitution, which restricts land 
ownership to Cambodian nationals, also states that "the (state's) 
right to confiscate properties from any person shall be exercised 
only in the public interest as provided for under the law and shall 
require fair and just compensation in advance."  Article 58 states 
that "the control and use of state properties shall be determined by 
law."  The Law on Investment provides that "the Royal Government of 
Cambodia shall not undertake a nationalization policy which 
adversely affects the private property of investors." 
 
¶17.  In late 2009, the National Assembly approved the Law on 
Expropriation which sets broad guidelines on land-taking procedures 
for public interest purposes and defines public interest activities 
such as construction of infrastructure projects, development of 
buildings for national protection and civil security, construction 
of facilities for research and exploitation of natural resources, 
and construction of oil pipeline and gas networks. 
 
¶18.  In spite of various legal protections, protection of immovable 
property rights is complicated by the fact that most property 
holders do not have legal documentation of their ownership rights. 
Numerous cases have been reported of influential individuals or 
groups acquiring property through means not entirely in keeping with 
the Constitution or laws.  This murky property holding environment 
may adversely affect long-term leases and /or corporate social 
responsibility goals unless proper due diligence is conducted. Cases 
of inhabitants being forced to relocate continued to occur when 
officials or businesspersons colluded with local authorities, 
although the numbers reported dropped significantly from the 
previous year.  Human rights NGO ADHOC reported receiving 186 land 
related cases during the year.  During the same period, another NGO 
received 115 land related cases in Phnom Penh and 14 provinces, 
affecting a total of 8,806 families.  Some of those expelled 
successfully contested these actions in court, but the majority of 
the cases in the courts were still being processed. 
 
¶19.  To date, there are no known investment disputes involving 
government expropriation of property belonging to U.S. citizens.  Up 
to 17 Thai businesses sustained varying degrees of damage during 
anti-Thai rioting in Phnom Penh on January 29, 2003.  The Cambodian 
government pledged to compensate Thai business owners, and all of 
claims have been resolved. 
 
Dispute Settlement 
------------------ 
 
¶20.  Cambodia's legal system is a mosaic of pre-1975 statutes 
modeled on French law, communist-era legislation dating from 
1979-1991, statutes put in place by the UN Transitional Authority in 
Cambodia (UNTAC) during the period 1991-93, and legislation passed 
by the Royal Government of Cambodia since 1993. 
 
¶21.  Cambodian culture and its legal system have traditionally 
favored negotiation and conciliation over adversarial conflict and 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000029  004.10 OF 017 
 
 
adjudication.  Thus, compromise solutions are the norm, even in 
cases where the law clearly favors one party in a dispute.  In civil 
cases, courts will often try conciliation before proceeding with a 
trial. 
 
¶22.  Cambodia's court system is generally seen as non-transparent 
and subject to outside influence.  Judges, who have been trained 
either for a short period in Cambodia or under other systems of law, 
have little access to published Cambodian statutes.  Judges can be 
inexperienced and courts are often understaffed with little 
experience, particularly in adjudicating commercial disputes.  The 
local and foreign business community reports frequent problems with 
inconsistent judicial rulings as well as outright corruption, and 
difficulty enforcing judgments.  For these reasons, U.S. investors 
are reluctant to resort to the courts to resolve commercial 
disputes. 
 
¶23.  The Cambodian judiciary system is beginning to undergo reform. 
To provide the necessary background knowledge, judges and court 
staff from around the country are being trained by the Royal Academy 
for Judges and Prosecutors, which was created in 2002.  In an effort 
to clean up the court system, the Prime Minister has announced ad 
hoc anti-corruption measures, including the dismissal, replacement, 
and transfer of judges and prosecutors.  The Supreme Council of 
Magistracy, comprised of a president (the King) and eight other 
members, is responsible for the appointment and conduct of judges 
and prosecutors. 
 
¶24.  To address the perception of many Cambodian and foreign 
business representatives that the court system is unreliable and 
susceptible to external political and commercial influence, the 
Cambodian government is finalizing draft legislation to create a 
Commercial Court.  In July 2009, the government passed a sub-decree 
creating a commercial arbitration body, the National Arbitration 
Center in the Ministry of Commerce.  When the National Arbitration 
Center is operational, parties involved in a commercial dispute that 
have a written arbitration agreement will be able to settle 
commercial disputes by means of quasi-judicial methods without 
involvement of the Cambodian courts.  Parties will be able to select 
arbitrators without direct government interference.  The Law on 
Commercial Arbitration also allows the Cambodia Chamber of Commerce 
to establish its own arbitration center for disputes between members 
or between members and third parties.  The law also mandates 
recognition of arbitral awards made outside of Cambodia. 
Arbitration awards can be appealed to the Appellate and Supreme 
Court of Cambodia based on limited grounds. 
 
¶25.  To handle specific disputes with regard to labor, the Ministry 
of Labor and Vocational Training established an Arbitration Council 
in May 2003.  Basing its decision on the provisions of the Labor 
Law, the Council has 30 arbitrators.  The Council is an independent 
body whose function is to resolve collective labor disputes that the 
Ministry is unable to solve by conciliation.  The Council's 
decisions are non-binding but it has been very successful in 
reducing the number of industrial actions in the garment sector. 
The Council plays a vital role in contributing to the development of 
healthy industrial relations in Cambodia.  The Council's success in 
the garment industry has prompted unions in other sectors, e.g., the 
hospitality and tourism sectors, to seek the Council's arbitration 
and mediation services. 
 
¶26.  Cambodia became a party to the Convention for the Settlement of 
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States in 
¶2005.  In 2009, the International Center for the Settlement of 
Investment Disputes (ICSID) approved a U.S. investor's Request for 
Arbitration in a case against the Kingdom of Cambodia. 
 
Performance Requirements and Incentives 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶27.  The Council for the Development of Cambodia (CDC), Cambodia's 
foreign investment approval body, administers a package of 
investment incentives.  The CDC was created as a one-stop shop to 
facilitate foreign direct investment. 
 
¶28.  Seeking to increase government revenue, the international 
financial institutions recommended that the Cambodian government 
scale back its investment incentives.  Consequently, the Cambodian 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000029  005.8 OF 017 
 
 
government amended the Law on Investment in 2003.  The law creates 
regimes for profit (20 percent), salary (5 to 20 percent), 
withholding (4 to 15 percent), value-added (10 percent) and excise 
taxes (rates vary).  While some incentives have been eliminated, the 
law provides a simplified, more transparent, and faster mechanism 
for investment approval. 
 
¶29.  Under the amended Law on Investment, the profit tax exemption 
is allocated automatically on the basis of activity and minimum 
investment amounts as set out in the sub-decree.  To maintain the 
incentives under the law, qualified investment projects (QIP) are 
required to obtain an annual Certificate of Compliance from the CDC 
and file this with the annual tax return. 
 
¶30.  The amended Law on Investment includes the following 
provisions, which include the exemption, in whole or in part, of 
customs duties and taxes, for QIPs: 
--  An exemption from the tax on profit imposed under the Law on 
Taxation for a set period.  The tax exemption period is composed of 
a trigger period + three years + n years (a number of years 
determined according to the Financial Management Law and depending 
on the economic sector).  The maximum allowable trigger period is to 
be the first year of profit or three years after the QIP earns its 
first revenue, whichever is sooner. 
--  100 percent exemption from import duties for construction 
material, production equipment and production input materials for 
export QIPs and supporting industry QIPs in accordance with the 
provisions of the sub-decree on the Implementation of the Amendment 
to the Law on Investment 
--  Transfer of incentives by merger or acquisition. 
--  Renewable land leases of up to 99 years on concession land for 
agricultural purposes and land ownership permitted to joint ventures 
with over 50 percent equity owned by Cambodians. 
--  No price controls on goods produced or services rendered by 
investors. 
--  No discrimination between foreign and local investors. 
--  100 percent exemption from export tax or duty, except for 
activities specifically mentioned in the Law on Customs. 
--  Employment of foreign expatriates where no qualified Cambodians 
are available. QIPs are entitled to obtain visas and work permits. 
--  A QIP that is located in a designated special economic zone 
(SEZ) is entitled to the same incentives and privileges as other 
QIPs as stipulated in the law. 
 
¶31.  The September 2005 sub-decree on the Implementation of the 
Amendment to the Law on Investment also details investment 
activities that are excluded from incentives, although investment is 
permitted.  They include the following sectors: retail, wholesale, 
and duty-free stores; entertainment (including restaurants, bars, 
nightclubs, massage parlors, and casinos); tourism service 
providers; currency and financial services; press and media related 
activities; professional services; and production and processing of 
tobacco and wood products. 
 
¶32.  Incentives are also excluded in the production of certain 
products with an investment of less than USD 500,000 such as food 
and beverages; textiles, garments and footwear; and plastic, rubber, 
and paper products.  Investors are encouraged to refer to the 
sub-decree for details of other investment activities that are 
excluded from incentives. 
 
¶33.  Investment activities that are eligible for customs duty 
exemption, but not eligible for the profit tax exemption, are 
telecommunication basic services; exploration of gas and oil, 
including supply bases for gas and oil activities; and mining. 
 
¶34.  Cambodia allows foreign lawyers to supply legal services with 
regard to foreign law and international law, and allows them to 
supply certain legal services with regard to Cambodian law in 
"commercial association" with Cambodian law firms.  Cambodia's WTO 
General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) commitment defines 
"commercial association" as any type of commercial arrangement, 
without any requirement as to corporate form.  Thus, there are no 
equity limitations on the practice of foreign and international law 
by foreign enterprises and there are no equity limitations on the 
formation of "commercial associations" under which foreigners may 
practice certain legal services with regard to Cambodian law. 
 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000029  006.8 OF 017 
 
 
¶35.  Investors who wish to take advantage of investment incentives 
must submit an application to the Cambodian Investment Board (CIB), 
the division of the CDC charged with reviewing investment 
applications.  Investors not wishing to apply for investment 
incentives, or who are ineligible, may establish their company 
simply by registering corporate documents with the Department of 
Legal Affairs of the Ministry of Commerce.  Once an investor's 
application is submitted, the CDC will issue to the applicant either 
a Conditional Registration Certificate or a Letter of Non-Compliance 
within three workdays.  The Conditional Registration Certificate 
will set out the terms, such as approvals, authorization, 
clearances, permits or registrations required.  If the CDC fails to 
issue the Conditional Registration Certificate or Letter of 
Non-Compliance within three workdays, then the Conditional 
Registration Certificate will be considered approved. 
 
¶36.  The CDC has the responsibility to obtain all of the licenses 
from relevant government agencies on behalf of investor applicants. 
The relevant government agencies must issue the required documents 
no later than 28 workdays from the date of the Conditional 
Registration Certificate.  At the end of the 28 days, the CDC will 
issue a Final Registration Certificate. 
 
¶37.  The Sub-decree on the Implementation of the Amendment of the 
Law on Investment adopted on September 27, 2005 does not require 
investors to place a deposit guaranteeing their investment except in 
cases in which the deposit is required in a concession contract or 
real estate development project.  Investors who wish to apply are 
required to pay an application fee of seven million riel (approx. 
USD  1,750) representing the administration fees for securing the 
approvals, authorizations, licenses, or registrations from all 
relevant ministries and entities including stamp duty. 
 
¶38.  Under a 2008 sub-decree, the CDC is required to submit to the 
Council of Ministers for approval investment proposals with an 
investment capital of USD 50 million or more; involve politically 
sensitive issues; involve the exploration and the exploitation of 
mineral or natural resources; may have a negative impact on the 
environment; have long-term strategy; or, involve infrastructure 
concessions. 
 
Right to Private Ownership and Establishment 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶39.  There are no limits on the rights of foreign and domestic 
entities to establish and own business enterprises or to compete 
with public enterprises.  However, the Constitution provides that 
only Cambodian citizens or legal entities have the right to own 
land.  A legal entity is considered to be Cambodian when at least 51 
percent of its shares are owned by Cambodian citizen(s) or by 
Cambodian legal entities.  A new law allowing foreign ownership of 
properties, such as apartments and condominiums is expected to be 
passed in 2010.  The current draft stipulates that only properties 
located above the ground floor can be foreign-owned, and foreigners 
would not be able to own property within 30 kilometers of a national 
border. 
 
¶40.  Under the 2001 Land Law, foreign investors may secure control 
over land through concessions, long-term leases, or renewable 
short-term leases.  If investors intend to take a long-term lease 
interest in land or ownership interest through a 51 percent 
Cambodian company, it is essential that caution be exercised to 
ensure that clear and unencumbered ownership of the land is 
verified. 
 
¶41.  The Land Law establishes a comprehensive legal framework for 
long-term leasing.  The leaseholder has a contractual interest in 
the land, which means the lease can be sold or transferred through 
succession and can be pledged as security in order to raise 
financing.  It is also important to make sure that the land 
ownership is clearly and legally established before entering into 
any leasing agreement. 
 
¶42.  Qualified investors approved by the Council for the Development 
of Cambodia have the right to own buildings built on leased 
property.  However the law is unclear as to whether buildings from 
qualified projects can be transferred between foreign investors or 
whether foreign investors can own buildings built through projects 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000029  007.8 OF 017 
 
 
not approved by the CDC. 
 
Protection of Property Rights 
----------------------------- 
 
¶43.  Cambodia has adopted legislation concerning the protection of 
property rights, including the Land Law and the Law on Copyrights 
and Law on Patent and Industrial Design.  Cambodia is a member of 
the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) and the Paris 
Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property. 
 
¶44.  Chattel and real property:  The 2001 Land Law provides a 
framework for real property security and a system for recording 
titles and ownership.  Land titles issued prior to the end of the 
Khmer Rouge regime in 1979 are not recognized due to the severe 
dislocations that occurred during the Khmer Rouge period.  The 
government is making efforts to accelerate the issuance of land 
titles, but in practice, the titling system is cumbersome, 
expensive, and subject to corruption.  The majority of property 
owners lack documentation proving ownership.  Even where title 
records exist, recognition of legal title to land has been a problem 
in some court cases where judges have sought additional proof of 
ownership.  Although foreigners are constitutionally forbidden to 
own land, the 2001 law allows long or short-term leases to 
foreigners. 
 
¶45.  Intellectual property rights (IPR):  Cambodia's IPR regime is 
in compliance with its WTO member commitments; however, 
comprehensive enforcement remains problematic.  The 1996 
U.S.-Cambodia Trade Agreement contained a broad range of IPR 
protections, but given Cambodia's very limited experience with IPR, 
the WTO agreement granted phase-in periods for the Cambodian 
government to fully implement IPR protections.  On November 9, 2005, 
the WTO granted a deadline extension until 2013 for Cambodia and 
other least developed countries to enforce copyright laws and begin 
accepting patents. 
 
¶46.  In a significant step toward consolidating IPR policy-making, 
enforcement and technical assistance, the Council of Ministers 
created the National Committee for Intellectual Property Management 
on September 18, 2008 with its secretariat within the Ministry of 
Commerce.  This committee is responsible for developing national 
policy on intellectual property, strengthening interagency 
cooperation, preparing and disseminating new laws and regulations, 
and acting as a clearinghouse for technical assistance relating to 
the intellectual property sector.  This new interagency IPR 
committee chaired by the Minister of Commerce includes a broad range 
of IPR actors including representatives from the Council of 
Ministers and the Ministries of Industry Mines and Energy; Culture 
and Fine Arts; Interior; Economy and Finance; Posts and 
Telecommunications; Health; Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries; 
Environment; Justice; Education; and Tourism. 
 
¶47.  Trademarks:  The Cambodian National Assembly approved the Law 
Concerning Marks, Trade Names and Acts of Unfair Competition to 
comply with Cambodia's WTO obligations under the Agreement on 
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS). 
Signed in February 2002, the law outlines specific penalties for 
trademark violations, including jail sentences and fines for 
counterfeiting registered marks.  It also contains detailed 
procedures for registering trademarks, invalidation and removal, 
licensing of marks, and infringement and remedies. 
 
¶48.  Since 1991, the Ministry of Commerce has maintained an 
effective trademark registration system, registering more than 
35,500 trademarks (nearly 6,599 for U.S. companies) under the terms 
of a 1991 sub-decree, and has proven cooperative in preventing 
unauthorized individuals from registering U.S. trademarks in 
Cambodia. 
 
¶49.  Despite lacking clear legal authority to conduct enforcement 
activities, the Ministry of Commerce has taken effective action 
against trademark infringement in several cases since 1998.  The 
Ministry has ordered local firms to stop using well-known U.S. 
marks, including Pizza Hut, McDonalds, Nike, Scotties, Marlboro, 
Seven Eleven, and Pringles.  In 2009, the Ministry of Commerce 
resolved 12 cases of trademark infringements. 
 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000029  008.8 OF 017 
 
 
¶50.  Copyrights:  Copyrights are governed by the Law on Copyrights 
and Related Rights, which was enacted in January 2003. 
Responsibility for copyrights is split between the Ministry of 
Culture and Fine Arts, which handles phonograms, CDs, DVDs, and 
other recordings, and the Ministry of Information, which deals with 
printed materials.  Pirated CDs, videos, textbooks, and other 
copyrighted materials are widely available in Cambodian markets and 
used throughout the country.  Before the adoption of the law, there 
were no provisions for enforcement of copyrights. 
 
¶51.  To protect and manage their economic rights, authors and 
related rights holders are allowed by law to establish a collective 
management organization (CMO).  The creation of the CMO requires 
authorization from either the Ministry of Culture and Fine Arts or 
the Ministry of Information, depending on the nature of their work. 
The Ministry of Culture and Fine Arts is developing a sub-decree on 
collective management.  In mid-2007, the Ministry of Culture and 
Fine Arts created a Copyright Department which is gradually building 
capacity. 
 
¶52.  Patents and industrial designs:  Cambodia has a very small 
industrial base, and infringement on patents and industrial designs 
is not yet commercially significant.  With assistance from WIPO, the 
Ministry of Industry, Mines, and Energy (MIME) prepared a 
comprehensive law on the protection of patents and industrial 
designs which went into force in January 2003.  The law provides for 
the filing, registration, and protection of patents, utility model 
certificates and industrial designs.  The MIME issued a declaration 
in June 2006 on granting patents and registering industrial 
designs. 
 
¶53.  Encrypted satellite signals, semiconductor layout designs, and 
trade secrets:  The Ministry of Commerce is preparing a draft law 
for trade secrets while the Ministry of Industry, Mines, and Energy 
is drafting a law on integrated circuit protection.  Cambodia has 
not yet made significant progress toward enacting required 
legislation on encrypted satellite signals, although it obtained a 
model law on encrypted satellite signals and semiconductor layout 
designs from WIPO in March 1999. 
 
¶54.  IPR enforcement:  With the exception of the trademark 
enforcement, the Cambodian government has taken few significant 
actions to enforce its IPR obligations.  However, in January 2008, 
at the annual conference of the Ministry of Culture and Fine Arts, 
the government suggested it would increase prosecutions for 
copyright violations on domestically produced products before 
expanding prosecutions for foreign products.  Cambodian copyright 
law allows IPR owners to file a complaint with the authorities to 
take action.  Law enforcement action taken at the request of owners 
is directed against the piracy of domestically produced music or 
video products, but not against piracy of foreign optical media. 
The owners requesting crackdowns must pay support costs to the 
authorities for conducting the operation.  Crackdowns on such IPR 
violations are not conducted on a consistent basis. 
 
¶55.  Infringement of IPR is pervasive, ranging from software, 
compact discs, and music, to photocopied books and the sale of 
counterfeit products, including cigarettes, alcohol, and 
pharmaceuticals.  In 2008, the Business Software Alliance estimated 
a 95 percent software piracy rate in Cambodia which cost the 
industry USD 47 million in 2007.  Although Cambodia is not a major 
center for the production and export of pirated CDs, videos, and 
other copyrighted materials, local businesses report Cambodia is 
becoming an increasingly popular source of pirated material due to 
weak enforcement.  The Ministry of Commerce has plans to put in 
place measures to stop IPR-violating products at borders, as 
post-inspection mechanisms are unlikely to be effective.  During the 
TIFA discussions in November 2007, Cambodia requested technical 
assistance for a draft sub-decree on Border Measures detailing 
procedures at the borders allowing IPR owners to file an application 
with customs to suspend clearance of suspected counterfeit goods. 
 
Transparency of the Regulatory System 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶56.  There is no pattern of discrimination against foreign investors 
in Cambodia through a regulatory regime.  Numerous issues of 
transparency in the regulatory regime arise, however, from the lack 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000029  009.8 OF 017 
 
 
of legislation and the weakness of key institutions.  Investors 
often complain that the decisions of Cambodian regulatory agencies 
are inconsistent, irrational, or corrupt. 
 
¶57.  The Cambodian government is still in the process of drafting 
laws and regulations that establish the framework for the market 
economy.  In addition to existing laws and regulations, in 2009, the 
government adopted the Law on Tourism, the Insolvency Law, and a 
sub-decree establishing a national commercial arbitration body.  A 
commercial contract law and other important business-related laws 
such as commercial court, e-commerce, telecommunications, and 
personal property leasing laws are in draft. 
 
¶58.  Cambodia currently has no anti-monopoly or anti-trust statutes. 
 On a practical level, Cambodia has indicated a desire to discourage 
monopolistic trading arrangements in most sectors. 
 
¶59.  Cambodia is currently working on the establishment of standards 
and other technical measures based on international practice, 
guidelines, and recommendations.  Under the Law on Standards in 
Cambodia, passed in 2007, the Institute of Standards in Cambodia 
(ISC) was created within the Ministry of Industry, Mines, and Energy 
(MIME) as a central authority to develop and certify national 
standards for products, commodities, materials, services, and 
practices and operations.  The ISC serves as the secretariat of the 
National Standards Council which consists of representatives from 
various government ministries, state-controlled academic/research 
institutions, the private sector, and a consumer representative 
created to advise as well as approve standards. 
 
¶60.  The ISC has been assigned as the focal point for technical 
barriers to trade (TBT) and as the agency responsible for 
notifications and publications required by the WTO TBT Agreement. 
The Ministry of Health is charged with prescribing standards, 
quality control, distribution and labeling requirement for 
medicines, but this responsibility may be brought under the ISC in 
the future. 
 
¶61.  Quality control of foodstuffs, plant and animal products is 
currently under the General Directorate of CamControl of the 
Ministry of Commerce.  Cambodia is a member of the Codex 
Alimentarius Commission.  Currently CamControl is the national 
contact point for Codex Alimentarius.  Its primary responsibility is 
the enforcement of quality and safety of products and services 
relating to sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures.  Cambodia was 
provided a transition period until January 2007 to implement its WTO 
TBT Agreement commitments and until January 2008 to implement its 
SPS Agreement commitments, but has not yet fully implemented these 
commitments.  The RGC plans to adopt a subdecree on Automatic 
Adoption of Codex Norms by the end of 2010. 
 
¶62.  The Cambodian Constitution and the 1997 Labor Code provide for 
compliance with internationally recognized core labor standards. 
The law authorizes the Ministry of Labor and Vocational Training to 
set health, safety and other conditions for the workplace.  (The 
"Labor" Section of this report discusses the labor situation in more 
detail.) 
 
¶63.  The National Bank of Cambodia supervises Cambodia's banks and 
financial institutions while the Ministry of Economy and Finance 
regulates the insurance industry.  The insurance market in Cambodia 
is relatively new, but has recently begun to gain credibility and 
expand its scope.  Currently, there are a few major insurance 
companies operating here such as Asia Insurance, the state-owned 
insurance company Caminco, Forte Insurance, Campubank Lonpac 
Insurance, and Infinity Insurance.  Cambodia Reinsurance Company 
(Cambodia Re) is the only reinsurance company in Cambodia 
established by the government to carry out reinsurance business 
operations for all classes of risk, including general insurance and 
life insurance. 
 
¶64.  To help Cambodian businesses stay competitive in the world 
market, the government introduced specific measures to facilitate 
business, in particular exports, by attempting to reduce informal 
costs and streamline bureaucratic hurdles. Measures included: (1) 
introduction of a joint inspection by CamControl and the Customs and 
Excise Department and issuance of a common inspection report valid 
for both agencies and the "Federal Office" in order to reduce the 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000029  010.8 OF 017 
 
 
amount of time spent applying for export goods inspection; (2) based 
on this common report, MIME and the Ministry of Commerce will issue 
the Certificate of Processing (CP) and the Certificate of Origin 
(CO), respectively; (3) reduction of the costs of registration from 
USD 615 to USD 177 and of the time limit for Cambodian government 
issuance of registration from 30 days to ten and a half working 
days; and (4) reduction of time required to acquire documents 
related to the CO and exports and for goods inspection. 
 
¶65.  Cambodia has renewed its commitment to creating a favorable 
environment for investment and trade and has further committed to 
reducing unofficial fees and costs related to imports and exports. 
 
Efficient Capital Markets and Portfolio Investment 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶66.  Cambodia is moving to address the need for capital markets.  In 
November 2006, the National Assembly passed legislation to permit 
the government to issue bonds and use the capital to make up budget 
deficits.  However no bonds have been issued since 2007 and Prime 
Minister Hun Sen said in 2008 that the government does not plan to 
issue bonds in the near future.  In 2007, the government also passed 
the Law on the Issuance and Trading of Non-government Securities, 
and, in partnership with the Korean Stock Exchange, plans to 
establish a stock market by the end of 2010. 
 
¶67.  At the end of November 2009, the Securities and Exchange 
Commission of Cambodia (SECC) released a draft administrative order 
on equity securities issuance, which is expected to be adopted in 
¶2010.  According to the regulation, the issuance of equity 
securities in the Cambodia stock market can be private placement or 
public offering.  Private placement refers to a personal offer that 
is made to no more than 30 investors and with an issue size not 
exceeding 20 percent of shareholder's equity when shareholder's 
equity is less than USD 4.8 million or with an issue size not 
exceeding 15 percent of shareholder's equity when shareholder's 
equity is more than USD 4.8 million during a 12-month period.  In 
addition, the allotment of equity securities of public offerings are 
divided, with a reserve of 20 percent of total public offering for 
investors who are Cambodian citizens, and 80 percent of the 
remaining public offering amount open to investors who are both 
Cambodian and non-Cambodian citizens. 
 
¶68.  The Cambodian government does not use regulation of capital 
markets to restrict foreign investment.  Domestic financing is 
difficult to obtain at competitive interest rates.  A new law 
addressing secured transactions, which includes a system for 
registering such secured interests, was promulgated in May 2007. 
Most loans are secured by real property mortgages or deposits of 
cash or other liquid assets, as provided for in the existing 
contract law and land law. 
 
¶69.  The total assets of Cambodia's banking system as of September 
2009 were approximately USD 4.9 billion, an increase of nearly 22 
percent from 2008.  Loans account for about 49 percent of the 
banking system's assets.  The National Bank of Cambodia (NBC) 
reported that the non-performing loans (NPLs) ratio of banks has 
increased from 3.7 percent in December 2008 to 5.2 percent in May 
2009 and that the rate could reach as high as 10 percent by the end 
of the year.  Credit disbursement has also slowed, from a growth 
rate of 50 percent in 2008 to just 1 percent through the middle of 
¶2009.  As of September 2009, credit granted by the commercial banks 
amounted to USD 2.4 billion.  Loans made to services and the 
wholesale and retail sectors accounted for over 40 percent of total 
loans.  The banking sector has shown significant improvement, but 
requires continued progress to gain international confidence. 
 
¶70.  Under the amended Law on Banking and Financial Institutions, 
all of Cambodia's commercial banks had to reapply for licenses from 
the NBC and meet new, stricter capital and prudential requirements 
by the end of 2001.  As a result, there was a significant shakeout 
and consolidation within the banking sector with the closure and 
liquidation of 12 banks.  In September 2008, the National Bank of 
Cambodia moved to slow the rapid growth in the number of commercial 
banks, which increased by more than 20 percent in the first nine 
months of 2008, giving commercial banks without an investment grade 
shareholder until the end of 2010 to triple minimum capital from USD 
13 million to USD 37 million.  In January 2008, Cambodia's banks 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000029  011.6 OF 017 
 
 
were given their first-ever risk assessment from Standard & Poor's 
of a 'B+/B' rating with stable outlook.  Their placement was 
alongside that of banks in Venezuela, Bolivia, Ukraine, and Jamaica. 
 Banks have been free to set their own interest rates since 1995 and 
average annual interest rate spread has declined from 15.3 percent 
in 2004 to 9.6 percent in May 2009 which reflects an increase in the 
interest rate for deposits and a decline in the interest rate for 
credit. 
 
Competition from State Owned Enterprises 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶71.  Private enterprises are allowed to compete with public 
enterprises under the same terms and conditions and in general are 
not entitled to special trading rights or privileges.  However, 
certain laws and regulations reserve special rights for the state to 
monopolize various services including the Electricity Law which 
provides special privilege for the Electricity of Cambodia (EDC) to 
provide power transmission to the distribution companies and bulk 
power consumers. 
 
¶72.  Cambodia has several state-owned enterprises and two 
joint-venture enterprises with a majority state holding.  These 
include rubber plantations and an agricultural inputs company, 
infrastructure operating companies, the Phnom Penh Water Supply, the 
EDC, the Rural Development Bank, and two joint-venture companies - 
telecommunication operator Camintel and Cambodia Pharmaceutical 
Enterprise.  Currently, the country does not have a sovereign wealth 
fund. 
 
¶73.  All SOEs are under the supervision of certain line Ministries 
or government institutions and are overseen by boards of directors 
drawn from among senior government officials.  The Law on Audit 
established the National Audit Authority and empowers the Auditor 
General to conduct audits of state-owned enterprises.  The audit 
conducted by the Auditor General's Office primarily focuses on 
compliance with rules governing SOE financial management.  Limited 
information is publicly available on the financial position and 
performance of state-owned enterprises. 
 
¶74.  Cambodia has yet to pass the Law on Competition as part of its 
WTO accession obligations.  Under the draft law, a National 
Committee on Competition will be established.  However, the 1993 
Constitution of Cambodia provides for the state to take necessary 
intervention measures to protect the competitive process of the 
marketplace as well as to protect consumer welfare. 
 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶75.  CSR is a new concept to Cambodia and is not widely understood 
among local producers or consumers.  However, certain labor and 
social standards have been established in key industries, 
particularly in the garment sector.  Under the terms of the 1999 
U.S.-Cambodia Trade Agreement, the U.S. Government committed to 
increase the size of Cambodia's garment export quota if the country 
could demonstrate improvements in labor standards.  This was the 
first bilateral trade agreement to positively link market access 
with progress in compliance with labor obligations.  Currently labor 
standard monitoring in the garment sector is being conducted by the 
International Labour Office (ILO) in coordination with the 
government.  The ILO project succeeded in improving compliance with 
labor standards, virtually eliminating the worst labor abuses such 
as forced labor and child labor within the garment sector.  Socially 
responsible businesses continue to source garments from Cambodia due 
to its well-deserved reputation for high labor standards. 
 
¶76.  Currently, the ILO's Better Work and Better Factories Cambodia 
program is developing a training package on planning and 
implementing the transition of the inspections regime towards 
substantial compliance with international labor standard such as the 
OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises.  In addition, several 
multinational enterprises conduct CSR programs in Cambodia which are 
viewed favorably by the local community. 
 
Political Violence 
------------------ 
 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000029  012.8 OF 017 
 
 
¶77.  Cambodia is relatively peaceful compared to its pre-UNTAC 
history.  Election-related violence has decreased in each national 
election held at five-year intervals since 1993.  Cambodia's 2007 
commune council elections followed by the July 2008 National 
Assembly election had little of the pre-election violence or 
intimidation that preceded the 2002 and 2003 elections.  The 2007 
and 2008 polls resulted in clear victories for the Cambodian 
People's Party, with the Sam Rainsy Party emerging as the main 
opposition party. 
 
¶78.  Cambodian political activities have turned violent in the past, 
and the possibility for politically motivated violence remains. 
During the anti-Thai riots in 2003, the Royal Embassy of Thailand 
and Thai-owned commercial establishments were attacked.  In November 
2006, police arrested six people for allegedly plotting to conduct 
bomb attacks in Phnom Penh during the Water Festival. 
 
¶79.  On July 29, 2007, three improvised explosive devices (IEDs) 
were planted at the Vietnam-Cambodia Friendship Monument in Phnom 
Penh.  One of the IEDs partially exploded, but the others failed to 
detonate and were recovered by Cambodian authorities.  No one was 
injured.  On January 2, 2009, two undetonated IEDs were found near 
the Ministry of National Defense and state-owned TV3.  While there 
is no indication these incidents were directed at U.S. or other 
Western interests, the possibility remains that further attacks 
could be carried out. 
 
¶80.  Following the July 2008 UNESCO World Heritage Site listing of 
the Preah Vihear Temple, thousands of Thai and Cambodian soldiers 
amassed in a few isolated areas along the Thai-Cambodian border, 
particularly near the disputed Preah Vihear temple area.  Since 
then, soldiers have clashed near the temple resulting in deaths on 
both sides, but the outbreaks of violence have been rare and lasted 
only a few hours.  Both the Thai and Cambodian governments have 
committed to a peaceful resolution of the dispute. 
 
Corruption 
---------- 
 
¶81.  Despite increasing investor interest, Cambodia continues to 
rank poorly on global surveys of competitiveness and corruption. 
According to the World Economic Forum's Global Competitiveness 
Report 2009-2010, Cambodia's competitiveness ranking slipped by one 
point to 110 of 133 countries surveyed, a reversal of the one point 
climb to 109 in the 2008-2009 report (of 134 countries).  The World 
Bank also ranked Cambodia in the lower half of the list, 145 of 183, 
on business climate.  In 2009, Cambodia scored 2.0 on a scale of 0 
(highly corrupt) to 10 (highly clean) in Transparency 
International's Corruption Perceptions Index, ranking 158 out of 180 
countries assessed, suggesting widespread and endemic forms of 
corruption. 
 
¶82.  Business people, both local and foreign, have identified 
corruption, particularly within the judiciary, as the single biggest 
deterrent to investment in Cambodia.  Corruption was cited by a 
plurality of respondents to the World Economic Forum survey as the 
most problematic factor for doing business in Cambodia.  A 2007 
USAID-funded survey of the Phnom Penh Chamber of Commerce also found 
that corruption is considered to be the main obstacle for doing 
business. 
 
¶83.  Public sector salaries range from USD 25-60 per month for 
working level officials, and around USD 2000 per month for 
high-ranking officials.  Although there is an annual salary increase 
of 10-15 percent, these wages are far below the level required to 
maintain a suitable quality of life in Cambodia, and as a result, 
public employees are susceptible to corruption and conflicts of 
interest.  Local and foreign businesses report that they must often 
pay extra facilitation fees to expedite any business transaction. 
Additionally, for those seeking to enter the Cambodian market, the 
process for awarding government contracts is not transparent and is 
subject to major irregularities. 
 
¶84.  Current Cambodian laws and regulations and their application 
are insufficient to address the problem of corruption.  Laws dating 
from the UNTAC period (1991-93) against embezzlement, extortion, and 
bribing public officials exist, but are enforced rarely, often for 
political reasons. 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000029  013.8 OF 017 
 
 
 
¶85.  Cambodia is not a signatory to the OECD Anti-Bribery 
Convention, but has endorsed the ADB/OECD Anti-Corruption Action 
Plan for Asia and the Pacific.  In 2007, the government signed a 
regional anti-corruption pact with eight other ASEAN countries, and 
in September of the same year, also signed the UN Convention Against 
Corruption.  Cambodia is considering joining the Extractive 
Industries Transparency Initiative governing the oil sector. 
 
¶86.  Cambodia is under increasing pressure from donors to address 
the issue of good governance in general, and corruption in 
particular.  Cambodia began efforts to draft and enact 
anti-corruption legislation in the 1990's.  In a draft action plan 
on good governance presented to donors in May 2000, Cambodia 
promised to pass anti-corruption legislation by late 2001.  Since 
then, donors have become increasingly frustrated with the 
government's failure to meet a series of benchmarks to enact new 
anti-corruption legislation. 
 
¶87.  However, in October, the National Assembly passed a new Penal 
Code, which the government has long stated was a prerequisite to the 
heavily anticipated anti-corruption law.  In December, the Cambodian 
government finally approved the draft anti-corruption law which is 
expected to be approved by the National Assembly in 2010.  Under the 
new law, all civil servants would be obliged to declare their 
financial assets to the government every two years. 
 
¶88.  The Ministry of National Assembly-Senate Relations and 
Inspection (MONASRI) has an anti-corruption mandate, but is largely 
inactive.  In 2007, however, MONASRI, with technical assistance from 
USAID, created a draft Access to Information Policy.  The draft has 
yet to be forwarded to the Council of Ministers.  The government 
also created an anti-corruption commission within the cabinet in 
late 1999, which has undertaken a few investigations, one of which 
resulted in the dismissal of a mid-level official in late 2001. 
Also in 2001, the government established a National Audit Authority, 
which has been only marginally effective because of its lack of 
transparency and independence. 
 
¶89.  Ignoring the existing anti-corruption commission, the 
government established the Anti-Corruption Unit (ACU) in August 
2006, a temporary body designed to address corruption until the 
anti-corruption legislation is passed.  The mission of the ACU is to 
focus on preventing corruption, strengthening law enforcement, and 
obtaining public support for combating corruption.  However the ACU 
is considered to be ineffective because of its lack of independence 
and capacity. 
 
¶90.  In its most comprehensive reform strategy, the Rectangular 
Strategy Phase II, adopted as the government platform in 2008 after 
phase I in 2004, the Cambodian government once again renewed its 
commitment to fight corruption and make good governance the 
centerpiece of reform.  The strategy acknowledges the importance of 
taking action against corruption, but the challenge remains a 
daunting and long-term one that will require political will at the 
highest levels of the government. 
 
Bilateral Investment Agreements 
------------------------------- 
 
¶91.  Cambodia has signed bilateral investment agreements with 
Australia, China, Croatia, Cuba, the Czech Republic, France, 
Germany, Indonesia, Kuwait, Japan, Laos, Malaysia, the Netherlands, 
North Korea, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries 
(OPEC), Pakistan, the Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, 
Switzerland, Thailand, and Vietnam.  Future agreements with Algeria, 
Bulgaria, Burma, Egypt, Hungary, Libya, Malta, Qatar, Russia, the 
United Kingdom, and Ukraine are planned.  The agreements provide 
reciprocal national treatment to investors, excluding benefits 
deriving from membership in future customs unions or free trade 
areas and agreements relating to taxation.  The agreements preclude 
expropriations except those that are undertaken for a lawful or 
public purpose, are non-discriminatory, and are accompanied by 
prompt, adequate and effective compensation at the fair market value 
of the property prior to expropriation.  The agreements also 
guarantee repatriation of investments and provide for settlement of 
investment disputes via arbitration. 
 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000029  014.12 OF 017 
 
 
¶92.  In addition, in July 2006, Cambodia signed a Trade and 
Investment Framework Agreement (TIFA) with the United States, which 
will promote greater trade and investment in both countries and 
provide a forum to address bilateral trade and investment issues. 
Two very successful meetings were held under the TIFA in 2007 in 
which the U.S. and Cambodian governments discussed WTO accession 
requirements, trade facilitation and economic development 
initiatives, and progress on intellectual property rights.  Since 
then, several bilateral working level meetings have been held to 
advance the TIFA agenda. 
 
OPIC and Other Investment Insurance Programs 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶93.  Cambodia is eligible for the Quick Cover Program under which 
the Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) offers financing 
and political risk insurance coverage for projects on an expedited 
basis.  With most investment contracts written in U.S. dollars, 
there is little exchange risk.  Even for riel-denominated 
transactions, there is only one exchange rate, which is fairly 
stable.  Cambodia is a member of the Multilateral Investment 
Guarantee Agency (MIGA) of the World Bank, which offers 
political-risk insurance to foreign investors. 
 
¶94.  The Export-Import Bank of the United States (Ex-Im Bank) 
provides financing for purchases of U.S. exports by private-sector 
buyers in Cambodia on repayment terms of up to seven years.  Ex-Im 
Bank support typically will be limited to transactions with a 
commercial bank functioning as an obligor or guarantor; however, it 
will consider transactions without a bank undertaking on a 
case-by-case basis. 
 
Labor 
----- 
 
¶95.  The country has an economically active population (defined as 
being ten years of age and older) of some 8.8 million people out of 
a population of 13.4 million.  While government statistics are 
somewhat higher, they do not fully capture the problems of 
unemployment and underemployment in Cambodia. 
 
¶96.  The economy is not able to generate enough jobs in the formal 
sector to handle the large number of entrants to the job market. 
This dilemma is likely to become more pronounced over the next 
decade.  Cambodia suffers from a large demographic imbalance. 
According to the 2008 General Population Census of Cambodia, 
Cambodia's annual population growth rate is 1.54 percent.  Persons 
20 years of age or younger account for 48.1 percent of the total 
population.  As a result, over the next decade at least 275,000 new 
job seekers will enter the labor market each year. 
 
¶97.  Approximately 65 - 70 percent of the labor force is engaged in 
subsistence agriculture.  At the end of 2009, about 278,000 people, 
the majority of whom are women, were employed in the garment sector, 
with 300,000 Cambodians employed in the tourism sector, and a 
further 50,000 people in construction. 
 
¶98.  The 2009-2010 Global Competitiveness Report of the World 
Economic Forum identified an inadequately educated workforce as one 
of the most serious problems in doing business in Cambodia.  Given 
the severe disruption to the Cambodian education system and loss of 
skilled Cambodians during the 1975-79 Khmer Rouge period, workers 
with higher education or specialized skills are few and in high 
demand.  A Cambodia Socio-Economic Survey conducted in 2004 found 
that about 12 percent of the labor force has completed at least an 
elementary education.  Only 1.2 percent of the labor force completed 
post-secondary education. 
 
¶99.  Overall literacy, for those aged fifteen and over, is 75.1 
percent with male literacy rates considerably higher than those for 
females in both urban and rural areas.  Many adults and children 
enroll in supplementary educational programs, including English and 
computer training.  Employers report that Cambodian workers are 
eager to learn and, when trained, are excellent, hardworking 
employees. 
 
¶100.  Cambodia's 1997 labor code protects the right of association 
and the rights to organize and bargain collectively.  The code 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000029  015.12 OF 017 
 
 
prohibits forced or compulsory labor, establishes 15 as the minimum 
allowable age for paid work, and 18 as the minimum age for anyone 
engaged in work that is hazardous, unhealthy or unsafe.  The statute 
also guarantees an eight-hour workday and 48-hour work week, and 
provides for time-and-a-half pay for overtime or work on the 
employee's day off.  The law gives the Ministry of Labor and 
Vocational Training (MOLVT) a legal mandate to set minimum wages 
after consultation with the tripartite Labor Advisory Committee.  In 
January 2007, the minimum wage for garment and footwear workers was 
officially set at USD 50 per month.  In April 2008, a USD 6 per 
month cost of living allowance was instituted to offset high levels 
of inflation.  There is no minimum wage for any other industry.  To 
increase competitiveness of garment manufacturers, the labor code 
was amended in 2007 to establish a night shift wage of 130 percent 
of day time wages. 
 
¶101.  Acleda Bank, a local commercial bank, is currently managing 
Cambodia's first National Social Security Fund (NSSF), which 
protects workers against occupational risks and workplace accidents. 
 The fund was established by sub-decree in 2007 and requires 
employers to contribute 0.8 percent of each employee's salary to the 
NSSF.  As December 29, 2009, approximately 350,000 workers, most 
from the garment sector, contribute to the fund through their 
employer.  The Cambodian government has responded to the global 
economic crisis by temporarily contributing 0.3 percent towards the 
NSSF on behalf of employers for two years (2009-2010) which has 
resulted in a reduction of employers' obligation from 0.8 percent to 
0.5 percent of total wages.  A second phase of the fund, to be 
implemented in 2010, will focus on health care for employees, 
followed by pensions in 2012. 
 
¶102.  Enforcement of many aspects of the labor code is poor, albeit 
improving.  Labor disputes can be problematic and may involve 
workers simply demanding conditions to which they are legally 
entitled.  In labor disputes in which workers complain of poor or 
unhealthy conditions, MOLVT and the Ministry of Commerce have 
ordered the employer to take corrective measures.  The U.S. 
Government, the ILO, and others are working closely with Cambodia to 
improve enforcement of the labor code and workers' rights in 
general.  The U.S.-Cambodia Bilateral Textile Agreement linked 
Cambodian compliance with internationally recognized core labor 
standards with the level of textile quota the U.S. granted to 
Cambodia.  While the quota regime ended on January 1, 2005, a 
"Better Factories" program continues to build on the labor standards 
established. 
 
Foreign Trade Zones 
------------------- 
 
¶103.  To facilitate the country's development, the Cambodian 
government has shown great interest in increasing exports via 
geographically defined special economic zones (SEZs), with the goal 
of attracting much-needed foreign direct investment. 
 
¶104.  The government is preparing a Law on Special Economic Zones 
which will define SEZs and establish the rules under which they will 
operate.  The law may be submitted for approval of the Council of 
Ministers in 2010. 
 
¶105.  In late December 2005, the Council of Ministers passed a 
sub-decree on Establishment and Management of Special Economic Zones 
to speed up the creation of the zones.  The sub-decree details 
procedures, conditions and incentives for the investors in the 
zone. 
 
¶106.  Since issuing the sub-decree, the Cambodia Special Economic 
Zones Board (CSEZB) has approved 21 SEZs as of December 2009, of 
which 4 are in operation, located near the borders of Thailand and 
Vietnam, and in Phnom Penh, Kampot, and Sihanoukville. 
 
Foreign Investment Statistics 
----------------------------- 
 
¶107.  Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) proposals approved by the 
Council for the Development of Cambodia (CDC) have dramatically 
increased in recent years, with approved FDI reaching USD 10.9 
billion in 2008, compared with USD 201 million in 2004. However, FDI 
inflows declined dramatically to only USD 1.6 billion as of October 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000029  016.10 OF 017 
 
 
2009 due to the impact of the global economic crisis. FDI registered 
capital however, has been modest since 1995, with an average inflow 
of USD 304 million in the period 1995-2008.  The FDI registered 
capital figures probably understate actual investment, since they 
report only registered capital and not fixed assets.  CDC statistics 
for fixed assets, however, are based on projections, and the CDC has 
no effective monitoring mechanism to determine the veracity of the 
numbers.  The FDI registered capital flow into Cambodia is uneven 
and gradually declined from USD 135 million in 1999 to USD 30 
million in 2003, but rose to USD 105 million in 2009. 
 
¶108.  Total FDI registered capital flows into Cambodia for the years 
1998-2009 are presented in the table below, in USD million. 
(Source: CDC) (Note: statistics from the National Bank of Cambodia 
differ significantly from CDC's figures.) 
 
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 
320  135  74   81   50   30   45   383  209  473  260  105 
 
¶109.  Figures from the CDC for registered capital of approved 
projects, including domestic investment, and broken down by country 
of origin and economic sector, are provided below.  The FDI 
registered capital figures below may overstate investment because 
they include projects that have not yet been, or may never be, fully 
implemented and retention of dormant or defunct projects from 
earlier years makes the investment figures appear higher. 
 
¶110.  Total cumulative registered investment projects approved, by 
country of origin, August 1994 to October 2009 (source: CDC) 
 
Country        USD millions        Pct. 
Malaysia       1,736               32.17 
Cambodia       1,526               28.28 
China          603                 11.17 
Taiwan         405                 7.50 
Thailand       221                 4.09 
Singapore      199                 3.68 
South Korea    170                 3.15 
U.K.           132                 2.44 
USA            71                  1.31 
Vietnam        69                  1.27 
Indonesia      55                  1.01 
Australia      55                  1.01 
France         42                  0.77 
Japan          24                  0.44 
Other          88                  1.63 
Total          5,396               100 
 
¶111.  Total cumulative registered investment capital by sector, from 
January 1998 to October 2009 (source CDC) 
 
Sector                  USUSD millions   Number of Projects 
Industry                1,538.7          748 
- Food Processing       93.5             13 
- Garments              469.4            421 
- Petroleum             212.2            9 
- Wood Processing       100.3            17 
- Footwear              33.8             27 
Agriculture             209.6            90 
Services                342.8            81 
- Construction          64.6             15 
- Telecommunications    94.5             16 
Tourism                 446.4            98 
Total                   2537.5 
 
¶112.  New investment projects in USD million, by country of origin, 
2004-2009(source: CDC) 
 
Country       2004    2005    2006    2007    2008    2009 
Malaysia      7.81    0.6     2.5     19.8    1       na 
Cambodia      15      78.5    116.8   264.3   99.8    17.6 
U.S.          2.1     2.2     4.3     6.5     12.3    1 
Taiwan        4.6     4.1     16.4    14      9.5     5 
Singapore     1.6     5.3     3.8     1       12      5.5 
China         24      38      28.3    40.4    37.9    34.5 
South Korea   4.1     16      4.5     22      19.5    5.2 
Hong Kong     na      0.3     1.5     0.6     na      1 
France        0.6     0.4     na      0.3     2.3     1.6 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000029  017.10 OF 017 
 
 
Thailand      2       15      10      13.8    30.6    15.5 
U.K.          1.5     1       1       1.5     1       2 
Canada        1.7     0.6     1.5     na      4.8     1 
Indonesia     na      na      na      na      na      1 
Australia     na      7       na      3.5     1       na 
Japan         0.7     na      1       7.5     4.6     1 
Other         na      na      8.1     78.5    4.1     11 
Total         65.71   169     199.7   473.7   240.4   102.9 
 
¶113.  New investment projects in USD million, by sector, 2004-2009 
(source: CDC) 
 
Sector             2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009 
Industry           53.5   325    173.4  269.9   90    56.7 
- Food Processing  1      na     22     24      4     2 
- Garments         19     54     41.9   45.1    49    20 
- Petroleum        1      200    na     na      na    9.2 
- Wood Processing  1      na     na     2       na    2 
- Mining           na     30     1      149     4     7 
Agriculture        2      4      2      50.1    26    32.5 
Services           5      32     16.3   127.2   43    4 
- Construct        3      31     6      5       1     na 
- Telecom          na     na     na     42.2    2     2 
- Infrastructure   na     na     na     65      na    1 
Tourism            5.5    18     18     33.5    101   12 
Total              66     379    209.7  480.7   260   105.2 
 
¶114.  The CDC has registered approximately USD 71 million in U.S. 
investment since August 1994.  Caltex has a chain of service 
stations and a petroleum holding facility in Sihanoukville; Crown 
Beverage Cans Cambodia Limited, a part of Crown Holdings Inc., 
produces aluminum cans; and Chevron is actively exploring offshore 
petroleum deposits.  W2E Siang Phong Co., Ltd., a joint venture 
between U.S.- Dutch investors, invested in biogas power generation. 
There are also U.S. investors in a number of Cambodia's garment 
factories. 
 
¶115.  In 2008, several Cambodia-focused private equity funds emerged 
seeking to raise between USD 100 and USD 500 million each for 
investments in infrastructure, agriculture, tourism, and real estate 
development, among other sectors.  However it appears the global 
economic slowdown is limiting fund-raising abilities, and widespread 
investments by these funds have not yet materialized. 
 
¶116.  Major non-U.S. foreign investors include Asia Pacific 
Breweries (Singapore), Asia Insurance (Hong Kong), ANZ Bank 
(Australia), BHP Billiton (Australia), Oxiana (Australia), Infinity 
Financial Solutions (Malaysia), Total (France), Cambodia Airport 
Management Services (CAMS) (France), Samart Mobil Phone (Malaysia), 
Shinawatra Mobile Phone (Singapore), Thakral Cambodia Industries 
(Singapore), Petronas Cambodia (Malaysia), Charoeun Pokphand 
(Thailand), Siam Cement (Thailand), and Cambrew (Malaysia). 
 
¶117.  Since 2007, several well-known U.S. companies opened or 
upgraded their presence in Cambodia.  General Electric and DuPont 
have established representative offices.  Otis Elevators, a division 
of United Technologies, also upgraded to a branch office, and 
Microsoft initiated a presence through its Market Development 
Program. 
 
¶118.  Some major local companies and their sectors are: Sokimex 
(petroleum, tourism, garment), Royal Group of Companies (mobile 
phone, telecommunication, banking, insurance), AZ Distribution 
(construction, telecommunication), Mong Rethy Groups (construction, 
agro-industry, rubber and oil palm plantation), KT Pacific Group 
(airport project, construction, tobacco, food and electronics 
distribution), Hero King (cigarettes, casinos and power), Anco 
Brothers (cigarettes, casinos and power), Canadia Bank (banking and 
real estate), Acleda Bank (microfinance), and Men Sarun Import and 
Export (agro-industry, rice and rubber export). 
 
¶119.  In 2009 Acleda Bank opened its first bank branch outside of 
Cambodia in Laos, and has announced plans for further expansion into 
Vietnam and China.  Statistics on Cambodian investment overseas are 
not available, but such investments are likely minimal. 
 
RODLEY