10TELAVIV104
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Tue Jan 19 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #0104/01 0191154
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 191154Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4999
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 0165
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 3076
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 7140
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 7339
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 6574
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 5254
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 7437
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 4191
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 2416
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 1068
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 8587
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 3600
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 7572
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 9660
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH PRIORITY 2394
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 3536
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 000104 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Aftermath of the Earthquake in Haiti 
 
¶2.  Mideast 
 
¶3.  Israel-Turkey Relations: 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
All media continued to report extensively on the aftermath of the 
Haiti earthquake and the successful activity of the Israeli field 
hospital in Port-au-Prince. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that sources close to Jordan's General 
Intelligence Department (GID) revealed yesterday that last week's 
failed attempt on the lives of Israeli diplomats in Jordan was 
apparently carried out on instructions from Tehran.  The sources 
were quoted as saying that the GID was investigating the possibility 
that the explosives used in the attack had been smuggled into the 
kingdom by Iranian diplomats.  The sources said that the attack 
itself was apparently carried out by local al-Qaida supporters who 
received money and explosives from Iran.  On Monday, Al-Arabiya 
reported that an Amman taxi driver was arrested on suspicion of 
involvement in the bombing.   According to the sources, the GID 
believes that the attack came in response to the killing of Iranian 
scientist Professor Massoud Ali Muhammadi in Teheran last week.  On 
Monday, Iran's Interior Minister Mostafa Muhammad Najjar vowed to 
take revenge on Israel over Ali Muhammadi's assassination. 
President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad accused Israel of being behind the 
assassination, which he said had been carried out in "Zionist 
style." 
 
On 1/17 Israel Hayom reported that Dennis Ross, who served as 
President Bill ClintonQs special envoy to the Middle East and who 
currently serves as an adviser to President Obama, visited Israel 
secretly last week and met with Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu. 
The newspaper stressed that Ross advises the President on the 
Iranian nuclear program. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that yesterday hard-line Likud Knesset 
Member Danny Danon told the daily that Israelis do not regard 
President Obama as a fair negotiator and that he would give the 
President a Qfailing gradeQ for his first year in office.  Danon is 
about to leave for a four-day visit to the U.S. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that Peter Yarrow of Peter, Paul, and 
Mary is in Israel to promote Operation Respect, which seeks to 
foster a compassionate learning environment for kids.  Yarrow was 
quoted as saying on Sunday: QIQve never been prouder of being 
American than because of what the American Embassy is doing here. 
 
On Sunday HaQaretz reported that in October Shin Bet head Yuval 
Diskin told PA Chairman Mahmoud Abbas that Israel would turn the 
West Bank into a Qsecond GazaQ if the latter did not ask for a 
postponement of the vote on the Goldstone report at the U.N. Human 
Rights Council. 
 
The media reported that yesterday police forces and Shin Bet agents 
raided the Mercaz Harav Yeshiva in Jerusalem with the goal of 
arresting suspects connected to the arson attack at the mosque in 
the West Bank village Yasuf on December 11.  Meanwhile, additional 
suspects were arrested from the yeshiva in the Yitzhar settlement. 
 
Leading media reported that the IDF has begun to take more stringent 
steps against acts of insubordination and that it decided yesterday 
for the first time to discharge from military service a soldier who 
supported insubordination.  The soldier in question is one of the 
soldiers who raised the placard calling for insubordination in the 
Shimshon Battalion. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted Israeli defense officials as saying 
yesterday that the Defense Ministry is working on allocating the 
funding to manufacture seven Iron Dome missile defense batteries 
over the next two years. 
 
Leading media reported that on 1/17 Infrastructure Minister Uzi 
Landau (Yisrael Beiteinu) visited Abu Dhabi, the capital of the 
United Arab Emirates -- the first Israeli minister to visit one of 
the Gulf states.  Landau attended an international conference on 
alternative energy alongside representatives of Arab states such as 
Syria and Lebanon.  LandauQs visit, which took place with the 
agreement of the UAE, is the result of a decision by the 
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) that Israel would 
participate and have full access to the organizationQs center in Abu 
Dhabi.  Maariv reported that recently, IsraelQs standing in the 
organization as also upgraded to the level of a Qstate with 
significant involvement. 
 
HaQaretz reported that a Libyan delegation visited Bethlehem three 
weeks ago, as part of the PAQs plan to woo the next host nation of 
the Arab League summit. 
 
The media reported that yesterday, during the historic joint 
Israeli-German Cabinet session in Berlin, German Chancellor Angela 
Merkel backed tough sanctions on Iran.  PM Benjamin Netanyahu called 
for the imposition of crippling sanctions on the Islamic Republic. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that yesterday Foreign Ministry 
Director-General Yossi Gal flew to Turkey to take part in the 
biannual Turkish-Israeli strategic dialogue session -- according to 
the newspaper, a further sign (along with DM Ehud BarakQs visit to 
Ankara on Sunday) that ties with Turkey have not collapsed. 
 
Israel Hayom reported that next week a delegation of top executives 
from Lockheed-Martin, which is developing the future F-35 combat 
jet, will be coming to Israel for meetings with government and 
military officials.  The deal in which Israel will purchase the 
future stealth bombers is expected to be signed either at the end of 
March or in early April.  The differences between the parties 
currently revolve mainly around the cost of the plane and the 
AmericansQ objections to IsraelQs desire to install Israeli 
electronic warfare systems  in the planes. That said, Israeli 
officials were quoted as saying that progress has been made in the 
talks.  Israel will receive the planes in 2014 or 2016.  In the 
initial stage, Israel will purchase 25 planes, with an option for 
purchasing an additional 50.  Israeli officials said that while the 
security establishment was interested in purchasing the planes, it 
would not do so Qat any price.Q  In 2002 Israel joined the 
multi-national project to build the combat jet of the future as an 
Qobserver,Q and not as an active partner.  Israel Hayom quoted Qsome 
peopleQ as saying that the decision not to become a full-fledged 
participant in the project was a very bad mistake. 
 
Major media reported that Shas has become the first ultra-Orthodox 
party to ask to join the World Zionist Organization. 
 
Leading media reported that Angel Gurria, the Secretary-General of 
the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) 
begins a two-day visit in Israel today, ahead of the countryQs 
possible admission to the organization.   HaQaretz reported that 
confidence is mounting Qin the Jerusalem corridorsQ that Israel will 
join the organization this May, becoming its 32nd member. The final 
decision will be made by the OECD ministerial committee.  Some media 
reported that Gurria has raised some reservations about IsraelQs 
entry into the OECD. 
 
The Jerusalem Post and other media reported that Jewish religious 
manuscripts rescued by U.S. troops from Iraq are being restored in 
Maryland. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
¶1.  Aftermath of the Earthquake in Haiti: 
----------------------------------------- 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  QValiant in Disaster 
 
Senior columnist and longtime peace advocate Yoel Marcus wrote in 
the independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (1/19): QEvery time disaster 
strikes anywhere in the world, I am filled anew with admiration at 
how ready and willing we are to assist and how speedy, effective, 
organized, and wholehearted that assistance is.  We did not rush aid 
to Haiti because there is a Jewish community there.  We went there 
for humanitarian reasons.  As a nation that has experienced 
disasters and bereavement for generations, other nations' disasters 
do not leave us indifferent.  Our photographers and reporters 
hurried over there not to humiliate some Turkish ambassador, but 
because they want to show -- and rightly so -- an attractive side of 
Israel, for a change.  It is easier for us to organize rescue 
operations outside Israel than do all that is necessary to advance 
peace inside it and thus prevent deadly attacks on our home front. 
There is no need to wait for an Qearthquake,Q as the Yom Kippur War 
was dubbed, to achieve a Qpeace of the brave. 
 
II.  QIsrael - a Leader among the Community of Nations 
 
Gershon Baskin, Co-Director of the Israel/Palestine Center for 
Research and Information, wrote in the conservative, independent 
Jerusalem Post (1/19): QHumanitarian disasters around the world 
bring out the best in Israel and in Israelis.... [But] our high 
level of morality demonstrated in Haiti will not cover up our 
immorality in Gaza nor will it postpone the collision course that we 
are on with the rest of the world.  Only real movement toward real 
peace, which is the morally right thing to do and also serves our 
interests, will place Israel where it needs to be and where it can 
easily be -- as a welcome member of the community of nations and 
even, perhaps, as a light unto nations. 
 
III.  QGood Intentions but Slow and Cumbersome Implementation 
 
Avraham Ben-Zvi, visiting Professor of Political Science at Haifa 
University and an expert in U.S.-Israel relations, wrote in the 
independent Israel Hayom (1/17): QThe tragedy that struck Haiti 
presented a challenge to Obama: to try to demonstrate to the United 
States and the world that the might of the American superpower is 
not directed only at military goals, but that it is also meant for 
noble humanitarian purposes. [But] despite the good intentions, the 
impression has been formed that the American giant has not yet 
learned the secret of improvisation and inventiveness and that the 
rescue operations started slowly and in a cumbersome fashion. 
Instead of devoting initial attention to urgent tasks -- including 
the immediate running of the airportQs control tower and the 
creation of a logistic infrastructure to receive the incoming aid -- 
[U.S.] activity dispersed to less vital domains.  It can only be 
hoped that the crouching giant will learn in the future how to 
combine an abundance of resources and advanced technology with some 
mind speed. 
 
 
 
 
 
------------ 
¶2.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
 
¶I.  QIn Order to Vanquish the Other 
 
Former Meretz leader, former Justice Minister, and chief Israeli 
promoter of the Geneva Initiative, Yossi Beilin, wrote in the 
independent Israel Hayom (1/18): QIt is not enough that both Prime 
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas 
have agreed to reach a permanent-status agreement or that that they 
have agreed in principle to adopt a two-state solution, as long as 
both sides view negotiations between them as a zero-sum game.... 
Progress will come through thinking that an agreement is one that 
only has two winners.  I believe that we proved the possibility of 
mutual victory in the Geneva Imitative that [Benjamin Netanyahu] 
agreed upon six years ago. 
 
II.  QThe Gaza Quagmire 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized (1/19): 
QWere Hamas to begin to lose its grip, it is far from clear that the 
joint Israeli and Egyptian hope of the return of secular Fatah rule 
to Gaza and enabling a new stability is well-founded.... Although 
al-Qaida has long chastised Hamas for failing to look beyond Israel 
and link up with bin Laden's global war, it is also skeptical over 
the survivability and ideological commitment of global jihadis in 
Gaza. The jihadis remain hopeful, however, and claim to be plotting 
large-scale attacks in a bid to earn al-Qaida's approval.  Al-Qaida 
has proven its ability to move into the vacuum left behind by failed 
states and convert territories with no sovereignty into bases for 
global jihad.  For now, Hamas retains a firm grip on Gaza, and the 
prospect of its replacement by an even more radical entity, made up 
of a coalition of al-Qaida-affiliated organizations dedicated to bin 
Laden's global war, is remote.  But the ambition is certainly there. 
And the existence of so dark a scenario only underlines the 
escalated complexity of attempting to resolve the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict when the Palestinian people are divided 
into two distinct, mutually hostile, geographic, and political 
entities. 
 
 
III.  QIsrael Is in the Picture, Too 
 
Arab affairs correspondent Smadar Perry wrote in the 
mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (1/19): QThis week Dr. 
Mustafa Fiki, Chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee of the 
[Egyptian] Parliament, entered the debate [over his countryQs 
Presidential elections].  He has been closely associated with 
[Hosni] Mubarak since the time when he served as Qinformation 
secretaryQ.... According to the veteran politician, QLike it or not, 
only the candidate who will earn American support, only the one 
whose nomination will not be disapproved by Israel, will be able to 
be elected EgyptQs next president.Q  In other words: the period of 
interrogation is over.  Behind the scenes, Washington and Jerusalem 
have entered the picture and are strongly involved in the process of 
the launching and smooth entry of the heir in his role.. From 
 
IsraelQs angle there is not room for consequences or homework. 
Those who need can study Gamal [Mubarak].  He, himself, will be wary 
of coming close to Israel in order not to be scratched at home. 
This is the plan, this is the man, and everything is ready.  Still, 
an experienced fox in Israel is warning that the story isnQt over. 
 
---------------------------- 
¶3.  Israel-Turkey Relations: 
---------------------------- 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
QFacing Turkey 
 
Former Israeli Ambassador to the U.S., former President of Tel Aviv 
University, and former Chief Israeli Negotiator with Syria Professor 
Itamar Rabinovich, wrote in the independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz 
(1/19): QThe strained relations between Ankara and Jerusalem affect 
the balance of power in the entire region.  A decade ago, Turkey was 
an ally of the United States and maintained varied and extensive 
relations with Israel.  In recent years, it has been sliding toward 
Syria and Iran and away from America, and has become a venomous 
critic of Israel.  If it slides any further, Turkey could become 
part of an Iranian-Syrian-Turkish triangle that would be a key 
element in Middle Eastern politics -- to the detriment of 
Washington, Israel and the moderate Arab states.... There is not 
much Israel can do under these circumstances.... [But] The Turkish 
leadership realizes that to mediate between Syria and Israel or to 
help the Palestinians it must maintain a dialogue with Israel.  To 
take advantage of its assets, Israel has to make a concerted effort, 
managed by the top governmental echelon.  A considerable part of the 
damage caused last week would have been averted if the Prime 
Minister had intervened earlier.... Having already made bitter 
enemies of the Greeks and the Armenians, [the Turks] certainly don't 
want to do the same with the Jewish people.  It is a difficult and 
complex task, whose fruits will not be immediately evident.  The 
Prime Minister must place it high on his agenda. 
 
CUNNINGHAM