02ANKARA9041
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Dec 18 00:00:00 +0100 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 009041 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 18, 2002 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
                         ------- 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEALS 
Fears for new biological attack in the US - Turkiye 
Erdogan Wants Broad Coalition for Iraq Operation - Milliyet 
PM Gul: We did not discuss 60,000 troops with the US - Sabah 
FM Yakis' "invasion" remarks appears on Athens' agenda - 
Hurriyet 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Foreign Policy Summit at the Presidential Palace - 
Cumhuriyet 
Cyprus Summit at Cankaya - Radikal 
PM Gul: Cyprus is our national issue - Yeni Safak 
EU deadline for solving Cyprus issue by February 28 creates 
tension in Ankara - Zaman 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Iraq:  "Milliyet" highlights AKP leader Erdogan's statement 
that Arab countries, including Syria, Egypt, and Saudi 
Arabia should take part in a possible operation against 
Iraq.  Erdogan said that such an operation could not be 
realize without a coalition.  Erdogan added that PM Gul will 
be traveling to the Middle East soon to seek support from 
Arab countries.  "Hurriyet" reports the same news under the 
headline `Middle East trip for Saddam,' and states that AKP 
leader Erdogan will travel to the region this month to seek 
support.  Citing the US media, "Hurriyet" also reports that 
the Pentagon plans to launch an international public 
relations campaign, which will include bribing some 
journalists to print pro-American stories.  "Sabah" reports 
that PM Gul denied reports that the US has delivered 50 
truck-loads of military equipment to Iraq.  Gul confirms 
claims that DepSecDef Wolfowitz and U/S Grossman had 
presented US demands to Turkey during their recent visit. 
However, the PM  stressed that Turkey has not yet responded 
to these requests.  "Milliyet" reports that Turkey has 
deployed nearly 40,000 troops along the Iraqi border in 
preparation for a possible operation.  These troops could be 
increased in line with developments.  "Yeni Safak" reports 
that Turkey would play a limited role in a possible war 
against Iraq, because the US is afraid of a possible clash 
between Turks and Kurds. 
 
 
Cyprus: "Cumhuriyet" reports on the heated argument between 
CHP leader Baykal and FM Yakis in parliament yesterday over 
the FM's statement that `Turkish troops would become 
occupiers of EU territory if the UN Cyprus plan is 
rejected.'  There are rumors that Yakis will be given a new 
assignment when Erdogan becomes Prime Minister and Gul is 
moved to Foreign Minister.  "Sabah" reports that the Greek 
Cypriots have launched a peace campaign in support of 
Annan's Cyprus plan.  The goal of the Greek Cypriots is to 
ensure Turkish support for the plan, thus securing EU entry 
of a United Cyprus.  All papers report that there will be a 
summit at the Presidential Palace today to discuss Turkey's 
foreign policy. President Sezer will chair the meeting, 
which will also include PM Gul, FM Yakis, Chief of General 
Staff Ozkok, and Foreign Ministry U/S Ziyal.  After this 
meeting, there will be a second meeting with the 
participation of TRNC president Denktas to discuss the 
Cyprus issue in more detail. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Iraq-US/Turkey 
 
 
"The US war plan" 
Editor-in-Chief of the tabloid "Star," Fatih Cekirge, 
claimed (12/18): "Two weeks ago, the Turkish Ambassador to 
Washington was summoned to the State Department.  During the 
meeting he was officially notified about the US war plan for 
Iraq and was presented with a list of US demands from 
Turkey.  The plan includes the use of Turkish airbases as 
well as Turkish territory.  The capacity of the airbases 
will be expanded for the use of the American air force, and 
US grounds troops will launch a military operation from 
Turkish soil into northern Iraq. . The meeting in Ankara at 
the presidential palace today is to make a crucial decision 
about this plan.  Ankara feels uneasy about it, yet the 
message from Washington is clear enough: Ankara must support 
the plan in exchange for Washington's recent support for 
Turkey's EU membership accession.  We will see if the AKP 
government will push for a `yes' to the plan, thereby 
putting Turkey into very big trouble." 
 
 
"An Iraq operation and the economy" 
Fatih Altayli argued in mass appeal Hurriyet (12/18): 
"Sooner or later there is going to be a military operation 
against Iraq.  This is not going to happen because of 
weapons of mass destruction or terrorism, but because the US 
economy is in need of it.  The future of the US economy 
depends on an operation.  US economic figures are not very 
encouraging at the moment, with ongoing stagflation, lots of 
bankrupt firms, a large number of unemployed and so on. . It 
seems that the hope for a better economic future for America 
goes through a military strike against Iraq." 
 
 
PEARSON