07HONGKONG1982
EXTRANCHECK: PRE-LICENSE CHECK: CONCORD CARNIVAL HOLDINGS
Mon Jul 30 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHHK #1982/01 2110703
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 300703Z JUL 07
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
INFO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2438
RHMFIUU/HQ BICE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS HONG KONG 001982 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDOC FOR 532/OEA/LHINES/DFARROW 
USDOC FOR 3132 FOR FCS/OIO REGIONAL DIRECTOR WILLIAM ZARIT 
BICE FOR OFFICE OF STRATEGIC INVESTIGATIONS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BMGT BEXP HK ETRD ETTC
SUBJECT: EXTRANCHECK: PRE-LICENSE CHECK: CONCORD CARNIVAL HOLDINGS 
LIMITED 
 
REF: A) USDOC 06490 
 
1.Unauthorized disclosure of the information provided below is 
prohibited by Section 12C of the Export Administration Act. 
 
¶2. As per reftel A request and at the direction of the Office of 
Enforcement Analysis (OEA) of the USDOC Bureau of Industry and 
Security (BIS), Export Control Officer Philip Ankel (ECO) conducted 
a pre-license check (PLC) of Concord Carnival Holdings Limited with 
a registered address of 807 Fortress Tower, 250 King's Road, North 
Point Hong Kong (Concord Carnival). The items in question are 158 
SRAM memory arrays (Arrays), valued at USD 29,704.  The export 
control classification number (ECCN) for these items is 3A001 and, 
according to reftel A, are controlled for national security (NS) and 
nuclear nonproliferation (NP) reasons.  The license applicant is 
Austin Semiconductor Inc., of Austin, Texas.  The Hong Kong 
purchaser of the items is AddCom Solution Limited (AddCom) while 
Concord Carnival is listed on the license application as the 
ultimate consignee.  According to documentation provided to the ECO 
by AddCom, the end-user of the items is the Shanghai Xinwei 
Electronic Equipment Research Institute, a division of SAST, in 
Shanghai (SAST). 
 
¶3.  According to the Hong Kong Companies Registry, Concord Carnival 
has been in existence since June 1997 and has only nominal paid-in 
capital.  Directors of Concord Carnival are listed as mainland 
Chinese national Peng, Xingxing as well as Australian nationals 
Dong, Fang Ming and Dong, Fang Ying. 
 
¶4.  The ECO attempted to arrange a meeting with Jane Qian, the 
General Manager of Concord Carnival by calling the company's Hong 
Kong phone number.  That number is actually the phone number of an 
accounting firm that acts as Concord Carnival's registered office. 
The accounting firm (discussed below) provided a contact number for 
Ms. Qian that turned out to be a mainland China mobile phone number. 
 When contacted, Ms. Qian stated that she typically works from 
Shanghai and would likely not be in Hong Kong for some time and 
would therefore not be able to meet the ECO.  Ms. Qian subsequently 
provided further background information about Concord Carnival by 
e-mail.  In addition, she encouraged the ECO to meet with AddCom, 
stating that this company likewise knew all there was to know about 
the transaction.  Ms. Qian stated that Concord Carnival does not 
have a physical presence in Hong Kong (aside from its registered 
address noted above).  It does not appear to have a web presence 
either. 
 
¶5.  According to the one page corporate description provided by Ms. 
Qian, Concord Carnival has been in business for over ten years.  Its 
main business is in mainland China.  Concord Carnival owns, as a 
partner, a 49% interest in Shanghai Tian Na Logistics Equipment Co. 
Ltd.  The primary focus of this joint venture is to produce shopping 
carts.  According to Ms. Qian, the joint venture has over 300 
employees and turnover in 2006 was RMB 12 million.  Additionally 
Concord Carnival's 100% owned mainland Chinese subsidiary Shanghai 
Ao Meng Co. Ltd. has seven employees and 2006 turnover was RMB 10 
million. The company also acts as agent in import and export 
transactions mainly in the food, textile and electronics areas. 
According to Concord Carnival's corporate description, the company 
was authorized by SAST to obtain the Arrays on SAST's behalf. 
Concord Carnival has a three-year business relationship with SAST 
and has provided Souriau brand sockets and 3d-plus, Samsung and 
Atmel products to SAST in the past. 
 
¶6.  The ECO, accompanied by Commercial Officer, Brock Wilson, 
visited AddCom, Unit B7, 7/F, Shatin Industrial Building, 22-28 Wo 
Shui Street, New Territories, Hong Kong on July 25, 2007.  AddCom 
Customer Service Representative, Ailey So represented AddCom at the 
meeting.  AddCom's premises consist of a one-room office with two 
desks and some additional space for product shipments received by 
AddCom in Hong Kong.  Ms. So was open and forthcoming about the 
transaction and the activities of AddCom.  She stated that AddCom is 
an electronics trading and distribution company established in 
Singapore seven years ago with offices in Malaysia, Thailand, the 
Philippines, mainland China and Hong Kong.  The Hong Kong office 
serves the Hong Kong and mainland China market and has been in 
existence for two years.  Mainland Chinese customers involved in the 
consumer electronics field typically use AddCom's products.  Ms. So 
stated that AddCom does not actually export any items itself but 
rather delivers items to the Hong Kong offices of companies that 
operate in the mainland or Addcom's customers come to it to pick up 
the items.  Ms. So stated that AddCom operates in this way to avoid 
the difficulties associated with getting products through mainland 
Chinese customs.  She stressed that AddCom's proucts are typically 
not very high tech and that, as a result, AddCom does not obtain 
licenses from Hong Kong TID (the Hong Kong export control agency). 
In the case of the items in question, Ms. So stated that AddCom is 
checking with TID to determine whether a license will be required to 
import them into Hong Kong. 
 
 
 
 
¶7.  The ECO provided Ms. So with detailed information concerning 
U.S. export control requirements related to items subject to U.S. 
jurisdiction (in particular, items AddCom receives from its U.S. 
suppliers).  Ms. So stated that she was pleased to receive the 
materials, stressed that AddCom is keen to comply with export 
control rules, and indicated that she would provide the information 
to management at her corporate headquarters in Singapore. 
 
¶8.  When the conversation turned to the transaction at hand, Ms. So 
stated that this was the first time that AddCom had dealt with 
Concord Carnival.  She stated that Concord Carnival had come to 
AddCom for the items because AddCom is Austin's authorized 
distributor in Hong Kong and mainland China.  So knows little about 
Concord Carnival.  She further stated that she anticipates that the 
transaction will involve shipment from the United States to AddCom 
in Hong Kong.  AddCom, in turn, will deliver the items to Concord 
Carnival in Hong Kong.  She expects that Concord Carnival will 
arrange for delivery to mainland China (though she stressed she has 
no specific information on this point). 
 
¶9.  According to the Hong Kong Companies Registry, AddCom has been 
in existence since August 2004.  It has the Hong Kong equivalent of 
USD 5,000 in registered capital.  Its Directors are listed as 
Singapore nationals Tan, Lee Kim Alison and Tan, Yew Mui Calvin. 
 
 
¶10.  On July 26, 2007, the ECO visited the registered offices of 
Concord Carnival at the address listed above and met with Elsie K. 
¶K. Cho of George Tso & Co., Certified Public Accountants.  Ms. Cho 
stated that her company registered Concord Carnival in Hong Kong and 
maintains the registered corporate address of the company.  She 
stated that she knows little of the activities of Concord Carnival 
and further that she believes Concord Carnival has no physical 
presence in Hong Kong. 
 
¶11.  All parties to the transaction cooperated with the PLC and 
provided the requested information (although Concord Carnival's 
representative could not meet within the 15-day time period allotted 
for the PLC). Additionally, the ECO notes that it is not uncommon 
for transactions involving mainland companies to be structured so as 
to involve one or more trading company intermediaries.  At the same 
time, the lack of a Hong Kong physical presence for Concord Carnival 
is a concern as is its apparent modest business activities.  The ECO 
recommends that this PLC be considered Unfavorable.