08HONGKONG1999
HONG KONG GOV'T PANEL REPORT ON MELAMINE
Wed Oct 29 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXRO7781
PP RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHHK #1999/01 3030928
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 290928Z OCT 08
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6138
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHDC PRIORITY
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HONG KONG 001999 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS TO USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR ECON ETRD TBIO HK CH
SUBJECT: HONG KONG GOV'T PANEL REPORT ON MELAMINE 
CONTAMINATION 
 
REF: HONG KONG 1764 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: The Hong Kong Government (HKG) has been 
working around the clock to test for melamine contamination; 
over 2,700 tests have resulted in over 34 imported products 
being pulled from store shelves.  Over 41,700 children have 
been voluntarily tested for possible melamine related health 
problems; ten children have been identified in Hong Kong with 
kidney stones possibly linked to melamine consumption. On 
October 20, 2008 the HKG released a special report by the 
Expert Group on Melamine (the Expert Group) detailing HKG 
actions and making specific recommendations for future steps. 
These include implementing a more sustainable melamine 
contamination testing regime and passage of legislation 
empowering the government to prohibit the importation and 
order the recall of foods deemed dangerous to public health. 
Draft legislation is expected to be submitted to the 
Legislative Council (Legco) on November 4.  Permanent 
Secretary for Health, Sandra Lee, told Econoff and 
Agricultural Attach on October 27 that the discovery of 
melamine in eggs imported from the Mainland on October 26 
will lead to expanded testing in the short term, delaying 
plans to scale back testing to a more sustainable level. 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Comment: The HKG response to melamine contamination 
has been swift, transparent and effective. Despite an initial 
run on non-Mainland produced infant formula, public fears 
were quickly addressed and people seem confident in the HKG's 
response, but media interest continues to be high. Legco 
members from all political parties have lined up in support 
of the proposed legislation, all but assuring a quick 
passage. 
 
 
The Expert Group on Melamine 
---------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Responding to the mid-September discovery of 
melamine contaminated infant formula (REFTEL), the HKG 
established an Expert Group on the Melamine Incident on 
September 23.  The Secretary for Food Health and Safety, Dr. 
York Chow, who chairs the Expert Group, is charged with 
protecting public health and recommending ways to prevent 
future food safety threats.  The Expert Group is composed of 
members from both the public and private sectors with 
specific expertise in public health, food safety, the medical 
and academic community, and communications.  The Group 
presented its findings and recommendations on October 20. In 
a public news conference, Chief Secretary for Administration 
Henry Tang endorsed the Group's recommendations and pledged 
to introduce legislation to allow the banning and recall of 
unsafe food products in Hong Kong. 
 
Melamine Testing Results and Recommendations 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Expert Group noted that the HKG Center for Food 
Safety (CFS) had announced melamine test results on over 
2,700 food product samples, of which 34 (covering 15 brands 
imported from a number of countries) contained melamine above 
established limits. Retailers have voluntarily withdrawn from 
store shelves all products that tested positive. Noting the 
increased emphasis on quality control in China and the effect 
on other Hong Kong services, the Expert Group recommended the 
continued testing of raw and pasteurized/UHT milk from China, 
but called for the adoption of a more sustainable and 
targeted approach to testing. This would gradually reduce the 
quantity of samples tested from nearly 100 per day to around 
100 per week as part of a standardized routine surveillance 
program. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Permanent Secretary for Health and Vice Chairman for 
the Expert Group, Sandra Lee, told Econoff and Agricultural 
Attach on October 27 that the October 26 discovery of 
melamine in fresh eggs from the Mainland was unexpected and 
the HKG will now expand the testing regime to include 
chicken/other poultry, pork and farmed fish.  The discovery 
of melamine in unprocessed animal products is likely the 
result of contaminated animal feed. Lee noted that the CFS is 
currently testing at capacity for melamine 24 hours a day, 7 
days per week.  CFS has briefed private firms capable of 
conducting the tests and is now considering out-sourcing some 
of the HKG testing to lesson the burden.  The new testing 
requirements for fresh foods will delay plans to scale back 
 
HONG KONG 00001999  002 OF 002 
 
 
testing, however. 
 
The Health Care Response to Melamine Contamination 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶6. (SBU) The Expert Group report praised the Center for 
Health Protection (CHP) and Hospital Authority for their 
screening programs and ability to allay public fear in the 
wake of the melamine discovery, noting that the CHP had 
handled over 9,866 telephone inquiries.  After peaking at 
1,876 calls on 25 September, inquiries fell to only 65 calls 
on 18 October.   Referrals from the CHP hotline and walk-ins 
at specially designated Hospital Authority clinics have 
resulted in over 41,748 voluntary initial screenings of 
children under 12 (averaging between 500-600 per day) and 
over 12,394 secondary referrals for additional testing.  CHP 
has identified 10 cases of children in Hong Kong to date with 
kidney stones suspected to be melamine-related.  Based on the 
dramatic drop in inquiry calls and the falling demand for 
screening consultations, the Expert Group recommended the 
information hotline be scaled back to normal business 
operating hours.  Voluntary screening clinics have already 
scaled back to regular operating hours but will continue to 
operate for an additional six months.  Dr. Liza Kay, HKG Food 
and Health Bureau, told Econoff and Agriculture Attach on 
October 27 that the Health Bureau has an excellent working 
relationship with both the Guangdong and Central Government 
authorities and Mainland health organizations are fully 
cooperating with HKG authorities, including arranging a 
recent HK Health Bureau trip to Hubei province to discuss 
ongoing clinical evaluations and patient care. 
 
The Authority to Ban Imports and Mandate Product Recalls 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Following the Expert Group recommendations, the HKG 
on October 24 released for public review proposed legislation 
to amend the current Public Health and Municipal Ordnance to 
give the Director of Food and Environmental Hygiene authority 
to prohibit the importation or supply of any food which is 
determined to be of danger to public health and to direct 
that such food be recalled, impounded or otherwise destroyed. 
 (Note: under current law, HKG health authorities cannot ban 
the importation of suspected problem food and can only 
recommend food product recalls.) In discussing this proposal, 
Lee told Econoff that the unexpected discovery of melamine in 
eggs drove home the point how important passage of this 
legislation is. The HKG will formally present the bill to 
Legco on or about November 4.  Members of all parties have 
spoken out in favor of the measure, which we expect to pass 
with little debate. An electronic version of the Expert Group 
Report is available on the HKG Food and Health Bureau Web 
Site at www.fhb.hk/en/index/html. 
DONOVAN