09HONGKONG604
EXTRANCHECK: POST SHIPMENT VERIFICATION: TECHWING
Wed Apr 01 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXYZ0007
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHHK #0604/01 0910533
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 010533Z APR 09
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
INFO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7297
RHMFIUU/HQ BICE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS HONG KONG 000604 
 
USDOC FOR 532/OEA/MNICKSON/ADYSON 
USDOC FOR 3132 FOR FCS/OIO REGIONAL DIRECTOR PATRICK SANTILLO 
BICE FOR OFFICE OF STRATEGIC INVESTIGATIONS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BMGT BEXP HK ETRD ETTC
SUBJECT: EXTRANCHECK: POST SHIPMENT VERIFICATION: TECHWING 
ELECTRONICS LIMITED 
 
REF: A) USDOC 00043 (2009) B) USDOC 07200 
 
 
¶1. Unauthorized disclosure of the information provided below is 
prohibited by Section 12C of the Export Administration Act. 
 
¶2. As per reftel A request and at the direction of the Office of 
Enforcement Analysis (OEA) of the USDOC Bureau of Industry and 
Security (BIS), Export Control Officer Philip Ankel (ECO) conducted 
a post shipment-verification (PSV) at Techwing Electronics Limited, 
Units 701-703, 7/F, Shing Yip Industrial Building, 19/21 Shing Yip 
Street, Hong Kong (Techwing). The items in question are two 
shipments of Xilinx electronic ICs exported to Techwing on or about 
May 20, 2008 and January 7, 2008 and valued at USD 2450 and USD 
13,500 respectively.  On the applicable shippers export declarations 
(SED), these items are classified under export control 
classification number (ECCN) 3A001 and, if properly classified, 
would be controlled for national security (NS) reasons.  The 
exporter was America II Electronics of Saint Petersburg, Florida. 
 
¶3.  Techwing does not appear to exist in any of the applicable Hong 
Kong government corporate or tax registries. 
 
¶4.  Web research revealed a web site for Techwing Electronics 
Limited.  That web site (www.techwing.com.hk) makes reference to the 
address to which the ICs were sent.  That site states that Techwing 
is a leader in the design, manufacture, marketing and support of 
high-quality, cost-effective, data communications solutions for 
industrial and avionics applications.  The company's customer list 
includes various mainland Chinese state-owned aviation and military 
companies. An internet domain search reveals that this web site is 
registered to a Hong Kong address, namely 12/F AT Tower, 100 
Electric Rd, North Point, Hong Kong (more on this address below). 
The contact e-mail for this registration is shiyue02@163.com. 
 
¶5.  Web research reveals a nearly identical web site for a company 
called Jointway Electronics Limited (www.jointway-elec.com.hk). 
This company's description is essentially identical although it 
makes reference to test, simulation and production interfaces for 
industrial, military and aerospace applications.  According to the 
Hong Kong Companies Registry, Jointway Electronics Limited was 
registered in August 2007 at the Techwing address noted above. 
Mainland Chinese national Mao, Xu Dong (passport number G16392329) 
is the company's sole director.  The company's secretary is listed 
as K&S Secretarial Limited.  This company is located at the 100 
Electric Rd. address noted above that corresponds to the internet 
domain registration address for Techwing. 
 
¶6.  Mao, Xu Dong is also a director of Hong Kong company, Askey Tech 
Limited.  This company has HKD 500,000 (USD65,000) in paid-in share 
capital.  Askey is registered at another K&S Secretarial location 
(namely Unit D, 11F, Seabright Plaza, 9-23 Shell St. North Point, 
Hong Kong).  According to other information available to the ECO, 
Askey and Jointway are both purchasers of controlled electronic 
components controlled under ECCN 3A001a2c in 2008. 
 
¶7.  It proved to be very difficult to schedule the EUC with 
Techwing.  After multiple calls and letters, ECO and Commercial 
Assistant Carrie Chan visited Techwing on March 23, 2009 and met 
with Mr. Alex Tam, Director.  The offices of Techwing are also the 
offices of company secretarial firm, Aurora.  While Techwing and 
Jointway are not included on Aurora's nameplates, Askey is 
included. 
 
¶8.  Mr. Tam provided an overview of the operations of Jointway.  He 
stated that Techwing does not have operations in Hong Kong but is 
rather located in Shenzhen.  The Shenzhen operation is owned by a 
BVI company.  Shenzhen Techwing is an original design manufacturer. 
It produces CFC cards and FPGAs for various industrial and aviation 
related applications. 
 
¶9.  As to the specific items in question, Mr. Tam stated that they 
were being used in the manufacture of a CFC card that will be used 
in the production of a prototype of an industrial control computer 
system to help analyze temperature during steel production.  Mr. Tam 
stated that the items were hand carried from Hong Kong to Shenzhen. 
No Hong Kong licenses were obtained for the import and subsequent 
reexport of these items (these were likely required).  Mr. Tam 
confirmed that Jointway has conducted work for a range of state 
owned enterprises in the past including for the China North 
Industries Group Corporation (CNGC).  According to the company's web 
site (www.cngc.com.cn), this company is the largest weaponry 
manufacturing group in China.  Mr. Tam stated that these items were 
not destined to this end-user. 
 
¶10.  When asked about Jointway, Mr. Tam initially stated that he 
knew nothing about the company.  When presented with a copy of the 
Jointway web site, Mr. Tam immediately noted that it was quite 
 
 
 
similar to the Techwing web site.  When presented with the corporate 
registration information for Jointway, Mr. Tam stated that he knew 
Mao, Xu Dong.  Mr. Tam stated that he was Mr. Tam's partner in the 
Techwing enterprise.  When ECO mentioned that Askey was also located 
at the Techwing address, Mr. Tam was incredulous until he was showed 
the name plate for Askey.  Later he stated that this address was 
likely a new address for Askey. 
 
¶11.  Mr. Tam stated that Askey is supposed to be the overseas 
distributor of Techwing products.  As noted above, Askey is a 
purchaser of controlled electronic components.  When asked about the 
reason for the two similar companies, Mr. Tam stated that this 
second business (Jointway) may be in place to serve different 
markets.  When ECO suggested that Jointway was potentially 
established to serve the military market, Mr. Tam did not object but 
offered no clear answer.  In ECO's view, Mr. Tam was caught by 
surprise by the existence of Jointway. 
 
¶12.  Mr. Tam stated that the majority shareholder of Techwing is 
actually named Daniel Leung and is a professor at Hong Kong City 
University.  ECO is researching this information.  Mr. Tam and Mr. 
Mao are both minor shareholders in Techwing. 
 
¶13.  Mr. Tam claimed that he had never heard of two companies that 
have been the subject of prior unfavorable end use checks, namely 
Winsuny and CAM-IC.  Information independently obtained by ECO shows 
that shipments of controlled electronic components purchased by 
Winsuny were actually delivered to Jointway.  Winsuny is also 
related to CAM-IC. 
 
¶14.  Based on the information noted above, ECO believes that 
Techwing is an unsuitable recipient of U.S. origin controlled 
technology.  ECO recommends that BIS reach out to America II to 
determine what information it had on hand when it shipped the items. 
 Further, ECO requests that OEA confirm the 3A001 classification of 
the shipment so that ECO may reach out to Hong Kong TID concerning 
potential violations of Hong Kong's export control rules in 
connection with these shipments.  ECO also recommends a thorough 
review of all shipments to Techwing, Jointway, Askey as well as to 
the addresses associated with those companies (noted above).