09HONGKONG1944
CLIMATE CHANGE: CHINA WANTS GREATER HONG KONG
Tue Oct 20 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXRO4167
PP RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHHK #1944/01 2930540
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 200540Z OCT 09
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8769
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HONG KONG 001944 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/CM, EAP/EP:MACFARLANE, OES/PCI: MIRZA, 
OES/EGC, EEB/ESC/IEC/ENR:MONOSSON, S/SECC:HOUSER AND 
SIERAWSKI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV ENGR KGHG SOCI HK CH
SUBJECT: CLIMATE CHANGE: CHINA WANTS GREATER HONG KONG 
CONTRIBUTIONS 
 
REF: HONG KONG 599 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  At the Hong Kong-hosted Second Annual 
International Climate Change Conference, October 7-9, 
participating Guangdong and central government 
representatives repeatedly called on Hong Kong to speed up 
technology transfer to China by becoming a model low carbon 
city and a leader in green financing and R&D.  The conference 
focused on climate change business opportunities and 
cooperation in the Pearl River Delta (PRD), and while 
participants encouraged the U.S. to raise its emission 
targets, there was little criticism of U.S. climate policy. 
PRC officials reiterated calls for developed countries to 
take the lead in reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. 
The growth of green business in China continues to be 
hampered by the lack of technical and financial expertise 
needed for complex transactions.  END SUMMARY 
 
Stress on Market Approaches 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  The Second Annual International Climate Change Conference 
(ICCC) took place October 7-9 in Hong Kong, jointly organized 
by The Climate Group and the Hong Kong Climate Change Forum. 
The ICCC brought together leading experts from a wide range 
of disciplines to discuss the impact of climate change on the 
Pearl River Delta region and to discuss policies for managing 
risk and sustaining economic growth.  Edward Yau, Hong Kong's 
Secretary of Environment and Professor Yanhua Liu, PRC's Vice 
Minister of Science and Technology, opened the conference. 
 
¶3.   Participants advocated a wide range of approaches to 
dealing with climate change, including the need to have 
multiple government and non-government players in the fight 
against climate change; encouraging low carbon development 
through cooperation between industrial and developing 
countries; crafting clear government policy; capital and 
financing; technology development/transfer; and carbon 
pricing mechanisms to reflect the true costs of combating 
climate change. 
 
¶4. Vice Minister Liu complained that developing countries 
were being expected to shoulder an unfair proportion of 
responsibility for reducing carbon and GHG emissions and 
urged developed countries to share carbon reduction 
technology.  He reiterated Beijing,s stance that developed 
countries should take the lead in committing to binding 
emissions reductions. 
 
U.S. Targets Too Modest 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  Lumumba Stanislaus-Ka Di-Aping, the Sudanese Ambassador 
and Deputy PermRep to the UN and Chair of the Group of 77, 
reporting back from the just-ended UNFCC meeting in Bangkok, 
remarked that the "ambitions of developed countries were 
irresponsibly modest" and that the U.S. and its allies were 
exhibiting "isolationism and exceptionalism".  Aside from 
Di-Aping,s remarks, there was little direct criticism of 
U.S. climate policy, although several participants called on 
the U.S. to raise its emissions targets.   Participants also 
regretted that no U.S. climate officials, businesses, or NGOs 
attended the conference.  Besides Hong Kong officials, the 
PRC, Denmark, Argentina, Canada, France, and United Kingdom 
fielded delegates. 
 
China Wants Hong Kong To Lead, But Hong Kong Falls Short 
--------------------------------------------- ----------------- 
 
¶6.  In their various interventions and speeches, Guangdong 
and central government representatives repeatedly called on 
Hong Kong to speed up technology transfer to China by 
becoming a leader in green financing and R&D as well as a 
model low carbon city.  The Hong Kong Government,s focus on 
mitigation activities, however, such as energy efficient 
building retrofits and electric vehicles, aimed at a 25 
percent reduction in energy intensity from 2005 levels by 
2030, was criticized by Mainland counterparts as 
insufficient.  Many voiced the view that Hong Kong, as the 
&wealthy brother8, should adopt more aggressive emission 
standards.  The HKSAR Government did not publicly respond to 
these calls during the conference. 
 
¶7.   Note:  HK's Chief Executive Donald Tsang in his Annual 
Policy Address October 14 stated that Hong Kong attached 
importance to the issue of climate change and the need to 
transition to a low carbon economy; however, he fell short of 
announcing any major new policy changes.  Two new inititaives 
 
HONG KONG 00001944  002 OF 002 
 
 
were announced, however -- a coupon scheme to replace 
incandescent light bulbs with compact fluorescent lamps (CFL) 
and a leasing scheme to promote electric vehicle usage.  He 
also reiterated Hong Kong's commitment to reduce energy 
intensity levels, arguing that, since Hong Kong was driven by 
non-energy intensive service industries, it would be able to 
reduce carbon emissions further through clean fuels and 
improved energy efficiency.  The CE stated that Hong Kong 
needed to extend landfills and construct a new integrated 
waste management facility, as well as a new food waste 
recycling center.  He also referenced HKSAR Government's 
on-going study to develop comprehensive strategies and 
measures to deal with climate change, scheduled for 
completion early next year.  End Note 
 
Barriers to Green Trade Persist 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.   Although much of the conference focused on the vast 
business opportunities arising from the global transition to 
a low carbon economy, it also highlighted the importance of 
entrepreneurs having access to finance in order to propel 
green investment and technology development.  Hong Kong 
banking and finance industry representatives acknowledged 
that they could play a key role but cautioned that current 
uncertainties over the outcome of Copenhagen were 
constraining business potential.  Finance industry reps also 
highlighted an additional barrier to green business in China. 
 As projects grew more technically complex, the need for 
advisers and technical consultants increases, but to date, 
Chinese companies have been unwilling to hire financial and 
technical advisers necessary to make these deals possible. 
MARUT