09HONGKONG1103
HONG KONG GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSE TO TIP RANKING
Tue Jun 16 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXRO0302
PP RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHHK #1103 1670912
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 160912Z JUN 09 ZDK
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7861
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS HONG KONG 001103 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR G/TIP, G, DRL, INL, EAP/RSP, EAP/CM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KTIP KCRM PHUM SMIG HK
SUBJECT: HONG KONG GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSE TO TIP RANKING 
DOWNGRADE 
 
REF: SECSTATE 60446 
 
¶1. (SBU) Per reftel instructions, Post met with Principal 
Assistant Secretary for Security W.H. Chow June 16 to inform 
him of Hong Kong's TIP ranking downgrade and provide a 
preview of Hong Kong's narrative in the 2009 Trafficking in 
Persons report. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Principal Assistant Secretary Chow was dismayed to 
learn that Hong Kong has been downgraded from Tier 1 to Tier 
2 in this year's TIP report.  After completing a line-by-line 
comparison of this year's narrative with last year's text, 
Chow argued the language on Hong Kong's lack of trafficking 
investigations and prosecutions was "misleading."  He noted 
the language could be misinterpreted to imply the Hong Kong 
government did nothing when potential trafficking cases are 
brought to its attention.  Chow insisted that is not the case 
at all.  The truth, Chow explained, is that Hong Kong law 
enforcement "rigorously" follows up on all investigate leads, 
but there simply has been very little evidence of human 
trafficking in Hong Kong.  Chow also emphasized that Hong 
Kong law enforcement cannot pursue trafficking cases if 
foreign consulates do not inform Hong Kong authorities of 
incidents where their nationals are victims of trafficking, a 
reference to the report's mention of seven trafficking 
victims assisted by a foreign consulate. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Poloff restated the USG's concern that the Hong Kong 
government may be failing to proactively identify trafficking 
victims amongst the large, and continuously growing, number 
of foreign domestic helpers and prostitutes working in Hong 
Kong.  Noting that the fight against human trafficking 
requires the efforts of all sectors of society, Poloff 
encouraged the Hong Kong government to enhance engagement 
with NGOs, foreign consulates, local businesses, and other 
stakeholders in its overall anti-TIP efforts. 
 
¶4. (SBU) After stating his government is not "comfortable" 
with a Tier 2 ranking, Chow stressed that Hong Kong wants to 
return to a Tier 1 ranking and asked what specific measures 
need to be undertaken to achieve that goal.  Poloff 
elaborated on the four recommendations included in the 
report, with Chow taking detailed notes during the 
discussion. Poloff stressed the USG's commitment to 
partnering with the Hong Kong government in addressing all 
aspects of the trafficking issue, to include arranging 
relevant USG training and helping identify available 
materials that can be incorporated into public awareness 
campaigns. Chow said his government welcomes new 
opportunities to work with the USG on TIP. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Chow concluded the meeting by reiterating his 
government's commitment to eradicating human trafficking.  He 
said even if Hong Kong had remained in Tier 1, the Hong Kong 
government is always looking for ways "to do better."  Chow 
told us his department has yet to decide whether to issue a 
formal press release responding to the report or just have 
remarks on hand for media inquires.  Either way, their 
primary message is to reassure the Hong Kong public that the 
government continues to take human trafficking very seriously 
and encourage Hong Kong citizens to report suspected 
trafficking crimes.  Poloff expressed the USG's appreciation 
for Hong Kong government's responsiveness and willingness to 
help us better understand Hong Kong's TIP situation, and said 
we look forward to continuing our excellent working 
relationship. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Comment: This year's TIP report clearly has gotten 
the Hong Kong government's attention, and Post expects 
increased opportunities to engage with Hong Kong counterparts 
on TIP issues in this reporting year.  Post welcomes G/TIP's 
involvement in reaching out to the Hong Kong government, and 
recommends that G/TIP visits to Post take place earlier in 
the information-gathering phase to allow adequate time to 
address problem areas that may surface.  End comment. 
MARUT