09HONGKONG132
2009 INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT, MACAU
Wed Jan 21 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXRO0982
RR RUEHCHI RUEHCN RUEHDT RUEHGH RUEHHM RUEHNH RUEHVC
DE RUEHHK #0132/01 0210153
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 210153Z JAN 09
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6709
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 HONG KONG 000132 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM AND EEB/IFD/OIA, STATE PASS USTR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV ECON OPIC KTTB USTR HK
SUBJECT: 2009 INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT, MACAU 
 
REF: 08 STATE 123907 
 
Openness to Foreign Investment 
------------------------------ 
 
¶1.  Macau became a Special Administrative Region (SAR) of the 
People's Republic of China on December 20, 1999.  Macau's status 
since reverting to Chinese sovereignty is defined in the 
Sino-Portuguese Joint Declaration (1987) and the Basic Law, Macau's 
constitution.  Under the concept of "One Country, Two Systems" 
articulated in these documents, Macau is promised a high degree of 
autonomy in economic matters and its economic system is to remain 
unchanged for fifty years.  Since reversion, the Macau Government 
has maintained a transparent, non-discriminatory and free market 
economy.  Macau has separate membership in the World Trade 
Organization (WTO). 
 
¶2.  The Government hopes to diversify Macau's economy by attracting 
foreign investment and is committed to maintaining an 
investor-friendly environment.  Corporate taxes are low.  The tax 
rate is 12 percent for a company's net profits greater than US$ 
37,500 (300,000 Patacas).  For net profits less than US$ 37,500, the 
tax ranges from 3 percent to 12 percent.  The top personal tax rate 
is 12 percent. 
 
¶3.  In 2002, the Government ended a long-standing gaming monopoly, 
awarding two gaming concessions to consortia with U.S. interests. 
This opening has encouraged very substantial U.S. investment in 
casinos and hotels, and has spurred exceptionally rapid economic 
growth over the last few years.  Macau is positioning itself to be a 
regional center for gaming, incentive travel, conventions and 
tourism. 
 
¶4.  Macau and the PRC implemented a free trade agreement, the Closer 
Economic Partnership Arrangement (CEPA), on January 1, 2004.  The 
agreement is similar to the Hong Kong-PRC CEPA.  As of 2008, it 
provided tariff-free access to Mainland China for all Macau-origin 
products and preferential treatment for 40 service sectors.  In 
December 2005, the Government inaugurated the cross-border 
industrial zone located between the northern part of Macau and 
Zhuhai.  Manufacturers have begun operating in the industrial zone, 
including one U.S. manufacturer of gaming tools. 
 
¶5.  Macau is heavily dependent on the gaming sector and tourism 
industries.  In addition, a single product category, textiles and 
apparel, accounts for approximately 58.5 percent of its goods 
exports.   Macau's textile and apparel exports decreased by 22.4 
percent for the first nine months of 2008, a continued result of the 
elimination of the textile quota system at the end of 2004. 
 
¶6.  Foreign firms and individuals are free to establish companies, 
branches and representative offices without discrimination or undue 
regulation in Macau.  There are no restrictions on the ownership of 
such establishments.  Company directors are not required to be 
citizens of, or resident in, Macau. 
 
¶7.  The Government is liberalizing the telecommunications sector 
under a law passed in August 2001.  Macau has liberalized the mobile 
phone market and Internet services.  It has issued three mobile 
telephone licenses to two foreign companies and one local firm.  In 
March 2005, the Government issued a license to a company operating a 
Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) network.  In October 2006, the 
Government issued three 3G licenses, and 3G operators began 
providing their services in October 2007. 
 
¶8.  Certain requirements are imposed on three professional services 
sectors as described below.  Under Macau law (Decree Law 14/95/M, 
22/96M and 22/97/M), qualified professionals and executives may 
apply for the right of temporary residency. 
 
--Education - an individual applying to establish a school must have 
a Macau Certificate of Identity or have the right to reside in 
Macau.  The principal of a school must be a Macau resident. 
 
--Newspapers and magazines - applicants must first apply for 
business registration and register with the Government Information 
Bureau as an organization or an individual.  The publisher of a 
newspaper or magazine must be a Macau resident or have the right to 
reside in Macau. 
 
--Legal services - lawyers from foreign jurisdictions who seek to 
practice Macau law must first obtain residency in Macau.  They also 
must pass an examination before they can register with the Lawyer's 
Association, a self-regulatory body.  The examination is given in 
Chinese or Portuguese.  After passing the examination, foreign 
lawyers are required to serve an 18-month internship before they are 
able to practice law in Macau. 
 
 
HONG KONG 00000132  002 OF 005 
 
 
Conversion and Transfer Policies 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  Profits and other funds associated with an investment, including 
investment capital, earnings, loan repayments, lease payments, and 
capital gains, can be freely converted and remitted.  The domestic 
currency, Macau Official Pataca (MOP), is pegged to the Hong Kong 
Dollar at 1.03 and indirectly to the U.S. Dollar at an exchange rate 
of approximately MOP8.02 = US$1.  The Monetary Authority of Macau, 
the de facto central bank, is committed to exchange rate stability 
through maintenance of the peg to the Hong Kong Dollar. 
 
¶10.  Although Macau imposes no restrictions on capital flows and 
foreign exchange operations, exporters are required to convert forty 
percent of foreign currency earnings into MOP.  This legal 
requirement is not applied to tourism services. 
 
Expropriation and Compensation 
------------------------------ 
 
¶11.  The U.S. Consulate General is not aware of any expropriation 
actions.  Expropriation of property may occur if it is in the public 
interest.  In such cases, the Macau SAR Government will exchange the 
private property with an equivalent public property based on the 
valuation and conditions of the property.  The exchange of property 
is in accordance with established principles of international law. 
There is no remunerative compensation. 
 
Dispute Settlement 
------------------ 
 
¶12.  The U.S. Consulate General is not aware of any investor-state 
disputes involving U.S. or other foreign investors or contractors 
and the Macau SAR Government.  Private investment disputes are 
normally handled in the courts or via private negotiation. 
Alternatively, disputes may be referred to the Hong Kong 
International Arbitration Center. 
 
¶13.  Macau has an arbitration law (Decree 55/98/M), which adopts the 
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) 
model law for international commercial arbitration.  The Macau SAR 
Government accepts international arbitration of investment disputes 
between itself and investors. 
 
¶14.  Macau's legal system is based on the rule of law and the 
independence of the judiciary.  Macau has commercial and bankruptcy 
laws (Decree 40/99/M).  Courts in Macau include the Court of Final 
Appeal, Intermediate Courts and Primary Courts.  There is also an 
Administrative Court, which has jurisdiction over administrative and 
tax cases.  These provide an effective means for enforcing property 
and contractual rights.  Commercial and bankruptcy laws are written 
under the Macau Commercial Code (Decree 40/99/M).  Macau's dramatic 
economic expansion in the last few years, combined with a shortage 
of qualified jurists, have put a strain on the operations of the 
judicial system, leading in some cases to delays in case 
resolution. 
 
Performance Requirements and Incentives 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶15.  To attract foreign investment, the Macau SAR Government offers 
investment incentives to investors on a national treatment basis. 
These incentives are contained in Decrees 23/98/M and 49/85/M and 
provided if companies can fulfill at least one of the following 
purposes: promoting economic diversification, contributing to 
promotion of exports to new unrestricted markets, promoting added 
value within their activity's value chain, or contributing to 
technical modernization.  There is no requirement that nationals own 
shares.  These incentives are categorized as fiscal incentives, 
financial incentives and export diversification incentives. 
 
¶16.  Fiscal incentives include full or partial exemption from 
profit/corporate tax, industrial tax, property tax, stamp duty for 
transfer of properties, and consumption tax.  The tax incentives are 
consistent with the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing 
Measures as they are neither export subsidies nor import 
substitution subsidies as defined in the WTO Agreement.  Financial 
incentives include government-funded interest subsidies (ranging 
from 4-6 percent) on private bank Pataca loans for buying/leasing 
new equipment or construction/leasing of industrial buildings. 
 
¶17.  Export diversification incentives include subsidies given to 
companies and trade associations attending trade promotion 
activities organized by Macau Trade and Investment Promotion 
Institute.  Only companies registered with Macau Economic Services 
may receive subsidies for costs of space rental and decoration, 
 
HONG KONG 00000132  003 OF 005 
 
 
production of audio-visual materials, etc.  Macau also provides 
other subsidies for the installation of anti-pollution equipment. 
 
Right to Private Ownership and Establishment 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶18.  Macau law and regulations provide for the right of foreign and 
domestic private entities to establish, acquire and dispose of 
interests in business enterprises. 
 
Protection of Property Rights 
----------------------------- 
 
¶19.  Macau is a member of the World Intellectual Property 
Organization.  Macau has acceded to the Bern Convention for the 
Protection of Literary and Artistic Works.  Patents and trademarks 
are registered under Decree 97/99/M.  Macau's copyright laws are 
TRIPS compatible and government offices are required to use only 
licensed software.  The Macau SAR Government devotes considerable 
attention to intellectual property rights enforcement and 
coordinates with copyright holders.  Source Identification Codes are 
stamped on all optical discs produced in Macau.  Macau Economic 
Services uses an expedited prosecution arrangement to speed up 
punishment of accused retailers of pirated products. 
 
¶20.  The Macau SAR Government has devoted considerable resources to 
combating optical disc piracy in recent years and claims to have 
closed down all illicit optical disc production lines.  Piracy of 
television signals (and much U.S.-origin program content) is 
rampant, however.  The Government does not have a clear position on 
criminal liability for commercial end-use piracy of copyrighted 
works.  The Consulate General has raised these issues with Macau 
officials and will continue to do so. 
 
Transparency of Regulatory System 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶21.  The Government has transparent policies and laws that establish 
clear rules and do not unnecessarily impede investment.  The basic 
elements of a competition policy are set out in Macau's 1999 
Commercial Code. 
 
Efficient Capital Markets and Portfolio Investment 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶22.  Macau allows free flows of financial resources.  Foreign 
investors can obtain credit in the local financial market.  At 
present, there are twenty-eight financial institutions in Macau, 
including twelve local banks and sixteen branches of banks 
incorporated outside Macau.  In addition, there are eleven 
moneychangers, two cash remittance companies, two financial 
intermediaries, five exchange counters and one representative office 
of a financial institution.  These institutions provide a range of 
credit instruments.  Banks with capital originally from Mainland 
China and Portugal have a combined market share of about 66.9 
percent of total deposits in the banking system.  Total deposits 
amounted to US$ 23.3 billion in September 2008.  In June 2008, banks 
in Macau maintained a capital adequacy ratio at 15.58 percent, well 
above the minimum eight percent recommended by the Bank for 
International Settlements.  Accounting systems in Macau are 
consistent with international norms. 
 
¶23.  Macau has no stock market, but companies can seek a listing in 
Hong Kong's stock markets.  There is cooperation between Macau and 
Hong Kong financial regulatory authorities. 
 
¶24.  Under the Macau Insurance Ordinance, the Monetary Authority 
authorizes and monitors insurance companies.  There are eleven life 
insurance companies and thirteen non-life insurance companies in 
Macau.  Total gross premium income from insurance services amounted 
to US$ 354.2 million in the first nine months of 2008. 
 
¶25.  Offshore finance businesses, including credit institutions, 
insurers, underwriters, and offshore trust management companies, are 
regulated and supervised by the Monetary Authority.  Profits derived 
from offshore activities are fully exempted from all form of taxes. 
 
Political Violence 
------------------ 
 
¶26.  Macau is politically stable.  The U.S. Consulate General is not 
aware of any incidents in recent years involving politically 
motivated damage to projects or installations. 
 
Corruption 
---------- 
 
HONG KONG 00000132  004 OF 005 
 
 
 
¶27.  Macau's anti-corrption agency is called the Commission Against 
Coruption (known by its Portuguese acronym CCAC).  Te CCAC has 
powers of arrest and detention.  Its udget and manpower have been 
increased in recent years.  The number of complaints of corruption 
handled by CCAC has increased significantly as a result of these 
changes, Macau's explosive economic growth and a public outreach 
campaign. 
 
¶28.  The highest profile corruption charge was leveled at Macau's 
Secretary for Transport and Public Works, Ao Man Long, who was 
arrested in December 2006 for corruption.  The CCAC reported that Ao 
had received bribes from real estate and construction companies in 
excess of US$23 million in return for contracts and approvals in 20 
public works projects.  Assisted by family members and others, Ao 
used shell companies in Hong Kong and the British Virgin Islands to 
launder money.  On January 30, 2008, he was convicted on 40 counts 
of bribe taking, 13 counts of money laundering, one count of holding 
assets from unknown sources and one count of incorrect declaration 
of assets.  Ao was sentenced to 27 years in prison and US$31.5 
million of his assets were seized, including assets not directly 
linked to his corruption and money laundering cases.  His wife was 
sentenced in absentia to 23 years in jail.  His father, younger 
brother and sister-in-law were convicted of 6-14 counts of money 
laundering, and were sentenced to 10-18 years.  The CCAC's overall 
effectiveness remains constrained by legislation limiting the scope 
of its authority to government - but not private - sector 
corruption.  However, the government plans to amend the law in 2009 
to empower the CCAC to also investigate private sector corruption. 
 
Bilateral Investment Agreements 
------------------------------- 
 
¶29.  Macau has signed investment protection agreements with Portugal 
and the Netherlands. 
 
OPIC and Other Investment Insurance Programs 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶30.  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) coverage is not 
available in Macau. 
 
Labor 
----- 
 
¶31.  Macau's unemployment rate in October 2008 was 3.1 percent, down 
from a high of 6.1 percent in 2003, primarily due to the increase in 
gaming facilities and hotels.  Some shortages of skilled workers 
have developed.  The government is studying proposals to resolve the 
human resources problem.  Macau has labor importation schemes for 
unskilled and skilled workers who cannot be recruited locally.  The 
Government is considering additional measures.  The current migrant 
labor pool is approximately 103,153 out of a total workforce of 
326,900.  The Government is successfully using the proceeds of a 
2005-implemented tax on the import of temporary workers for 
retraining local unemployed people. 
 
Foreign-Trade Zones/Free Ports 
------------------------------ 
 
¶32.  Macau is a free port. 
 
Foreign Direct Investment Statistics 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶33.  According to the Direct Investment Statistics 2007 compiled by 
the Statistics and Census Service, there were 1,853 foreign direct 
investment companies in Macau, employing 78,341 workers.  Hong Kong 
was the largest foreign investor in Macau, accounting for 59.1 
percent of total foreign direct investment.  The United States now 
exceeds Mainland China as the second largest foreign investor in 
Macau, accounting for 20.2 percent of foreign direct investment. 
 
Table 1: Stock of foreign direct investment by country/territory, 
2007 
 
Country/Territory US$ Million % Share of Total 
Hong Kong 4,657.0  59.1 
United States 1,587.6  20.2 
China 831.3  10.6 
Portugal 469.4  6.0 
United Kingdom 86.6  1.1 
Others 245.7  3.0 
TOTAL 7,877.6  100.0 
 
Source: Statistics and Census Service 
 
HONG KONG 00000132  005 OF 005 
 
 
 
Table 2: Stock of foreign direct investment by industry, 2007 
 
Sector US$ Million % of Total 
Gaming  4,731.0 60.1 
Banks and securities 1,438.9 18.3 
Industrial production 350.1 4.4 
Hotels and restaurants 178.5 2.3 
Transport, storage and 
 communications 126.5 1.6 
Insurance 198.4 2.5 
Construction 431.6 5.5 
Wholesale and retail 404.1 5.1 
Cultural, recreational and other services 0.2 
TOTAL 7,877.6 100.0 
 
Sources: Statistics and Census Service 
Note: Total does not sum due to rounding. 
 
Web Resources 
------------- 
 
Macao Special Administrative Region Government: 
http://www.macau.gov.mo 
Macao Trade and Investment Promotion Institute - IPIM: 
http://www.ipim.gov.mo/en/index2.asp 
Macau Fair & Trade Association: http://www.macaufta.com 
World Trade Centre Macau: http://www.wtc-macau.com