08LUSAKA465
MEDIA COVERAGE OF A/S FRAZER VISIT TO ZAMBIA
Mon Apr 28 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Lusaka
VZCZCXRO9616
PP RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHLS #0465 1191128
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 281128Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY LUSAKA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5744
INFO RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVEUNCLAS LUSAKA 000465 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ZI ZA
SUBJECT:  MEDIA COVERAGE OF A/S FRAZER VISIT TO ZAMBIA 
 
REF:  LUSAKA 463 
 
¶1.  Summary.  In interviews with Zambian national and international 
TV, local reporters and major news wire services during a brief 
visit to Lusaka, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs 
Jendayi Frazer broadcasted U.S. concerns about the recent Zimbabwean 
election and spoke out forcefully against violence in post election 
Zimbabwe.  A/S Frazer used her press opportunities to clarify, but 
not back off from, remarks she had made days before in South Africa 
that MDC candidate Morgan Tsvangirai had won the March 29 election, 
stating clearly that she had based her comments on a wealth of 
post-election tallies by independent observers.  Her visit - and her 
call for a tougher international community stance against President 
Robert Mugabe - featured prominently in local and international 
media.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. During a brief April 26-27 visit to Lusaka that included meetings 
with President Levy Mwanawasa and former President Kenneth Kaunda, 
A/S Frazer sat down for interviews with Associated Press (AP), 
Reuters, the BBC World Service, Radio France International, and 
several local Zambian media outlets.  In each interview she spoke 
out forcefully against post-election violence in Zimbabwe and called 
on the international community, and specifically on SADC, to take a 
tougher stance against reports of gross human rights abuse.  She 
also continued to emphasize that Zimbabwe's election results should 
reflect the will of the people.  A/S Frazer's statements were picked 
up and placed prominently on Zambian and international television, 
radio, print, and internet sites. 
 
¶3. Local media outlets concentrated on Frazer's meeting with 
President Mwanawasa, and on his role as SADC Chairman.  Zambia's 
most-read newspaper, "The Post" (circulation: 30,000), got an 
exclusive interview ("US rep, Levy hold talks over Zim crisis") and 
led with Frazer's concerns about post-election violence.  Though the 
paper has previously criticized Western involvement in the 
Zimbabwean crisis, their coverage of the A/S visit was accurate and 
highlighted the A/S' main points. The government-run "Daily Mail" 
(circulation: 20,000) and "Times of Zambia" (circulation: 25,000) 
both took their front-page reports from a Zambia News and 
Information Services (ZANIS) reporter who sat in on the AP 
interview.  Both articles mirrored each other (The Times: "America 
exerts pressure on Zim."  The Daily Mail: "Levy urged to pressurise 
[sic] Mugabe") and both led with A/S talking points about U.S. 
concern over Zimbabwe violence. 
 
¶4.  Zambia National Broadcasting Company television (viewership: 4 
million) and radio (listenership: 8 million) broadcasts took 
advantage of an exclusive interview, and lead by saying "the United 
States of America has expressed concern over the deteriorating 
security environment in Zimbabwe." (The TV bulletin also ran a 
separate clip, featuring A/S comments highlighting the Zambian 
government's anti-corruption efforts.)  A number of popular, 
privately-owned radio stations mentioned the A/S visit, basing their 
reports on the ZANIS report. 
 
¶5.  Almost as if anticipating A/S Frazer's visit, the Post - 
Zambia's largest circulation and only independent newspaper ran an 
editorial calling on Mugabe to hand over power peacefully.  This was 
an unexpected shift in message for The Post, which has traditionally 
been a liberation movement stalwart.  In fact, the Post's publisher 
used the opportunity of the PAO's last visit to the newsroom to 
lambaste the West for its imperial/colonial interference in 
Zimbabwean politics. The subsequent editorial ("Let the imperialists 
choke on their frustration") was straight out of Mugabe's past 
talking points.  However, given that they are bordering countries, 
the lack of original and/or insightful reporting on Zimbabwe from 
Zambia is a notable disappointment.  With the exception of the local 
angle - President Mwanawasa's role as SADC chairman - most Zimbabwe 
coverage comes from international wire services.  With the visit of 
the A/S, and given the chance to report directly on the situation, 
the Zambian media was by and large positive, and accurate, reporting 
back the A/S' talking points just as she presented them. 
 
MARTINEZ