06WELLINGTON470
PRESENCE OF 9/11 HIJACKER CRONY IN NEW ZEALAND
Tue Jun 20 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN
Embassy Wellington
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHWL #0470/01 1712251
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 202251Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2913
INFO RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA PRIORITY 4455
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 0018
RUEHYN/AMEMBASSY SANAA PRIORITY 0011
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI PRIORITY
RHHJJAA/JICPAC HONOLULU HI PRIORITY
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L WELLINGTON 000470 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
NOFORN 
 
STATE FOR D (FRITZ), EAP/FO, AND EAP/ANP 
NSC FOR VICTOR CHA 
SECDEF FOR OSD/ISD LIZ PHU 
PACOM FOR JO1E/J2/J233/J5/SJFHQ 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/19/2016 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PTER NZ
SUBJECT: PRESENCE OF 9/11 HIJACKER CRONY IN NEW ZEALAND 
PUTS POLITICAL HEAT ON LABOUR GOVERNMENT 
 
REF: 05 WELLINGTON 363 
 
Classified By: Ambassador William McCormick, 
for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
Summary 
-------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) The New Zealand Government announced on June 11 
that it had two weeks earlier deported Rayed Mohammed 
Abdullah Ali, a Saudi national of Yemeni background.  When 
Ali had lived in the United States some years ago, he studied 
flying and roomed in Phoenix with 9/11 hijacker Hani Hanjour, 
who crashed American Airlines Flight 77 into the Pentagon. 
Local media report that Ali was admitted to New Zealand in 
February on a student visa to study English, but had also 
been flying with instructors at Palmerston North's Manawatu 
Aero Club.  The Government expelled Ali to Saudi Arabia under 
Section 72 of the Immigration Act. This is only the second 
time in history that New Zealand has used this provision, 
which requires approval by the Governor General and does not 
allow for an appeal.  While the government says its decision 
demonstrates the seriousness with which it takes security 
issues, GNZ officials clearly also wished to avoid a repeat 
of the protracted asylum case of Algerian Ahmed Zaoui 
(reftel). Meanwhile, the Opposition is using the incident to 
question the competence of the Government's national security 
measures. End Summary. 
 
Background of the case 
---------------------- 
 
¶2. (C). Ali was able to enter the country on a legal passport 
despite his name appearing on a police list of undesirable 
persons and details of his terrorist links being easily 
available on the internet. The Government has revealed that 
Ali was not identified on entry at the border because he 
added the name Ali to the existing name on file.  However, 
press reports indicate that the only variation in Ali's name 
was the use of the initial "A" instead of Abdullah, and that 
this had been noted in a correction inside the passport. 
(NB: Post understands that he added the name Ali AND had the 
initial A. instead of Abdullah.) 
 
National condemns Government's handling of national security 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶3. (SBU) The opposition National Party has tried to make 
Prime Minister Helen Clark directly accountable for what it 
says is a national security failure. As is customary for New 
Zealand Prime Ministers, Clark has overall responsibility for 
the Security Intelligence Service (SIS), New Zealand's 
intelligence agency. However thus far, Clark has escaped 
political scrutiny thus far. To avoid any direct questioning 
in Parliament on this matter, she has deftly shifted 
responsibility to the Minster of Police by successfully 
arguing that police is the lead agency in tracking terrorists 
in New Zealand. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Undeterred by its inability to make Clark the focus, 
National has still managed to keep the heat on the 
Government. Somewhat illogically, the Nats have used this 
case to renew questions on why New Zealand has only adopted 
United Nations designations of individuals and organizations 
as terrorists and not made its own designations, as Australia 
and Canada have done. National's foreign affairs 
spokesperson, Murray McCully has referred to both Australia 
and Canada having made 88 and 59 non-UN designations to their 
national lists, respectively. 
 
Obfuscation is the hallmark of this case 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) McCully's reference to the Australian list in 
particular led to a good deal of confusion and 
misunderstanding.  The head of police counter-terrorism, 
Assistant Commissioner Jon White, said Ali's name appeared on 
a police terrorist list provided by New Zealand's security 
partners. However, the Minister of Police, Annette King, had 
 
a different view, declaring that Ali was "not on any 
designated list, anywhere." 
 
¶6. (SBU) King also had to retract her claim that New Zealand 
had designated the same number of terrorist groups as had 
Australia. She was apparently unaware that there are two 
Australian lists -- one from the Attorney General -- the UN 
designations -- and the other from the Foreign Affairs 
Ministry, to which McCully had referred. White's initial 
reaction to McCully's claim -- he said he had no idea what 
McCully was talking about -- has also created problems for 
Labour, as the Opposition has questioned White's 
understanding of security systems in other jurisdictions. 
 
Foreign Minster's alleged role in uncovering Ali 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶7. (C) Additional doubts have surfaced about Government 
assurances about the effectiveness of its border security. 
The press claims it was actually Foreign Minister Winston 
Peters who discovered Ali was in the country, when he was 
telephoned by a man demanding money in return for information 
about a terrorist in New Zealand. The media says Peters told 
the man he could see his phone number on the caller ID, and 
said the man would be in trouble if he did not reveal all. 
The man then told him about Ali. Peters has neither confirmed 
nor denied the story, claiming that he is duty-bound by his 
membership in the security and intelligence select committee 
not to comment on the matter.  A spokesman for Clark says the 
story has no credence.  (NB: U.S. officials familar with the 
case say the same.) 
 
Government announces review of border security 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶8. (SBU) Despite continuing to declare his confidence in New 
Zealand's "overall" border security system, Immigration 
Minister David Cunliffe has announced a review of existing 
measures. The Government will reconsider the visa-free status 
of Middle East countries. Although Cunliffe claimed this was 
unrelated to the Ali incident, he did note that the 
Government's particular scrutiny of Middle Eastern countries' 
visa status is a reflection of "the highest public interest 
at the moment." 
 
¶9. (SBU) Cunliffe's announcement has not pleased everyone. 
Javed Kahn, the President of the Federation of Islamic 
Associations of New Zealand, called the review a "knee-jerk 
response" to the Ali case. The Green Party's Keith Locke said 
that the Government's application of visa-free status is 
inconsistent, noting that Israelis receive it but 
Palestinians do not. National's immigration spokesman, 
Lockwood Smith welcomed the review but claimed it would not 
address the need to maintain an accurate immigration database 
and methodology for detecting people who are a serious threat 
to New Zealand. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶10.  (C) Some local commentators have accused the Government 
of overreacting, as Ali had allegedly been extensively 
interviewed after 9/11 by the FBI in America and was released 
for lack of evidence.  In general, however, public criticism 
of Ali's deportation has been muted, and nowhere near the 
levels of concern generated by the Zaoui case.  As a 
practical matter, we would have preferred that Ali remain in 
New Zealand, where close law enforcement cooperation would 
have let us keep an eye on him.  However, GNZ believed it 
would face less embarrassment if it got rid of Ali quickly, 
before the Opposition got wind of his presence in the country 
and before he became another Green Party cause celebre. 
 
¶11.  (C) Even so, this incident may have some upsides for us. 
 SIS officials have told us that it may now be easier for 
them to convince NZ Treasury to provide funds for new 
computers to support a proposed US-NZ MOU on exchanging 
unclassified screening information on known or suspected 
 
SIPDIS 
terrorists. NZ Police says it may also help GNZ use its 
 
authority to designate a non-UN-listed terrorist.  End 
Comment. 
McCormick