06AITTAIPEI4111
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQ STUDY GROUP REPORT, TAIWAN'S MAYORAL
Wed Dec 13 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #4111/01 3470907
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 130907Z DEC 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3426
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6087
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 7315UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 004111 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQ STUDY GROUP REPORT, TAIWAN'S MAYORAL 
ELECTIONS 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies continued to 
focus their coverage December 13 on the aftermath of Saturday's 
Taipei and Kaohsiung mayoral elections, and on alleged vote-buying 
in Kaohsiung.  In terms of editorials and commentaries, a commentary 
in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" discussed the Iraq Study Group 
Report, saying that the report will not become an internal consensus 
of the United States, but it will become a point of reference for 
future debates.  With regard to Saturday's mayoral elections, an 
editorial in the pro-unification "United Daily News" discussed KMT 
Chairman Ma Ying-jeou's quandary in the wake of the elections.  An 
editorial in the limited-circulation, pro-independence, 
English-language "Taiwan News" said the election results "sent a 
ringing message" to hostile China.  End summary. 
 
¶2. Iraq Study Group Report 
 
"Iraq Study Group Report Will Be Unable to Become a Consensus" 
 
James Tu, president of the "Apple Daily" [circulation: 500,000], 
commented in his paper (12/13): 
 
"... The final key lies in the Executive Branch.  President Bush and 
his national security team obviously have their own plan.  They 
don't want to criticize the Iraq Study Group Report in the face, but 
they turned down some of the ideas raised in the report in a zigzag 
manner.  Now Bush is closely monitoring reactions from all sides on 
the one hand and on the other hand is demanding that his own 
national security team come up with a new assessment report on Iraq. 
 It is expected that Bush cannot possibly agree to the entire plan 
proposed by James Baker and his team, but he would probably adopt 
some of the ideas in the report.  For Bush, the worst situation is 
over, after all.  All political figures are now eying the 2008 
elections, while Bush is the only one who has no such pressure.  He 
wants to make the best use of the remaining two years of his term to 
direct Iraq and the Middle East onto the track he desires, and he 
wants to consider calmly his place in history. 
 
"The Iraq Study Group Report will not become an internal consensus 
of the United States.  But no matter whether a consensus is formed, 
this report will become a point of reference for future debates 
after all; it is regarded as a success simply based on this point. 
James Baker and others [who worked on the report] should be able to 
congratulate themselves for not having worked in vain over the past 
nine months. 
 
¶3. Taiwan's Mayoral Elections 
 
A) "Ma Ying-jeou's Quandary: Is It a Trap or a Niche [Pigeonhole]?" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (12/13): 
 
"Ma Ying-jeou was badly injured in Saturday's [mayoral] elections. 
The worst injury he suffered was people's questioning of his 
'ability' and sneering at his inflexible moral burdens and the 
shackles of rule of law that he wears. ...  The quandary Ma is in 
today is in reality a quandary facing Taiwan's politics.  On the one 
hand, Taiwan people are generally aware that less shrewdness, less 
dishonesty, and fewer schemes are the one and only cure for Taiwan, 
and perhaps this is the reason why many people place their hopes in 
Ma.  But on the other hand, many Taiwan people also believe that 
there is no way morality and rule of law can possibly cope with the 
bitter and severe political struggles in Taiwan.  They believe that 
under the circumstances, while one's rivals are both crafty and 
dishonest, the burdens of morality and the shackles of rule of law 
are analogous to 'inability' or 'incompetence.'  This is probably 
why many people are disappointed with or have sneered at Ma.  A 
distinct contrast that is worth pondering is that during the mayoral 
elections, almost no one called Chen Shui-bian 'incompetent,' while 
Ma was generally questioned and sneered at by people as being 
'incompetent.' ... 
 
"In reality, there are two origins for Ma's real limitations: 
First, he is a second-generation Mainlander, and second, [he 
carries] the KMT's historical burdens.  Political figures like Chen, 
who is corrupt in every way he can be and who has caused his country 
to stagnate, can only possibly appear in the Green camp, yut the 
public generally identifies him as a representative of 'nativist 
values.'  By contrast, Ma's mainland Chinese origin and his KMT 
label bar him from any attempt to engage in chicanery or be 
dishonest; should he play such tricks, it will only turn his image 
into something like 'Chinese pigs.'  Thus, it is actually not merely 
Ma's nature that makes him the way he is today - deep in a trap; it 
is in reality also due to his unavoidable 'historical/social' niche 
[pigeonhole]. ..." 
 
B) "Message for PRC in Mayoral Polls" 
ELECTIONS 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (12/13): 
 
"The ability of the governing Democratic Progressive Party to win 
the mayoralty of Kaohsiung City by a razor-thin margin and boost its 
vote share in Taipei City sent a ringing message to the hostile 
People's Republic of China regime while frustrating the attempt by 
the former ruling Kuomintang to turn the poll into a 'no-confidence' 
vote on embattled President Chen Shui-bian. ... Voters, especially 
in southern Taiwan's metropolis, rejected the KMT's hypocritical 
definition of the poll as an 'action against corruption' and refused 
to allow the DPP to lose Kaohsiung, an event which would surely have 
been interpreted by the local and the international press as a 
signal that the 'pro-unification' KMT would win back presidential 
power in March 2008.  In addition, this hefty share of the 
electorate simultaneously demonstrated their rejection of siren 
calls by KMT candidates, notably in Kaohsiung, for full 
liberalization of 'direct links' in marine and sea transportation as 
the panacea to Taiwan's economic pains. ... 
 
"The 2008 presidential election will be very much significant not 
only for the DPP but also for the KMT and CCP.  It will be a battle 
for the rivalry between Taiwanese consciousness and Chinese 
consciousness.  The victory of either side will mark the direction 
that Taiwanese people choose to go.  Moreover, the international 
community has also a major stake in the results, which will 
determine whether Taiwan and its 23 million people remain in the 
world democratic community or begin a slide into the sphere of 
influence of the authoritarian PRC regime.  In this regard, the 
United States has a responsibility as the main leader of the world 
democratic community to protect the fair democratic transformation 
of Taiwan and ensure that our people can determine their own 
political direction and fate free of the fear of the threat of force 
or the use of force by the PRC. ..." 
 
YOUNG