06ANKARA6610
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Dec 07 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO9126
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #6610/01 3411444
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 071444Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0225
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 7637
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1756
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1404
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 5606
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 5326
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1987
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 006610 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, DECEMBER 7, 2006 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Erdogan on Turkey's EU Process 
All papers report prior to departing for Damascus on Wednesday, 
Prime Minister Erdogan told the press that Turkey would wait to see 
the decisions to be taken at the EU meetings on December 11 and 
December 14-15.  "In the worst case, the EU entry process might slow 
down, but Turkey will stick to its EU membership goal without 
reacting emotionally," Erdogan maintained, adding Turkey had ready 
"a Plan B and Plan C" if ties with the European bloc break.  Erdogan 
slammed the French and German efforts to freeze talks with Ankara, 
saying France, concerned about the upcoming general elections, chose 
to satisfy its domestic audience by opposing Turkey joining the EU. 
 
 
Turkey Offers EU to Open Ports, Airport to Cyprus 
Turkish and international wire agencies and TVs report Thursday 
morning that a spokesman for Finland's EU presidency said Turkey has 
submitted to EU an offer to open one port and one airport to Greek 
Cypriot ships and planes in exchange for the opening of Ercan 
Airport and Maras (Varosha) port in Turkish Cyprus to international 
trade.  Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA) sources stated the proposal 
does not include a unilateral opening of ports.  TV news broadcasts 
reported early in the afternoon that the Greek Cypriot 
administration had rejected the offer. 
 
Iraq Study Group Report 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Sabah, Radikal, Cumhuriyet, Zaman, Yeni Safak 
and others report the Iraq Study Group, led by former Secretary of 
State James Baker and former US Rep. Lee Hamilton, presented 
President Bush with a report carrying recommendations for US troop 
reductions and an international support group for Iraq.  The report 
suggests that the upcoming 2007 referendum on Kirkuk be postponed in 
an effort to block the spread of violence and that the diplomatic 
process should include Syria and Iran.  It underlines that Turkey 
should participate in supporting the process for a solution in Iraq. 
 Several Turkish papers highlight the report says there is "No magic 
formula" for Iraq.  News commentaries in Cumhuriyet and the 
economic/political Referans point to Erdogan's recent visits to 
Tehran and Damascus, the latter occurring on the day when the Iraq 
Study Group unveiled its report, speculating that Turkey began to 
lay the groundwork for US policies in the Middle East. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Iraq Study Group Report 
Washington-based correspondent Rusen Cakir comments in the mass 
appeal Vatan that expectations for the report have been raised too 
high:  "The US and almost the entire world are expecting too much 
from the ISG's report, hoping to find a settlement to the Iraq 
issue.  Following the release of the report those hopes have faded. 
There is no miraculous solution offered in this report.  The gist of 
the report actually presents a strong indication that the US is 
desperately seeking a way out in Iraq.  The content of the ISG 
report suggests a midpoint between Democrats and Republicans and 
offers some plans which both parties can agree on, although nothing 
is new.  On the other hand, the ISG report has a symbolic importance 
-- it shows that the US has not won the war in Iraq, and will not in 
the future either.  This does not mean that Iraq has won the war, 
but Iran and Syria are certainly on the winning side of the 
equation.  Although the report stands against the idea of a divided 
Iraq, the reality tells just the opposite.  It is hard to predict 
what would happen after the withdrawal of American forces, but Iran 
and Syria will continue to hold the strings in Iraq as they have 
already gained control over Shiites and Sunnis respectively." 
 
In the conservative Bugun, columnist Cengiz Candar points out there 
is no "magic formula" for Iraq:  "We waited for the report by Iraq 
Study Group as if we were waiting for Godot.  For me the report has 
never been a subject of excitement because the Iraq problem can 
never be settled via miraculous ideas.  Besides everything about 
 
ANKARA 00006610  002 OF 003 
 
 
Iraq and the possibilities for its future have already been 
discussed, debated and speculated on.  In other words, there is 
nothing left for the ISG to create idea-wise. At this point the ISG 
report, regardless of its suggestions, does not have a chance of 
implementation.  The Iraq issue is directly related to the colossal 
transformation process in the Middle East, and by focusing on Iraq 
alone we simply cannot see the whole picture.  There is no calendar 
for pull out even in the Baker-Hamilton report and President Bush is 
not going to commit himself to the contents of this report.  The 
reality is far from a magical formula for Iraq.  The US is suffering 
from an obvious weakness on Iraq while the violence mounts to an 
incredible dimension, and as the potential for a civil war in 
Lebanon grows." 
 
Baser and Ralston to Meet on December 11 
Yeni Safak, Zaman, Radikal, Milliyet and others:  Today's papers 
report that Turkey-US cooperation in countering terrorism continues. 
 Within this framework, Turkish and US special envoys for countering 
PKK terrorism Baser and Ralston will meet for the fourth time, 
either in Germany or Belgium upon the request of Baser, on December 
¶11. 
 
PM Erdogan's One Day Visit to Syria 
All papers report that PM Erdogan paid a one-day working visit to 
Damascus.  He met with President Assad and PM Mohammed Naji 
al-Otari.  Syrian PM Otari urged that both countries make joint 
investments.  Erdogan and Syrian President Assad discussed regional 
matters, developments in Iraq and Lebanon, and the Israel-Palestine 
conflict.  On his return to Turkey, PM Erdogan told the press that 
Iran, Syria and Turkey share the same belief regarding protection of 
the territorial integrity of Iraq. 
 
Survey on the Plight of Women in Southeast Turkey 
Milliyet and Radikal carry a survey conducted with 472 married women 
in 97 villages around the mainly Kurdish city of Diyarbakir, which 
shows 80 percent of the women are illiterate, 58 percent forced into 
marriage, 43 percent gave birth at the age of 14 -18, 63 percent 
have no social security, and girls are not sent to school.  Thirty 
percent of the women were married when they were under the age of 
15, and 44 percent of them have six or more children.  The survey 
was conducted by Diyarbakir Municipality's Research Center for 
Women's Problems.  A social worker from the survey team said people 
in the villages live in "stable-like houses" together with their 
sheep and cows, citing one example where she saw 24 living in a 
single room. 
 
Pamuk to Receive Nobel Prize on Sunday 
Hurriyet, Sabah, Radikal, Zaman and others report Orhan Pamuk, the 
first Turkish novelist to win the Nobel Prize in literature, 
Wednesday told around 60 journalists from various countries in 
Stockholm that he was pessimistic about Turkey's EU membership 
process.  "Unfortunately, excitement in Europe and Turkey has been 
lost, which makes me sad," he said, noting that Turkey's accession 
to the EU would be an example that there is harmony among the 
civilizations, not clashes.  Pamuk will give a speech on Thursday 
and attend a ceremony on Sunday where he will receive his Nobel 
Prize worth of USD 1.4 million. 
 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV, 6.00 A.M. 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Turkish Foreign Ministry spokesman Namik Tan said developments 
leading to divisions in Iraq would be harmful for the whole region. 
 
 
- Turkish Cyprus leader Mehmet Ali Talat will travel to The Hague at 
the invitation of Dutch Foreign Minister Bernard Bot. 
 
ANKARA 00006610  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
- Turkish Justice Ministry drafted a bill for the establishment of a 
national DNA bank that will facilitate the fight against crime. 
 
- Turkey's Council of State (Danistay) has suspended the decision of 
the Privatization Administration for the sale of state-owned 
Halkbank. 
 
- Four people have been killed and many others injured as more than 
50 cars collided in the heavy fog near Istanbul.  Eleven killed and 
26 others were injured in another traffic accident on a highway near 
the city of Bolu. 
 
International News 
 
- Pope Benedict addressed a reception in the Vatican after his 
landmark trip to Turkey, expressing hope that Turkey could become a 
"bridge of friendship and brotherly cooperation between the West and 
East". 
 
- Defense Secretary-designate Robert Gates said "if the US leaves 
Iraq in chaos," a regional conflict would break involving Saudi 
Arabia, Turkey, Syria, and Iran. 
 
- Lebanese Prime Minister Siniora has urged the opposition to end 
the street protests and return to the negotiating table, stressing 
he would stay in office. 
 
- France's Foreign Minister Philippe Douste-Blazy said Iran will 
face UN sanctions for refusing to halt its nuclear program. 
 
- Mortar fire on the Midan district of Baghdad killed 10 people and 
wounded another 54. 
 
 
  Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
WILSON