06KUWAIT4569
KUWAIT GRANTS COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR NEA A/DAS L. VICTOR
Tue Dec 05 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kuwait
VZCZCXYZ0008
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKU #4569/01 3390556
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 050556Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY KUWAIT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7778
INFO RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD IMMEDIATE 0751UNCLAS KUWAIT 004569 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/FO CARMEN RYAN AND NEA/I LINNEA BOHN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA ASEC KU IZ COUNTRYCLEARANCE
SUBJECT: KUWAIT GRANTS COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR NEA A/DAS L. VICTOR 
HURTADO DECEMBER 5-11, 2006 
 
REF: STATE 191873 
 
¶1. Embassy Kuwait welcomes and grants country clearance for NEA 
Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary L. Victor Hurtado to Kuwait from 
December 5 to 11, 2006. Please note action request in para. 4.J. 
 
¶2. This clearance is not/not valid for entry into Iraq; you must 
apply for Iraq clearance through Embassy Baghdad. 
 
¶3. Hotel reservations have been made for the nights of December 5 
(Hurtado), 6 (Hurtado +3), and 9 (Hurtado +3) at the Radisson SAS 
Hotel at the rate of 66.000 KD plus 15% (approximately USD 260) per 
night per single room, which includes a buffet breakfast. The per 
diem rate for Kuwait is USD 260 plus M&IE of USD 96 for a total of 
USD 356. The hotel phone number is (965)575-6000; fax number 
(965)575-0155. An Embassy visit officer and a driver/expeditor will 
meet and assist you at the airport. Embassy points of contact are: 
 
Jonathan Turley, Political Section (Visit Officer) 
Office- (965) 259-1495 
Cell- (965) 978-3185 
Unclass e-mail: TurleyJC@state.gov 
 
SIPDIS 
 
And 
 
Carri Mowry, Coordinator Iraq Support Unit (for Logistics) 
Office- (965) 259-1419 
Cell- (965) 973-9854 
Fax- (965) 259-1190 
Unclass e-mail: MowryCA@state.gov 
 
SIPDIS 
 
4 Following is post's standard guidance for visitors to Kuwait: 
 
a. Entry Requirements: Kuwait now issues single-entry visas to 
American citizens on arrival, upon presentation of a valid passport. 
 There is a processing fee of three (3) Kuwaiti Dinar (KD 3.000, or 
USD 12.00) for each visa issued. The fee may be paid either in KD or 
USD. Post strongly advises travelers to carry some documentation on 
the purpose of their visit.  Passengers arriving on other than 
commercial flights should anticipate extra delays, because 
immigration services are not available on the military side of the 
airfield and passports have to be carried to a different location at 
the airport for processing.  Airport visas are valid for 90 days 
after arrival; anyone staying beyond this period must obtain an 
extension, which should be requested 2 weeks prior to visa 
expiration.  Anyone departing Kuwait who has overstayed the visa 
will be charged a fine of KD 10.000 (US 35.00) per day at the 
airport.  All travelers planning to visit Iraq should make sure that 
they obtain the required exit/entry stamps for each transit through 
Kuwait, and be aware that they will need to obtain a new Kuwaiti 
visa upon return, even after a daytrip to Baghdad.  Failure to do so 
can result in heavy fines.  If possible, travelers should try to 
obtain a multiple-entry visa before arriving in Kuwait. 
 
b. Visitors are reminded that the importation of alcohol, pork 
products, personal firearms, and any suggestive/pornographic 
materials (videotapes, magazines or books) is strictly prohibited by 
Kuwaiti law.  Kuwait is still clearing mines and munitions. Visitors 
must remain on major paved roads when traveling in Kuwait. Travel 
north of Jahra toward the Iraqi-Kuwaiti border is not authorized 
without approval from the embassy and an appropriate escort. 
 
c. Embassy Kuwait's normal workweek is Saturday through Wednesday, 
and office hours are from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. The time difference 
with the East Coast of the United States is EST plus eight hours. 
The embassy switchboard number is (965) 259-1001, and the IVG number 
is 4950000. The after-hours number which rings at Marine Guard Post 
One is (965) 538-2098.  The mission duty officer can be reached 
through the embassy switchboard, Post One or by cell phone at (965) 
967-7265. The embassy pouch address is 6200 Kuwait Place, Dulles, VA 
20189-6200. 
 
d. Threat Assessment: Kuwait is a high-threat post and the military 
threatcon is currently Charlie.  We have increased security 
precautions at official U.S. installations in Kuwait and recommend 
that all Americans in Kuwait remain alert to their surroundings and 
review their personal security practices. 
 
e. Health Advisory for Kuwait: Visitors from November to March can 
expect cold winds and, at times, heavy rains.  Light winter clothing 
is suitable for Kuwait during these months.  At this time, allergies 
and colds are more common, and visitors to the area are advised to 
bring over-the-counter medications, such as Tylenol, Ibuprofen and 
cough medicine, with them for self-treatment. 
 
f. Money:  Credit cards are widely accepted at hotels, restaurants 
and other establishments throughout Kuwait and ATM machines are also 
readily available. For travelers on official orders, the Commercial 
Bank of Kuwait can provide accommodation services (cashing a 
personal check drawn on a U.S. bank into local currency) up to a 
 
maximum of USD 300.00 per day from noon to 2:00 p.m., Saturday 
through Wednesday. At the current rate of exchange, one Kuwaiti 
Dinar (KD) is equivalent to approximately USD 3.50. 
 
g. CAA Access: Visitors who need unescorted access into secure areas 
of the mission must slug cables to the attention of the RSO, and 
include the level of their clearance.  The cable should include the 
visitor's Social Security Number, and the name of the agency 
granting the clearance.  Cables should include the ASEC tag to 
ensure distribution to the RSO office and the Marine Security guard 
at Post One. 
 
h. Computer and Electronics Usage: Sensitive military information 
has been discovered recently on business center computers at local 
hotels in Kuwait City.  All U.S. Government personnel and 
contractors must remember that it is their responsibility to observe 
good computer and information security practices.  Information 
processed on computers in hotel business centers, through email 
correspondence or document creation, is highly exploitable.  Public 
computers located in hotel business centers, internet cafes, airport 
lounges, etc. should never be used to process, store or disseminate 
sensitive information.  Compromise of sensitive government or 
military information can result in serious damage to national 
security.  Compromises of sensitive personal data can result in 
significant personal and financial hardship.  Random checks are 
conducted by Embassy personnel on public PC's.  Breaches on COMPUSEC 
will result in the violator receiving security infractions and/or 
security violations.  Interagency security standards prohibit the 
introduction or use of non-USG owned computer hardware and software 
at all USG diplomatic facilities. Cell phones, palm pilots, radios 
and other convenience electronics are prohibited in all secure areas 
of the mission. 
 
i. Photography:  Tourist photography is encouraged in Kuwait. 
However, it is strictly forbidden to photograph public buildings, 
economic infrastructure, or military and other security-related 
facilities and personnel.  Confiscation of film and camera and even 
arrest may result from doing so.  A good rule of thumb:  If there is 
any doubt as to whether a photograph should be taken, don't take it. 
 
 
j. ACTION REQUEST:  Each visitor, regardless of length of stay, must 
bring or forward fiscal data to pay for direct costs of the visit. 
Each agency, organization or visiting delegation will be charged for 
the actual costs attributed to their visit.  Direct charge costs 
include, but are not limited to:  American and LES staff overtime 
(e.g., expeditor, accommodation exchange, representational event 
support), field travel, lodging and meals and incidental expenses 
(M&IE) by embassy employees, vehicle rentals, long-distance 
telephone calls, equipment rentals, office supplies and all other 
costs that are directly attributable to the visit.  If fiscal data 
on a traveler's authorization is to be used for this purpose, this 
information must be spelled out in the travel orders and sufficient 
funding provided to meet these expenses.  In addition, for TDYers 
over thirty (30) days, there will be a charge for ICASS support 
services.  If your sponsoring agency is not signed up for ICASS 
services at post, please be prepared to sign an ICASS Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU) for ICASS support services upon arrival.  The 
agency should provide post with written communication, generated by 
the traveler's headquarters, that confirms the agency will pay ICASS 
charges for the TDYer, provide the agency ICASS billing code for the 
TDY support to be provided, and authorize the traveler to sign the 
ICASS invoice generated by the TDY module.  When travel is urgent, 
TDYers should bring this document with them to ensure there are no 
interruptions in the provision of services.  Post will not provide 
any services to a TDYer staying in excess of 30 days without having 
received this documentation prior to day 31 of the TDY. 
 
k. Visit Kuwait's Classified Website at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/kuwait/ 
 
¶5. This cable was last updated on October 30, 2006. 
 
LeBaron