06MANAGUA2696
CONTROVERSIAL ASSEMBLY REFORMS SENT TO PRESIDENT,
Thu Dec 14 00:00:00 +0100 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO5580
PP RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #2696/01 3482125
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 142125Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8440
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 MANAGUA 002696 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/11/2016 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM NU
SUBJECT: CONTROVERSIAL ASSEMBLY REFORMS SENT TO PRESIDENT, 
ALTHOUGH NEW ASSEMBLY MAY MODIFY 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 2673 
 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 2652 
     ¶C. MANAGUA 2646 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul Trivelli for reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: According to present and future National 
Assembly deputy for the Nicaraguan Liberal Alliance (ALN) 
Maria Eugenia Sequeira, the Assembly's controversial ways and 
means bill has been sent to President Bolanos for signing, 
but will likely face a veto, giving the new Assembly a chance 
to further modify the legislation.  Certain articles granting 
the Assembly the power to summon private citizens and approve 
its own budget are inconsistent with the constitution, stated 
Sequeira and the reforms in general are designed to 
strengthen the shared political dominance of the Sandinista 
Front (FSLN) and Liberal Constitutional Party (PLC).  Various 
civil society leaders publicly support Sequeira's analysis 
and have urged the President to ignore or veto the bill.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) Poloff met with ALN deputy Maria Eugenia Sequeira on 
December 14 to discuss the final version of the National 
Assembly's "Organic Law" that was sent to President Bolanos 
for signature on December 8.  Sequeira commented that she was 
able to work with certain "perturbed" PLC deputies (who were 
not re-elected and feel betrayed by the party) to modify some 
of its most objectionable articles.  In addition, the FSLN 
voted with the ALN to remove an article that would have 
facilitated an amnesty vote for convicted ex-President and 
PLC leader Arnoldo Aleman (reftels).  Nevertheless, the bill 
still contains several provisions that Sequeira deems 
"unconstitutional and anti-democratic." 
 
¶3. (C) Sequeira highlighted the following articles for poloff: 
 
- Weakening the Authority of the Executive Board (Article 7): 
The deputies may convoke a special session of the Assembly 
with a majority vote (increased from a one-third vote).  If 
the Executive Board does not respond in 15 days, the deputies 
may convoke a session without the Executive Board.  (Note: In 
the past, minority parties have been able to use the 
Executive Board to block objectionable votes, including 
amnesty bills.  End Note.) 
 
- Assembly May Approve Own Budget (Article 12): The reforms 
stipulate that the Assembly may approve its own budget 
without vetting it through the Executive.  Sequeira noted 
that this provision is blatantly unconstitutional. 
 
- FSLN Caucus Chief May Change the Agenda (Article 39): Over 
the objections of the ALN, this article was approved to allow 
the head of a caucus that represents at least one-third of 
the deputies (only the FSLN meets this definition) to change 
the order of the Assembly's daily agenda. 
 
- Assembly May Summon Private Citizens (Article 52): As 
mentioned in reftels, the Assembly wishes to empower itself 
(specifically, the commissions) to summon public and private 
citizens to testify.  Sequeira described this provision as a 
"coup d'etat" by the FSLN and PLC to grant themselves the 
power to intimidate and prosecute journalists, civil society 
leaders, business owners, and others as they see fit. 
 
- Assembly Not Required to Reveal Sources (Article 59): 
Although the commissions would have the power to summon 
private citizens, the deputies would not be required to 
reveal their sources of information, according to this 
article. 
 
¶4. (C) Sequeira agreed that these reforms are clear evidence 
of a continued pact between the PLC and FSLN and an assault 
on Nicaraguan democracy.  Other articles strengthen the 
authority of the caucus heads at the expense of the deputies, 
she explained.  Sequeira noted, however, that some in the 
FSLN seem to be experiencing cold feet over the reforms due 
to the denunciations of the ALN and pressure from civil 
society.  According to Sequeira, the ALN will urge President 
Bolanos to veto the bill so that the new Assembly sworn in on 
January 9 can have a chance to modify its provisions.  The 
ALN will work with the FSLN, which she described as having 
more "mature" deputies, to try to improve the bill. 
 
¶5. (C) Sequeira raised her personal relationship with FSLN 
caucus chief Edwin Castro, who is related to her ex-husband 
and the uncle of her children.  She said that Castro is the 
only member of her ex-husband's family that did not reject 
her after the divorce due to his close relationship with her 
children.  Sequeira commented that Castro, a "moderate 
Sandinista" associated with Daniel Ortega's wife Rosario 
Murillo and FSLN Foreign Affairs Secretary Samuel Santos, may 
convince Ortega to back away from the more controversial 
aspects of the bill, which are supported by former 
intelligence chief Lenin Cerna and other hardliners. 
 
Civil Society Supports ALN Objections 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6. (U) Movimiento por Nicaragua (MpN) Executive Committee 
member Dr. Carlos Tunnerman released an article on December 
12 questioning the validity of the reforms.  Tunnerman cited 
a 1992 Supreme Court ruling defining the difference between 
internal Assembly "regulations," which the Assembly may 
approve internally, and "laws," which must be sent to the 
President.  Tunnerman argues that the Organic Law reforms are 
essentially modifications to internal regulations with an 
article inserted, inappropriately, that would give Assembly 
commissions the power to summon private citizens.  Tunnerman 
advises the President to refuse to act on the Law and advises 
the Supreme Court to declare it unconstitutional. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Officials of Hagamos Democracia publicly concurred 
with Tunnerman's assessment of the Law.  Privately, Hagamos 
analyst Jose Somarriba expressed concern regarding possible 
political manipulation regarding the reduction of Assembly 
commissions, the increased powers of the caucus heads 
relative to regular deputies, and the article stating that 
the deputies' rights and immunities will not be affected by a 
state of emergency.  Permanent Human Rights Commission (CPDH) 
executive director Marcos Carmona recently told us that the 
CPDH is allying with other NGOs to question the 
constitutionality of the Law. 
 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
¶8. (C) Pressure from civil society and the ALN coupled with 
our private objections to the FSLN (Ref A) appear to have 
caused a reassessment of the bill on the part of the 
Sandinistas, who are still eager to reassure the world that 
they are ardent democrats.  We will continue to work with the 
ALN and civil society groups to maintain pressure on the new 
Assembly to reform the reforms. 
TRIVELLI