06STATE197205
INSTRUCTIONS: CO-SPONSORING UNSCR 1701 PRST
Fri Dec 08 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0004
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #7205 3422331
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 082324Z DEC 06
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 197205 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC IS LE
SUBJECT: INSTRUCTIONS: CO-SPONSORING UNSCR 1701 PRST 
 
¶1. (U)   USUN is authorized to join France and the UK in 
sponsoring the draft PRST in para 2 below, reacting to the 
Secretary General's letter on UNSC resolution 1701 
 
SIPDIS 
implementation.  USUN should report outcome of negotiations 
to Department and seek Department guidance regarding the 
final draft. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Begin text. 
 
The Security Council recalls all its previous resolutions on 
Lebanon, in particular resolutions 1701 (2006), 425 and 426 
(1978), 520 (1982), 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006), as well as 
the statements of its president on the situation in Lebanon, 
in particular the statements of 30 October 2006 
(x/PRST/2006/43) and of 21 November 2006 (x/PRST/2006/46). 
 
The Security Council reiterates its full support for the 
legitimate and democratically-elected Government of Lebanon 
and condemns any effort to destabilize Lebanon. It reaffirms 
its strong support for the territorial integrity, 
sovereignty, unity, and political independence of Lebanon 
within its internationally recognized borders and under the 
sole and exclusive authority of the Government of Lebanon. 
The Council reiterates its call upon all parties concerned to 
cooperate fully and urgently with the Security Council for 
the full implementation of all relevant resolutions 
concerning the restoration of the territorial integrity, full 
sovereignty, and political independence of Lebanon. 
 
The Security Council welcomes the letter of the Secretary 
General to the President of the Council of 1 December 2006 
(x/2006/933), as well as his previous reports of 18 August 
2006 (x/2006/670) and of 12 September 2006 (x/2006/730) on 
the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006). 
 
The Security Council calls for the full implementation of 
resolution 1701 (2006) and urges all concerned parties to 
cooperate fully with the Security Council and the 
Secretary-General to achieve this goal. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
The Security Council welcomes the Secretary General,s 
indication of the continuing commitment of the Government of 
Lebanon and the Government of Israel to all aspects of the 
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006). It urges both 
governments to strictly abide by their commitment and to 
pursue their efforts to achieve a permanent cease-fire and a 
long-term solution as envisioned in the resolution. 
 
The Security Council notes that important progress has been 
made towards the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), in 
particular through the cessation of hostilities, the imminent 
withdrawal of all the Israeli forces from Southern Lebanon 
and the deployment of the Lebanese Armed Forces in the south 
of the country for the first time in three decades, together 
with the deployment so far of more than 10,000 troops from 
the reinforced UNIFIL. 
 
The Security Council welcomes the maintenance of the 
cessation of hostilities since 14 August 2006, supports the 
work done by UNIFIL, together with the parties, to finalise 
the Israeli withdrawal from the remaining area inside Lebanon 
and set up temporary security arrangements for the part of 
the village of Ghajar inside Lebanese territory, welcomes the 
decision of the Israeli Cabinet in this regard, and looks 
forward to its early implementation. 
 
The Security Council commends the Lebanese government for 
extending its authority throughout its territory, 
particularly in the South, and encourages it to continue its 
efforts in this regard, including through the reinforcement 
of its capacities along its borders and the exercise of its 
monopoly of the use of force all over its territory in 
accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions. 
 
The Security Council reiterates its full support to UNIFIL 
and looks forward to the completion of its deployment early 
next year as contemplated by the Secretary General in his 
Letter. It expresses its strong appreciation to Member states 
who have contributed to UNIFIL in the past and since the 
adoption of resolution 1701 (2006) and notes with 
appreciation the establishment of the Strategic Military Cell 
dedicated to UNIFIL at UN Headquarters 
The Security Council, while expressing deep concern at the 
continuing Israeli violations of Lebanese air space, appeals 
to all parties concerned to respect the cessation of 
hostilities and the Blue Line in its entirety, to refrain 
from any act of provocation and to abide scrupulously by 
their obligation to respect the safety of the UNIFIL and 
other United Nations personnel, including by avoiding any 
course of action which endangers United Nations personnel and 
by ensuring UNIFIL is accorded full freedom of movement 
throughout its area of operation. 
 
The Security Council, in this context, reiterating its deep 
concern at reports of illegal movements of arms into Lebanon, 
reaffirms that such movements are a breach of the embargo 
established in paragraph 15 of resolution 1701 (2006), urges 
all member states, in particular in the region, to take all 
necessary measures to fully abide by the arms embargo and 
expresses its intention to consider further steps to achieve 
the goals set out in this paragraph. 
It welcomes in that regard the initial steps taken by the 
Government of Lebanon, notably the deployment of 8000 troops 
along the border, to prevent movements of arms in conformity 
with relevant resolutions, and reiterates its call upon the 
Government of Syria to take similar measures to reinforce 
controls at the border. 
 
The Security Council, mindful of the conclusions of the team 
of border police experts dispatched by the Secretary General 
at the request of the Government of Lebanon, invites the 
Secretary General to pursue further technical and independent 
 
SIPDIS 
assessment of the situation along the border and to report 
back to the Council on further findings and recommendations 
in this regard. 
 
The Council invites further Member states, as recommended by 
the Secretary General, to consider possible bilateral 
assistance to the Government of Lebanon to enhance its border 
security capacities. 
 
The Security Council welcomes the concrete steps taken by the 
Government of Lebanon, with the assistance of UNIFIL, to 
establish between the Blue Line and the Litani river an area 
free of any armed personnel, assets and weapons other than 
those of the Government of Lebanon and of UNIFIL and calls 
upon the Government of Lebanon to strengthen its efforts to 
this end. The Council also reiterates its call for disbanding 
and disarmament of all militias and armed groups in Lebanon. 
 
The Security Council expresses deepest concern at the 
presence in very high numbers of unexploded ordnance in South 
Lebanon, including cluster munitions. It deplores the death 
and injury of dozens of civilians, as well as of several 
de-miners, caused by those munitions since the cessation of 
hostilities. It welcomes the continued contribution of UNIFIL 
to operational mine clearance, encourages further assistance 
in mine action by the United Nations to the Government of 
Lebanon in support of both the continued development of its 
national mine action capacity and clearance of the remaining 
mine / unexploded ordnances threat in the South, commends 
donor countries for supporting these efforts through 
financial and in kind contributions and encourages further 
international contributions and practical cooperation. 
 
The Security Council reaffirms the urgent need for the 
unconditional release of the abducted Israeli soldiers. 
 
The Security Council further encourages efforts aimed at 
urgently settling the issue of the Lebanese prisoners 
detained in Israel. 
 
The Security Council commends the efforts of the Secretary 
General and his facilitator to this end and calls upon all 
parties concerned to support those efforts. 
 
Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of resolutions 1559 
(2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006), in particular on the 
delineation of the Syrian-Lebanese border, the Security 
Council takes note with interest of the appointment by the 
Secretary General of a senior cartographer to review relevant 
 
SIPDIS 
material and develop an accurate territorial definition of 
the Shab,a Farms area. 
 
The Security Council notes with appreciation the process 
launched by the Secretary General to investigate the 
cartographic, legal and political implications of the 
proposal contained in the seven-point plan of the Government 
of Lebanon and looks forward to its further recommendations 
on this issue early next year. 
 
The Security Council calls upon the international community 
urgently to provide the Government of Lebanon with financial 
assistance in support of the national early recovery and 
reconstruction process. It expresses its appreciation to the 
Member States, United Nations bodies and intergovernmental, 
regional and non-governmental organizations that have 
provided and continue to provide assistance to the Lebanese 
people and Government, and looks forward to the success of 
the international Conference which will be held in Paris, on 
25 January 2007, in support of Lebanon. 
 
The Security Council reaffirms its full support to the 
Secretary-General in his efforts and dedication to facilitate 
 
SIPDIS 
and assist in the fulfilment of all provisions of resolution 
1701 (2006) and requests the Secretary General to report on a 
quarterly basis on the implementation of this resolution, 
notably on further progress made towards the achievement of a 
permanent cease-fire and a long term solution. 
 
End text. 
RICE