06RABAT1412
SUMMER UNIVERSITY EVALUATES REFORMS IN MOROCCO
Wed Jul 26 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXYZ0009
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRB #1412/01 2071144
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 261144Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4327
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 3029
RUEHNK/AMEMBASSY NOUAKCHOTT 3246
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 4306
RUEHCL/AMCONSUL CASABLANCA 1938UNCLAS RABAT 001412 
 
SIPDIS 
CORRECTED COPY - SIGNATURE ADDED 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM MO
SUBJECT: SUMMER UNIVERSITY EVALUATES REFORMS IN MOROCCO 
 
¶1.  (U)  Summary:  From July 13 to 15 the Moroccan Center for Social 
Studies organized a summer university, i.e., a conference, in 
Tetouan to discuss and assess the reform process. Polfsn political 
specialist attended the conference.  The participants, who were 
university professors, political analysts and students, discussed 
the new Family Law Code, human rights, press freedom and 
constitutional reform in a panel format with designated respondents. 
Although reforms started in Morocco as early as 1975, participants 
thought the most important ones have taken place since King Mohammed 
VI ascended to the throne.  At the same time, some participants 
thought that only strategic plans will ensure the continuation and 
implementation of reforms.  End Summary. 
 
----------------------------- 
The Reform of the Family Code 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U)  The Family Code, which became law in 2004, was the first 
sign that reforms were going to occur, according to most of the 
participants.  Mohamed Sassi, a professor of law at Mohamed V 
University in Rabat, said that the code "was a significant change." 
At the same time, however, Sassi recognized that there are 
implementation problems.  He noted that the code moved the law from 
the religious and sacred sphere into a civil legal framework, which 
he identified as a "tremendous transformation." 
 
------------ 
Human Rights 
------------ 
 
¶3. (U)  University students thought the primary reform was in the 
area of human rights.  Students applauded the Equity and 
Reconciliation Committee's (IER) work because it both implicitly and 
explicitly acknowledged the GOM's responsibility for human rights 
abuses during the period from 1956 to 1991.  The Moroccan 
Association for Human Rights (AMDH) representative, Abdessalam 
Benabdeillah, however, considered the IER to be limited because it 
was established by the king.  Amina Bouayach, president of the 
Moroccan Organization for Human Rights (OMDH), said that the IER was 
groundbreaking, but it will prove to be pointless if the government 
does not act on the recommendations.  According to Bouayach, "with 
the report, at least we have an official document that acknowledges 
a state policy of systematic oppression and flagrant human rights 
violations, but it's not enough - in reality we need an ongoing 
effort." 
 
------------- 
Press Freedom 
------------- 
 
¶4.  (U)  Younes Moujahid, the Secretary General of the Moroccan 
Press Union, underlined the absence of a professional, independent 
press, noting that there is no code of ethics and that there is a 
lack of information, i.e., journalists do not do research. Mohamed 
Brini, director of Al Ahdath Al Maghribia, an Arabic daily, noted 
that the press helped inform the public about the Family Law Code 
and other new laws.  Brini, however, pointed out that, as long as 
prison sentences are part of the press code, there is no way to 
discuss press freedom. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Constitutional and Political Reform 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (U) The political analysts agreed about the difficulty of 
democratic reforms.  Abdallah Saaf, Director of the Center for 
Social Studies, supported parliament by pointing out that it has 
independent commissions.  Sassi countered by saying "Moroccans 
simply don't think that they are represented.  For them parliament 
is some kind of a political game between the political elites.  They 
are corrupt.  In short, the parliament is not a serious avenue or 
institution for representation." 
 
¶6.  (U) Mohamed Tozy, echoed Sassi's comments and said that the 
relationship between the monarchy, "state," and "government" is 
ambiguous.  Because Moroccans have started to talk about these 
issues, though, Tozy also thinks there will be constitutional reform 
in the near future. He stated: "The most important story about 
Morocco is that the push for reform did not come from political 
parties, but from civil society -- human rights groups, women and 
Berbers.  The political parties have not been at the front in terms 
of demanding reforms either because they have been co-opted or 
because they are ideologically not interested in democracy.  And 
although civil society can accomplish a lot, there is a limit where 
you need political change and for that you need strong political 
parties and a strong parliamentary system." 
 
¶7.  (U)  Defining the separation of powers between the executive, 
legislative and judicial branches of government remains an issue. 
Participants unanimously agreed that the monarchy will always have a 
prestigious and symbolic role, and power.  Mohamed Darif, professor 
of political science at Hassan II University in Mohammedia pointed 
out the difference between how religion is integrated into Moroccan 
society and the constitution, and how this differs from a liberal 
democracy. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Is Morocco a Model for Arab Reform? 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (U) Ahmed Bouz, editor of Assahifa, an Arabic daily, said using 
"model" is premature.  He said "there is still a process that is 
unfolding.  There are still too many issues to be resolved.  What is 
going to work in Morocco will not necessarily work for Egypt or 
Saudi Arabia or Algeria."  Saaf disagreed with Bouz saying that 
Morocco could be a model for the Arab world "because several Arab 
human rights activists and NGOs visited Morocco and met with members 
of the Equity and Reconciliation Committee.  They all try to draw on 
this Moroccan experience.  You adapt success stories to your own 
specificities, and there is nothing wrong with that.  I hope that 
the Arab-Muslim and Berber-Muslim worlds still take on this example, 
Morocco as a model.  It deserves to be taken as a model." 
RILEY