09RABAT929
CIVIL SOCIETY'S FORUM FOR THE FUTURE PREPARATORY MEETING
Wed Nov 25 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXRO5470
RR RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHKUK RUEHROV
DE RUEHRB #0929/01 3290835
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 250835Z NOV 09 ZDS
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 085Q
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 1646UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 RABAT 000929 
 
C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y (ADDED SIGNATURE) 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL KDEM XF XA MA
SUBJECT: CIVIL SOCIETY'S FORUM FOR THE FUTURE PREPARATORY MEETING 
 
RABAT 00000929  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  PLEASE PROTECT ACCORDINGLY. 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (U) Over 150 participants from the Broader Middle East and North 
Africa (BMENA) region attended the Civil Society (CS) preparatory 
meeting to the Forum for the Future (FFF) led by the Moroccan 
Organization for Human Rights (OMDH) and the Italian NGO No Peace 
Without Justice (NPWJ) in Casablanca, Morocco on October 31 and 
November 1, 2009.  Three workshop reports on the global financial 
crisis, democracy and local governance, and human security concept 
greatly contributed to the 2009 FFF.  However, these reports did not 
address CS concerns, like the legal environment of NGOs, freedom of 
expression and corruption.  Despite a protest and uncertainty over 
commitment, the audience underlined the crucial role of the USG to 
revitalize democratization and protect reformers in BMENA and 
reaffirmed that the Forum was the centerpiece of BMENA reform 
initiatives.  Despite long-standing disagreement with US policies in 
Iraq, Afghanistan and Palestine, CS leaders from the region 
acknowledge, more than ever before, the role of the Middle East 
Partnership Initiative (MEPI) in empowering reformers and advancing 
democratization. 
 
--------------------------------- 
CONFERENCE TOPICS AND DISCUSSION 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) The civil society preparatory meeting was the culmination 
of three thematic workshops held respectively in Beirut, Rabat and 
Doha in September-October 2009 that addressed issues on the global 
financial crisis, democracy and local governance, and human 
development and human security .  Participants acknowledged that 
work done in 2009 was thoughtful and insightful but remains 
insufficient in addressing reform priorities important to civil 
society.  Participants expressed concern about numerous obstacles 
and setbacks against reform and enforcement of legislation against 
CS.  "The NGO legal environment is considered as a key topic that 
sets the frame for democratization in the region." said Mr. Slah 
Jourchi, coordinator of Network of Democrats in the Arab World. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Participants pointed out positive impacts from the FFF's 
first five years, but noted it had difficulty achieving broad 
political reform.  "Most Arab regimes have not taken actions that 
are consistent with their declarations to engage in democratic 
reform," said Mr. Ezzedine Al-Asbahi Director of the Yemeni Human 
Rights Information and Training Center. 
 
¶4. (U) Many participants repeated recommendations from previous FFFs 
on the legal environment for CS, political pluralism, elections, 
rule of law, independent media, corruption and transparency, 
political empowerment for women and youth.  There continues to be 
high expectation for the USG's leadership role in support of the FFF 
process.  The audience agreed that President Obama's Cairo speech 
increased positive interpretations of the USG's desire to promote 
democratic reform.  However, action and resultsQave not matched the 
good intentions. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
CS MEPI GRANTS CONTRIBUTION 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶5. (U) Two MEPI alumni gave presentations in the second session. 
Permanent Peace Movement (Lebanon) presented the first one about a 
field-study on benchmarking democratic reform progress in the BMENA 
region conducted in 10 Arab countries. Discussion on this study and 
the accomplishments and efficiency of the FFF process coalesced 
around recognizing the FFF's positive impact in fostering democratic 
reform, in varying degrees, across the region.  One speaker noted 
that the process has contributed to promoting dialogue between civil 
society and governments, while another said that the FFF has created 
a new regional dynamic which positively influences the local 
political environment. 
 
¶6. (SBU) The second presentation by Mr. Amine Ghali, Program 
Director of Kawakibi Center, publicized the impact of their advocacy 
campaign on promoting an enabling legal environment for civil 
society in the region through the implementation of the Partnership 
Document  Note: The "Partnership between G8 and BMENA Goverments and 
Civil Society" document as presented at the 2008 Forum in Abu Dhabi 
and outlines a set of universal standards and democratic principles 
to structure the relationship between governments and civil society. 
End Note).  Coalitions led by Kawakibi Center and its national 
partners are using the momentum created around this campaign to 
encourage governments to reform the NGO laws along the principles in 
the Partnership Document. The two CS MEPI grants provided valuable 
contributions to significant and relevant discussion on the FFF's 
core issues. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
 
RABAT 00000929  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
USG ENGAGEMENT TO ENHANCE FFF's MOMENTUM 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) While most participants agreed that many NGOs in BMENA 
welcome the Forum's distinctive relationship with CS, some also 
feared that the USG is no longer giving high-level attention to 
democratization in BMENA.  (Comment: These reactions may have 
changed after Secretary Clinton's Marrakech speech. End Comment.) 
The audience thanked donors and particularly MEPI, but underscored 
the need for additional financial resources to enhance the momentum 
gained on the reform agenda through the FFF.  Skeptics questioned 
whether the G8 countries still see real value in continuing the FFF 
process and if the USG and others were willing to work with CS to 
implement previous recommendations.  Some were dismayed at the lack 
of governments and CS follow-up to the four previous Forums. 
 
---------------------- 
ANTI-FFF DEMONSTRATION 
---------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) The Moroccan Association for Human Rights (AMDH), which is 
critical of U.S. foreign policies in the region, led an anti-U.S. 
gathering on November 2, 2009 from 5 pm to 6 pm in front of the 
Congress Palace of Marrakech calling for a boycott of the sixth FFF 
and the CS preparatory meeting.  (Comment: Anti-American groups 
commonly harass events with high-level USG presence as experienced 
in previous FFFs. End Comment.)  They rejected the FFF as Western 
dominance and condemned the foreign model of democracy citing 
failings in Iraq and Afghanistan. They deem USG efforts to promote 
democracy as hypocritical, referring to perceived American 
indifference to Palestinians and support for Israel.  Most Arab CSOs 
attending the FFF believe that those dogmatically anti-American 
groups will not be helpful to reform. 
 
----------------------- 
ORGANIZATIONAL PROBLEMS 
----------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) OMDH's failure to organize and run the conference in a 
professional manner had a negative impact on the general ambiance 
and the outcome of the civil society preparatory meeting.  Late 
invitations prevented many civil society participants from attending 
since they were unable to obtain visas or make travel arrangements 
on short notice.. The majority of participants expressed their 
frustration over poor management of the conference, lack of working 
documents, erratic agenda, non-existent logistics, and absence of a 
final statement at the meeting end. Some activists voiced doubts 
about the usefulness of the CS preparatory meetings if hosted and 
managed by incompetent partners. 
 
------------------ 
CS RECOMMENDATIONS 
------------------ 
 
¶10. (U) CSOs felt that BMENA governments do not take the FFF process 
or CS partnership seriously. The FFF has become a show for the G8. 
Participants made an urgent call for partner governments to deeply 
believe in and commit to the spirit of partnership.  Previous CS 
recommendations need to be turned into practical project plans, 
time-bound and tailored according to specific country needs.  Civil 
society criticized its failure to come up with practical mechanisms 
to interact regularly with their own governments on a national 
level.  One eminent CS participant said that the failure to resolve 
the Arab-Israeli conflict prevented the United States from gaining 
credibility as an advocate of democracy in the Middle East. 
Participants see the continuing Arab-Israeli conflict as having a 
negative impact on the credibility of USG.  Most participants argue 
that there is an urgent need to address the organization of the 
CSpreparatory meeting.  They urged the USG and G8 countries to 
consider establishing a permanent secretariat to provide information 
for CS. 
 
JACKSON