09RABAT638
MOROCCO'S STRATEGY FOR MUSLIM ENGAGEMENT
Thu Jul 23 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXRO4324
OO RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHGI RUEHJS RUEHKUK RUEHLH
RUEHPW RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHRB #0638/01 2040713
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 230713Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0488
INFO RUCNISL/ISLAMIC COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHCL/AMCONSUL CASABLANCA PRIORITY 4682UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 RABAT 000638 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR S/P, R, NEA, OES, DRL AND NEA/MAG 
AID/W FOR MEA AND DCHA 
AMMAN ALSO FOR REGIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL HUB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL EAID OEXC SENV SOCI KISL MO
SUBJECT: MOROCCO'S STRATEGY FOR MUSLIM ENGAGEMENT 
 
REF: STATE 071325 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  Moroccans, like others in the 
region, most clearly expressed a desire to see 
action on the Arab-Israeli conflict as a follow-up 
to the President's words in Cairo; so deeper 
partnership on economic development fronts will have 
the greatest impact if, and as, concrete political 
steps are achieved. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Nonetheless, Morocco is proud of the 
historic ties to the U.S. that the President noted 
in his Cairo speech, is a bastion of moderate Islam, 
and is a regional leader of reforms -- however 
uneven.  Mission Morocco has reached out since the 
Cairo speech and has expanded consultations with the 
Government and civil society.  Ongoing consultations 
at all levels are also a key component of Millennium 
Challenge Account (MCA) programs in Morocco, from 
the moment Morocco became eligible for MCA funding 
in 2005 and continuing through the completion of the 
program in September 2013.  Morocco is eager for 
enhanced partnership in the areas suggested in 
reftel and sees itself as a door to broader 
cooperation in the region, including as a potential 
platform for Secretary Clinton during the November 
2-3 Forum for the Future (FFF).  In fact, we are 
finding strong interest in all manner of exchanges 
and have heard proposals for cooperation in public 
health and scientific technology, including Morocco 
becoming a regional renewable energy center of 
excellence.  Earth Day 2010 presents a unique 
opportunity.  English-language teaching is another 
starting point for expanded cooperation and can open 
the door to even traditionally reluctant sectors. 
Moroccan media, which regularly cover mission 
initiatives, can help amplify the mission's 
consultative and outreach efforts. 
 
¶3.  (U) Exchange program alumni recommended more 
summer U.S. student exchanges, more visiting 
speakers, affordable English classes, and more 
American Corners and academic programs throughout 
the country.  The alumni also asked for training in 
management, teambuilding, grant writing, and 
creating a culture of "volunteerism."  Others 
suggested a new USG website specifically for Muslim 
world outreach and consultation, named 
"ANewBeginning.org" and modeled after President 
Obama's pre-election website "Change.org"; a web 
platform to establish direct micro-financing 
networking opportunities between American citizens 
and Moroccans; a consultation outreach section on 
the embassy's website, amplified via our extremely 
popular new Facebook page; USG support for enhanced 
professional and vocational training; and a 
presidential award to recognize USG-funded NGO/CSO 
projects or programs that implement innovative ideas 
and achieve real change. 
 
¶4.  (U) Rabat is also home to the Islamic 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
(ISESCO), the UNESCO of the Organization of the 
Islamic Conference (OIC).  In response to the new 
administration and the Cairo speech, it seeks closer 
ties to the U.S., including joint programs.  Working 
in English, French and Arabic, ISESCO has fought 
extremism, promoted tolerance and, with the UN 
Alliance of Civilizations, plans to launch an 
exchange program, including Americans, modeled on 
State's International Visitor Leadership Program. 
The Charge d'Affaires, a.i., is scheduled to meet 
the ISESCO Director General July 24.  With guidance 
from R and IO, post would welcome serving as the 
channel for expanded USG engagement with the Muslim 
world through ISESCO; please see paras 18-20 at end 
of this message.  End Summary. 
 
¶5.  (U) Charge convened a round table discussion on 
July 16 with embassy country team and key locally 
engaged staff (LES) to review the mission's 
consultative process for Muslim engagement following 
President Obama's June 4 Cairo speech.  Those 
present reported on ongoing consultations as well as 
existing and proposed USG engagement with Morocco on 
human development, entrepreneurship and interfaith 
partnership, and science and technology. 
 
RABAT 00000638  002 OF 004 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Consultations: Mission Actively Engages Moroccans 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Charge met with Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs and Cooperation Secretary General Youssef 
Amrani and asked him to consider how the major 
themes of President Obama's Cairo speech could be 
implemented in the upcoming FFF meeting to be held 
November 2-3 in Marrakesh.  Amrani offered for 
Morocco to host an Interfaith Dialogue as part of 
the program.  Secretary Clinton's proposed 
participation in the FFF would allow her to build 
upon the President's message, and at the same time 
draw public attention to Peace Corps, Middle East 
Partnership Initiative (MEPI), and other relevant 
USG partnership support to this country. 
 
¶7.  (U) During the mission's official July 4 
celebration, the Public Affairs Section (PAS) 
provided translations of President Obama's Cairo 
speech in Arabic and French to everyone present. 
The fact that Moroccans continue not only to praise 
the speech but also actively discuss and share it 
reflects a general reinvigoration of hope and 
optimism for U.S.- Muslim relations. 
 
¶8.  (U) Embassy Rabat, Consulate Casablanca, USAID, 
MCC and other agencies have steadily engaged the 
Government of Morocco (GOM) and civil society since 
the speech.  A group of young MEPI Alumni told us on 
July 20 that they would like to see increased 
personal contact between Americans and Moroccans. 
They recommended more summer U.S. student exchanges, 
more visiting speakers, affordable English classes, 
and more American Corners and academic programs 
throughout the country.  The alumni asked for 
training in management, teambuilding, grant writing, 
and creating a culture of "volunteerism."  These 
young alumni leaders confirmed that existing PAS and 
MEPI emphasis on cultural presentations, caravans, 
and sports is well placed to engage Muslim youth, 
and such efforts should be expanded.  Meanwhile, 
recent MCA public consultations on agriculture, 
small-scale fishing, and crafts/medinas included 
government agencies at the national, regional, and 
local levels; civil society; NGOs; the private 
sector; and beneficiaries, and were held throughout 
the country. 
 
¶9.  (U) The Mission is organizing additional 
structured consultations with USG exchange program 
alumni (Fulbright, International Visitor, MEPI, 
Access, Yes, USAID, and others).  Key opinion 
leaders with good understanding of both Morocco and 
the U.S. will guide us towards useful and welcome 
partnerships.  The Mission is also developing an 
active Ramadan outreach program as well as 
organizing a series of monthly dialogues focused on 
topics such as the environment, women in politics, 
healthcare, and interfaith issues.  The Mission will 
incorporate these collaborative efforts into future 
action plans and programs, building on our emphasis 
on outreach to youth and women in particular, as 
outlined in our Mission Strategic Plan and Country 
Assistance Strategy. 
 
¶10.  (U) To further demonstrate U.S. commitment to 
dialogue and partnership, the Mission (Embassy in 
Rabat and Consulate General in Casablanca) will 
invite, on a regular basis, host country speakers on 
"Islam in Morocco" and related topics.  Such an 
Occasional Speakers Program will be a clear sign 
that we are listening and interested, as well as 
providing an excellent opportunity to identify new 
areas for engagement. 
 
---------------------------- 
Building on Existing Success 
---------------------------- 
 
¶11.  (U) Building upon prior Peace Corps, MEPI and 
PAS efforts (summer camps, book distributions, youth 
caravans, cultural outreach, and Peace Corps 
staffing of "Dar Chebabs" or youth centers), the 
Mission seeks to engage the Ministry of Youth and 
 
RABAT 00000638  003 OF 004 
 
 
Sports in developing a structured national network 
of partnership youth centers.  Cultural, educational 
and youth initiatives such as those advocated by the 
MEPI alumni are ready to be scaled-up through such a 
network.  A new USAID initiative that could be 
scaled up is directed at helping civil society 
organizations provide out-of-school youth with a 
broader array of educational offerings, particularly 
vocational training and employability skills. 
 
¶12.  (U) Post's extremely successful English- 
language teaching programs (Access and PAS/Peace 
Corps summer camps) involve close cooperation and 
partnership with both the GOM and the Moroccan 
Association of Teachers of English (MATE).  With 
sufficient funding, these activities could be 
scaled-up quickly.  Given the GOM's recent 
designation of English as an urgent education 
priority, we expect mission efforts in this area 
will be strongly welcomed. 
 
¶13.  (U) The Moroccan American Commission for 
Educational and Cultural Exchange (MACECE or 
Fulbright Commission) already receives 40 per cent 
of its funding from the GOM.  The role of 
universities in research and development is the 
theme of the Moroccan Fulbright Alumni Association's 
2009 annual conference.  Post will pursue this and 
other opportunities for intensified consultation and 
expanded cooperation at the higher-education level, 
assisted by the arrival of a new MACECE director in 
September.  This is an opportune moment, as several 
new private universities are being developed in 
Morocco, some with significant U.S. university 
involvement. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Expanding Science and Technology Cooperation 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶14.  (U) Moroccans are ready for more scientific and 
technological cooperation.  GOM officials 
responsible for scientific research and energy 
efficiency and renewables have requested USG support 
for a reorganization of the institutional structure 
and mandate of Morocco's Center for Renewable Energy 
Development (CDER).  The CDER, originally 
established with USAID support, is mandated to 
increase the use of renewable energy and energy 
efficiency technologies throughout Morocco, mainly 
in such vital sectors as water pumping and agro- 
processing.  The CDER may be a strong candidate to 
serve as a "Center of Excellence" for North Africa 
and the Middle East.  At the same time, USAID will 
be working with water users associations for better 
water management and governance, creating another 
avenue to reach out to often-neglected rural 
populations. 
 
¶15.  (U) Similarly, the Moroccan National Institute 
of Hygiene (INH) has also requested USG support in 
its transformation into a public health agency 
patterned after the U.S. Centers for Disease Control 
(CDC).  In addition to organizational advice and 
expertise, the INH would like assistance for design 
and construction of a new headquarters with 
laboratory facilities consistent with biosafety and 
biosecurity best practices.  The Moroccan Royal 
Armed Forces have requested assistance from the 
American military health services in the fields of 
virology, emerging infections and bioterrorism. 
These initiatives would enhance partnership in 
public health promotion, as well as continue 
cooperation under the State Department's Biosecurity 
Engagement Program.  In considering such a major 
undertaking, however, the USG will have to consider 
that Morocco graduated from USAID assistance in the 
health sector in 2003, per agreement between the GOM 
and USG, although, through the State Partnership 
Program, the Utah National Guard continues to work 
with the Moroccan military on issues ranging from 
avian influenza to vaccinations. 
 
¶16.  (U) Earth Day 2010 (April 22, 2010) presents a 
unique opportunity for the Mission to engage both 
the Palace and broader Moroccan society.  According 
to the U.S. NGO Earth Day Network, Rabat will host 
 
RABAT 00000638  004 OF 004 
 
 
one of six major Earth Day events worldwide, 
organized with the Palace's support.  Earth Day 
Network seeks to capitalize on this high-level, 
official interest to strengthen "green focused" 
civil society, and has solicited mission assistance 
in this effort.  The Peace Corps already plans to 
dedicate 100 volunteers to 2010 Earth Day projects 
with local community organizations, and other 
Mission agencies and sections will also build on 
this opportunity. 
 
¶17.  (U) Post's new LES social-media manager 
proposed several web-based approaches:  a) a new USG 
website specifically for Muslim world outreach and 
consultation, named "ANewBeginning.org" and modeled 
after President Obama's pre-election website 
"Change.org"; b) a web platform to establish direct 
micro-financing networking opportunities between 
American citizens and Moroccans from targeted areas 
(including women, youth, and disenfranchised 
communities), based on a U.S. NGO called KIVA 
(www.kiva.org); c) a consultation outreach section 
on this embassy's website, amplified via post's 
extremely popular new Facebook page.  Other LES 
ideas include USG support for enhanced professional 
and vocational training, including in sustainable 
tourism, and for President Obama to create a 
Presidential award to recognize USG-funded NGO/CSO 
projects or programs that implement innovative ideas 
and achieve real change. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
ISESCO - Means to Engage the Muslim World 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶18.  (U) Islamic Organization for Education, 
Science, and Culture (ISESCO) Chief of Staff Dr. 
Ahmed Said Ould Bah told PolCouns on July 21 that 
ISESCO was very open to cooperation with the United 
States.  He described ISESCO as the Islamic world's 
United Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization (UNESCO).  Its mandate, in fact, is 
even broader than UNESCO's, covering the areas of 
many UN technical agencies such as the World Trade 
Organization and the United Nations Children's Fund, 
due to lack of parallel OIC organizations. 
Headquartered in Rabat, ISESCO has approximately 200 
employees from all over the Islamic world, with 
field offices in the United Arab Emirates and 
Tehran.  Sixty percent of its budget comes from 
cooperative programs, linked to projects. 
 
¶19.  (U) Ould Bah said that Obama's speech in Cairo 
signaled a new era of relations between the United 
States and the Islamic world.  ISESCO could 
cooperate with the U.S. in a number of potential 
areas, such as secondary education exchanges, 
linking universities, scientific research, and 
countering extremism.  He said that the first 
important step would be for the USG to invite ISESCO 
Director General Abdulaziz Othman Al-Twajri to 
Washington.  Dialog with the USG could be conducted 
through U.S. Embassy Rabat. 
 
¶20.  (U) Morocco has been a fitting home for ISESCO 
due to its traditionally open form of Islam, 
increasing tolerance, and high quality work force. 
Subsequent to our initial meeting, Ould Bah 
suggested cooperation in education, specifically 
exchanges with its 250 member universities; youth 
exchanges; cultural dialog; joint research among 
religious leaders; and in science through twinning 
research centers.  We will report separately in more 
depth on this remarkable opportunity with ISESCO. 
 
¶21. (U) The staff of Consulate General Casablanca 
contributed their ideas to this cable. 
 
Jackson