09RABAT44
OSAC/CRIME SAFETY REPORT FOR MOROCCO
Fri Jan 16 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXYZ0007
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRB #0044/01 0161318
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 161318Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9546
INFO RUEHCL/AMCONSUL CASABLANCA 4459UNCLAS RABAT 000044 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR DS/DSS/OSAC, DS/IP/NEA AND DS/DSS/ITA 
DEPT ALSO FOR CA/OCS AND NEA/MAG 
CASABLANCA FOR CG, RSO AND CONSULAR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC CASC AMGT APER MO
SUBJECT: OSAC/CRIME SAFETY REPORT FOR MOROCCO 
 
REF: 08 STATE 132056 
 
¶1.  The following information is keyed to reftel. 
 
¶I.  OVERALL CRIME AND SAFETY SITUATION: 
 
¶A.  CRIME THREATS: 
 
In general, crime in Morocco does not pose a great threat to 
Americans visiting or working in this country.  However, 
every individual visiting or working in a foreign country 
should take security precautions and should be aware of their 
own personal safety.  Morocco and the United States are 
similar in that crime trends are generally higher in areas 
where there is a high concentration of people and tourists. 
The same precautions that one might take in a large U.S. city 
should also be exercised in Moroccan cities. 
 
Property crimes are the most common and range from simple 
pick-pocketing to home burglaries.  In particular, 
pick-pockets and purse snatchers generally work in crowded 
areas of cities, for instance, the medinas (outdoor markets), 
city centers and any other areas where there is heavy 
pedestrian traffic.  Visitors should also pay particular 
attention when utilizing automatic teller machines (ATMs), as 
these can be specifically targeted by thieves.  Pick-pockets 
and purse snatchers have become increasingly organized and 
professional and often work in teams to increase their 
chances of success.  It is common for thieves to distract 
would-be victims, while their partners steal wallets, purses 
and cash from their victims. 
 
Firearms are not common in Morocco and are strictly 
controlled by the Government.  Therefore, firearms are not 
utilized often during armed robberies.  Instead, most armed 
assailants utilize edged weapons, i.e., knives, razors, 
daggers or swords, during the commission of their crimes. 
The numbers of armed robberies is on the rise in Morocco, 
with most of these crimes occurring in the larger cities. 
Although there has been an increase in the number of armed 
robberies during daylight hours, most still occur at night. 
Visitors should avoid being out alone and during the late 
hours of the night or early hours of the morning in areas 
that are poorly lit or secluded. 
 
¶B.  SAFETY:  ROAD CONDITIONS AND ROAD HAZARDS 
 
Traffic accidents are a major concern, when traveling in the 
cities and around the country.  On average, more than 10 
Moroccans perish in motor vehicle accidents each day. 
Morocco experiences a high number of traffic accidents each 
year varying from simple fender-benders to fatalities 
involving other vehicles and pedestrians.  Generally, the 
population does not abide by traffic laws, with speeding 
being the biggest issue.  Visitors to Morocco who drive must 
have their Passport and/or International Driver,s License 
with them and will be required to present either, if they are 
stopped by the local police or the Royal Gendarmerie. 
Confiscation of one,s driver,s license is possible, if the 
violator is unable or unwilling to settle the fine at the 
time of the traffic stop.  Royal Gendarmerie check-points and 
temporary speed control points are frequently erected along 
the auto-routes and roads entering into the cities.  These 
checkpoints are established to verify drivers' documents and 
vehicle safety.  Moroccan roads vary from those that are well 
maintained to those that are in disrepair and barely passable. 
 
Public transportation varies from taxis and buses to trains. 
Taxis and buses are operated throughout most cities, but 
these vehicles are often poorly maintained, overcrowded and 
may be operated in a reckless manner.  It is common to see a 
mid-sized sedan taxi with six (6) passengers weaving in and 
out of traffic.  Trains are primarily utilized for 
transportation between cities.  Casablanca has a limited 
&subway8 system, which is utilized primarily by commuters 
and individuals accessing the airport.  This system is very 
limited and experiences crimes of pick-pocketing, as one 
would experience in the medinas or large pedestrian 
gatherings. 
 
II.  POLITICAL VIOLENCE: 
 
¶A.  HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE: 
 
In 2007, Casablanca experienced terrorist bombings that 
targeted some of the more populated areas of the city and the 
U.S. Consulate.  No Americans were killed during these 
attacks, and after investigations, they appeared to be less 
organized than attacks seen in other parts of the world. 
 
Also in that same year, a suicide bomber unsuccessfully 
targeted a public bus in Meknes.  To date, Rabat has not 
experienced a successful terrorist attack.  In spite of more 
than 100 arrests in 2008, terrorist cells are still believed 
to be operating in and around Morocco. 
 
¶B.  REGIONAL TERRORISM AND ORGANIZED CRIME: 
 
Morocco does have an element of domestic terrorism.  However, 
these groups, primary focus is on Moroccan government 
institutions and secondarily on Western and U.S. interests or 
policies.  Morocco does have an element of organized crime 
that is rooted in the illegal drug trade and importation of 
stolen vehicles from Europe. 
 
¶C.  INTERNATIONAL TERRORISM OR TRANSNATIONAL TERRORISM 
 
The potential for terrorist attacks against American interest 
remains high in Morocco, but the Government of Morocco 
continues its efforts to identify, locate and disrupt Islamic 
extremist and terrorist cells that are operating in this 
country.  The security services of Morocco have had many 
successful arrests and subsequent prosecutions of members of 
terrorist cells living and operating in Morocco.  Those 
arrested in recent years have been linked with radical 
extremism, and some have allegedly been associated with 
regional and international terrorist groups. 
 
¶D.  CIVIL UNREST: 
 
In January of 2009, Casablanca and Rabat, in particular, 
experienced large, public protests over the armed conflict 
between Israel and Hamas in Gaza.  These protests range from 
as little as a few hundred protesters to as many as 50,000. 
The majority of protests are peaceful in nature, with the 
occasional flag burning and anti-American and Israeli chants 
and slogans.  All lawful protests require the authorization 
by the local police jurisdiction.  This allows the police to 
establish the duration, route and parameters of the protest. 
However, impromptu protests have arisen on university 
campuses, in city centers other locations where there are 
internationally affiliated facilities in response to world 
events and the status of the Western Sahara, which continues 
to be a politically charged issue in Morocco.  These reactive 
protests have the potential to become more violent, as they 
are usually in response to a particular local or world event, 
which fuels the emotions or incites an angry response. 
Unauthorized protests are usually met with an overwhelming, 
reactive response by the police.  However, visitors are 
advised to avoid all protests, especially those involving 
direct links to conflicts involving Americans or U.S. 
policies. 
 
III. POST SPECIFIC CONCERNS: 
 
¶A.  ENVIRONMENTAL: 
 
The rainy season in Morocco is from November to March and 
often involves flash floods in the mountainous areas of the 
country.  These floods can materialize quickly and impact 
individuals traveling in the rural areas of Morocco by 
causing land slides and damaging otherwise navigable roads to 
the extent that they become impassable.  In addition, flash 
floods and extensive rains can also have a direct impact in 
the cities where the drainage systems are not sufficient to 
carry away excess water caused by heavy rains.  Many streets 
can become flooded and impassable, which may increase the 
propensity for vehicular accidents. 
 
¶B.  INDUSTRIAL AND TRANSPORTATION ACCIDENTS: 
 
Few industrial accidents are reported in Morocco.  Automobile 
accidents occur often and vary from the simple fender-bender 
to fatalities.  These accidents are due in part to the lack 
of adherence to established traffic laws and limited driver 
training.  It is not uncommon to see drivers disregard 
traffic control lights, drive against the flow of traffic or 
not adhere to the established lane designations.  Drivers 
should pay particular attention when traveling late at night 
or early in the morning when there is limited traffic.  At 
these times, individuals are less likely to obey traffic 
laws, and there is a greater potential for individuals 
driving under the influence of alcohol.  Some taxis, in 
particular the &grand taxi" (interurban taxi) or "taxi 
blanc8 have an additional negative impact on traffic because 
they are overcrowded and may pay little attention to the 
rules of the road.  Visitors who decide to drive in Morocco 
should remain attentive and avoid distractions. 
¶C.  KIDNAPPINGS: 
 
Kidnappings are not prevalent in Morocco, but there have been 
increasing numbers in this region of Africa.  This is a 
common terrorist tactic that may migrate to Morocco. 
 
¶D.  DRUGS AND NARCOTERRORISM: 
 
The drug trade is thoroughly entrenched in Morocco.  The 
primary drugs exported are hashish and marijuana.  Most of 
the illegal drugs produced or transported through Morocco are 
destined for European markets.  Morocco is quickly becoming a 
transit country for narco-terrorists who funnel their 
products from sub-Saharan countries and South American 
countries into Europe.  Recent arrests have involved members 
of the Royal Navy, Royal Gendarmerie and Auxiliary Forces 
(all are government security or military agencies in Morocco). 
 
Even with the prevalence of hashish/marijuana in Morocco, 
visitors must understand that it is still illegal to possess 
illegal substances.  These laws are enforced by the police 
and are applicable to all of those in possession, regardless 
of whether or not the person is a Moroccan citizen or a 
foreign national. 
 
IV.  POLICE RESPONSE: 
 
¶A.  PROCEDURES FOR VICTIMS OF POLICE DETENTION OR HARASSMENT: 
 
Police harassment of visitors and foreign nationals, 
especially Americans, is very rare.  There have been 
incidents where Americans have been arrested and detained. 
In the cases that visitors are arrested or experience 
legitimate police harassment, they should contact American 
Citizen Services at the U.S. Consulate General in Casablanca. 
 
¶B.  PROCEDURES FOR VICTIMS OF CRIMES: 
 
The Moroccan police force is based on the French system, with 
the "Surete National" enforcing law in the urban areas and 
the Royal Gendarmerie in the rural areas.  Moroccan law 
enforcement officials are well trained, with many attending 
international training programs provided by a variety of 
countries.  However, the police are understaffed and in some 
cases under-equipped.  The Moroccan police generally respond 
effectively to a report of a foreign victim of a crime.  This 
quick reaction and the familiarity of the police with the 
people and area they patrol have oftentimes resulted in quick 
arrests of perpetrators.  Therefore, it is important that all 
crimes be reported in a timely manner and detailed statements 
be provided.  All police officers speak French or Arabic, but 
English translation may not be readily available.  In the 
event that a visitor is the victim of a crime and requires 
assistance, s/he should contact American Citizen Services at 
the U.S. Consulate General in Casablanca. 
 
¶V.  MEDICAL EMERGENCIES: 
 
¶A.  Morocco has adequate medical services available in the 
large cities, with care diminishing as one travels further 
into the rural areas of the country.  The medical facilities 
and hospitals in Rabat and Casablanca can treat most general 
illness and can provide emergency trauma care.  However, 
specialized care, which is widely available in the United 
States, is not as easily accessible in Morocco.  French and 
Arabic are widely spoken and medical personnel may have 
limited to no English-language abilities.  Prescription and 
over-the-counter drugs can be obtained from pharmacies 
located throughout large cities but may be difficult or 
impossible to find in the smaller cities or rural areas of 
the country.  Specialty prescription medications may be 
difficult to locate even in Casablanca and Rabat. 
 
In the event of a medical emergency or serious traffic 
accident, immediate ambulance services are usually not 
available.  The numbers below represent a sample of medical 
services available but should not be interpreted as 
recommended by the U.S. Embassy or Consulate General. 
 
Police Emergency Service ) 190 (dialed from a cell phone) 
Fire Department / Emergency Ambulance ) 150 
Private Ambulance Service ) 037-72-72-72 (Rabat), 
022-25-25-25 (Casablanca) 
Air Ambulance Service (Rota, Spain) - 0034-56-82-3555 
 
Private Clinics and Hospitals: 
Agdal Clinic (Rabat) 037-77-77-77 
Nations Unies Clinic (Rabat) 037-67-05-05 
Clinique Badr (Casablanca) 022-49-28-00 
Zerktouni Clinic (Casablanca) 022-25-33-00 
Polyclinic du Sud (Marrakech) 024-44-79-99 
Assalam Clinic (Tangier) 039-32-25-58 
 
For more medical clinics and specialty offices, please visit 
www.casablanca.usconsulate.gov. 
 
VI. TRAVEL PRECAUTIONS: 
 
It is important, while traveling or working in Morocco, that 
visitors are aware that they may be specifically targeted by 
the local criminal population.  Most visitors, who are the 
victim of crimes, are involved in property crimes.  Thus, it 
is important to make oneself a harder target.  This may 
include but is not limited to dressing in a more conservative 
manner, not displaying large amounts of currency, talking on 
cell phones in a manner as not to expose the phone to 
possible snatching, carrying wallets in front pockets for 
men, ensuring that purse straps are over one,s shoulder and 
one,s head with the purse positioned in the front for women, 
not wearing elaborate jewelry or watches, etc. 
 
If one chooses to drive in Morocco, ensure that your windows 
are raised and the doors remain locked, while in transit. 
Criminals will attempt to surreptitiously enter your vehicle 
when stopped at traffic lights or will attempt to draw you 
out of your vehicle by otherwise harmless means, in order to 
enter your vehicle and steal your belongings.  It is against 
the law in Morocco to utilize your cellular telephone without 
a hands-free device while driving. 
 
Visitors, especially females, should make a concerted effort 
to travel in pairs and avoid walking alone, especially at 
night. 
 
Taxis are the most common method of public transit in the 
larger cities.  &Petits Taxis8 are the safest of the taxi 
services and can be found in every major city.  Unlike other 
services, the &Petits Taxis8 limit themselves to three (3) 
people at a time. 
 
Establishments that could be perceived as catering to U.S. or 
western interests, such as hotels, clubs, restaurants, etc., 
could be potential targets for terrorism.  Visitors should 
remain particularly alert and informed during periods of 
heightened tension in the country or region.  It is important 
that visitors make a special effort to reduce their profile, 
attempt to blend into the society as much as possible and not 
bring unwanted attention to themselves. 
 
The Regional Security Offices at the U.S. Embassy in Rabat 
and at the U.S. Consulate General in Casablanca remain the 
best sources of information for the latest on the security 
situation. 
 
VII.  FURTHER INFORMATION: 
 
Utilize the Consular Information Sheet at Travel.State.Gov 
for additional travel information as well as the latest 
travel warnings and public announcements regarding the 
security/safety situation in the country or region. 
 
U.S. Embassy:  037-76-22-65 
U.S. Embassy (after-hours):  037-76-96-39 
U.S. Consulate General Casablanca:  022-26-45-50 
U.S. Consulate General American Citizen Services: 
022-26-71-51 
 
When dialing Morocco from the United States, dial the country 
code &2128 and drop the first &08 in the above 
numbers. 
 
Senior Regional Security Officer (Rabat):  George G. 
Frederick 
Assistant Regional Security Officer (Rabat):  Josh S. Godbois 
Assistant Regional Security Officer (Rabat):  Enrique 
&Henry8 Laxa 
Regional Security Officer (Casablanca):  Yvon Guillaume 
Chief, Consular Section:  Miguel Ordonez 
Commercial Officer:  Rick Ortiz 
American Citizen Services Officer:  Chris Bergaust 
 
 
***************************************** 
Visit Embassy Rabat's Classified Website; 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/rabat 
***************************************** 
 
Riley