07KUWAIT959
COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR USCIS JULY 4TH MILITARY
Thu Jun 21 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kuwait
VZCZCXYZ0004
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKU #0959/01 1720722
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 210722Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY KUWAIT
TO RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 0338
INFO RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD PRIORITY 0918
RUEHFT/AMCONSUL FRANKFURT PRIORITY 2441
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9413
RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN 0254
RUEAHLA/HQ CIS IAO WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS KUWAIT 000959 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USCIS FOR REFUGEE, ASYLUM AND INTERNATIONAL OPERATIONS AND OSI 
EMBASSY ROME FOR USCIS ANNE ARRIES CORSANO 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CVIS ASEC OTRA GM IZ KU COUNTRY CLEARANCE
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR USCIS JULY 4TH MILITARY 
NATURALIZATION TEAM 
 
REF: A) ROME 001276 (NOTAL) B) HIGI/CORSANO TELCON 06-21-07 
 
¶1. Embassy Kuwait welcomes and grants country clearance for DHS 
USCIS Assistant Secretary Jonathan Scharfen and party to transit 
Kuwait o/a June 30 to July 6, 2007. 
 
¶2.  RSO is in the process of obtaining clearances for Special Agent 
Vorwerk's SPE as requested in ref. A.  Per ref. B, Post advises 
Embassy Rome to check with Consulate Frankfurt if similar action is 
required when the party transits Frankfurt. 
 
¶3. This clearance is not/not valid for entry into Iraq; you must 
apply for Iraq clearance through Embassy Baghdad. 
 
¶4. Visit Officer: An Embassy visit officer and a driver/expeditor 
will meet and assist you at the airport. 
 
Embassy point of contact is: 
 
John Higi, ISU Management Officer 
Office- (965) 259-1545 
Cell- (965)983-5923 
Fax- (965) 259-1190 
Unclass e-mail: HigiJR2@state.gov 
 
SIPDIS 
ClassNet e-mail: HigiJR2@state.sgov.gov 
 
¶5. Lodging: ISU understand that Embassy Rome USCIS has reserved 
rooms at the Radisson SAS for July 4, 2007 with a late check out 
July 5.  The hotel telephone number is (965) 575-6000 and the fax 
number is (965)575-0155. The single room rate at the hotel is 
approximately USD 291.00 per night, which includes breakfast. The 
hotel accepts major credit cards and is within the per diem rate. 
The daily per diem rate for Kuwait is USD 291.00 for lodging, plus a 
meal and incidental expense (M&IE) allowance of USD 105.00 for a 
total of USD 396.00. 
 
¶6. Following is post's standard guidance for visitors to Kuwait: 
 
a. Entry Requirements: Kuwait now issues single-entry visas to 
American citizens on arrival, upon presentation of a valid passport. 
 There is a processing fee of three (3) Kuwaiti Dinar (KD 3.000, or 
USD 12.00) for each visa issued. The fee may be paid either in KD or 
USD. Post strongly advises travelers to carry some documentation on 
the purpose of their visit.  Passengers arriving on other than 
commercial flights should anticipate extra delays, because 
immigration services are not available on the military side of the 
airfield and passports have to be carried to a different location at 
the airport for processing.  Airport visas are valid for 90 days 
after arrival; anyone staying beyond this period must obtain an 
extension, which should be requested 2 weeks prior to visa 
expiration.  Anyone departing Kuwait who has overstayed the visa 
will be charged a fine of KD 10.000 (US 35.00) per day at the 
airport.  All travelers planning to visit Iraq should make sure that 
they obtain the required exit/entry stamps for each transit through 
Kuwait, and be aware that they will need to obtain a new Kuwaiti 
visa upon return, even after a daytrip to Baghdad.  Failure to do so 
can result in heavy fines.  If possible, travelers should try to 
obtain a multiple-entry visa before arriving in Kuwait. 
 
b. Visitors are reminded that the importation of alcohol, pork 
products, personal firearms, and any suggestive/pornographic 
materials (videotapes, magazines or books) is strictly prohibited by 
Kuwaiti law.  Kuwait is still clearing mines and munitions. Visitors 
must remain on major paved roads when traveling in Kuwait. Travel 
north of Jahra toward the Iraqi-Kuwaiti border is not authorized 
without approval from the embassy and an appropriate escort. 
 
c. Embassy Kuwait's normal workweek is Saturday through Wednesday, 
and office hours are from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. The time difference 
with the East Coast of the United States is EDT plus seven hours. 
The embassy switchboard number is (965) 259-1001, and the IVG number 
is 4950000. The after-hours number which rings at Marine Guard Post 
One is (965) 538-2098.  The mission duty officer can be reached 
through the embassy switchboard, Post One or by cell phone at (965) 
967-7265. The embassy pouch address is 6200 Kuwait Place, Dulles, VA 
20189-6200. 
 
d. Threat Assessment: Kuwait is a high-threat post and the military 
threatcon is currently Charlie.  We have increased security 
precautions at official U.S. installations in Kuwait and recommend 
that all Americans in Kuwait remain alert to their surroundings and 
review their personal security practices. 
 
e. Health Advisory for Kuwait: April through October is the hot 
season in Kuwait. Temperatures reach 120-140 degrees F in summer. 
Caution should be taken to prevent dehydration and heat exhaustion 
by 1) drinking plenty of fluids and 
2) staying indoors, especially during peak temperature hours of noon 
to 3:00 p.m. (1200-1500). Low humidity coupled with high 
temperatures creates excessive moisture loss from evaporation.  It 
is necessary to drink 2-4 quarts of water daily to prevent 
dehydration. 
 
f. Money:  Credit cards are widely accepted at hotels, restaurants 
and other establishments throughout Kuwait and ATM machines are also 
readily available. For travelers on official orders, the Commercial 
Bank of Kuwait can provide accommodation services (cashing a 
personal check drawn on a U.S. bank into local currency) up to a 
maximum of USD 300.00 per day from noon to 2:00 p.m., Saturday 
through Wednesday. At the current rate of exchange, one Kuwaiti 
Dinar (KD) is equivalent to approximately USD 3.50. 
 
g. CAA Access: Visitors who need unescorted access into secure areas 
of the mission must slug cables to the attention of the RSO, and 
include the level of their clearance.  The cable should include the 
visitor's Social Security Number, and the name of the agency 
granting the clearance.  Cables should include the ASEC tag to 
ensure distribution to the RSO office and the Marine Security guard 
at Post One. 
 
h. Computer and Electronics Usage: Sensitive military information 
has been discovered recently on business center computers at local 
hotels in Kuwait City.  All U.S. Government personnel and 
contractors must remember that it is their responsibility to observe 
good computer and information security practices.  Information 
processed on computers in hotel business centers, through email 
correspondence or document creation, is highly exploitable.  Public 
computers located in hotel business centers, internet cafes, airport 
lounges, etc. should never be used to process, store or disseminate 
sensitive information.  Compromise of sensitive government or 
military information can result in serious damage to national 
security.  Compromises of sensitive personal data can result in 
significant personal and financial hardship.  Random checks are 
conducted by Embassy personnel on public PC's.  Breaches on COMPUSEC 
will result in the violator receiving security infractions and/or 
security violations.  Interagency security standards prohibit the 
introduction or use of non-USG owned computer hardware and software 
at all USG diplomatic facilities. Cell phones, palm pilots, radios 
and other convenience electronics are prohibited in all secure areas 
of the mission. 
 
i. Photography:  Tourist photography is encouraged in Kuwait. 
However, it is strictly forbidden to photograph public buildings, 
economic infrastructure, or military and other security-related 
facilities and personnel.  Confiscation of film and camera and even 
arrest may result from doing so.  A good rule of thumb:  If there is 
any doubt as to whether a photograph should be taken, don't take it. 
 
 
j. Action Request:  Each visitor, regardless of length of stay, must 
bring or forward fiscal data to pay for direct costs of the visit. 
Each agency, organization or visiting delegation will be charged for 
the actual costs attributed to their visit.  Direct charge costs 
include, but are not limited to:  American and LES staff overtime 
(e.g., expeditor, accommodation exchange, representational event 
support), field travel, lodging and meals and incidental expenses 
(M&IE) by embassy employees, vehicle rentals, long-distance 
telephone calls, equipment rentals, office supplies and all other 
costs that are directly attributable to the visit.  If fiscal data 
on a traveler's authorization is to be used for this purpose, this 
information must be spelled out in the travel orders and sufficient 
funding provided to meet these expenses.  In addition, for TDYers 
over thirty (30) days, there will be a charge for ICASS support 
services.  If your sponsoring agency is not signed up for ICASS 
services at post, please be prepared to sign an ICASS Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU) for ICASS support services upon arrival.  The 
agency should provide post with written communication, generated by 
the traveler's headquarters, that confirms the agency will pay ICASS 
charges for the TDYer, provide the agency ICASS billing code for the 
TDY support to be provided, and authorize the traveler to sign the 
ICASS invoice generated by the TDY module.  When travel is urgent, 
TDYers should bring this document with them to ensure there are no 
interruptions in the provision of services.  Post will not provide 
any services to a TDYer staying in excess of 30 days without having 
received this documentation prior to day 31 of the TDY. 
 
k. Visit Kuwait's Classified Website at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/kuwait/ 
 
¶7. This cable was last updated on October 30, 2006. 
 
LeBaron