02ANKARA8845
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Dec 04 00:00:00 +0100 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 008845 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 4, 2002 
 
THIS  REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER  TWO 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
                         ------- 
TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY 
Wednesday, December 4, 2002 
 
 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEALS 
Air-Base Crisis  - Hurriyet 
Bush invites Erdogan officially - Hurriyet 
Erdogan will be at the White House next week - Sabah 
US pressures Turkey - Turkiye 
Turkey requests $25 billion from US for possible operation 
against Iraq - Milliyet 
 
 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Agreement reached on Iraq - Cumhuriyet 
Ankara accepts Wolfowitz and Grossman's request for Turkish 
bases - Radikal 
US: Let's plan together and let you have what you want in 
Northern Iraq - Zaman 
Wolfowitz: If you don't want a Kurdish State, you should 
enter Iraq - Yeni Safak 
 
 
FINANCIAL JOURNALS 
U.S. pressure mounts - Finansal Forum 
U.S. fiscal support with `Iraq condition' attached -- Dunya 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
DepSec Wolfowitz and U/S Grossman Visit: All papers 
highlight the visit under banner headlines and feature 
extensive front page coverage as well as details of US- 
Turkish discussions.  The general consensus among reporters 
is that the talks centered on Turkey's willingness to 
cooperate with the US in a possible operation in Iraq, and 
the US list of demands and offers of compensation in return. 
The demands are listed as follows: Turkey should allow its 
bases and ports to be used by US troops and aircrafts. 
Turkey should be a logistical base and supply center in the 
event of a military strike.  Turkey should be prepared to 
serve as a second operational headquarters after Tampa, 
Florida.  The option for allowing Turkish troops to join 
British and American troops in northern Iraq should also be 
considered by Turkey.  In exchange for meeting these 
demands, Wolfowitz and Grossman reportedly offered a total 
of 3.5 billion dollars in aid.  Some papers talk about an 
additional 20 billion dollars of aid as well.  The support 
will be given within a three-year period, and will also 
include the forgiveness of Turkey's FMS debts, the 
establishment of qualifying industrial zones, encouraging US 
investments in Turkey, and some favors on trade quotas. 
Reports also noted that the US affirmed its commitment to 
prevent a separate Kurdish state in northern Iraq.  The U.S. 
stance against a Kurdish state came as a relief to Turkish 
officials, and made Ankara more willing to allow use of its 
base facilities.  All papers report the `breaking news' that 
Foreign Minister Yasar Yakis, following his meeting with 
British Foreign Minister Straw, said that Turkey will open 
its airbases and facilities for the US in the event of a 
military operation.  However, mass appeal "Hurriyet" fronts 
a flashy story that referred to the issue as a `base 
crisis.'  According to "Hurriyet," Yakis' announcement 
caused serious concerns among military officials and Foreign 
Ministry bureaucrats.  Deputy Chief of General Staff Gen. 
Buyukanit told "Hurriyet" that permission for use of the 
airbases requires a political decision, and that the 
military is not aware that such a decision has been taken. 
General Buyukanit said that the FM's statement `might be his 
personal opinion.'  In a press release issued after 
midnight, the MFA clarified the Foreign Minister's remarks, 
saying that `Turkey has not committed itself.  Minister 
Yakis was talking about possible options in the spirit of 
good, friendly relations with the US.' 
 
 
Reports also note that both Wolfowitz and Grossman 
reiterated strong US support for Turkey's EU accession, and 
underlined the importance of settling the Cyprus issue as 
soon as possible. 
 
 
Erdogan to Washington:  All papers report that AKP leader 
Erdogan received an official invitation from the White 
House.  The date of Erdogan's meeting with President Bush 
has been set for December 10. The invitation was extended to 
Erdogan during the dinner at the American Embassy residence 
in honor of Wolfowitz and Grossman.  Erdogan changed his 
travel plans immediately, and decided to go to Denmark 
before the EU summit and fly to Washington from there. 
 
 
EU Reforms: The AKP government has prepared a series of 
legal reforms and sent the reform package to Parliament for 
final consideration.  The package would make closure of 
political parties more difficult, bring tougher measures to 
prevent torture, and ease the restrictions on minority 
foundations wishing to acquire property.  The changes will 
also pave the way for Erdogan to become eligible to run for 
parliament.