02ANKARA8523
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Nov 21 00:00:00 +0100 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 008523 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 21, 2002 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
                    ------- 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEALS 
We took more so that we can give later - Hurriyet 
7 of 15 EU members want Turkey be given a date - Vatan 
Bush: I am working for Turkey - Vatan 
Headscarf is in state protocol - Milliyet 
A settlement package for EU - Aksam 
Bush pressuring EU for Turkey - Sabah 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Gul: We are for negotiations on Cyprus - Radikal 
AKP Deputies Praying Show at Hilton - Cumhuriyet 
Gul: We will take steps which will shock the EU - Yeni Safak 
Erdogan's radical approach on EU and Cyprus issues - Zaman 
Headscarf in protocol - Cumhuriyet 
 
 
FINANCIAL JOURNALS 
London supports Turkey being given a date  - Dunya 
Erdogan diverts from the official policy line for the sake 
of EU membership- Finansal Forum 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Cyprus: "Hurriyet" fronts an interview with the former 
President Kenan Evren who served as Chief of Staff for the 
Turkish Ground Forces during the Turkish army's Cyprus 
operation in 1974.  Retired Gen. Evren is quoted as saying, 
Turkey at that time invaded more territory than was 
originally planned. They did this to ensure a negotiable 
portion for bargaining.  He said that the UN plan brings a 
historic chance and called on the concerned parties to work 
for a settlement.  "CNN Turk" carried out the interview, and 
the "Hurriyet" report also mentions that the two Greek 
television stations, "Antenna TV" and "Mega TV" will re- 
broadcast it. 
All papers report opposition leader Baykal's statement about 
the Cyprus plan, in which he says `it is not going to bring 
peace to the island in its present form'.  The CHP leader 
received a briefing from the Foreign Ministry and warned 
against losing the two-community structure of the island if 
the Kofi Annan plan is adopted. 
Meanwhile, Prime Minister Abdullah Gul gave an interview to 
"Radikal" and emphasized that `no solution is the best 
solution for Cyprus' is not the approach they will be 
pursuing.  Gul spoke in a determined tone to work for a 
settlement and called the Annan plan negotiable. 
"Cumhuriyet" reports that British Rep. for Cyprus Sir David 
Hannay is to visit Ankara this weekend for consultations. 
 
 
Erdogan, EU: Papers continue to report AKP leader Tayyip 
Erdogan's lobbying in various European capitals.  His 
meetings with the British PM as well as EU officials in 
Brussels was the media highlight of the day.  Erdogan 
repeated Turkey's determination to join the EU and 
underlined the expectation that the Copenhagen summit would 
provide a date for negotiations.  "Milliyet" says that 
following his consultations with the EU so far, Erdogan had 
reached a point (in moving discussions forward) at which the 
upcoming EU summit might set a date for Turkey in order to 
set a calendar for the accession program, and that would be 
good enough at this point.  "Radikal" as well as "Zaman" 
front Erdogan's pragmatic approach toward the EU as he 
suggested to take on "EU-Cyprus-ESDP" as a package. 
"Radikal" says this approach is quite a contradiction to 
Ankara's traditional policy. 
 
 
NATO Summit/Bush-Sezer: All papers highlight the Bush-Sezer 
meeting during the NATO summit.  Reports carry a positive 
tone and emphasize the US support for Turkey's EU accession 
which Bush personally expressed to Sezer.  According to the 
reports, Bush-Sezer meeting focused on three items: Iraq, EU 
and Cyprus.  Bush reaffirmed the US's commitment to protect 
Iraq's territorial integrity. 
 
 
Speaker Hastert: "Cumhuriyet" mentions that Speaker Hastert 
is heading a Congressional delegation and is to see Prime 
Minister Abdullah Gul as well as Parliamentary 
Speaker/Acting President, Bulent Arinc. 
 
 
Kurdish Broadcast: Higher Council of Radio and Television 
[RTUK] announced that it has finished the necessary 
regulation-drafting work so that (national TV network) "TRT" 
can initiate Kurdish broadcasting.  According to the final 
regulation the Kurdish broadcast will be 4 hours radio, and 
2 hours television in a week. 
 
 
Supreme Court's torture verdict:  Papers report a verdict 
from the High Court of Appeal on torture.  The Supreme Court 
turned down a local court's decision to acquit two policemen 
used torture against a thief in order to have him confessed. 
The court's verdict says, torture is a crime against 
humanity and under no circumstances it shall be considered 
as an excuse. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Iraq/UN Inspection 
 
 
"Hans Blix and the Hawks" 
Fikret Ertan wrote in the Islamic-intellectual Zaman 
(11/21): "The only obstacle before the US about its Iraq 
operation plan is the current UN inspection process in Iraq, 
and the upcoming report to UNSC.  This report is going to be 
a very critical one because it will actually come up with an 
opinion on whether there is a need for use of force against 
Iraq. . In sum, the Hans Blix report will pave the way 
either for peace or war.  He stands as a target against the 
anti-Iraq group, i.e. the hawks, in the Bush administration. 
They consider Blix over-moderate and tolerant toward Iraq. . 
Hans Blix concentrates his efforts on finding a way to 
cooperate with Iraq first rather than rushing into a 
conflict with Iraq.  His goal is to disarm Iraq without any 
armed conflict.  Let's hope he succeeds and Iraq has got the 
message. .because the hawks will not miss any little chance 
to use against Iraq."