02ANKARA9122
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Dec 26 00:00:00 +0100 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 009122 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, DECEMBER 26, 2002 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
                         ------- 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEALS 
"Red line" around Mosul, Kirkuk - Hurriyet 
U.S. offers $20 billion - Sabah 
Ankara, reluctant, heads to war - Aksam 
U.S. asks for logistical support - Milliyet 
Siirt elections: Erdogan's path cleared - Sabah 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
U.S. bribe for war: $5 billion - Cumhuriyet 
Business world: War will delay economic revival - Yeni Safak 
Grand fear: War refugees - Radikal 
KDP against Turkey's conditions for Northern Iraq - Zaman 
Pope's Christmas message: Refrain from war in Iraq - Zaman 
 
 
FINANCIAL JOURNALS 
Investment continues despite Iraq crisis - Dunya 
Iraq war will cost Turkey $150 billion in coming decade - 
Finansal Forum 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Iraq: Dailies quote Foreign Minister Yakis as saying Turkey 
has not yet made any commitment regarding Iraq.  Some of the 
details leaked to the press are correct, some are wrong, 
Yakis said.  Prime Minister Gul said that Turkey would wait 
to see the report by UN arms inspectors.  Ankara's decision 
will be shaped at the Supreme Military Council (YAS) meeting 
today, and the National Security Council (MGK) meeting 
tomorrow, papers agree. 
 
 
"Milliyet" claims the U.S. has asked for Turkey's support on 
logistics, communication, and intelligence.  The U.S. has 
also asked that Turkish troops speaking Kurdish and Arabic 
should guide them in Northern Iraq.  The U.S. is planning to 
use Turkish railroads to transport personnel and armored 
vehicles, according to Milliyet.  "Vatan" reported that the 
U.S. is pressuring Ankara to allow deployment of 80,000 U.S. 
troops in the southeastern towns Sirnak and Silopi, whereas 
Ankara is inclined to permit only small special teams. 
Vatan also notes that Ankara has agreed to allow the U.S. 
access to three Turkish ports in the Mediterranean. 
According to "Yeni Safak," the U.S. wants to establish 
military rule in Northern Iraq, where it is planning to stay 
for at least five years to ensure political stability in the 
region.  "Cumhuriyet" reports on its front page that the 
U.S. has offered Turkey a "war bribe" of $5 billion in the 
short-term, and $15-20 billion in the long term in exchange 
for cooperation.  In an effort to keep the Kurds and British 
troops away from Mosul and Kirkuk, Turkey wants to establish 
"red lines" around the two Northern Iraqi towns, "Hurriyet" 
claims.  Safeen Dizayee, the KDP representative in Ankara, 
criticized Turkey in "Zaman" on Wednesday by saying that 
Ankara exaggerated the situation in Northern Iraq.  Dizayee 
warned that regional countries would not remain indifferent 
to a unilateral Turkish intervention, which could draw Iran 
into the conflict.  He noted that KDP leader Barzani would 
visit Turkey next week.  A "Radikal" commentary claimed that 
Ankara will give passive support to the U.S. by opening its 
airbases, airspace, and territory.  The town of Silopi is 
expected to become the operational headquarters and the 
point for processing refugees.  Turkey is considering 
setting up a buffer zone 30-40 km. deep in Northern Iraq; 
this zone would ease the passage of U.S. and allied troops 
and facilitate Turkish control over the region.  Ankara's 
official position will be finalized at the NSC meeting on 
Friday, and the government will seek parliamentary approval 
for the deployment of foreign troops, the paper reported. 
 
 
Constitutional amendments: While the parliament is searching 
for ways to override the  president's veto and enact 
constitutional changes, the High Election Board (YSK) has 
announced the calendar for the Siirt elections.  Elections 
are set for February 9, and the  deadline for candidate 
applications is January 23.  President Sezer will have to 
sign the constitutional amendments by that time. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: Iraq 
 
 
"The 80 thousand US soldiers" 
Chief Columist of mass appeal Hurriyet, Oktay Eksi opined 
(12/26): "It would be very foolish to believe that the US 
intention is to bring democracy to Iraq and to the region. 
When Kuwait was saved from the Iraq occupation in 1991, the 
US did not care about democracy at all.  This is simply 
because the operation was meant to prevent Iraq's control of 
Kuwaiti oil reserves. . This is the very time to be 
realistic and act accordingly.  Turkey, under the current 
circumstances, has no chance to refuse to support the US. 
Yet we better design Turkey's support to be as limited as 
possible.  For instance, plans to station US soldiers in 
Turkey and have them stay here for 5 years are totally 
unacceptable." 
 
 
"Saddam should go" 
Editor-in-Chief of mass appeal Milliyet, Mehmet Yakup Yilmaz 
wrote (12/26): "Turkey's interest is in lasting stability 
and a peaceful atmosphere in the region.  Yet this goal 
cannot be achieved as long as Saddam remains in charge.  . 
Opposing a war is certainly correct from the humanitarian 
point of view, but when the situation makes war inevitable 
there is no room for emotionalism.  Romantic stances do not 
work, particularly in international relations.  . Let's hope 
that Saddam realizes the fact that war is imminent and will 
cost a colossal number of Iraqi lives." 
"The Permanent Trouble" 
Fehmi Koru argued in Islamic-intellectual Yeni Safak 
(12/26): "A close look at Afghanistan will give us a clue 
about US intentions in Iraq.  The US plans to remain in the 
region permanently.  The Afghan operation helped the US to 
expand its military presence from Pakistan to the 
Philippines and Georgia.  In the event of an Iraq operation, 
Turkey will be assuming Pakistan's role.  The roles of the 
Philippines and Georgia will be given to Qatar, Saudi 
Arabia, Kuwait, and the UAE. . All organs of the Turkish 
state mechanism, particularly the parliament, should pay 
utmost attention to US intentions for this region.  Turkey 
should not be put in the position of introducing a 
`permanent' problem into the region." 
 
 
PEARSON