02FRANKFURT10188
HESSE SPD CHOOSES GERHARD BOEKEL TO CHALLENGE
Mon Nov 04 00:00:00 +0100 2002
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Frankfurt
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 010188 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINR GM
SUBJECT: HESSE SPD CHOOSES GERHARD BOEKEL TO CHALLENGE 
MINISTER-PRESIDENT KOCH FOR FEBRUARY 2003 STATE ELECTIONS 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary.  The Hesse SPD voted overwhelmingly on 
October 19 for Gerhard Boekel to challenge Minister- 
President Roland Koch (CDU) in the February 2003 state 
elections.  Boekel, a 56-year-old lawyer and former Hesse 
Interior Minister, is admired for his integrity and his good 
management and team-building abilities.  Hesse state 
elections are important in Germany next year and could be a 
barometer for the national CDU's future chances in 2006 
elections.  (Minister President Koch is widely discussed as 
a CDU chancellor candidate for 2006.)  While polls rate 
Boekel more trustworthy and likeable than Koch, they also 
show Boekel is still a relative unknown to over half the 
voters in the state.  Chancellor Schroeder's failure to 
appear at the Hesse state SPD convention to support Boekel 
was viewed by many as a snub.  End Summary. 
 
 
Overwhelming Delegate Support for Boekel 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) At its October 19 convention in Wiesbaden, the Hesse 
SPD voted overwhelmingly for Gerhard Boekel to challenge 
Hesse Minister-President Roland Koch (CDU) in the February 
2, 2003 state elections.  After his 90-minute speech, 99 
percent of the delegates supported Boekel, the best result 
ever for an SPD candidate.  In his speech, Boekel described 
improving education and reduction of youth unemployment as 
key issues for his administration.  He expressed clear 
preference for an SPD-Green Party coalition.  (Frankfurt 
airport expansion is the only major controversial issue 
between the two parties).  The Hesse SPD electoral list was 
accepted without major changes.  It had been vetted in 
advance to balance the northern and southern districts of 
the party. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The 56-year-old Boekel was a controversial choice 
at first but has managed to unite the party behind him in 
recent months.  Hesse SPD delegates emphasized to us 
Boekel's integrity and team-building ability.  They believe 
these qualities will help him against the incumbent.  (NOTE: 
In polls, Hesse M-P Koch, CDU, ranks low among German 
politicians in the area of trustworthiness and credibility. 
Koch has had to shake off a campaign finance scandal in the 
past.  But he is admired by many for his energy and 
strategic thinking and is frequently discussed as a CDU 
chancellor candidate for national elections in 2006.  END 
NOTE.)  Hesse SPD delegates were optimistic after a major 
poll (Infratest Dimap) showed that Boekel is considered more 
likeable than Koch and that Koch rates lower then previously 
assumed in several areas of competence.  Boekel's biggest 
obstacle is that he is still a relative unknown among the 
general population in Hesse: only four out of ten people are 
familiar with the former Interior Minister. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) One sour note at the Hesse SPD event was the 
failure of Chancellor Schroeder to appear.  The Chancellor 
cancelled his appearance at the convention at the last 
minute with a not-very-convincing excuse, much to the dismay 
of Hesse party officials.  His absence was seen by some as 
displeasure with Boekel's candidacy.  Schroeder had 
reportedly favored Offenbach Lord Mayor (Oberbuergermeister) 
Grandke but was unable to push his candidate through. 
Schroeder's failure to appear generated a lot of talk on the 
margins and tension among the party delegates.  It was 
viewed by many as a deliberate snub. 
 
Biographic Information on Boekel 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (U) B1oekel studied law at the University of Giessen. 
In 1978, he was elected into the Hesse Landtag (state 
parliament) and remained a member until his election in 1985 
as county executive advisor (Landrat) of Lahn-Dill county. 
Boekel served in that position until 1994.  Boekel was 
appointed Hesse's Interior Minister in July 1994 and served 
until 1999.  In 2001 Boekel was also appointed Hesse SPD 
party chairman succeeding Hans Eichel (former Hesse Minister- 
President, now federal Finance Minister).  The center-right 
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung newspaper has described Boe2 
kel as "an active administrator with managerial qualities." 
Boe3kel characterizes himself as a pragmatic politician of 
the center.  His sympathies are generally considered to lie 
with the right wing of the SPD.  As county executive, he 
refused to enter into an SPD-Green Party coalition, 
preferring more conservative and independent voter groups. 
 
¶6.  (U) As Hesse Interior Minister, Boe4kel stoutly defended 
Hesse SPD policies by temporarily halting deportations of 
Kurdish asylum seekers.  He was also cautious regarding the 
return of Bosnian refugees.  His performance as minister 
enjoyed support from all parties and his centrist approach 
comes across well with unaffiliated voters too.  Since 
assuming a dominating role in the Hesse SPD, Boekel has 
begun a number of initiatives to sharpen his party's 
profile.  One example is his outspoken and early support to 
create a network of "all day" schools.  He also decided to 
abandon the months-long battle over the CDU state party 
financing scandal.  Boekel felt that the SPD was not gaining 
ground with the issue, Hesse politics had been brought to a 
near standstill by it, and that the focus needed to shift 
back to more substantive matters. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Roland Koch was barely known in Hesse when he was 
nominated to run against Hans Eichel in 1999.  This has 
given hope to the SPD, which has still not recovered from 
its election defeat in the last state elections.  The Hesse 
state elections are the most important in Germany next year. 
Not only might the CDU lose its majority in the Bundesrat if 
Boekel wins, but Koch's career may suffer a serious setback. 
For this reason, one might have expected  Chancellor 
Schroeder to show interest in giving Boekel a good show of 
support.  The Hesse SPD was certainly disappointed with 
Schroeder's failure to appear.  In any case, Boekel has a 
lot of heavy campaigning to do to build his image and ensure 
an election victory.  The Hesse SPD is fully behind him now. 
End comment. 
 
¶8.  This message was coordinated with Embassy Berlin. 
 
BODDE 
_______________________________ 
1 
2 
3 
4