02HARARE1839
MEDIA REPORT TRAVEL RESTRICTIONS; HARARE
Thu Aug 15 00:00:00 +0200 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HARARE 001839 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/PD, AF/S, INR/R/MR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KMDR KPAO ZI
SUBJECT: MEDIA REPORT TRAVEL RESTRICTIONS; HARARE 
 
  ¶1.   Under headline "Retaliatory sanctions welcome" the 
      government-controlled daily "Chronicle" dedicated its 
      August 14 editorial to backing Mr. Robert Mugabe's 
      "retaliatory sanctions" against the United States, European 
      Union and other Western countries that have imposed travel 
      restrictions on Mugabe's administration.  Excerpts: 
 
  ¶2.   "There is an adage that says: if you sow wind, you 
      reap the whirlwind, and when this happens, you will 
      have only yourself to blame.  The European Union and 
      the United States have imposed what they prefer to 
      call smart sanctions on 72 senior government and 
      ZANU PF officials for giving land to the black 
      majority. . .What these nations forgot was that they 
      have no monopoly in imposing sanctions against any 
      nation, no matter how small it might be. . .We 
      welcome the President's announcement and hope that 
      it will send the right message to the British and 
      their MDC messengers who appear to be basking in the 
      misguided notion that they are immune to 
      sanctions. . .Zimbabwe is not a punch bag for 
      bullies from the Western world who, while preaching 
      democracy, have autocratic foreign policies. 
      President Mugabe has already made it clear that the 
      time to hit back has come and we hope that those who 
      got the ball rolling will not cry foul when we 
      retaliate. . .The Tony Blairs and the George Bushes 
      of this world need to be reminded that Zimbabwe is 
      no longer a colony that is told what to do at every 
      turn.  They should leave the country's leaders to go 
      about their business in this global village without 
      hindrance." 
 
SULLIVAN