02HARARE1849
MEDIA REPORT U. S. FOREIGN POLICY UNDER FIRE;
Thu Aug 15 00:00:00 +0200 2002
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HARARE 001849 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/PD (DALTON), AF/S (SCHLACHTER), AF/RA, INR/R/MR 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO KMDR ZI
SUBJECT: MEDIA REPORT U. S. FOREIGN POLICY UNDER FIRE; 
HARARE 
 
  ¶1.   Under headline "Bush's policy disastrous" the August 
      12 edition of the government-controlled daily "The Herald" 
      carried the following op-ed by Tim Chigodo on page 8: 
 
  ¶2.   "Since the fall of the Communism in Eastern Europe and 
      the end of the Cold War, the United States has been engaged 
      in bully tactics and is trying to impose leaders in Third 
      World and Middle East countries.  Since President George W. 
      Bush came to power in controversial presidential elections. 
      . .he has appointed himself arbitrator over destinies of 
      millions of people in other countries around the world. . 
      .In a bully fashion, the American president is using his 
      country's economic and military power and has threatened to 
      oust presidents in countries which do not agree with his 
      foreign policies.  Such countries include Zimbabwe, Iraq 
      and Palestine.  He wants to impose leaders on the 
      countries, a move the people of the targeted countries have 
      resolutely resisted.  The U. S. has assumed a god-like 
      arbitrage over other nations. 
 
      The U. S. has been working tirelessly to tarnish the 
      good intentions of socialism saying the ideology 
      could not deliver the goods like capitalism of which 
      America is the supreme incarnation. . .In its 
      determined efforts to destroy communism, the U. S. 
      has engaged in competitive struggle to prove to the 
      world that it could out-materialize socialism and 
      deliver what the ideology could not.  The American 
      leader wants to make decisions in Washington that 
      affect the entire world, yet the world has got no 
      say in his policies.  It is very clear that America 
      still holds paternalistic and imperialistic 
      attitudes towards African and Arab states.  The 
      recent legislation on farm subsidies signed into law 
      by President Bush will not only push millions of 
      small African farmers out of business but impoverish 
      them.  Some analysts fear that the Bill will 
      sabotage world trade negotiations launched in Doha, 
      Qatar in November last year. . .The huge subsidies 
      given to American farmers will contribute to global 
      over production of wheat, corn, cotton and other 
      basic crops.  Small countries will be particularly 
      hard hit since agriculture plays a very significant 
      role in their economies. 
 
      ". . .The U. S. has been relentlessly trying to 
      topple Cuban President Fidel Castro for dumping 
      capitalism in favor of socialism. . .Since the 
      September terrorist attacks on the U. S., the Bush 
      administration has turned to righteous vengefulness 
      and sought to display its supremacy with some 
      supernatural power which it could not do during the 
      Cold War because of the Soviet Union's military 
      rivalry.  The U. S. is now using the attacks to bomb 
      Moslem states under the pretext of fighting 
      international terrorism.  The man blamed for the 
      terrorist attacks, Osama bin Laden, has put up a 
      challenge that has deflated American ability as a 
      superpower and demoralized its security 
      forces. . .This is not the first time the Americans 
      will have lost a vicious war.  They did so in 
      Vietnam despite all the sophisticated weaponry. 
 
      "Observers have described President Bush's foreign 
      policy as disastrous.  The U. S. administration has 
      continued to support Israel that has violated Middle 
      East peace accords with impunity. . .President Bush 
      has also threatened to topple Iraqi President Saddam 
      Hussein with the assistance of Britain. . .The 
      Americans can never claim to be holy and begin 
      lecturing to Zimbabwe, Iraq and Palestine when their 
      past is tainted with evil and injustices.  The 
      Americans and some EU countries were directly 
      involved in the slave trade to be capable of 
      selfless contribution to issues like good governance 
      and democracy.  They failed to denounce the social 
      ills of racism during the racism and xenophobia 
      conference in South Africa last year.  They have 
      their hands, historically, dripping with the 
      incalculable suffering of the black people under 
      slavery.  The latest moves by the U. S. to topple 
      leaders on other countries and replace them with its 
      stooges has clearly shown that Mr. Bush regards the 
      earth as America's experimental playing field." 
 
SULLIVAN