03ADANA273
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY,
Tue Oct 21 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ADANA 0273 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY, 
          OCTOBER 18-20, 2003 
 
 
¶1. This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for October 18-20, 2003.  Please note that 
Turkish press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch 
for the accuracy of the reports summarized 
here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
¶2. Vakit / According to research conducted by the 
Sanliurfa Municipality Press Department in 
Siverek, about 2,000 children in Siverek do not 
have birth certificates or any other kind of 
legal documentation to confirm their identity. 
 
 
¶3. Evrensel, Cumhuriyet / A statue of Pir Sultan 
Abdal, who was a famous poet,folk singer, and 
peacemaker, was dedicated in Tunceli.  Three 
thousand people were in attendance. 
 
 
¶4. Evrensel, Ozgur Gundem / In Eruh, Siirt 
province, three people allegedly introducing 
themselves as PKK-KADEK members, came to the 
Gulgornu village and asked for food. They also 
wanted the villagers to act as village guards 
to help protect them.  Villagers reportedly 
became distressed about the incident. 
According to Ozgur Gundem, the three people 
were "fake" guerillas, possibly investigating 
PKK sympathizers. 
 
 
¶5. Turkiye / A terrorist escaped from Kandil 
Mountain and applied to Turkish officials in 
Sirnak to benefit from the "reintegration" law. 
 
 
¶6. Zaman / According to the reports of the 
National Intelligence Office (MIT) and National 
Security Office, there are 3,000 foreign 
(secret) agents from 40 different countries in 
the southeast Turkey. Turkish officials 
expelled thirteen of these agents.  According 
to the reports, these agents are instigating 
the separatist issues in the area. (Editor's 
Note: The article doesn't state where or when 
the agents were expelled.) 
 
 
¶7. Turkiye, Ozgur Gundem / Ramazan Demir (75), who 
was shot by Turkish security forces, believing 
him to be a terrorist, died in Diyarbakir Dicle 
University Hospital at the weekend. He was 
wounded during the attack on Kovali Village, 
Derik, Mardin on October 13.  According to 
Ozgur Gundem, a large number of people attended 
Demir's funeral and shouted, "We are Apo fans," 
and "we don't regret." 
 
 
¶8. Yeni Safak / The case of six people, including 
a high school manager and 2 teachers, 
previously detained and released, commenced in 
Mus.  The Turkish Jandarma forces are accused 
of torturing them during their detention. 
 
 
¶9. Turkiye / A PKK/KADEK terrorist was found dead 
in Dicle, Diyarbakir province.  Security forces 
found 1 Kalashnikov rifle, 50 bullets, 2 
grenades and a pair of binoculars with the 
terrorist. 
 
 
¶10. Turkiye / In Nizip, Gaziantep province, 
Jandarma found 10 kg of marijuana and detained 
3 people for the incident. 
¶11. Turkiye / Petroleum Pipeline Corporation 
(BOTAS) pipeline in Demiryolu village, Batman 
province was the target of the thieves who 
stole some crude oil and escaped. The 
investigation still continues. 
 
 
¶12. Ozgur Gundem / PKK/KADEK attacked a Turkish 
Army helicopter in Kirkpinar, Dicle, Diyarbakir 
province and killed 7 soldiers and a KADEK 
member. 
 
 
¶13. Ozgur Gundem / In Barbaros district, Adana, 
police collected white "peace" flags from the 
shop windows prepared by the Democratic 
People's Party (DEHAP). In Diyarbakir, Ramazan 
Dengiz, Diyarbakir head of DEHAP, is being 
investigated for putting up a white flag on the 
DEHAP party building. 
REID