03ADANA278
SOUTHEAST TUREKY PRESS SUMMARY
Thu Oct 30 00:00:00 +0100 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 0278 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT:  SOUTHEAST TUREKY PRESS SUMMARY 
OCTOBER 28, 2003 
 
 
¶1. This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary 
for October 28, 2003.  Please note that Turkish 
press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch 
for the accuracy of the reports summarized 
here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
¶2. Turkiye, Cumhuriyet, Evrensel, Milliyet, Ozgur 
Gundem / DEHAP members in eight provinces went 
to court yesterday in order to use the letters 
"x, q and w", (which do not exist in Turkish 
alphabet), when naming children.   (Editor's 
Note: Turkish law permits giving children 
Kurdish names, but local registrars often 
refuse names with letters not found in the 
Turkish alphabet.) 
 
 
¶3. Cumhuriyet / Fourteen people in Cukurca, 
Hakkari province, accused the security forces 
of pulling them through animal feces because 
they were PKK/KADEK supporters.  Witnesses 
reported that the forces broke a man's hands 
and a woman's shoulders.  The group brought 
suit against the security forces involved in 
the incident. 
 
 
¶4. Evrensel / In Yellice village, Kurtalan, Siirt, 
village guards relinquished their guns on 
September 1, Peace Day, and announced that they 
are for peace. 
 
 
¶5. Milliyet / Mustafa Erkal will be the new 
governor of Tunceli.  Erkal was removed from 
his position by court order in February and 
applied to the high court to get his position 
back.  The High Court's decision will return 
him to the governorship. 
 
 
¶6. Bolge / There was a clash between the security 
forces and protesters during protests in Ova 
district, Adana province on October 27.  A 
group of people gathered on 2nd street in Ova 
district and shouted slogans praising Abdullah 
Ocalan.  People threw stones at the police and 
burned plastic tires.  Two police officers were 
wounded during the clash. 
REID