03ANKARA4950
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Aug 06 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 004950 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 6, 2003 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- - 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEALS 
Turkey Decides to Send Troops to Iraq - Hurriyet 
Troop Motion to Parliament in September - Milliyet 
Turkey to Send Team to Iraq to `Take the Pulse' of Iraqi 
Tribes - Sabah 
Unexpected Iraq Summit in Ankara - Turkiye 
A Blow to Uzans, This Time From Switzerland - Sabah 
Babacan: Turkish Delegation to Washington for talks on $8.5 
billion - Sabah 
Uzan Family in Shock - Milliyet 
Babacan: Don't Take Any Risks for Foreign Exchange 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Four Conditions for Troop Deployment in Iraq - Cumhuriyet 
Ankara: Troop Deployment Difficult Without a UN Decision - 
Radikal 
Military Risk Assessment At the Summit - Yeni Safak 
Five Conditions for Deployment of Turkish Troops in Iraq - 
Zaman 
High Court in Switzerland Reject's Uzans' Appeals - Zaman 
Uzan Family in Collapse - Yeni Safak 
Interest Rates Dropped, Eyes Turned to Central Bank - Yeni 
Safak 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
Iraq Summit: All papers and TV channels report on 
yesterday's `Iraq summit' at the Prime Ministry.  "Hurriyet" 
reports that Prime Minister Erdogan, Chief of General Staff 
General Ozkok, Interior Minister Aksu, Defense Minister 
Gonul, Foreign Minister Gul, FM Under Secretary Ziyal, and 
Intelligence Undersecretary Atasagun attended the two-hour 
meeting.  In a written statement released after the meeting, 
officials said they had made preliminary assessments about 
Iraq.  "Milliyet" reports that officials agreed in principle 
at the meeting that a new motion is needed for troop 
deployment in Iraq.  Parliament is expected to convene in an 
extraordinary session in September to address the troop 
issue.  The motion will be presented to the Parliament as a 
way `to contribute to Iraq's peace and stability.'  "Zaman" 
reports that officials analyzed the political and military 
risks of a possible deployment.  All participants agreed 
that Turkey cannot send troops to Iraq while Northern Iraq 
remains a threat to Turkish security.  According to "Zaman," 
Turkey will lay down five conditions for the sending of 
Turkish troops: Turkey will not be involved only in security 
matters but in political issues and the reconstruction of 
Iraq as well; Turkey will not send troops to Iraq before the 
PKK/KADEK threat in Northern Iraq is eliminated by the US; 
Turkey must convince regional and EU countries to support 
the deployment; an invitation is needed from members of the 
interim Iraqi Council including Barzani and Talabani; 
finally, the US must meet the expenses of the Turkish 
deployment.  While "Hurriyet" and "Milliyet" report that 
Turkey will send troops to Iraq, "Radikal" remains cautious, 
arguing that Ankara will insist on a UN decision first. 
 
 
Economic News: Turkey's papers continue to report on 
positive developments in the financial markets.  Economy 
Minister Babacan said that there are `no obstacles' standing 
in the way of the $8.5 billion credit freom the US.  A 
Turkish delegation will go to Washington August 18 to 
determine the conditions for the loans.'  Babacan added that 
the credit was not vital for Turkey, but noted that it would 
ease pressure on interest rates.  "Yeni Safak" reports that 
within one week interest rates on Treasury Bond has declined 
by 4.5 points.  Now it is expected that the Central Bank 
will respond to the positive mood in the markets by making 
further cuts in interest rates. 
 
 
The Uzan Family:  Today's papers report on a Swiss court 
decision to freeze the Uzans' $800 million in assets held by 
Swiss Banks.  Papers note that the decision came as a second 
blow to the Uzans, following a US court ruling against the 
family earlier this week.  Genc Party Leader Cem Uzan 
cancelled a planned meeting with party leaders, and the 
Isparta Genc Party provincial chairman and 62 party members 
resigned from the Party  "Vatan" reports that the Uzans' 
application to the Swiss Court revealed that the family had 
transferred much of its wealth abroad.  The Uzans have $800 
million in assets in Switzerland and $125 million in the US 
and Britain. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: Iraq 
 
 
"A new Vietnam syndrome" 
Zafer Atay commented in the economic-political Dunya (8/6): 
"The current situation in Iraq for the US is reminiscent of 
the `Vietnam syndrome' in the 1960s.  Yet the problems in 
Vietnam began after some years of a US presence there.  In 
Iraq, the problems started immediately after the US 
operation. . The initial planning for a post-war Iraq does 
not seem to be working.  The US was hoping to see a smooth 
transition period after the war, but now must deal with 
attacks against American soldiers. . It is interesting to 
read the comments of US soldiers serving in Iraq, who openly 
argue with the reasons for their presence there. The US is 
seeking military support from its allies, but has yet to 
receive an answer.  In the meantime, families in the US are 
marching to protest the loss of lives.  Moreover, the war 
budget for Iraq has become inadequate as monthly spending 
has jumped to 4 billion dollars.  These are all signals that 
the Vietnam syndrome has returned for the US." 
 
 
"Sending Turkish troops to Iraq" 
Kamuran Ozbir noted in the nationalist Ortadogu (8/6): 
"Before discussing whether or not to send Turkish troops to 
Iraq, we better analyze the situation there.  The Iraq case 
has proven the argument that the establishment of peace is 
more difficult than winning a war.  Washington has found 
itself in a serious deadlock, and the foreseeable future 
does not give much hope for democracy, peace, and stability. 
Under these circumstances, Turkey should not be in a hurry 
to send its troops to Iraq.  The decision process should 
weigh all the pros and cons.  Moreover, the US does not seem 
to be pushing Turkey for a quick decision." 
 
 
DEUTSCH