03ANKARA6197
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Oct 02 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 006197 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 2, 2003 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEALS 
Military objects to U.S. loan conditions - Hurriyet 
Robert Wexler urges Turkey to send troops to Iraq - Milliyet 
PM Erdogan: We'll decide on Iraq fast - Aksam 
Iraqi Intifadah: Unemployed Iraqis revolt - Hurriyet 
EU's Patten: Turkey essential for Iraqi rebuilding - 
Milliyet 
F-16 technology crisis between U.S., Turkey - Turkiye 
Verheugen: Turkey will become occupier if Cyprus is not 
resolved - Milliyet 
Israel continues construction of security barrier - Sabah 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Rumsfeld defends $87 billion additional Iraq budget at 
Congress - Radikal 
Jobless in Baghdad revolt, attack police - Radikal 
Military uneasy over U.S. loan conditions - Cumhuriyet 
U.S. hawks halt technology transfer to Turkey - Zaman 
Ret. Gen. Zinni: Heads must roll at the Pentagon - Yeni 
Safak 
Annan: Baath members should be in Iraqi government - 
Cumhuriyet 
Americans close Turkmen newspaper in Telafer - Zaman 
Chechens lose 400,000 victims in four years - Yeni Safak 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Military concerned about U.S. loan conditions:  Turkey's 
military leadership has grown uneasy that the $8.5 billion 
U.S. loan for Turkey is linked to Turkish military activity 
in Northern Iraq.  TGS Chief General Ozkok said at a 
reception to mark the reopening of the parliament Wednesday 
that he is not happy that the government has pledged to the 
U.S. that Turkey will stay out of Northern Iraq in return 
for a loan deal worth $8.5 billion.  The ruling party did 
not consult the military before agreeing to the condition, 
Ozkok said.  Other top military commanders said that 
economic agreements should not be linked to political 
conditions.  State Minister for the Economy Ali Babacan 
responded by saying that the conditions the U.S. Congress 
placed on the loan had been announced on April 16, and that 
the text of the agreement was available on the Internet. 
Ambassador Cofer Black and delegation in Ankara:  An 
American delegation led by State Department counter- 
terrorism coordinator Ambassador Cofer Black arrived in 
Ankara late Wednesday for talks with MFA officials on 
regional terrorism issues.  Ankara is expected to give the 
Americans the message that Turkey will take unilateral 
action if the U.S. fails to make concrete moves to eliminate 
the threat posed by the PKK/KADEK in Northern Iraq.  Ankara 
wants to retain the right of `hot pursuit' against the PKK. 
The Turks will ask the Americans to refrain from statements 
which might create an impression that Turkey is acting under 
U.S. pressure regarding the Iraq issue.  The Turks are also 
expected to press the Americans for a written agreement on 
the issue. 
President Sezer addresses the reopening of parliament: 
President Sezer addressed lawmakers at the reopening of the 
parliament on Wednesday, and noted that the Turkish 
Parliament that will decide about the deployment of 
peacekeepers abroad.  Sezer urged the effective 
implementation of EU reforms.  He said that the existence of 
the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC) should not be 
ignored if a solution is to be reached in Cyprus.  Sezer 
encouraged the government in its fight against corruption, 
and urged a transparent administration.  Parliamentary 
immunity for lawmakers should be restricted, he noted. 
Sezer also urged the government to adopt effective measures 
to renew trust in the banking system.  He dwelled on the 
significance of a pluralistic democracy, and warned the 
government to show restraint in using its authority. 
Dailies write that Sezer has `drawn a roadmap' for the AK 
Party by warning the government against overreaching in his 
90-minute speech. 
Pentagon blocking F-16 technology transfer to Turkey: 
Dailies cite U.S.-based "Defense News" in claiming that the 
Pentagon has warned BAE Systems North America not to 
transfer a state-of-the-art F-16 defense technology to 
Turkey.  Turkish defense industry officials and the military 
have grown uneasy over the attitude of the Pentagon on the 
issue.  Papers regard the U.S. policy as an economic 
sanction against Turkey, and believe that the U.S. is 
attempting to punish Ankara for its reluctance to deploy 
peacekeepers in Iraq. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: 
A)  Mideast 
B)  Iraq/US-Turkey 
 
 
"Israeli Pilots Are Rebelling" 
Zafer Atay commented in the economic-political "Dunya" 
(10/2): "A group of Israeli war pilots protested an order to 
attack civilian targets and criticized the Israeli 
occupation.  Both the wording and the nature of the protest 
require a careful analysis, and this is much too important 
to be called as an isolated action by individuals. . The 
Israeli government's current policy in dealing with 
terrorism is only serving to undermine peace and stability. 
Israel is keeping up its `war against terrorism' rhetoric, 
yet its policy is harming civilians, not terrorists. . 
Moreover, as a result of Israeli policy, Arafat has gained 
in prestige and become even more influential than before. 
Israel continues to make a big mistake by dreaming of 
eliminating terror by murdering Arafat.  Given the 
circumstances, the protest voiced by the Israeli pilots is 
extremely significant." 
 
 
"Humanitarian assistance or deployment of troops?" 
Soli Ozel wrote in the mass appeal "Sabah" (10/2): "The 
ruling AKP has so far failed to provide a tangible vision 
about Turkey's future in both domestic and foreign affairs. 
Urgent foreign policy issues highlight this inefficiency in 
a striking way.  The Cyprus issue continues to suffer from 
irrelevant remarks and inconsistent policies.  The Iraq 
issue is another example.  Turkey's Foreign Minister went to 
the US for consultations without being accompanied by the 
MFA's Undersecretary.  FM Gul's remarks from the US are 
reason to be frightened about the future.  We still don't 
understand whether or not the government wants to send 
troops to Iraq?  It is even unclear if the troop decision 
will be made before or after a UN resolution. . The Prime 
Minister and Foreign Minister should feel obliged to tell to 
Turkish public about their strategy, their policy approach, 
and their analysis of the situation." 
 
 
EDELMAN