03ANKARA2847
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu May 01 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002847 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, MAY 1, 2003 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
                    -------------------- 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEALS 
Government gives secularism guarantee-Sabah 
4 Important decisions from the NSC-Hurriyet 
Regime Warning-Milliyet 
NSC eases the Tension-Turkiye 
Rumsfeld in Baghdad-Milliyet 
Grossman Warns Kurds: Be careful in your approach-Hurriyet 
18-item Package from Greek Cypriots to Turkish Cypriots- 
Sabah 
Greek Cypriots open the Package-Milliyet 
Spring in the island-Turkiye 
 
 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
No Crisis at the NSC meeting-Zaman 
NSC draws attention to Secularism-Yeni Safak 
NSC: Secularism is the main issue-Radikal 
NSC warns AKP: Secularism should be defended-Cumhuriyet 
Barzani takes a step back-Cumhuriyet 
Britain does not want Turkey in the Peacekeeping Force- 
Radikal 
Grossman: Turkey did not mislead us in the North-Zaman 
Positive Step from the Greek Cypriots-Yeni Safak 
Dialog becomes stronger in Cyprus-Zaman 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Earthquake: An earthquake measuring 6.4 on the Richter scale 
shook southeastern Bingol province at 3:27 this morning. 
The epicenter of the quake is near the city center of 
Bingol.  The death toll is already over 100, and the number 
is likely to increase.  Many buildings collapsed in the 
city, and more than 400 people have been injured. 
 
 
NSC: "Zaman" reports that yesterday's NSC meeting did not 
turn into a conflict, as was feared by many.  During the 7.5 
hour meeting, the military drew attention to the need to 
protect secularism instead of issuing warnings about 
fundamentalism.  A declaration released at the end of the 
meeting said that `the importance of secularism, one of the 
basic characteristics of the republic, and the need for 
protecting secularism carefully was stressed'.  The three 
other issues in the declaration were developments in Iraq 
and Cyprus, and Turkey's energy pipelines. 
 
 
Iraq: "Hurriyet" reports that US Assistant Secretary Marc 
Grossman warned the Kurds to be careful in their approach to 
Turkey, and also about their policy toward PKK-KADEK 
militants.  "Zaman" quotes Grossman as saying that `During 
his Washington visit PM Erdogan made no promises for a US 
troop deployment.  No Turkish leader could make any promises 
at that time because that decision required the Parliament's 
approval'.  "Radikal" reports that Britain has begun the 
work of establishing a peacekeeping force in Iraq.  Turkey, 
however, has not been asked to participate in this force. 
Ankara is disturbed by this decision and has already 
informed the British Embassy in Ankara of Turkey's 
disappointment. 
 
 
Cyprus:  "Turkiye" gives extensive front-page coverage to 
the rapprochement on the island.  People of both sides 
continue to take advantage of free passage.  They have 
proved that the dispute between the governments is not a 
problem for the people, according to "Turkiye."  "Sabah" 
reports that the Turkish Cypriot decision on free passage 
forced the Greek side to make some concessions too, and the 
Greeks announced a new set of measures yesterday.  The 
package offers employment possibilities to the Turks, and 
gives them the right to vote in Greek Cypriot elections and 
to run for seats in the Cypriot Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: 
 
 
a) Iraqi rebuilding 
b) Turkish foreign policy 
 
 
"Rebuilding Iraq" 
Soli Ozel wrote in mass appeal Sabah (45/1): "The Bush 
administration continues to take radical steps in both 
foreign and domestic policy.  The post-September 11 
psychology has to a certain extent deprived the American 
people of some basic rights and freedoms. Internationally 
speaking, the US is pursuing a policy of `preemptive 
strikes', which calls for the continuation of American 
military strength.  . It will be interesting to see whether 
the current US policy will work in the rebuilding of Iraq. 
The rebuilding efforts will eventually have an impact on the 
Middle East process as well. . Despite all of the power and 
authority of the United States, the Iraq case is subject to 
a series of benchmark tests.  The first test is how to shape 
a new structure on the relics of the old system, and whether 
that can really work.  Second, the US success in rebuilding 
Iraq depends not only on the US, but also the decisions to 
be taken by the `other actors' in Iraq.  The US will 
eventually have to cooperate with its allies as well as 
regional actors as part of this process." 
 
 
"A warning for the Turkish foreign policy" 
Yilmaz Oztuna warned in conservative-mass appeal Turkiye 
(5/1): "Turkey, whether intentional or not, is making a 
mistake by its current contacts with Iran and Syria.  Let's 
not forget that the US is Turkey's ally, whereas both Iran 
and Syria are not.  Moreover, the US listed both of them as 
terrorist states, and both of them will eventually face an 
American intervention.  . Reading history will tell us 
enough about how `one-sided love affairs' between states end 
up disastrously.  Unfortunately, religiously-based movements 
always ignore this fact." 
 
 
PEARSON