03ANKARA7933
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Dec 24 00:00:00 +0100 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 007933 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 24, 2003 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Qaddafi calls on others to dismantle WMD programs - Milliyet 
Missile shield over Washington, New York - Milliyet 
Talabani confident Iraq will become a federation - Sabah 
Vazir, Hochburg AG companies financing terror - US Treasury 
- Aksam 
Ankara wants changes to Annan Plan - Hurriyet 
Saddam's `spider hole' to be taken to US - Sabah 
FM Gul to meet Turkey's EU envoys - Turkiye 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
TRNC parliament deadlocked - Cumhuriyet 
Rumsfeld's dirty past with Saddam - Radikal 
IBDA-C on EU terror list, `new' PKK still out - Zaman 
Iran, Libya accept investigation, Israel's nuclear capacity 
still a mystery - Zaman 
Terror fear prevails in US - Cumhuriyet 
UBP leader Eroglu takes U-turn on Annan Plan - Radikal 
UBP's Eroglu: Annan Plan negotiable - Radikal 
Israel attacks civilians again: 8 dead - Zaman 
Israel raids Palestinian refugee camp, 8 dead - Radikal 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Cyprus:  In a change of rhetoric, UBP leader and outgoing 
TRNC Prime Minister Dervis Eroglu said the Annan Plan is 
negotiable.  Turkish dailies were surprised by Eroglu's 
change in tone.  Eroglu, just like Turkish Cypriot leader 
Denktas,  has been a staunch opponent of the Annan Plan. 
Denktas is expected to designate a new prime minister 
following the oath-taking ceremony on Friday.  The UBP and 
CTP leaders have given moderate messages of compromise, and 
DP leader Serdar Denktas vowed to extend unconditional 
support to a coalition under Eroglu's leadership. 
Meanwhile, in an effort to contribute to a peaceful solution 
to the Cyprus problem, Turkey's ambassadors to 15 EU 
countries and the Turkish Ambassador to the United States 
will meet in Ankara on December 25-26 to discuss Cyprus. 
 
 
EU list of terror organizations:  The EU is expected to 
announce today a new list of terrorist organizations. 
Ankara is worried that the PKK/KADEK and its successor, KHK, 
are not included in the list.  The EU reviewed the list on 
December 15 in light of alleged Al-Qaeda connections to the 
recent bombings in Istanbul.  A recent report released by 
Europol said that organizations linked to Al-Qaeda regard EU 
countries as bases for logistical support and a vast pool of 
potential militant recruits. 
 
 
74.4 percent of Turks want EU Membership:  According to an 
opinion poll conducted by Bosphorus University, which 
sampled the views of 2,123 people in 20 provinces, 74.4 
percent of Turks want to join the EU.  However, 45 percent 
are concerned that EU membership could reduce Turkey's 
national sovereignty.  Researchers believe the AK Party had 
been successful in convincing its grassroots to support 
Turkey's EU aspiration. 
 
 
Turkey, Greece reach energy agreement:  Caspian Sea basin 
natural gas will be delivered to Europe via Greece, papers 
report.  Turkey's Energy Minister Guler signed an energy 
agreement with Greek Oil Minister Tsohatzopoulos on Tuesday. 
Tsohatzopoulos said the agreement would enable Turkey to 
 
SIPDIS 
become established in the European energy market.  The EU 
will need 100 billion cubic meters of natural gas after 
2005, according to reports.  The Turkish press characterized 
the deal as the first step for Turkey to establish itself as 
an `energy bridge' to Europe. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: Libya; Iraq 
 
 
"The Libya Example" 
Sami Kohen commented in mass appeal Millyet (12/24): "The 
surprisingly rational and realistic new approach by Qadhafi 
is comforting news for the whole world.  More importantly, 
it is such a good Christmas gift for Bush and Blair.  . The 
Libyan leader apparently felt strong pressure mounting 
against his isolation policies, and figured out that he must 
change his stance on WMD and terrorism in the post-war era. 
He made a clever move by establishing a dialogue with the 
Western world instead of defying it.  Unlike Saddam Hussein, 
Qadhafi corrected his mistakes in time.  The Libya example 
also proves that diplomacy is still the best option for 
resolving international disputes, a method that was not used 
in the case of Iraq." 
 
 
"US and Kurds" 
Fatih Altayli warned in mass appeal Hurriyet (12/24): 
"Turkey's reaction against  developments in Iraq, 
particularly with regard to the Iraqi Kurds, is sometimes 
very paranoid.  Sometimes we worry without even considering 
the realities and seeing the nuances.  If you read the 
headlines in the Turkish papers, Turkey is now worried about 
the establishment of a federal Kurdistan.  The headline- 
makers are unfortunately taking into account only the 
statements from the Iraqi Kurds.  In reality, it is going to 
be all Iraqis -- not only the Kurds -- who will determine 
Iraq's future. . In reality, the Iraqi Kurds are seeking a 
federal Kurdish state and expect US support in exchange for 
the  support they gave the US during the war.  At this 
point, this is only a hope for the Kurds, because there is 
no evidence that the US supports the idea.  Moreover, the US 
does not have a clear plan for Iraq yet.  Turkey should 
enhance its bilateral ties with the US and exert its 
regional influence.  It seems that everybody but Turkey 
realizes that nothing can happen contrary to Turkey's 
desire." 
 
 
EDELMAN