03ANKARA5774
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Sep 11 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 005774 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: 
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 11, 2003 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- - 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEALS 
Two Years After September 11 - Hurriyet 
Chalabi Will Not Ask Turkey For Troops - Hurriyet 
Chalabi To Ask For 10,000 Turkish Troops For Western Iraq - 
Sabah 
Ambassador Edelman: Credit Issue to be Finalized in Dubai 
-Sabah 
Guarantee From Edelman Against Terrorism - Sabah 
Denktas Plan versus Annan Plan - Milliyet 
US Delegation to Discuss PKK in Ankara - Milliyet 
Edelman: President Bush Promised to Eliminate the PKK - 
Turkiye 
FM Gul Says Annan Plan Can Be Re-Discussed - Hurriyet 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Bush's Rating at its Lowest Two Years After September 11 - 
Yeni Safak 
Edelman: Details of US Credit After Dubai Meetings - Yeni 
Safak 
The Day That Changed The World - Yeni Safak 
Two Delegations For Iraq - Radikal 
The Day That Rocked the World - Cumhuriyet 
An Anniversary Video From Bin-Laden - Cumhuriyet 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Anniversary of September 11 Attacks:  All papers note that 
today marks the second anniversary of the horrific attacks 
of September 11, 2001.  "Cumhuriyet" notes that September 11 
was the day that rocked the earth and caused the American 
people to lose their trust in their future and security. 
Meanwhile, Al Jazeera TV broadcast a new tape reported to 
contain Osama Bin-Laden and his deputy Al-Zavahiri praising 
the September 11 attacks and calling on Iraqis to fight 
against the Americans. 
 
 
US Delegation Comes to Turkey to Discuss PKK/KADEK:  All 
papers and TV channels report that a delegation from the US 
State Department will arrive in Ankara today for meetings 
tomorrow with Turkish officials.  "Vatan" notes that the 
visit represents the first step in cooperation between 
Turkey and the US to eliminate the PKK/KADEK presence in 
northern Iraq.  Following his meeting yesterday with 
Parliament Speaker Arinc, Ambassador Edelman reminded that 
President Bush has promised to eliminate PKK/KADEK, and 
confirmed that a US delegation will come to Turkey to 
discuss this issue.' 
 
 
Ahmet Chalabi in Ankara Today:  "Sabah" reports that the 
chairman of the Iraqi Interim Council Ahmet Chalabi comes to 
Ankara today to request Turkish troops.  Chalabi's spokesman 
had already indicated that the Council would welcome 10,000 
Turkish troops to be deployed outside of the Kurdish region, 
in western Iraq, under a UN umbrella.  "Sabah" draws 
attention to Chalabi's remarks, which appear to contradict 
this claim.  At a press conference yesterday in Baghdat, 
Chalabi reportedly said that he will not request troops from 
Turkey.  Calabi pointed out that the Iraqi Interim Council's 
policy is not to bring more foreign forces to the country, 
but rather to reduce the number of foreign forces currently 
in Iraq. 
 
 
$8.5 Billion U.S.Credit:   Following his meeting with the 
Turkish Agriculture Minister,  U.S. Ambassador Edelman said 
that details concerning the $8.5 billion loan will be 
clarified at the IMF-World Bank meeting in Dubai on 
September 23-24.  "Zaman" reports that markets were 
encouraged by positive signs on the credit, and that the 
central bank had to intervene to prevent a further decline 
in the value of the dollar. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: 9/11 
 
 
"Lessons of September 11" 
Sami Kohen wrote in mass appeal Milliyet (9/11): "After 
9/11, terrorism has become an international phenomenon.  It 
is not only a serious threat against the US, but for the 
whole world.  Any country should be able to take measures to 
protect itself.  Yet the fact of the matter is that the 
fight against terrorism cannot be achieved solely through 
military means.  The reasons for terrorism should be 
evaluated, and necessary economic, social and political 
steps should be taken as well." 
 
 
"Weakness and Dauntlessness" 
Fikret Ertan argued in the Islamist-intellectual Zaman 
(9/11): "The perpetrators of 9/11 were targeting the US- 
Israel alliance.  The attack proved the incompetence of 
American intelligence units.  Although the 9/11 attack 
occurred during the Bush administration, real responsibility 
should be given to the Clinton administration, which failed 
to monitor Al-Qaeda and to take preventive measures. 
However, the Bush administration has continued to make poor 
policy choices and to implement practices that cannot be 
justified.  . Unfortunately, even today the US continues to 
ignore the rest of the world and move forward unilaterally." 
 
 
"Thoughts on September 11" 
Fehmi Koru wrote in the Islamist-intellectual Yeni Safak 
(9/11): "In the post-September 11 era, the world has become 
more vulnerable to terrorism.  Today the international 
equilibrium stands at a new low.  The US ignores and 
neglects important human values such as democracy, human 
rights and the supremacy of law.  Blood, tears and agony 
have become the symbols of 9/11." 
 
 
"The Ominous Day" 
Soli Ozel wrote in the mass appeal Sabah (9/11): "9/11 was 
an assault against the US, but also against the world 
system. The US has thus supported the entire world system 
through its steps to protect world order.  After September 
11, the United States had a unique opportunity to forge 
worldwide cooperation on this issue.  It is therefore 
unfortunate the policy to deal with the issue was shaped by 
the neo-conservatives in the American administration. . 
Europe has also made a mistake by remaining aloof from the 
issue.  In this atmosphere, the US was drunk with its own 
power, a condition which led to the unilateral war against 
Iraq.  The US interpreted the 9/11 correctly at the 
beginning, but later began implementing the wrong kinds of 
remedies to deal with it." 
 
 
EDELMAN