03ANKARA3798
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Jun 11 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 003798 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, JUNE 11, 2003 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
----------------- 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEALS 
Powell thanks Gul - Aksam 
Powell sends letter of appreciation to Gul - Milliyet 
Hamas leader escapes seven missiles - Aksam 
White House angered by killing attempt by Israel - Vatan 
U.S. insists on Annan plan for Cyprus - Turkiye 
TGS tough on Athens: Don't provoke us - Hurriyet 
Athens heating up the Aegean - Milliyet 
Armenian Diaspora's insurance trick - Hurriyet 
NATO plans to carry Naples base to Izmir - Sabah 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
U.S. shapes new regimes in Afghanistan, Iraq, Palestine - 
Cumhuriyet 
UK disagrees with U.S. on Iran - Cumhuriyet 
Missiles hit road map - Radikal 
Rantisi vows to continue fighting - Yeni Safak 
U.S. tells EU to support GOT - Zaman 
Bin Hussein, a `king' in Baghdad - Radikal 
AP: 3,420 civilian casualties in Iraq - Cumhuriyet 
Egypt imposes visa on Turkish visitors - Yeni Safak 
 
 
FINANCIAL JOURNALS 
Central Bank foresees 25 percent inflation in 2003 - Dunya 
Italian investors to Turkey in Fall - Finansal Forum 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Powell letter to Gul: Secretary Powell has written a letter 
to Foreign Minister Gul, praising him for calling on the 
Islamic world to move toward democracy, transparency and 
human rights at the Organization for Islamic Conference 
(OIC) summit in Tehran last month.  Dailies regard the 
`warm' letter by Powell as an indication of easing tensions 
in U.S.-Turkey relations. 
 
 
Armenians might demand compensation from Turkey: The 
Assembly of Turkish-American Associations (ATAA) said that 
some insurance policies given to Armenians during the 
Ottoman period are currently being held by American and 
French insurance companies, "Hurriyet" reports.  The 
Governor of California, Gray Davis, has announced that he 
believes the papers are still effective, and ATAA warns that 
Turkey might be obliged to pay billions of dollars to 
Armenians. 
 
 
U.S. urges the EU to back Turkey: U.S. Special Cyprus 
Coordinator Thomas Weston said at meetings with EU officials 
Verheugen and Solana in Brussels on Tuesday that the EU 
should extend support to the Turkish government's reform 
efforts.  Weston also voiced support for the EU financial 
aid package for Turkish Cypriots, and urged Ankara to exert 
pressure on Denktas to continue with the UN-sponsored peace 
plan. 
 
 
Iraqi business delegation in SE Turkey: Mosul's Turkmen 
deputy governor Ibrahim Arafat, accompanied by a 40-strong 
delegation of Iraqi businessmen, paid a business visit to 
Turkey's southeastern border town of Sirnak.  The Iraqi 
delegation conveyed to Turkish officials and businessmen a 
message of goodwill and cooperation from Mosul's Arab 
governor, who has urged Turks to pursue increased levels of 
bilateral trade. 
 
 
TGS rejects  `harassment' allegation: Dailies cite Greek 
press reports claiming a vast increase in Turkish military 
jets' violation of Greek airspace.  The Greek defense 
minister reportedly complained that dialogue with Turkish 
politicians has produced no results because political 
control in Turkey remains in the hands of the military.  A 
TGS statement said on Tuesday that a military jet passing a 
passenger plane at a ten kilometer distance cannot be 
defined as harassment.  Dailies speculate that Athens is 
playing a game to ensure that the Aegean dispute is carried 
to the EU agenda. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: 
Middle East/US policy in the post war Iraq 
 
 
"Where do we stand on the Pax Americana?" 
Yilmaz Oztuna warned in the mass appeal-conservative Turkiye 
(6/11): "Sometimes it is very hard for nations to comprehend 
the realities of international politics, even though these 
realities present themselves very clearly.  The `Pax 
Americana' is a reality of this century that will continue 
to increase in importance because it has not yet been 
concluded.  Take Syria, for example, which used to be 
strongly anti-American.  Today, however, the Damascus regime 
has completely changed its tune. . Eventually, both Saudi 
Arabia and Syria will bow to US policies without the need 
for a war.  There will inevitably be, however, a military 
operation against Iran.  Yet Iran too will eventually 
reconcile with the US.  After Iran, the US focus will be on 
the Asian continent in an effort to expand the Pax 
Americana.  It is worrying to see that many in Turkey keep 
their heads under the sand and remain blind to world 
realities." 
 
 
"Yet another test for US-Turkey relations" 
Cuneyt Ulsever stated in mass appeal Hurriyet (6/11): 
"Turkish-American relations are on the eve of another test. 
The US will give Turkey a litmus test, especially on Iran, 
Syria, and the Israel-Palestinian dispute in connection with 
the American plan to reshape the Middle East region. . In 
the US view, Iran and Syria have anti-American regimes that 
incite terrorism.  There is still a chance to change both 
regimes without the need for a military operation.  A new 
order for the Middle East requires a lasting solution to the 
Israel-Palestine issue. . Thus the visit of Undersecretary 
Ziyal to Washington will take place at a very critical time, 
especially for the future of Turkish-American relations. 
The US is looking for a clear and precise stance from Turkey 
with regard to Iran and Syria. . Turkey failed to pass the 
credibility test before, and it remains to be seen what the 
result will be this time." 
 
 
PEARSON