03ANKARA6997
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY
Fri Nov 07 00:00:00 +0100 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

071451Z Nov 03UNCLAS ANKARA 006997 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU IZ ADANA
SUBJECT: SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY 
NOVEMBER 7, 2003 
 
 
¶1. This is the Southeastern Turkey press 
summary for November 7, 2003.  Please note that 
Turkish press reports often contain errors or 
exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch 
for the accuracy of the reports summarized 
here. 
 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
 
¶2. Milliyet, Radikal, Ozgur Gundem / A Swedish 
Social Democrat human rights commission 
delegation visited Diyarbakir and Mardin. 
During the delegation's visit with Mardin 
Governor Temel Kocaklar, Anne Ludvigsson, head 
of the delegation, stated that the EU 
Harmonization Package is not being actively 
applied in Turkey. 
 
 
¶3. Sabah, Radikal, Ozgur Gundem, Yeni Safak / The 
court hearing in the case of a woman allegedly 
raped by 405 soldiers in 1993-1994 commenced on 
November 5 in Mardin.  The Mardin Court 
commission wanted to hear the testimony from 
the doctor who approved report, confirming use 
of torture.  The hearing will recommence on 
December 11. 
 
 
¶4. Turkiye, Evrensel / In Bingol on November 5, 
during Turkish army operations, three KADEK 
terrorists and one Turkish army officer were 
killed, while two KADEK terrorists and three 
Turkish army officers were wounded.  Turkiye 
also reports that two KADEK terrorists were 
captured with their guns and important 
documents. 
 
 
¶5. Ozgur Gundem / In Mus and Mersin, seven people 
were arrested because they joined in a meeting 
organized for peace. 
 
 
¶6. Ozgur Gundem / Hasan Fidan, a Van village 
guard, was arrested and put in jail because he 
allegedly raped a disabled woman in Yankitepe, 
Ercis, Van province. 
 
 
¶7. Hurriyet / Hatay Governor Abdullah Sari 
announced that the Syrian and Turkish 
governments have made arrangements to invite 
approximately 5000 people from both countries 
to get together with their relatives and 
celebrate the Ramadan festival in Reyhanli. 
The Turkish government will be hosting these 
5000 people. 
 
 
¶8. Turkiye / At the Cilvegozu border gate, 
Reyhanli, Hatay, police found 75.5 kg of 
heroine, and detained Yunus Ucak as a suspect 
in the incident. 
 
 
¶9. Evrensel / Adana Human Rights Organization 
prison spokesman Ethem Acikalin announced that 
prisoners in Kurkculer prison are 
systematically being tortured. 
 
 
¶10. Cumhuriyet / In Tunceli, approximately 700 
high school students, along with some DEHAP 
members, attempted to close a main road in 
order to make a press release protesting AKP 
education policy.  Police warned the group and 
detained some of the protestors, including 
DEHAP Tunceli head Alican Unlu. 
EDELMAN