03ANKARA2234
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Apr 07 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002234 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, APRIL 7, 2003 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
                         ------- 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Ankara gives Mosul, Kirkuk note to U.S. - Hurriyet 
`Friendly fire' massacre in N. Iraq: 18 peshmerge killed - 
Milliyet 
Powell asked for action, three Iraqi diplomats expelled - 
Hurriyet 4/6 
U.S. troops in Baghdad - Milliyet 4/6 
Saddam on Baghdad streets - Sabah 4/5 
Enraged Shiites attack Saddam statue - Sabah 
First U.S. plane lands at Baghdad airport - Vatan 
Gul, Kharrazi discuss the `new' Middle East - Turkiye 
Kharrazi: If Turkey enters N. Iraq, we'll do the same - 
Aksam 
Baghdad lies - Aksam 4/5 
Tough decision awaits AKP on `Milli Gorus' - Hurriyet 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Northern Front opens with `friendly fire' - Radikal 
`Friendly fire' on Barzani - Yeni Safak 
Baghdad siege tightening - Cumhuriyet 
Civilian convoys flee Baghdad - Radikal 4/6 
Bush: Iraqi people run to freedom - Zaman 4/6 
Post-Iraq scenarios deepen rift between Powell and hawks - 
Radikal 4/6 
Invaders encounter fierce resistance in Baghdad - Cumhuriyet 
4/6 
Baghdad resists - Yeni Safak 
A defiant Saddam on Baghdad streets - Cumhuriyet 4/5 
Allies knock on Baghdad's door - Radikal 4/5 
Peshmerges advance on Mosul, Kirkuk - Radikal 4/5 
Bush: Northern Front opened - Zaman 
Iran, Turkey share concern on Iraq's future - Zaman 
Death, smoke on Baghdad streets - Zaman 4/6 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Iraq: Worried about the Kurds' advance on Mosul and Kirkuk, 
Ankara presented a note of protest to Washington, saying 
that Turkey would not hesitate to intervene if peshmerges 
attempt to seize the oil-rich Northern Iraqi towns, 
"Hurriyet" reports.  Iranian Foerign Minister Kharrazi, in 
Ankara for meetings on Northern Iraq and the Kurdish issue, 
said that tripartite consultation on Iraq between Turkey, 
Iran and Syria should be reactivated.  Kharrazi stressed at 
a joint press conference with FM Gul on Sunday that Iran is 
against a separate state in northern or southern Iraq.  He 
also voiced objection to any third country intervention in 
Northern Iraq, and warned that Iran would follow suit if 
Turkey sends troops to the region.  A high-level Iranian 
delegation is expected in Ankara in the coming weeks. 
Ankara declared three Iraqi diplomats persona non grata for 
activities beyond their diplomatic authority.  Iraqi Embassy 
First and Second Secretaries Mohamad Hikmat Ibrahim and 
Sabah Al-Duri, and deputy Commercial Counselor Ahmad Matloub 
were notified to leave Turkey by April 9.  Dailies agree 
that the Iraqis are being expelled in line with the demand 
of Secretary Powell, who was in Ankara last week. 
Mainstream papers over the weekend see the allies' taking 
over the Baghdad airport as a strategic victory for 
coalition forces, and a psychological defeat for the Iraqi 
army.  Monday's "Sabah" reports that Shiite residents of 
Kerbela took down a five-meter bronze statue of Saddam after 
U.S. and UK troops took control of the city.  The Shiites 
gave water and food to U.S. troops.  Saturday's papers 
report a circular by the Turkish police, warning that Al- 
Qaida has been preparing since November 2002 for attacks 
against U.S. and Israeli targets in Turkey through an 
Iranian-origin terror organization.   Meanwhile, 50,000 
demonstrators from NGOs, unions, pro-Kurdish, and leftist 
parties rallied against the war in Istanbul. 
 
 
Germany, Turkey agreement on `Milli Gorus': "Hurriyet" 
expects a heated debate in the parliament on the German- 
Turkish agreement which labeled the Islamist `Milli Gorus' 
(National View) organization as a terror network.  The 
agreement was sent by the MFA to the parliament for 
approval.  The justification signed by Foreign Minister Gul 
says that `Milli Gorus' should be outlawed.  `Milli Gorus' 
is a German-based, financially powerful Islamist 
organization which is strongly affiliated to Necmettin 
Erbakan and his Virtue Party (SP), and has been under tight 
scrutiny for years by the German police for alleged ties to 
international terror organizations and illicit fundraising 
activities in Germany.  AKP deputies coming from the `Milli 
Gorus' movement voiced strong criticism of the agreement and 
said labeling the group a `terrorist' organization is 
unacceptable.  Pro-Islamic papers see the attempt as 
`treason,' and believe the agreement will not be approved by 
the parliament. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Post war scenarios / Turkey-Iran 
 
 
"Questions about Iraq's future" 
Intellectual-social democrat Cumhuriyet carried this front- 
page editorial opinion (4/7): "What is going to happen after 
the war?  It remains to be seen if the US, as an occupying 
force, will be able to establish a stable order not only in 
Iraq, but also in the region.  Otherwise, a wave of terror 
throughout the region is a high probability. .  It is no 
longer a secret that the US intention is actually not 
limited to Iraq, and many commentators are speculating about 
Iran, Syria, and some other Islamic countries on the list. 
This scenario recognizes the presence of a colossal American 
empire in the region, and Turkey better think clearly about 
its stance and policies, without excluding any possible 
development." 
 
 
"Iranian FM visit is a dangerous development" 
Ufuk Guldemir opined in sensational Haberturk (4/7): "From 
the very beginning of the Iraq issue, Ankara has mishandled 
the crisis.  Yet recent developments also bring the question 
to one's mind if this mishandling is deliberate, and whether 
the government's real purpose is to change Turkey's western 
orientation and direct Turkey's face toward the Middle East. 
. The sudden visit by the Iranian Foreign Minister to Ankara 
is an alarming negative development.  Giving the appearance 
of an alliance with Iran clearly puts Turkey in the anti- 
western league.  The praise from the Iranian FM about 
Turkish foreign policy is also something that should worry 
us.  What is the purpose of Ankara policy-makers?  Are they 
going to form an anti-western alliance with Syria and Iran? 
Let's not forget that both of them are on the US target 
list. . The current policy being pursued by Ankara alienates 
Turkey from western ideals and orientation." 
 
 
PEARSON