03HARARE1419
MEDIA REACTION PRESIDENT BUSH'S VISIT TO AFRICA;
Fri Jul 11 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

110943Z Jul 03UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HARARE 001419 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/PDPA FOR DALTON, MITCHELL AND SIMS 
NSC FOR JENDAYI FRAZER 
LONDON FOR GURNEY 
PARIS FOR NEARY 
NAIROBI FOR PFLAUMER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO KMDR ZI
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION PRESIDENT BUSH'S VISIT TO AFRICA; 
HARARE 
 
 
  ¶1.   There has been an outpouring of articles, op-ed and 
      opinion pieces in the mainstream newspapers 
      following talks on Zimbabwe between President George 
      ¶W. Bush and his South African counterpart Thabo 
      Mbeki, including President Bush's visit to Botswana, 
      in the leading newspapers published on July 11. 
      Excerpts of the articles follow: 
 
  ¶2.   Under headline "Bush's statement a shift in U. S. 
      policy? the government-controlled daily "Chronicle" 
      (07/11) carried the following op-ed by Kennedy 
      Mavhumasha on page 4: 
 
      "United States President, George W. Bush this week 
      performed a quick climb-down from his earlier anti- 
      Zimbabwe rhetoric, but analysts say he must now 
      match his public statements with practical measures 
      to normalize diplomatic relations with Harare. . 
      .But political analysts interviewed. . .yesterday 
      were quick to point out that the government should 
      give it time, as the U. S. President's words might 
      fail to translate into a shift in his country's 
      policy towards Zimbabwe. . .Dr. Godfrey Chikowore, a 
      University of Zimbabwe international relations 
      lecturer said: `The change is welcome but we want to 
      see if the statement was one of principle and not 
      just a matter of buying time. . .It will be unwise 
      for us to bank on statements and promises.  Let us 
      give him time. . .'  A lecturer at the National 
      University of Science and Technology, Dr. Lawton 
      Hikwa, said: `It is difficult to say at the moment 
      but there is a significant appreciation that 
      whatever Mr. Bush has heard about the situation here 
      was exaggerated.  Perhaps as time goes on, we could 
      see some objectivity. . . .'" 
 
  ¶3.   Under headline "Visit gives Bush rude awakening" the 
      government-controlled daily "The Herald" (07/11) 
      carried the following analysis by Lovemore Mataire 
      on page 9: 
 
      "United States President Mr. George W. Bush's image 
      making visit to Africa suffered a major setback when 
      he openly expressed confidence in South African 
      President Mr. Thabo Mbeki's mediation in Zimbabwe. 
      Mr. Bush's statements were in sharp contrast to his 
      and that of his Secretary of State Mr. Collin (sic) 
      Powell's earlier statements urging South Africa to 
      exert more pressure on Zimbabwe to have a 
      transitional arrangement in place. . .Mr. Bush's 
      endorsement of Mr. Mbeki as an `honest broker' in 
      Zimbabwe fell short of admitting that he had been 
      misled about the real situation prevailing in the 
      country. . .Cautious of not treading on unpopular 
      track, Mr. Bush found himself with no option but to 
      back down from his previous hard-line stance towards 
      President Mugabe. . .But Mr. Bush's public support 
      for Mbeki's Zimbabwe policy appeared to mark a 
      personal defeat for (Morgan) Tsvangirai (MDC 
      leader), who has criticized the South African leader 
      for `choosing to be in solidarity with a 
      dictator. . . .'" 
 
  ¶4.   Under headline "Where will Tsvangirai turn to now?" 
      the independent daily "The Daily News" (07/11) carried the 
      following opinion piece by Kuthula Matshazi, who is based 
      in Toronto, Canada, on page 10: 
 
      "South African President Thabo Mbeki's words are 
      coming back to haunt us.  The resolution of 
      Zimbabwe's problems lies squarely with Zimbabweans. 
      United States President George W. Bush implicitly 
      endorsed this view when he met with Mbeki on 
      Wednesday in South Africa. . .Where will Tsvangirai 
      turn to now that Bush has embraced Mbeki's position? 
      In other words, Bush has told Tsvangirai to deal 
      with Mbeki. . . ." 
 
  ¶5.   Under headline "MDC leader bows to Uncle Sam's might" 
      the government-controlled daily "Chronicle" (07/11) carried 
      the following article on page one: 
 
      "Opposition MDC leader Morgan Tsvangirai was 
      yesterday forced to withdraw `angry' remarks he made 
      against President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa after 
      the United States endorsed Pretoria's quiet 
      diplomacy on Zimbabwe.  Tsvangirai. . .back-tracked 
      on his earlier outburst in which he accused Mbeki of 
      being `mischievous' and trying to `buy time' for the 
      Zimbabwe government.  His climb-down came following 
      the announcement by President George W. Bush that 
      the U. S. was now of `one mind' with South Africa 
      and would leave Mbeki the task of helping resolve 
      Zimbabwe's challenges. . . ." 
 
  ¶6.   Under headline "Botswana backs Zim: `. . .no need for 
      outsiders to interfere in Zimbabwe's problem's'" the lead 
      article in the government-controlled daily "The Herald" 
      (07.11) reads: 
 
      "Botswana sees no need for outsiders to interfere in 
      the problems affecting Zimbabwe.  Minister of 
      Foreign Affairs Mr. Mombati Merafe said soon after 
      the meeting between President George Bush. . .and 
      President Festus Mogae of Botswana that Zimbabwe was 
      a sovereign state with a government which came into 
      place through a legitimate process adding that the 
      situation in the country required persuasion and 
      that no one should dictate what should be done.  Mr. 
      Merafe stressed that the position of Zimbabwe has 
      not changed and the visit by the U. S. President to 
      Botswana and the region in general would not change, 
      alter or influence the cordial bilateral relations 
      between Zimbabwe and Botswana.  The U. S. President 
      yesterday expressed satisfaction and concurred with 
      President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa's policy of 
      quiet diplomacy on Zimbabwe. . . ." 
 
SULLIVAN