03KUWAIT2522
DART UPDATE ON AL MUTHANNA
Sun Jun 08 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kuwait
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 KUWAIT 002522 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE ALSO PASS USAID/W 
STATE PLEASE REPEAT TO IO COLLECTIVE 
STATE FOR PRM/ANE, EUR/SE, NEA/NGA, IO AND SA/PAB 
NSC FOR EABRAMS, SMCCORMICK, STAHIR-KHELI, JDWORKEN 
USAID FOR USAID/A, DCHA/AA, DCHA/RMT, DCHA/FFP 
USAID FOR DCHA/OTI, DCHA/DG, ANE/AA 
USAID FOR DCHA/OFDA:WGARVELINK, BMCCONNELL, KFARNSWORTH 
USAID FOR ANE/AA:WCHAMBERLIN 
ROME FOR FODAG 
GENEVA FOR RMA AND NKYLOH 
ANKARA FOR AMB WRPEARSON, ECON AJSIROTIC AND DART 
AMMAN FOR USAID AND DART 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREF IZ WFP
SUBJECT:  DART UPDATE ON AL MUTHANNA 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED - PROTECT ACCORDINGLY 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (U) Health, security, water, and electricity conditions 
have improved in Samawah, Al Muthanna Governorate since the 
DART's last visit on 15 May, according to the deputy 
governor.  He said unemployment was now the largest 
problem.  The DART also visited with WFP, ACTED, and with 
CMOC staff.  WFP said it expected a relatively smooth June 
food distribution in the Al Muthanna and Al Qadisiyah 
Governorates.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
AL AL MUTHANNA, AL QADISIYAH FOOD DISTRIBUTION UPDATES 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶2.  (U) The DART met with U.N. World Food Program (WFP) 
staff in Samawah on 31 May to discuss the planned 1 June 
start date for the public distribution system (PDS). 
According to WFP, the Al Muthanna Governorate was prepared 
to begin distributions and there were no major issues 
affecting the PDS. 
 
¶3.  (U) Flour distributions will begin on 1 June, followed 
by food commodity distributions on 2 June.  The civil- 
military operations center (CMOC) will deploy additional 
security patrols and will station teams at the distribution 
points to assist the Ministry of Trade (MOT) security 
personnel.  WFP mentioned that contracted workers were 
asking for an increase in salaries, posing a problem for off- 
loading trucks during distributions. 
 
¶4.  (U) All MOT offices were functioning, and the DART 
witnessed the Ration Card Center (RCC) registering new 
beneficiaries.  As of 29 May, the grain silo had received 
3,194 metric tons (MT) of wheat grain with additional 
deliveries due on 31 May.  It had an additional storage 
capacity of approximately 7,000 MT.  WFP said an unknown 
quantity of lentils was expected on 31 May, but WFP was 
unsure if the deliveries planned for June would allow for a 
complete ration for all beneficiaries.  Milling is ongoing 
without any reported problems. 
 
¶5.  (U) WFP reported difficulty in working with the MOT 
warehouse manager, particularly in identifying warehouse 
space for PDS commodities.  WFP staff stated that despite 
what it viewed as counterproductive management decisions by 
the warehouse manager, they would continue to work around 
the problem to avoid disruptions in June's distribution. 
 
¶6.  (U) Management issues were also a concern in Ad 
Diwaniyah Governorate.  MOT management changes at the 
warehouse and the Grain Board were delaying the disbursement 
of emergency-payment funds to MOT employees and slowing the 
release of operating funds for necessary start-up costs and 
repairs. 
 
¶7.  (U) Staff at MOT facilities reported they were receiving 
some operating supplies from Baghdad, but needed funds for 
fuel, furniture, payment of contracts, chemicals, and grain 
testing and office supplies. 
 
¶8.  (U) According to the Ration Center Manager, the Ration 
Center has begun to serve beneficiaries and will register 
new arrivals from outside Iraq, as well as new arrivals from 
other governorates and those with lost or stolen 
identification or ration cards.  As of 29 May, the Ration 
Center has issued new ration cards for 15 families. 
 
-------------------------- 
OTHER Al QADISIYAH UPDATES 
-------------------------- 
 
--  CMOC has assisted in obtaining two air conditioners for 
the WFP and MOT offices at the warehouse and work has begun 
on installation. 
 
--  According to CMOC/Ad Diwaniyah, the flour distribution 
in Al Qadisiyah has begun and planned food distributions 
will begin the week of 1 Jun. 
 
--  Coalition forces have begun initial assessments of the 
repair requirements at MOT facilities. CMOC has informed the 
DART that repair projects will be developed for the Grain 
Board and the warehouse. 
 
--  WFP and MOT offices in Al Qadisiyah, Karbala, An Najaf, 
Al Muthanna, and Babil have not yet received instructions 
for the local purchase of grains. 
 
--  The DART has seen fake PDS item lists in Al Hillah and 
Samawah that are reportedly being sold on the local market 
for 250 dinars.  The DART assumes this may cause some 
confusion during June's distribution. 
 
--------------------------- 
IMPROVING PROTECTION ISSUES 
--------------------------- 
 
¶9.   (U) The DART met on 31 May with the Deputy Governor of 
    Al Muthanna and with the CMOC director.  Both indicated 
    protection issues in town have improved since the DART's 
    first visit to Samawah two weeks ago.  Coalition forces have 
    begun training programs for a new Iraqi police force, 
    thereby increasing the number of police on the streets and 
    improving their basic policing procedures.  Community 
    members have also gotten together and set up a neighborhood 
    watch for many of the districts in town.  The deputy mayor 
    is very happy with the support the community has received 
    from Coalition forces on this matter.  The justice system is 
    showing improved operations as well.  Police are properly 
    arresting offenders, writing arrest reports, keeping track 
    of evidence, and beginning to send cases to trial.  Judges 
    have been vetted and the courthouse is being repaired with 
    Department of Defense ODHACA funds. 
 
¶10.  (U) In terms of reprisals, CMOC reported that there 
have not been any obvious cases of reprisals in Samawa. 
People tend to either go to Coalition forces or the 
authorities before taking matters into their own hands. 
Communities are well organized and come bearing petitions 
that request Coalition forces to investigate someone accused 
of corrupt dealings during the former regime.  However, 
there continues to be petty theft and incidents of looting, 
as well as tribal tensions. 
 
¶11.  (U) According to the CMOC, there are three small mass 
graves near Samawa and one larger one between Samawa and Al 
Saman.  A Kuwaiti forensics team has traveled to that site 
to identify possible Kuwaiti citizens who were thought to be 
buried there.  The criminal investigation division is also 
becoming involved in the mass graves issues around town. 
 
------------------------- 
POTENTIAL REFUGEE RETURNS 
------------------------- 
 
¶12.  (SBU)  There have been recent reports that 
approximately 5,200 refugees in Rafha refugee camp in Saudi 
Arabia will be voluntarily repatriated to Basra and Samawa 
in the next couple of weeks.  In preparation for possible 
repatriations to Samawa, the DART discussed refugee 
repatriation issues with the deputy governor, the Agency for 
Technical Cooperation and Development (ACTED), WFP, and the 
CMOC.  According to the deputy governor, there are between 
650,000 to 700,000 people in Al Muthanna Governorate. When 
asked if refugees would be easily accepted back into the 
community, he seemed supportive of returning Iraqis who had 
either been expatriates (he was an expatriate himself) or 
refugees, as long as they brought skills with them that 
could help Samawa build up and continue to develop.  (Note: 
this answer is generally shared by Iraqis when asked this 
same question.  End Note.) 
 
¶13.  (U) On food rations, it seems as long as refugees have 
an identity card that identifies them as returned Iraqi 
citizens, they are able to register with the governorate's 
ration center for a ration card.  Overall, it appears most 
of the sectors are up and running in the city, including 
water, electricity, security, food, and health.  While many 
of the urban sectors in Samawa are functioning at pre-war 
levels, many rural areas continue to lack proper 
electricity, security, health, and water and sanitation. 
Therefore, it is critical to know the makeup of these 
returning refugees, such as the number of extremely 
vulnerable individuals, and the percentage of rural versus 
urban dwellers. 
 
----------------------------------- 
IMPROVING CONDITIONS IN AL MUTHANNA 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶14.  (U) Since the DART last visited Samawah on 15 May, 
conditions have markedly improved, according to Al 
Muthanna's Deputy Governor.  "You can ask people if you want 
to confirm," he said.  In rural areas, 18 additional tankers 
have begun to distribute water, and in Samawah, power supply 
has increased to 50 megawatts (MW) from 10 MW following a 
"deal" the governor made with Samawah's source of power, An 
Nasariyah.  The Deputy Governor said the governorate 
requires 75 megawatts. 
 
¶15.  (U) In health, the pediatric hospital recently 
installed or improved its air conditioning system, and the 
Coalition troops began providing better security at health 
facilities, according to the Deputy Governor.  One week ago, 
GOAL delivered a shipment of DART-funded drugs to the 
Ministry of Health.  On food, the Deputy Governor said 
residents had two to three months of food rations stored in 
their homes. 
 
¶16.  (U) Problems remaining included "individual" security 
problems regarding thieves, and joblessness, especially 
among teenagers, according to the Deputy Governor.  He said 
youths were increasingly turning to drugs, particularly 
pharmaceuticals, such as Valium.  He also said that job 
prospects would improve once a central government in Baghdad 
was established. 
 
¶17.  (U) The city council, selected by tribes and political 
parties, has ballooned to 60 members, none of whom are 
women.  The Deputy Governor said the Coalition would like 
that number reduced to 25 with members having sectoral 
expertise.  He said residents would welcome women on the 
council and said that many women served in the municipal 
government.   He suggested elections would take place upon 
the establishment of a central government. 
 
¶18.  (U) The DART visited with ACTED on 31 May, a French 
agency that has been active in Al Muthanna since late 
April.  ACTED hopes to work on rural water and sanitation, 
and health activities in Al Muthanna, a governorate with one 
of the highest rural populations.  It is also interested in 
the agriculture sector.  ACTED calls water the greatest 
problem in rural Al Muthanna with many people drinking water 
straight from canals.  Most compact water units are not 
functioning, according to ACTED.  It proposes repairing or 
replacing water units, and improving the water-tanker 
distribution system.  ACTED has office space at the water 
treatment center, and will work on monitoring the water 
system with the water department.  ACTED called Al 
Muthanna's wheat yield among the lowest in the world. 
"Wheat is a disaster," it said.  ACTED blamed the problem on 
the intrusion of salty water, bad seeds, and possibly a lack 
of proper fertilizers. 
 
¶19.  (U) The DART met with CMOC director and other CMOC 
representatives on 31 May in Samawah who confirmed the 
deputy governor's belief that the health sector had 
improved.  According to the CMOC director, there are 
currently no major health concerns, however oxygen is scarce 
and expensive. 
 
¶20.  (U) The director also said that general fuel supplies 
were low and that prospects of replenishment were unclear. 
He said twenty tons of liquid petroleum gas (LPG) came into 
Samawah each of the last two days, providing 1,100 families 
with one bottle each.  Samawah has an estimated 150,000 
people.  The director also said that 24 tankers of benzene 
arrived last week, temporarily meeting benzene needs. 
Diesel fuel remained in short supply.  According to the 
director, the electrical supply should improve by late June 
when a third generator in An Nasariyah, Samawah's power 
source, goes into operation. 
 
JONES