03OTTAWA1911
MANITOBA DAY IN LOS ANGELES
Mon Jul 07 00:00:00 +0200 2003
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS OTTAWA 001911 
 
SIPDIS 
 
APP WINNIPEG 03/001 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD ECON PGOV PREL CA
SUBJECT: MANITOBA DAY IN LOS ANGELES 
 
¶1.  The Canadian Consul General in Los Angeles, Colin 
Robertson, hosted a broad Manitoba trade mission led by 
Premier Gary Doer as a part of the Consulate's Canada Day 
celebrations.  The trade mission included announcements of 
several important business deals and entertainment ventures. 
The most surprising announcement was a contract for the sale 
of over 1 million pounds of Manitoban carrots (from leading 
produce trader Peak of the Market) to Western Veg-Produce of 
Bakersfield.  Peak of the Market CEO Larry McIntosh told 
Consul that he couldn't believe he was selling carrots to 
California, a traditional carrot exporter.  Maple Leaf 
Distillers also announced plans to expand its distribution 
system to provide spirits and liqueurs (worth some $20 
million annually) to some 2000 outlets in California. 
 
¶2. On the entertainment front, Manitoba bands were 
highlighted at a top L.A. club in a "Manitoba Sound Night" 
featuring Holly McNarland, Doc Walker, McMaster and James, 
and Waking Eyes.  And one of Winnipeg's most famous 
citizens, "Let's Make A Deal" host Monty Hall, was honored 
for his charity work by Manitoba Lt. Governor Peter Liba 
with the Order of Manitoba. 
 
¶3.  Among the business deals announced were the opening of a 
Los Angeles office by Frantic Films, a film and TV 
production and post-production firm, and a cooperative 
production agreement between the Manitoba Theatre Center and 
the Rubicon Theater in Ventura, which includes an exchange 
of productions between the theaters as well as the co- 
production of a Eugene O'Neill play.  Winnipeg-based John 
Aaron Productions announced plans with two other U.S. film 
producers for cross-border productions of several films, 
including "American Woman," about Winnipeg's own rock band, 
"the Guess Who." 
 
¶4. COMMENT:  Provincial and city officials realize that  the 
U.S. presents the greatest opportunities for economic 
growth, but also that the lack of awareness in the U.S. 
about Winnipeg and Manitoba is among their greatest 
obstacles.  Events such as "Manitoba Day" are less about 
sales but rather represent a concerted effort to raise the 
profile of the region as a business and investment 
destination.  End comment.