04AMMAN2099
Monitoring and Evaluating ICMC's Humanitarian
Thu Mar 18 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Amman
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 002099 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR PRM/ANE, NEA/ARN AND NEA/NGA 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREF PREL IZ LE JO
SUBJECT:  Monitoring and Evaluating ICMC's Humanitarian 
Assistance Program for Vulnerable Iraqis in Lebanon 
 
REF:  A) PRM Monitoring Instructions of 9/29/03 
 
      B) 03 Amman 3308 
 
¶1.  As requested ref a, regional refcoord and Embassy Beirut 
polFSN monitored ICMC's humanitarian assistance program for 
vulnerable Iraqis in Lebanon on March 12 (cooperative 
agreement SPRMCO03CA119).  In addition to meetings at the 
ICMC/Caritas office, we also visited Baabda Hospital and 
Notre Dame du Perpetuel Secours School, which provide 
services to Iraqis under the grant, and met four beneficiary 
families in their homes.  Refcoord, PRM/ANE program officer 
and emboffs also met with ICMC and Caritas officials in 
October 2003. 
 
¶A.  On March 12, we met with ICMC Forced Migration 
Specialist (and project manager) Jim Kelly, Caritas Migrants 
Center Coordinator Najla Chahda and project officer Isabelle 
Saade, who supervises the three other social workers 
supported by the grant.  Unpaid student interns also work on 
the project as part of their university training. 
 
¶B.  After a slow first year (ref b), ICMC and its local 
implementing partner Caritas are running a solid, well- 
performing project that is reaching vulnerable Iraqis 
throughout Lebanon.  The project is meeting and in some 
cases exceeding program objectives and has developed 
alternative plans to meet the one objective, vocational 
training, where it is falling short.  The project addresses 
PRM cross-cutting policy goals of protection, women, 
children and reproductive health.  However, as more time 
passes since the fall of Saddam Hussein's regime, it is 
increasingly difficult to classify Iraqis in Lebanon as 
refugees or asylum-seekers.  Most appear to be irregular 
movers in search of a new, permanent home.  While their 
illegal status leaves them vulnerable in terms of access to 
services, ICMC acknowledges that humanitarian assistance to 
irregular Iraqi movers should not last indefinitely. 
 
¶C.  Since the current grant began on September 1, ICMC has 
provided: 
  -    outpatient medical services to 399 vulnerable Iraqis 
     (vice a target of 700 in 12 months) 
  -    inpatient medical services to 74 vulnerable Iraqis 
     (vice a target of 150 in 12 months) 
  -    humanitarian assistance to 85 vulnerable Iraqis (vice a 
     target of 250) 
  -    primary school support to 141 vulnerable Iraqis (vice a 
     target of 120) 
  -    non-formal education to 130 vulnerable Iraqis (vice a 
     target of 150); and 
  -    vocational training to 6 Iraqis (vice a target of 100) 
 
Project Manager Jim Kelly reported that 40 percent of ICMC's 
beneficiaries - 127 of 318 families -- are new cases (vice a 
target of 30 percent).  Of the new caseload, 57 families are 
recent arrivals in Lebanon, all of whom left Iraq after 
August 2003.  Kelly commented that the Iraqi population flow 
seems to go both ways in Lebanon.  While many new arrivals 
have come to Lebanon in search of security and better 
economic prospects, many Iraqi men are returning home 
without their families to find work and reestablish proper 
homes before sending for their families.  Kelly said a 
significant number of these Iraqi men have simply 
disappeared, leaving wives and children in increasingly 
vulnerable situations in Lebanon. 
 
¶D.  Kelly acknowledged that ICMC is behind target for the 
humanitarian assistance and vocational training components 
of the project.  Kelly attributed the shortfall in 
humanitarian assistance packages to two factors.  First, 
because ICMC was slow in implementing the FY02 grant for 
vulnerable Iraqis (ref b), most of the humanitarian 
assistance items funded under the FY02 grant were provided 
in the spring and summer of 2003.  Vulnerable Iraqis covered 
under the previous grant simply do not have a need for 
additional blankets, mattresses, cooking utensils, etc., and 
all 85 beneficiaries under the current grant are new 
clients.  Kelly also said that social workers are reluctant 
to use humanitarian assistance, for fear of creating 
expectations and jealousy among the Iraqi community.  Kelly 
said he routinely counsels social workers on this issue and 
expects the project to meet its target August 31.  For the 
vocational training program, Kelly said Caritas has been 
unable to attract Iraqis to traditional vocational training 
programs, as they have been reluctant to take the time away 
from any income-earning opportunities.  Instead, Kelly 
proposes to develop apprenticeship opportunities for young 
Iraqis, where they could learn trades while earning money. 
An apprenticeship program strikes us as an appropriate 
solution. 
Kelly also acknowledged that, as more time passes from the 
fall of Saddam Hussein's regime, it is becoming difficult to 
classify Iraqis in Lebanon as refugees and asylum seekers. 
Kelly observed that most Iraqis in Lebanon seem to have made 
the calculated decision that their lives would be better in 
Lebanon than in Iraq, usually for security or economic 
reasons.  Many Iraqis in Lebanon also seem to be irregular 
movers, in search of a new permanent home.  For example, 
three of the four families we met were trying to be 
resettled outside the region and two had been accepted for 
humanitarian resettlement in Australia.  (Only one family 
had been recognized by UNHCR as refugees.)  And while all 
four families had at least one member who was capable of 
working and seemed to be coping on the periodic wages they 
earned, the families remained vulnerable in terms of access 
to services due to their non-citizen status.  They simply 
could not afford the medical interventions or school fees 
covered under the grant.  The real question seems to be how 
long these vulnerable Iraqis should be considered eligible 
for refugee assistance.  Kelly suggested that EVI assistance 
should continue only until UNHCR begins an assisted return 
program for Iraqis. 
 
¶E.  ICMC's staffing level seems appropriate for the program, 
and the team of four social workers seems to be fully and 
gainfully employed. 
 
¶F. The program is run out of Caritas' Migrants Center.  The 
project workspace is clean and well-organized.  All 
equipment seems to be in good working order and used on a 
regular basis.  An acceptable inventory system is in place. 
 
¶G.  N/A 
 
¶H.  Nearly a year after the fall of Baghdad, it seems 
increasingly difficult to justify continued assistance to 
Iraqis living outside Iraq.  Humanitarian needs certainly 
exist among this population, but those Iraqis who remain in 
Lebanon nearly a year after the fall of Baghdad seem to fit 
the definition of economic migrant or irregular mover, 
rather than refugee.  Should PRM continue to support 
assistance programs for vulnerable Iraqis in Lebanon, we 
recommend that the program be carefully tailored to reflect 
UNHCR policy on assisted returns.  As soon as UNHCR lifts 
its temporary protection order for Iraqis and organizes 
assisted returns, PRM-funded assistance programs should 
change to support voluntary repatriation. 
 
¶2.  Embassy Beirut cleared this message. 
 
GNEHM