04AMMAN9898
IRAQ OUT-OF-COUNTRY VOTING PROGRAM LAUNCHES IN
Tue Dec 14 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Amman
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 009898 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL ASEC IZ JO
SUBJECT: IRAQ OUT-OF-COUNTRY VOTING PROGRAM LAUNCHES IN 
AMMAN 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (U)  The International Organization for Migration 
launched its Out-of-Country Voting (OCV) Program for Iraq 
from its Amman headquarters on December 12.  Eligible Iraqis 
living outside Iraq will have the opportunity to register and 
vote in 14 countries, in the national assembly election.  A 
significant portion of the OCV program's $92 million budget 
will cover security costs.  In Amman, Jordan's Interior 
Ministry has signaled its support, but important details have 
yet to be worked out.  These include the location of 
registration and polling stations, and how to deal with many 
Iraqis in Jordan who have overstayed their visas.  End 
Summary. 
 
-------------------------------- 
AMMAN TO SERVE AS OCV PROGRAM HQ 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U)  The International Organization for Migration (IOM) 
on December 12 launched in Amman its Out-of-Country Voting 
(OCV) Program on behalf of the Independent Electoral 
Commission of Iraq (IECI).  The program will enable Iraqis 
living abroad to participate in the Iraqi National Assembly 
Election scheduled for January 30, 2005.  (Note: Details 
about the program can be found on its web site, 
www.iraqocv.org.  We have also faxed an OCV factsheet to 
NEA/ELA and Embassy Baghdad.)  During a briefing for select 
members of the diplomatic corps in Amman prior to a press 
conference announcing the launch, Peter Erben, director of 
the OCV program, noted that the IECI selected the 14 
countries participating based on their relatively large Iraqi 
populations.  They are: Australia, Canada, Denmark, France, 
Germany, Iran, Jordan, Netherlands, Sweden, Syria, Turkey, 
United Kingdom, United Arab Emirates, and the United States. 
 
¶3.  (U)  Given Jordan's proximity to Iraq and large Iraqi 
expatriate community, estimated at up to 400,000, Amman will 
serve as the headquarters for the OCV program.  There are 150 
OCV international staff in place in all 14 countries. 
Currently located in Le Meridien Hotel in Amman, IOM Iraq 
Election Unit headquarters will re-locate to its own office 
space within the coming weeks.  Erben said IOM is in the 
process of finalizing memorandums of understanding (in some 
cases "letters of understanding") with the 14 host 
governments.  Denmark was the first country to sign.  In 
Jordan, the Minister of Interior has initialed the MOU and 
has forwarded it to the Prime Minister with a recommendation 
that he sign.  Once the PM signs, Erben claimed that the 
details specific to Jordan can be worked out, including 
polling locations, security arrangements, and accommodation 
for Iraqis who have overstayed their Jordanian visas.  He 
said the process is different in each country; in some 
places, the governments insisted that the details be worked 
out before an MOU is signed.  The OCV program will seek to 
hire local Iraqis in each country to assist with 
implementation, a process already underway.  Erben stated 
they are currently negotiating with the Interior Ministry to 
win waivers for Iraqi residents in Jordan to obtain work 
permits so the OCV program can hire them. 
 
---------------------------------- 
LIMITED COVERAGE INVITES CRITICISM 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U)   Erben noted that the short time frame dictated the 
limited program coverage, and the decision has already been 
widely criticized by Iraqis living in non-participating 
countries.   According to Erben, Iraqis resident in other 
countries may register and vote in any of the 14 countries, 
but travel is the responsibility of the would-be voters.  The 
short time frame will not allow for registration or voting by 
mail.  He said preparations for a vote of this magnitude 
would "normally" take one year. 
 
¶5.  (U)  Erben elaborated on the registration and voting 
process.  He said that approximately two weeks before the 
vote, a seven-day registration period will be held in each of 
the 14 countries.  In Jordan, he estimated there would be 
about ten registration/voting centers, most of them in Amman 
where the bulk of Iraqi expatriates reside.  To be eligible 
to vote, Iraqis must be born on or before 31 December 1986 
and present specific supporting documentation as defined by 
the IECI.  Erben said he expects this guidance "any day now." 
 Registered voters will cast their ballots January 28-30.  To 
prevent voting more than once, each person casting a ballot 
will have a finger marked with indelible ink.  The "monster 
tally" of all the out-of-country votes will be occur in 
Amman, according to Erben. 
 
¶6.  (U)  Due to the limited demographic data available, and 
the fact that the absolute number of voters will not be known 
until registration is complete, the program has built-in 
flexibility to handle up to approximately one million voters 
if necessary.  Erben estimated a "successful turnout" in 
Jordan as 100,000 Iraqis actually registering and voting. 
 
------------------------------ 
SECURITY IS THE MAIN CHALLENGE 
------------------------------ 
 
¶7.  (U)  Recognizing the "highly controversial" nature of the 
Iraqi elections, the IECI has allocated $92 million for the 
program, half of which is earmarked to cover security costs. 
Erben reported that the first tranche has been distributed to 
begin operations in each of the 14 countries.  In Jordan, the 
OCV officers have been working with the Ministry of Interior 
on security arrangements and logistics, and they expect most 
polling places to be located in Amman, where the bulk of 
Iraqi citizens reside. 
 
¶8.  (U)  Attendees at the briefing noted that fear of 
intimidation may keep Iraqis abroad away from the polls. 
This is a particular concern in Jordan, where the local 
population is highly critical of the interim Iraqi government 
and the election process, despite the GOJ's strong support. 
Acknowledging the concern, Erben said they are doing 
everything in their power to secure the sites, but that there 
are no guarantees.  The registration sites will be publicized 
to attract as many potential voters as possible, and Iraqis 
will register and vote in the same place.  He emphasized that 
the voter registrations lists themselves will not be shared 
-- either with the public or with the host governments. 
Registration lists will, however, be available for public 
inspection and challenge at each registration station. 
 
--------------------------------- 
ELECTION OBSERVERS TO PLAY A ROLE 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (U)  Erben stated that international election observers 
will play a role in the OCV program, in part to ward off 
accusations of voter fraud and enhance the credibility of the 
process.  He said members of the diplomatic community in 
Jordan (and presumably each country that hosts the OCV 
program) will be able to become accredited to observe the 
registration and voting process.  However, he did not specify 
how many observers will participate, or whether/when notional 
training for the observers will begin. 
 
¶10.  (U)  Baghdad minimize considered. 
 
Please visit Embassy Amman's classified web site at 
http://www.state.sgov/p/nea/amman/ or access the site through 
the Department of State's SIPRNET home page. 
HALE