04AMMAN2701
PROPOSAL FOR INL-FUNDED JOINT ISRAELI-JORDANIAN
Thu Apr 08 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Amman
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

081355Z Apr 04UNCLAS AMMAN 002701 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PREL IS JO
SUBJECT: PROPOSAL FOR INL-FUNDED JOINT ISRAELI-JORDANIAN 
TRAINING COURSE 
 
 
¶1.  (U)  Embassy Amman, with the support of Embassy Tel Aviv, 
requests assistance from DOS/INL to fund a mid-level Major 
Case Management (Law Enforcement) Course to be held in Amman, 
Jordan.  In 1999, this course was offered as part of a joint 
training program between the Israelis and Jordanians, and was 
held in Israel.  There is current interest in running this 
joint training course again, this time in Amman, Jordan.  It 
is anticipated that the course will promote law enforcement 
cooperation, and enhance the efforts for peace in the region. 
 
¶2.  (U)  The total number of students will be 20 Israeli 
officers and 20 Jordanian officers.  The total number of 
instructors will be four or five.  The course lasts five 
days, and hotel accommodations for 40 students will be for 
six days; seven days lodging will be necessary for the 
instructors.  Airfare will be necessary for the instructors. 
Bus transportation will be available for arriving students 
from Israel.  Course materials are minimal, and A/V equipment 
and conference room and can provided by the Jordanian Police 
Academy.  Money can also be funded for special events, such 
as a graduation dinner, and coffee/pastry service during the 
course. 
 
¶3.  (U)  It is likely this course will enable 
person-to-person exchanges between Israeli and Jordanian 
personnel, and the networking that will follow from these 
meetings will pay dividends that far exceed the expense of 
sending FBI training personnel to this area.  Both Legatt 
Amman and Legatt Tel Aviv are in agreement concerning the 
value of this joint training initiative. 
GNEHM