04ANKARA2505
Interior Ministry U/S on Aviation Security,
Tue May 04 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ANKARA 002505 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR DS, EB/TRA/OTP - RADETSKY/WALKLET AND EUR/SE 
PARIS FOR TSA 
DHS FOR TSA 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER EAIR ASEC EINV TU
SUBJECT:  Interior Ministry U/S on Aviation Security, 
Diplomatic Security and the Bedoian Case 
 
 
Ref: Ankara 1989 
 
 
Sensitive But Unclassified.  Please Handle Accordingly. 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) In an April 21 meeting with Interior Ministry 
Undersecretary Harput, DCM raised the continuing gap in 
border controls for international passengers 
transferring to domestic flights, police protection for 
the U.S. Consul General in Istanbul, and the Bedoian 
investment case.  Mustafa Bal, head of the Turkish 
National Police (TNP) Protection Department, Econoff and 
RSO FSN Investigator also attended. 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) DCM pointed out that, until international 
passengers are required to clear customs and border 
control at the initial point of entry to Turkey, there 
is a risk that terrorists or criminals will enter the 
country undetected using commercial airlines.  Harput 
responded that the GOT had decided to implement control 
at the first port of entry (usually Istanbul), but that 
physical adjustments were necessary, and that these 
might not be completed until August 2004.  Note: 
Turkish authorities have given various estimates of the 
time needed to complete this project, some of which 
extend into 2005.  End Note.  DCM emphasized that this 
loophole in border control is of particular concern in 
the runup to the June NATO Summit, and urged Harput to 
accelerate work to eliminate this risk.  Harput 
described extensive security plans for the Summit, but 
agreed to look into this matter with other members of 
the GOT's Summit security coordination committee.  The 
DCM also noted that lack of a visa requirement for 
Iranians also poses some concerns with respect to the 
Summit.  In a followup conversation with Econoff on May 
4, Turgay Sahan, head of the TNP Airport Division, told 
us that GOT agencies would meet to discuss this problem 
further on May 7.  One option under consideration is the 
use of color-coded boarding cards to control transit 
passengers. 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) The DCM also raised a Mission request to 
restore a police follow car for our CG in Istanbul. 
Harput responded that the issue would probably be 
discussed in the Istanbul Governor's protection 
committee that same day.  Harput offered to discuss the 
matter with the Istanbul Governor, and invited the DCM 
to raise the issue again with the Interior Ministry if 
our concerns were not resolved. 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) DCM also raised the case of Victor and Kristy 
Bedoian's investment in a Van hotel, and their 
administrative court cases concerning residence and 
operating permits for the facility.  He noted that the 
Bedoians were also engaged in litigation with private 
parties over the sale of the property.  DCM expressed 
the hope that, once the private court case is decided, 
the authorities would help promote foreign investment by 
ensuring fair treatment for the Bedoians on various 
permit issues related to the hotel.  Harput agreed on 
the importance of eliminating discrimination against 
foreigners, and encouraged us to contact him if there 
were any further problems in this case. 
Edelman