04ANKARA2268
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT,
Wed Apr 21 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 002268 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT, 
SATURDAY-MONDAY, APRIL 17-19, 2004 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Powell: "A Mistake to say `No' in Cyprus" - Milliyet (4/17) 
New Hamas Leader Assassinated - Milliyet (4/18) 
Tension in Najaf - Turkiye (4/18) 
Anger over Rantisi Assassination - Sabah 
`Time' Lists Erdogan Among World's Most Influential - 
Hurriyet 
Spain Decides to Withdraw Its Troops From Iraq - Hurriyet 
Karamanlis Promises Not to Block Turkey's EU Entry - 
Milliyet 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Pressure Increases on Greek-Cypriots - Radikal (4/17) 
Taiwan Model For Cyprus - Yeni Safak (4/17) 
`Yes' Votes Increase in `TRNC' - Radikal (4/18) 
Erdogan Urges AKP Unity in Cyprus Voting - Cumnhuriyet 
Polls Indicate Declining `No' Votes in Greek-Cyprus - 
Radikal 
Zapatero Orders His Troops to Leave Iraq - Zaman 
Stop the Killer (Sharon) - Yeni Safak 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
Assassination of Hamas Leader:  All weekend papers covered 
the news of the assassination of Hamas Leader Abdulaziz 
Rantissi by Israel.  Today's `Yeni Safak' notes that the 
action has brought international condemnation against 
Israel.  The paper adds that the U.S. is the only country to 
support the right of Israel to carry out such an attack. 
The EU, UN and the Islamic world harshly condemned Israel 
for the killing.  "Milliyet" reports that PM Erdogan warned 
Israel, saying that `nothing can be achieved by throwing 
bombs at peace.'  The Turkish Foreign Ministry issued a 
statement condemning what it referred to as `an illegal 
assassination.' 
 
 
Cyprus:  Saturday's "Milliyet" reports that US Secretary of 
State Colin Powell urged both sides to support a `yes' vote 
in the Cyprus referendum.  Powell added that the Annan plan 
is a `golden opportunity' for the island's reunification. 
Saturday's "Cumhuriyet" notes that the parties in Cyprus are 
in intense preparations to cope with the new situation that 
will pertain on the island after April 24.  The Turkish 
Foreign Ministry expects the Turkish side to vote for a 
`yes' and the Greek side for a `no'.  Diplomats believe the 
Greek Cypriots should be punished for saying `no' to a 
settlement.  The Turkish side is expected to launch an 
intensive diplomatic campaign in the US, the EU and the UN 
to gain international recognition of the `TRNC.'  However, a 
new UN Security Council resolution would be required. 
Saturday's "Sabah" reports that recent surveys showed that 
59.3 percent of Turkish Cypriots would vote `yes' on April 
¶24.  Saturday's "Cumhuriyet" notes that the US 
Undersecretary of State Marc Grossman phoned Serdar Denktas 
to say that if the Greek Cypriots say `no,' the US and EU 
would take steps to minimize the losses of the Turkish 
Cypriots.  Today's "Cumhuriyet" reports that during the AK 
party meeting held over the weekend in Antalya, PM Erdogan 
urged all AKP deputies to support reunification during the 
parliamentary vote on Cyprus. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
"A catastrophe looming" 
Fehmi Koru wrote in the Islamist/opinion maker "Yeni Safak" 
(4/19):  "The Israeli violence in Palestine is disrupting 
global balances. .  How can US expect from people horrified 
by the incidents in Palestine, understanding for the Greater 
Middle East project - an initiative Americans have been 
developing as an exit strategy in their fight against 
terrorism.  Sharon has exploited to the utmost the upcoming 
presidential elections in the US.  The extent of Bush's 
tolerance for Tel Aviv is taking him to the end of the road 
in politics by deepening the difficulties in Iraq.  Seems 
that catastrophe is at doorstep for Bush." 
 
 
"Greater Chaos Project" 
Ferai Tinc opined in the mass appeal "Hurriyet" (4/19): 
"Sharon got written guarantees from Bush to keep the Israeli 
settlements in the West Bank before an Israeli withdrawal 
from Gaza. .  Before withdrawing, Israel will eradicate 
Hamas.  The plan is obvious: Israel will withdraw from Gaza, 
and a Palestine state will be established.  But this new 
state's borders will be defined by Israel.  The Greater 
Middle East project may have a clause like, `Israel's 
security will be fully guaranteed before establishment of a 
Palestine state.' .  However, the killing of Rantisi took 
people in Lebanon, Morocco, Palestine, Jordan and Egypt to 
the streets.  How can you expect to drain a so-called marsh 
through actions that fan enmity against US and Israel? . 
One may think that the Greater Middle East project has got 
room for chaos scenarios." 
 
 
"US may create new Saddams" 
Mustafa Balbay commented in the intellectual/opinion maker 
"Cumhuriyet" (4/19):  "US has managed to unite all Iraqis 
except the Kurds against itself. .  US is striving to make 
the Iraqi Shiites act independent of Iran.  However, 
regional scales prove that this will be a difficult task to 
attain.  Muqtada es-Sadr has called for solidarity against 
Americans. .  Those resisting Americans do not want to 
establish democracy, but their own administrations. 
Eventually, neither Americans nor resisters target 
democracy.  US has toppled Saddam, but will probably create 
new Saddams." 
 
 
"Why should Turks say `yes'" 
Etyen Mahcupyan observed in the conservative/intellectual 
"Zaman" (4/19):  "The latest Annan Plan meets almost all 
expectations of the Turkish side. .  Greek Cypriots will 
belatedly acquire their property rights in due time while 
the Turkish side will gain in detail a brand new legal 
status.  A federal Cyprus republic will automatically bring 
international recognition for the constituent state in the 
north, the TRNC. .  A solution will make Greece and Greece 
Cyprus natural supporters of Turkey's EU drive. .  The UN- 
backed plan gives Turks extraordinary rights compared to the 
1960 Agreement. .  We must not surrender to selfishness and 
fanaticism under a nationalist disguise that actually 
disregards our national interests." 
EDELMAN