04ANKARA1786
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT,
Wed Mar 24 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 001786 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT, 
TUESDAY, MARCH 23, 2004 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Turkey and Greece Meet about Cyprus After 30 Years - 
Hurriyet 
Arafat Concerned For His Life - Hurriyet 
US Lifts Travel Warning for Turkey - Milliyet 
FM Gul Hopeful But Concerned on Cyprus - Sabah 
The Fourth Annan Plan - Sabah 
Don't Let Cyprus Become Another Kosovo - Turkiye 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
PM Erdogan: "Israel is Carrying Out Terror" - Radikal 
TRNC Prepares for Referendum - Radikal 
A New Plan for Cyprus - Yeni Safak 
Killing of Hamas Leader Halts Greater Middle East Project - 
Yeni Safak 
President Bush Defends Sharon - Yeni Safak 
Two Fronts For Turkish Side to Fight in Switzerland - Zaman 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Cyprus: All papers report that four-party Cyprus talks will 
begin today in Burgenstock-Switzerland, with the 
participation of the Turkish and Greek Foreign Ministers. 
Before departing for Switzerland yesterday, Turkish Foreign 
Minister Abdullah Gul told reporters that Turkey would 
expend every effort for a solution.  Gul said that Turkey 
hopes that the two sides will agree on most points in the 
plan, leaving very few blanks to be filled in by UN 
Secretary General Annan.  `This does not mean that we are 
 
SIPDIS 
intent on a solution at any cost,' Gul added.  The Foreign 
Minister also expressed concern that a settlement reached in 
Switzerland could be challenged in European courts by Greek 
Cypriots.  He urged the European Union to find a way to 
include the agreement in EU Primary Law.  "Hurriyet" notes 
that on March 29 the Turkish and Greek Prime Ministers, 
together with Secretary General Annan, will transform the 
negotiations into an historic summit.  "Cumhuriyet" draws 
attention to reports in the Greek press that the UN is going 
to present the sides with a new version of the Annan plan. 
The so-called `Fourth Annan Plan' is an effort to find a 
middle way between the concerns expressed by the two sides. 
The new plan will set limits on Greek migration to the North 
and strengthen the concept of bi-zonality.  In exchange, the 
Turkish side will give up an unspecified amount of 
territory. 
 
 
Reactions to Hamas Leader's Assassination:  Demonstrations 
continue throughout the world to protest the assassination 
of the Hamas leader Sheikh Yasin.  "Turkiye" reports that 
President Bush defended Israel, saying that `every country 
has the right to defend itself against terrorism.'  After 
the assassination, Al-Qaida's promise of revenge alarmed the 
US, Israel and their allies.  Extra security measures were 
taken in countries all over the world.  "Milliyet" reports 
that Hamas elected Dr. Abdulaziz El Rantissi as its new 
leader.  Israeli Chief of General Staff Mose Yaalon 
announced that Israel's policy of eliminating Palestinians 
responsible for terror, including members of Hamas and 
Hizbullah, will continue. 
 
 
U.S. Lifts Travel Warning for Turkey:  Papers report that 
the United States has lifted its travel warning for Turkey. 
The warning was implemented following the November bombings 
in Istanbul.  Several dailies suggest that the lifting of 
the travel warning was connected to the Turkish Government 
decision to lower the visa fee for U.S. visitors to Turkey. 
The fee, which had been 100 USD, will be lowered to 20 USD 
as of April 1. 
 
 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
 "Expanded terror initiative" 
Mim Kemal Oke commented in the mass appeal "HO-Tercuman" 
(3/24):  "The US' growing isolation in Iraq is a problem for 
Turkey as well.  The extent to which Washington approves of 
assassinations by the Israeli state will be questioned, and 
will probably strengthen the solidarity along the anti- 
American front.  It will also harden the nationalist front 
in Turkey, and will further consolidate the unity between 
the US and the Kurds in northern Iraq.  Such a development 
might increase US receptiveness to the Kurds' demands.  If 
US-Israeli relations do not undergo a serious revision, no 
US initiative has a chance of success in the Middle East. 
The EU is increasingly concerned that the US cannot or will 
not restrain Israel.  It seems that a bi-polar structure is 
emerging within the western world." 
 
 
"Sharon's dirty schemes" 
Fehmi Koru wrote in the Islamist/opinion maker "Yeni Safak" 
(3/24):  "Ariel Sharon and his political accomplices' 
killing of Sheikh Yasin was a premeditated assassination. . 
Even though Washington has denied it, the US has retained 
its place in the global memory as Sharon's comrade in arms. 
Sharon's other calculation is even more important: Instead 
of securing normalization in Israel, Sharon would prefer to 
create worldwide disorder.  Long before he took office, 
Sharon has sought to encourage radicalism in Palestine.  If 
no country can feel safe from terror today, Sharon's policy 
of `terror globalization' bears a considerable 
responsibility for this." 
 
 
"Buying arms from the terrorist" 
Umur Talu wrote in the mass appeal "Sabah" (3/24):  "Would 
Turkey buy weapons from Israel and allow the modernization 
of its tanks done by a state that pursues terrorist 
activities? .  Could Turkey, with its government and armed 
forces, carry the burden of being a partner with Sharon's 
state terror?  Could Turkey continue to allow its Manavgat 
waters to flow to Israel, which kills people and turns 
others into terrorists through their displacement and 
oppression?  Can our Prime Minister and the Chief of Staff 
accept this with a clear conscience?" 
 
 
"Final Cyprus bargaining soon" 
Mehmet Ali Birand observed in the mass appeal "Posta" 
(3/24):  "An MFA official said that if certain of Turkey's 
expectations are not met at the UN-backed Cyprus meetings, 
the Turkish side would work for the rejection of the 
referendum. .  Another problem is Denktas.  He has openly 
challenged Ankara, saying that if the necessary assurances 
on his `red lines' are not given, he will launch a campaign 
against the referendum.  MFA officials say they were waiting 
for a response from the UN regarding the `red lines.'  The 
Greek Cypriots have their own `red lines.'  It seems that 
under any scenario, neither side will be fully satisfied." 
 
 
EDELMAN