04ANKARA5673
EXBS; TURKEY ADVISOR MONTHLY REPORTING CABLE-
Sat Oct 02 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 005673 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NP/ECC- PVANSON, ACHURCH, TGROEN 
DEPT FOR EUR/ACE- DMARTING, DMCCORMICK 
CBP/INA FOR PWALKER, RGALBRAITH 
USDOE/NNSA FOR TPERRY 
DOC FOR PETERSON-BEARD 
USCG FOR RCIESLINSKI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETTC KNNP KSTC MNUC PARM PREL
SUBJECT: EXBS; TURKEY ADVISOR MONTHLY REPORTING CABLE- 
(SEPTEMBER 2004) 
 
REF: STATE 146478 
 
¶1.  Summary: September proved to be a very productive month 
for the Non-proliferation programs in Turkey.  The EXBS 
Advisor was able to make significant advances in the EXBS 
Agreement, Second Line of Defense (SLD) prioritization, 
Internal Control Program (ICP) coordination and establishment 
of baseline of capabilities and areas of improvement in 
training, equipment and facilities of the Turkish Customs 
Authority.  While, minor set backs were experienced in 
Turkey's participation in PSI, all other programs seem to be 
moving ahead with desired results. The upcoming months should 
see continued interaction with the Ministries involved in 
non-proliferation and the EXBS advisor as the programs, along 
with new initiatives, are introduced. 
 
¶2.    Completed Actions for the Reporting Period 
 
¶A.    Site Assessment and Meetings During Recent Reporting 
Period 
 
      1)  September 3- EXBS advisor met with MFA DDG for Arms 
Control and Disarmament Haluk Ilicak. During the meeting, 
current projects, including the EXBS MOU, Turkey's current 
and future participation in the PSI Experts Working Group, 
and proposed visits by teams to discuss ICP and Commodity 
Identification Training (CIT) programs in Turkey were 
discussed, as was Turkey's support for and activities in the 
Missile Technology Control Regime.  Finally, EXBS advisor 
informed Ilicak that Turkey would not be invited to be a 
member of the Core Group of PSI.  Ilicak noted his 
displeasure with this decision and stated that he could not 
predict the GOT's reaction to this information.  He was 
unsure if Turkey would remain a participant in the upcoming 
PSI Experts Working Group exercise. 
 
      2)  September 9- EXBS advisor met with MFA Head of 
Department, Arms Control and Disarmament Bulent Meric. 
During the meeting, current projects including the EXBS MOU, 
Turkey's current and future participation in the PSI experts 
working group, and proposed visits by teams to discuss ICP 
and CIT programs in Turkey were discussed.  In addition, a 
general agenda for the upcoming ICP meetings was agreed on as 
well as the location and list of attendees for the meetings. 
Proposed dates for the upcoming CIT visit were also discussed. 
 
      3)  September 15- EXBS advisor met with MFA Head of 
Department, Arms Control and Disarmament Bulent Meric. 
During the meeting EXBS adviser delivered the newest revised 
U.S. proposal for the EXBS MOU.  Also discussions were 
conducted concerning Turkey's current and future 
participation in the PSI experts working group, and the 
proposed visits by teams to discuss ICP and CIT programs in 
Turkey.  The detailed agenda for the upcoming ICP meetings 
was agreed on along with final details on the meetings. 
 
      4)  September 16- EXBS Adviser participated in meeting 
with LCDR Michael Bee, USCG, U.S. International Port Security 
Liaison to discuss Turkey's compliance with International 
Ship and Port Facility Security (ISPS) Code and the effects 
that these changes could have on port activity.  Also, 
discussed was the coordinating of Coast Guard, Customs and 
Border Protection and Transportation Security Administration 
activities to best utilize limited Turkish and Embassy 
resources. 
 
      5)  September 20- EXBS adviser was notified by MFA Head 
of Department, Arms Control and Disarmament Bulent Meric of 
GOT's decision not to participate in the upcoming PSI Experts 
Working Group exercise in Newport.  According to Meric, this 
decision was a result of the GOT's need to focus more on its 
area of immediate influence within the region and in response 
to being excluded from consideration for membership in the 
PSI Core Group. 
 
      6)  September 21-24- Department of Commerce led 
Internal Control Program (ICP) team visited Turkey to conduct 
meetings in Ankara and Istanbul.  (see Section E) 
 
      7)  September 28- EXBS advisor met with 
Undersecretariat for Customs, Department Head for Customs 
Enforcement Mehmet Guzel.  EXBS adviser was shown a detailed 
presentation of the current state of Customs Enforcement in 
Turkey, including new technology being utilized and 
technological advances being implemented into the Customs 
Border Crossing.  EXBS advisor was also provided a list of 
areas where the GOT believes the US can assist in improving 
the capabilities of Turkish customs, along with Turkey's 
prioritized list of border locations for SLD installations. 
A future meeting, following EXBS Adviser's trip to US in 
October, will be scheduled to review this information and 
develop a schedule of visits to Customs Border Posts. 
 
      8)  September 30 - EXBS advisor met with Head of 
Department, Arms Control and Disarmament Bulent Meric. 
During the meeting EXBS adviser discussed the latest proposed 
EXBS Agreement which appears ready for inter-ministerial 
review,  Turkey's future participation in the PSI experts 
working group, and proposed visits by team CIT programs in 
Turkey.  EXBS Advisor also reviewed the previous meetings by 
the ICP team, and gained GOT agreement that the ICP project 
is on track. 
 
¶B.    Training Conducted During Reporting Period: None. 
 
¶C.    Equipment Delivered During Reporting Period: None 
 
¶D.    Imminent Training or Equipment Status Update: None 
 
¶E.    Significant Developments in Export Controls, 
Nonproliferation, or Related Border Security 
 
      1)  Turkey participated in the Southeast European 
Defense Ministers conference, which will took place in Bled, 
Slovenia.  This conference allowed the Turkish 
representatives to share experiences with other delegations 
concerning terrorism and other threats within the region. 
 
      2)  Turkey withdrew from participation in the PSI 
maritime exercise, which took place in Newport, Rhode Island. 
While GOT had identified a highly qualified team, the GOT 
determined in a reevaluation of PSI participation that Turkey 
would focus its active participation on activities occurring 
within its immediate region. Both MFA and TGS contacts 
confirm that the GOT still supports participation in PSI. 
Turkey's Military Attach in Japan will represent Turkey at 
the upcoming Japanese-led exercise in October.  The GOT is 
still awaiting invitation to the planned Spanish led exercise 
scheduled for early 2005, and is evaluating the possibility 
of hosting an exercise in 2006. 
 
      3)  DOC ICP team visited Turkey from September 20-24 to 
conduct final coordination meetings.  These meetings allowed 
GOT to conduct one final review of the proposed product, 
while also establishing criteria for the selection of a 
Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) that will assist in 
customization of the program for Turkey.  A presentation was 
also conducted for major Turkish exporters to review the 
program and provide feedback on usefulness in Turkey. 
Industry representatives were enthusiastic about the product 
and expressed their belief that it will be useful in the 
control of inventories and determination of exporting 
licensing requirements.  GOT is currently in the process of 
selecting the appropriate NGO to work with ICP Team to begin 
customization process. 
 
      4)  Turkey participated in the EXBS sponsored-Black Sea 
and Caspian Sea Maritime Conference conducted in Kiev, 
Ukraine.  This conference allowed all countries with coasts 
on either the Black Sea or Caspian Sea to share current and 
future programs.  It also allowed each maritime organization 
to meet the leaders of other maritime organizations in the 
region. 
 
      5)  The United States, verbally received the Turkish 
reply to the US's latest draft of the umbrella EXBS 
agreement.  The newest draft appears to meet the necessary 
requirement for GOT approval.  An inter-ministerial meeting 
is being scheduled for early October to discuss the proposed 
agreement, in hopes of achieving the necessary governmental 
approval for signature and submission to parliament for final 
approval. 
 
¶3.    Future Activities 
 
      a.  Oct 4-17 - EXBS adviser will travel to Washington, 
DC for program consultations and leave. 
 
      b.  Oct 18-20- EXBS adviser will participate in EUCOM 
Black Sea Conference being held in Garmish, Germany. 
 
      c.  Oct 25-26- DOE INCEP team will visit Ankara and 
hold coordination meetings with the Turkish government as the 
preliminary steps in introducing the Commodity Identification 
Training Program to Turkey. 
 
      d.  Nov/Dec-  EXBS Advisor will begin on-site review of 
Custom Border posts, including actual site visits.  A 
schedule of visits is being developed with the 
Undersecretariat for Customs Enforcement and will include 
visits to major seaports, airports and land border crossings. 
 
      e.  Jan 2005 - DOC Product Identification Tool 
coordination meeting to be held. (tentatively) 
 
 
¶4.    Red Flag Issues 
 
      a.  Final approval of the U.S./Turkey EXBS agreement 
appears to be closer than it has been for quite some time. 
The approval of this agreement will have an impact on the 
EXBS program here in Turkey.  The GOT is very interested in 
beginning both the SLD and ICP Programs.  While the start of 
the ICP program does not require approval of the EXBS 
agreement, this agreement is a source of discussion during 
every meeting with MFA, Customs, Foreign Trade or other GOT 
organizations involved in the EXBS program.  Once approved, 
the SLD program can move ahead coordinating its 
implementation agreement and schedule visits to start the 
design and installation phase of the program.  Also, other 
activities and support can begin without concern over the 
status of this project. 
 
 
¶5.    Contact Information for EXBS Adviser: Kevin Lyon, phone 
(90)(312) 455-5555 ext 2525, fax (90)(312) 468-4775, email 
LyonK@state.gov. 
 
 
EDELMAN