04ANKARA1237
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Mar 02 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001237 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MARCH 2, 2004 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Mrs Gul Withdraws Her Complaint Against Turkey - Milliyet 
Mrs Gul: "I Withdrew my Complaint Because of My Husband - 
Hurriyet 
US' 2003 Narcotics Report: "Turkey is a Transit Country for 
Narcotics" - Hurriyet 
Democracy in Iraq, Interim Constitution Approved - Sabah 
Denktas: "Solution is Very Hard" - Sabah 
Turkmens Ignored in the New Iraqi Constitution - Turkiye 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Weston Warns Both Sides in Cyprus Not to Miss Opportunities 
- Radikal 
Greek Cypriots Rejected Turkish Cypriots' Proposals - 
Cumhuriyet 
Greater Middle East Preparations in Ankara Prior to Grossman 
Visit - Cumhuriyet 
A Kurdish Official Says Erdogan's Visit to US Changed US' 
Kurdish Policy - Zaman 
US' Stance Changed Towards Kurdish Demands on Request of 
Turkey - Yeni Safak 
No Place For Turkmen Demands in the New Iraqi Constitution - 
Yeni Safak 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Foreign Minister Gul's Wife Withdraws Her Turban Case from 
the ECHR:  All papers report that Hayrunnisa Gul, the wife 
of Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul, has decided to withdraw 
her case from the ECHR.  Mrs.Gul had filed a complaint 
against Turkey, after her application to Ankara University 
was rejected because she wore a headscarf.  Mrs.Gul said 
that, because of her husband, she became the plaintiff and 
the defendant in the same case, and this forced her to 
withdraw her case. 
 
 
Iraqi Interim Constitution:  All papers report that the 
Iraqi Governing Council yesterday approved the interim 
constitution.  The Constitution says that Islam is the State 
Religion but not the basis for law.  "Hurriyet" says that 
the constitution encourages an Islamic state in Iraq. 
"Sabah" says despite the Kurdish demands for expanded 
autonomy, the new constitution preserves their current 
status.  And the general belief among the Kurds is that the 
US' stance changed against Kurds after continuing pressure 
by Turkey.  However, "Turkiye" says that the constitution 
gives the green light to a Kurdish state.  Kurdish language 
becomes an official language together with Arabic. 
Reportedly, Turkmens vowed to fight for their rights and 
they complained that they have been kept out of the 
administration. 
 
 
Cyprus:  "Cumhuriyet" reports that Greek Cypriots have 
rejected all proposals made by the Turkish Cypriot side. 
The negotiations continue between the both sides and Denktas 
continues to brief the press on the developments despite 
requests for a news blackout by Erdogan and De Soto. 
"Zaman" draws attention to the words of Denktas that no 
progress had been made at Cyprus talks.  "Cumhuriyet" 
reports that Denktas will come to Ankara on Thursday to meet 
with PM Erdogan. 
 
 
EDITORIALS 
Greater Middle East Initiative; Cyprus 
"Turkey getting on Greater Middle East State stage" 
Sedat Ergin observed in the mass appeal "Hurriyet" (3/2): 
"Prime Minister Erdogan  focused on human rights, supremacy 
of law, and democratization in his meeting with President 
Bush at the White House last January. .  Erdogan gave Bush 
the message that the US should launch its Middle East 
initiative via Turkey. .  Ankara's views on this initiative 
are not in accordance with the tough policies pursued by the 
Bush Administration thus far.  MFA U/S Ugur Ziyal said in 
Washington that in order to make modernization, 
liberalization, and democratization in the Greater Middle 
East a reality, institutions must not be destroyed, but 
strengthened through evolution. .  In a speech at Harvard 
University, Erdogan invited the US to gain the trust of the 
people of the region, and added that change in the region 
should be carried out by gentle methods.  This is the point 
where the problem lies.  The Bush Administration does not 
believe in gentle methods, and is destroying institutions in 
Iraq.  The Bush Administration lacks the confidence required 
to succeed in this project." 
 
 
"Greater Middle East" 
Hasan Cemal commented in the mass appeal "Milliyet" (3/2): 
"The Americans' Greater Middle East is a Muslim region . 
Washington believes that global terror is rooted in this 
Muslim region. .  Muslim countries in the region must be 
introduced to democracy, because it is religious regimes, 
such as Iran and Saudi Arabia, or authoritarian regimes, 
such as Syria, that are feeding terror. .  Terror channels 
will be blocked to the extent that these countries are 
democratized and integrated into the world. .  The GME 
project cannot be regarded solely as an initiative related 
to oil and Israel. .  Europe, with its Muslim population of 
14 million, cannot remain aloof to changes of regime in this 
region in a post-9/11 world.  Germanys' Schroeder has agreed 
in principle with President Bush on the GME project. . 
Turkey's door will be knocked on as well, just as Marc 
Grossman is currently knocking on the doors of the EU, 
Turkey and a number of Arab countries." 
 
 
Everyone will pass the ball to Annan" 
Mehmet Ali Birand opined in the mass appeal "Posta" (3/2): 
"Neither Papadopoulos nor Denktas support a solution. .  But 
they also don't want to be perceived as the side that left 
the negotiating table. .  The Greek Cypriot side is 
resisting even more than Denktas.  They both indicate that 
they don't want a solution based on the Annan Plan. .  Both 
sides prefer Ankara and Athens to come in and make some of 
the difficult decisions for them. .  The government of 
Turkey will wait and see what Athens does before deciding on 
its policy.  If Athens takes some constructive steps, Turkey 
will follow, but if not, it will let UN Secretary-General 
Annan resolve the matter. .  The attitude of Athens will 
become clear after the March 7 general elections in Greece. 
.  Ankara prefers Papandreou's victory because it is 
familiar with this leader. .  However, the problem is that 
Greece does not want to make any decisions on Cyprus. .  The 
Greeks see themselves as responsible for the past troubles 
of having interfered with the domestic affairs of the 
island. .  Athens feels it has paid for its past mistakes by 
making Cyprus a member of the EU and does not want to bear 
the responsibility of an agreement that will affect the 
future of the Cypriots. .  That's why they might prefer 
Annan to make the final decisions." 
 
 
EDELMAN