04ANKARA6620
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Nov 29 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 006620 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, NOVEMBER 29, 2004 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Ambassador: Terrorists in Fallujah kill Turkish truck 
drivers - Hurriyet 11/28 
Fury over Fallujah takes thousands to streets in Istanbul - 
Sabah 
Mosul streets turn into killing fields - Milliyet 
Election crisis in Iraq - Hurriyet 11/28 
Minister Tuzmen: Turkey-Russia trade to exceed $10 billion - 
Aksam 
Ukraine on the brink of collapse - Aksam 
Referendum on division of Ukraine - Milliyet 
Sarkozy a new Napoleon for France - Sabah 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Tens of thousands denounce `cruelty' in Iraq - Yeni Safak 
5,000 civilians killed by chemical weapons in Fallujah - 
Yeni Safak 
`Mystery killings' on the rise in Mosul - Zaman 11/28 
Iraqi elections in jeopardy - Yeni Safak 11/28 
Shiite, Turkmen want Iraq elections on time - Yeni Safak 
Kurds change mind, will participate in Iraq elections - 
Zaman 
PUK: Kirkuk oil is Kurds' future - Radikal 11/28 
Greek Cypriots accelerate acquisition of arms - Yeni Safak 
Athens warns Ankara of possible veto in December - 
Cumhuriyet 
Sharon, Abbas ready for talks - Yeni Safak 
Iran backs down, centrifuge crisis resolved - Cumhuriyet 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Mass demonstration against US actions in Fallujah:  On 
Sunday, 20,000-30,000 people demonstrated in Istanbul 
against US military operations in Fallujah.  Several Turkish 
NGOs and some unions joined the rally, which was organized 
by Turkey's banned Islamist leader Necmettin Erbakan's 
Saadet Party (SP).  Erbakan strongly criticized the ruling 
AK Party for opening Turkey's airbases and ports to the US 
military during the war in Iraq.  The occupation of Iraq, 
carried out by US forces and backed by Zionist Jews, is 
another step forward for a `Greater Israel,' Erbakan 
claimed.  `The Fallujah operation is carried out against 
Islam, not terror,' he said.  Demonstrators carried Iraqi 
flags and burned a US flag while chanting slogans like `Iraq 
is a hell for non-Muslims,' and `American bandits out of 
Iraq.'  More than 60 people laid wreaths Saturday outside 
the US Embassy in Ankara and the Consulate in Istanbul to 
protest US military operations in Iraq.  The Turkish 
consumers' association called for a 24-hour boycott of US- 
made goods. 
 
Ambassador Edelman Interview with "Aksam":  In an exclusive 
interview with the Turkish daily "Aksam," US Ambassador Eric 
Edelman characterized false claims in the Turkish press 
about US operations in Fallujah as `very disturbing.'  The 
Ambasador flatly denied allegations that US forces had used 
chemical or nuclear weapons or cluster bombs in Fallujah. 
He stressed that the Embasy had kept the MFA and the Turkish 
military informed about the operation, and said the number 
of civilian casualties was very small given the scale of the 
fighting in Fallujah.  The Ambassador rejected any parallel 
between the current situation in Iraq and the war in 
Vietnam.  He showed the interviewer photos and documentation 
provided by multinational forces in Iraq to confirm the use 
of mosques by insurgents as weapons caches and fighting 
positions.  Edelman stressed that in such a case, mosques 
lose their protected status under the laws of war.  He also 
documented multiple laboratories discovered by coalition 
forces in Fallujah which had served as bomb-making factories 
for the insurgents.  Photos of Iraqi humanitarian assistance 
being distributed to Fallujah civilians accompanied the 
story in "Aksam." 
 
`Genocide' tension between the US and Turkey:  Having been 
accused by parliamentary human rights committee chairman 
Mehmet Elkatmis of carrying out `genocide' in Fallujah, US 
diplomats in Ankara warned the AK Party government that such 
`exaggerated' statements could cause damage to US-Turkish 
relations, papers report.  The Americans said that Ankara 
should not expect Washington to block charges of Armenian 
genocide if Turks continue to use the term `genocide' in 
such an exaggerated way.  Washington is also worried about 
growing criticism coming from PM Erdogan and other prominent 
figures in the ruling AK Party, papers comment.  US 
Ambassador Eric Edelman has conveyed Washington's 
`uneasiness' over the statements made by Elkatmis.  Edelman 
told FM Gul last week that the terrorists were using mosques 
in Fallujah as arms depots.  `We are fighting against those 
terrorists who have killed Turks in Iraq,' Edelman said, 
adding that the insurgents were deliberately taking shelter 
inside Fallujah mosques in an effort to provoke the Muslim 
world.  Gul reportedly assured Edelman about Turkey's 
intentions to make its criticism `constructive.'  PM Erdogan 
recently called on the Islamic countries to unite against 
`dominating' forces while criticizing the Fallujah 
operation.  US officials are trying to determine whether 
such statements reflect a shift in policy, or a domestic 
political show for the AK Party grassroots, papers 
speculate. 
 
US chemical attacks kill 5,000 in Fallujah:   Islamist- 
oriented "Yeni Safak" cites the `Alwasan.net' webpage in 
claiming that US forces have killed at least 5,000 civilians 
in Fallujah, including some by chemical weapons.  The report 
claims that the US army used toxic gas and chemical weapons 
against civilian homes, shops, and mosques, killing 
thousands.  According to the report, US forces have arrested 
3,000 people and raped several women.  Half of Fallujah is 
still controlled by the insurgents, according to the report. 
 
International meeting on Turkish truckers in Iraq:  A 
technical meeting is to be held in Ankara soon between 
Turkey, US and Iraq to discuss the security problems faced 
by Turkish truck drivers entering Iraq, reports Sunday's 
"Zaman."  The meeting envisages the establishment of 
`security pockets' for Turkish convoys inside of Iraqi 
territory.  Diplomatic sources denied claims that Turkish 
peacekeepers would be deployed in Iraq, saying that such an 
action would require parliamentary approval. 
 
Iraqi intellectuals flee country:  Following the US invasion 
of Iraq last year, 310 academics have been killed by MOSSAD 
and other intelligence organizations, yesterday's "Yeni 
Safak" reports.  Citing a discussion at a conference held in 
Cairo to discuss the issue, the report further claims that 
17,000 Iraqi intellectuals have fled the country. 
 
Israel wants Turkey's contribution to solution in Palestine: 
Israel is encouraging Turkey to take an effective role in 
the Middle East peace process in the wake of Arafat's death, 
Saturday's "Sabah" reports.  Israeli foreign ministry 
Undersecretary Ron Prosor recently paid a visit to Ankara to 
invite FM Gul to Israel following the December 17 EU Summit. 
Tel Aviv wants Ankara to send observes for the Palestinian 
presidential elections and to train Palestinian leaders to 
facilitate their transition to democracy. 
 
`Zionism' conference due to open in Ankara:  Israel is to 
commemorate the father of Zionism, Theodore Herzl, at a 
conference in Ankara on December 6, "Cumhuriyet" reports. 
Israeli diplomatic sources said their aim is to explain 
modern Zionism to those who have distorted opinions of the 
idea on which the state of Israel is based.  "Cumhuriyet" 
doubts whether high-level AK Party officials will attend the 
conference. 
 
Greek Cypriots to `renew' weaponry:  Greek Cypriot Defense 
Minister Kiriakos 
Mavronikolas told the Cypriot daily "Fileleftheros" that 
Nicosia would `renew' its old weapons by early 2005 by 
accelerating their acquisitions program, Turkish papers 
report.  Mavronikolas said they would discuss the issue with 
Athens as well. 
 
AKP official offers presidential system for Turkey:  A 
consultant of PM Erdogan, Prof. Burhan Kuzu, said that a 
presidential system should be introduced in Turkey before 
the electoral threshold is reduced to 5 percent for general 
elections.  Monday's "Vatan" reports that Kuzu warned that 
Turkey's EU hopes would be damaged if the country enters 
another period of multi-party coalitions.  "Vatan" regards 
some statements by AKP leaders in support of a presidential 
system as preparation for a transition to the presidential 
system. 
 
Putin to visit Turkey:  Russian President Vladimir Putin is 
due in Turkey December 5-6, papers report.  Putin will 
discuss with Ankara ways to ease tanker traffic in the 
Turkish straits, cooperation in the struggle against 
terrorism, and ending the international isolation of Turkish 
Cypriots, and various energy issues. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Ukraine; Israel-Palestine 
 
"America Should Look in the Mirror" 
Hasan Unal argued in the Islamist-intellectual "Zaman" 
(11/29): "The US administration is reacting harshly against 
the criticism in Turkey of its war crimes.  Apparently the 
US Embassy in Ankara voiced its disappointment to the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  This reminds of past instances 
in which the US expressed uneasiness about the reaction in 
Turkey against the war crimes committed in Tal Afar. 
Interestingly enough, the US feels disturbed when an 
official statement is added to the reactions in public 
opinion.  The warnings issued by Washington to Ankara in 
this regard raise the following question: What type of 
democracy does the US intend to promote?  Is the US really 
expecting to see no reaction from the Turkish public or from 
the government or parliament while committing war crimes and 
presenting such horrifying images?" 
 
"Ankara-Washington Fault Line" 
Asli Aydintasbas commented in the mass appeal "Sabah" 
(11/29):  "What kind of impact will the latest tension 
between the US and Turkey have on both countries?  Surely, 
the US will not stop supporting Turkey, and won't switch off 
the IMF channel due to Erdogan's provocative statements.  As 
a matter of fact, not only the AKP government, but a great 
portion of the public have anti-American feelings, and the 
US is well aware of it.  Despite this annoyance, Turkey 
continues to be the sole, valid example and hope for the 
future of the Middle East.  However, the recent problems are 
proof that the US-Turkish relationship is weakening with 
every passing day. Washington's stance against Ankara is 
rather cool.  For example, I am not sure the US 
Administration will make an effort to stop the Armenian 
genocide resolution from passing in the Congress next April. 
Recent statements by some in Turkey's governing party that 
included Islamic references have also bothered some people 
in Washington.  At the same time, Ankara, which politely 
rejected the US request to upgrade cooperation at Incirlik, 
is not likely to welcome any further US request concerning 
Iraq.  Although Turkey stands with the West on the issue of 
Iran's nuclear program, it's heart really isn't in it. 
Turkey's stance is also rather vague on issues such as 
Israel, the Greater Middle East, and the Iraqi elections. 
Hoisting its sail towards Europe, Turkey has placed its 
relations with Washington on a real fault line." 
 
"The Chaos in Ukraine" 
Zafer Atay wrote in the economic-politic "Dunya" (11/29): 
"The case ofUkraine is a typical communist regime classic. 
The ruler does everything to win a popular election, 
including cheating.  Yugoslavia tried this when Milosevic 
declared a victory by changing the vote totals, but in the 
end it failed.  Georgia under Shevardnadze also tried and 
failed, and Ukraine is the latest on the list.  . Things are 
going toward a chaos in Ukraine, and the President of the 
country has warned against the possibility of civil war.  It 
remains to be seen whether the opposition will succeed in 
toppling the ruling figure, who is depending on the stance 
of the Ukrainian security forces. . The issue is all about 
the culture of democracy.  Those among the former Soviet 
Republics who have a genuine experience with democracy 
managed to pass the transition period smoothly.  They have 
even managed to join NATO and the EU.  Those who have no 
historical experience with such a culture are still 
suffering." 
 
EDELMAN