04ANKARA2076
Trafficking in Persons: HRDF Reports Recent
Fri Apr 09 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002076 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: Trafficking in Persons: HRDF Reports Recent 
Developments 
 
 
(1)  SUMMARY: In April 9 discussions with emboff, Dr. Demet 
     Gural, executive director of Turkey's Human Rights 
     Development Foundation (HRDF), reported 1) specific case 
     implementation of the September 2003 MOI-HRDF Assistance to 
     Victims of Human Trafficking protocol (para 10), 2) 
     confirmed HRDF access to police detention centers, and 3) 
     ongoing law enforcement training as evidence the GOT is 
     cooperating with HRDF to assist victims of human 
     trafficking.  Gural noted that, despite the momentum, 
     funding shortages severely limit HRDF effectiveness. END 
     SUMMARY. 
 
 
 
 
----------------------------------------- 
PROTOCOL IMPLEMENTED, VICTIMS REPATRIATED 
----------------------------------------- 
 
 
(2)  Citing TIP action in Istanbul, HRDF Executive Director 
     Dr. Demet Gural told emboff that police are implementing 
     terms of the September 2003 human trafficking protocol 
     signed by HRDF and the MOI General Directorate of Security. 
     According to Gural, two Moldavian women were taken into 
     custody on April 7 in Yalova and Silivri.  Istanbul police, 
     she said, screened the two women, determined they were 
     victims of trafficking, and, in the absence of shelter 
     facilities, transported them to HRDF's office for further 
     evaluation.  Police held one woman in an Istanbul detention 
     center (HRDF was permitted to visit her).  Police provided 
     the second woman with a free-of-charge hotel room while HRDF 
     coordinated with the International Organization for 
     Migration to repatriate the victims. 
 
 
(3)  Regina Boucault, IOM Chief of Mission in Turkey, noted 
     MOI officials immediately granted IOM staff access to secure 
     areas of Istanbul's Ataturk Airport to escort the victims to 
     their flights.  Following standard IOM repatriation 
     procedures, IOM Turkey notified IOM Moldova.  Moldova 
     confirmed the victims' arrival last night, April 8, 2004. 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
MOI GUARANTEES HRDF ACCESS TO DETENTION CENTERS 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
 
(4)  In October 2003, Istanbul Police invited Dr. Gural and 
     other representatives from HRDF to tour police detention 
     facilities.  At that time, Gural asserts, police told her 
     "HRDF can visit this center at any time."  Gural, however, 
     finds it more convenient for police to bring potential 
     victims to her office. 
 
 
(5)  Gural also noted that, in previous repatriation cases 
     in Antalya and Kusadasi, police officials invited HRDF staff 
     to visit women in their custody. According to Gural however, 
     "due to lack of funds, we could not visit these women". 
 
 
 
 
--------------- 
NEW INITIATIVES 
--------------- 
 
 
(6)  HRDF, Gural says, is actively pursuing two major 
     initiatives: 1) donors and development funds to establish a 
     shelter for victims of trafficking, and 2) a framework for 
     social services to trafficking victims.  Because funds are 
     unavailable, HRDF provides these services on a case-by-case 
     basis when staff is available at its already-established 
     refugee/illegal immigrant services office in Istanbul. 
 
 
(7)  HRDF, according to Gural, is also emphasizing the 
     importance of strengthening international NGO networks. A 
     proposal submitted to the European Commission in January 
     2004 would provide HRDF funding for networking activities. 
     Catholic Relief Services (CRS) in Bulgaria provided some 
     support to HRDF to improve the NGO networking between 
     Bulgarian and Turkish NGOs. 
 
 
----------------- 
TRAINING PAYS OFF 
----------------- 
 
 
(8)  According to Gural, beginning January 2004, HRDF 
     initiated several new training programs for police officers 
     assigned to local Foreigners and Public Order departments. 
     Gural noted that the European Commission and British Embassy 
     provided funds, with technical assistance provided by IOM. 
     Officers in Ankara, Izmir, Erzurum, Antalya and Samsun have 
     already participated.  Local Chambers of Commerce provide 
     free space and catering for the three-day trainings in some 
     cities. 
 
 
(9)  Gural noted HRDF has trained eighty MOJ officials in 
     human trafficking issues.  Forty were trained in January 
     ¶2004.  Programs focus on differences in International Legal 
     Definitions of TIP Crimes and Migrant Smuggling; Human 
     Trafficking Causes, Actors, Mechanisms, and Consequences; 
     Violation of Human Rights; IOM Activities in Counter 
     Trafficking; Case Studies; Identification of Trafficked 
     Victims; Treatment of Traffic Victims; TIP Conditions in 
     Turkey; Best Practices for Treatment of Victims; Treatment 
     of Victims as Witnesses; Investigation Methods and 
     Techniques; and Intelligence on Trafficking. 
 
 
---------------- 
TEXT OF PROTOCOL 
---------------- 
 
 
(10) Signed on September 3, 2003, the MOI-HRDF Assistance to 
     Victims of Human Trafficking protocol enumerates the 
     following goals. Begin Text: 
 
 
   HRDF RESPONSIBILITIES 
 
 
      ¶1.   To establish a network among non-governmental 
        organizations in Turkey and regional countries affected by 
        human trafficking; 
 
 
      ¶2.   To provide training for government officers to refresh 
        and consolidate on the recent amendments of Turkish Penal 
        Code and the standards of international legislations on 
        human trafficking; 
 
 
      ¶3.   To advocate for the amendments in Turkish Penal Code 
        required by the standards set by the international 
        legislations; 
 
 
      ¶4.   To execute activities in order to strengthen the 
        capacity of Turkish NGOs for the promotion of human rights 
        in Turkey including the rights of trafficked persons and sex 
        workers; 
 
 
      ¶5.   To establish a counseling center which will provide 
        psychological, health and legal services for trafficked 
        victims; 
 
 
 
 
      ¶6.   To provide a shelter for the victims, within the 
        framework of the procedures and fundamentals set by the 
        Ministry of Interior, concerning temporary residence permit 
        and staying in Turkey; 
 
 
      ¶7.   To provide a shelter for human trafficking victims; 
 
 
 
 
      ¶8.   To develop and distribute information, education and 
        communication materials to inform the public, related 
        institutions and the victims about human trafficking; 
 
 
      ¶9.   To evaluate the demands of collaboration and support of 
        international non-governmental organizations working in this 
        field, such as the International Office of Migration (IOM) 
        and to inform the said organizations about the activities 
        and present implementations of Turkey in this field. 
 
 
 
 
      MINISTRY OF INTERIOR RESPONSIBILITIES: 
 
 
        ¶1.   To support the HRDF for the national and international 
           efforts detailed below and future necessities about 
           combating human trafficking in Turkey and in the region; 
 
 
        ¶2.   To inform the HRDF when a victim of human trafficking 
           is arrested or during his/her investigation, trial, house 
           arrest or before s/he is deported and to facilitate 
           interview process of the HRDF representatives with the 
           victims.  To assist the mentioned victims to take advantag 
           of the health and legal services that will be provided by 
           HRDF; 
 
 
        ¶3.   To provide the victims of human trafficking to take 
           utmost advantage of the counselling and shelter units, 
           established by HRDF; 
 
 
        ¶4.   To provide collaboration of the units, established by 
           HRDF, with the related non-governmental organizations in t 
           countries of the victims of human trafficking before they 
           are deported. To provide the security of human trafficking 
           victims' transportation operations that will be supported 
           the funds received; 
 
 
        ¶5.   To provide the security of counselling and shelter 
           units established by HRDF and the staff working in the 
           programme; 
 
 
        ¶6.   To evaluate the denunciations on human trafficking 
           issued from the regional countries as an outcome of the 
           network established by HRDF; to carry out the denunciation 
           by the mediation of the units, established by HRDF; 
 
 
        ¶7.   To provide trainers for the trainings about Turkish and 
           international laws and regulations on human trafficking th 
           will be organized by HRDF experts and also to enhance the 
           participation of the police officers, who are in need of 
           these trainings; 
 
 
        ¶8.   To participate in the national and international 
           monitoring and evaluation activities of the programme that 
           will be developed; 
 
 
        ¶9.   To support the communication of the staff working in 
           the units established by HRDF with the police officers 
           working in the departments of Public Security and 
           Foreigners, and to facilitate the access of the staff in 
           these departments. END TEXT. 
 
 
EDELMAN