04ANKARA4148
TIP IN TURKEY: MEDIA ATTENTION, JULY 1-15, 2004
Wed Jul 28 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 ANKARA 004148 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: MEDIA ATTENTION, JULY 1-15, 2004 
 
 
¶1.   (U) In response to G/TIP inquiries about anti-TIP 
   public information campaigns, post provides as examples the 
   following TIP press reports published in daily newspapers 
   and circulated nationwide.  Text of the articles (originally 
   published in Turkish) is provided through unofficial local 
   FSN translation. 
 
 
¶2. (U) Published July 14, 2004 by Tajik News source Khujand 
Leninabadskaya Pravda in Russian: 
 
     TITLE: Tajikistan: Poverty Pushing People To Slave 
     Labor, Paper Reports 
 
     BEGIN FBIS TRANSLATED TEXT: Khujand Varorud in Russian 
     on 14 July in an article entitled "Slaves of the new 
     civilization" reported that Tajik nationals are 
     forcibly exploited as labor or sex slaves in some 
     foreign countries and poverty drives people to this. 
 
     "Our country's citizens are often forcibly exploited as 
     slaves or a free labor force (sometimes for paltry 
     wages) in the steppes of Kazakhstan and on the expanses 
     of Russia.   And young women are becoming the objects 
     of sexual exploitation in the United Arab Emirates, 
     South Korea, Turkey and China.  It is quite possible 
     that forcible exploitation also exists in the country, 
     but open trade is not yet an issue.  The cause of all 
     this is material dependence which pushes people to 
     agree to slave labor in the search for a piece of 
     bread," the article said. 
 
     The first deputy prosecutor of northern Soghd Region, 
     Izzatullo Muhammadiyev, said in his interview to the 
     newspaper that organized criminal groups were arranging 
     trafficking in women. 
 
     "Law-enforcement agencies of the country have 
     established that some criminal groups under the guise 
     of tourism and shopping tours together with residents 
     of other Central Asian states take our women abroad, 
     where, taking away their documents or making them 
     financially dependent, force them to be engaged in 
     prostitution.  During the investigation of a number of 
     criminal cases we found out that they take girls out of 
     the country mainly under false passports, changing 
     their names, nationality and age, as well as concluding 
     fictitious marriages.   In 2003, according to data 
     presented by tourist organizations, 138 women and girls 
     left the country on tourist visas, 91 of them to Dubai 
     city, 45 to China and two to Iran.   Seven women took 
     abroad with themselves their teenage daughters aged 
     from 14 to 17 years," Muhammadiyev said. 
 
     The deputy prosecutor also added that the region's law- 
     enforcement bodies were operating actively in this 
     field. 
 
     "Last year, 415 loose women were detained as a result 
     of checks carried out by staff of the Soghd Region 
     police directorate.   The region's law-enforcement 
     agencies are conducting very active and successful work 
     in this area.   Sixty people, including 12 people for 
     human trafficking who were members of organized 
     criminal groups, have been sentenced for crimes in this 
     area," he said. END TEXT. 
 
 
¶3. (U) Published July 8, 2004 by Turkey's Anatolian News 
Agency: 
 
     TITLE: President Sezer Meets Romanian President 
     Iliescu; SEZER: ''WE REACHED CONSENSUS TO DEVELOP 
     COOPERATION'' 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: BUCHAREST - Turkish President Ahmet Necdet 
     Sezer, on an official visit to Romania, said on 
     Thursday that he and Romanian President Ion Iliescu 
     reached consensus to promote existing cooperation in 
     bilateral, regional and international issues. 
 
     Following their tete-a-tete Sezer and Iliescu chaired 
     meetings between their respective delegations. Later, 
     they held a joint press conference in which Sezer noted 
     that bilateral relations and cooperation were 
     significantly developed between the two countries 
     during the last 15 years. 
 
     There was not any political problem between Turkey and 
     Romania, Sezer stressed. 
     Noting that economic and commercial relations were at a 
     very good level, Sezer said that Turkey was the biggest 
     trade partner of Romania in the region. He stated that 
     trade volume was increased to nearly 2 billion U.S. 
     dollars last year. 
 
     According to official data, Turkish businessmen's 
     investments in Romania amounted to 418 million U.S. 
     dollars, he noted. 
 
     Underlining that Turkey was very pleased over Romania's 
     participation in NATO Summit held in Istanbul on June 
     28th and 29th, 2004, Sezer said, "I believe that we, as 
     two allied countries, would maintain the solidarity and 
     close contacts, contributing this way to the safeguard 
     of global and regional peace and stability." 
 
     President Sezer stressed that his visit also helped to 
     boost bilateral relations that had roots deep in 
     history. Recalling that Turkish Prime Minister Recep 
     Tayyip Erdogan had given Romanian Prime Minister Adrian 
     Nestase a replica of King Stefan of Romania's sword, 
     which is currently exhibited at the Topkapi Palace in 
     Istanbul, during his visit to Romania last May, Sezer 
     said that the sword would now be exhibited temporarily 
     at the National Arts Museum in Romania. 
 
     Meanwhile, sources said that during his meeting with 
     Romanian President Iliescu, President Sezer expressed 
     his pleasure seeing Romania as a NATO ally. 
 
     Sezer also briefed Iliescu on the latest developments 
     on the Cyprus issue and asked for the support of 
     Romania which is a non-permanent member of the UN 
     Security Council, for the lifting of restrictions and 
     embargoes imposed on the Turkish Republic of Northern 
     Cyprus (TRNC), sources said. 
 
     They added that the two leaders also discussed 
     terrorist organization PKK/Kongra-Gel issue. President 
     Sezer said that PKK carried out activities in Romania 
     form time to time and asked that Romania took necessary 
     measures against such activities. 
 
     Sources added that the two leaders decided to initiate 
     efforts to open a Turkish Culture Center in Bucharest, 
     recalling that a Romanian Culture Center was already 
     opened in Istanbul. 
 
     ILIESCU: 2004 WILL BE TURKEY YEAR FOR ROMANIAN ECONOMY 
 
     Describing bilateral relations as ''brilliant'', 
     Iliescu said Sezer's visit to Romania was a follow-up 
     of ''high level dialogue'' between the two countries. 
 
     Iliescu said new fields of cooperation were probed in 
     their bilateral meetings with Sezer. 
 
     He expressed his appreciation for the successful 
     organization of NATO Istanbul Summit, stating that 
     important decisions were taken about NATO's future. 
 
     Iliescu said NATO member Romania wanted to join forces 
     with Turkey and other member countries to contribute to 
     the strengthening of the Alliance in north of the 
     Balkans and the Black Sea. 
 
     He added Romania's full membership to NATO enhanced the 
     cooperation between the two countries, stressing that 
     it also contributed to the security and stability in 
     the region. 
 
     Iliescu said they also had the opportunity with Sezer 
     to discuss the situation in Europe. 
 
     Romanian President said they ''hailed'' the legal 
     reforms in Turkey, stating that this would contribute 
     to Turkey's bid to meet Copenhagen criteria. 
 
     Iraq, Cyprus question, and other regional issues were 
     also discussed at the meeting, Iliescu said. 
 
     Pointing to the importance of economic relations 
     between the two countries, Iliescu said they call 2004 
     as ''Turkey year'' for Romanian economy and stressed 
     that the volume of bilateral trade between the two 
     countries would reach 2.5 billion U.S. dollars in 2004. 
     Iliescu said he and Sezer discussed cultural relations 
     like establishment of a Romanian university in Turkey. 
     "International terrorism, non-proliferation of weapons 
     of mass destruction, drug and human trafficking were 
     also discussed at the meeting," Iliescu noted. 
 
     Iliescu said relations between Turkey and Romania 
     constituted an example for "good neighborhood". END 
     TEXT. 
 
 
¶4. (U) Tbilisi Rustavi-2 Television in Georgian on July 6, 
¶2004.  [FBIS Translated Text] 
     TITLE: Georgia: Turkish 'Captives,' Human Trafficking 
     Victims, Escape From Abkhazia 
     BEGIN TRANSLATION: [Presenter Nino Shubladze] Victims 
     of human trafficking in Abkhazia: Three Turkish 
     captives crossed the Inguri bridge [between breakaway 
     Abkhazia and the rest of Georgia] to this side today. 
     These people have escaped after two months of 
     captivity by an Abkhaz separatist group. They were 
     kept in the village of Kochora and forced to work in 
     difficult conditions. The Turkish captives were given 
     food only once a day and subjected to physical abuse. 
     They lived as slaves. 
 
       Now the victims are at the Gali District security 
     department [subordinated to Georgia-backed government 
     of Abkhazia in exile]. They are demanding release of 
     other captives who remain on the territory of 
     Abkhazia. According to them, 22 other people who need 
     help are still in Abkhazia. [Video shows two men 
     getting in a car, a group of people around a table] 
 
     [Man, captioned as Ali Konja, Turkish citizen, in 
     Turkish with Georgian translation superimposed] Many 
     others also wanted to leave, but they turned back 
     because they were scared. I feel terrible and I pity 
     those left there. We were lucky that we had hidden a 
     mobile phone and managed to contact the [Turkish] 
     consulate. 
 
     [Another man, captioned as Sertan Dilek, Turkish 
     citizen, Georgian translation superimposed] We were in 
     very difficult conditions. They assigned watchmen to 
     us, and we were unable to contact anyone. They also 
     took our documents away. Every day, they would take us 
     to work in [the village of] Akarma and [the town of] 
     Tqvarcheli. We were treated like slaves. 
 
     [Gia Jikia, the chief of the Gali District security 
     department, interviewed] The security ministry of 
     Abkhazia [in exile] has more than once obtained 
     information that foreign citizens were taken to 
     Abkhazia under false promises. In fact, they are 
     forcing them to work and treating them as slaves. 
 
     [Description of Source: Tbilisi Rustavi-2 Television 
     in Georgian -- Leading commercial TV station known for 
     its aggressive reporting and critical attitude toward 
     the country's central and regional authorities. The 
     company's web site (www.rustavi2.com) claims that 
     broadcasts reach "around 84 percent of the country's 
     population".] END TRANSLATION. 
 
¶5. (U) Published Friday, July 2, 2004 by Transitions Online 
(TOL), a Czech nonprofit organization established with 
financial and professional support from the Open Society 
Institute's (OSI) Internet program and the Media 
Development Loan Fund (MDLF): 
 
     TITLE: Moldova's Battle Against Human Trafficking 
     by Lauren Gard 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: Moldova's efforts to crack down on 
     traffickers are under funded, the crime is 
     underreported, and the victims are misunderstood. 
 
     Editor's note: This is the first in a series of 
     articles by students in the University of California at 
     Berkeley's Graduate School of Journalism, written in 
     collaboration with TOL correspondents. 
     Irina slides six snapshots across the table in a sunlit 
     lawyer's office in northern Moldova. "I used these 
     photos to put him behind bars," she says. 
 
     One image shows the slim 21-year-old in a tank top and 
     shorts lounging on a flowery futon. "This was the 
     apartment in Turkey," she says. In another, she's on a 
     boat in the Mediterranean Sea, her hands full of small, 
     iridescent fish. "I was with a client in this one." 
 
     Irina, a redhead with a pixie haircut and catlike, 
     sparkling green eyes, stares silently at a photo of her 
     Turkish captor. He stands casually by a dock in black 
     pants and a white button-down shirt, smoking a 
     cigarette. His dark eyes seem to gaze back at her. 
 
     "He gave me these photos so I would have a memory of 
     him," Irina says, with a thin smile. "He was stupid. I 
     knew what town he was in. I knew the street, the 
     apartment." 
 
     "He" is Medmed Cara, the man who forced Irina to stay 
     with him in Turkey for several months while he beat her 
     and earned thousands of dollars by selling her to 
     clients for sex. 
 
     When Irina made her way back to Moldova five months 
     ago, she got in touch with the Center for the 
     Prevention of Trafficking in Women, a legal aid group 
     set up in 2001 by the Moldovan Association of Women 
     Lawyers to assist trafficking victims. The lawyers at 
     the center's office in Balti, Moldova's second-largest 
     city, have become Irina's closest allies. They helped 
     her bring the case against the man in the snapshots. In 
     March, he was found guilty of trafficking. 
 
     "Tomorrow his sentence will be handed down," Irina 
     says, gathering up the photos. "He'll get 10 to 20 
     years." 
 
     'A PERSONAL PROBLEM FOR THE GIRLS' 
 
     Irina's case is one of more than 50 that the anti- 
     trafficking center has handled here in Moldova, a tiny 
     country of 4 million people with a largely agricultural 
     economy--often described as the poorest country in 
     Europe--sandwiched between Romania and Ukraine. The 
     number of cases represents a fraction of the total 
     number of Moldovan women who have been taken abroad, 
     some willingly, most not, to work as prostitutes or sex 
     slaves in the last decade. 
 
     According to many estimates, since the mid-1990s more 
     than 200,000 Moldovan girls and women have been 
     trafficked to the Balkans, Western Europe, Russia, 
     Turkey, and Dubai. Shortly after his appointment last 
     year as the Organization for Security and Cooperation 
     in Europe's ambassador to Moldova, William Hill told 
     the BBC that Moldova had become "the largest supplier 
     state in all of Europe" for trafficking victims. 
 
     Punishing traffickers is a difficult--and new-- 
     challenge for law enforcement authorities in Moldova. 
     Before 2001, the country had no laws against sex 
     trafficking, and before 2003, none mandating minimum 
     prison sentences for traffickers. Convicted traffickers 
     simply paid a fine and walked away. 
 
     Even now, court cases against traffickers are the 
     exception, not the rule. Police units are underfunded 
     and overwhelmed by the immensity of the problem. Unlike 
     crimes like murder and theft, victims of this type of 
     crime are rarely willing to talk. Some traffickers pay 
     their victims to keep quiet, but most don't need to be 
     bribed; they simply won't go to the police, much less 
     appear in court. There is a huge fear of ruining their 
     own reputation or that of their family. 
 
     "It makes it difficult to build a case because they 
     keep it all inside," says Irina's lawyer, Nelly 
     Babcinschi. "They're very damaged. And it's hard for a 
     girl to make a statement in court because her lawyer, 
     her trafficker's lawyer, the judge, and her parents may 
     all be there." 
 
     Cracking down on traffickers is becoming more important 
     to the Moldovan government, but it is still not a 
     priority. A national anti-trafficking plan was adopted 
     in November 2001, but it was two years before a 
     committee of government ministers, state prosecutors, 
     and representatives of local and international 
     nongovernmental organizations was formed. 
     The issue briefly gained a foothold in the public's 
     mind when three international sex-trafficking 
     conferences took place during the same week in March in 
     Chisinau. No less than the OSCE has stepped in to help 
     the government implement an anti-trafficking program, 
     but if not for the efforts of small nonprofits, funded 
     primarily by foreign governments like the United States 
     and Sweden, observers say little would be achieved. 
 
     Svetlana Rijicova, one of only two psychiatrists in 
     Moldova who counsels trafficked girls, says the future 
     looks bleak. "For the moment the government has no 
     money to support anti-trafficking organizations," she 
     says. "It's not a priority. It's perceived as just a 
     personal problem for the girls." 
 
     Nonprofits have focused primarily on educating girls in 
     the most at-risk age group, those aged 18 to 24, and on 
     forming alliances with agencies abroad to help bring 
     trafficked women back. An estimated 80 percent of women 
     who are trafficked knew the risks before it happened to 
     them. 
 
     "Of course I knew about it," Irina says, "but I never 
     thought it would happen to me." 
 
     Until now, Irina hasn't shared her story with anyone 
     outside her lawyer's office or the courtroom. "I love 
     and trust my friends, but I won't tell them because I 
     don't think they can help. It's better to keep my 
     feelings inside than to walk down the street and have 
     people point and say, `There's that girl who was a 
     prostitute in Turkey,' " she says, staring at a cup of 
     black tea growing cold on the table before her. As for 
     her widowed mother, who lives in a village 30 
     kilometers away, "It would kill her if she knew." 
 
     SOLD INTO SLAVERY 
 
     Before she fell into Medmed Cara's hands, Irina was 
     working as a seamstress for a Turkish pajama company in 
     Balti, earning $40 a month. That's less than the 
     average national wage of $56, but not bad for someone 
     in Moldova who has only finished 10th grade. But it 
     didn't go far. When her landlady told her about a 
     bartending job in Turkey, she agreed to go. The 
     International Organization for Migration (IOM) 
     estimates that half of Moldovan women who are 
     trafficked knew the person who "recruited" them. 
 
     "I wanted to be rich," Irina says. "I wanted to buy my 
     mom an apartment in Balti." 
 
     Irina lied to her mother and told her she was going to 
     Moscow to work, as many people in her village had done. 
     Instead, she took a minivan to Ukraine, and from there 
     took a ship to Istanbul. She was met at the dock by 
     Cara, the man in the photo, who took her by boat to the 
     popular resort town of Fethiye. 
 
     "I refused to work as a prostitute," she says. "So he 
     beat me and then raped me while a client waited outside 
     in his car. He made me shower, and then I went with the 
     client." Cara beat her and forced her to have sex with 
     him every night after that. After two weeks, she tried 
     to run away but failed. The brutal beating that 
     followed knocked one of her teeth out. 
 
     Irina decided that the only way to survive was to 
     convince Cara that she loved him. The strategy worked, 
     the fist-and-belt beatings lessened. Several months 
     after her arrival in Turkey she called a neighbor in 
     Moldova in order to speak with her mother, who has no 
     phone. "She asked why my Romanian was so bad," Irina 
     remembers. "I spoke only Turkish there, had no one to 
     speak Romanian with." The client who let her use his 
     phone said he was very sorry that she'd gotten into 
     such a bad situation. Then he had sex with her. 
 
     When her visa expired in November, Cara sent Irina back 
     to Moldova with $150 in her pocket and a promise that 
     he would soon follow. 
 
     Back home, she waited and began forming a plan to 
     involve the police. Law enforcement authorities are 
     notoriously untrustworthy in countries where corruption 
     is rampant, like Moldova. Sometimes when a girl reports 
     that she has been trafficked, their response is to sell 
     her back to her traffickers and pocket the money. In 
     Irina's case, though, the police listened, especially 
     once she told them that she had photos. 
 
     When, true to his word, Cara came after Irina, he moved 
     into her mother's house and insisted on sharing her 
     bed. "My mom thought he was a boyfriend from Moscow," 
     she says. "She didn't like him. He complained all the 
     time that our food wasn't spicy enough. He told her we 
     were getting married. And what could I say?" 
 
     WARNINGS GO UNHEEDED 
 
     In a riverside village 150 kilometers east of Glinjeni, 
     60 teenagers slouch in wooden chairs in a school 
     auditorium. Their attention is focused on a television 
     on the stage, which is showing a movie of a teenage 
     girl from an unnamed former Soviet bloc country who 
     jumps at an offer to travel to Sweden with her handsome 
     new boyfriend. Once there, she is locked in an 
     apartment, beaten, and repeatedly sold to male clients 
     to be raped. The 2001 movie, Lilya 4-Ever, by Swedish 
     director Lukas Moodysson, is being shown as part of a 
     public education campaign by UNICEF, the IOM and the 
     anti-trafficking group La Strada, with the help of a 
     $100,000 grant from the U.S. State Department. The film 
     ends with a desperate Lilya leaping to her death off a 
     freeway overpass. 
 
     As the credits roll a few nervous laughs can be heard 
     in the cold auditorium. Ana, a college student dressed 
     in neat slacks and a sweater, looks out at the young 
     faces. She offers some basic information about 
     trafficking, then asks if anyone in the room knows 
     someone who has been trafficked. 
 
     "My friend's mom went to Italy," a girl says, prompting 
     a burst of laughter. 
 
     "Are there any other possibilities to make a living 
     other than going abroad?" Ana asks. 
 
     "Yeah," one boy calls out, "become a prostitute here!" 
     More laughter. 
 
     "The problem is that Moldovan girls from rural areas 
     are stupid. And traffickers know it," offers Oxana, 16. 
 
     "Families can't afford to buy food and clothing. They 
     would rather risk dying abroad than die here," another 
     says. 
 
     The students say they liked Lilya 4-Ever, but can't 
     ever imagine being in Lilya's shoes. "There must be 
     someone who would help you," one says. Before they 
     leave, Ana hands out pamphlets promoting La Strada's 
     trafficking hot line, which receives 250 calls a month, 
     some from girls who have been trafficked to other 
     countries and are desperate for help. Despite heavy 
     promotion of the telephone hot line after screenings of 
     the film--which has been shown in Chisinau and in 
     dozens of village schools since January--the number of 
     calls hasn't increased. The IOM says it is showing the 
     film in an attempt to get people talking about 
     trafficking, to create "a more common discourse," 
     according to Allan Freedman, IOM's deputy chief of 
     mission. A pamphlet handed out at screenings reads: "We 
     want this film to strengthen safeguards and inspire 
     educators, social service workers, local authorities, 
     and all of us on the battle's front lines." 
     After the film a dozen girls gather in the chilly 
     hallway to talk about their dreams for the future. Many 
     have parents working abroad and have to care for 
     younger siblings. Most say they dream of leaving 
     Moldova. "There is no future in this country," says 
     Aliona, 16, who has not seen her mother in a year. 
     According to the IOM, more than 55 percent of 
     trafficked women have children. 
     Irina had never heard of the IOM before she went to 
     Turkey, and she isn't one of the 1,200 women the 
     organization has brought back to Moldova since 2001. 
     She's never seen Lilya 4-Ever. Some at the IOM consider 
     that a good thing, since the film's graphic depiction 
     of life as a sex slave would likely summon up painful 
     memories. 
 
     LIFE GOES ON 
 
     After lunch Irina pulls on her faux fur-lined coat and 
     steps outside. She's craving a cigarette, but she walks 
     a half-mile down the dirt road before pausing in the 
     sheltered entrance of an abandoned building to light 
     one. "Good village girls don't smoke," she says with a 
     laugh. 
 
     Further along the road, Irina stops in front of the 
     house of a man she dated for two years before she was 
     trafficked. She chats easily with his parents, who are 
     working in the front yard, and pets their timid new 
     pony. "I still love him," she says later, watching a 
     few chickens skitter across the road. "But I can't tell 
     him what happened because then the whole village might 
     find out. So I can't be with him." 
 
     Irina lowers her voice slightly as she walks. "I had an 
     abortion here when I came home," she says, shoving her 
     hands deep in her pockets. "I couldn't stay overnight 
     because my mother might have found out, but I went back 
     for checkups." During her four months in Turkey, almost 
     none of the hundreds of men who had sex with her used 
     condoms. She says Cara earned $25,000 by selling her to 
     as many as 10 clients a day, seven days a week, at a 
     rate of $25 an hour. 
 
     In the center of town, Irina stops at a new Italian 
     sportswear factory. "It's like the factory I used to 
     work in," she says. Several of her friends labor in its 
     fluorescent-lit rooms, cutting fabric and stitching 
     paisley-patterned bathing suits decorated with plastic 
     dangling hearts. It's chilly enough inside to need a 
     thick sweater. The smell of body odor competes for 
     attention with the staccato buzz of the machines. A few 
     middle-aged women pump pedals and slide material along 
     the narrow tables, but it is mostly young girls who 
     hover behind the machines, their long hair pulled back 
     in loose ponytails. 
 
     "We prefer the younger girls, 16, 17, because they have 
     no bad habits to unlearn," the factory's accountant 
     says. "They are malleable and will do what we want them 
     to do." In her statement there is the echo of 
     traffickers, who are targeting younger and younger 
     girls. The International Catholic Migration Commission 
     estimates that 30 percent of trafficking victims are 
     minors. The actress who stars in "Lilya 4-Ever" looks 
     no older than 16. 
 
     Although the education campaigns, film screenings, and 
     government commissions have yet to make a noticeable 
     dent in the problem, the battle against traffickers is 
     not as one-sided as before. There are new laws--if 
     Irina had been trafficked two years ago, her trafficker 
     would be in Turkey now, a free man--and there are 
     groups that provide legal assistance. If Irina hadn't 
     been able to turn to the anti-trafficking center for 
     help, more girls may have wound up in Medmed Cara's 
     bed. 
 
     Three weeks after Cara followed her to Moldova, Irina 
     put her plan into action. In her pigeon Turkish, she 
     offered to help him recruit some local girls. "He told 
     them they would work as prostitutes but they still 
     wanted to go," she says, shaking her head. "They just 
     wanted money, and they trusted him." 
 
     On a cold January day, as Cara and his newest 
     acquisitions--two teenagers--drove toward Chisinau, the 
     police were waiting. They stopped the car and arrested 
     Cara. At his trial, Irina testified against him. Then 
     she prayed. And made plans. She decided to move into a 
     shelter for trafficked women in Chisinau and to study 
     massage therapy. 
 
     On 2 April, Irina learned that Cara had been sentenced 
     to 10 years in a Moldovan prison. He is now a prisoner 
     in a foreign land, just as Irina was. "If he had been 
     free he would have killed me," she said, recalling the 
     way Cara had looked at her during the trial. When she 
     testified, she said, she stared him in the eye, and 
     felt relief. "He must have felt the same way I did when 
     I was in Turkey." 
 
     With additional reporting by TOL correspondent Angela 
     Sirbu.  END TEXT. 
 
 
  ¶6. (U) Published Wednesday, June 30, 2004 by Cumhuriyet 
  Newspaper: 
 
     TITLE: GUL, POWELL LEND SUPPORT TO ANTI-TRAFFICKING 
     EFFORTS 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul and US 
     Secretary of State Colin Powell yesterday attended a 
     signing ceremony between the Istanbul Municipality and 
     the Foundation for Developing Human Resources paving 
     the way for a future shelter for victims of human 
     trafficking at Istanbul's Hilton Hotel. Stating that 
     both the Turkish and US governments supported the 
     shelter project, Gul thanked Powell for attending the 
     ceremony. Gul added that Turkey appreciated NATO's anti- 
     trafficking measures as important international steps. 
     Powell also emphasized that the US placed great 
     importance on the fight against human trafficking and 
     that it was encouraging all countries do all they can 
     to tackle this problem. END TEXT. 
 
 
¶7. (U) Published Tuesday, June 29, 2004 by CihanNews: 
 
     TITLE: Gul And Powell Attend Opening Ceremony At 
     Shelter For Victims Of Human Trade 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: ISTANBUL (CIHAN) - Turkish Foreign 
     Minister, Abdullah Gul and US Secretary of State, Colin 
     Powell attended the opening ceremony between the 
     Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality and Human Resource 
     Development Association (IKGV) to build a shelter for 
     people who were victims of human trade. 
 
     Gul made a statement before the signing ceremony and 
     said he is happy to provide help to these people but 
     the struggle against such crimes is difficult. Gul 
     added that collaboration against these crimes and the 
     development of new strategies is necessary. 
 
     Powell also made a statement and he said that, "Turkey 
     has taken a big step in the struggle against human 
     trade. All governments in the world must collaborate on 
     this issue." Also Powell thanked to Turkey for its 
     leadership on this topic. 
 
     Consultancy services for legal, psychological and 
     medical assistance will be offered. END TEXT. 
 
DEUTSCH