04ANKARA1393
BELBASI INSTALLATION AND THE ACTIVATION OF A NEW
Tue Mar 09 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

091216Z Mar 04UNCLAS ANKARA 001393 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR EUR/SE AND L/PM 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR PARM TU
SUBJECT: BELBASI INSTALLATION AND THE ACTIVATION OF A NEW 
SEISMIC RESEARCH STATION:  REQUEST FOR GUIDANCE 
 
 
¶1. This is an action request.  See para 4. 
 
 
¶2. The Embassy recently received a diplomatic note from the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) advising that Turkey had 
fulfilled its procedures to ratify the agreement signed on 
February 8, 2000 between the US and Turkey concerning the 
closure of the Belbasi installation and the activation of a 
new seismic research station.  (Para 5 contains the complete 
text of the diplomatic note.  Post faxed a copy of the 
agreement to EUR/SE).  The note asks whether the US has taken 
the necessary steps to allow the agreement to go into force. 
MFA DDG for the Americas Suna Ilicak subsequently told 
Pol-Mil Counselor that the GOT was anxious to have the 
agreement go into effect and asked us to confirm by 
diplomatic note that the US had completed its necessary 
actions. 
 
 
¶3. Comment:  It is our understanding that before such an 
agreement goes into force, two conditions must be met: (1) 
the individual who signed the agreement on behalf of the USG 
must have the authority to do so and (2) the agreement must 
be reported to Congress in accordance with the Case Act. 
According to the copy of the agreement at post, the agreement 
was signed by then-US Ambassador to Turkey Parris on behalf 
of the USG.  Our other records related to this agreement were 
retired. 
 
 
¶4. Action request: Embassy requests the Department advise 
whether the USG has completed the necessary processes for the 
agreement to go into force.  If the USG has taken all of the 
necessary steps, we request authorization to inform the MFA 
in writing that all internal US processes have been completed 
and this agreement is in force. 
 
 
¶5. Begin text of diplomatic note number 2004/ALGY/67567: 
 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
presents its compliments to the Embassy of the United States 
of America and has the honor to inform the Embassy of the 
fulfillment of all national procedures regarding the 
ratification of the "Agreement Between the Government of the 
Republic of Turkey and the Government of the United States of 
America Concerning the Closure of Belbasi Installation and 
the Activation of a New Seismic Research Station" signed on 
February 8, 2000 in Ankara. 
 
 
The Ministry kindly requests the Embassy to provide 
information on the ratification status of the aforesaid 
Agreement in the United States in order for the Agreement to 
enter into force, in accordance with Article XVI. 
 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey 
avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the Embassy of 
the United States of America the assurances of its highest 
consideration. 
 
 
Ankara, February 18, 2004. 
 
 
End text. 
 
 
 
 
EDELMAN