04ANKARA5968
TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH AMBASSADOR TO MOLDOVA
Wed Oct 20 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 005968 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM PGOV SMIG PREF KWMN TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH AMBASSADOR TO MOLDOVA 
DELIVERS ANTI-TIP SPEECH 
 
 
¶1. SUMMARY.  Turkish Ambassador to Moldova Fatma Topcuoglu 
delivered the following speech at a 2-day conference on human 
trafficking in Chisinau, Moldova.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. BEGIN TRANSCRIPT OF PREPARED REMARKS: 
 
SPEECH DELIVERED BY H.E. FATMA FIRAT TOPCUOGLU 
AMBASSADOR OF THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY IN CHISINAU 
 
Trafficking in Human Beings 
 
- I would like to give brief and concise information on the 
situation in Turkey from different aspects as regards the 
trafficking in human beings. 
 
- Turkey, at the crossroads of Asia, Middle East and Europe, 
bordering eight countries and lapped by 5,000 miles of 
coastline, has seriously been confronted with various forms 
of transnational organized crime, which pose a threat to its 
social order and human and democratic values. 
 
- The situation in Turkey vis a vis human smuggling and 
trafficking in human beings is most often confused with each 
other. Although Turkey is a transit country for "migrant 
smugglers", no particular link has been discovered as to the 
existence of organized transit trafficking activity or 
trafficking networks operating on the Turkish territory. 
 
- On the other hand, in recent years Turkey has become a 
destination country for nationals of transitional 
democracies, who are in search of better living conditions 
and job opportunities abroad. 
 
- Nationals of the countries of origin may enter Turkey by a 
visa obtained at border gates and may stay in Turkey for up 
to two months.  Their purpose is twofold.  Mostly, they 
travel to Turkey for "suitcase trading". Secondly, they come 
to Turkey in search of job opportunities, which were 
available for them only in illegal labour markets until 
recently. 
 
- While their presence in Turkey is generally voluntary, 
their illegal work and resident status,  nevertheless, make 
them vulnerable to exploitation. Some of them obtain legal 
residency through arranged marriages. Some others end up in 
small workshops, in tourism and entertainment sector or in 
private households, working illegally without any job 
security, insurance or administrative and judicial 
safeguards. According to statistics, majority of male workers 
are employed in the construction sector and females in 
domestic services. 
 
- As for the international obligations, Turkey became a party 
to UN Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and to 
its two additional Protocols including the "Protocol to 
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking, especially women 
and children", along with other conventions on this issue. 
 
- In this connection, Turkey amended all its domestic laws 
accordingly starting with; the Penal Code  (defines in terms 
of  Palermo Protocols "trafficking in human beings" and 
prescribes heavy penalties for traffickers, including 5 to 10 
years of imprisonment),the law on Combating Benefit-Oriented 
Criminal Organizations (criminalizes establishing, promoting, 
leading or participating in benefit-oriented criminal 
organizations with a view to carrying out organized crime 
activities), Citizenship Law (stipulates before acquiring 
Turkish citizenship through marriage a probation period of 3 
years. Law on Working Permits for Foreigners (Employment of 
foreigners in domestic services is made possible.  The 
Ministry of Labour and Social Security is authorized to issue 
all forms of work permits for foreigners to ensure better 
management and control over the process. The law aims at 
providing legal protection for foreigners against 
exploitation in labour markets and extending legal and 
administrative safeguards to private services.)  Highway 
Transportation Law (which states that the transportation 
permit will be canceled for 3 years if the charged person is 
sentenced according to certain crimes including human 
trafficking and migrant smuggling.) 
 
- In Turkey, Ministry of Foreign Affairs is responsible for 
national coordination of issues related to trafficking in 
human beings. The Ministry chairs the National Task Force on 
Combating Trafficking in Human Beings, which is composed of 
experts from concerned ministries and NGOs such as the Human 
Rights Presidency of the Prime Minister's Office, the 
Foundation for the Development of Human Resources (IKGV), the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Interior, the 
Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Labour and Social 
Security and the Directorate General of the Status and 
Problems of Woman. 
 
- The National Task Force was convened for the time in 
October 2002 and had five more meetings, last being on 18 
February 2004. The National Action Plan, prepared by the Task 
Force is already under implementation. 
 
- In the context of international cooperation, 
Turkish experts are participating to the ongoing meetings of 
the ad-hoc committee (CAHTEH), which is entrusted to prepare 
a Convention Against Trafficking in Human Beings in the 
Council of Europe. 
 
Further co-operation possibilities are considered 
particularly with the IOM on a project basis in areas of 
awareness raising, national referral mechanisms, victim 
protection, and voluntary return and reintegration assistance. 
 
In this framework, Turkey is co-funding the project on 
Establishment of the Network of and Joint Training for 
Operational Law Enforcement Officers, NGOs and International 
Organizations in Fighting Human Trafficking into the EU 
Member States from EU Accession Countries and Countries 
Bordering the EU after Enlargement which is implemented by 
IOM, in cooperation with the European Commission (EC), 
European Parliament (EP), selected EU Member States, as well 
as the Candidate Countries and Third Countries bordering the 
enlarged European Union under the European Commission 
Directorate General Justice and Home Affairs, AGIS Programme 
¶2003. 
 
Turkey has proposed bilateral co-operation and a draft 
protocol on cooperation in combating trafficking in human 
beings to the main countries of origin, whose nationals 
target Turkey in search of better standards of living and may 
become vulnerable to exploitation. So far, the positive 
responses of Belarus, Ukraine, Azerbaijan and Georgia have 
been received. In this respect, on 28 July 2004, Turkish and 
Belarus Interior Ministers signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding to enhance cooperation and show their 
determination in combating trafficking in human beings. In 
source countries, Turkish missions have expanded their 
activities in order to cooperate within the framework of the 
said protocols. 
 
A Twinning Project on "strengthening Institutions in the 
Fight against Trafficking in Human Beings" has been developed 
under the European Union 2003 Pre-accession Financial 
Assistance Programme. 
 
On the other hand, visa application measures are set in order 
to prevent fake certificates of good services issued by some 
companies in the countries of origin to be used in the 
entertainment sector, such as in casinos or hotels. In this 
respect, an informative questionnaire is prepared for visa 
applicants. 
 
- As a major step in the field of victim protection, the 
Ministry of Interior signed a protocol on 4 September 2003 
with the Foundation for the Development of Human Resources 
(IKGV), as well-established non-governmental organization 
that actively involved in projects aimed at improving social 
and health conditions and assists to victims of trafficking 
in human beings. 
 
- The Turkish Government, with its limited resources, 
provides, if necessary, accommodation and emergency services 
including psychiatric services, out of national budget and 
funds. The Ministry of Health has made the necessary 
arrangements in order to provide medical treatment free of 
charge to victims of trafficking in human beings. 
 
- The Ministry of Interior is developing an improved 
screening method in order to identify victims of trafficking 
and to address their specific needs. Moreover, victims are 
granted extended courtesy residence permits. 
 
- To address the specific needs of the children, a new 
Department for Children Affairs has been established within 
the Ministry of Interior. Accordingly Children Protection 
Units have been designated in 81 cities. 
 
- As regards awareness raising/media coverage, Turkish media 
is sensitive to criminal and humanitarian aspects of 
trafficking in human beings. Trafficking cases and 
international developments are reported widely in the media. 
 
- Awareness raising activities are focused on official 
targets such as law enforcement authorities. In additional to 
training programs, various events were organized to raise 
awareness and interest on the issue. 
 
- Anti-trafficking training has become an integral part of 
the general professional training in the Turkish 
International Academy against Drugs and Organized Crimes. 
Participants include police officers as well as other 
national and regional law enforcement officials. 
 
- Trafficking in human beings has also been included in the 
curricula of the Police Academy for final year students 
starting from this academic year. Around one thousand 
students will benefit from this lesion. Additionally, the 
Turkish Gendarmerie has included as form October 2003 the 
subject of trafficking in human beings in its education 
curriculum. 
 
- Finally, the Ministry of Interior and the Ministry of 
Justice are organizing special seminars/training programs to 
address different aspects of trafficking. Turkish experts 
take part also in comprehensive training programs organized 
by the Stability Pact Task Force, ICMPD and IOM. 
 
- Most recent developments in this regard is the 
establishment of a shelter in Istanbul in July 2004 provided 
for the victims of trafficking. 
 
Thank you for listening. 
 
 
 
EDELMAN