04BRUSSELS1337
EU SUMMIT: FOREIGN POLICY TOPICS
Fri Mar 26 00:00:00 +0100 2004
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Brussels
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRUSSELS 001337 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/26/2014 
TAGS: PREL ZL CY IS IZ IV EUN RU USEU BRUSSELS
SUBJECT: EU SUMMIT: FOREIGN POLICY TOPICS 
 
 
Classified By: Rick Holtzapple, PolOff, Reasons 1.4. (B/D) 
 
SUMMARY 
------ 
 
¶1. (SBU) The EU's March 25-26 Summit ran quickly through a 
series of foreign policy issues during dinner on March 25, 
followed up by a lunch discussion on Cyprus March 26 that 
lasted less than one hour.  The final Conclusions (available 
on at ue.eu.int/latest news) consisted of language largely 
repeating earlier positions on Iraq, the Middle East, Cyprus, 
Kosovo, and Afghanistan.  Two topics added to the agenda at 
the last minute were Russia and Cote d'Ivoire, but even on 
those the language essentially reiterated earlier positions. 
On some topics, particularly Cyprus, however, the fact that 
the Conclusions say nothing new does not mean they weren't 
the subject of lengthy debate at the working level.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
IRAQ 
---- 
 
¶2. (C) A British source told us the Conclusions on Iraq had 
been drafted by the UK together with the Irish Presidency. 
They were "carefully worded to be as helpful to the Coalition 
as possible."  The Conclusions harshly condemn the recent 
terror attacks, particularly the targeting of civilians as a 
method of attempting "to disrupt the process of restoring 
sovereignty and stability to Iraq."  The Conclusions make 
repeated reference to the EU's desire for "a strong" or 
"vital and growing" UN role in the political transition 
process, but dances around the issue of any further UNSCR by 
saying the EU looks forward to having the UN's role 
"endorsed" by the UNSC.  Asked during a press conference if 
he felt a new UNSCR was necessary, French President Chirac 
noted France's "consistent" position that the only way to 
bring stability to Iraq was by putting in place a 
representative government with full powers, but on a UNSCR 
would only say that "France's position continues to be that 
it would be useful."  European Parliament President Pat Cox, 
in a separate press conference, underlined the EU's interest 
in a "core and central role" for the UN, but added, in what 
appeared to be an indirect reference to Spain and others, 
that if such a role could be secured in time, then the EU's 
June 17-18 EU Summit "would have to deliver." 
 
MIDDLE EAST: GME, YASSIN'S DEATH 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) The language here is largely a repetition of past 
GAERC or EU Summit Conclusions.  One sentence, highlighted in 
press reports, makes a reference that we do not recall seeing 
in earlier Conclusions, but which is consistent with standard 
EU policy: "the EU will not recognize any change to the 
pre-1967 borders other than those arrived at by agreement 
between the parties."  The Conclusions also repeat the March 
22 GAERC's objections to the "extra-judicial killing of Hamas 
leader Sheikh Ahmed Yassin."  But, asked by the press about 
the EU's views on the vetoed UNSCR condemning the Israeli 
attack, Irish FM Brian Cowen commented that the draft 
Resolution failed because it was "unbalanced" and failed to 
condemn suicide bombings as well.  Asked in his press 
conference about whether Yassin's death would torpedo the 
U.S. Greater Middle East initiative, Chirac said that the 
project had been "bouscule" (which can be loosely translated 
as either "shoved" or "knocked over").  Still, in the Summit 
Conclusions the EU leaders recalled "the readiness of the EU 
to work with the US and other partners in cooperating with 
the region."  Irish PM Ahern noted that he and FM Cowen would 
be traveling to the Arab League Summit next week, and meeting 
with Egyptian President Mubarak on March 29. 
 
CYPRUS 
------ 
 
¶4. (C) Our British contact stressed that the Conclusions say 
"absolutely nothing that has not been said before."  He noted 
that drafters had argued all through the night of March 
25-26, only concluding their negotiations at 6 a.m. this 
morning.  While the final version says the Summit "welcomes 
the Commission's continued willingness to offer assistance 
for a speedy solution within the framework of the acquis," 
our contact said the Greek delegation had argued "endlessly" 
for tougher language that would stress that any settlement 
must conform to the acquis, or that no EU citizen could be 
treated differently than another.  He said that after the 
negotiations the Greeks were irritated by the British 
insistence on sticking strictly to old texts, while the Turks 
were annoyed the Conclusions included any reference at all to 
the "acquis."  "The Turks should be pleased there is nothing 
new in the text, and that it is not worse," he added.  We 
also note that the Conclusions include a sentence saying the 
Summit "welcomes the Commission's offer to organize a 
high-level international conference in Brussels on 15 April 
to prepare a donors conference." 
 
RUSSIA 
------ 
 
¶5. (C) Reportedly, over the past of couple of weeks the EU 
has gone back and forth about whether to include specific 
reference to Russia in this Summit's Conclusions.  In the end 
the Summit took the opportunity to not only congratulate 
President Putin on his re-election, but, more substantively, 
to reiterate to Russia that the EU expects its Partnership 
and Cooperation Agreement with Russia "to be applicable to 
all Member States without pre-condition or distinction as 
from May 1, 2004."  A Russian colleague observing at the 
Summit with us, acknowledged that Russia had been taken by 
surprise by its inclusion in the Conclusions, and speculated 
that it was Poland that most likely pushed for the language 
on the PCA to be included. 
 
COTE D'IVOIRE 
------------- 
 
¶6. (U) Presumably at French request, the Summit added a short 
paragraph on March 26 to its Conclusions regretting the 
recent violence and stressing that "full implementation of 
the Marcoussis agreements is essential for returning peace in 
the country." 
 
SCHNABEL