04FRANKFURT8667
Schroeder Calls for More Arab Support for Iraq
Wed Oct 06 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Frankfurt
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS FRANKFURT 008667 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINR PTER GM IZ
SUBJECT: Schroeder Calls for More Arab Support for Iraq 
 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: In widely-publicized remarks at the Frankfurt 
Book Fair -- dedicated this year to the Arab world -- German 
Chancellor Schroeder reiterated German support for the war 
on terror and for stability in Iraq, calling on Arab states 
(specifically the Arab League) to take a more active role in 
Iraq.  END SUMMARY. 
 
UNITED AGAINST TERROR 
--------------------- 
 
¶2.  At the opening ceremony of the Frankfurt book fair 
October 5 -- where the "Arab World" is this year's guest of 
honor -- chancellor Gerhard Schroeder spoke about the West's 
approach to terrorism, the Arab world, and Iraq.  He said 
terrorist attacks are a "call to battle" for the civilized 
world and one of the greatest threats to the international 
community, but noone should equate the war against terror 
with a "clash of civilizations."  Schroeder emphasized that 
economic development and human rights are key elements to 
counter the terrorist threat in the Muslim world.  He 
declared that the conflict between Israelis and Palestinians 
can only be solved politically and not militarily. 
 
ARAB STATES SHOULD DO MORE ON IRAQ 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  On Iraq, Schroeder said: "In Iraq, the security and 
stability of the whole region are at stake.  Germany will 
continue to contribute to the stabilization and 
reconstruction of Iraq.  When evaluating the conflict, the 
focus should not be on "who was right" -- this question is 
already part of history, though an important one -- but 
rather on our common responsibility for stability and 
democracy in the region.  This can only be realized when we 
are able to bring peace to Iraq.  In cooperation with the 
United Arab Emirates, we are training Iraqi police and 
military personnel ... to enable the people of Iraq to 
guarantee safety and security.  I believe only in this way 
can the conflict be solved.  But Arab states must also use 
their traditionally close relations with the Iraqi people to 
enable peace and guarantee economic development ....  I 
think the Arab League has in this respect a very important 
role to play."   NOTE:  Arab League Secretary General Amre 
Moussa was present at the ceremony, but spoke primarily on 
cultural issues.  END NOTE. 
 
BODDE