04HARARE1147
HIGHLIGHTS / RESULTS REPORT:  COMMUNITY BANKING
Tue Jul 13 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

131146Z Jul 04UNCLAS HARARE 001147 
 
SIPDIS 
 
AF/PD FOR CDALTON, IIP /G AF FOR EYORK , GCHRISTIANSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP KPAO ZI
SUBJECT: HIGHLIGHTS / RESULTS REPORT:  COMMUNITY BANKING 
 
 
¶1.  Description of Activity: 
     PAS Harare hosted a one-hour TPC on Community Banking 
with Liz Kelderhouse, Community Officer for the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). Ms. Kelderhouse 
outlined the different models of Community Banks in the U.S. 
and how they strive to reach out to the less privileged 
communities. The Information Resource Center (IRC) 
distributed copies of supporting materials to the guests. 
 
¶2. Date: July 12, 2004 
 
¶3. MPP Themes and Audience: 
  Theme: Economic / Democratic Empowerment and Business 
Development. 
  Audience: Through this event, PAS Harare reached diverse 
audiences ranging from local CEOs from the Banking sector, 
representatives from micro financing institutions and NGOs. 
A total of 25 new high profile contacts listened attentively 
and commented positively on the presentation. 
 
¶4. Justification and Objectives: 
  Despite Zimbabwe's relatively developed economy, the 
country continues to experience institutional impediments to 
financing small scale and community- based enterprises. The 
establishment of Community Banks in Zimbabwe is crucial in 
providing the much-needed funds by small enterprises that 
may not meet the credit requirements of commercial banks. 
The TPC increased awareness of the topic and presented the 
rationale behind Community banking to the Zimbabwean 
commercial banks, NGOs and community financing institutions. 
 
¶5. Results/Impact: 
     Very Good. Post was able to reach several key audiences 
(i.e.) local banking executives, representatives from micro 
financing institutions and NGOs. Some of the guests had 
never experienced a TPC and they were very curious about the 
TPC procedure. We received positive feedback from the 
participants, including several requests to continue this 
type of programming. A CEO from the local Deposit Protection 
Board who recently visited FDIC in the U.S. felt that the 
topic was very relevant to the Zimbabwe's economic 
situation. Many participants expressed interest in receiving 
more resource materials from the IRC on Community Banking. 
The event also played an important role in the Mission's 
continued effort to educate Zimbabweans about American 
business values and society, thus helping further our MPP 
goal of Economic and Democratic Empowerment as well as 
business development. 
 
¶6.   Quality of USG Support: Excellent. We commend, once 
again, the excellent support from IIP's Eboni York and 
Gretchen Christianson. 
 
 
SULLIVAN