04ISTANBUL381
ECUMENICAL PATRIARCH APPOINTS NON-TURKS TO CHURCH
Thu Mar 11 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Istanbul
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISTANBUL 000381 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL TU
SUBJECT: ECUMENICAL PATRIARCH APPOINTS NON-TURKS TO CHURCH 
SYNOD 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: In an attempt to ensure the viability of 
his institution in the face of the declining Orthodox 
community in Turkey, Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I, 
first among equals in the Orthodox world, appointed six 
non-Turkish citizen metropolitans to the church's Holy Synod. 
 The twelve-person body has ultimate authority over 
theological policies of the patriarchate and the eventual 
election of Bartholomew's successor.  Though the Treaty of 
Lausanne and other legal precedents suggest no direct problem 
with the appointments, the move raised the ire of Turkish 
secularist nationalists and sparked a wave of attention in 
the Turkish press.  How the Turkish Government and State (not 
always the same thing) respond to the appointments will be a 
test of Turkey's understanding of, and willingness to 
practice, religious freedom.  END SUMMARY. 
 
 
"Metropolitan Crisis" 
--------------------- 
 
 
¶2. (U) Bartholomew's move represented the first time in the 
80-year history of the Republic of Turkey that non-citizens 
have been included in the Synod.  The six new appointments to 
the 12-member body, which went into effect on March 1, 
include metropolitans from Greece (Crete and Rhodes), the UK, 
New Zealand, Finland, and the United States (Metropolitan 
Demetrios).  Six Turkish citizens remain members.  The 
appointments sparked a flurry of attention in the Turkish 
press, with several articles alleging that the Patriarch was 
in violation of the Lausanne Treaty.  To date, Bartholomew 
has been careful to avoid the appearance of "challenging" the 
Turkish state, and has not yet responded to many requests for 
interviews on the subject. 
 
 
¶3. (U) However, as a number of press commentators pointed out 
below the sensational headlines, the Treaty of Lausanne makes 
no mention of either the Patriarch or of the Holy Synod, nor 
does it discuss the nationality of people serving in 
theological capacities in Turkey.  In fact, the well-known 
requirement that the Patriarch and those who elect him be 
Turkish citizens dates from a 1923 edict from the Istanbul 
Governor's office, and is thus not formal Turkish 
legislation.  Since that time, no non-Turkish citizens have 
been Synod members, though the current Patriarch's 
predecessor, Athenagoras, was a U.S. citizen who was 
automatically naturalized upon arrival in Istanbul in 1948. 
It is noteworthy that Athenagoras' situation was a unique 
confluence of interests, in that his Patriarchal status was 
approved by Greece, Turkey, and the United States.  He 
reportedly arrived in Turkey on a plane lent to him by 
then-President Harry Truman. 
 
 
¶4. (U) Press coverage, while initially somewhat 
sensationalist, has not been bombastic.  However, a series of 
inaccuracies in press reporting has clouded the issue. 
Papers variously (and inaccurately) have reported that: the 
new appointees have been "hired" by the Patriarch and will 
work in Turkey; the appointees will live in Turkey and cannot 
simply enter as tourists; Turkish citizens were "removed" to 
make way for foreigners (partially true: the previous 
incumbents were too old or infirm to carry out their duties, 
and were retired); the appointments are a direct 
contravention of the Lausanne Treaty (no specific articles 
cited). 
 
 
Demographic and Political Concerns 
---------------------------------- 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Poloff met March 6 with Metropolitan Meliton, Chief 
Secretary of the Holy Synod.  Per Meliton, the appointments 
 
SIPDIS 
were intended as one way to deal with Turkey's shrinking 
Greek community.  With around 2,000 Greeks left in Turkey, 
few able Metropolitans remain.  The six newly-appointed Synod 
members are filling spots previously held by Turkish citizens 
now too old and infirm to participate effectively.  Though 
none of the new appointees are young, per Meliton, 
establishing a precedent for non-Turkish citizen 
participation in the Synod is crucial to the continuance of 
the patriarchate in Turkey.  Meliton reports that in August 
2003, prior to the new appointments, the Patriarch sent 
letters to both the MFA and Prime Minister's office which 
outlined his proposal for putting non-Turkish citizens on the 
Synod.  No reply has been received to date. 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) Though neither the GoT nor any organ of the Turkish 
State (e.g. the MFA) has given a public reaction to date, 
Meliton says he has heard that both the Turkish National 
Intelligence Organization (MIT) and other portions of the 
Turkish security establishment are unhappy with the new 
appointments.  Separately, former Foreign Minister Ilter 
Turkmen confirmed to poloff that some within the GoT will 
find the appointments objectionable, and expressed some 
surprise that the Ministry of the Interior hasn't spoken out 
to date.  Turkmen speculated that there may be legal problems 
with the appointments, though he said he was not an expert in 
minority legal matters. 
 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) The appointment of six non-Turkish citizens to the 
Synod is a bid to lengthen the life-span of the patriarchate 
in Istanbul.  With only 2,000 Greeks left, finding qualified 
senior theologians in Turkey is becoming impossible. 
Appointing foreigners to these posts also strengthens the 
Patriarch's hand within the larger Orthodox world, and helps 
the Patriarch appear in touch with his far-flung communities. 
 The appointments represent no threat to Turkey's interests; 
indeed, by strengthening the Ecumenical Partriarchate, Turkey 
enhances its position.  However, elements of the Turkish 
secularist-nationalist establishment are likely to challenge 
the appointments.  Demonstrating flexibility toward the needs 
of Turkey's minorities could be very beneficial in the run-up 
to possible EU accession talks.  But, by choosing a path of 
continuing intransigence on Halki, refusal to recognize the 
ecumenical status of the patriarchate, and objection to 
participation in the Holy Synod by non-Turkish citizens, the 
Turkish establishment is shooting itself in the foot. 
ARNETT