04ISTANBUL1575
ECUMENICAL PATRIARCHATE FOCUSES ON SECURITY ISSUES
Tue Oct 19 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Istanbul
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ISTANBUL 001575 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM TU
SUBJECT: ECUMENICAL PATRIARCHATE FOCUSES ON SECURITY ISSUES 
AND PRESS ALLEGATIONS 
 
REF: ISTANBUL 1151 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified-- not for internet distribution. 
This message was coordinated with Embassy Ankara. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Following the October 7 hand grenade attack 
on the compound of the Ecumenical Patriarchate in Fener, 
Consulate security personnel have worked closely with 
officials there to provide security advice.  The 
Patriarchate's chief administrative officer, Chancellor 
Theoliptos, expressed appreciation for the USG's attention 
and noted that he is planning a number of security upgrades 
to the compound.  He added that he is generally satisfied 
with police cooperation and response to incidents at the 
Patriarchate.  On a separate subject, Patriarchal officials, 
including the Patriarch himself, continue to inquire about 
the status of a U.S. response to press allegations that the 
Department of Defense provided 12 million USD in funding for 
"bribes" to facilitate the opening of Halki seminary.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Bombing and Follow-up: As reported in reftel, 
shortly after midnight on October 7 an unidentified assailant 
threw an explosive device (identified as a hand grenade by 
police after subsequent discovery of a pin) over the back 
wall of the Ecumenical Patriarchate compound.  The device 
exploded near the roof of St. George Church, shattering 
several windows in the upper clerestory, as well as the 
window of one apartment in the Patriarchal residential 
building facing the church.  There were no injuries.  On 
October 13, Istanbul RSO met with Chancellor Theoliptos to 
review developments and provide security advice.  The 
chancellor indicated that he is "generally satisfied" with 
police department response and cooperation.  He noted that he 
spoke with Istanbul Police Chief Celalettin Cerrah about 
security subsequent to the attack, and that the chief had 
undertaken to send someone from the Turkish National Police 
to visit the Patriarchate and make security recommendations. 
(Note: In a subsequent phone conversation, Cerrah's deputy, 
the Police Chief for Fener, confirmed that he will send 
someone to review security issues.  We will follow up this 
week to ensure that this occurs.  End Note.) 
 
¶3. (SBU) Upgrades: Theoliptos noted that he plans security 
upgrades, including a new perimeter security camera system, a 
new metal detector, and installation of new fencing that will 
make it more difficult to throw material over the wall.  RSO 
also recommended installation of shatter resistant window 
film, creation of safehavens, and solicitation of police 
support for patrolling of the back wall of the Patriarchate, 
which has been the location of most incidents.  (Note: 
Currently there is a permanent police presence at the front 
of the compound, but not at the rear.  In addition, the TNP 
provides a three-man personal protection detail to the 
Patriarch.  End Note.) 
 
¶4. (SBU) Halki Controversy: On an unrelated subject, 
Patriarchate officials, including His All Holiness himself, 
continue to express concern about a press controversy which 
briefly flared at the beginning of October regarding 
allegations that the U.S. Defense Department provided the 
Patriarchate with 12 million USD to "bribe" Turkish officials 
to facilitate the reopening of Halki Seminary.  The 
allegation, made in documents submitted to the 6th District 
Court in Kadikoy by Vasilaki Filoridi, who is suing the 
Patriarchate for alleged misuse of 3.3 million USD that he 
contributed, received wide press coverage in early October 
(albeit mostly in more marginal, nationalist papers).  The 
Patriarchate convoked the Consulate on October 6 to request 
an official USG statement denying the allegation.  We 
understand that such a message is being cleared on an 
inter-agency basis in Washington.  The Patriarch himself made 
an oblique reference to the issue in his October 10 meeting 
with a delegation from the American Jewish Committee. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Comment: The recent spate of security incidents 
surrounding the Patriarchate, coming after several years of 
relative quiet, are a matter for concern.  Turkey's progress 
towards the European Union, and understanding of the sorts of 
changes that this will require, appears to have inflamed the 
sentiments of a small core group of extreme nationalists, 
leading not just to the recent terrorist incident, but also 
to a public campaign against reopening of Halki.  We will 
continue to closely monitor the situation, and provide advice 
as appropriate, and have encouraged the Patriarchate to 
immediately inform us of further, similar developments.  End 
Comment. 
 
ARNETT