04MANAMA981
RETURNED IV PARTICIPANT IN THE SPOTLIGHT
Wed Jun 23 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 000981 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/PPD JDAVIES AND APENDLETON; ECA/PE/V/R/N RREMEIKA, 
LMOODY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OEXC SCUL KPAO BA
SUBJECT: RETURNED IV PARTICIPANT IN THE SPOTLIGHT 
 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: In the midst of anti-American sentiments in 
some segments of Bahraini society, Yousif Mohammed 
Mahmoud, a participant in an April 2004 International 
Visitor (IV) program, gave the U.S. a much-needed 
positive press spin this week.  Mr. Mahmoud reflected to 
the local press on his International Visitor experience 
and extolled American accomplishments in museum 
management, while also highlighting the value of these 
accomplishments to Bahrain.  The articles demonstrated 
the potential influence that visits to the U.S. could 
have on participants and their home societies. END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. On June 20, a half-page article in the Gulf Daily News 
entitled "Official's US Visit Builds Cultural Bridges" 
focused on the experience of International Visitor (IV) 
Mr. Yousif Mohammed Mahmoud. Mr. Mahmoud is the Director 
of the Bahrain Contemporary Art Association and was the 
only Arab participant in the "Role of Museums in American 
Society" IV in April 2004.  In the article, he asserted 
that American communities are keen to present their 
heritage and culture to the world and that Bahrain, as a 
whole, can benefit from this experience. He emphasized 
that following the example of the USG's support for 
cultural preservation would be a step in the right 
direction for Bahrain.  A similar article was published 
two weeks ago in the Bahrain Tribune. 
 
----------------------- 
IVs Make a Difference 
----------------------- 
 
¶3. Since returning from his visit to the U.S., Mr. 
Mahmoud has been active in fostering the U.S./Bahraini 
relationship. In a report written by Mr. Mahmoud to post 
about his IV experience he asserts, "I am ready to work 
with you on any program or activities that help to 
promote our relation for better understanding." He 
reported to journalists that in the spring of 2005 he is 
planning to organize a visual art exhibition of American 
artists and their Bahraini counterparts. As part of the 
project, he will use his newfound network of colleagues, 
developed during his trip in the U.S., to nominate 
participant artists. 
 
¶4. COMMENT:  This article demonstrates the long-term 
influence that visits to the U.S. can have on IV 
participants and their home societies.  As Mahmoud 
states, "The impact of this visit on me was completely 
different from what I had expected as an Arab visitor 
after 9/11.  The American people were so friendly and 
agreed that we should not judge Islam on the basis of 
individual fundamentalist activities." Post will continue 
to stay in close touch with Mr. Mahmoud and our other IV 
returnees.  END COMMENT. 
 
WILLIAMSON