04MANAMA593
MEPI INTERNEWS JOURNALISM TRAINING ON TRACK
Tue Apr 27 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 000593 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/PI-DMULENEX AND CBOURGEOIS; NEA/PPD-PAGNEW; NEA/ARP 
CKANESHIRO; DRL/PHD JLEVINSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMPI KPAO KDEM BA
SUBJECT:  MEPI INTERNEWS JOURNALISM TRAINING ON TRACK 
 
 
¶1.  Post arranged a series of meetings on April 19-22 for 
visiting Internews Network Vice President Jeanne 
Bourgault and Middle East Regional Director Karim Alrawi 
to finalize plans for MEPI-funded journalism training in 
Bahrain.  The Minister of Information has approved the 
training and he has requested that Internews partner with 
the Bahrain Journalists Association.  The first training 
workshop, on basic skills for journalists, is scheduled 
for May 22-26, and follow-on training on internet skills 
and media management are planned for the fall/winter. 
Poloff will nominate a Bahraini attorney to attend a 
course on media law in July. 
 
¶2.  Internews staff and PAO engaged with senior Ministry 
of Information staff, an editor in chief and two managing 
editors, Mass Communications faculty at the University of 
Bahrain (recipients of a MEPI university linkage), and 
practicing journalists, all of whom stressed that 
journalism training is desperately needed in Bahrain.  In 
addition to developing basic skills, journalists need 
expertise in covering democratic institutions, such as 
Bahrain's new parliament, as well as business and 
economic issues, given the ongoing negotiations for a 
Free Trade Agreement.  Although this was their first 
visit to Bahrain, the Internews staff worked quickly and 
effectively with their Bahraini counterparts to lay the 
groundwork for the upcoming training.  Post was pleased 
with their professionalism and responsiveness to program 
suggestions and logistical requests. 
 
¶3.  During a meeting with the Communications Department 
at the University of Bahrain, Internews VP Bourgault 
provided needed expertise and advice on equipment 
purchases and training for the University's new Media 
Center (currently under construction).  The Media Center 
will train Bahrain's next generation of media 
professionals and emphasize the importance of freedom of 
speech in a democracy; support for the Center is in 
post's MPP.  We appreciate Bourgault's offer of help to 
the University, especially her quick follow-on emails. 
Post will be submitting a request shortly to NEA/PI for a 
MEPI Small Grant to the University of Bahrain to support 
the new campus radio station, which will be housed in the 
Media Center. 
 
HAHN