04MADRID838
EMERGENCY ACTION COMMITTEE MEETING (EAC) - EMBASSY
Thu Mar 11 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MADRID 000838 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR DS/IP/EUR, DS/ICI/PII, DS/DSS/ITA, EUR/EX 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC
SUBJECT: EMERGENCY ACTION COMMITTEE MEETING (EAC) - EMBASSY 
MADRID 
 
REF: MADRID 00827 
 
¶1.  (U) In response to the multiple train bombings in Madrid 
on the morning of March 11, the Ambassador chaired a full EAC 
meeting to discuss the impact and implications, if any, on 
the Embassy personnel and facilities as a result of the 
bombings.  Highlights of some general and operational 
contingencies for the Ambassador to deal with can be found in 
reftel. 
 
¶2.  (U) At 0735, the first detonations occurred.  By 0745, 
the Embassy was in contact with the State Department 
Operations Center and since that point, the OPS Center has 
been kept informed and updated.  A verification of the safety 
and accountability of all employees was conducted by 
Management and Human Resources.  One employee had been in an 
adjoining commuter train coach and had been splattered with 
blood splatter but was unharmed.  PA established themselves 
as the communication Source, anticipating press inquiries. 
As of 1700 hours, no American citizens have been indentified 
as being involved in the bombings. 
 
¶3.  (U) At 1300 hours, a moment of silence was held in the 
Embassy to honor those individuals (173 at latest count) who 
lost their lives.  Also at 1300 hours, supportive 
demonstrations took place in virtually every precinct of 
Madrid.  The Spanish Government has declared a period of 
three days of official mourning and the Embassy and Consulate 
General in Barcelona will honor it by carrying our flags at 
half-mast. 
 
¶4.  (U) The physical security situation of the Mission was 
reviewed to consider any needed upgrades as a result of the 
terrorist act and determined to be fine as is.  The 
Ambassador has canceled an event scheduled for this evening 
as a show of respect and solidarity and spoke to all 
employees at 1615 hours today to discuss the tragedy and 
offer condolences.  The Embassy will be participating in a 
program of blood donation to assist with the community's 
needs and, a Locally Employed Staff (LES) appreciation day 
scheduled for Friday has been postponed.  A Warden Notice has 
been produced and has been distributed to stem the tide of 
questions and concerns, and an in-house Staff Notice was 
circulated to deal with employee questions. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The local police and Guardia Civil have 
demonstrated a concern toward Mission by increasing their 
presence and have reported two incidents of suspicious 
vehicles patrolling past the Embassy, which are currently 
being investigated. 
ARGYROS