04MADRID1834
SPAIN REQUESTS SUPPORT FOR ITS ICAO GROUP II RE-
Thu May 20 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MADRID 001834 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB/TRA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: EAIR SP ICAO
SUBJECT:  SPAIN REQUESTS SUPPORT FOR ITS ICAO GROUP II RE- 
ELECTION 
 
 
¶1.  This is an action request.  See paragraph 4. 
 
¶2.  Embassy received a dip note from the Spanish Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation requesting USG support and 
affirmative vote for the GOS's reelection as member of the 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Council, 
Group II.  The vote will take place during ICAO's meetings 
in Montreal from September 28 through October 8. 
 
¶3.  An informal translation of the pertinent language of the 
dip note follows: 
 
Begin Informal Translation 
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation presents its 
compliments to the Embassy of the United States of America 
in Madrid and has the honor to communicate that Spain is 
going to stand for the re-election as member of the ICAO 
Council, Group II, at the elections that will be during the 
35th Session of the Assembly of this organization to be held 
in Montreal from 28 September to 8 October 2004. 
 
Spain has belonged to the ICAO Council uninterruptedly since 
1951, having taken an active part in different Committees 
and Working Groups of the Organization, especially in 
operational safety, protection of air transport, and 
development of the world system of satellite navigation 
areas. 
 
Spain's geographic situation, as well as other factors 
(e.g., economic and political factors), make it a country 
with special interests in transport and air navigation, and 
in the promotion of international civil aviation. 
 
In 2003, the movement of airships and passengers in Spain's 
41 airports open for public use registered an increase of 
6.49% and 7.43% respectively, totaling more than 151 million 
of passengers and more than 1.5 million airship movements. 
Of the 41 mentioned airports, seven of them registered more 
than 8 million passengers; Madrid airport (35.4 million), 
Barcelona (22.5 million), and Palma de Mallorca (19.1 
million). 
 
Spain wishes to continue paying special attention to 
cooperative programs in the next triennium with developing 
countries, finalizing new agreements of technical 
cooperation with different countries, in harmony with the 
goals and principles that the ICAO promotes. 
 
For all the above reasons, Spain would appreciate the 
valuable support of the United States in its re-election as 
member of the ICAO Council. 
 
End translation. 
 
¶4.  Embassy requests advice on how to respond. 
 
ARGYROS