04MANAMA722
JAMES ZOGBY ENGAGES BAHRAINIS AND ADDRESSES ABU
Mon May 17 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MANAMA 000722 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/PPD MQUINN, ACASPER, DMACINNES, APENDLETON; NEA/ARP 
DJONES AND CKANESHIRO; IIP/G/NEA RWINCHESTER, TSCOTT; ECA 
DIVES 
CAIRO FOR STEVE BONDY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP OEXC KPAO KDEM BA
SUBJECT: JAMES ZOGBY ENGAGES BAHRAINIS AND ADDRESSES ABU 
GHRAIB PRISON ABUSES 
 
 
¶1.   James Zogby, founder and President of the Arab 
American Institute and media commentator, visited Bahrain 
May 10-12, 2004.  His speaking tour was co-sponsored by 
the American Studies Center at the University of Bahrain 
and the Bahrain Center for Studies and Research, with 
partial funding from PAS.  Zogby spoke to a wide cross 
section of Bahrainis during two days of well-attended 
public lectures at the University, the Bahrain Center for 
Studies and Research(think tank), and round table 
discussions.  Charg hosted a majlis in the DCMR in 
Zogby's honor for parliamentarians, business 
representatives, and government officials.  The entire 
Arab diplomatic corps (Ambassadorial rank) attended one 
of his public lectures - the hotel ballroom was full. 
Given the timing of his visit, the number one topic of 
discussion was the treatment of Iraqi POWs in Abu Graib. 
The lack of progress on resolving the Palestine/Israel 
problem was also criticized by his audiences.  His visit 
received wide and positive coverage in Bahrain's press. 
 
¶2.  Zogby's visit coincided with a time when American 
credibility faces harsh challenges due to local concerns 
about the Abu Ghraib prison abuse.  Zogby faced tough 
crowds and criticism at all of his lectures.  One 
university student, who also studied in the U.S., accused 
Zogby of "painting a rosy picture" regarding the Arab- 
American political and social experience in the U.S.  A 
Bahraini government official asked him if the U.S. would 
ever "have a fair and courageous President who could help 
solve the problems in the Middle East."  A leftist female 
columnist launched into a monologue at the Charge's 
majlis about "the American culture of killing."  She 
believes that American culture is one that encourages the 
disrespect of other peoples, citing Abu Ghraib prison 
abuse as an example.  She asked Zogby to take the 
following message back to American policymakers:  "In 
order for the U.S. to change its image in the region, it 
should stop killing people." 
 
¶3.  Zogby did an outstanding job connecting with his 
audiences.  (Comment: The columnist who gave him a hard 
time at the DCMR later stood in line to have her 
photograph taken with him.)  Zogby encouraged his 
audiences to be more proactive in shaping American 
perceptions about Arabs. "The only way to change 
misperceptions is by creating new perceptions."  He 
called on Bahrainis and all Arabs to put aside their 
concerns about visa problems and harassment at airports 
and travel to the U.S.  He encouraged them to meet with 
Americans from all walks of life - not just to visit 
Disneyland or the East Coast.  This idea was particularly 
well received.  A senior MFA official agreed that to 
initiate real change both Americans and Arabs must see 
each other clearly through personal interaction.  The 
editor-in-chief of an Arabic daily, who introduced Zogby 
at one of his lectures, hoped that an American/Arab 
dialogue could be built on a foundation of the integrity 
demonstrated by those who came forward about the 
incidents in Abu Ghraib.  The editor praised the U.S. 
media who made the abuses public, stating, "Let us not 
forget that these atrocities would have gone completely 
unnoticed had it not been for the integrity, honesty and 
decency of America's press." 
 
¶4.  Comment:  Zogby is a master; it is hard to overstate 
the usefulness of his visit.  We were fortunate to get 
him - he told Emboffs that he receives at least ten 
invitations a week to speak in the U.S. or overseas.  He 
accepted the invitation because he had not visited 
Bahrain for many years.  His integrity as a champion of 
Arab-American issues gave him hard earned credibility in 
the eyes of Bahrainis.  His message that America is not 
perfect, but is always working towards that goal, was 
particularly helpful.  N.b., He also provided a needed 
morale boost for Embassy FSNs, some of whom have been 
criticized by friends and family for continuing to work 
for the U.S. following Abu Ghraib.  END COMMENT. 
 
FORD