04PARIS8949
INTERIOR MINISTER VILLEPIN DISCUSSES ANTI-SEMITISM
Tue Dec 14 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

141424Z Dec 04

ACTION DRL-00   

INFO  LOG-00   AF-00    EAP-00   EUR-00   UTED-00  TEDE-00  NEA-00   
      P-00     SA-00    SAS-00     /000W
                  ------------------94B763  142249Z /62    
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9565UNCLAS  PARIS 008949 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KISL KIRF FR
SUBJECT: INTERIOR MINISTER VILLEPIN DISCUSSES ANTI-SEMITISM 
WITH U.S. HOLOCAUST MEMORIAL MUSEUM REPRESENTATIVES 
 
 
Sensitive but unclassified.  Protect accordingly. 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary: Throughout his meeting with United States 
Holocaust Memorial Museum officials on November 19, Interior 
Minister Villepin underlined the GOF determination to fight 
anti-Semitism in every way possible.  Villepin decried the 
rise in the number of anti-Semitic acts in France, commented 
on the recently released Rufin report on anti-Semitism, 
reviewed judicial action against perpetrators of anti-Semitic 
acts, and outlined measures he will propose to further combat 
anti-Semitism.  The Interior Minister also highlighted the 
growing concern about the rise in anti-Semitism across 
Europe.  End Summary. 
 
 
RISE IN ANTI-SEMITIC ACTS 
------------------------- 
¶2.  (U) On November 19, French Interior Minister Dominique de 
Villepin met with visiting U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum 
director Sara Bloomfield and museum officials Paul Shapiro 
and Radu Ioanid.  Villepin began the meeting by noting that 
there had been 166 violent anti-Semitic acts committed during 
the first ten months of the year.  While 10 or 11 of those 
could be attributed to elements of the extreme right, and 
approximately 50 more were committed by individuals of 
Maghreb or Arab origin, the perpetrators and motives are 
unclear for more than 100 of these incidents.  Villepin 
posited that many of these incidents are likely the work of 
individuals copying crimes who may be confused about their 
own motive for attacking Jews and Jewish sites.  Villepin 
noted that, while there had been almost identical numbers of 
Jewish and Muslim cemeteries desecrated in recent months, 
there had been many more Christian churches attacked. 
However, many Church authorities do not report or draw 
attention to such attacks to avoid copycats. 
 
¶3.  (U) In response to a question on the effect of foreign 
events on the rise in anti-Semitic acts in France, Villepin 
acknowledged that the rate of incidents increased 
dramatically after the beginning of the second Intifada in 
September/October 2000.  However, Villepin stated, the plight 
of the Palestinians is not the main cause of anti-Semitism in 
France; most North African and Arab youths in France have 
little understanding of the situation in the region.  Rather, 
he continued, anti-Semitism is a result of feelings of 
rejection and the lack of identity of some groups on the 
fringes of society.  Villepin's analysis tracks with the 
conclusions of the recently released report on anti-Semitism 
in France by noted humanitarian Jean-Cristophe Rufin that 
Villepin had requested in June.  Villepin also cited the 
Rufin report in making the link between the extreme left and 
anti-Semitism, noting that strong anti-Zionist sentiment can 
veer into anti-Semitism. 
 
GOF ACTION AGAINST ANTI-SEMITISM 
-------------------------------- 
¶4.  (U) Villepin insisted that the GOF is committed to 
combating anti-Semitism in every way possible.  The GOF 
reacts quickly, strongly, and publicly after anti-Semitic 
incidents.  Additionally, the GOF has launched education 
initiatives, brought together religious groups for 
inter-faith dialogue, and created an inter-ministerial 
committee that serves as a model for other EU countries.  On 
the judicial front, Villepin stated that punishments for 
anti-Semitic acts have been increased, although these 
toughened punishments must be applied to be effective. 
Villepin also added that judges are increasingly giving 
harsher sentences.  Currently, the Interior Ministry is 
working closely with the Justice Ministry on a special 
program to combat cyber-crime, and the GOF plans to monitor 
the internet for hate sites. 
 
FOREIGN FUNDING OF MUSLIM ORGANIZATIONS 
--------------------------------------- 
¶5.  (U) Villepin then turned to the problem of foreign 
funding of French Muslim organizations.  He noted that 
donating money is an important part of Islam, and, in many 
parts of the world, it is the fundamentalist groups that 
provide social services to the needy.  Villepin stressed the 
need to find a different and open financing structure to make 
sure social work in France is not coming from radical groups, 
citing efforts to create a system for receiving and 
collecting money from foreign governments and citizens that 
would help negate direct funding and, therefore, influence 
from abroad.  Such a foundation would also allow the money to 
be directed to organizations known to be free of radical 
ties.  Villepin also pointed out that French intelligence 
closely monitors the speeches of imams to ensure that they 
are not spreading violent sermons, and he spoke of the need 
to educate imams in the French language, institutions, and 
culture.  (Note.  This meeting took place as Villepin was 
unveiling the GOF's plan to facilitate the funding of mosques 
through the establishment of a foundation, details of which 
 
 
will be reported septel.  End note.) 
 
HOLDING FIRM AGAINST ENCROACHMENT ON REPUBLIC IDEALS 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
¶6.  (SBU) Perhaps most insightful were Villepin's closing 
comments concerning the law banning religious symbols in 
schools, which he said has been "unfairly" referred to in the 
media as the "veil law."  He noted that he had met with three 
Muslim groups before the beginning of the school year, 
telling them he would not tolerate opposition to the law and 
warning that he would vigorously combat any group that 
encouraged girls to wear headscarves or offered lawyers to 
fight the law.  "You must understand that first and foremost 
these groups want to be legitimate.  That is why we must say 
'no.'  If you give them this much (indicating the first 
knuckle on his index finger), they will demand this much 
(indicating second knuckle).  That is why you must be 
forceful and say 'no.'  Keep them here (pointing to end of 
finger).  We must stick strictly to the rules of the 
Republic.  If we don't go by the book, we will be swallowed 
up.  If we are not strict about what they can and can't do, 
they will impose their own rules." 
Leach 
 
 
NNNN