04PANAMA576
PANAMA ADOPTS "ENERGETIC MEASURES" AGAINST
Tue Mar 09 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Panama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PANAMA 000576 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
 
DEPT. FOR WHA/CEN/BRIGHAM, G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, IWI, 
AND WHA/PPC/FALLS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KCRM KWMN KFRD SMIG PM POL CHIEF
SUBJECT: PANAMA ADOPTS "ENERGETIC MEASURES" AGAINST 
TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
 
 
REF: A. PANAMA 0548 
     ¶B. LINDERMAN-SANCHEZ EMAIL 7/28/2003 
 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
¶1.  (SBU) In the past ten days (March 1-9) the Panamanian 
government (GOP) organized an inter-agency anti-TIP working 
group, set into motion a 45-day action plan, launched a 
public awareness campaign, prepared tougher anti-TIP 
legislation, readied a victims hotline, and announced that it 
had identified members of TIP gangs and that arrests would 
soon follow.  In a public statement March 8, Minister of 
Justice and Government (MOGJ) Arnulfo Escalona said that he 
had ordered Immigration, the Panamanian National Police (PNP) 
and the Judicial Technical Police (PTJ) to take "energetic 
measures" against TIP.  Legislative Assembly President Jacobo 
Salas predicted to POL Counselor March 3 that the Assembly 
would soon pass new anti-TIP legislation to include 
anti-child pornography, unimpeded police investigations, and 
stiffer sentencing requirements.  MOGJ Escalona met with DCM 
and POL Counselor March 5 to emphasize the GOP's wishes to 
fully cooperate and comply with G/TIP requirements.  We also 
learned on March 5 that PNP Director Carlos Bares had met 
several days before with Colombia's top police officials to 
discuss how the two countries should coordinate anti-TIP 
migration measures.  These events follow POL Counselor's 
March 1 meeting with Vice Foreign Minister (VFM) Nivia 
Rossana Castrellon, who has mobilized the GOP at its highest 
levels to focus on producing tangible anti-TIP results. 
Castrellon will meet PPC Director Paul Trivelli March 11 to 
discuss TIP, among other topics.  End Summary. 
 
 
Demarche to Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs 
-------------------------------------------- 
¶2.  (SBU) In an effort to focus GOP attention on TIP, POL 
Counselor met with VFM Castrellon March 1 to explain the 
annual G/TIP report and the likelihood that, in the 2003 
report (to appear in June 2004), Panama for the first time 
would be listed as out of compliance with minimum TIP 
standards. 
 
 
POL Counselor emphasized that to improve Panama's anti-TIP 
stance, GOP officials should 
 
 
A) make anti-TIP public statements; 
B) launch a public awareness campaign; 
C) institute a victims' shelter and restitution program; 
D) redouble efforts to arrest and prosecute traffickers; 
E) pass tougher TIP legislation; 
F) work toward regional anti-TIP cooperation; and 
G) form an inter-agency working group to improve coordination. 
 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Castrellon assured POL Counselor that combating TIP 
is a top GOP and a personal priority.  She said she would 
inform the GOP agencies with the power to influence TIP, 
especially MOGJ which oversees Immigration, the PNP, the 
Panama Judicial Police (the PTJ has the lead in TIP cases) of 
our discussion.  (Comment: Castrellon evidently moved 
immediately to mobilize the GOP.  PolOffs overheard her 
several hours later telling Panama's Immigration chief, "We 
need to meet very soon to discuss an urgent matter."  MOGJ 
Escalona contacted DCM McMullen shortly thereafter to request 
a meeting to discuss TIP.  End Comment.) 
 
 
Demarche to Legislative Assembly President 
------------------------------------------ 
¶4.  (SBU) On March 3, POL Counselor met with Legislative 
Assembly President Salas to explain Panama's likely status in 
the USG's 2003 TIP report, to brief him on USG TIP minimum 
requirements, and to give him a copy of the USG's model TIP 
law.  Salas, a member of the Arnulfista Party, introduced 
fellow Arnulfista legislators Francisco Aleman and Jose 
Blandon, Jr., author of the anti-TIP law now before the 
legislature.  Salas explained that there is no opposition to 
the law and predicted it would pass by April.  The bill began 
as anti-child pornography legislation last October, Blandon 
explained, but since has become a more frankly anti-TIP bill. 
 For instance, the new law will permit the police to 
investigate TIP crimes without having to wait for a victim's 
statement, which the police now do.  Examining our model law, 
Blandon commented that he would include as many provisions 
from it as possible. 
 
 
Anti-TIP Legislation 
-------------------- 
¶5.  (SBU) Speaking with a legislative staffer March 8, 
Embassy political specialist reported that the bill before 
the Assembly will include the following provisions: 
 
 
A) The police will no longer need a victim's statement to 
investigate TIP crimes; 
B) Victims who make police statements will have immunity from 
prosecution; 
C) Victims will be indemnified; 
D) Sexual tourism will be penalized; 
E) Increased sanctions for TIP crimes; and 
F) Anti-child pornography will be penalized, especially 
internet child porn. 
 
 
The legislation is due for a second debate soon.  It can 
become law only after three debates, so further improvements 
could be made before then, the legislators said.  (Comment: 
Embassy political specialist learned from a MOGJ source that 
MOGJ is drafting a more general anti-TIP legislative 
proposal.  Embassy will ensure that the drafters have access 
to the USG's model law.  The GOP also has proposed changes to 
Immigration statutes to eliminate the "Alternadora" visa, 
used by entertainers and sex workers.  End comment.) 
 
 
Meeting with MOGJ and PNP 
------------------------- 
¶6.  (SBU) DCM McMullen and POL Counselor met with PNP chief 
Bares, National Security Chairman Ramiro Jarvis, and MOGJ 
Escalona on Friday, March 5, at Escalona's request.  POL 
Counselor briefed the officials on minimum G/TIP requirements 
and on the likelihood that in June 2004 Panama would be 
listed as out of compliance with minimum standards for the 
first time.  Escalona informed us that that week the GOP had 
formed a high-level anti-TIP working group to coordinate 
anti-TIP initiatives among MFA, MOGJ, the Legislative 
Assembly, Immigration, and Ministry of Youth, Family, and 
Minors and had launched a 45-day action plan to produce rapid 
results.  PNP Chief Bares said he had just returned from a 
visit to Colombia where he had met with top Colombian police 
officials to discuss how Panama and Colombia would coordinate 
cross-border anti-TIP activities.  Escalona said Panama 
President Mireya Moscoso, as a woman head of state, was 
particularly troubled that Panama had not yet taken effective 
anti-TIP actions and therefore could be cited in the G/TIP 
report.  "Just tell us what you want us to do on TIP and 
we'll do it," Escalona said.  Bares informed EmbOff March 9 
that he had appointed a retired PNP officer to head an 
internal anti-TIP group within the PNP. 
 
 
Information from Dominican Republic 
----------------------------------- 
¶7.  (SBU) Saying that Embassy was disturbed by reports from 
the Dominican Republic Foreign Ministry via G/TIP that a 
Panamanian diplomatic official was facilitating the 
trafficking of Dominican women to Panama (See Ref B), DCM 
passed the official's name to Escalona.  Glancing at the 
name, Escalona replied that the official in question, former 
Consul General Otilio Miranda Melendez, had been fired and 
left the DR months ago.  Escalona did not specify why Miranda 
had been fired.  (Comment: Further research by Embassy 
political specialist revealed that Miranda had been fired six 
months ago on September 3, 2003 by Executive Decree 211. 
Escalona has asked Foreign Minister Arias to update MFA's 
webpage which still lists Miranda as CG.  End Comment.) 
 
 
MOGJ Acts 
--------- 
¶8.  (SBU) Following up on the March 5 meeting, POL Counselor 
spoke with MOGJ Escalona on Monday, March 8 to reiterate that 
while Friday's news regarding anti-TIP GOP activities was 
very good, concrete and public actions (such as statements, 
arrests, victim sanctuaries, etc.) are much better.  Escalona 
replied that he expected to make a public statement on TIP 
that day and that arrests would follow.  Escalona, 
accompanied by PNP Bares, appeared later in a March 8 news 
conference in which he announced to the public media, 
including television news, that the GOP had ordered a series 
of "energetic measures" against TIP and would investigate and 
break up TIP rings, pass more effective anti-TIP legislation, 
and collaborate with other countries to close down TIP. 
Escalona said a new victims hotline is operating and he 
encouraged victims to come forward to denounce their 
tormentors. 
 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
¶9.  (SBU) The GOP has introduced, in little over a week, a 
breathtaking array of anti-TIP plans and measures, which will 
make parts of our G/TIP report input obsolete (Ref A).  Our 
message on TIP has clearly gotten through to the GOP.  We 
will report changes and new developments on TIP as they 
occur.  Embassy will remain vigilant to ensure that the new 
GOP measures and actions bring real results. 
 
 
WATT