04PHNOMPENH1701
CAMBODIA'S MAN WHO WON'T BE KING -- RANARIDDH'S
Fri Oct 29 00:00:00 +0200 2004
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Phnom Penh
O 290822Z OCT 04
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3153
INFO ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS
AMEMBASSY BEIJING 
AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 
AMEMBASSY PARIS 
AMEMBASSY TOKYO 
USMISSION USUN NEW YORKC O N F I D E N T I A L PHNOM PENH 001701 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EAP/BCLTV 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS USAID/ANE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/29/2014 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM CB
SUBJECT: CAMBODIA'S MAN WHO WON'T BE KING -- RANARIDDH'S 
SNIT FIT 
 
Classified By: DCM Mark C. Storella for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C)  As Cambodia crowns King Norodom Sihamoni today, his 
half-brother, Norodom Ranariddh, is infuriating even 
supporters through childish and petulant behavior.  Ranariddh 
is stealing local headlines from the solemn coronation 
ceremonies through a series recent missteps: 
 
-- On October 25, Ranariddh's car was not permitted to enter 
the palace through the central gate, as Ranariddh sought to 
follow in behind the new King's motorcade.  Ranariddh was 
furious.  On October 26, Ranariddh insisted on removal of the 
senior palace police security officer for closing the gates 
in his face. 
 
-- On October 26, Ranariddh called for the ouster of senior 
palace minister Kong Som-ol, arguing that the position should 
not be held by an individual aligned with a political party, 
the CPP. 
 
-- Also on October 26, Ranariddh, who is president of the 
National Assembly, attacked Information Minister Khieu 
Ranariddh for halting live broadcasts on government TV of 
National Assembly sessions in favor of 15-minute summaries. 
Kanharith argued that viewers were not interested and that 
the only ones asking for airing of the full sessions were the 
Parliamentarians themselves. 
 
-- On October 28, Ranariddh raised eyebrows throughout the 
royal family by failing to attend a Buddhist coronation rite 
for royals. 
 
-- On October 29, Ranariddh emerged from one of the 
coronation ceremonies to face a phalanx of reporters.  He 
avoided controversy until the end when he was asked if he 
regretted that he was not King.  Ranariddh responded that he 
did not mind because, while not King, he was "a King maker." 
 
¶2.  (C)  Over dinner October 28 with Ambassador and visiting 
U.S. ECOSOC Ambassador Sichan Siv, three leading members of 
Ranariddh's FUNCINPEC party all expressed disgust with the 
Prince's behavior.  While all three had some personal reasons 
to be angry with Ranariddh, the strength of their 
condemnations was striking.  Prince Sisowath Sirirath noted 
that Ranariddh did not even know that, under palace protocol, 
only the King, the PM and heads of state were permitted to 
use the gate from which Ranariddh had been blocked.  Sirirath 
told the story of Napoleon, who approached the gates of 
Fontainbleau in normal clothes and was barred by the guard. 
On returning in full imperial regalia, he elevated the guard 
to general of his guard for sticking to the rules.  Sirirath 
commented that that was the way a leader should act, whereas 
Ranariddh had responded with pique and fired someone who was 
simply following orders. 
 
¶3.  (C)  FUNCINPEC Deputy Secretary General Sina Than 
expressed frustration with Ranariddh's inability to keep his 
mouth shut.  Sina noted that the National Assembly and 
FUNCINPEC had spokesmen and Ranariddh should avail himself of 
their services rather than speaking every time there was an 
open microphone.  The group went on to say that Ranariddh had 
become increasingly unserious as a political leader.  They 
expressed irritation with his fawning efforts to curry favor 
with Hun Sen, noting Ranariddh's recent declaration that the 
police should report directly to the PM so that they would 
not be subject to political manipulation.  The FUNCINPEC 
members considered this patent nonsense.  Japanese Ambassador 
Takahashi told Ambassador that Sihanouk had expressed his own 
disgust with Ranariddh during an audience October 27. 
Sihanouk reportedly said that Ranariddh had demonstrated 
consistent bad judgment and tat Sihamoni was the better 
choice to preserve the monarchy. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Comment:  Ranariddh's poor comportment over the past 
week clearly demonstrates his pique at being passed over for 
a younger half-brother as King.  While Ranariddh has 
vociferously denied any desire to ascent the throne of late, 
former King Sihanouk has commented simply that, "anyone who 
tells you they do not want to be King is lying."  Our dinner 
companions October 28 expressed grave doubt in Ranariddh's 
leadership ability, suggesting that, rather than raising his 
stature, he is increasingly making himself a laughing stock. 
King Sihamoni's reserved and respectful behavior, by 
contrast, seems quite regal indeed. 
 
 
Ray