04PRAGUE1856
CZECH PARLIAMENT COMPLETES APPROVAL FOR 2005
Tue Dec 21 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Prague
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS PRAGUE 001856 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MARR EZ IZ
SUBJECT: CZECH PARLIAMENT COMPLETES APPROVAL FOR 2005 
OVERSEAS DEPLOYMENTS 
 
REF: A. PRAGUE 1838 
     ¶B. STATE 270548 
     ¶C. PRAGUE 1855 
 
Sensitive but unclassified -- not for internet distribution. 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY.  The Czech Chamber of Deputies approved the 
final chapters of the government's 2005 deployment plan on 
December 15.  The deployment plan, which reflects the 
government's priority in the Balkans, calls for up to 600 
troops for the KFOR mission in Kosovo, and up to 90 troops as 
part of the EU's operation in Bosnia.  In Iraq it covers the 
previously authorized team of military policy through 
February, 2005, as well as a small group of military surgeons 
in Basra; approximately 90 Czech troops will be deployed in 
Afghanistan.  Any deployment of military police in Iraq 
beyond February (as per ref B) would need separate 
parliamentary approval.  END SUMMARY 
 
¶2. (U) The 2005 deployment plan approved by the Czech 
parliament on December 15 will cost the Czech government 1.3 
billion Crowns, or roughly 56 million dollars.  The plan 
authorizes the deployment of up to 850 personnel, or 
approximately 3.5% of the current Czech military force. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The 2005 deployment plan has been pending for some 
time.  Former Prime Minster Spidla's cabinet had approved the 
overall plan in July; the Senate approved it later in the 
summer.  But political instability, and opposition from the 
Civic Democrats (ODS) -- who want to limit the number of 
foreign deployments to three, and ideally two -- kept the 
comprehensive plan from being sent to the Chamber of Deputies 
for a vote.  The less controversial deployments, to Kosovo 
and Afghanistan, were separately approved by the Chamber in 
November, as was the two-month extension of the military 
policy in Iraq until after the Iraqi elections.  The new 
Bosnia mission was the most controversial and the explicit 
target of ODS criticism.  The GOCR intentionally scheduled 
the vote on the Bosnia mission to coincide with voting on the 
2005 budget, i.e., when the government was sure that it would 
have all coalition members in place to maintain its one-vote 
majority. 
 
¶4. (U) For the deployment to Kosovo, the number of Czech 
troops will grow from approximately 400 to 600 next year. 
They will operate in a joint battalion with 100 Slovaks in 
the Central Brigade, now commanded by Finns.  The Czechs 
expect to take command of the brigade in August of 2005. 
 
¶5. (U) In Bosnia, roughly 25 troops will accompany two M-17 
helicopters that are being sent for use by Eurofor HQ staff, 
and 40 Czechs will join 40 Austrians in a mechanized unit. 
Six Czech staff who have been at mission HQ will continue 
their assignments. 
 
¶6. (U) The Czechs will have approximately 90 troops in two 
operations in Afghanistan.  One group of 50, primarily 
engineers and demining experts, has been working with the 
ISAF mission in Kabul.  Their mission will continue in 2005. 
A second group of 40 light infantry recon troops and medical 
staff will be deployed as part of the German PRT in Faisabad. 
 
¶7. (SBU) The 4th contingent of Military Police training Iraqi 
police at a base in Shaiba, not far from Basra, as part of 
the multinational force, MNF-I, rotated back to Prague in 
December.  The 5th contingent of approximately 80 
MPs, which recently replaced them, will stay in Basra until 
February 28, consistent with the parliamentary decision last 
month.  No additional military police deployments were 
discussed during the parliamentary vote on December 15. 
Orders for the 5th contingent include breaking camp before 
their return to Prague. 
 
¶8. (U) The December 15 decision did include authorization for 
a six-member Czech surgical team that will remain in Iraq 
with a British field hospital.  Parliament also authorized an 
additional 35 troops from an NBC platoon to join the NATO 
Reaction Force in the second half of the year. 
 
¶9. (SBU) The GOCR is under increasing pressure from the U.S. 
and UK to extend (or otherwise replace) their military police 
in Iraq beyond February (reftels).  As discussed in more 
detail ref C, the next opportunity for the Czech parliament 
to approve additional Iraq deployments will be during early 
February. 
CABANISS