04PRETORIA5466
CLOUD CUCKOO-LAND'S LAST REDOUBT: A VISIT TO ORANIA
Tue Dec 21 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PRETORIA 005466 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SF PGOV
SUBJECT: CLOUD CUCKOO-LAND'S LAST REDOUBT: A VISIT TO ORANIA 
 
 
¶1.  Summary: A dusty little Karoo farm town situated an hour 
and a half south of Kimberly, Orania would be unexceptional 
except for one thing: all of its 600 residents are white 
Afrikaners.  Founded on the principles of self-reliance and 
preservation of Afrikaner culture, non-whites are not allowed 
to live or work in the town, which is privately owned.  The 
town even issues its own currency, the ora.  Town leaders and 
politicians hope that Orania will be the start of a new 
"volkstaat" (people's state) for Afrikaners.  Nonetheless, it 
was clear to Emboffs who visited recently that the town, with 
no discernible industry or new construction, is an entity of 
South Africa's past, not its future.  (Note on the title: 
Taken from an Aristophanes play, "cloud cuckoo-land" refers 
to a system or entity that is wildly impractical and was 
widely applied to apartheid South Africa and white-ruled 
Rhodesia in the 1970s and 1980s.)  End Summary. 
 
---------------------- 
BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 
---------------------- 
 
¶2.  Orania was originally built in 1964 by the Department of 
Water Affairs for workers on a dam on the Orange River.  The 
housing was mostly pre-fabricated but the village itself was 
quite well developed, with a church, school, post office, and 
many recreation facilities.  However, when work on the dam 
was completed in the mid-1980s, the town was almost 
completely abandoned and quickly deteriorated.  In 1990, the 
government decided to sell the town as a single entity and a 
group called the Afrikaner Freedom Movement purchased it for 
R1.5 million (at the time about $500,000).  The town 
officially opened in 1991, and soon purchased a large 
commercial farm nearby for agricultural development. 
 
¶3.  The stated aim of Orania is to provide a haven for 
Afrikaans and Afrikaner culture, which the town's leaders 
claim is threatened by demographics and the loss of political 
power in the new South Africa.  Conservative Afrikaners view 
the "volkstaat," in which Afrikaners do not rely on outside 
labor or assistance, as the only means by which their 
community can survive and thrive in the 21st century. 
Orania, which has about 600 residents, applies these 
principles to everyday life.  All jobs, even the most menial, 
are held by Afrikaners, and the town operates its own school, 
medical clinic, library, and postal agency.  The economic 
base is agricultural, with town-owned farms that grow pecans, 
almonds, and olives. 
 
¶4.  The Freedom Front, a conservative Afrikaner party that 
holds 6 seats in the National Assembly, firmly supports the 
ideals of the "volkstaat."  Poloff spoke with Jaco Mulder, 
the party's provincial leader in Gauteng, about Orania and 
how it fits with the party's aims.  Mulder said that while 
the Freedom Front does not fund Orania, he described the 
progress made there as "excellent" and thought that it could 
be the basis to show Afrikaners that the idea was 
sustainable.  He noted, however, that he did not expect the 
vast majority of Afrikaners to pick up stakes and move there, 
but that he would be happy if he could get well-to-do 
Afrikaners to financially support the community, "as Jews 
abroad have long done for Israel." 
 
------------------------------ 
AN UNIMPRESSIVE PLACE TO VISIT 
------------------------------ 
 
¶5.  Emboffs visiting Kimberly decided to take a day trip to 
Orania on December 16, currently the Day of Reconciliation 
holiday but previously known as the Day of the Vow.  The Day 
of the Vow commemorated the 1838 Battle of Blood River, in 
which a small group of Afrikaner "voortrekkers" armed with 
rifles defeated a far larger Zulu army, in the process 
killing several thousand Zulus but with no loss of Afrikaner 
life.  The victors viewed this as a sign that they were 
blessed by God, and the Day of the Vow was long considered 
one of the most sacred holidays in the Afrikaner community. 
Given that this marks the 10th year since the holiday was 
changed to its present nomenclature, Emboffs suspected that 
there might be some sort of rally or event going on in the 
town.  Upon arriving, Emboffs saw that the town was 
practically deserted.  All shops save a bakery were closed, 
and there were few people in sight.  There were a few people 
at the town pool, and Emboffs witnessed a few backyard 
picnics despite temperatures that hovered around 100 degrees, 
but most residents appeared to be out of town for the 
holidays. 
 
¶6.  Emboffs spent a few hours driving around the town and 
observed a sleepy country town with few signs of growth or 
vitality.  While there were a handful of relatively new 
houses, most of the approximately 150 homes were clearly 
refurbished from the original town.  Most were well-kept, but 
quite small.  The roads, although in good condition, appeared 
to have not been retarred since they were built in the 1960s. 
 Upon driving into town, there were several signs (all in 
Afrikaans) for guesthouses, coffee shops, and other 
attractions, but nearly all were run out of private homes and 
not stand-alone businesses.  The two major attractions were 
the small museum and the home in which the widow of former 
Prime Minister Hendrik Verwoerd, considered the primary 
architect of apartheid, spent her last years.  The yard is 
strewn with busts of the Prime Minister. 
 
¶7.  Immediately outside the town center is a small shopping 
center with about 8 stores and a garage.  Although closed, 
the town bookseller let Emboffs in her shop when she saw them 
looking through the window.  The shop was unexceptional, but 
she was able to change our rands into ora, the local 
currency.  The ora, which has the appearance of glossy 
Monopoly money, has pictures of plants, animals, and children 
on the front of the bills and advertisements for local 
businesses on the back.  The shopkeeper said the bills are 
printed in Kimberly.  She claimed that they are proving 
popular in other local towns, which also want to use the ora. 
 
 
---------------------------------- 
NOT A TOWN WITH A PROMISING FUTURE 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  Although Emboffs were unable to interact with many local 
residents and hear their perspectives, it was clear that 
Orania is not a town on the rise.  While clean and orderly, 
there was no sign of expansion or new construction in the 
town, and even the town's website (www.orania.co.za) notes 
that growth is slow.  Simply put, Orania is in the middle of 
nowhere, and except for, as one resident told a reporter, 
"old people running away from the blacks, and young people 
desperate to get jobs," there is nothing to draw people to 
this hot, dusty Karoo town.  Even Carel Boshoff, the town's 
founder and a son-in-law of Verwoerd, has told the press, "If 
South Africa stays peaceful...then I do not think I will see 
the realization of a 'volkstaat' in my lifetime."  Given the 
country's stability since 1994, and the unwillingness of 
urban Afrikaners to give up their comfortable lives to move 
to the bush, Emboffs saw no reason to disagree. 
FRAZER