04PRETORIA5323
SOUTH AFRICA: EMBASSY SCIENCE FELLOW FROM
Thu Dec 09 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Pretoria
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PRETORIA 005323 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR OES/STC/BDAUGHARTY, JROTTIER, OES/PCI/ESHAW 
STATE ALSO FOR EB/TPP/ABT/BTT/JBOBO, AF/S AND AF/EPS 
USDA FOR FAS/SOWENS, DKINCAID AND APHIS/BRS/BECH 
USDA ALSO FOR FAS/BIOTECH/SIMMONS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR ETRD SENV TBIO SF
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICA: EMBASSY SCIENCE FELLOW FROM 
USDA/APHIS HAS SUCCESSFUL VISIT 
 
REFS: A) PRETORIA 1462; B) STATE 46634 
 
CONTAINS SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED INFORMATION.  NOT FOR 
INTERNET. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  Embassy Pretoria was pleased and 
privileged to host Dr. Subhash Gupta as Embassy Science 
Fellow from September 29 to December 8, 2004.  During his 
ten-week stay, Dr. Gupta met with research groups at five 
universities and two government research councils, private 
sector representatives, numerous South African Government 
officials, and other biotechnology stakeholders.  He made 
ten presentations at workshops, conferences and seminars. 
At the end of his stay, he gave an extensive outbrief and 
recommendations to receptive officials at the Department of 
Science & Technology.  His concluding remarks encouraged: 
the South African government to take a stronger leadership 
role on plant biotechnology domestically and beyond; the SAG 
to strengthen initiatives for graduate students training in 
biosafety; the GMO regulatory body to engage in greater 
dialogue with scientists, developers and anti-GMO groups; 
and, the office of the registrar for genetically-modified 
organisms (GMO) to add several qualified scientists to its 
staff, to respond better to anti-GMO pressures.  End 
summary. 
 
Two-way information sharing with research community 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶2. (U) Embassy Science Fellow Subhash Gupta, a senior 
biotechnologist from USDA's Animal and Plant Health 
Inspection Service (APHIS), gained extensive insights into 
plant molecular biology and biotechnology research taking 
place in major universities and parastatal research 
institutions.  He met with groups of researchers at the 
Universities of the Witwatersrand, Cape Town, Stellenbosch, 
Pretoria, and the North, as well as the Council for 
Scientific and Industrial Research and the Agricultural 
Research Council.  In addition to learning about research 
activities underway and hearing local scientists' views of 
South Africa's regulatory system, Dr. Gupta shared 
information about the U.S. regulatory system for 
biotechnology products with the researchers. 
 
Interaction with private sector 
------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) Dr. Gupta visited local seed manufacturer Pannar 
Seeds at their main office in Greytown, KwaZulu Natal 
province.  He met with the CEO, biotech researchers and 
several other key groups in the company.  Pannar uses 
licensed genetic engineering (GE) technology from Monsanto 
in several of its seed products, and also is conducting 
significant research, both through conventional breeding 
techniques and GE, to address wide-ranging plant pests. 
Dr. Gupta also attended a conference of major commercial 
agricultural producers, during which he met with sugar 
farmers and millers and learned about biotechnology research 
in the sugar industry.  At this event, Dr. Gupta had the 
opportunity to meet Minister of Agriculture and Land Affairs 
Thoko Didiza. 
 
Many formal presentations, including to key policy group 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶4. (U) During his stay in South Africa, Dr. Gupta 
participated in several major workshops and conferences 
organized by the South African government and by AfricaBio, 
a local NGO that supports biotechnology and develops 
information to educate and train officials and the public. 
He made presentations at a "Bio2Biz Conference" focused on 
commercialization of biotechnology, workshops on the 
Management of Applied R&D Projects with GM Crops and on Food 
Aid and Biotechnology, along with a breakfast seminar on the 
global regulatory climate for biotechnology.  Dr. Gupta also 
spoke to a group of graduate students from all over the 
African continent at University of Cape Town's All-Africa 
House--reportedly one of his toughest audiences. 
 
¶5. (SBU) One of Dr. Gupta's most critical presentations was 
to members of the national Executive Council on Genetically 
Modified Organisms, the regulatory entity for GMOs in South 
Africa.  Representatives from six different SAG departments 
sit on the council, whose secretariat, the GMO Registrar, is 
based in the National Department of Agriculture (NDA).  On 
November 23, he gave a talk entitled "U.S. regulations, risk 
analysis and compliance for agricultural biotechnology 
products."  Based on the knowledge he had built up over 
seven weeks in-country, he commended the regulators for the 
system in South Africa.  He addressed particular issues of 
concern, including the treatment of stacked genes, 
encouraging adoption of a pragmatic approach.  He also added 
some discussion of biotech-derived pharmaceuticals, at the 
request of a Department of Health representative.  Dr. 
Gupta's comments were appreciated and well-received, 
although due to a tight schedule, there was little time for 
questions and answers.  On the margins of the session, Dr. 
Gupta urged NDA's Julian Jaftha to strike a reasonable 
balance and take a practical approach to regulating GMOs. 
 
Start-to-Finish Interaction with DST 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶6. (U) Department of Science and Technology was an 
enthusiastic and attentive interlocutor.  The DST Director 
for Biotechnology Ben Durham provided Dr. Gupta with a 
comprehensive overview of the SAG's activities in biotech 
soon after his arrival.  DST supported Dr. Gupta's 
attendance at events such as the launch of PlantBio, a DST- 
sponsored innovation center focused on plant biotechnology 
(where he was able to meet Minister of Science & Technology 
Mosibudi Mangena), at the DST-supported Bio2Biz conference, 
and in meetings with its other biotech innovation centers 
and incubators supported by DST.  Durham and his colleagues 
sought Dr. Gupta's feedback and observations in an extended 
wrap-up session on December 3.  Dr. Gupta shared his views 
of South Africa's regulatory system, the challenges it 
faces, and suggestions for addressing the challenges and 
engaged in an excellent exchange of ideas with four 
biotechnology officials from this highly-supportive 
government Department. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Dr. Gupta's feedback to DST noted the vital and 
crucial leadership role South Africa could and should play, 
at a regional, continental, and global level, given the 
country's scientific expertise, financial support for 
biotech development, and progressive regulatory system. 
However, he also noted the chilling effect that anti-GMO 
pressure groups such as BioWatch and SAFEAGE had on SAG 
leadership in agricultural biotechnology. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Dr. Gupta also discussed a notable shortcoming of 
the current regulatory system-the lack of active 
consultation with academia and industry, and the distrust 
between academia/industry and government regulators.  He 
commented that this could be caused by fear of the anti-GMO 
lobby, as well as the regulator's lack of confidence and 
capacity to carry out risk analyses.  He encouraged the 
regulators to be more open to interaction with researchers 
and the private sector, and even the anti-GMO lobby, noting 
that this will provide them with helpful insights and 
information.  He suggested that the GMO Registrar's office 
add several positions, including a full-time senior 
scientist, possibly through establishment of a prestigious 
program for scientists.  He also encouraged the government 
to organize hands-on risk analysis training to prepare 
regulators as well as researchers and developers to deal 
with biosafety issues and concerns. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Dr. Gupta raised another area of concern, namely 
the limited availability of local graduate students and the 
brain-drain of that limited number of graduates.  He 
suggested that the government consider providing incentives 
to retain graduates in South Africa and establishing science 
fellow programs at the post-doctorate or graduate level to 
help integrate science and policy. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Dr. Gupta noted the efforts of DST in supporting 
innovation centers and incubators but stressed that efforts 
needed to be expanded, to help develop and commercialize 
indigenous technologies that address agricultural needs of 
the continent.  He also urged increased funding for programs 
to raise the public's awareness and understanding of 
biotechnology, observing that only one such program existed. 
DST's Director for Biotechnology welcomed Dr. Gupta's 
comments and feedback and sincerely thanked Dr. Gupta for 
coming to South Africa.  He said he planned to continue 
their productive dialogue electronically for the foreseeable 
future. 
 
Sidetrip to Botswana 
-------------------- 
 
¶11. (U) Dr. Gupta traveled to Botswana for a productive day- 
long program on December 6, organized by Embassy Gaborone in 
cooperation with the APHIS and FAS representatives in this 
region. 
 
Thanks from Pretoria 
-------------------- 
 
¶12. (U) ECON Section's EST Unit and USDA/FAS Ag Counselor co- 
hosted Dr. Gupta's stay.  ECON and FAS staff organized and 
accompanied Dr. Gupta to as many of his meetings as 
possible.  Mission appreciated the opportunity to host Dr. 
Gupta and thanks State Department, USDA/FAS and USDA/APHIS 
for their support of his Embassy Science Fellowship in 
Pretoria.  We look forward to using the ESF program 
regularly to support mission priorities in South Africa in 
future years. 
 
¶13. (U) Dr. Gupta reviewed and cleared this cable prior to 
his December 8 departure. 
 
FRAZER