04QUEBEC108
MIXED PREDICTIONS ON BTA ENFORCEMENT IMPACT ON QUEBEC
Fri Jul 16 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Quebec
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS QUEBEC 000108 
 
SIPDIS 
 
CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION WASHDC (BONNER) 
DHS OFFICE FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS (OPTICAN) 
STATE FOR WHA/CAN (WHEELER/MCCULLA), EB/TPP/ABT/ATP (BARBARA 
YODER), EB/EPPD/PD (MARTHA DEUTSCHER) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TBIO ETRD EAGR PTER CA
SUBJECT: MIXED PREDICTIONS ON BTA ENFORCEMENT IMPACT ON QUEBEC 
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE EXPORTERS 
 
REF: A. OTTAWA 000224 
     ¶B. OTTAWA 000489 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  As the August 12 deadline for BTA enforcement draws 
near, a report in the Quebec City daily "Le Soleil" claims that 
most small Quebec agricultural export companies have yet to 
comply with the BTA requirements for registration and are 
unprepared for prior notice.  The article said that exporters 
will encounter some nasty surprises when the rules are fully 
implemented next month, and the provincial economy will suffer 
as a result.  the great majority of large producers, however, 
have already registered or are awaiting accreditation from FDA. 
ConGen follow up with key players, however, gave a mixed 
picture.  End Summary 
 
¶2.  Claude Tardif, Vice President of the Quebec Exporters and 
Manufacturers (Manufacturiers et exportateurs du Quebec (MEQ)), 
told "Le Soleil" and Consulate, that he believes that only 35% 
of small and medium-sized exporting companies were currently 
accredited in accordance with the BTA. "There is still some 
resistance," he said "but one does not fool around with FDA." 
The larger food producers such as Lassonde and Aliments Carriere 
have been ready for months, said Tardif. The Quebec trucking 
industry appears to be better prepared, with 95% of their 
exporting members (the majority of which belong to large-scale 
transportation companies) already registered.  MEQ provides 
assistance for training and coaching related to various 
complicated customs issues.  As an organization, Tardif told us, 
the MEQ was more concerned about the C-TPAT cargo security and 
customs clearance standards than with BTA.  Tardif's grim view 
was echoed by Garth White of the Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business (Federation canadienne de l'entreprise 
independante (FCEI)), a fifth of whose 105,000 members are in 
Quebec.  "Le Soleil" quoted White as saying that a large 
majority of FCEI members are not prepared and pointed a finger 
at Ottawa for failing to effectively inform members.  These 
producers, he predicted, will complain when U.S. Customs truly 
takes action next month. 
 
¶4.  Quebec agricultural organizations, however, were more 
sanguine.  Director Andre Coutu of the Quebec Agri-Food Export 
Club (Club export agro-alimentaire du Quebec) said that his 
members are set.  "No one finds it amusing, it's a lot of 
paperwork.  Inspections are more frequent but we have no choice. 
 Washington is in charge."  Likewise, Andre Turenne, Director of 
the Quebec Produce Marketing Association (Association quebecoise 
de la distribution des fruits et legumes), said that most of 
their members are in compliance. The perception among QPMA 
members is that the BTA is not an issue. In his view, Ottawa did 
a good job at getting the word out among members, many of which 
attended several meetings with U.S. and Quebec officials. 
Turenne, however, he said the association is still highly 
concerned about border delays, especially with seasonal exports 
and sees potential problems connected to the prior notice 
mechanism.  He noted that there was only a single Virginia-based 
center for prior notice, and wondered whether it would be enough 
to meet the demand. 
 
¶5.  Monique Trudel at the Quebec Ministry of Agriculture, 
Fisheries and Food judged that the situation was under control 
among Quebec produce growers.  She told us that there was no 
sign of any problems in the short term, and eventual issues will 
be dealt with on a case-by-case basis.  "Le Soleil's" article 
elicited little or no reaction at the Ministry, she stated.  The 
Ministry could not provide input on the status of transport 
companies, but assumed the figures quoted in the article were 
correct.  She said that she had seen no evidence in support of 
the charge that Ottawa had failed to effectively circulate 
information on the new rules. 
 
¶6. Comment:  Like any significant procedural change, the 
efficacy of public information campaign and of the BTA system 
itself will be evident only when it goes fully into effect. 
Given the time sensitive nature of agricultural produce, 
however, any glitches will result in significant economic loss 
to Quebec producers.  End Comment. 
 
 
 
 
 
STRUDWICK