04SANAA710
MEPI WOMEN'S PROGRAM GRADUATES CREATE SUCCESS
Mon Mar 29 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SANAA 000710 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR NEA/PI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM KDEM YM DEMOCRATIC REFORM HUMAN RIGHTS
SUBJECT: MEPI WOMEN'S PROGRAM GRADUATES CREATE SUCCESS 
 
REF: SECSTATE 48784 
 
 ¶1. (U) Summary:  Alumnae of MEPI regional programs 
immediately put lessons learned to work to advance women's 
interests in Yemen.  Less than one week after Doha, a female 
journalist won a seat on the 12-member board of the Yemeni 
Journalists Syndicate using tactics gained in the conference. 
 Political party women who participated in Doha secured 
agreement from the Supreme Committee for Elections and 
Referenda (SCER) to establish a Women's Department within the 
SCER, an important step in their efforts to reform the 
election law to create better conditions for women to run for 
office.  An Amman alumna held an "Inspiring Women in Law" 
conference in Aden 3/13 and plans follow-up work that may be 
supported by MEPI Small Grants.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
Doha Alumna Elected to Yemeni Journalists Syndicate Board; 
Election Commission to Establish Women's Department 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶2. (U) Freelance journalist and NGO activist Dhekra Abbas 
Shamsan Saeed was elected to the 1000-member Yemeni 
Journalists Syndicate (YJS) 12-member board February 24, less 
than one week after returning from Doha.  She was the only 
woman elected to the board, receiving the fifth highest vote 
count.  She said she believes she won because of the 
techniques and skills she learned at Doha, including crafting 
a message and communicating effectively.  She also credits 
the conference with providing the motivation and belief in 
herself necessary to run for office. 
 
¶3. (U) Similar, if less dramatic, success was reported by the 
National Democratic Institute (NDI) on behalf of political 
party alumnae of Doha.  Effective advocacy by several alumnae 
and NDI with the SCER resulted in an agreement mid-March to 
establish a Women's Department within the SCER, reportedly 
the first such department in the region and perhaps the 
world.  The women are discussing details of the new 
department, including its aims, structure, work plan and 
criteria for hiring, with the SCER. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Amman Alumna Holds Follow-On Conference 
on Women and the Law 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) Less than one month after returning from Amman, lawyer 
Reem Abdullah organized a workshop called "Inspiring Women in 
Law" March 13 in the southern port city of Aden to examine 
the state of women lawyers and judges in Yemen, given their 
long history in the judicial sphere, and develop a plan to 
advance their roles.  Sponsored under the auspices of the 
Governor of Aden, the workshop drew together male and female 
judges, lawyers, university professors, NGO activists and 
ROYG representatives from the Ministry of Human Rights, 
Ministry of Justice and the National Women's Committee.  The 
participants identified obstacles to women in the law, came 
up with specific proposed solutions and developed a work plan 
to generate change. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) These specific results from MEPI regional 
programming are heartening for the prospects of advancing 
women's participation in Yemen.  In a wide-ranging discussion 
between MEPI alumnae, NDI representatives and Ambassador at a 
DCM-sponsored dinner 3/9, it became clear that the Yemeni 
women returned from Doha and Amman motivated and full of 
specific ideas to advance women's interests.  While NDI will 
continue to train and assist the Doha women, Post is 
exploring a MEPI Small Grant with Reem Abdullah to support 
her efforts on women in the law.  End Comment. 
HULL