04SANAA611
TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT -- YEMEN
Tue Mar 16 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 SANAA 000611 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, IWI, NEA/RA, NEA/ARP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM SMIG ASEC PREF ELAB KCRM KWMN KFRD YM TRAFFICKING PERSONS
SUBJECT: TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT -- YEMEN 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 07869 
     ¶B. SANAA 505 
     ¶C. 02 SANAA 2848 
     ¶D. 02 SANAA 2028 
 
 ¶1.  (SBU)  Following is Post's response to ref A questions. 
 
-------- 
Overview 
-------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Ref A para 18 (Overview of a Country's Activities 
to Eliminate Trafficking in Persons) 
 
¶A.  Yemen may be a country of origin, transit and destination 
for internationally trafficked persons.  In the past, 
trafficking has not been a known problem in Yemen, but some 
indications exist that one may be emerging. 
 
Several cases of children being trafficked within Yemen and 
to Saudi Arabia for street begging were caught by ROYG in 
2002 (confirmed) and perhaps in 2003 and 2004 (unconfirmed). 
These cases involve smugglers known to families who allow 
their children to be taken for begging purposes.  The 
Ministry of Interior (MOI) has made arrests in several cases 
and given instructions for police to investigate and stop the 
practice.  In addition, several ROYG ministries are working 
with UNICEF to investigate the problem. 
 
In 2003 and 2004, increasing numbers of prostitutes, 
particularly from Iraq, may point to a possible problem with 
sex trafficking.  Unreliable and unconfirmed estimates from 
several sources place the number of prostitutes from 1,000 to 
as high as 5,000 in Yemen.  The increase is directly related 
to the new development of Iraqi women acting as prostitutes. 
The prostitution appears organized, although by whom or what 
is unknown at this time.  Two prostitutes told Emboffs they 
were forced via threats against their family in Iraq to 
become prostitutes.  It is unknown but suspected that some 
prostitutes may be under unreasonable debt bondage or 
underage.  The ROYG has begun an investigation (ref B). 
 
Smuggling of migrants from the Horn of Africa (HOA) is a 
problem, although there is no evidence that any are forced 
into prostitution or exploitative labor.  The ROYG is aware 
of the smuggling problem, and treats those who arrive in 
Yemen as prima facie refugees. 
 
Numbers of possibly trafficked persons are impossible to 
estimate accurately.  Yemen has poor government 
infrastructure and little ability to collect and maintain 
reliable statistics.  Children affected in the 2002 cases 
numbered 20, with no confirmed information on further cases 
of child smuggling in 2003-2004.  While the number of 
prostitutes is estimated to be between 1000 and 5000, Post 
can only confirm two instances where Iraqi prostitutes 
indicated they were forced. 
 
¶B.  The children smuggled were trafficked from areas in 
northern Yemen near the Saudi border to Saudi Arabia by 
persons known to their families for begging purposes.  The 
prostitutes who might be trafficked come primarily from Iraq. 
 Other prostitutes and migrants come from Horn of Africa 
(HOA) countries such as Ethiopia, Somalia and Eritrea. 
 
¶C.  Post became aware of an increase in the numbers of Iraqi 
prostitutes in Yemen in late 2003.  Although it is unclear 
how many of these prostitutes fit the trafficking definition, 
it is likely that the sex trafficking problem increased in 
scope. 
 
¶D.  The ROYG and UNICEF have undertaken a project to examine 
the nature and extent of possible internal and external child 
smuggling.  The project is in its nascent stages, with survey 
work beginning in March 2004. 
 
ROYG ministerial officials were unaware of any possible 
problem with sex trafficking until Post began raising it in 
January 2004.  In February 2004, the Minister of Human Rights 
informed Ambassador that an investigation by relevant ROYG 
ministries into possible sex trafficking had begun (ref B). 
Because trafficking is a nascent issue in Yemen, no surveys 
or reports have been available previously. 
 
¶E.  The prostitutes that may be trafficked into Yemen live 
mostly in Aden and Sana'a.  In Aden, they provide their 
services through hotels and clubs.  In Sana'a, brothels are 
normally found in houses, although some services can be 
obtained at major hotels.  It is not known what conditions 
they might live in when not at work. 
 
Two Emboffs were told by two different Iraqi prostitutes that 
they were forced into prostitution via threats against their 
families in Iraq.  In addition, the prostitution rings appear 
to be well-organized.  One source reported that the Iraqi 
women are brought into Yemen on three-month rotations (see 
classified reporting).  It is not known whether any are 
subject to debt bondage.  It is not confirmed but suspected 
by one source that some may be under the age of 18 (marriage 
age in Yemen is 15). 
 
¶F.  Ministry of Interior forces caught persons who were 
smuggling children across the Yemen border to Saudi Arabia 
for the purposes of begging.  MOI arrested 8 persons in three 
incidents involving 20 children.  According to several 
sources, including non-governmental, the smugglers were from 
the same areas as the children and known to the families, in 
some cases relations.  The families let their children go for 
begging because they live in extreme poverty and they were 
either given or promised money.  There is no/no evidence that 
any children have been smuggled against their families 
knowledge, nor is there evidence that any children did not 
return to their families.  MOI explained to the families that 
smuggling was illegal.  As with the child labor problem (ref 
D), Yemeni culture and tradition do not lend themselves to 
the understanding that these issues are wrong. 
 
¶G.  Trafficking in persons is not/not a high-profile issue in 
Yemen because it has not been a problem in the past, the 
scope of the problem now is unknown, and counterterrorism is 
their primary concern.  However, high-level ROYG political 
will to combat trafficking was recently evidenced by 1) 
active cooperation with UNICEF on a study to examine child 
smuggling, including minister-level instructions given to MOI 
offices in remote governorates to help gather statistics; 
and 2)  an immediate response to Post's queries about the 
possibility of Iraqi prostitutes being trafficked via A) the 
decision to require entry visas for Iraqis (ref B); and B) an 
immediate investigation launched into possible sex 
trafficking (ref B). 
 
Because trafficking has not been a problem in the past, it is 
unknown whether the ROYG would be willing to take action 
against government officials if they were involved in 
trafficking. 
 
¶H.  It is unknown whether individual members of government 
forces facilitate or condone trafficking.  Should the 
prostitution issue be confirmed to contain incidents of sex 
trafficking, it is possible that some government officials 
would have been aware or involved, including customs and 
border officials as well as law enforcement and the military. 
 For example, hotels in Aden where prostitutes ply their 
trade are always monitored by MOI and Political Security 
Organization (PSO) officers.  Corruption is a problem in 
Yemen. 
 
¶I.  The ROYG's ability to combat trafficking faces several 
limitations, including extreme poverty, porous borders with 
Saudi Arabia and along its 1400  km coastline, and lack of 
training for police and security officials in identifying and 
preventing cases of trafficking. 
 
¶J.  The ROYG does not systematically monitor or report its 
anti-trafficking efforts, because it was not/not a problem in 
the past. 
 
¶K.  All aspects of prostitution are illegal and criminalized, 
including the activities of the brothel owner/operator and 
others.  See para 4. 
 
¶L.  Marriage age in Yemen is 15 years old.  Young marriage is 
a problem, particularly in rural areas where by tradition 
girls can marry as young as 13 years old.  However, these 
instances of young marriage do not seem to fit the parameters 
of buying and selling of "child brides," but rather come from 
Yemen's traditional society.  There is no evidence that 
Yemenis go abroad to purchase "child brides." 
 
---------- 
Prevention 
---------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Ref A para 19 (Prevention) 
 
¶A.  The issue of trafficking in persons is too new for the 
ROYG to admit to an overall problem because ROYG officials 
both lack understanding of the issue and do not yet know the 
scope and type of any potential problem.  However, when 
specific problems arise, such as child smuggling, the ROYG 
has admitted to a possible problem and taken action against 
it, e.g., arrests and prosecution of the child smugglers and 
undertaking a study to examine the issue.  When Post raised 
the issue of possible trafficking of Iraqi prostitutes and 
noted the difficulty of tracking numbers and cases because 
Iraqis were not required to have a visa, the ROYG responded 
within weeks by issuing a ruling to require entry visas for 
Iraqis (ref B). 
 
¶B.  ROYG agencies involved with any anti-trafficking efforts 
would include:  Ministries of Human Rights, Interior 
(including immigration and border control), Labor and Social 
Affairs, Foreign Affairs, Justice; the Prosecutor General. 
 
¶C.  Because trafficking was not/not a problem, the Government 
has not run any anti-trafficking information or education 
campaigns. 
 
¶D.  Yes, the ROYG supports many programs that indirectly help 
prevent trafficking problems, although they are not 
specifically targeted at trafficking.  For example, several 
programs on women's literacy, combating violence against 
women and increasing women's rights have been supported by 
the ROYG and NGOs.  Combating child labor is a ROYG priority 
(see para F below). 
 
¶E.  As a poor country, Yemen's ability to support prevention 
programs is limited. 
 
¶F.  Because trafficking has not been a problem, there is no 
relationship per se between the ROYG and NGOs on the 
trafficking issue.  However, generally the ROYG and NGOs 
cooperate closely on related issues such as combating 
violence against women, promoting women's rights and 
children's work.  For example, the U.S. Department of Labor 
funded ILO-International Program for the Elimination of Child 
Labor (IPEC) program combating child labor in Yemen 
cooperates with ROYG entities and with local NGOs working on 
similar issues (ref D). 
 
¶G.  In response to the attack on the USS Cole in 2000 and the 
9/11 attacks, the ROYG embarked on a comprehensive border 
control improvement program with U.S. assistance.  Yemen's 
borders are ocean, rugged mountains and desert, which are 
very difficult to control.  Smuggling and illicit trade are 
problems.  Border agreements with Saudi Arabia and Oman were 
agreed in 2000, with border demarcation proceeding.  The U.S. 
is assisting the ROYG with border control through the 
Terrorist Interdiction Program (TIP), using the Pisces 
system, and through assistance to establish a Yemeni Coast 
Guard to patrol the seas.  While border control improvements 
began in response to the terrorist threat in Yemen, increased 
border control has the added affect of improving the ROYG's 
ability to identify and prevent instances of trafficking 
should they exist. 
 
At the same time, effective border control remains nascent 
and the ability to monitor emigration and immigration 
patterns for trafficking is limited.  A U.S. training program 
in this regard may be warranted. 
 
¶H.  Because trafficking in Yemen has not been a problem, 
there is no inter-agency working group or task force to 
combat the problem.  Should a task force be established, it 
would likely involve the entities listed in para 3.B. above 
and be coordinated by the Minister of Human Rights. 
 
¶I.  Because trafficking has not been a problem, the ROYG does 
not coordinate with multinational or international working 
groups to prevent, monitor and control trafficking.  At the 
same time, the ROYG is actively involved with related groups, 
such as the UN Commission on Human Rights. 
 
¶J.  Because trafficking has not been a problem, the ROYG does 
not have a national plan of action to address the issue. 
 
¶K.  Because trafficking has not been a problem, the ROYG does 
not have a specific person or entity identified that is 
responsible for developing anti-trafficking programs. 
However, as noted above, any efforts in this regard would 
likely be coordinated by the Minister of Human Rights, who 
has broad responsibilities to improve human rights in Yemen 
(ref C). 
 
----------------------------- 
Investigation and Prosecution 
----------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Ref A para 20 (Investigation and Prosecution of 
Traffickers) 
¶A.  Article 248 of the Yemeni Penal Code stipulates a jail 
sentence of 10 years for "anyone who buys, sells, or gives as 
a present, or deals in human beings; and anyone who brings 
into the country or exports from it a human being with the 
intent of taking advantage of him."  Article 249 punishes 
kidnappers for seven years, with the death penalty in cases 
where the kidnapping included killing or sexual assault. 
Article 280 provides sentences of 15 years to death in the 
second offense for persons who "accept adultery for his wife, 
female members of his family or those he is taking care of," 
which presumably could be used to punish sex traffickers. 
Persons accused of trafficking, especially that involving 
coerced labor or prostitution, would also presumably be in 
violation of Article 47 of the Yemeni Constitution, which 
stipulates that "the State shall guarantee to its citizens 
their personal freedom, preserve their dignity and their 
security...personal freedom cannot be restricted without the 
decision of a competent court of law."  Article 161 of the 
Child's Rights Law imposes upon the State to "protect the 
child from all forms of sexual molestation and economical 
disadvantage" and to protect the child from carrying out 
immoral activities or using them in prostitution or 
molestation or other illegal activities. 
 
The Constitution prohibits forced or compulsory labor. 
 
While only Article 248 appears to explicitly punish 
trafficking, the other articles outlined above could 
presumably be used as well. 
 
¶B.  The penalty for traffickers under Article 248 is up to 
ten years in prison, while other offenses carry penalties up 
to and including the death penalty. 
 
¶C.  The penalty for rape by an individual is up to seven 
years in prison. If the rape is committed by two or more 
persons, the punishment is a minimum of two years and a 
maximum of ten years. If the victim is less than 14 years 
old, the penalty is a minimum of three years and a maximum of 
¶15. 
 
¶D.  In 2002, the ROYG arrested 8 persons for attempting to 
smuggle 20 children to Saudi Arabia for begging purposes. 
The Ministry of Interior (MOI) reported that most of the 
arrestees were related to those children recovered from their 
custody (mostly elder brothers) and provided the names of 
those arrested and those children recovered to Post.  The 
children were returned to their families, who had allowed the 
children to be taken, and MOI held discussions with the 
families to explain why what they were doing was wrong.  MOI 
also issued a circular to the governorates that border Saudi 
Arabia instructing MOI offices to be alert to the problem of 
child smuggling and to arrest perpetrators. 
 
MOI indicated that those arrested in 2002 were referred to 
the judicial authorities.  Post was unable to obtain 
confirmation from the General Prosecutor or Ministry of 
Justice on the status of these cases in time for this report. 
 This inability to provide detailed case information is not 
surprising.  The Yemeni judicial system is fragmented and 
disorganized, with court decisions still hand-written and 
court records decentralized among individual clerks within 
courts. Post will report such information when it becomes 
available. 
 
In 2003, the Minister of Justice issued circular 13 for 2003 
to the Heads of Appeals courts of all governorates in which 
he noted that rulings issued by primary courts against 
kidnappers and smugglers did not correspond with the "size 
and danger" of the phenomenon of smuggling. 
 
¶E.  Regarding child smuggling, research is underway to 
determine the scope and methods of such operations (see para 
2) but initial indications are that smugglers are free-lance 
operators who are often related to the children in question 
or at minimum well-known to the families.  It would appear 
that such smuggling is due to dire economic conditions and is 
not organized internationally or related to large crime 
syndicates. 
 
Regarding possible sex trafficking, the problem is too new to 
determine yet who might be behind the trafficking.  One 
source identified a particular company, but that information 
is not corroborated (see classified reporting). 
Regarding migrant smuggling that could possibly include 
instances of trafficking, it is unknown who might be behind 
the trafficking. 
 
¶F.  The ROYG has actively investigated instances of child 
smuggling (see para 4.D above).  The ROYG has launched an 
investigation into possible sex trafficking (ref B). 
Overall, however, because trafficking has not been considered 
a problem in Yemen, the ROYG's investigative focus has been 
on counterterrorism rather than trafficking.  In addition, 
the MOI's abilities in investigation and surveillance remain 
limited and rudimentary. 
 
¶G.  Because trafficking has not been a problem in Yemen, Post 
does not believe specialized training has been provided. 
Should such training be identified as necessary, Post would 
welcome ideas on how U.S. assistance might help because the 
ROYG's capabilities in this regard are limited. 
 
¶H.  Because trafficking has not been a problem in Yemen, it 
is doubtful that the ROYG formally cooperates with other 
governments on TIP. 
 
¶I.  Post is unaware of any extradition of persons charged 
with trafficking to other countries.  The ROYG maintains 
active counterterrorism cooperation with several countries, 
including Saudi Arabia and Egypt, where some wanted persons 
have been exchanged.  However, under the Constitution, Yemeni 
citizens cannot be extradited to another country. 
 
¶J.  Post cannot confirm any government involvement in or 
tolerance of trafficking.  However, should the prostitution 
problem be identified as sex trafficking, it is likely that 
low-level ROYG officials would have been, at minimum, aware 
of it because most prostitution takes place in hotels where 
there is a large presence of both Ministry of Interior and 
Political Security Organization officers. 
 
¶K.  Because it is not confirmed that government officials are 
involved in trafficking, no steps have been taken by the ROYG 
to end such participation.  The ROYG is undergoing an 
investigation into possible sex trafficking that may uncover 
low-level government involvement. 
 
¶L.  The government signed and ratified ILO Convention 182 
Concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the 
Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour in 1999. It 
ratified the Slavery Convention of 1926 in 1987, and the 
Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons and 
Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others in 1989. Yemen 
ratified the Rights of the Child Convention in 1991.  The 
ROYG has signed but not yet ratified the Optional Protocol to 
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on Sale of Children 
and Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the 
Child in Armed Conflict in 1991. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Protection and Assistance to Victims 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Ref A para 21 (Protection and Assistance to 
Victims) 
 
A-I.  Because trafficking has not been a problem in Yemen, 
questions A-I in paragraph 21 of ref A do not yet apply in 
Yemen.  No NGOs address this problem specifically (see para 
3). The children recovered from the child smuggling incidents 
were returned to their families.  The possible sex 
trafficking problem is too new to establish what, if any, aid 
to victims might be provided.  Post will seek information 
from G/TIP to give to the ROYG about what kind of assistance 
ROYG should provide that best meets international standards 
in case a problem is confirmed. 
HULL