04TAIPEI4074
AIT URGES TAIWAN TO FOLLOW ICCAT AND OTHER FISHING
Mon Dec 27 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 004074 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR OES/OMC, EAP/RSP/TC 
 
STATE PLEASE ALSO PASS TO AIT/W 
 
USDOC FOR NOAA/NMFS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: SENV EFIS TW
SUBJECT: AIT URGES TAIWAN TO FOLLOW ICCAT AND OTHER FISHING 
RULES 
 
¶1. Summary.  On December 13 and 14, OES/OMC Deputy 
Director Stetson Tinkham urged Taiwan's Fisheries 
Agency and Ministry of Foreign Affairs to heed the 
International Commission for the Conservation of 
Atlantic Tuna (ICCAT) call for Taiwan to crack down 
on Taiwan fishing vessels found to be fishing in 
excess of their allotted bigeye tuna quotas in the 
Atlantic Ocean.  Tinkham noted that failure to do so 
could both erode gains Taiwan has made in 
participating in international fisheries 
organizations and U.S. support for such 
participation.  End Summary. 
 
Issues raised on sidelines of APEC Fisheries Talks 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶2. While the main purpose of Tinkham's trip was to 
discuss the handover of the APEC Fisheries Working 
Group Lead Shepherd responsibilities, Taiwan's side 
was so well prepared for the talks that time was left 
for other discussions.  Therefore, on behalf of AIT, 
Tinkham raised ICCAT issues both on the sidelines of 
his meetings with Fisheries Administrator Shieh Dah- 
wen on December 13 and with Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs (MOFA) Deputy Director General for the 
Department of North American Affairs Kelly Hsieh on 
December 14. 
 
Background 
----------- 
 
¶3.  At the November 2004 meeting of the International 
Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT), 
Chinese Taipei was "identified" as having diminished the 
effectiveness of ICCAT management measures.  In particular, 
Taiwan's fishing vessels were determined to have caught 
bigeye tunas in the Atlantic Ocean and then reported them as 
caught in the Pacific or Indian Oceans, a practice known as 
"tuna laundering," or falsifying catch records.  If this 
situation is not corrected by next year's ICCAT meeting, 
Chinese Taipei risks loss of its cooperating party status in 
ICCAT and thus risks losing opportunities to fish for ICCAT- 
managed species. 
 
Talks with Fisheries Agency 
--------------------------- 
 
¶4.  Following very productive and efficient talks regarding 
the hand-off of APEC Fisheries Working Group Lead Shepherd 
responsibilities, Tinkham met with Fisheries Administrator 
Shieh Dah-wen.  Tinkham urged Shieh to do all that he can to 
meet Taiwan's obligations to reduce its catch of Atlantic 
bigeye tuna to make up for past overages in its ICCAT catch 
allocation in accordance with the agreement reached at the 
November ICCAT meeting in New Orleans.  Tinkham noted that a 
failure to do so could diminish Taiwan's ability to take 
full advantage of its role as APEC Fisheries Working Group 
Lead Shepherd.  He further noted the great progress both 
sides have accomplished in finding ways for Taiwan to fully 
participate in numerous regional fisheries organizations. 
He reiterated the statements made at the ICCAT meeting by 
OES Deputy Assistant Secretary David Balton that better 
compliance was critical in order to uphold the terms of the 
2002 AIT/TECRO Memorandum Of Understanding Concerning 
Cooperation in Fisheries and Aquaculture.  If Taiwan does 
not improve its adherence to international fisheries 
convention rules, AIT might withdraw from the MOU.  The MOU 
serves as the basis for continued U.S. efforts to assist 
Taiwan in participating in fisheries organizations. 
Administrator Shieh appeared to understand the message and 
its significance and committed to do all he can to maintain 
the very positive cooperative working relationship between 
himself and his agency on behalf of TECRO and OES and the 
National Marine Fisheries Service on behalf of AIT. 
 
Talks with MOFA 
--------------- 
 
¶5.  At the early end of the APEC Fisheries Working Group 
talks, on November 14, Tinkham and AIT ESTOFF visited Kelly 
¶W. Hsieh, MOFA Deputy Director General for the Department of 
North American Affairs.  Tinkham reviewed Taiwan's fishing 
problems and imparted AIT's hope that those problems would 
not undermine gains made by Taiwan in the international 
fisheries community over the past decade, which could hinder 
further opportunities for Taiwan to participate in other 
regional fisheries organizations.  Tinkham reviewed the 
problems identified at ICCAT and informed Hsieh about the 
2002 AIT/TECRO MOU, from which AIT may withdraw if Taiwan 
does not find a way to see that its fishermen adhere to 
international fishing convention rules.  Tinkham also 
thanked Hsieh for Chinese Taipei's willingness to take on 
the APEC Fisheries Working Group Lead Shepherd role and 
urged Taiwan not to let its fishing problems undermine 
opportunities such a leadership role could afford. 
¶6. Hsieh expressed his appreciation for AIT's concern and 
ongoing positive cooperation.  He asked that AIT provide him 
with written points on the matter.  He also requested more 
details about the exact purported discretions on Taiwan's 
part. 
 
¶7.  AIT thanked Hsieh for his time and promised to provide 
written points as soon as possible. 
 
¶8.  Comment.  Tinkham in all of his meetings made clear the 
importance of reining in rogue fishermen.  This challenge 
was only accentuated by a Taiwan-sponsored field trip to a 
fishing village on December 13, where the local guide 
informed Tinkham and AIT ESTOFF that the eyes drawn on 
either side of the bows of several fishing boats were 
intended to symbolize fishermen's efforts to see and move 
toward fish below water and see and move away from 
government officials above water.  End Comment. 
 
¶9. This report has been cleared by State/OES/OMC.