04TAIPEI3360
TAIWAN: LATE-SEASON TYPHOON STRIKES TAIWAN
Thu Oct 28 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TAIPEI 003360 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO AIT/W AND EAP/RSP/TC 
 
STATE PLEASE ALSO PASS TO USEPA/OIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT SENV ECON KSCA KPAO TW
SUBJECT:  TAIWAN: LATE-SEASON TYPHOON STRIKES TAIWAN 
 
¶1. Summary.  Typhoon Nock-ten struck Taiwan's northeast on 
October 25.  Nock-ten moved more swiftly than July's Typhoon 
Mindulle and August's Aere and caused less damage. 
Nevertheless, four people were killed, one remains missing, 
and more than 100 were injured.  Taipei was one of the 
hardest hit areas.  Schools and offices in Taipei and some 
eastern cities were closed, and financial markets were shut 
down for one day.  380,000 households lost power, but 
service was restored quickly to most.  Taiwan's Council on 
Agriculture estimates total agricultural losses to be USD 
8.75 million.  End summary. 
 
 
Strong Winds and Floods 
----------------------- 
 
¶2. Gusting winds and torrential rains battered northern 
Taiwan as Typhoon Nock-ten struck the island on October 25. 
The fast-moving storm spent most of a day working its way up 
Taiwan's eastern coast to the capital Taipei, disrupting 
road and air traffic.  Hardest hit was the northeast, where 
Keelung harbor was temporarily closed and many flights in 
and out of Taipei were canceled.  Schools and offices in 
Taipei and some eastern cities were closed.  Financial 
markets were also shut down for one day.  Sandbags were 
piled at the entrances to Taipei's subway system to prevent 
flooding.  However, as the Typhoon moved swiftly over the 
island its influence quickly dissipated.  Although the 
powerful winds flipped over a truck on the highway, 
officials said that precipitation was much less than 
predicted. 
 
¶3. The Taiwan government's Flood Disaster Relief Center 
announced on October 26 that Typhoon Nock-ten had resulted 
in a total of four deaths, one missing and 100 injuries. 
Among the four deaths, three people were killed in flash 
floods, including a TV reporter and a rescue worker who were 
swept away by raging waters.  Typhoon Nock-ten was the 24th 
typhoon reported in the Pacific Ocean this year.  Taiwan's 
death toll this year so far due to Typhoons stands at 53 
people.  An additional, 30 people are still listed missing. 
Nock-ten formed particularly late in the season.  Taiwan's 
Central Weather Bureau officials said that the last typhoon 
to strike Taiwan this late in the year occurred in 1959. 
 
Power and Water Disruption 
-------------------------- 
 
¶4. On October 25, about 380,000 households in Taiwan lost 
electricity, but power was quickly restored to most.  By the 
evening of October 26, only 28,000 households were still 
without power.  The state-owned Taiwan Power Company 
indicated that all service should be restored by October 27. 
High turbidity levels disrupted water supplies after the 
last two typhoons.  However, the Water Resources Agency 
stated that this storm did not affect reservoirs.  Water 
turbidity levels are within the acceptable range, and water 
supplies are operating normally. 
 
Agricultural and Economic Impact 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶7. The Council of Agriculture estimated on October 26 that 
the total damage to the agricultural sectors was NTD 295.9 
million (about USD 8.75 million), but those figures may be 
revised upwards.  Rice, leafy vegetables and various 
seasonal fruits were the hardest hit.  Despite the losses, 
agricultural officials said most supplies should not be 
affected since the fast-moving storm missed the central and 
southern parts of Taiwan where the majority of the island's 
vegetables are grown.  Because electricity and water 
supplies were not badly disrupted, industrial losses were 
minimal. 
 
Paal