04WELLINGTON640
NEW ZEALAND COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR DHHS/CDC
Wed Jul 28 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WELLINGTON 000640 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OTRA AS NZ
SUBJECT:  NEW ZEALAND COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR DHHS/CDC 
OFFICIALS MARY SERDULA, MARY KAY SOLERA, AND KATHY COBB, 
AUGUST 7-13, 2004 
 
REF:  CDC ATLANTA GA 002694 
 
ATD NO. 2277 
 
¶1.  CDC should note that no official USG travel to New 
Zealand can be undertaken without country clearance. 
Country clearance for New Zealand should never be assumed by 
CDC or any other USG agency. 
 
¶2.  Embassy grants DHHS/CDC officials Mary Serdula, Mary Kay 
Solera, and Kathy Cobb country clearance to New Zealand from 
August 7 - 13, 2004.  The purpose of this visit is to attend 
the 4th annual Produce for Better Health Foundation 5-a-day 
International Symposium in Christchurch as guest speakers. 
 
¶3.  Embassy understands that no further assistance is 
required. 
 
¶4.  Embassy point of contact is Economic officer Joy 
Yamamoto. 
Contact details are as follows: 
Office:  644-462-6182 
Fax:     644-472-3537 
Cell:    027-446-4467 
E-mail:  YamamotoJO@state.gov 
 
¶5.  All official visitors to the Embassy are required to 
report to the Regional Security Office for a TDY security 
briefing. 
 
¶6.  Visitors should use local taxi service, which is 
generally safe, reliable and frequent.  Taxi fare from the 
airport to downtown Wellington hotels is approximately 
NZD30. 
 
¶7. Travelers can exchange currency at the airport upon 
arrival and ATM machines are readily available throughout 
New Zealand. 
 
¶8.  Biosecurity Fines: 
 
The government of New Zealand instituted fines for non- 
declared biosecurity hazards on travelers entering New 
Zealand with undeclared plant, animal or food material. 
Travelers found carrying these undeclared items will be 
immediately fined NZ$200 (US $150).  Biosecurity is a 
serious issue in New Zealand and fines will be administered 
immediately and without warnings. 
 
¶9.  Security Assessment: 
 
a.  There are no local terrorist groups or support groups 
believed to be operating in New Zealand at this time.  In 
light of the worldwide security alert all visitors should 
heighten their security awareness and report any unusual 
incidents to the regional security office. 
 
b.  Anonymous telephonic threats and obscure threat mail 
have occasionally targeted U.S. diplomatic missions in New 
Zealand.  In response to U.S. policies and actions, various 
groups in New Zealand have demonstrated occasionally at the 
embassy in Wellington and at the consulate in Auckland. 
These demonstrations were of a small scale and were 
peacefully conducted.  During these demonstrations, the host 
country police and protective services provided adequate 
protection to the embassy and consulate. 
 
c.  While New Zealand is considered a low threat crime 
environment, Wellington and Auckland have experienced an 
increase in violent and petty crimes.  Home invasion 
robberies and assaults, once very rare, are becoming more 
frequent.  Burglaries and thefts occur countrywide. 
Visitors should be aware that street crime is a daily 
occurrence in the larger cities, including Wellington and 
Auckland.  Common sense precautions should be taken, 
especially at night, to avoid becoming a target of 
opportunity. 
 
d.  All forms of public transportation are generally safe at 
all times of the day. 
 
Swindells