05ADANA190
SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR OCTOBER 18, 2005
Wed Oct 19 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Adana
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ADANA 000190 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS PGOV PHUM TU ADANA
SUBJECT: SOUTHEAST TURKEY PRESS SUMMARY FOR OCTOBER 18, 2005 
 
This is the Southeastern Turkey press summary for October 18, 
¶2005.  Please note that Turkish press reports often contain 
errors or exaggerations; AmConsulate Adana does not vouch for 
the accuracy of the reports summarized here. 
 
POLITICAL, SECURITY, HUMAN RIGHTS 
 
BOLGE / ZAMAN:  Adana Governor's Office launched a campaign to 
raise money for the earthquake victims in Pakistan. 
 
¶2.      HURRIYET:       Van Bar Association condemned the remarks of 
Van Prosecutor Kemal Kacan, who reportedly told a bar member in 
September that he did not trust the Bar Association attorneys 
because half of their members were also supporters of the PKK. 
Kacan was already known for his July 19 disclosure to the press 
of details of a classified investigation conducted against the 
rector of Van's Centennial University. 
 
¶3.      SABAH / HURRIYET:       Mehmet Kartal, Van deputy from the CHP 
(Republican People's Party) and Chief Doctor of the Istanbul 
Kosuyolu Hospital, paid a visit to Van's Centennial University 
rector, who is currently under arrest at a Van jail on charges 
of smuggling historical artifacts and for irregularities while 
conducting the purchase of a 25-million-dollar medical device 
for the faculty of medicine in the university. Meanwhile, YOK 
(Higher Education Board) deputy chairperson has been conducting 
studies in Van to submit a report on the case to the 
extraordinary meeting of the YOK members tomorrow. 
 
¶4.      HURRIYET:       Erzurum's Veterinary Control Research 
Institute announced that chicken deaths in Agri's Patnos 
district were most probably due to a type of cholera seen in 
chickens. 
 
¶5.      OZGUR GUNDEM:   Women activists in Adana and Diyarbakir 
held activities to extend support for the "World Women's March", 
an event that started on March 8, 2005 in Brazil and ended in 
Burkina Faso, one of the poorest countries of Africa. 
 
¶6.      OZGUR GUNDEM:   Adana Security Directorate conducted 
home raids in Adana and detained 6 persons.  The officers did 
not divulge any information about the reasons for the 
detentions. 
 
¶7.      OZGUR GUNDEM:   A 21-year-old male disappeared in Adana 
on October 10, and his family has "serious" concerns for the 
life of their son. 
 
¶8.      OZGUR GUNDEM:   The daily reported incidences of 
mutilated bodies of terrorists killed, and drew attention to the 
(Turkish) judicial system for not responding to cases in which 
there were complaints filed by the regional Human Rights 
Associations on the issue of terrorists' body parts, such as 
ears, noses, and other extremities, found cut apart or dissected 
from the body. 
 
¶9.      OZGUR GUNDEM:   The second court hearing of the Ugur and 
Ahmet Kaymaz case will be held in Eskisehir on October 24. (The 
first hearing was held in Eskisehir on July 12.) According to 
the daily, MHP Provincial Cahirperson in Eskisehir has been 
issuing "intimidating" messages and "stirring" tension in the 
province as the day for the court trial draws closer.  Security 
officers in the province have already been taking precautions to 
heighten security measures. 
 
¶10.     BOLGE:  A whirlwind caused material damage in Adana's 
Karatas district causing a roof of a building in a mosque 
complex and two separately located minarets  to collapse. 
 
 
 
 
REID