05AMMAN2435
PAS Amman Hosts Iraqi and Jordanian
Thu Mar 24 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Amman
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AMMAN 002435 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/PPD for Martin Quinn 
IIP/T/GIC for Jennifer Bochner 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP KMPI KPAO XF IZ JO
SUBJECT: PAS Amman Hosts Iraqi and Jordanian 
Journalists for Economic Reporting Workshop 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  As part of PA Amman's ongoing Media 
Professionalization Program, and in support of the MEPI 
goal of encouraging a professional and independent 
media, PA Amman organized workshop on economic, 
financial, and business journalism in the period March 
14-17.  The workshop, which was directed by journalist 
and university lecturer Martha Steffens, attracted 
participants from all Jordanian dailies as well as six 
leading Iraqi publications, introduced participants to 
concepts in economic journalism that were new to them, 
and provided practical experience in interviewing 
techniques.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. Description of Activity:  During her one-week stay, 
journalist and university lecturer Martha Steffens 
directed a four-day workshop on economic, financial, 
and business journalism.  Ms. Steffens guided 
participants through discussions on the journalist's 
role in economic transparency, the importance of 
journalist ethics in reporting business and company 
information, basics of business journalism, 
understanding global business issues, understanding 
public companies, covering emerging markets, and 
covering capital flow in emerging markets, including 
the role of the Central Bank.  There was also a mock 
interview with a former economic advisor to the prime 
minister of Jordan, and a DVC with students of Global 
Journalism and Business and Economic Reporting classes 
at the University of Missouri School of Journalism. 
Participants included both Jordanian and Iraqi 
journalists.  The program was organized by US Embassy 
Amman in coordination with US Embassy Baghdad. 
 
¶3.   Date: March 14-17, Fiscal Year: 2005. 
 
¶4.   Justification and objectives: Jordan, and to a 
greater extent Iraq, are undergoing deep economic as 
well as political transformation.  With movement 
towards a market economy, economic developments are 
taking place that are completely new to journalists. 
This workshop was an attempt to help them understand 
some of these new developments, and to acquaint them 
with how they are covered in the American media. 
 
¶5.   MPP objective and audience reached:  Promotion of 
democracy and freedom of expression by enhancing the 
professional skills of journalists. 
 
¶6.   Result/impact:  Through lectures, participation 
from the floor, and a mock interview, the workshop 
leader engaged participants in an intensive exchange, 
which eight out of the 15 participants rated as 
excellent, and a further 3 rated as very good. The 
majority considered that the selection of the topic, 
its suitability to journalists' needs, the treatment of 
the subject, and the selection of reading material were 
very good to excellent. 
 
¶7.   Material developed by post:  Post produced a 
workshop program that included Arabic-language articles 
on a number of economic subjects pulled from the 
website of the "Initiative for Policy Dialogue," a 
global network of resources for journalists begun by 
Nobel-prize winner Joseph Stiglitz.  This information 
was identified by the workshop leader, Ms. Steffens. 
Post also provided participants IIP-produced Arabic 
language material on the US economy, the "Language of 
Trade" and the importance of transparency. 
 
¶8.   Non USG source of in-country funding/in-kind 
support: None 
 
¶9.   Quality of U.S. support and IIP offices involved: 
Excellent support -- and a special thanks to Jennifer 
Bochner for her excellent work and unflagging energy in 
helping post put together this ongoing and valuable 
series.  HALE