05AMMAN6848
STREAMLINING THE JORDAN ARMED FORCES
Wed Aug 24 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Amman
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 AMMAN 006848 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/23/2015 
TAGS: PREL MARR MASS MCAP PM JO
SUBJECT: STREAMLINING THE JORDAN ARMED FORCES 
 
REF: A. AMMAN 5849 
 
     ¶B. IIR 6 853 0072 05 
     ¶C. IIR 6 853 0148 05 
     ¶D. IIR 6 853 0156 05 
     ¶E. IIR 6 853 0165 05 
 
Classified By: CDA Christopher Henzel for reasons 1.4 (b), (d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  The Jordan Armed Forces are seeking to 
re-make themselves as a smaller, more highly-skilled force. 
It remains to be seen whether this will be a less-expensive 
force.  Some of the military,s traditional social welfare 
and political functions will be hard to shed at a time of 
belt-tightening across the government.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) With a serious fiscal crisis forcing the civilian side 
of the GOJ to tighten its belt (ref A), more cost-cutting and 
modernizing changes could be coming soon for the Jordan Armed 
Forces (JAF) (refs B-E.)  The JAF has already taken some bold 
steps to turn itself into a lighter force.  For example, it 
has placed into long-term storage much armor, artillery, and 
other heavy equipment that is no longer necessary, given the 
JAF,s present needs and future threat assessment.  At the 
same time, the JAF is reducing recruitment of low-skilled 
infantrymen in order to focus on building a smaller number of 
better-trained units.  King Abdullah has spoken to Charge 
Hale of reducing total JAF manpower from about 110,000 to 
90,000. 
 
----------------- 
Review and Reform 
----------------- 
 
¶3. (C) The JAF is undergoing a review process, similar to the 
U.S. Department of Defense's Quadrennial Defense Review 
(QDR), in an effort to overhaul the Jordanian military and 
align the JAF with King Abdullah,s efforts to cut public 
expenditures.  Post's Defense Attach Office (DAO) is 
moderately confident that some level of real reform will take 
place; however, it remains to be seen whether these changes 
will translate into reduced expenses and a lower overall 
defense budget, or increases in efficiency without real cost 
savings. 
 
¶4. (C) JAF leadership is preparing to present to the King 
plans for a military that can respond rapidly and be deployed 
quickly.  This review was scheduled for presentation during 
early July, but has been postponed several times.  Some of 
the issues under consideration: 1) consolidation of 
resources; 2) the extent to which communications systems need 
to be upgraded and made more interoperable; 3) the impact of 
potential reforms on recruiting, training, and promotions; 
and 4) increased inter-service cooperation among military 
branches.  Senior JAF officials have told us they are 
committed to reforming promotions procedures from automatic 
length of service or time-in-grade promotions to advancement 
based on merit, regardless of time spent in the military. 
Senior JAF leadership also says it wants to increase the role 
of women in the military beyond the traditional 
administrative and nursing functions in which they are still 
concentrated.  (Note: Post has been informed that 
recommendations for 40 new positions for women ranging from 
enlisted personnel up to the general officer level will be 
included in the JAF's review.  End Note.) 
 
¶5. (C) DAO contacts explain that the JAF's review for the 
King has been postponed primarily to incorporate comments 
from the British military.  We understand that British 
officers, who were asked by King Abdullah to oversee the 
review process, were very critical of their Jordanian 
counterparts after being briefed on JAF reform plans.  They 
argued that the JAF focused too heavily on hardware to the 
detriment of strategic planning and internal reform. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Political and Social Service Functions 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (C) The GOJ will no doubt move cautiously, however, 
because of the likely political and economic consequences of 
some of the reform proposals.  The JAF has traditionally 
served an important role in the monarchy,s alliance with 
Jordan,s East Bank minority.  Its officer corps has provided 
careers for many loyal East Bank families, and its enlisted 
ranks have been part of the social safety net, an employer of 
last resort for both tribesmen and East Bank townsfolk.  This 
is, of course, an expensive way to provide services to 
economically challenged loyalists.  Finding alternative means 
to carry out some of the JAF,s social and political 
functions will prove a challenge for the GOJ.  DAO Amman is 
encouraging the JAF to focus this review more on further 
consolidation of its resources, and ways to better utilize 
USG funding and programs in an effort to reach its goals. 
The ultimate success of the review process will depend on the 
magnitude of cut-backs and reforms it recommends, and the 
King's reaction to it. 
 
HENZEL