05ANKARA6554
TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, October 16-
Wed Nov 02 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 10 ANKARA 006554 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, October 16- 
31, 2005 
 
¶1. In response to G/TIP inquiries, national and 
  international media sources published the following news 
  articles about TIP in Turkey.  Text of articles 
  originally published in Turkish is provided through 
  unofficial local FSN translation. 
 
¶2.  Published by Hurriyet on Monday, October 17: 
 
     TITLE:  Six Sex Slaves, Including a Pregnant Woman, 
     Saved 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Moldovan M.A. (26), who took refuge at the 
     Antalya Police Department, claimed that Sedat Ugurkan 
     (26) forced her and her two sisters into prostitution. 
     She explained that she fled the house that they were 
     kept in by tying a bed sheet to the balcony. 
 
     The police raided the house and detained Sedat Ugurkan 
     and saved O.F. (21), who is pregnant, and V.F. (19). 
 
     M.A. said that she was kidnapped in Izmir and brought 
     to Antalya.  She added that she was subject to torture 
     with iron bars and forced into prostitution. 
 
     O.F. said, "He sold us and also forced us to be with 
     him.  When they realized that I was pregnant, they 
     tried to sell me to other pimps for $3,000.  They 
     decided not to buy me when they learned I was pregnant. 
     So they replaced me with a woman from another house." 
 
     In a raid on a second house, Ukrainian O.Y. (25) and 
     N.D. (22) and Georgian N.O. were saved. Metin Marasli 
     (43), Ramazan Celebi (46), Mehmet Turgut (44), Mehmet 
     Kabadayi (34), Selim Coman (26) and Moldovan Nino 
     Sarikaya were detained for forcing women into 
     prostitution.  The gang members reportedly had a 
     criminal record on mediating for prostitution and human 
     trafficking.  END TEXT. 
 
¶3.  Also reported by Hurriyet on Monday, October 17: 
 
     TITLE:  Those who sleep with sex slaves are guilty of 
     rape 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Men in England who are with women who are 
     either sex slaves or who have fallen in the hands of 
     prostitution gangs can be charged with rape.  Ministry 
     of the Interior Tony McNulty told the Observer, "Even a 
     man without intention who has sex with such women are 
     guilty of rape."  McNulty continued, "For example, a 
     woman who tells her customer that she is being forced 
     to prostitute and that customer having paid for the 
     services, without argument, is guilty of rape."  The 
     Observer noted that the Minister's words do not imply a 
     change to the law, but rather there will be new 
     applications of the law.  END TEXT. 
 
¶4.  Published by Vatan on Tuesday, October 18: 
 
     TITLE:  Pimp Priest gets 2.5 years in prison 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  A 42-year-old priest assigned to Midilli 
     Island in Greece was found guilty of pimping and given 
     a sentence of 2.5 years and a fine of 2,000 Euros.  The 
     priest, in response to the charges of pimping a 28-year- 
     old Russian woman and a 22-year-old Polish woman, said, 
     "I really felt sorry for these women because they were 
     not getting paid for sleeping with men.  I was giving 
     the money I collected from customers to them.  The 
     allegations are slanderous."  It was noted that 
     relations with the military were good due to the fact 
     that the priest and the two pimped women went to the 
     barracks together.  The priest's attorney, in defense 
     of his client, stated, "Everyone who lives here has 
     slept with these two women."  The principal of the 
     regional high school was seen at the arraignment to 
     show his support for the priest.  END TEXT. 
 
¶5.  Published the The Miami Herald (www.miami.com) on 
Tuesday, October 18: 
 
     TITLE:  Azerbaijan asks Dade how to fight slavery 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  With the threat of financial aid from the 
     United States being cut off, beset by public corruption 
     and plagued by sex slave trafficking, the former Soviet 
     republic of Azerbaijan needs help. 
 
     It found some this week in Miami. 
 
     On Monday, a group of prosecutors from Azerbaijan met 
     with their counterparts at the Miami-Dade state 
     attorney's office to learn how American prosecutors 
     handle sex crimes and help victims cope with the 
     trauma. 
 
     "Anytime we can assist prosecutors around the world 
     helping victims of sexual abuse get justice, it's in 
     the interest of our office," said Assistant State 
     Attorney Joshua Weintraub, head of the sexual battery 
     division. 
 
     The problems plaguing Azerbaijan are not uncommon to 
     former Soviet republics. 
 
     Tucked next to the Caspian Sea between Russia and Iran, 
     Azerbaijan has become a hub for trafficking in human 
     cargo:  Women and children are sold as sex slaves to 
     countries such as the United Arab Emirates, Pakistan 
     and Turkey. 
 
     The U.S. State Department has called the country's 
     efforts to prosecute traffickers "anaemic."  In 2004, 
     only 106 trafficking-related investigations were 
     reported, of which only 10 resulted in convictions - 
     down from the previous year. 
 
     In terms of monetary aid, the State Department lists 
     Azerbaijan on its "Tier 2 watch list."  Tier 3 
     countries, such as Cuba, get no humanitarian aid from 
     the United States. 
 
     But progress is slowly being made, officials say. 
 
     Last year, the government outlined a national plan to 
     battle corruption and crime.  This year, an 
     anticorruption law was passed, and antitrafficking 
     legislation is being drafted. 
 
     "We have the political will to create very effective 
     legislation to fight these types of crimes," Bahruz 
     Mahmudov, the head of human resources for the 
     Azerbaijan Prosecutor General's Office, said after 
     presenting a keepsake rug to Miami-Dade prosecutors as 
     a show of thanks. 
 
     Intertwined in that battle against human trafficking is 
     the prosecution of sexual abuse cases, which in many 
     developing countries often go unreported because of 
     apathy and cultural stigmas. 
 
     The idea to visit with the prosecutors sprang from Beth 
     Sreenan, a legal advisor at the U.S. Embassy in 
     Azerbaijan who once was a prosecutor in Miami. 
 
     On Monday, the visitors sat down with 10 prosecutors, 
     attorneys from the American Bar Association and several 
     representatives from nongovernmental agencies, such as 
     the Azerbaijan Association of Young Leaders, which play 
     a crucial role in advocating change in the former 
     republic. 
 
     Miami-Dade prosecutors explained how they meet with 
     victims of sexual assaults, interview suspects and 
     gather important forensic evidence. 
 
     They also talked about coordinating counseling for 
     victims and using task force methods to involve other 
     agencies in the cases. 
 
     "In Azerbaijan, we do not have the shelters.  We do not 
     have the hot lines," Sreenan said.  "What we are trying 
     to do is develop the institutional cooperation at all 
     levels and a larger level of trust between the NGOs and 
     the government."  END TEXT. 
 
¶6.  Published by Tempo Magazine on Tuesday, October 18: 
 
     TITLE:  Slave Market 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Date:  October 11, 2005.  Place: 
     Umraniye, one of the modern shanty-towns of Istanbul. 
     We are in a first-floor office on the busiest street of 
     this sub-province.  On its sign it says that they find 
     nannies, employees without children to work at villas, 
     and nurses.  We are in the single-room office of a 
     consulting company. 
 
     The owner of the company wears a suit and he is middle- 
     aged.  He did not want to talk to a tape recorder 
     because of security reasons, but he talked when I 
     turned off the recorder. 
     "There is slave market in Istanbul that is carried out 
     under the guise of a consultation company.  I listen to 
     the foreign women who come here for work.  There are 
     Ukrainian, Uzbek and Bulgarians who are raped and 
     beaten.  I also know women who are taken from such 
     companies and sold for prostitution." 
 
     When I asked for an address or a contact person, he 
     refused to share this with a journalist because he was 
     afraid.  The only result that I had was that I was on 
     the right path.  I found myself in hot pursuit. 
 
     The information was that some consultation companies, 
     which were established under the guise of finding 
     nannies, nurses and servants, created an almost slave 
     market.  Women are being rented from one company to 
     another without any guarantees or protection. 
 
     On the second day, I am again in Umraniye.  I head down 
     a street right across from a modern and luxurious 
     residential area.  I had called the company the day 
     before and told them that I was looking for a foreign 
     nanny.  We set up an appointment for the next day. 
 
     When I walked into the building, I noticed the 
     humidity.  I noticed a few women inside who looked 
     foreign.  I asked for the owner, with whom I had talked 
     to on the phone.  He came and we shook hands.  He 
     invited me to his office.  M.B. did not have a sign on 
     the door indicating that he had a company there.  He 
     knew only my name, and without checking out who I was 
     and not asking who recommended me, acted eager to reach 
     a deal in this slave market.  If I paid the money, I 
     could take a woman out right that moment.  There is no 
     contract or agreement.  Where do I take her?  To whom 
     do I take her?  Am I going to hurt her?  There is no 
     answer to any of these questions.  At least it is not 
     important for the company owner. 
 
     I could immediately take away a Bulgarian woman if I 
     paid the $350 monthly salary and the 60 million TL 
     leave expense, as well as the 70 percent commission to 
     the company.  But my purpose was to collect 
     information.  I kept bombarding him with questions that 
     a regular client would not think of asking.  M.B. 
     responded, "I currently have one woman.  There are 
     those who will arrive in three to four days.  They 
     arrive by boat.  But I do not know today how old they 
     are and what their specialties are.  I have a woman 
     broker.  She brings them." 
 
     M.B.:  You will pay 350 USD monthly and pocket money 
     for her expenses on her days off.  This is the lowest 
     price.  We get 15 million TL per week for the day off. 
     They take one day off each week.  They leave in the 
     morning and come back in the evening.  This is the 
     monthly salary.  For example, Bulgarians have to exit 
     every three months.  We have women from 25 to 55 years 
     of age.  I work mostly with Bulgarians and Uzbeks. 
 
     Q:  How much do I pay you? 
 
     M.B.:  We charge a 70 percent commission.  For example, 
     if you are not pleased with her, we immediately replace 
     her. 
 
     Q:  Would I be in a difficult position legally?  It is 
     legally wrong? 
 
     M.B.:  Legally speaking, they do not have work permits. 
     In short, it is illegal.  But there are a lot of such 
     foreign women who are working.  Everybody works like 
     this.  Yes, they are illegal, but then there are many 
     workers in Turkey who are not enjoying social security. 
 
     Q:  Do you pay tax? 
     M.B.:  Companies have to obtain permission to employ 
     foreigners.  So they work illegally, without 
     permission. 
 
     Q:  Are we going to enter into a contract? 
     M.B.  We do not need to sign a contract because there 
     is no legal aspect to it.  If you like, I can give you 
     a receipt confirming that you made a payment for 
     consultation. 
 
     Q:  If I talked to a young woman, what would be her 
     price? 
 
     M.B.:  Young ones will not go for less than 500-600 
     USD. 
 
     Q:  If the woman steals something and runs away, what 
     would I do? 
 
     M.B.:  We keep the passports of these women.  Trust is 
     very important and we guarantee the work.  This has 
     happened to some of our clients in the past.  In order 
     to prevent this, we keep their passports. 
 
     Q:  For how long have you been involved in this 
     business? 
 
     M.B.:  I have been doing this for seven months, but I 
     came a long way.  I sent two people to Cyprus last week 
     to the house of a mother of a famous artist. 
 
     Q:  How do women come to you?  Is the Mafia involved? 
 
     M.B.:  Foreigners come here and spend some money.  They 
     pay a commission to those who bring them here.  For 
     example, a woman brings them to me.  In other words, 
     the Mafia is not involved.  If they individually wanted 
     to come, they would not be able to.  Where would they 
     go?  They do not know where to go.  But certainly there 
     are those who are involved in other businesses under 
     the guise of consultation. 
 
     I was encouraged with this chat that I had in the 
     consultation company.  Look what is being experienced 
     in Istanbul:  a slave market.  As I delved deeper, I 
     noticed that these consultation companies were all over 
     town, from Kadikoy to Bostanci, Bakirkoy to Sisli, and 
     Besiktas to Umraniye.  They established a slave market 
     under the guide of human resources. 
 
     On the third day, I called one company on the 
     recommendation of another.  When I told them that I 
     wanted to interview them and the foreign nannies as a 
     "Tempo" reporter, I got the same response, "Hold on for 
     a minute," but I could not manage to talk to the 
     bosses.  I was not given appointments either.  Some of 
     them claimed, "We do not employ foreigners."  So the 
     only remaining method was to pretend to be a client. 
 
     This time my appointment is in Sirkeci.  I am facing a 
     broker who rents women either to clients or to such 
     companies.  He gave me an appointment at a hotel that 
     he owns.  It is on one of the side streets on the 
     Sultanahmet-Sirkeci tramline.  I was surprised when I 
     saw the hotel.  This four-story hotel was in very bad 
     shape.  Inside looked like those in the old Turkish 
     movies where peasants coming to a big city go.  In the 
     lobby there were five rows of very dirty armchairs. 
     There was an old television.  I saw the person that I 
     talked to on the phone.  He was in his 60s and spoke 
     with an East (Kurdish) accent and one of his feet was 
     on the coffee table in front of him. 
 
     His phones rang constantly.  His conversations proved 
     that I was at the right address.  Haggling over prices 
     . A new Georgian women's group . Problems with one 
     woman.  Finally it is my turn.  The 30-35 year-old- 
     looking man next to him is his son.  He did not even 
     raise his head from the paper he was reading.  The 
     father immediately asked, "How did you find me?  Who 
     gave you a reference?"  I responded in general terms, 
     "A friend of mine recommended you."  He did not look 
     satisfied.  He asked me what type of service I needed 
     and how much I was willing to pay.  He told me that he 
     had women from Ukraine, Moldova, Uzbekistan and 
     Bulgaria.  Indeed, women who are waiting for clients 
     stay at his hotel.  This hotel owner in Sirkeci is 
     involved in an illegal business, without establishing a 
     legitimate company and without paying tax. 
 
     He asked for one billion TL per month for a young 
     woman.  He said he would take 60 percent and the woman 
     40 percent.  But he also said he would personally 
     deliver the woman.  He decided to use such a method 
     after some incidents.  A client who employed her as a 
     servant made indecent proposals and the woman 
     complained to him about the client.  They immediately 
     took away the Ukrainian woman from that man. 
 
     As we were speaking, his son said, "If you are pleased 
     and if the woman is happy, then there is no problem. 
     It is between the two of you."  He noted that he could 
     show me a woman right away, but that 2-3 days later a 
     new group would be coming and that I would have a 
     better selection.  He added, "I wanted to meet you 
     personally because I cannot make such arrangements 
     immediately following the first encounter."  I told him 
     I would come back after the new group arrives.  He 
     asked for a phone number to call me.  I told him that I 
     would call him and left. 
 
     The slave market works like this:  women from the 
     Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Bulgaria and Moldova are sent to 
     Turkey by brokers who have contacts here.  These women 
     first pay a commission to the brokers.  Later the 
     brokers in Turkey meet with them.  They rent these 
     women and keep their passports.  Women are sent to 
     houses to work, as if they are the property of these 
     brokers or consultation companies.  Nothing is legal in 
     this business.  Neither do the women have work permits, 
     nor do they have any social security.  They do not pay 
     taxes either. 
 
     Following my three-day research, I see the inhuman 
     implementations.  In some of those consultation 
     companies, there are rooms for these women.  They live 
     all together in these single rooms until the clients 
     leave.  Some women are covered in bruises, and others 
     are dirty.  A client walks into those rooms and picks 
     one.  I could not get permission, as a "Tempo" writer, 
     to take pictures of these rooms. 
 
     Certainly working women and men do need to have 
     domestic help, and there are those companies which are 
     involved in legal work.  One of the legal businesswomen 
     is Gulseren Aktuna, who told us how the slave market 
     operates in Istanbul. 
 
     Aktuna, who is the owner of such a company, said, 
     "There is almost a slave market established.  The 
     number of those who are exploiting this profession are 
     more than those that work legally.  It is time to say 
     `Stop' to this." 
 
     Nietzsche, who was an enemy of women, used to say, "If 
     you are going to be with a woman, do not forget your 
     whip," and "Men who would receive lessons on war and 
     women should entertain men."  Hegel had comments on 
     slavery.  In the Istanbul of the 21st century, there is 
     a slave market.  There is fear.  Neither the battered 
     women speak, nor do those with a conscience and who do 
     not approve of what is going on.  But still a woman 
     spoke to "Tempo" and gives the entire picture.  Aktuna 
     said, "There are consultation companies that are 
     involved in prostitution in some of the villas in 
     Zekeriyakoy." 
 
     Interview with Gulseren Aktuna, owner of a consultation 
     company.  There are women who are tortured and raped. 
     There is a very ugly market established in Turkey for 
     this.  For example:  Laleli.  There is almost a human 
     market there.  Women coming from Ukraine, Moldova, 
     Azerbaijan and other Turkic Republics and who speak 
     some Turkish are brought here and a slave market is 
     created.  They are exposing people.  People go there 
     and pick one and take her home for household help.  But 
     it is not clear where these women go.  There are women 
     who go to houses where they are tortured and raped. 
     There is no responsibility taken by the broker.  He 
     disappears after he takes the money.  On the other 
     hand, people who genuinely look for household help, 
     too, go to these markets.  But there are those who are 
     subject to harassment or theft by those who come into 
     the house. 
 
     When you look at such companies, you can see that 
     companies who are exploiting this business are more 
     than those who do regular work.  There are those who 
     are involved in prostitution in villas in Zekeriyakoy 
     under the guise of a consultation company.  But then 
     there are very serious institutions that have been 
     involved in serious work.  There are those who employ 
     people from Bulgaria and Moldova with no ties to their 
     countries, and such companies broker for them.  The 
     consultation company must also provide social security. 
     If the employing family covers those charges, the price 
     goes up further. 
 
     These women are in the position of illegal workers. 
     There is nothing legal about it.  Such companies must 
     be paying their tax differently. 
 
     In the past we had our mothers and neighbors take care 
     of our children.  Now the young people look for people 
     who have a good education and who can take care of 
     their children.  We all work.  People have only Sunday 
     off and should they spare that day to clean the house? 
     Others employ a person who can look after their 
     children around the clock. 
 
     In general, we give our employees to people with a 
     certain economic background.  It is not easy to employ 
     a person.  In the slave market, people work for 200-300 
     USD or 350 million TL.  Our company charges 500-600 
     million TL for an untrained employee.  For babies, we 
     employ a person for a few months before the baby is 
     born and she is responsible for the baby until it is 
     one and half years old.  Her rate is 1500-2000 YTL. 
     The price changes for twins.  The only work the nanny 
     does is with the baby - nothing else.  But they have 
     training and experience in this field.  This section 
     has good sides and wrongs sides as well.  END TEXT. 
 
¶7.  Published by The Turkish Daily News on Wednesday, 
October 19: 
 
     TITLE:  Police recover babies sold to childless couples 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  French investigators of human trafficking 
     have recovered five babies allegedly sold for 5,000 
     euros-6,000 euros (5,970-7,160 USD) by their mothers to 
     couples without children, police said.  Police said the 
     babies, aged about 1, were in good health and had not 
     been mistreated.  Several couples were in custody. 
     Investigators from a police office against human 
     trafficking recovered the infants in sweeps on Tuesday 
     in the Paris region and in Brittany in northwest 
     France.  END TEXT. 
 
¶8.  Published by TurkishPress.com on Wednesday, October 19: 
 
     TITLE:  Turkish Police Arrest 557 Illegal Migrants in 
     Istanbul 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Turkish police arrested 557 illegal 
     migrants who entered Turkey illegally, in their 
     operations in the Turkish metropolis of Istanbul in the 
     last week, sources said on Friday. 
 
     Sources told an A.A. correspondent that the majority of 
     the detainees were of Pakistani origin. 
     According to these sources, the illegal migrants wanted 
     to sneak into European countries via Turkey, and paid 
     3,000-8,000 USD per person to those who aided and 
     abetted them. 
     Police had been searching for five people in connection 
     with human trafficking, said the same sources. 
 
     They added that the illegal migrants would be deported 
     after legal proceedings. END TEXT. 
¶9.  Published by Minsk Belapan on Wednesday, October 19: 
 
     TITLE:  Belarusian Police Arrest Suspected Human 
     Trafficker 
 
     BEGIN FBIS TRANSLATED TEXT:  Criminal proceedings have 
     been launched against a 28-year-old female resident of 
     Kobryn [Brest Region] who is suspected of human 
     trafficking. 
 
     The department of information and public relations of 
     the Brest regional police directorate told Belapan that 
     the criminal case was launched under Article 181 Part 2 
     of the Penal Code (trafficking in people) on 18 
     October.  The proceedings were instituted on the basis 
     of material received from the regional police 
     directorate's department for combating illicit drug 
     trafficking and vice-related crimes.  The district 
     centre resident is suspected of trafficking a 23-year- 
     old female resident of Brest to Turkey and selling her 
     to an unidentified individual for 500 dollars for 
     sexual exploitation in November 2003. 
 
     Police officers in the Brest Region closed off 13 
     channels for trafficking women abroad for sexual 
     exploitation [in January-September 2005].  END FBIS 
     TRANSLATED TEXT. 
 
¶10.  Reported by UzReport.com on Tuesday, October 25: 
 
     TITLE:  Conference Addresses Human Trafficking Issues 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  A two-day conference entitled "Combating 
     trafficking in persons" opened in Tashkent on 25 
     October. 
 
     The Istiqbolli Avlod Youth-Information Center, in 
     cooperation with the Interior Ministry of Uzbekistan, 
     organized the event.  Istiqbolli directs its activity 
     to fight human trafficking and inform people about it. 
 
     Representatives of the Uzbek government and 
     international organizations, as well as neighboring 
     countries and Russia, are participating in the event. 
 
     Nadira Karimov, regional coordinator of the project 
     "Prevention of Human Trafficking" of the International 
     Office for Migration said that 562 cases of illegal 
     recruitment of people to work abroad were registered in 
     Tashkent and 302 in Samarkand.  She said that 1,465 
     cases of human trafficking were registered in 
     Uzbekistan last year.  The main destination countries 
     for human trafficking are Israel, the UAE, Turkey, 
     Russia, Kazakhstan and Thailand. 
 
     Ilkhom Abdulhuseynov, head of the consulate department 
     of the Uzbek Foreign Ministry, said that recently there 
     have been cases where Uzbek citizens obtained passports 
     of neighboring countries and put themselves in 
     difficult situations when they lost their passports 
     abroad.  He said that the Uzbek consulate issued 
     certificates to allow Uzbek citizens to return home. 
     END TEXT. 
 
¶11.  Published by newKerala.com on Wednesday, October 26: 
 
     TITLE:  Illegal Asian immigrants seek asylum in Kosovo 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Pristina:  A group of illegal immigrants 
     from Asian countries have sought asylum in Kosovo after 
     they were detained by the airport police here. 
     "Of the 13 immigrants, ten are from Bangladesh, two 
     from Pakistan and one from India," said Helvise Gallet, 
     protection officer of the United Nations High 
     Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). 
     They have not been interviewed yet because UNHCR was so 
     far unable to find translators, Gallet said.  The 
     immigrants arrived on a flight from Istanbul. 
 
     It was the second group of asylum seekers within 10 
     days to arrive in Kosovo from Turkey. 
 
     Six Bangladeshis detained earlier this month are still 
     waiting for the UN mission in Kosovo to decide their 
     fate, with deportation to Turkey remaining a 
     possibility. 
 
     With its porous borders, Kosovo, administered by the UN 
     for the last six years, has become a Balkan hub for 
     international human trafficking. 
 
     In August, UN police arrested three Pakistani police 
     officers under suspicion of involvement in the 
     lucrative business of transferring immigrants from 
     Kosovo into Serbia and Montenegro.  They were later 
     released due to lack of evidence.  END TEXT. 
 
¶12.  Published by Regnum News Agency (Moscow) on Wednesday, 
October 26 and the Kazakh information agency (Kazinform) on 
Thursday, October 27: 
 
     TITLE:  About 1,500 cases of human trafficking spotted 
     in Uzbekistan last year 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  According to Nadira Karimova, coordinator 
     of the "Counteraction to human trafficking in Central 
     Asia and Uzbekistan" project, since the beginning of 
     2005 there have been 1465 cases of human trafficking 
     reported, as a Regnum correspondent reports from 
     "Counteraction to human trafficking" conference, which 
     ended on October 26 in Tashkent. 
 
     Karimova said that only in Tashkent and Samarkand 
     (Uzbekistan's two largest cities), 762 cases of illegal 
     recruiting of people to work abroad have been 
     identified.  Mostly Uzbekistani citizens go illegally 
     to Israel, Russia, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates, 
     "and we must remember it when granting visas to the so- 
     called `tourist groups' heading towards these 
     countries," stressed Karimova. 
 
     The head of the Uzbekistani ministry of foreign affairs 
     consulate department Ilham Abdulkhuseinov stated that 
     there was an increase of cases, when Uzbekistani 
     citizens leave the country with passports of 
     neighboring states that they received illegally.  "And 
     such workers are ideal for all employers because they 
     are absolutely deprived of civil rights," said 
     Abdulkhuseinov. 
 
     The "Counteraction to human trafficking in Central Asia 
     and Uzbekistan" project has been created to help such 
     people come back to their home countries, providing 
     psychological, legal and medical help. 
 
     The founders of the project are "Istikbolly avlod" 
     Youth Information Center and the Interior Ministry of 
     Uzbekistan. 
 
     Representatives of various ministries, state 
     prosecution, women's committees of Uzbekistan, 
     Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Russia and foreign 
     foundations participated in the conference.  END TEXT. 
 
¶13.  Published by Aksam on Friday, October 28: 
 
     TITLE:  I was sold for 1300 dollars 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Kidnapped Russian tour guide Glena 
     Turovlena said, "I was taken to a villa in Izmir and 
     found out that I was sold for 1300 dollars.  When they 
     heard that my father is a colonel in the Russian Army, 
     they let me go." 
 
     The Russian guide, who was allegedly kidnapped by 
     people dressed as policemen three days ago in Antalya, 
     was liberated. 
     Glena Turovlena (22) claimed that she was sold to a 
     trafficker in Izmir and recounted her horrible days to 
     Aksam. 
 
     Turovlena noted that she had lived through horrible 
     hours during the kidnapping and added, "On the day of 
     the incident, we were working on a transfer (airport). 
     A car stopped.  Two policemen came down and showed 
     their IDs.  Later they asked for my ID and invited me 
     to the police station.  I informed my friend about the 
     situation and got into the car (of the so-called 
     policemen).  When my friend called the police and 
     noticed that the policeman was not aware of the 
     incident, she called me.  When I told them that the 
     policeman was not informed, they took away my phone and 
     then I realized that I had been kidnapped." 
 
     She noted that her kidnappers were driving towards 
     Alanya.  "They took me and three other girls to a villa 
     where I learned that we had been sold for 1300 USD 
     each.  When I told them that I was involved in tourism 
     and that my father was a colonel in the Russian army, 
     they were intimidated.  They told me that they would 
     release me.  Later they put a bus ticket in my pocket 
     along with a five million lira bill.  They put me on 
     the Antalya bus and told me that I should not tell 
     anyone what happened," she said. 
 
     As soon as she arrived in Antalya, she went to the 
     police to testify.  The police are now searching for a 
     person known as "Scorpio." 
 
     Caption under photo:  Yevgenya Koroglu, who shares a 
     home with the young Russian woman, said, "I am very 
     glad to see my friend.  This incident was a lesson for 
     us.  We will be more cautious from now on."  END TEXT. 
 
¶14.  Published by Sabah on Monday, October 31: 
 
     TITLE:  198 women saved with one phone call 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The 157 hotline, set up to serve women 
     brought to Turkey from abroad with great expectations, 
     but who find themselves as victims, has been 
     operational since May.  Selin Unal, Project Assistant 
     for IOM, said that mostly women brought to Turkey from 
     Ukraine, Moldova and Russia call this line.  Unal said, 
     "Twenty-six percent of those who call the 157 hotline 
     and give information are the victims themselves; 
     seventy-four percent are either a friend or a client of 
     the victim." 
 
     She went on, "Women who are forced into prostitution 
     are so frightened and scared to call us."  She 
     summarized their (the hotline's) duty as, "Our mission 
     is to serve as a bridge between law enforcement and 
     victims." 
 
     Unal noted that they have been working with experts who 
     speak five languages and that for those who call 157 
     and get saved are sent to a shelter.  She noted, 
     "Currently there is a shelter in Istanbul in connection 
     with the fight against human trafficking.  A second 
     shelter will soon be operational in Ankara." 
 
     A Moldovan who received help from the 157 hotline, but 
     who wanted to remain anonymous, told of her experience 
     and liberation as "My country was in an economic 
     hardship.  A friend told me that I would earn good 
     money if I served as a dancer in Turkey.  He arranged 
     my plane ticket and passport.  But those who greeted me 
     in Antalya took away my passport and told me that I was 
     brought to serve as a prostitute.  They said that I did 
     not have an alternative and that if I objected I would 
     be killed.  I called an NGO in Moldova at the first 
     opportunity.  They asked me to call the 157 hotline in 
     Turkey.  I called 157 and told the operator about my 
     situation and location.  The Antalya police saved me 
     from the hotel." 
     TITLE:  From ages 19-25. 
 
     Selin Unal, Project Assistant for the International 
     Office for Migration said that the average age of women 
     brought to Turkey is from 19 to 25.  Twenty-six percent 
     of the calls to 157 are from victims and 74 percent are 
     from friends or customers of victims.  END TEXT. 
 
¶15.  Published in Aksam on Monday, October 31: 
 
     TITLE:  Girl runs away from orphanage and is dragged 
     into prostitution 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  16-year-old N.G., who ran away from the 
     orphanage in Gaziantep's Nizip district, was caught 
     practicing prostitution in a minibus with two other 
     women.  The girl was conned into escaping for the 
     orphanage with a promise of marriage and fell into the 
     hands of a prostitution ring.  It was discovered that 
     N.G. was forced into prostitution.  "My friend D's step 
     mother, Z.T., was going to marry me off to 21-year-old 
     I.G.  She promised me.  I believed it and escaped from 
     the orphanage.  I understood later that she lied to me. 
     When I resisted, I was beaten up and threatened with my 
     life.  Because I was afraid, I did what she wanted," 
     N.G. said in her statement to police. 
 
     As a result of N.G.'s statement, step-mother Z.T. and 
     her imam nikahli spouse (a marriage sanctioned by an 
     imam, but not by the government) M.T. were arrested. 
     Mehmet Merkepcioglu, Director of the Kilis Social 
     Services, said that he notified police when N.G. ran 
     away from the orphanage.  END TEXT. 
 
MCELDOWNEY