05ANKARA6900
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Nov 22 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO4839
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #6900/01 3261705
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 221705Z NOV 05
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1422
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 6700
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 9113
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 9998
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 4936
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 4636
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1250
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/CDRUSAE IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OSS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 006900 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, NOVEMBER 21, 2005 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Erdogan to Make Surprise Visit to Troubled Southeast - 
Milliyet 
`Toros' v `Nikiforos' - Milliyet 
Bush Warns Denmark to Prohibit Roj-TV - Sabah 11/20 
Talabani: PKK Harms Kurds' Interests - Aksam 11/20 
US House Rejects Democrats' Iraq Pullout Bill - Milliyet 
11/20 
Bush, CIA Distorted Germans' Pre-War Intelligence - Sabah 
Hundreds of Iraqis Protest against Torture in Iraq - Star 
Zarkawi Targets King Abdullah - Sabah 11/20 
Hadley the Real Source of Leak in `Plamegate' - Sabah 
Sharon to Quit Likud Party - Sabah 
Turmoil in Kurdish Province of Mahabad in Iran - Milliyet 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Erdogan Pays Surprise Visit to Hakkari - Radikal 
Erdogan: Parliamentary Elections to be Held in 2007 - Yeni 
Safak 
Talabani: Independent Kurdish State Cannot Survive - 
Cumhuriyet 
Ankara Warns Barzani against Independent Kurdistan - 
Cumhuriyet 11/19 
US to Denmark: Ban Roj TV - Radikal 11/20 
Rice Involved in CIA Leak Scandal - Yeni Safak 
Bush: Iraq War Will Continue Until Victory - Cumhuriyet 
11/20 
Former CIA Chief: Cheney is `VP for Torture' - Cumhuriyet 
11/19 
Lockheed-Martin Involved in Iraq Interrogations - Cumhuriyet 
UK Press: Iraqi Interior Ministry Wages War against Sunnis - 
Radikal 
Suicide Bomber Kills 48 in Bakuba - Zaman 11/ 20 
Palestine Elections May be Put Off - Cumhuriyet 
Sharon to Found New, Moderate Party - Cumhuriyet 
US-China Summit in Beijing - Cumhuriyet 
Bush's China Visit: A Pinch of Freedom, Plenty of Trade - 
Radikal 
Bush Demands Religious Freedom in China - Yeni Safak 
Holbrooke: Dayton Accord Needs Improvement - Zaman 
Bosnia Pins Hopes on Americans - Zaman 11/20 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Erdogan Visits Troubled Southeast:  On Monday, Prime 
Minister Tayyip Erdogan paid a surprise visit to the 
southeastern town of Semdinli, pledging support for a probe 
of alleged security force links to a bombing which has 
fueled a series of violent clashes.  Tensions have escalated 
in Hakkari province since the November 9 bombing that is 
blamed on members of the security forces.  The government 
has demanded a parliamentary inquiry into the bombing.  `We 
will monitor the legal process and do whatever is necessary 
on the administrative front.  Whatever ethnic or religious 
group we are part of, we must live together hand-in-hand,' 
Erdogan, flanked by heavily armed bodyguards, told a crowd 
of hundreds in Semdinli earlier today.  Erdogan was 
accompanied by Interior Minister Abdulkadir Aksu and Justice 
 
ANKARA 00006900  002 OF 005 
 
 
Minister Cemil Cicek.  Monday papers carry a "Newsweek" 
commentary speculating that the Semdinli incident could `put 
Erdogan on a collision course with what Turks call the Deep 
State -- a shady alliance of nationalist officers, 
bureaucrats and judges who consider themselves the true 
guardians of Turkey's interests.'  Former Prime Minister 
Bulent Ecevit said over the weekend that the bombing in 
Semdinli was planned and carried out by the jandarma 
intelligence organization, JITEM.  On Tuesday, the Turkish 
parliament will debate a motion to investigate the Semdinli 
incident.  Meanwhile, one man was killed and another was 
wounded in clashes between police and pro-Kurdish 
demonstrators at a rally in the southern city of Mersin on 
Sunday.  The group was protesting against the killing of two 
people in the southeastern province of Hakkari on November 
¶15.  In the neighboring city of Adana, police arrested four 
people for taking part in an illegal demonstration.  Pr- 
Kurdish demonstrators also clashed with police in two 
Istanbul neighborhoods on Sunday.  The demonstrators turned 
over an armed personnel carrier and set it ablaze. 
 
US Pressures Denmark to Ban Roj TV:  The United States has 
extended Turkey a helping hand by making a request to the 
Danish Government urging the closure of pro-Kurdish Roj-TV, 
weekend papers reported.  The station is suspected of having 
links with the PKK terrorist organization.  `We strongly 
urge the Danish Government to shut down Roj-TV, Mesopotamia 
TV, and MBMG (two other media outlets linked to Roj-TV) and 
seize their assets.  We do not believe these sorts of 
broadcasts should enjoy a safe haven in Europe,' the US 
Administration reportedly said in its demarche.  The US used 
exactly the same arguments as Turkey, stating that Roj-TV 
has links with the outlawed PKK.  During a visit to 
Copenhagen on November 15, Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan 
angrily called off a joint press conference with Anders Fogh 
Rasmussen because reporters from Roj-TV were present. 
Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul said over the weekend that 
Prime Minister Erdogan's posture played an important role in 
the US warning to Denmark over the issue.  `Not only the US, 
but many European states are of the opinion that Roj-TV 
should be banned.  Had PM Erdogan appeared at that news 
conference, then all Turkish  newspapers would have written 
headlines that the Turkish prime minister shared a forum 
with the terrorist organization,' Gul said.  Danish 
Ambassador Christian Hoppe noted that Roj-TV correspondents 
could not have been banned from open press meetings in 
Denmark in the absence of a court decision supporting such a 
move. 
 
Ankara Warns Barzani against PKK Remarks:  Speaking to 
Turkey's all-news broadcaster NTV in Italy, Kurdistan 
Democratic Party (KDP) leader Massoud Barzani said that if 
civil war were to break out in Iraq, the Kurds would be left 
no choice but independence, weekend papers reported. 
Barzani said that a federal structure in Iraq is the only 
way to avert the danger of a civil war, and to preserve the 
country's territorial integrity.  `The PKK is Turkey's 
problem.  Its presence on the Iraq-Turkey border and in the 
mountainous regions along the Turkey-Kurdistan border should 
not be used to cover up the existence of this problem.  The 
issue is a political one,' Barzani said.  Barzani declined 
to respond to a question about whether the PKK is a 
terrorist organization. 
Ankara, disturbed by Barzani's statement, warned Baghdad 
that such comments could add to the unrest in Hakkari 
province. 
 
Gul Meets Merkel:  Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul met in 
Berlin on Friday with Christian Democrat Union (CDU) leader 
 
ANKARA 00006900  003 OF 005 
 
 
Angela Merkel, the incoming German Chancellor.  Gul 
reportedly praised the good relationship between the two 
countries and pleaded for all sides to `take their time' on 
the EU question.  Merkel emphasized the need for the 
integration of Turks in Germany, and stressed the need for 
competence in the German language.  Merkel said that 
cooperation between Germany and Turkey remains strong 
`despite our difference of view on the EU question.'  FM Gul 
asserted that the idea of an EU `privileged partnership' was 
not raised in the discussion.  Merkel accepted an invitation 
from Gul to visit Turkey in the first half of 2006.  FM Gul 
also met with outgoing Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer and 
his successor, Frank-Walter Steinmeier. 
 
EU Will Slow Down Entry Talks if Turkey Denies Nicosia 
Access to Ports:  Saturday's "Vatan" said that the EU 
committee of permanent representatives (COREPER) is 
discussing sanctions to be applied if Turkey refuses to give 
Greek Cypriots access to Turkish ports and airports.  EU 
sources said that if Turkey denies access to Nicosia, the EU 
will not suspnd entry talks with Turkey, but will slow down 
the negotiations.  Talks on key chapters will ot begin 
before Turkey meets EU requirements, and financial aid for 
Turkey may be suspended, according to EU sources. 
 
Prosecutor to Investigate Erdogan Remarks on ECHR Headscarf 
Ban:  A Turkish prosecutor plans to launch an investigation 
into comments on Islamic headgear by Prime Minister Tayyip 
Erdogan.  The PM's remarks enraged the opposition and 
revealed a growing rift between secularist opposition groups 
and the government, weekend papers commented.  Erdogan had 
criticized the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) last 
week for upholding a ban on the Muslim headscarf in Turkish 
universities, saying that the ECHR should have consulted 
Islamic scholars (the `ulema') before taking its decision on 
November 10.  `We are closely watching the statements of 
political party members in the wake of the ECHR decision. 
Reactions of this type should not go beyond the bounds of 
legality,' said Nuri Ok, a prosecutor on Turkey's Supreme 
Court (Yargitay).  `The contemporary values of our republic, 
with its secular state and legal structure, should not be 
targeted,' Ok stressed.  An AKP spokesman said PM Erdogan 
had merely meant to advise the ECHR to call on Muslim 
theologians if it wants to give more precise decisions. 
 
Turkish Involvement in Erez Industruial Zone:  The Jerusalem 
Post reported on Sunday that Israel, Turkey, and the 
Palestinian Authority are in talks over substantial Turkish 
involvement in the Erez industrial zone on the Israel-Gaza 
border.  Israeli officials said that the talks involve 
discussion of a major Turkish investment in Erez in plants 
that would manufacture goods that would be exported to the 
EU, US, and Persian Gulf countries duty free.  The plants 
are expected to employ some 6,000 Palestinians.  The 
discussions with Israel are now believed to be focused on 
how to ensure quick and reliable transfer of the merchandise 
out of Gaza.  According to one Israeli official, Turkey has 
asked for assurances from Israel that it would continue to 
provide electricity and water to the area.  The official 
said that, in general, Jerusalem views the plan favorably, 
because it will provide `soft security' for the area, since 
the Palestinian Administration will have to ensure that 
terror attacks don't occur in the zone. 
 
Arinc: New Turkish President Will be Elected by Existing 
Parliament:  Parliament Speaker Bulent Arinc said that 
Turkey's current parliament will elect a new president in 
¶2007.  Arinc ruled out an early election before November 
2007, despite calls for an election by the opposition CHP. 
 
ANKARA 00006900  004 OF 005 
 
 
`This parliament was renewed on November 2002.  Our 
Constitution says that elections are held every five years. 
If this government completes its term and it seems likely to 
do, elections will be held in November 2007.  The 
presidential elections are due in May 2007, so it seems that 
the current parliament will elect the new president,' Arinc 
said. 
 
Baykal Reelected CHP Chairman:  Deniz Baykal was reelected 
chairman of the opposition Republican People's Party (CHP) 
during the party's 31st congress over the weekend.  Of the 
1,223 ballots cast in the voting, Baykal received 1,158 
valid votes.  There was no opposition candidate.  Addressing 
the congress, Baykal charged that the AKP government has not 
been able to come to terms with the principles of the 
secular and democratic republic.  In a reference to the 
discussion about the `ulema' (Muslim theologians,) Baykal 
claimed that PM Erdogan had turned into a `Taliban.' 
Regarding the recent incidents in Semdinli and Hakkari, 
Baykal warned the government needs to distinguish between 
the PKK and the citizens living in the southeast. 
 
Al-Qaida Suspects Arrested in Konya:  A father and son 
suspected of being members of Al-Qaida were arrested in the 
conservative central Anatolian province of Konya, Sunday 
papers reported.  Police detained the father and son, who 
had brought from Istanbul to Konya two electronic cards 
capable of activating an explosive mechanism.  A search 
conducted in the suspects' house revealed various materials 
related to the remote operation of various mechanisms, 
including a bomb.  The media notes that the two men had 
spent a brief tim in prison in 2003-04 for their alleged 
involvement in the Istanbul bombings of November 2003. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Iraq; Syria 
 
"The Reason for Bush's Interest in Turkey" 
Erdal Guven argued in the conservative "Tercuman" (11/21): 
"All of a sudden, President Bush is making some efforts to 
block the PKK by asking the Danish Prime Minister to close 
Roj-TV.  . Russian President Putin's visit to Turkey and the 
opening of a new energy corridor through Turkey have caused 
significant uneasiness in the US.  The US is especially 
worried about close links between China, Russia, and India, 
and is concerned about the possibility that Turkey will side 
with them.   This is where the sudden US interest in Turkey 
comes into play.  On the one hand, the US is allowing the 
terrorist group to benefit from shelter in northern Iraq, 
and is protecting the entire Kurdish presence in that area. 
On the other hand, the Americans are pressuring Denmark to 
close down a television channel linked to the PKK.  This is 
an effort by the US to present itself as if it is siding 
with Turkey.  In fact, it is an obvious American game to 
manipulate both Turkey and the Kurds by appearing to act in 
their interests.   This is because the US needs the Kurds 
for its plans for the Middle East, but it also needs to keep 
Turkey as an ally." 
 
"Iraqi Sunnis Should not Be Alienated" 
Kamuran Ozbir commented in the nationalist "Ortadogu" 
(11/21): "Although belatedly, the Iraqi ruling coalition 
took a realistic step by recruiting soldiers from Saddam's 
former army.  The government of Iraq will get even stronger 
once its dependence on US forces is ended.  . Apart from 
this mistake by Paul Bremer, which has now been corrected, 
there are other things in Iraq that still need to be put 
right.  According to a report presented to the Congress, the 
30 billion dollars approved for Iraq's reconstruction have 
 
ANKARA 00006900  005 OF 005 
 
 
not been properly utilized.  Security operations absorbed 
more money than anything wlse, and reconstruction projects 
were not properly audited.  In such an environment, it is 
not surprising that corruption flourished.  In sum, the US 
money didn't really help to improve the lives of the Iraqi 
people.  But the return of Sunni soldiers to the Iraqi army 
is a good start, and may be a hopeful sign for the future. 
Social consensus can only be achieved by creating employment 
opportunities for all groups.  The Sunnis should be able to 
work in other areas as well, such as teaching or health 
care.  Many people were punished just because they used to 
belong to the Baath Party.  In fact, under the former regime 
Baath Party membership was a precondition for their 
professional existence.  The recruitment of Sunnis could be 
helpful to prevent an outbreak of civil war and to signal 
the start of a real rebuilding process." 
 
"Turkey Advises Syria" 
Zafer Atay observed in the economic-political "Dunya" 
(11/21):  "At the last minute, Russia and China thwarted a 
possible decision by the UN to impose sanctions against 
Syria in case it refuses to cooperate in the Mehlis 
investigation.  Nevertheless, if Syria doesn't fulfill the 
UN demands by December 15, no one will be able to stand in 
the way of Syria being punished.  Foreign Minister Gul has 
warned Syria that if the regime ignores this fact, Assad's 
fate could be similar to Saddam's.  There is speculation 
that FM Gul advised Assad to begin immediate, unconditional 
cooperation with the international community before he is 
forced to do it.  The close relationship between Ankara and 
Damascus in recent years has put Turkey in a position to 
give such advice.  The American hawks might be planning to 
open a front in Syria as well, but Turkey is deeply 
concerned that -- like in Iraq --  another neighboring 
country could be drawn into fire and blood.  We believe that 
other countries in the region should do everything in their 
power to prevent this problem from becoming a chronic one." 
 
MCELDOWNEY