05ANKARA2242
TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, April 1-15,
Wed Apr 20 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 002242 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, April 1-15, 
2005 
 
 
¶1. (U) In response to G/TIP inquiries, national and 
  international media sources published the following news 
  articles about TIP in Turkey.  Text of articles 
  originally published in Turkish is provided through 
  unofficial local FSN translation. 
 
¶2. (U) Published on Friday, April 1 by Hurriyet: 
 
    BEGIN TEXT: Cavit Alan, who has a dockyard of yachts in 
    Turkbuku, Bodrum, was killed probably by human 
    traffickers the other day. 
 
    Alan was driving (his car license plated 48 UK 940) to 
    Kizilagac village and some people stopped his car. 
 
    They shot him four times in the abdominal area. 
 
    He was found in his car and hospitalized, but could not 
    be saved because of loss of blood. 
 
    He might have been killed by human traffickers over a 
    money issue because Alan, in the past, stayed in jail 
    for some time for human trafficking. 
 
    His wife, Arzu Alan (34), said that he did not share 
    with her many things and added, "But lately he was 
    nervous about some phone threats.  Some people went to 
    the dockyard and threatened him.  I'm in a state of 
    shock.  I don't know what to say.  It will be a great 
    consolation if my husband's murderers are captured as 
    soon as possible." END TEXT. 
 
¶3. (U) Published Monday, April 4 by Baku Baki Xaber, 
Azerbaijan: 
 
     TITLE:  Azerbaijan: Around 4,500 Women Trafficked to 
     Dubai, Turkey Every Month 
 
    BEGIN FBIS TRANSLATED TEXT:  Up to 500 Azerbaijani 
    women are taken away to Turkey and about 4,000 to the 
    United Arab Emirates every month.  The State Committee 
    for Women's Problems has provided this information to 
    APA news agency.  The committee said that women are 
    also brought to Baku from the districts for 
    prostitution.  Investigations revealed that 82 per cent 
    of the victims of human trafficking accept this 
    proposal because of poverty and in order to improve 
    their living conditions. END TEXT. 
 
¶4. (U) Published Tuesday, April 12 by Turkish Press; 
www.turkishpress.com: 
 
     TITLE:  Erdogan: No Religion allows Killing of People 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  OSLO - Turkish Prime Minister Recep 
     Tayyip Erdogan said on Tuesday that no religion 
     tolerate the killing of people or terrorist actions. 
     Delivering a speech on "Search for Global Peace and 
     Turkey's Contributions" at the Nobel Institute, 
     Erdogan said that countries should try to reach peace 
     without use of force. 
     Noting that "terrorism, proliferation of weapons of 
     mass destruction, human trafficking and drug 
     smuggling, racism, xenophobia, and environmental 
     problems were the biggest threats on security and 
     freedom in today's world", Erdogan said that 
     "particularly terrorism was an international scourge 
     as terror could hit anybody and any country without 
     distinction". Erdogan stressed that Turkey was a 
     country which has the highest number of deaths due to 
     terrorism in the world, adding that Turkey always felt 
     itself alone in its fight against terrorism. 
     "International cooperation against terrorism is a 
     must", Erdogan indicated. 
     He also said that he didn't approve attributions of 
     'terrorism or terrorists' concepts to a certain 
     religion, condemning such efforts in his speech. 
     Referring to the globalism, Erdogan said that the 
     dependency of all countries on each other increased 
     significantly and pointed out to the prominent role of 
     the United Nations (UN), NATO, European Union and 
     Organization of Security and Cooperation in Europe 
     (OSCE) to safeguard peace in the world. 
     "Turkey which is located at the intersection of 
     different cultures and potential threats, actively 
     launches efforts to encourage peace, stability and 
     compromise in its region," Erdogan said. END TEXT. 
¶5.  (U) Reported on Friday, April 1 by Anadolu Ajansi: 
     BEGIN TEXT:  H.O. was detained in Eminonu, Istanbul, 
     for bringing women from abroad by offering them jobs 
     and later forcing them into prostitution. 
     H.O. already had a criminal record with the police. 
     He was forcing four women from Russia and the Ukraine 
     into prostitution in a house in Fatih district. 
     The police seized his telephone book in which names 
     and numbers of many foreigners were listed. 
     H.O. will be sent to the prosecutor.  Meanwhile the 
     four foreign women were deported.  END TEXT. 
 
EDELMAN