05ANKARA6105
Turkey's AI Outbreak - More Questions
Mon Oct 10 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 006105 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FRO EUR/RUS, OES/STC, EB/TPP/ATP, EB/TPP/BTA 
HHS FOR WSTEIGER/PBUDASHEWITZ 
ITP/MACKE/THOMAS, CMP/DLP/WETZEL 
FAS PASS FSIS AND APHIS 
VIENNA PASS APHIS 
BRUSSELS PASS APHIS/FERNANDEZ 
GENEVA PASS HEALTH ATTACHE 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: ETRD EAGR KPAO TBIO
SUBJECT:  Turkey's AI Outbreak - More Questions 
 
Sensitive but unclassified.  Not for Internet Distribution. 
 
¶1.  Summary.  Turkey is waiting for the results of tests, 
which were sent to England to determine the type of Avian 
Influenza (AI) that was detected in a turkey flock near 
Baliksehir last week.  There is still some uncertainty among 
officials whether the virus is the H5N1 strain.   The 
outbreak occurred on a private farm, which raised birds on 
an open field near a large wildlife preserve.  The area is 
also home to many of Turkey's largest commercial poultry 
operations.  End Summary. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Outbreak Near Large Commercial Operations 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The outbreak occurred in a village near Baliksehir 
in the Marmara region.  This is a rich agriculture area and 
home to several of the largest commercial poultry operations 
in Turkey.  According to one large commercial poultry 
operator, there are about 25 million commercial birds in 
this region and poultry companies have been concerned about 
such an outbreak for some time.  Specifically, the area has 
some major wildlife refuges, which, at times during the 
year, are home to hundreds of species of birds, which 
migrate from Russia to Africa every year and which could 
potentially carry AI.  On Monday, one private representative 
reported that the outbreak occurred on a farm where the 
flocks were kept outdoors and in possible contact with the 
wild bird population.  According to this same 
representative, about 250 turkeys died the first day of the 
outbreak with 500 dying the second day.  Since that time, 
all ducks, geese, turkeys and chickens have been culled in a 
25 km radius around the village in the hope of containing 
the outbreak. 
 
 
--------------- 
Fact or Fiction 
--------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) This being Turkey, truth and rumor exist 
simultaneously.  Some villagers are contending that the 
affected flocks were fed in rice fields, which had been 
sprayed with chemicals.  At the same time, commercial 
poultry producers indicated on Monday that tests on all 
parent stocks in the area and have thus far not revealed any 
other contamination.  Nonetheless, poultry facilities 
continue to restrict access to their facilities and have 
implemented specific biosafety protocols in order to prevent 
any contamination. 
 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The strain of the virus is still unknown.  Several 
contacts indicated that Turkish officials have sent samples 
from the affected flock to England for testing since Turkey 
does not possess any reliable testing facilities for this 
disease.  They hope to have the results of the tests by 
Tuesday at the latest to determine the strain of Avian 
Influenza (AI) in the area.  One EU official noted that no 
other cases had been detected and that it was possible that 
the outbreak was not H5N1. 
 
 
¶5.  (SBU) According to the Dutch Agriculture Attache, a 
large number of officials from the Ministry of Agriculture 
in Ankara have been sent to the area.  Nonetheless, it 
appears that much of the responsibility for preventing any 
new outbreaks will fall on the private sector. One company 
hired some Australians who were familiar with the outbreaks 
in Asia to provide training.  Most of the large companies 
Banvit and Seker Pilic have been holding training sessions 
for all of their contract farmers.  During a recent visit to 
the region, the larger private companies indicated to 
AgCounselor that they were sharing information on detection 
and safety procedures with smaller companies unable to 
afford training. 
 
 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Press reports also noted that the Turkish 
government promised to reimburse farmers for any flocks, 
which need to be culled.  This is in contrast to previous 
statements in which GOT officials stated that the government 
has not budgeted for this type of expense.  In the event the 
government decides not to reimburse farmers, there may be 
reluctance on the part of private farmers to report small 
outbreaks.  The cost to the GOT could be substantial if any 
large outbreak does occur. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Comment:  Private Sector Responsibility 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Both private and government Turkish officials seem 
to be taking this outbreak very seriously.  It is a good 
sign that the outbreak was announced quickly and that 
officials took decisive steps immediately.   However, 
private poultry representatives are very concerned with the 
government's readiness to address any large-scale outbreak. 
Although three Turkish ministries are responsible for 
combating this issue, communications among them seem to be 
inadequate, particularly after meeting with several 
ministries.  The private sector seems to be bearing most of 
the responsibility for preventing an outbreak in the 
commercial sector.  Still, it is unclear whether information 
is being disseminated to small private farmers. 
 
MCELDOWNEY