05ANKARA2312
LETTER TO PRESIDENT BUSH FROM TURKISH
Fri Apr 22 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

221305Z Apr 05UNCLAS ANKARA 002312 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL TU AM
SUBJECT: LETTER TO PRESIDENT BUSH FROM TURKISH 
PARLIAMENTARIANS UNION REGARDING ARMENIAN GENOCIDE 
 
 
¶1. Post received the original and faxed version of an April 
18, 2005 letter to President Bush from the Turkish 
Parliamentarians Union regarding The Armenian Genocide issue. 
 Original will be sent to the White House.  Following is the 
post's informal translation of the letter: 
 
¶2. BEGIN TEXT: 
 
H.E. George W. BUSH 
President of the United States of America 
 
                                                April 18, 
2005 
                                                Ankara 
 
 
Excellency, 
 
The continuation of biased and racist displays of aggressive 
attitudes by fanatic Armenian organizations over many years, 
in a fashion not in conformity with historical facts, affects 
our bilateral relations with Armenia. 
 
Obviously, this situation includes totally &political8 
goals and unreal claims.  These anti-Turkish campaigns, 
organized by Armenian extremists and their supporters, are 
regarded as very unfortunate by circles seeking peace and 
compromise, and generate concern and sorrow among all our 
people, chiefly among our Armenian-origin citizens. 
 
In fact, many scholars have proven that these untrue claims, 
supported and guided by lobbying activities of racist 
fanatics, were constructed on fake, distorted, ide fix and 
incomplete narratives. 
 
These theories of so-called &Armenian Genocide8 contradict 
the relevant provisions of United Nations Convention for 
Prevention of Genocide, and the global understanding of law 
and its interpretations. 
 
Turkey is aware of its responsibility to evaluate and discuss 
history correctly.  In fact, the Turkish History 
Institution's examination of information and documents in 
foreign archives for many years invalidates rhetoric that the 
so-called genocide issue remains a &taboo8 in Turkey.  Our 
expert writers and academicians discuss these claims in all 
their dimensions and in a broad perspective, and try to 
clarify prejudiced and surreal rhetoric that is a product of 
a biased, dark mentality. 
 
Our greatest wish is that you would resist this fanatic 
campaign tied to biased interpretations not confirmed by 
Ottoman Archives (that are open for research) as well as 
other state archives. 
 
The Turkish Parliamentarians Union, its membership including 
former and current parliamentarians, welcomes the initiative 
of the Turkish Grand National Assembly, with its ruling and 
opposition parties, for a study of world archives by a joint 
committee under the auspices of an independent arbitration 
institution, and requests your support for this initiative. 
 
Respectfully, 
 
                                                Hasan 
Korkmazcan 
                                                Chairman 
 
END TEXT 
 
 
 
EDELMAN