05ANKARA4732
TURKEY: POL-MIL ROUND-UP, JULY 2005
Thu Aug 11 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

111429Z Aug 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 004732 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
 
E.O.  12958:  N/A 
TAGS: MARR MOPS PREL PTER TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY: POL-MIL ROUND-UP, JULY 2005 
 
REFERENCE: A) ANKARA 3892, B) 2004 ANKARA 6000 
 
(Note: This is the second in a regular series of 
unclassified reports on significant Turkish defense and 
 
SIPDIS 
national security issues in the press and other open 
sources. End note) 
 
Contents 
-------- 
 
-- Debates on Cross-Border Operation Against the PKK 
-- Turkey's Security Relations with Other Countries 
-- Defense Industry Activity 
 
Debates on Cross-Border Operations Against the PKK 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶1. Throughout the month, government and military officials 
publicly accused each other, Turkey's neighbors, the EU and 
the US of inaction to respond to the PKK terrorist threat. 
However, they were unified in emphasizing that Turkey 
reserved the right to pursue the PKK into Iraq if necessary. 
Turkish Land Forces Commander General Yasar Buyukanit made 
the opening salvo when, on July 1, he accused Iraq's 
neighboring countries and EU members of supporting the PKK. 
Deputy Chief of the Turkish General Staff (TGS) General 
Ilker Basbug, in a July 19 press conference, said that a 
cross-border operation is "one of a number of options - in 
fact it's the last option" to address the PKK threat 
emanating from northern Iraq. 
 
¶2. PM Erdogan repeatedly and publicly made known his 
unhappiness with US inaction against the PKK in northern 
Iraq.  The center right Hurriyet newspaper, on July 7, 
quoted him as calling on the US to take action against the 
PKK in northern Iraq to improve Turkish-American relations. 
On July 13 Erdogan said in a TV interview that, given the 
lack of support from the US and EU countries -- and accusing 
the US of not taken measures against infiltration of the PKK 
into Turkey-- Turkey might launch cross-border operations 
against the PKK.  On July 27 Erdogan in an interview with 
`The Times' of London said he has not seen a US effort 
against the PKK, and Turkey's patience had its limits. 
Taking a more measured tone, MFA Spokesman Namik Tan 
concurred that "Turkey will take the necessary measures 
against the PKK whenever it becomes necessary," but added 
that "we have no problem with the US in the fight against 
the PKK".  Turkish newspapers quoted Iraqi Interior Minister 
Al Zubaida as saying the Iraqi security forces lacked the 
capacity to drive the PKK out of Iraq. 
 
Turkey's Security Relations with Other Countries 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶3. Iraq: Turkish press continues reporting on government 
efforts against the PKK terrorist organization. The center- 
right Hurriyet reported that in the last few months 700 PKK 
militants infiltrated into Turkey from northern Iraq. 
Interior Ministers of the countries neighboring Iraq issued 
a communique from their second round of meetings of July 19 
in Istanbul condemning terrorism and expressing their full 
solidarity with the Iraqi government.  After the meeting, 
Turkey's Minister of Interior Abdulkadir Aksu stated that 
Iraq's neighbors agreed to sign a regional security 
protocol. 
 
¶4. Sudan: The Turkish centrist Milliyet reported that 
Turkish National Police provided counter-narcotics, counter- 
terrorism, organized crime and homeland security training to 
4 Sudanese policemen in 2004 and to 45 in 2005. 
 
¶5. Pakistan: Defense Minister Vecdi Gonul said after meeting 
with his Pakistani counterpart on July 28 that Turkey is 
considering the purchase of tanks from Pakistan following 
Turkey's 2004 cancellation of a main battle tank tender. 
 
¶6. Kuwait: Turkey signed a Security Cooperation Agreement 
with Kuwait.  According to Turkish Interior Minister 
Abdulkadir Aksu, the agreement was a broader form of an 
earlier protocol to increase the countries' joint efforts to 
fight drug trafficking, terrorism and organised crime. 
 
¶7. Azerbaijan: Turkish Defense Minister Vecdi Gonul met with 
his Azerbaijani counterpart in Baku on July 20 to discuss 
military cooperation within the NATO framework. 
 
Defense Industry Activity 
------------------------- 
¶8. SSM released the names of companies that received the RFI 
(Request for Information) for a reconnaissance and 
surveillance satellite system; Lockheed Martin was among the 
competitors. 
 
¶9. SSM announced a new tender for the purchase of 142,292 
anti-Nuclear/Biological/Chemical suits for the Turkish Armed 
Forces. 
 
¶10. Raytheon Systems Company ordered thermal weapons glass 
worth USD 3.34 million from Aselsan, which will deliver the 
order in 2006. 
 
MCELDOWNEY