05ANKARA240
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Jan 13 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 000240 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, JANUARY 13, 2005 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
 
Serious Warning to Iran and Syria from US - Hurriyet 
NYT: "US Told Turkey It Won't Fight the PKK" - Hurriyet 
Abizaid: "Turkey Will be a Key Country in Iraq" - Sabah 
Abizaid: "Incirlik Formula Ease Turkish Drivers' Problem" - 
Sabah 
The US Will Not Fight Against the PKK - Milliyet 
US Will Extradite PKK Militants to Iraq - Milliyet 
PM Erdogan to Russia: "Let Us Jointly Re-Construct Iraq" - 
Turkiye 
No Permission For Incirlik; No Operation Against PKK - Vatan 
Military Relations Between Turkey and US Improve - Star 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
 
Ankara Asks For Osman Ocalan - Cumhuriyet 
Joint Military Exercise by Turkey-US-Israel - Cumhuriyet 
General Abizaid Urges Turkey to Support Iraqi Elections - 
Radikal 
Turkey Asks Iraq to Hand Over 150 PKK Militants - Radikal 
Erdogan Urges Russia to Cooperate on Iraqi Re-construction - 
Zaman 
Mossad Believes US Will Attack Syria in February - Yeni 
Safak 
White House: "There Are No WMDs in Iraq" - Yeni Safak 
 
BRIEFING 
 
General Abizaid Visit: 
CENTCOM Commander General Abizaid left Ankara yesterday 
after meeting with Deputy TGS Chief General Ilker Basbug. 
"Milliyet" reports that during the meeting, the Turkish side 
highlighted its concerns about the PKK, Kirkuk, and the need 
to preserve Iraq's territorial integrity. "Hurriyet" adds 
that Abizaid conveyed important messages to Iran and Syria 
through Turkey not to disturb the regional peace, and warned 
them that the US would not tolerate interference in Iraq. 
"Sabah" notes that Abizaid's meeting with Basbug took place 
in a `relaxed' atmosphere and included a `big picture' 
discussion of a wide range of regional issues.  The paper 
claims that the two sides were careful to `speak in a common 
language' on sensitive issues.  General Abizaid reportedly 
referred to General Basbug as `a good soldier.' 
 
"Sabah" Ankara Bureau Chief Asli Aydintasbas, who 
interviewed Abizaid notes that Abizaid repeated several 
times `the need to keep communications channels with Ankara 
open.' `I didn't come here with any demands, but rather to 
have a dialogue with Turkey,' he said.  Aydintasbas comments 
that although this might seem at first glance like `an empty 
expression,' it was in fact the main goal of the visit both 
for the US and Turkey.  Abizaid acknowledged that CENTCOM 
has not had the kind of dialogue with Turkey that it should 
have.  `Turkey is important, and what Turkey says and does 
is critical for Iraq,' he added.  Abizaid discussed efforts 
by Baathists and Al-Qaeda elements to intimidate Sunni Arab 
voters in Iraq, but insisted that most Sunni Arabs want to 
participate in the upcoming elections.  Abizaid asserted 
that conditions for elections were good `in 14 of Iraq's 18 
provinces.'  He hinted that if the turnout is significantly 
lower among Sunni Arabs, a way would need to be found to 
ensure Sunni representation in the new Iraqi Assembly. 
Abizaid said he had no new proposals concerning Incirlik air 
base, but said he had reminded the Turks of the US interest 
in establishing a cargo hub at Incirlik.  Such a hub, 
according to Abizaid, `could reduce the traffic at the Habur 
Gate, and could reduce the number of attacks against Turkish 
drivers in Iraq.'  Abizaid stressed that Kirkuk is `a 
political issues that nobody should try to resolve through 
force.'  He said he was confident that Iraqis could work out 
a solution for Kirkuk through patient negotiations.  `Kirkuk 
is an Iraqi city, just like Baghdad, Basra, and Mosul are 
Iraqi cities,' he added.  Abizaid stated emphatically that 
the United States `does not support the establishment of a 
Kurdish state.'  The Iraqi elections, he said, `are for all 
Iraqis, not for any particular ethnic group.'  Abizaid said 
that US forces would remain in Iraq `to give the Iraqis the 
opportunity to build the future they deserve.'  He noted 
that the Turkish example is `critically important' for the 
future of Iraq.  `We know that we must work together with 
Turkey in the War on Terroism,' Abizaid said.  He noted that 
`while we may from time to time have some differences on 
tactics, we are on the same page at the strategic level.' 
 
"Milliyet" columnist Fikret Bila writes that Ankara was 
`pleased' by the results of the Abizaid visit.  He notes 
that Abizaid shares Turkey's assessment of Iraq, 
particularly on the questions of Iraq's territorial 
integrity and the need to hold the Iraqi elections on time. 
Abizaid made no new demands on Incirlik, Bila writes, but 
mentioned a possible broadening of logistical cooperation at 
Incirlik within the framework of existing UN decisions. 
Abizaid told Turkish officials that US forces fought 
exclusively with insurgents in Fallujah, and claimed that 90 
percent of the city's civilian population had left the city 
before the fighting began.  He pointed out that US forces 
had found torture chambers, and suggested that even some 
mosques may have been used for this purpose. 
 
Trilateral Meetings on the PKK:  "Cumhuriyet" reports that 
`no concrete results' emerged from the trilateral meeting in 
Ankara held by officials of Turkey, the US, and Iraq. 
Ankara failed to convince the US to carry out a military 
operation against the PKK or to prevent PKK participation in 
the upcoming Iraqi elections.  "Milliyet" reports that after 
getting the message from the US that captured PKK militants 
in Iraq would be handed over to Iraqi authorities, Turkish 
officials decided to arrange bilateral meetings with Iraq to 
discuss the possibility of increased bilateral cooperation 
against terrorism.  The US delegation declined a Turkish 
request for direct extradition of PKK militants, and said 
that the responsibility for such issues belongs to Iraq. 
"Milliyet" Ankara Bureau Chief Fikret Bila claims that 
Turkey and Iraq agreed that existing Iraqi law would permit 
Iraqi authorities to extradite PKK leaders if they are 
arrested in Iraq.  "Hurriyet" reports that PM Erdogan said 
the meeting represented a `serious step forward,' adding 
that he anticipated `serious measures by the United States 
on the PKK issue after the Iraqi elections.  All papers 
report that Turkey has requested the capture and return to 
Turkey of about 150 PKK militants, including Osman Ocalan, 
brother of jailed PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan. 
 
WMD Presence in Iraq:   "Yeni Safak" and "Aksam" cite "The 
Washington Post" in reporting that the United States has 
called off its search for weapons of mass destruction in 
Iraq.  The report of US inspectors claims that while Saddam 
had the will to produce WMDs, he had neither the financial 
resources nor the technical capacity to carry out such a 
project. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Iraq-CENTCOM Visit 
Abizaid: "Turkey's Support of Key Importance to Future of 
Iraq" 
Murat Yetkin wrote in the liberal-opinion maker "Radikal" 
(1/13):  "General John Abizaid, who commands the United 
States' war in Iraq, used the expression "keeping the 
channels of communication open" to describe his two-day 
visit to Turkey.  US Central Forces (CENTCOM) Commander 
Abizaid, who runs the war in both Iraq and Afghanistan, used 
this expression three times in the course of our half-hour 
interview yesterday. 
 
As to why General Abizaid, who had met on the day before 
yesterday with Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul and MGK 
[National Security Council] General Secretary Ambassador 
Yigit Alpdogan and then yesterday with Deputy General Staff 
Chief General Ilker Basbug, felt the need for this emphasis, 
one can see it in these words of his:  "The relationship and 
the channels of communication to date between Turkey and 
CENTCOM via EUCOM (the United States' European Forces) have 
not been able to be open.  I am here to discuss these things 
and keep the channels open.  I am here to keep the channels 
of information flow open, and to exchange views.  We have to 
be able to discuss everything openly with our friend and 
ally Turkey." 
 
Does this include the incident on 4 July 2003, when US 
troops under the command of CENTCOM put bags over the heads 
of Turkish troops in Al-Sulaymaniyah and detained them?  Or 
the ongoing murders of Turkish truck-drivers in Iraq despite 
Turkey's request for extra protection?  Or the killing of 
the five Turkish police officials? 
 
Abizaid said that "Al-Sulaymaniyah was an unfortunate 
incident.  The killing of the Turkish security personnel 
near Mosul was as well.  We regret these things.  But this 
is a war.  Our efforts to take greater measures together 
have to continue."  The American commander said nothing 
different from what has been said before regarding the PKK 
presence in Iraq:  "We stand behind our promise that we are 
not going to allow terrorists to establish themselves in 
Iraq.  The PKK and its extensions are accepted by our 
government as a terrorist organization.  But I cannot tell 
you everything that is going to be done on that topic; no 
commander, in fact, reveals what he is going to do.  But we 
are aware that we have a commitment in this regard. 
Naturally, we also have some priorities and commitments of 
our own:  At the head of these come holding the elections in 
Iraq, a political system starting to function, and the 
establishment of an Iraqi army.  We are going to accomplish 
all of these, and the restructuring of Iraq, with our Iraqi 
partners." 
 
We can translate this as follows:  There is no possibility 
of a military intervention against the PKK presence in Iraq 
prior to 30 January.  And there are problems afterwards as 
well.  Because the Kurds have to contribute in order to keep 
Iraq together and establish a unified Iraqi army.  Not only 
the Iraqi Kurds, but the Arabs as well are opposed to a 
military operation against the PKK.  The fact that Iraqi 
Deputy Foreign Minister Hamid al-Bayati, in the security 
meeting the day before yesterday, asked the Turkish side 
whether or not it was considering an amnesty for the PKK 
militants in the mountains showed this.  And perhaps it 
would be useful for Ankara to re-assess whether or not the 
only way to combat the PKK presence in Iraq is a military 
approach, and to explain this to the public. 
 
But it is clear that, for the United States, the Iraq 
priorities are the 30 January elections and then afterwards 
the establishment of a National Assembly, a government, and 
an army with the broadest participation possible.  Abizaid 
said that "Turkey's support and the example that Turkey 
provides are of key importance for the future of Iraq." 
Well, then, what does he mean by Turkey's support?  One 
dimension is military.  Included within this is greater use 
of Incirlik.  Abizaid said "There has been no new request in 
terms of Incirlik, and I did not come to Ankara with any new 
request."  He continued:  "I reminded [Turkish officials] of 
our earlier request to be able to make greater use of 
Incirlik.  Your government may reconsider this.  We would 
like to use Incirlik as a logistical center for Iraq and 
Afghanistan.  In this way, more aid and equipment could be 
transported by air." 
 
The political support that the United States expects from 
Turkey in terms of Iraq is more important.  Abizaid 
explained as follows:  "The Iraqi insurgents' target is the 
Sunni Arabs.  Because they have no chance of influencing or 
winning over the Shi'ites or the Kurds.  The insurgents get 
their strength from two sources:  One is the former 
Ba'thists, and former military and intelligence personnel; 
the other is the [Abu Musab] Al-Zarqawi group.  And it's 
because they have been unable to influence the Shi'ites and 
the Kurds that they are concentrating the pressure on the 
Sunnis.  The Sunnis' participation in the elections, and in 
the political process in general, may be relatively lower 
than that of the other groups.  So if Turkey could 
contribute in convincing the Sunnis to take part in the 
political process, we would be very grateful."   It is clear 
that this topic also came up during the meeting that Abizaid 
had with Foreign Minister Gul. 
 
Abizaid spoke as follows regarding the concerns that, after 
elections, Iraq may split up, as well as the Kurdish 
leaders' efforts to lay claim to Kirkuk:  "Kirkuk is no 
doubt a difficult political problem.  No one should try to 
resolve this problem by force.  Kirkuk, just like Baghdad, 
Basra, and Mosul, is an Iraqi city.  The United States 
opposes the establishment of a separate Kurdish state in 
Iraq.  We want Iraq to be established as one united country. 
The elections will not be elections of the Sunnis, or of the 
Shiites, or of the Kurds, or of any other group.  They will 
be elections of the Iraqis.  An elected government will 
replace the delegated government.  And the new 
administration will resolve the problems in Kirkuk inherited 
from the Saddam Hussein regime, as well as the other 
problems." 
 
There was another aspect in Abizaid's meetings that did not 
draw much attention:  Afghanistan, and, in general, the 
United States' expectations of Turkey in the global context. 
It would be useful to recount Abizaid's words:  "We ascribe 
importance to Turkey's taking over the command of the NATO 
force in Afghanistan.  Its contribution to Afghanistan via 
NATO is an important factor of stability, not just in that 
country but in Central Asia as well.  The United States is 
waging a global war against terrorism, and it has to act 
together with Turkey in this war.  Even if there are some 
differences experienced at the tactical level, we are on the 
same line on the strategic level.  It's for this reason 
important that the lines of communication between the two 
countries be kept open." 
 
From these words, one can draw the following conclusion: 
With the Iraqi elections, the United States' regional 
policies will enter into a new phase (and in a way that is 
not limited just to Iraq).  In this phase, increased 
political and military cooperation in Iraq, Afghanistan, and 
Central Asia may be requested.  When the ups and downs of 
the Turkish-US relationship over the past two years are 
taken into account, this [situation] indicates that new 
sources of tension stand before us.  Abizaid was working to 
lay the groundwork, so that the errors that were made in the 
Iraq crisis are not repeated. 
 
"Iraq Elections" 
Yilmaz Oztuna observed in the conservative "Turkiye" (1/13): 
"General Abizaid's visit is related to the Greater Middle 
East Project, and he most likely told Ankara what role has 
been designed for Turkey in this initiative.  The elections 
in Iraq will not bring stability.  The Sunni Arabs do not 
want an election.  Therefore, the results will only 
emphasize Kurdish supremacy in the north and Shiite 
supremacy across the country.  All of this is enough to 
incite civil war and chaos, despite Washington's hope for 
peace and stability. . The US is very likely to launch a 
campaign against Syria.  It will also do its best to end the 
Iranian nuclear capacity. It is also likely that a 
Palestinian and Israeli agreement will not be finalized. . 
The Middle East will eventually see a better and more 
peaceful period, but not in this lifetime." 
 
"The US Insistence on Incirlik " 
Mustafa Balbay wrote in the social democratic-opinion maker 
"Cumhuriyet" (1/13): "There are increasing numbers of 
visitors from the US, including Deputy Secretary Armitage, 
USNATO Commander Jones, and CENTCOM Commander John Abizaid. 
Yet there is a reason behind this immense interest about 
Turkey.  . The US might make some demands from Turkey right 
after the Iraqi elections.  American officials, General 
Abizaid included, are well aware that the elections will not 
bring stability to Iraq.  Therefore, the US wants to use 
Incirlik airbase more effectively.  The European media has 
started reporting about the US plan to relocate its troops 
overseas.  The US already has started negotiations with 
Bulgaria to establish a new base.  The US insistence on the 
use of Incirlik probably stems from another intention --  to 
keep Turkey under better control." 
 
"Turkey-US Relations" 
Cuneyt Ulsever commented in the mass appeal "Hurriyet" 
(1/13): "Given the current picture, the relationship between 
Turkey and the US might seem to be stumbling due to 
differences over the Iraq issue and PKK terrorism.  . But 
circumstances are forcing a better alliance between Turkey 
and the US.  Turkey cannot be successful by itself in the 
fight against terrorism.  The security and energy policies 
of the US throughout the region require a working 
relationship between Ankara and Washington.  The elimination 
of the PKK in northern Iraq also calls for close cooperation 
between the two. . On the other hand, the US will also 
benefit from smoothing its relations with Turkey.  A good 
working US relationship with Turkey will facilitate the 
political process in the new Iraq as well as a solution to 
the Palestinian problem.  Turkey's location, its relations 
with regional countries, including Israel, and the EU can 
serve US interests.  Turkey is also the only reliable and 
stable US ally in the Middle East. . Given these facts, 
let's hope that Turkish-US relations can return to the good 
old days." 
 
EDELMAN