05ANKARA4188
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Jul 20 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 004188 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, JULY 19, 2005 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Putin: Sanctions on Turkish Cyprus Must be Lifted - Milliyet 
Turkey, Russia Target 25 Billion USD Trade - Sabah 
World Denounces Kusadasi Bombings - Hurriyet 
Germany Warns Zana to Take Position Against Terror - 
Milliyet 
Austria Proposes Postponing EU Talks With Turkey - Vatan 
7/7 Cost UK 2 Billion Pounds - Hurriyet 
American `Hawks' Threaten to Bomb Islam's Holy Places - 
Sabah 
Jafari Extends Iran Visit - Milliyet 
`Atlanta Bomber' Gets Life Sentence - Vatan 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Putin Vows to Take Concrete Steps for Cyprus - Zaman 
France, Belgium, Spain, US Support Turkey On Kusadasi 
Bombing - Radikal 
Dan Fried: PKK a Concern for US - Yeni Safak 
Tancredo: Islam's Holy Places May be Targeted - Cumhuriyet 
`Odd' Reaction from US Lawmaker: US May Strike Kaaba - Zaman 
Straw: We Are Grateful to Turkey for Fight Against Terror - 
Yeni Safak 
US Threatens to Bomb Kaaba - Yeni Safak 
US, Taliban Secretly Agree to Swap Prisoners - Yeni Safak 
500 UK Muslim Clerics, Academics Denounce Terror - Yeni 
Safak 
London Questions its Alliance With US - Cumhuriyet 
Reports Shake Blair: Iraq War Made UK a Terror Target - 
Radikal 
World Bank to Give Iraq 500 Million USD - Radikal 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Putin-Erdogan Meeting:  Russian President Vladimir Putin and 
Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan told the press after meeting 
over breakfast at Putin's summer house in Sochi yesterday 
that they had had a very fruitful discussion.  Putin said 
the two country's common goal was to increase bilateral 
trade to 25 billion USD in the coming years.  Turkish 
businesses have invested 1.5 billion USD in Russia, Putin 
said, adding that Russian companies are also interested in 
making investments in Turkey.  The Moscow-based "NTV Mir" 
reported that Putin said that one Russian company, the Alfa 
Group, intends to invest over 3 billion USD in the Turkish 
telecommunications sector.  Putin said  that the capacity of 
the Blue Stream natural gas pipeline between the two 
countries should be increased to 16 billion cubic meters 
annually.  He added that he had discussed with Erdogan ways 
for building new pipelines to carry Russian natural gas to a 
variety of destinations.  But Putin reportedly rejected 
Turkish requests to reduce the price of Russian natural gas. 
Putin also said that Russia will continue supporting the 
initiatives of  UN Secretary General Annan on the Cyprus 
issue.  `International sanctions implemented against a part 
of the island don't make sense, and they should be removed,' 
Putin stressed.  Erdogan said that he shared `identical' 
views with Putin with regard to regional welfare and 
stability, and global peace.  Both Turkey and Russia support 
a joint struggle against terrorism, Erdogan said.  The 
Turkish PM also said that Putin shares his view that a 
solution must be found for the Nagorno-Karabakh problem. 
Following his joint press conference with Putin, Erdogan 
continued on to Mongolia for an official visit. 
Iraq's al-Zubaydi on PKK, Border Security, Extradition of 
Terrorists:  Iraqi Interior Minister al-Zubaydi told the all- 
news channel NTV that a cross-border Turkish incursion into 
Iraq must be contingent on permission from the Iraqi 
government.  `There is an elected government and a 
parliament in Iraq.  The Iraqi Parliament would have to 
decide about a Turkish cross-border operation,' al-Zubaydi 
said.  He added that the Iraqi government has been 
discussing the PKK issue with Turkish and US officials, but 
said that the Iraqi Kurds should also join these meetings. 
`The Kurdish peshmerge are in control of Iraq's border with 
Turkey,' al-Zubaydi noted, adding that the central 
government in Baghdad `does not have sufficient forces to 
deploy in the region for border security.'  Asked about 
reports that Sadettin Akdas and Burhan Kus, al-Qaida-related 
Turkish terrorists suspected in the Istanbul bombings in 
November 2003, had been captured and are being held in Iraq, 
al-Zubayri said he had `no information' on the issue.  He 
stated that the Turkish government's request to have the 
suspected terrorists extradited has not yet reached Baghdad. 
Al-Zubaydi also said that Iraq will ask for Turkey's help in 
training Iraqi police. 
 
Interior Ministers of Turkey, Iraq, Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, 
Kuwait, Egypt, Syria, Iran, and Jordan are attending the 
ministerial-level meetings in Istanbul to discuss the 
security situation in and around Iraq.  Turkish papers 
report that the Iraqi interior minister criticized Syria's 
failure to take serious steps to stop the infiltration of 
terrorists into Iraq from Syrian territory.  `We have given 
Damascus the names of terrorists who have sought and found 
shelter in Syria.  The Syrians denied that they were on 
their territory.  But we are 100 percent sure that these 
terrorists are there.  I have their addresses and pictures,' 
he said.  Syria expressed `deep regret' over the Iraqi 
interior minister's statement.  A Syrian Foreign Ministry 
spokesman said that Damascus had increased the number of 
observation posts and deployed a large number of troops 
along the border with Iraq, and called on diplomatic 
missions and media outlets to visit the border to check on 
the Syrian security measures.  Iranian Interior Minister 
Abdolvahed Mousavi-Lari said that there are `no PKK camps in 
Iran,' and added that Tehran opposed the PKK as well as a 
Kurdish federation in northern Iraq. 
 
Assistant Secretary Fried on the PKK:  Turkish papers report 
that US Assistant Secretary Dan Fried told a conference at 
the Washington Institute that a Turkish cross-border 
incursion against PKK militants nestled in northern Iraq may 
cause `undesired consequences.'  `I understand Turkey's 
anger and disappointment in the face of PKK attacks,' Fried 
said.  `However, hot pursuit and the subsequent military 
tension that it would cause would not be the best option. 
We must act together in making Iraq a successful state, and 
then remove the terrorist presence from its territory,' 
Fried noted. 
 
McEldowney: We Regard al-Qaeda and the PKK as the Same:  US 
Embassy Charge d-Affaires Nancy McEldowney hosted a group of 
Turkish exchange students at the embassy on Monday, "Yeni 
Safak" reports.  McEldowney issued a message of cooperation 
in the fight against terrorism.  `Whether the group calls 
itself al-Qaeda or PKK/Kongra Gel, Turkey and America are 
united in the knowledge that they are terrorist groups. 
Whether the bomb explodes in Cesme or Washington, in 
Kusadasy or New York, Turkey and America are united in the 
struggle to stop the violence,' McEldowney said. 
 
EU, US Condemn Bomb Attacks in Turkish Resort:  Jonathan 
Todd, a European Commission spokesman, said that the EU 
condemned the bomb attack in Turkey's Aegean resort of 
Kusadasi last Saturday.  Todd offered condolences to the 
families of victims, including EU citizens, and condemned 
terrorist attacks targeting innocent people.  "Radikal" 
reports that the United States also condemned the `vicious 
terrorist bombing' that killed five people and wounded 
thirteen in Kusadasi. `We express our profound condolences 
to the victims and their families.  Senseless attacks such 
as this only reinforce our determination to combat terrorism 
wherever it appears, and no matter who is responsible.  We 
stand together with our ally, Turkey, in our common fight 
against terrorism,' the US State Department Spokesman said. 
 
Charge McEldowney Meets With Turkish Cypriot Representative: 
US Charge d'Affaires Nancy McEldowney met with Turkish 
Cypriot `Ambassador' Temel Gazioglu in his private capacity 
for lunch at her residence yesterday, several papers report. 
McEldowney and Gazioglu discussed the need to reenergize 
talks for a solution to the Cyprus issue.  They also 
discussed steps the United States has taken to alleviate the 
isolation of the Turkish Cypriots.  Gazioglu stressed the 
importance of the issue of direct flights to northern 
Cyprus.  McEldowney said that `we are looking into what we 
might be able to do, but on that issue there are some 
international and legal obstacles.'  McEldowney highlighted 
the fact that USAID recently announced the disbursement of 
10 million USD in assistance to improve the business climate 
and the banking sector in northern Cyprus. 
 
Tancredo: If Attacked, the US May Strike Islam's Holy 
Places:  Turkish papers report that US congressman Tom 
Tancredo (R-FL) told a local radio station last Friday that 
if the United States faces a terrorist nuclear attack from a 
radical Islamic group, then it may retaliate by carrying out 
a military strike against Islam's holy places.  Asked 
whether he meant a possible bombing of Mecca, Tancredo 
reportedly replied `yes.'  Tancredo later tried to clarify 
his remarks, saying he meant to that gravest threat should 
be answered in the strongest possible way. 
 
Poll: Majority of Europeans Oppose Turkey's EU Bid: 
According to a poll by "Eurobarometer," 52 percent of 
European nationals oppose Turkey's membership with the EU, 
while only 35 percent approve it.  A similar poll by the 
same organization in 2002 showed only 32 percent support for 
Turkey's EU membership.  The most negative country on this 
issue was Austria, where 80 percent of respondents oppose 
Turkey in the EU.  Germany was next, with 74 percent 
opposed.  Italy was the only EU country in which a majority 
(52 percent) of respondents supported Turkey's membership in 
the Union. 
 
EU Warns Turkey on Non-Muslim Minorities:  The European 
Commission urged in a letter to Ankara that concrete steps 
be taken to ensure religious freedom for non-Muslim 
minorities before Turkey starts accession talks in October, 
"Radikal" reports.  The Commission warned that Turkey has 
not made the necessary improvements regarding the religious 
freedom of non-Muslim minorities, and that the draft on 
minority foundations has not brought a solution to the 
problems faced by the minorities. 
 
Ocalan Blocks Declaration Condemning Killing of HADEP 
Member:  "Milliyet" reports that Kurdish activist Leyla Zana 
and her former Kurdish lawmaker colleagues were preparing to 
release a declaration condemning the killing of former HADEP 
deputy chairman Hikmet Fidan, but that the declaration was 
blocked by imprisoned PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan.  Several 
columnists called for a thorough investigation of Fidan's 
killing, and speculated that support for the separatist 
organization would decline significantly if a PKK role in 
the assassination is revealed.  "Cumhuriyet" suspects the 
PKK might have killed many prominent Kurds in Turkey in the 
past, including Musa Anter, Nurettin Aydyn, Mustafa 
Gunaydyn, Dr. Rodi Demirkapi, and Salah Nuri. 
 
Osman Ocalan to stablish Political Party in Turkey:  Osman 
Ocalan, brother of  imprisoned PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan, 
has written a letter to northern Iraqi Kurdish leaders 
Talabani and Barzani asking for increased financial support 
for his 750 militants, "Zaman" reports.  Ocalan claimed that 
he could convince PKK militants in the mountains to lay down 
their weapons.  Ocalan said he would establish a political 
party and publish a weekly newspaper in Turkey, and asked 
Talabani and Barzani for 100,000 USD in monthly financial 
support, according to "Zaman.". 
 
Several Delegations to Participate in July 20 Ceremonies in 
North Cyprus:  The Turkish Cypriot "BRT-1 TV" reported on 
Monday that the `TRNC' will host guests from Turkey, the 
Central Asian republics, and some European countries on the 
31st anniversary of Turkey's intervention in Cyprus on July 
20, 1974.  Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul is expected to lead 
the Turkish delegation to the `TRNC' tomorrow.  Delegations 
from Azerbaijan, Denmark, Belgium, Macedonia, Georgia, 
Yemen, Indonesia, Pakistan, and Palestine are to participate 
in the ceremonies, according to BRT. 
 
Turkey's First Kurdish Course Closed:  Turkey's first 
Kurdish language course, which drew criticism because of 
suspicions that it could encourage separatism, has been 
closed due to a lack of students and financial difficulties, 
papers report.  The school was opened in Turkey's mainly 
Kurdish southeastern province of Batman in April 2004 within 
the framework of EU harmonization laws.  30,000 people 
participated in the opening ceremony. 
 
Turkey Becomes Popular With Middle Eastern Tourists:  Turkey 
is becoming increasingly popular with Arab and Iranian 
tourists, papers report.   Streamlined visa procedures at 
airports have boosted tourist arrivals from Middle Eastern 
countries by 50 percent, to 750,000 in the first six months. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Israel; Iraq; Terrorism 
 
"Attention in Palestine and Israel" 
Kenan Akin wrote in the nationalist "Ortadogu" (7/19): 
"Israel's expected operation in Palestine has a grave 
potential to again put the Middle East region in flames. 
International efforts should focus on controlling Hamas, but 
should also aim to prevent an Israeli attack in Palestine 
which could turn into a massacre.  Sadly enough, there seems 
to be no sign of an effort in this direction on the part of 
the international community, including the United Nations. 
The Middle East cannot bear further massacres in the midst 
of the ongoing bloodshed in Iraq.  The Arab world and Turkey 
should do their best to express concern over the planned 
attack by Israel.  But past events proven that Israel has 
never paid attention to international concerns, and does not 
heed international pressure.  It looks like the Middle East 
is on the verge of a new era of bloodshed." 
 
"The Importance of Northern Iraq" 
Erdal Guven commented in the conservative "DB Tercuman" 
(7/19):  "The evasive statements by the Iraqi Interior 
Minister indicate the difficulty for Turkey in trying to get 
permission for a cross-border operation against the PKK. 
But it is impossible for Turkey to eliminate terrorism 
without wiping out the terrorist camps in northern Iraq. 
Turkey used to take counter-measures in advance when the 
Turkish army controlled 70 kilometers along the Iraqi 
border.  But this situation no longer exists.  Iraq is doing 
nothing to stop PKK terrorism.  Instead, the PKK is being 
given shelter and encouragement from the Barzani 
administration.  Given the current situation, Turkey must 
start an operation in northern Iraq immediately.  The 
Turkish military should position itself in northern Iraq so 
that the PPK's growing terrorism can be countered in a 
timely fashion." 
 
"Calling it What It Is" 
Sami Kohen wrote in the mass appeal "Milliyet" (7/19): "The 
international media, especially the European press, presents 
a confused picture when it comes to the use of the terms 
`terrorist' and `terrorism.'  Interestingly, some British 
papers characterized the bombing in Turkey's Kusadasi as 
`terrorism,' but refrained from using the word `terrorist' 
to describe the bomber.  There are several terms that the 
European papers generally prefer to use when referring a 
terrorist incident - there is `militant,' `attacker,' and 
`guerrilla.'  These terms are used especially when referring 
to the PKK.  The list of terrorist organizations compiled by 
both the US and the EU includes the PKK.  But why are PKK 
members not named as terrorists in the media?  If we are 
characterizing the attack in the proper context, why are we 
not doing the same thing for the person who carried it out?" 
 
MCELDOWNEY