05ANKARA5140
TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, August 16-
Fri Sep 02 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 21 ANKARA 005140 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, August 16- 
31, 2005 
 
¶1. In response to G/TIP inquiries, national and 
  international media sources published the following news 
  articles about TIP in Turkey.  Text of articles 
  originally published in Turkish is provided through 
  unofficial local FSN translation. 
 
¶2.  Published by Tempo Magazine in its August 16 edition: 
 
     TITLE: The Russian Mafia in Antalya:  Russian Girls 
     become Sex Slaves in Ornekkoy, Lara 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  THE RUSSIAN MAFIA GOES RAMPANT IN ANTALYA 
 
     The rich Antalya businessman was chatting with his 
     friends at a crowded table at a fish restaurant on the 
     shore when he turned to them and said, "I need to feed 
     the birds."  He left the table.  As the rich 
     businessman has left to feed his birds, at the table 
     there was a heated conversation on "birds." 
 
     The rich businessman rented a house in the Ornekkoy 
     area of Lara, the famous district of Antalya for the 
     beautiful five girls he brought from Russia.   He 
     stopped by a kebab place and bought Turkish pizza and 
     entered the house.  The girls were sitting calmly. 
     While some were knitting and doing needlework, others 
     were reading books. 
 
     This Antalya businessman has been living for almost a 
     month with his "harem."  The girls were providing 
     services to him.  They were relieving not only the 
     businessman, but also the important guests of their 
     guardian. 
 
     This is only one of the incidents that have turned 
     Antalya into a prostitution city.  The businessman does 
     not sell these women, but using his money he makes his 
     private life more colorful.  Actually this has been one 
     of the increasing supplies that went up in a prominent 
     way in recent times.  When you say Ornekkoy, you 
     definitely see an impression hiding behind mischievous 
     looks.  Everybody in Antalya knows that Ornekkoy has 
     been a residential center for Russians particularly who 
     work in the prostitution sector.  This is a residential 
     area for Natashas.  Night clubs and hotels in Ornekkoy 
     have turned into a place where the pretty Russian 
     prostitutes work. 
 
     As a result of research that "Tempo" conducted in 
     Antalya and with information obtained from security 
     sources, we found important facts about the Kurdish and 
     Russian Mafia cooperation in the prostitution traffic. 
     Russian girls are sold, bought and rented as if they 
     are a commodity.  They are transferred from one person 
     to the other. 
 
     According to the security sources, the Kurdish Mafia is 
     conducting the Natasha prostitution traffic in Antalya. 
     Special "contact tours" are organized to Russia for 
     this purpose.  Or the woman exchange is conducted 
     through the Russian Mafia. 
 
     Russian women are brought to ports and airports. 
     Security forces have a very important allegation about 
     this point.  This is a grave accusation that in Russia 
     there is a state mechanism, like a ministry, in charge 
     of women, is organizing the prostitution, in particular 
     for Turkey.  Security forces are aware that Russian 
     prostitutes, who are deported after being caught in 
     prostitution, obtain a new ID with the help of the 
     state and return to Turkey.  According to these 
     sources, the Russian Mafia is powerful enough to have 
     an influence at the state level. 
 
     The first step for the Russian women who enter 
     prostitution in Antalya is to arrive at the airport. 
     They are met by members of the Kurdish Mafia.  There is 
     a certain price for renting these women.  Although it 
     differs, depending on their characteristics, two 
     Russian prostitutes can be rented for two months for 
     $5000.  Two months later, one has to return the girls 
     to their original master without any damage.  If there 
     is interest, their rental period can be extended in 
     return for money.  Or the girls are rented to new 
     owners. 
 
     A police operation conducted two years ago gave an 
     important tip about the financial dimension of 
     prostitution.  Police caught a Kurdish pimp whose diary 
     listed the names of all women with checkmarks.  A 
     Natasha can go out with 15 separate clients in one 
     night and this astonishes even the police. 
     Natashas charge 50 YTL per hour.  Overnight charge is 
     100 Euro.  There is information that women are rented 
     for a week or a month. 
 
     The prostitution traffic is conducted through two 
     means:  First, just like the case in the Aksaray 
     (Istanbul) market, one openly bargains at nigh clubs or 
     on the dance floor.  Secondly, bargaining can be 
     conducted on the phone through a pimp. 
 
     It has been said that lately this bargaining has been 
     going on mostly through the phone in Antalya.  Wherever 
     the client wants, a pimp takes the Natasha to a house 
     or a hotel. 
 
     Security forces also are aware of the role of the night 
     clubs in the prostitution business in Antalya. 
     According to security records, some night clubs 
     organize the prostitution.  Some night club managers of 
     Kurdish origin, who have a criminal record of theft, 
     are involved in the Natasha trade.  These people are 
     also involved in drug trafficking as well.  In other 
     words, the Kurdish Mafia is conducting both Natasha and 
     drug trafficking. 
 
     Recently a new issue popped up: The Russian capital 
     lately has been investing in particular in the tourism 
     sector and that the Russian Mafia was influential in 
     this sector.    This fact is silently accepted in 
     Antalya.  It also constitutes the secret agenda of 
     Antalya. 
 
     More importantly, Antalya talks about the Turks who 
     were punished by being subject to Russian Mafia's 
     torture.  Turks who are cheated by the Russian Mafia 
     are suffering from an economic collapse. 
 
     "Tempo" reporters reached two Turks who were victims of 
     the Russian Mafia but who refused to identify 
     themselves because of the fear.  They indicated that 
     Antalya was full of signs that the Russian Mafia was 
     rampant in Antalya. 
 
     C.K. has been in the tourism business for 20 years.  He 
     owns a hotel, one of the five-star places in Antalya. 
     He entered partnership with a Russian last January. 
     C.K. was impressed with the charisma of the Russian who 
     introduced himself as the President of Spartak Moscow. 
     They bought land and wanted to create new investment 
     centers.  But the Russian partner never met any of his 
     obligations.  C.K. was in debt and secured loans.  His 
     Russian partner kept saying that he would resolve it. 
     He never kept any of his promises.  C.K. faced a full 
     collapse and lost all his professional prestige.   One 
     day he traveled to Moscow as the guest of his Russian 
     partner and experienced the following interesting 
     incident: 
 
     "One day my Russian partner invited me to Moscow.  He 
     took me to such a place that it was impossible not to 
     be infatuated.  We went there with a Mercedes.  We drew 
     through a special forest and stopped along with super 
     luxurious vans and got out of the car.  We passed the 
     body guards and arrived at a restaurant.  I could not 
     believe my eyes.  I was surprised to see such a place. 
     It was an unbelievable place.  There was a person at 
     the table who was introduced as an aide to Putin. 
     There were Russian politicians and businessmen.  I saw 
     UNSYG Annan at the next table.  I think it was a state 
     restaurant.  I felt lucky when I realized the 
     connections of my partner.  I told to myself, 'OK.  We 
     will do great things.'   But I still cannot get angry 
     at him.  I still am speechless in the face of his 
     charisma.  But I can say that there were around six or 
     seven Turks like me.  We did not apply to any 
     officials.  There was nothing to do.  The Russian Mafia 
     is trying to take over the Turkish tourism.  That was 
     why we were the victims of a major operation." 
     Another victim of the Russian Mafia is T.Y., who has 
     been involved in tourism for 19 years.  He, too, was 
     deceived like C.K. by the same Russian man.  He had to 
     sell all his assets.  Currently the Russian still is 
     his partner because T.Y. cannot get out of it since the 
     Russian partner is not around.  He, too, is aware that 
     he was deceived by the Russian Mafia.  He said, "I made 
     a mistake.  I had the illusion that I would become a 
     big businessman and earn a lot of money.  I thought 
     that I was lucky." 
 
     He brought to our attention the influence of the 
     Russian Mafia in Antalya.  According to a probe by 
     "Tempo," we tracked down a member of the Russian Mafia. 
     The person who introduced himself as the President of 
     Sparta Moscow is Gelani Tovbulatov.  There were Turkish 
     media reports on him 2004.  He bought two flats with a 
     sea view for 150,000 Euros in the Club Erdogan 
     Residence, in Konyaalti, Antalya.  He was the first 
     Russian to buy a residence in Turkey.  Tovbulatov was a 
     former KGB spy.  He headed the Sparta Moscow Ice Hockey 
     team.  It was claimed that he was a prominent member of 
     the Russian Mafia. 
 
     There are many allegations about the activities of the 
     Russian Mafia in Antalya.  It was claimed that the 
     capital of many travel agencies came from Russians but 
     Turks were seen as owners.  It was also claimed that 
     there were serious money laundering operations. 
 
     A Turkish businessman who was subject to torture by the 
     Russian Mafia said important things.  After entering a 
     partnership, the businessman had problems and was 
     invited to Moscow.  His hands and feet were tied and 
     was kept hostage in a house.  He was subject to 
     intensive beating and torture.  All his wealth was 
     taken away from him.  He signed some documents and he 
     received a blow economically. 
 
     According to sources in Antalya, the Russian Mafia also 
     tortured Turks in Antalya.  The strange part about it 
     was nobody applied to officials and complained about 
     torture by the Russian Mafia because they are very 
     afraid.  Huseyin Acarlioglu, who has around 25 leather 
     and jewelry shops in Russia and at one point had a 
     partner from the Russian Mafia, said that the Russian 
     Mafia did not respect any rules and behaved the way it 
     liked.  He warned that for this reason Turks should be 
     careful while doing business with Russians. 
     -- 
 
     KURDISH MAFIA WITHIN THE CITADEL (AREA) 
 
     The other agenda item in Antalya are some problems that 
     began with the Kurdish influx to the city.  Especially 
     lately Kurdish origin people began to serve as bar, 
     night club or parking managers in the area within the 
     Antalya Citadel.  There is a serious uneasiness in the 
     area about this fact.  According to an allegation, the 
     Kurdish Mafia, too, is active in the same area.  I 
     learned that some were operating without licenses and 
     no legal action can be taken against them.  The Kurdish 
     Mafia has created its own sphere of influence in the 
     region.  For example, using children as beggars, like 
     in Istanbul, is valid for Antalya as well.  Also, the 
     Kurdish Mafia is controlling parking, drugs and 
     prostitution.  In some police operation, information is 
     obtained to prove this fact. 
 
     -- 
 
     IF YOU ARE DOING BUSINESS WITH RUSSIANS, NEVER MAKE A 
     MISTAKE 
 
     Huseyin Acarlioglu is the owner of companies called 
     "Mondial" and "Alice."  He also is the honorary consul 
     of Kazakhstan in Antalya.  He has major investments in 
     Russia in the leather and jewelry business.  Acarlioglu 
     shared with "Tempo" the codes and activities of the 
     Russian Mafia, as well as the characteristics of the 
     most dangerous Mafia of the world. 
     He said, "In 1998 I was having dinner in Moscow.  I had 
     a very bright friend at the table.  The person we were 
     having dinner was the partner Abromovitch, who 
     currently is the owner of 'Chelsea.'  While chatting, 
     my friend said, 'Invest in Antalya.  We can make hotels 
     and holiday villages together.'  That person responded, 
     'I'll ask you something.  Is there a Mafia in Antalya?' 
     When my friend said, 'No,' that person said that then 
     there won't be anything happening in Antalya.  He went 
     on, 'They are in New York, Tokyo, and Moscow.  Meaning 
     that the money is there.  This means that there is no 
     money in Antalya.  Mafia is where the money is.  One 
     needs to accept this.' 
 
     "Antalya is a region generating a serious amount of 
     money.  Land is very expensive.  In order to accomplish 
     something, one needs to receive a go ahead from many 
     places.  The Russian Mafia has arrived and active here 
     because they are making serious investments gradually. 
 
     "I had a business partner.  He owned 49 percent of the 
     shares of an oil company.  He proposed, 'Huseyin, you 
     take my oil and sell to Syria, Southern Cyprus and 
     Malta.'  I told him that this was not my business.  But 
     I was involved in barter trade.  I sent him textiles, 
     he sent back raw leather, polyethylene and lumber.  We 
     had such a partnership.  At that stage I began to open 
     branches.  I opened my first branch in Kazan in 
     leather.  Later I entered the jewelry business.  The 
     governor of that town was a strong man.  He was my 
     friend.  I began with his encouragement. 
 
     "The businessman who I referred as 'oilman' was also a 
     Mafia member.  When we were having dinner at his summer 
     house we were surrounded by his 15-20 bodyguards.  They 
     were carrying automatic rifles under their coat.  This 
     is a fact of life there.  Somebody came to us running 
     and whispered something in my partner's ear.  He jumped 
     for joy and said, 'Today is a joyful day for me.  We 
     will eat and drink the best today.  We will have fun.' 
     He had a Mafia rival in the South and he reportedly 
     killed all members of that Mafia, including the leader. 
     They were ambushed.  Our partner was very pleased.  Our 
     blood froze. 
 
     "'Mondial' has been doing its own business for 21 
     years. I employ 1000 people.  I have employees in 
     Russia.  I also have a hotel venture in Antalya.  I 
     have a plot of land of around 200,000 square meters on 
     the shore.  I'm planning to open a 5-star hotel aiming 
     at 'therapeutic tourism.'  I receive serious offers, 
     mostly from Russia, to be my partner.  I may enter 
     partnership. 
 
     "In Russia the state is regarded as a Mafia.  If the 
     state wants, the price of a land can increase.  It may 
     make a company very successful and another go bankrupt. 
     There are strong politicians who are also Mafia 
     members.  Strong businessmen are also Mafia members. 
     Similarly, strong artists, too, are Mafia members.  One 
     has to regard the Mafia like this.  In the past 'street 
     Mafia' was more prominent in Russia but some of them 
     earned a lot of money and became gentlemen.  They drive 
     the most fashionable cars and I can see that their 
     behavior has changed.  I can observe that they live in 
     very good houses and mingle with good politicians or 
     such officials. 
 
     "Most of the Russian investors coming to Turkey are 
     involved in mining, iron, oil, gas and lumber business 
     in their own country.  They have serious assets.  They 
     earn their living by getting their income.  The 
     cheapest rent was $150,000 per year, five fold of what 
     they would pay in Antalya.  Such people invest their 
     money through sound links in Turkey.  These can be 
     hotel land, villas, and houses.  They buy a hotel and 
     manage it.  And this trend is accelerating. 
 
     "About a year ago a law was adopted.  In the past 
     Russians were not allowed to buy property.  The state 
     granted this right to people from the North.  I had 
     some friends.  They bought houses and other property 
     here.  They put the deed in my name.  Why?  They could 
     not buy property.  They had to do it through a person 
     they trusted.  But now the business is legal.  So I 
     returned the deed to them. 
     "Russians have a Mafia-like method.  That country has 
     such a tradition.  One has to accept this.  If you 
     enter a business, you should not make a mistake because 
     laws won't protect you in that country.  You may do 
     business and pay money and you are robbed but laws do 
     not protect you there.  Who ever is strong, his will 
     rules.  If you are rich, then you can pursue your 
     business.  You need to have dependable and sound 
     business partners there.   One has to be very careful 
     about entering business partnership with Russians. 
     Although partnership means something in global 
     commerce, this may mean nothing there.  In other words, 
     the man there one day may question, 'Why am I not 
     having all?'  They don't respect the rules.  One has to 
     be prepared to this. 
 
     "There has been money laundering around the world, and 
     not only in Turkey.  If you put $500,000 in your pocket 
     and fly to Canada, they offer you citizenship.  Those 
     people are investing their money in very different 
     countries."  END TEXT. 
 
¶3.  Published by Milliyet on Friday, August 19: 
 
     TITLE:  Ukrainian Woman on Vacation in a Prostitution 
     Trap 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  A Ukrainian woman who called the 157 
     hotline from Alanya, Antalya and said she was forced 
     into prostitution was saved by a sting operation. 
     Information gathered shows Natalia B. (23) called 157 
     and said she was stuck in a prostitution quagmire.  She 
     asked for help. 
 
     When the young woman gave an approximate address of 
     where she was, the Public Order Department of the 
     police got organized.  The teams determined the house 
     where the woman was staying, retrieved her and took her 
     to the police department. 
 
     Natalia B explained that she came to Alanya for 
     vacation and met a person named Yakup Gurakar.  She 
     said that he raped her and forced her into 
     prostitution.  Upon this development Gurakar, B.D. and 
     C.B. were detained and taken to court.  While Gurakar 
     was arrested, the Ukrainian woman was given to the 
     Foreigner's Department of the police for deportation. 
     END TEXT. 
 
¶4.  Published by Milliyet on Friday, August 19: 
 
     TITLE:  A 13 YEAR OLD GIRL SAVED FROM PROSTITUTION 
     NETWORK 
     BEGIN TEXT:  B.C. (13) who had been missing for 15 days 
     in Kahramanmaras was saved from the hands of a 
     prostitution network.  Ten people who made the little 
     girl serve as a prostitute and those who entered a 
     relationship with her were arrested. 
     V.C. applied to the police 15 days ago and said that 
     his daughter B.C. was missing.  Police Public Order 
     Heavy Crimes Department teams learned that B.C. was in 
     the hands of Nurgul S. and Songul P., who had a 
     criminal record for serving as prostitutes and 
     mediating for prostitution.  Police conducted its 
     investigation in great secrecy and with an operation 
     saved B.C. from the prostitution network.   Nurgl S. & 
     Songl P., who forced B.C. into prostitution and Ycel 
     S., Ahmet G., Milcan K., Hamza P., Murat B., Mehmet B., 
     Seyfettin S. & Sleyman F., who allegedly had sexual 
     contact with her, were detained. 
     B.C., who claimed that the two women forced her into 
     prostitution in return for 20-30 m TL, was given to her 
     family. 
     The ten suspects, including the two women, were sent to 
     court where they were arrested for kidnapping an 
     underage youngster, forcing her into prostitution with 
     threats and raping a girl younger that 15.  END TEXT. 
 
¶5.  Published by Turkish Daily News on Sunday, August 21: 
21: 
     TITLE:  Turkey to host international forum on human 
     trafficking 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Turkey is preparing to host an 
     international conference on human trafficking later 
     this month to discuss the problem and ways to deal with 
     it, the Foreign Ministry announced in a statement. 
     The conference on "Trafficking in Persons in Southeast 
     Europe-a Threat to Human Security" is a joint 
     initiative of the Regional Stability in South East 
     Europe (RSSEE) Study Group of the Germany-based 
     Partnership for Peace Consortium of Defense Academies 
     and Security Studies Institutes, the International 
     Organization on Migration (IOM), and the Center for 
     Strategic Research at the Turkish Ministry of Foreign 
     Affairs.  It will take place on August 25-27 at 
     Istanbul's Bahcesehir University, the Foreign Ministry 
     statement said. 
     Turkey, a destination country for a growing number of 
     women from the former Soviet republics who have been 
     trafficked primarily for sexual exploitation, has taken 
     a series of steps to fight human trafficking.  It 
     introduced an action plan and launched a national task 
     force two years ago to cope with the issue. 
     The efforts were in response to a surge over the past 
     few years in the number of persons trafficked into 
     Turkey, mostly in parallel to improving living 
     standards and job opportunities here. 
     The Geneva-based IOM, which Turkey joined in 2004, is a 
     major ally of the Turkish government in counter- 
     trafficking efforts. 
     The Istanbul conference will focus on several aspects 
     of the human trafficking including rights of victims, 
     especially in destination countries, to temporary 
     resident permits and law enforcement measures that 
     could be taken to stop human trafficking-with a focus 
     on investigative techniques-to witness-protection 
     programs and cross-border collaboration. 
     It will also cover anti-trafficking measures that could 
     be taken at the regional level. 
     Turkey launched a 157 telephone hotline to assist 
     trafficked individuals two months ago, and security 
     officials were able to rescue more than a dozen victims 
     after calls were made to the hotline. 
     The IOM says Turkey's anti-trafficking efforts have 
     brought about significant progress but calls for 
     increased prosecution of traffickers.  END TEXT. 
¶6.  Published by Sabah on Sunday, August 21: 
     TITLE:  WHILE ESCAPING POVERTY, THEY LOST THEIR FREEDOM 
     BEGIN TEXT:  They are always on the 3rd pages of 
     newspapers.  Picture of a young woman of Ukrainian or 
     Moldavian, Georgian, Uzbek origin, with a black line on 
     her eyes (to conceal her identity), is published with a 
     three or five sentence article noting that she was 
     captured during an operation and while being involved 
     in prostitution. 
 
     There may be some readers who think that this was the 
     path they chose but most of them actually come here for 
     working in regular jobs.  They fall in the hands of 
     human traffickers and turn into modern age slaves. 
     Where do I know?  Because there have been thousands of 
     calls to Hotline 157 although it opened only two months 
     ago. 
 
     This line was set up by the IOM and it has saved lives 
     of those who are in particular citizens of the former 
     Soviet Union. 
 
     The IOM was established during the 1st Gulf War in 
     ¶1991.  Its headquarters is in Geneva and has 109 
     members.  We talked to Selin Unal, the rep of IOM, both 
     about human trafficking, and the 157 hotline. 
 
     Unal explained that the U.S. ad Turkish Governments 
     were financing the $700,000 budget of a campaign to 
     prevent human trafficking.  She added that a great 
     majority of human trafficking victims were Moldavians 
     and Ukrainians. 
     Unal noted that as of Friday (August 19), the IOM has 
     saved 144 women.  She noted that in the past they were 
     able to reach these women when they called an authority 
     in their own country or during operations by Turkish 
     law-enforcement officials. 
 
     She said that 44 of these women came to Turkey from the 
     Ukraine, 39 from Moldavia, 16 from Russia, 11 from 
     Uzbekistan, 10 from Kyrgyzstan, seven from Romania, 
     five from Kazakhstan, five from Belarus, three from 
     Armenia, two from Turkmenistan, one from Azerbaijan and 
     one from Uganda. They sent back 132 of them to their 
     countries.  The twelve remain here for finalizing the 
     procedures and for rehabilitation work. 
 
     It has been seen that more than one third of these 
     women were kept as slaves in Istanbul.  Antalya comes 
     the second and Ankara the third. 
 
     Among victims 82 entered Turkey from Istanbul, seven 
     from Sarp and five from Antalya.  When one looks at the 
     ages of the victims, one sees that traffickers are 
     after young women since 13 of those who were saved were 
     between 16-18 years old, 73 were between 19-25, 35 is 
     between 26-30 and eight between 31-38.  Only three were 
     older than 38. 
 
     There is also a hotline 157 that has been operating 
     since May 23.  Thousands of calls were evaluated and 
     passed on to the police and Jandarma.  This has been 
     conducted in cooperation with the former Soviet 
     republics and it is an important component of the fight 
     against human trafficking. 
 
     They could reach 31 of the 144 women who were saved 
     through this hotline.  The 157 operators speak Russian, 
     Romanian and English along with Turkish.  Information 
     on all calls are conveyed to the law enforcement 
     officials.  Sometimes after a long pursuit they can 
     reach victims who fell into the hands of and forced 
     into prostitution by human traffickers. 
 
     How does one exploit a person in human trafficking? 
     Unal responded by saying, "Turkey is both a destination 
     and transit country in human trafficking.  By checking 
     the statistics we can say that a great majority of 
     victims in Turkey are subject to sexual exploitation 
     and are forced to work in the prostitution sector. 
     This does not rule out the fact that other types of 
     exploitation also exist.  There are those who are 
     forced to do house work, those who do not get paid, 
     those who are forced to do another job than the one 
     they thought they would be doing, and those whose 
     passports are taken away from them.  A woman, who is 
     from Uganda, called 157 for being forced to work." 
 
     Since they have to live with an income less than $1 per 
     day in their country, these women consider working in 
     Turkey as a salvation.  How they end up in the hands of 
     human traffickers is both identical and at the same 
     time very different from each other. 
 
     Information at the website www.countertrafficking.org 
     too, confirms this fact. According to it those at 
     greatest risk are women who are between 16-24 years of 
     age without adequate education.  A great majority of 
     these women, who do not have a hope to get a good job 
     in their own country, have kids and become an easy 
     target for human traffickers to promise them a between 
     job and life. 
 
     Those who come to Turkey through mediators in their own 
     country to become a dancer, waitress or baby-sitter, 
     they find themselves in the middle of a nightmare. 
     Even before they leave their country, these women were 
     made part of human trafficking and turn into a prey 
     through newspaper ads offering jobs abroad.  In general 
     these women are made slaves through other women within 
     major crime gangs.  According to studies, each criminal 
     organization has around 80 employees for finding houses 
     and for other arrangements. 
     The stories of the victims who end up returning home 
     demonstrate the scope of their nightmare.  They said 
     that if they did not abide by what was said, they were 
     raped, tortured, threatened to be killed, beaten and 
     made to starve.  They added that those who were 
     pregnant were forced to enter intercourse and that 
     infants were killed after labor. 
 
     These modern slaves are sold numerous times as they 
     wait to be saved.  Some enter the domination of one 
     merchant for $200 while others go for $2000. 
     It is extremely hard for them to run away from this 
     hell.  These women are closely monitored and locked in 
     apartments.  They are threatened that their families 
     would be killed if they flee.  Those who still try and 
     manage to escape, have a hard time continuing their 
     life from where they left before because the trauma 
     they experienced affects them deeply.   According to 
     psychiatrists only 30 percent of these women recover 
     enough to lead a normal life. 
 
     The IOM meets the needs of the women and children here 
     before they are sent to their countries.  Psychological 
     support is provided to those who are having a trauma. 
     Unal said that victims stay at the Kiev's shelter in 
     Istanbul until they leave Turkey.  She added, "A 
     shelter will open in Ankara as well in September." 
 
     Since these women who are saved do not have passports, 
     first passports are issued.  Those who are ready to go 
     back home are put on a plane accompanied by a person 
     who is assigned for this job.  If they like, in their 
     home country, they can attend a program for 
     rehabilitation.  They, too, are hosted at shelters 
     there until their need for psychological, social and 
     legal needs are met. 
 
     Those who want to continue with their education or 
     learn a profession can receive help.  They are even 
     provided with small amounts of credit to begin a job. 
     Officials pay periodic calls on them and see whether 
     these victims face any pressure. 
 
     THEIR STORIES ARE SAD 
 
     The stories of some of the victims on the 
     www.countertrafficking.org run by the IOM give an idea 
     how young women are deceived. 
 
     She Was Victimized by Friend 
     I was born in Moldavia in 1974.  I had economic 
     problems.  A girl friend said that one could earn good 
     money in Turkey by dancing.  I earlier worked as a 
     dancer in Slovenia and encountered no problem.  My 
     friend who offered me the job arranged for my expenses, 
     plane ticket and passport.  They told me that a man 
     named Veysel would meet me at the Antalya airport. 
     Veysel took me to a village house in Antalya.  They 
     took away my passport.  There was a woman from Moldavia 
     at that house.  They told me that I was brought here to 
     serve in the prostitution sector.  When I objected and 
     wanted to return home, I was beaten at gunpoint.  I was 
     subject to pressure.  Clients were coming to the 
     village house.  A few other girls, too, were doing the 
     same thing.  One day the Moldavian women took me to a 
     hotel to a client.  From the hotel I called a hotline 
     by the Moldavian NGO La Strada.  I asked for help. 
     They asked me to call 157.  I called 157 and told the 
     operator where I was.  The Antalya police saved me. 
 
     They Told Me That I Was in Debt 
     My profession is cooking.  I'm from Romania.  I was 
     told that I would work as a dancer at a casino.  I 
     signed a contract in Romania with an employer in 
     Turkey.  The contract said that expenses would be 
     covered by the employer.  When I arrived in Turkey I 
     was told that I was in debt.  My accommodation, the 
     visit to a doctor and even the cigarette that I smoked 
     were listed as debt.  They asked me to serve as a 
     prostitute at a night club to pay my debt. I did not 
     accept and told them that this was a violation of human 
     rights.  I wanted to go back home.  They did not allow 
     me to go home.  When I went to the Turkish Embassy in 
     Romania to get a visa, they gave me a brochure about 
     the 157 Hotline.  I called 157 and eight more Romanian 
     women, too, were saved.  The other eight women, who 
     have kids and old families, did not file a complaint 
     against those who forced them to work because they did 
     not want to go back home without any money. 
 
     We Would Serve As Waiters 
     I was born in Moldavia in 1984.  With my girlfriend who 
     was born in 1980 and still another girlfriend, we met a 
     man in Chisinau.  He told us that we could work as 
     waitresses in Kusadasi.  He arranged our ticket and 
     passport.  We arrived in Istanbul on May 4.  A Turkish 
     man met us at the airport and we took a bus to 
     Kusadasi.  We were told that there was no place to work 
     as a waitress in Turkey and that because of our travel 
     expenses, we owed them and that we should pay our debt 
     in one way or another.  They also told us that we could 
     pay back by serving as prostitutes and that there was 
     no other way.  We did not accept.  They told us that we 
     could work for one month until we pay our debt and then 
     we could work on our own.  Nothing changed after a 
     month.  I remembered calling the hotline at home.  When 
     I called the hotline by La Strada, they told me to call 
     ¶157.  In half an hour the police saved us and other 
     girls. 
 
     They Sold Us to Ankara 
     I was born in Ukraine in 1982.  I have a daughter who 
     is one-and-a-half years old.  I'm separated from my 
     husband.  We were living with my mom and both of us 
     were unemployed.  A man told my girl friend who was 
     born in 1984 that he could find us a job as waitresses 
     in Turkey and we would earn good money.  My friend 
     introduced me to that man who arranged our travel to 
     Turkey.  In Istanbul we were met by a Turkish man.  He 
     took us to the market place and began to buy us flashy 
     nightgowns.  He told us that we owe him and that we 
     could pay him back by working as prostitutes.  When we 
     objected, he told us that we did not have an 
     alternative.  When we wanted to go back, they did not 
     let us.  They could not sell us in Istanbul.  So they 
     sold us to Ankara.  We were taken to Ankara and they 
     made us work there.  My friend one day called her 
     boyfriend in the Ukraine and asked for help.  Her 
     boyfriend called the hotline in Moldavia and they told 
     him that we should call 157 in Turkey.  He told us so 
     and we called 157.  They called 155 and policemen saved 
     us from a hotel in Ankara.  END TEXT. 
 
¶7.  Published by Anadolu Ajansi on Friday, August 19: 
 
     TITLE:  Istanbul to Host an International Conference on 
     Human Smuggling (Comment:  This conference is actually 
     on Human Trafficking.  End Comment.) 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: An international conference will take place 
     in Istanbul in the coming days under Turkey's fight 
     against human smuggling. 
     Releasing a statement, the Turkish Ministry of Foreign 
     Affairs stated on Friday that Istanbul would host an 
     international conference between August 25th and 28th 
     in association with the Austrian Ministry of Defense, 
     Germany-based Southeastern Europe Regional Stability 
     Working Group and the International Organization for 
     Migration. 
     Issues such as protection of victims of human 
     smuggling, their integration to society in their 
     countries, legal arrangements about human smuggling, 
     and cross-border cooperation will be discussed at the 
     meeting. 
     The conference will take place at Istanbul's Bahcesehir 
     University. END TEXT. 
¶8.  Published by Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty on Tuesday, 
August 23: 
     TITLE:  World:  Sex Traffickers Prey on Eastern 
     Europeans 
     BEGIN TEXT:  UNESCO, the UN's cultural organization, 
     has proclaimed August 23 as International Day for the 
     Remembrance of the Slave Trade and its Abolition.  But 
     despite laws against slavery in all of the world's 
     countries, modern-day slavery continues to thrive in 
     illegal underground forms.  In the second of a two-part 
     series, RFE/RL correspondent Ron Synovitz examines how 
     the latest wave of sex-slave trafficking preys upon 
     Eastern European women to fuel the global sex trade. 
     Prague, 23 August 2005 (RFE/RL)-Maria is a 30-year-old 
     mother from Ukraine who left behind her husband and two 
     young children to take what she was told would be a job 
     in Italy as a cleaner. 
     The recruiters who originally promised her a high- 
     paying salary were men who posed as representatives of 
     a legitimate employment agency.  Maria says they gained 
     her trust because they looked professional and 
     persuasive. 
     "The process I went through to get there was normal. 
     Everything looked fine.  There were two other girls 
     with me.  They were from the same region, but I didn't 
     know them. I was going [to Italy] to work as a 
     housekeeper.  In Ukraine, they told me already that I 
     would work either as a housekeeper or work in a bar 
     washing dishes," Maria said. 
     Maria says her nightmare began after she and the other 
     women arrived in Italy and were met by several 
     suspicious men.  They were human traffickers in the 
     illegal global sex industry. 
     "We went there and arrived in one city.  They took us 
     to a building on the outskirts of the city and they 
     told us to clean off, to relax from the travel.  Later, 
     they confronted us with the fact that we would be 
     providing sex services.  It is a shock for a human 
     being. Escape from there was impossible.  The windows 
     were barred and there was the constant presence of a 
     guard," Maria said. 
     One man in the building told Maria he had "bought" her 
     for several hundred dollars. He said she owed him money 
     for the cost of the airplane ticket and would have to 
     work for him until the debt was repaid. 
     For the next nine months, Maria was forced against her 
     will to work as a prostitute. Sometimes she was forced 
     to have sex with 10 different men within a single day. 
     She was beaten brutally whenever she refused.  And if a 
     customer complained about her performance, the brothel 
     owner added a fine to her debt-prolonging her sentence 
     as a sex slave. 
     It was only when the brothel was raided by Italian 
     police that Maria was freed from captivity. 
     Authorities in Italy charged her with prostitution and 
     deported her back to Ukraine. 
     Maria's story is a common one in Eastern Europe and the 
     former Soviet republics. 
     Trafficking from the region for sexual exploitation has 
     become so common since the early 1990s that it is 
     considered by experts as a distinct wave in the global 
     sex trade. 
     The U.S. State Department estimates that 800,000 people 
     are trafficked against their will across international 
     borders every year and that millions more are 
     trafficked internally. 
     John Miller directs the U.S. State Department's Office 
     for Monitoring and Combating Trafficking in persons. 
     "Information on slavery is very inexact.  But we 
     believe that the majority of slave victims-in the 
     neighborhood of 80 percent-are the female gender, and 
     that around 50 percent are children.  We believe that 
     the largest category of slavery is sex slavery.  This 
     is not to minimize other large categories-domestic 
     servitude slavery, forced labor in farms and factory 
     slavery, child soldier slavery," Miller said. 
     Organized criminal groups have created intricate 
     transport routes to move women to different countries. 
     Most of these routes-whether over land, sea or 
     air-originally were established by weapon and drug 
     smuggling syndicates. 
     The so-called "Eastern Route" through Poland and into 
     German is a key overland corridor for smuggling women 
     into the European Union from Russia, Ukraine, Romania, 
     and the Baltics.  The cities of Prague, Amsterdam, and 
     Frankfurt also are common destinations.  Large numbers 
     of these women also reportedly end up in Italy, Greece, 
     Belgium, Austria, and France. 
     The so-called "Balkan route" is another notorious path 
     for sex-trade traffickers.  It moves through Serbia and 
     Montenegro, Croatia, Albania, Macedonia, Bosnia- 
     Herzegovina, and Kosovo. 
     A third major trafficking route passes through southern 
     Bulgaria into Greece.  Eastern European women, 
     especially Ukrainians, also end up in Turkey after 
     traveling overland through Georgia and Bulgaria, or 
     after crossing the Black Sea on boats from the 
     Ukrainian port of Odessa. 
     Meanwhile, the former Soviet republics in the Caucasus 
     and Central Asia have emerged in recent years as new 
     recruitment zones-with women being moved through 
     Central Europe to the EU or to the Middle East and 
     China. 
     Israel, the United Arab Emirates, South Korea, 
     Thailand, China, and Japan also are considered key 
     destinations for criminal groups that smuggle women for 
     sexual exploitation. 
     Miller, who is responsible for the State Department's 
     annual report on trafficking in persons, says Canada 
     and the United States are also becoming significant 
     destinations. 
     "Human trafficking is synonymous with slavery.  Human 
     trafficking relies on coercion and exploitation.  It 
     thrives on converting hope to fear.  It's maintained 
     through violence.  The trade in people is a major 
     source of revenue-in the billions [of dollars per 
     year]-for organized crime, along with the drug trade 
     and the arms trade.  Let there be no misunderstanding. 
     Modern slavery plagues every country in the 
     world-including the United States," Miller said. 
     Canadian-based journalist Viktor Malarek is the author 
     of "Natashas:  The New Global Sex Trade."  His book 
     documents how criminal groups have increasingly preyed 
     upon the hopes of young women like Maria since the 
     collapse of the Berlin Wall and the Soviet Union. 
     Malarek says that in places like Israel and Turkey, the 
     name Natasha has become synonymous with prostitutes or 
     victims of the sex trade from all the former communist 
     countries of Eastern Europe-whether they are from 
     Bulgaria, Romania, Moldova, Ukraine or Russia.  And 
     regardless of their nationalities, brothel owners and 
     their customers usually refer to these women as 
     "Russians." 
     Malarek says not all of those caught up in the 
     international sex trade are innocent and nave women 
     who have been led astray.  He says police and 
     government officials stress that some women willingly 
     enter the sex trade.  But he says the vast majority of 
     Eastern European women lured into the trade are not 
     aware of the nature of sex slavery or the conditions 
     they will work in. 
     Malarek concludes that virtually every city, town and 
     village in Eastern and Central Europe has seen some of 
     its girls and women disappear-becoming expendable pawns 
     in the sex business. 
     It has been several years now since Maria returned to 
     her home in Ukraine.  She still has not told her family 
     about her ordeal in Italy.  She says that she is unsure 
     if she ever will be able to tell her husband the truth. 
     "It was not worth it.  What is important in life is 
     family-my children and my husband-in spite of 
     everything.  At the beginning, the desire for material 
     wealth was at the front of my mind and family came in 
     second place.  But after what happened, my priorities 
     have been reversed," Maria said. 
     Maria now offers advice to other young women who are 
     being recruited for jobs abroad as cleaners, nannies, 
     bartenders, waitresses or models.  She says before 
     traveling, women should think long and hard about where 
     they are going, why they have received the job offer, 
     and what they expect to happen to them once they leave 
     home.  END TEXT. 
¶9.  Published by Vatan on Sunday, August 21: 
 
     TITLE:  BRIDE DISAPPEARS ON THE EVE OF HENNA NIGHT 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Ayca Okmen Dereli, who earlier married 
     Aydin Dereli, disappeared on the "henna night" before 
     their wedding in Kusadasi. 
 
     Dereli is concerned that his wife might be in the hands 
     of women traffickers.  He applied to the Jandarma and 
     said, "Please find my wife."  He said that following 
     his wife her friend Nazmiye Ozada (21), too, 
     disappeared. 
     Dereli works as a decorator in Kusadasi.  He officially 
     wed Ayca Okmen at the Kusadasi Municipality on July 27. 
     He furnished his flat in the Yuvam Kur residential area 
     and spent about 12,000 YTL. 
 
     They got invitations printed to a "henna night" on 
     August 12 and a wedding on August 13. 
 
     Dereli said, "Ayca wanted to come out as a bride from 
     her grandmother's house in Nazilli.  So I went to 
     Nazilli on August 12 for the henna night.  She was not 
     there.  Her family told me that she went to Aydin to 
     meet me.  Her phone was turned off.  I'm looking for 
     her since them.  My Ayca disappeared before she could 
     put on her wedding gown." 
 
     Dereli said that with family members and guests they 
     looked for Ayca in Nazilli and Aydin but could not find 
     a trace.  He added, "The same night Nazmiye Ozada, a 
     girl friend of my wife, too, looked for her the same 
     evening.  The next day she disappeared as well.  I'm 
     afraid they are in the hands of women traffickers.  I 
     want my wife to be found before bad things appeared to 
     her."  END TEXT. 
¶10.  Reported by Sabah on Wednesday, August 24: 
     TITLE:  THEY WERE BASED ON THE UPPER FLOOR OF A WOMEN'S 
     ORGANIZATION 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The police raided five separate houses 
     following the information that a Turk and his Russian 
     wife were forcing foreign women into prostitution in 
     Izmir. 
 
     It was surprising to see that one of the flats was the 
     upper floor of an association defending women's rights. 
     In other words, while women were forced into 
     prostitution on the upper floor, others were working to 
     protect women on the lower floor. 
 
     Police found about the network when Russian U.G. 
     testified after fainting as she was walking in the 
     Konak district last week.  After a medical treatment, 
     she was taken to the police station where she said that 
     she was brought to Turkey with promises of working as a 
     dancer but found herself in a prostitution ring.  She 
     explained that she and her friends were forced into 
     prostitution.  The police conducted immediate raids on 
     the houses in Hatay and Guzelyali and saved the women. 
     END TEXT. 
¶11.  Published by Tercuman on Saturday, August 20: 
     TITLE:  "Hair-rising 'Commerce' Report" 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  International institutions are closely 
     monitoring the lives of women who serve as sex slaves 
     because of pressure and violence. 
 
     "Medecins du Monde" in Greece, International Blue 
     Crescent Humanitarian Assistance and Development 
     Foundation, with the support of the European 
     Commission's Turkey Representative, completed a study 
     on trafficking of women.   The report, entitled, 
     "Trafficking in Women is an Important Human Rights 
     Violation," was sent to relevant institutions. 
 
     Muzaffer Baza, Vice President of the Blue Crescent, 
     said the following on the report prepared with 
     contributions from the academicians, TNP and MFA, 
     "Human trafficking also involves women trafficking for 
     sexual exploitation.  Human trafficking is a manmade 
     disaster but the world is ignoring the suffering of 
     these women.  As the society we need to help these 
     women who are forced to work as slaves.  We must know 
     who uses these women known as Natashas and how." 
 
     Baca noted that human and women trafficking could be 
     prevented by international cooperation.  He added, 
     "This is team work.  It is conducted by international 
     organized crime.  We should not regard the issue only 
     through law-enforcement measures since it involves 
     human rights violations as well.  We are a destination 
     country as well because of our location.  We have to 
     cooperate with other countries that experience the same 
     problem with us.    There is workforce coming to Turkey 
     from Southeast Europe, Russia, Caucasus, Middle East 
     and Africa.  Many illegal sex slaves who come from 
     Ukraine, Moldavia, Romania, Russia, Azerbaijan, Georgia 
     and Belarus, work in Turkey.  Some of them are brought 
     here by the organized crime and forced into 
     prostitution.  A great majority arrive knowing that 
     they would work as illegal sex worker." 
 
     In a two small sidebar articles, the daily wrote that 
     the report was 170 pages long.  The project coordinator 
     was Nazan Sati.  The sub-titles included: Reasons and 
     Results for Human Trafficking; Human Trafficking and 
     Reproductive Health; What Turkey Has Done to Prevent 
     Human Trafficking? And Human Trafficking in the Black 
     Sea Region and Trabzon. 
     Grigoris Lazos from the Panteion University in Athens 
     said, "Human trafficking began in 1980s.  In 1990s 
     women from Russia, Albania, Moldavia, Ukraine and 
     Balkan countries began to come to Greece and work in 
     the prostitution sector.  In 2000 there were incredible 
     increases and problems in the prostitution sector.  In 
     1997, the number of women who were forced and tortured 
     into prostitution reached 250,000.  Greece turned into 
     a concentration center for these women. ..."   END 
     TEXT. 
¶12.  Published by Pakistan Online International News Network 
and Pak Tribune on Wednesday, August 24: 
 
     TITLE:  Pakistan calls for cooperation from Iran, 
     Afghanistan, Turkey to curb human trafficking 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  ISLAMABAD:  Pakistan has asked Iran, 
     Turkey, Greece, and Afghanistan to extend cooperation 
     to its law enforcement agencies in elimination of human 
     trafficking. 
 
     A high level meeting was held here Tuesday in interior 
     ministry to review the steps taken by the government 
     for eradication of human trafficking.  Interior 
     Minister Aftab Ahmad Khan Sherpao presided over the 
     meeting. 
 
     Director General FIA and senior officials of respective 
     agencies identified the hindrances on the way to 
     prevention of human trafficking. 
 
     Interior ministry sources told Online it was decided in 
     the meeting that Pakistan would improve its contacts 
     with neighbouring countries to curbing menace of human 
     smuggling.  These countries would be asked to join 
     hands with Pakistan in its drive for elimination of 
     human trafficking as the elements involved in this evil 
     bring bad name for the respective countries by using 
     their borders [sic]. 
 
     The Interior Minister also underscored the need for 
     forging a joint bloc with Iran, Greece, Turkey and 
     other neighbouring countries so that intelligence could 
     be shared with these countries on this issue and those 
     involved in this heinous crime could be apprehended. 
 
     The Interior Minister informed that hundreds of agents 
     involved in human smuggling had been arrested due to 
     government efforts and cases have been registered 
     against them.  "We will not give in to any pressure in 
     this connection," he announced. 
 
     He directed FIA to tighten [the] security systems at 
     all airports and initiate stern action against the FIA 
     personnel involved in this trade.  END TEXT. 
 
¶13.  Reported by Daily Times [Pakistan] on Wednesday, August 
24: 
     TITLE:  Interior Ministry wants foreign coordination to 
     stop human trafficking 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Islamabad:  The Interior Ministry and the 
     Federal Investigation Agency (FIA) reviewed the 
     government's anti-human trafficking policies on Tuesday 
     and called for better coordination among countries 
     facing the problem. 
 
     FIA Director General Tariq Pervez briefed a meeting 
     about the latest situation on human smuggling. 
     Interior Minister Aftab Ahmed Khan Sherpao chaired the 
     meeting. 
     The FIA said that the smugglers were using a route 
     through Pakistan, Iran and Turkey to illegally send 
     people to Europe.  They said there was a need to crack 
     the new routes developed by the human traffickers. 
 
     The meeting called for establishing additional 
     immigration check posts and passport circles to control 
     illegal immigration through the Pakistan-Iran border 
     and coastal areas of Balochistan. 
 
     FIA sources told Daily Times that a number of human 
     traffickers were still operating in Gujranwala, Gujrat, 
     Mandi Bahauddin, Sialkot and the adjoining areas. 
     "This year, the FIA has identified and arrested 31 high 
     profile human smugglers from Lahore, Gujranwala, 
     Rawalpindi and Faisalabad. 
 
     Recently, the government established the Anti- 
     Trafficking Unit (ATU) to stop human trafficking, 
     protect its victims, investigate cases, build a 
     database of offenders and maintain liaison with foreign 
     agencies.  The ATU is also tasked with eradicating 
     legal immigration through authorized routes.  END TEXT. 
 
¶14.  Published by ADNKI.com on Thursday, August 25: 
 
     TITLE:  Turkey:  Human Trafficking Under Scrutiny 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  M - her full name was not released for 
     security reasons - is one of the lucky ones.  Her 
     ordeal started when she arrived in Turkey from the 
     Ukraine after a friend told her about a vacancy for a 
     job as a waitress.  Instead, she was held by human 
     traffickers who kept her locked in a house in the town 
     Silivri, near Istanbul, except when they forced her out 
     on the streets to work as a prostitute.  She was 
     rescued in a police operation. 
 
     M's plight is similar to that of many other would-be 
     immigrants that arrive in Turkey and it is the subject 
     of an international three-day conference at Istanbul's 
     Bahcesehir University that began on Thursday. 
     "Trafficking in Persons in Southeast Europe - a Threat 
     to Human Security" is a joint initiative of the 
     Regional Stability in South East Europe (RSSEE) Study 
     Group, the International Organization on Migration 
     (IOM) and the Center for Strategic Research at the 
     Turkish foreign affairs ministry. 
 
     The conference will focus on several aspects of human 
     trafficking ranging from the rights of victims, 
     especially in destination countries, temporary 
     residence permits and law enforcement measures that 
     could be taken to stop human trafficking - with a focus 
     on investigative techniques - to witness-protection 
     programs and cross-border collaboration.  It will also 
     cover anti-trafficking measures that could be taken at 
     a regional level. 
 
     Turkey is a destination country for a growing number of 
     women from the former Soviet republics who are being 
     smuggled into the country primarily for sexual 
     exploitation, and a transit country for Middle Eastern 
     and Asian immigrants who wish to enter European 
     countries. 
 
     The Turkish government has taken a series of steps to 
     fight the problem, including the creation of a national 
     task force.  But, one of the most successful measures 
     has been a national telephone hotline (157), financed 
     by the IOM's Ankara office, to help victims.  It was 
     launched four months ago and to date police have been 
     able to rescue 24 women - mostly from Moldova and 
     Ukraine - after being alerted through phone calls.  The 
     women were sent back to their countries. 
 
     The Geneva-based IOM, which Turkey joined in 2004, says 
     Ankara's anti-trafficking efforts have brought about 
     significant progress, but calls for increased 
     prosecution of traffickers. 
 
     The Development of Human Resources Association (DHRA), 
     A Turkish NGO specialized in social support to 
     uneducated and poor people, has also been helping 
     victims of human traffickers since 2003.  It opened a 
     safe house/shelter for victims in December 2004. 
 
     The small building can accommodate 10 women, most of 
     whom are aged between 20-25, and stay at the house on 
     average between four and five weeks.  DHRA's aim is to 
     provide a friendly atmosphere for the women, 
     rehabilitate them, and to cooperate with non- 
     governmental organizations in the women's home 
     countries to ensure their safe return. 
 
     Although there are no accurate figures available on the 
     number of trafficked women in Turkey, according to the 
     data from the Turkish interior ministry's General 
     Directorate for Foreigners, 3500 women were deported 
     for prostitution in 2001.  END TEXT. 
 
¶15.  Published by Hurriyet in a full page supplement devoted 
to human trafficking victims on Monday, August 29: 
 
     TITLE:  MODERN DAY SLAVES AWAITING HELP 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The Hotline 157 has been operating since 
     May 23 and it is operated by the IOM around the clock 
     for seven days a week.  Turkey assumes coordination. 
     The U.S. is contributing financially with an annual 
     $700,000.  The main goal is to help save victims.  It 
     is providing information to those who fall in the hands 
     of human traffickers.  It gives guidance on how to 
     return home safely. 
 
     Operators, who received special training, get the calls 
     to 157.  They speak Russian, Romanian, English and 
     Turkish.  Operators get in touch with the police or 
     Jandarma as necessary depending on the threat or risk. 
 
     Those who are saved with by sting operations first go 
     to the Foreigners Police.    At this point the IOM 
     officials get involved and victims are sent to the 
     shelter of the IKGV (Human Resource Development 
     Foundation).   They receive medical, social, and 
     psychological rehabilitation.  After legal procedures 
     are over, they are sent to their countries.  The IOM 
     officials are involved so victims do not end up in the 
     hands of human traffickers again.  They meet them at 
     the airport and enroll them into vocational or 
     professional courses. 
 
     IOM officials in Turkey, Moldavia and Ukraine are 
     working together with NGOs. 
 
     Women who enter Turkey through Istanbul, Antalya and 
     Trabzon airports and who are between 18-25 are being 
     warned through various techniques.  Brochures are 
     distributed in four languages.  There are billboard 
     notices.  There is a video.  The IOM officials got a 
     film shot for this purpose.  Copies were sent to 26 TV 
     stations through RTUK (NOTE:  A television regulatory 
     council). 
 
     HOW DO YOU IDENTIFY HUMAN TRAFFICKING VICTIMS? 
 
     You can notify the security forces about human 
     trafficking victims if certain places or individuals 
     look as though they are involved in human trafficking. 
     You can either call the hotline 157, or 156 Jandarma, 
     and 155 police hotlines. 
     -  Multiple foreign or Turkish women and children are 
     kept in confinement in certain houses. 
     - They cannot establish social relations. 
     - They are taken out together in certain vehicles and 
     brought back. 
     - When they are taken out, their guide usually is the 
     same person. 
     - In bars and discos these victims usually communicate 
     through a suspicious looking person. 
     - In general they do not carry passports.  Their 
     guardian keeps their passports and when necessary shows 
     it. 
     - They don't carry cash. 
     - They look afraid, timid and shy. 
     - They don't talk to those around them unless it is 
     necessary. 
     - They think that there is nobody to help them. 
     - They have marks and bruises on their bodies. 
     - Since they are sold, they wear clothes showing off 
     their body. 
 
     NO NEED TO BE ALARMED 
 
     Murat Ersavci, Ambassador and National Coordinator in 
     the Fight Against Human Trafficking: 
     "Turkey was delayed in the fight against human 
     trafficking but scored important progress in a short 
     time.  Around 40 of our institutions are working 
     together.  We can see the progress in the annual Human 
     Trafficking Report by the U.S.  Many important steps 
     were taken within the context of EU process.  Turkey is 
     both a destination and transit country.  It is not yet 
     facing major problems in this field.  The problem has 
     not reached alarming levels.  We are very determined in 
     the fight.  We still have some deficiencies.  The 
     Police and the Jandarma have an easier time since they 
     have the hotline 157.  We made special agreements with 
     Georgia, Belarusian and the Ukraine to prevent human 
     trafficking.  We are due to sign agreements with 
     Azerbaijan and Moldavia." 
 
     TURKEY IS BOTH A DESTINATION AND A TRANSIT COUNTRY 
 
     Selin Unal, Press Spokesperson for IOM Human 
     Trafficking Department: 
     "Turkey's economic situation is better compared to 
     neighboring countries so it is both a destination and 
     transit country.  We notify the Jandarma and the police 
     about all calls we receive.  Initially it was thought 
     that women from East Bloc countries were willing to 
     serve as prostitutes.  This is changing.  Sometimes 
     when victims ask for help, they may not give a full 
     address or describe the location.  Since they are 
     afraid, they talk on the phone whispering and one can 
     hardly understand what they are saying.  Some of them 
     cry as they speak.  Some can explain their problem 
     after two or three calls.  But law enforcement 
     officials still can locate and save them." 
 
     THEIR TARGET IS 19-25 YEAR OLD WOMEN 
     - According to IOM, all human trafficking victims in 
     Turkey are women.  Most of them come from Moldova, 
     Ukraine, Russia, Azerbaijan, Kyrgyzstan, Georgia, 
     Romania, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan and Belarus. 
     - Until now 269 callers reached 157 and 163 of them 
     were reporting a crime, while 28 of them were saved, 
     including ten Moldovans and 10 Ukrainians, three 
     Russians, two Turks, one Romanian, one Ugandan and one 
     Belarusian.  The other nine are under surveillance. 
     - In Turkey in 2005, a total of 125 victims were 
     identified, while 117, including 37 Ukrainians, 30 
     Moldavians, 11 Russian, 10 Uzbeks, eight Kyrgyz, seven 
     Romanians, five Kazakh, four Belarusian, two Georgians, 
     two Turkmen and one Azeri. 
     - When one looks at the ages of victims, one sees that 
     13 were between 16 - 18; 66 were between 19 - 25, 28 
     were between 26 - 30, eight were between 31 - 38 and 
     two were over 38. 
     - In Istanbul 46, Antalya 23, Ankara 19, Artvin eight, 
     Kusadasi seven, Igdir seven, Trabzon three, 
     Kahramanmaras one, Izmit one, Mersin one, and Urfa one 
     victims were determined. 
     - Seventy-eight of the victims entered Turkey through 
     Istanbul, seven from Sarp, four from Trabzon and two 
     from Antalya. 
 
     TRUE STORIES FROM MODERN DAY SLAVES 
     - I was born in Moldova in 1974.  I have three kids and 
     I could not meet the needs of my family.  When a friend 
     offered me a job in Turkey, I accepted without any 
     hesitation.  My friend made arrangements for my 
     passport, ticket and visa.  I was told that a person 
     named Veysel would greet me at the Antalya Airport to 
     take me to the office.  Veysel took away my passport. 
     He took me to a village house.  A Moldovan woman there 
     told me that I was brought for prostitution.  When I 
     refused and wanted to go back, they threatened me at 
     gunpoint.  I was beaten.  They told me that they would 
     kill me if I did not agree. 
 
     - I'm Romanian.  I'm earning a living for my family.  I 
     was trained as a cook.  I signed an agreement to serve 
     as a dancer at a club in Turkey.  They paid my travel 
     expenses.  When I arrived in Turkey, they charged me 
     for accommodation and health services.  They asked me 
     to work at a bar to pay my debt).  I refused but they 
     did not let me leave.  I remembered the brochure on a 
     hotline 157 that I saw at the Turkish consulate in 
     Romania.  The Turkish Police and IOM saved me along 
     with the other Moldovan women.  Other women refused to 
     testify against those who held us hostage thinking that 
     they would get money.  I received assistance from IOM 
     to return home.  I would rather starve rather than go 
     to Turkey again. 
 
     - I was born in Moldova in 1984.  A person that my 
     friend and I met in Moldova told us that we could earn 
     a lot of money by serving as waitresses in Turkey.  He 
     arranged the tickets and passports.  We arrived in 
     Turkey on May 4.  At the hotel that we were taken to in 
     Kusadasi, they charged us for the travel expenses.  We 
     were asked to serve as prostitutes in order to pay (our 
     debt).  We rejected.  They convinced us by saying that 
     we would pay our debt in one month and that we would 
     earn a lot of money.  A month later, threats began. 
     The La Strada helpline in my country directed me to 
     ¶157.  I called and the police saved us in one hour.  We 
     will go back home with the help of IOM. 
 
     -    I was born in the Ukraine in 1982.  I have a 
     daughter who is one-and-a-half years old.  After 
     getting a divorce from my husband, I began to live with 
     my mother.  We were both unemployed.  Somebody told me 
     that I could earn a lot of money by serving as a 
     waitress in Turkey.  He arranged transportation.  I 
     arrived with a friend.  We were met at the airport and 
     taken shopping.  They bought us nightgowns.  When we 
     asked, "Why?" we were told that we would pay back the 
     travel expenses by serving as prostitutes.  We refused 
     and wanted to go back.  We were told that we did not 
     have any other option.  When they could not sell us in 
     Istanbul, they took us to Ankara.  We were asked to 
     work.  We tried to flee by could not succeed.  My 
     friend called her friend in the Ukraine for help.  We 
     were asked to call 157.  We did and the police saved 
     us.  END TEXT. 
 
¶16.  Published by TurkishPress.com on Monday, August 29: 
 
     TITLE:  Nigerian Interior Minister Mohamed Meets Aksu 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Turkish Interior Ministry Abdulkadir Aksu 
     said on Friday that cooperation among countries in 
     security area was very high on the international 
     agenda, adding that "security issue is as important as 
     economic and political issues in bilateral meetings 
     between countries." 
 
     Nigerian Minister of Internal Affairs Magaji Mohamed, 
     who is currently visiting Turkey, met Aksu today in 
     Ankara. 
     Reminding that Turkish government declared 2005 
     "African Year," Aksu said that Turkey is eager to 
     improve relations with African countries. 
 
     Aksu said that Turkey and Nigeria signed many 
     agreements in cultural, economic, scientific and 
     commercial fields, adding that he would be pleased by 
     the signing of a security cooperation agreement between 
     the two countries. 
 
     "We share Turkey's views on security," Mohamed said 
     stressing that Nigeria had many things to learn from 
     Turkey as regards security, particularly about the 
     fight against illegal migration, child and human 
     trafficking." 
 
     Inviting Aksu to visit Nigeria, Mohamed added that the 
     signing of the security cooperation agreement between 
     the two countries would further improve bilateral 
     relations.  END TEXT. 
 
¶17.  Published by Realtime News NewsBlaze 
(www.newsblaze.com) on Tuesday, August 30: 
 
     TITLE:  Crossfire War:  Europe; Turkey-Greece-Half Moon 
     Joint Exercise-Regional Imp 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Ostensibly under the command of NATO 
     Kosovo Force (KFOR), Turkish and Greek battalions 
     conducted a joint exercise called Half Moon. 
 
     The 62 Turkish and Greek soldiers were under the 
     command of Turkish Captain Ahmet Dener and Greek Major 
     Konstantinos Alexopulos.  The three day maneuvers were 
     conducted on the check points formed on the border with 
     Albania and in the Dragas region of Kosovo.  The 
     purpose of the exercise is to guarantee the security of 
     Kosovo.  The operations included:  preventing illegal 
     crossings, weapons drug and human trafficking. 
 
     The Greek soldiers stayed in the Turkish Barracks of 
     Sultan Murat I in Prizren. 
 
     Sultan Murat I's reign, from 1362?-1389 was a period of 
     rapid conquest of the Balkans by the Ottoman Empire. 
     What is not widely known is that during the first 
     Balkan wars from 1991-95 there were Greeks who fought 
     alongside Serbs.  The precise number Is not known but 
     Athens probably supported them since Greece and Serbia 
     followed the same Orthodox ritual. 
 
     At the time I never would have imagined the day would 
     come when Greek and Turkish units of any size conduct 
     joint maneuvers but that was before the 78-day bombing 
     of Serbia by NATO in 1999.  A couple of years later the 
     news announced that Greece and Turkey conducted a joint 
     peace mission to the Middle East.  Athens has been 
     giving more of an audience to Turkey and the Middle 
     East ever since this site has been chronicled. 
 
     For Tehran and its Expediency Council this is another 
     situation they will take advantage of in Tehran's 
     attempt to remove the West as a major force in world 
     affairs.  Athens is accepted by Ankara, Tehran, Riyadh 
     and other Islamic capitals who would not mind if Greek 
     units beat the Jihad to Vienna. 
 
     Brussels is still under the illusion that Greece 
     remains under the command of NATO, but that is true in 
     name only.  NATO defeated itself when it agreed to the 
     most regressive decision in modern history-the division 
     of Yugoslavia in the name of the New World Order.  It 
     has unleashed Old World Chaos.  END TEXT. 
 
¶18.  Published by The New Anatolian on Saturday, August 27: 
 
     TITLE:  Nigerian minister's visit works to build ties 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Security issues are as important as 
     economic and political ones in international contacts, 
     said Interior Minister Abdulkadir Aksu on Friday. 
     In a visit from Nigerian Interior Minister Magaji 
     Muhammed and an accompanying Nigerian delegation, Aksu 
     maintained that cooperation on security matters is a 
     priority in international relations. 
     Aksu stated that he wishes to develop relations with 
     countries as part of the project "Open to Africa," 
     launched in 1998, and added that said that Muhammed's 
     visit will add impetus to further contacts and 
     cooperation between the security institutions of both 
     countries.  He stated that he'd like a contract on 
     security cooperation to be signed by both interior 
     ministers. 
     Muhammed referred to the economic cooperation pact 
     signed in 1988 between Turkey and Nigeria and said that 
     it had improved Turkish-Nigerian relations.  The 
     Nigerian minister added that he would particularly like 
     to benefit from Turkey's experience in the issues of 
     illegal migration and human trafficking.  END TEXT. 
 
¶19.  Published by Milliyet.com.tr on Wednesday, August 31: 
 
     TITLE:  Through a sting operation, they were saved from 
     a prostitution gang's hands 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Under operation "Eagle" three Moldovan and 
     Ukrainian university students were saved from forced 
     prostitution by calling the 157 Human Trafficking 
     Victims Rescue Line after they came to Mersin with the 
     promise of modeling jobs.  Five people have been 
     arrested in connection.  According to L.C. (23), who is 
     a medical student from Moldova, she and two of her 
     friends were forced into prostitution. She explained 
     that they had been sold to men for 11 months in the 
     Kizkalesi district of Mersin.  Upon the call, the 
     police, raided hotels in the Kizkalesi region.  During 
     the operation that lasted for four days, university 
     students L.C., Ukrainian citizens Y.C. (21) and S.B. 
     (21) were saved from the hands of a prostitution 
     network. 
 
     During the operation, C.B. (24), hotel manager A.A. 
     (42), N.D. (43), I.D. (30) and C.N. (37) were detained. 
     The court put them under arrest.  Meanwhile, an arrest 
     warrant was issued for M.D. 
 
     Authorities said that the prostitution network in 
     Mersin was transferring money to some people in the 
     Ukraine and that they seized copies of banking 
     transactions.  The three women were brought to Turkey 
     with promises of serving as models and working in the 
     tourism sector.  Each was paid $2,500.  After 
     completing the necessary paperwork, the three women 
     will be sent back to their countries.  END TEXT. 
 
¶20.  Published by the Turkish Daily News on Wednesday, 
August 31: 
 
     TITLE:  Aid organizations turn to the telephone to help 
     victims of sex 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Aid groups trying to help women who fall 
     prey to international sex traffickers are turning to 
     the telephone in an effort to free the victims from the 
     gangs' clutches or simply open their eyes to the risks. 
 
     The Geneva-based International Organization for 
     Migration (IOM), working alongside local groups in a 
     host of countries, has stepped up attempts to stem the 
     flow of people trafficked into prostitution or other 
     forced labor-approximately 150,000 a year from Eastern 
     Europe alone. 
 
     The odds appear stacked against aid groups-the IOM has 
     been able to help just 9,000 victims since 1999-but 
     they are constantly reinventing their tactics. 
 
     "We have to work all the different angles at the same 
     time," said Richard Danziger, head of the IOM's counter 
     trafficking service. 
     "We have to get away from constantly playing catch-up 
     to being a step ahead of the traffickers." 
 
     Young women in former communist nations, confronted by 
     grinding poverty and social breakdown, are all to 
     readily duped by the traffickers. 
     The organization has spurred hotlines in countries such 
     as Moldova and Ukraine to help trafficking victims-and 
     potential victims. 
 
     It is also behind lines in countries where gangs' 
     victims end up, such as Turkey.  Similar lines exist in 
     Western Europe. 
 
     The IOM trains people from local charities who work the 
     phones in often-shoestring operations, and brings 
     together hotline staff from different countries to 
     share their experiences. 
 
     It advises staff how to cope with anything from prank 
     calls to outright threats from the traffickers. 
 
     "Security is a major issue when you're working in this 
     field," said Danziger, noting that one counselor in 
     Macedonia has had to move house three times. 
 
     It can cost $50,000 a year to run a hotline, and the 
     IOM also drums up finance from donor governments. 
 
     Hotlines are part of the attempts to show potential 
     victims how to decode the all-too-enticing small ads, 
     which offer jobs abroad. 
 
     "A man told my girlfriend he could find us work in 
     Turkey as waitresses and we would be able to make good 
     money," said a 23-year-old Ukrainian unemployed single 
     mother. 
 
     "The man arranged our travel to Turkey.  We were met by 
     a Turkish man at Istanbul airport." 
 
     "He said because of our travel expenses, we were in 
     debt and had to work as prostitutes to pay it off. We 
     refused but he said we had no alternative." 
 
     The woman, whose testimony is among others collected by 
     IOM, was freed after contacting a friend, who managed 
     to call a hotline in Moldova that in turn directed him 
     to its Turkish counterpart-leading to a raid by Turkish 
     police. 
 
     Ten Ukrainian women were freed in Turkey earlier this 
     month, after years of prostitution, torture and 
     imprisonment in a basement, thanks to a tip-off to the 
     country's "157" hotline from one who used a mobile 
     phone belonging to a client. 
 
     Launched in May, the hotline is staffed by Russian, 
     Romanian and Turkish speakers. 
 
     Turkish custom officials and aid workers hand out 
     leaflets at the border promoting the hotline, focusing 
     in particular on young women who fit the profile of a 
     trafficking victim. 
 
     The focus of hotlines is not gang busting, Danziger 
     said:  "The central concern is always the well-being of 
     the victim." 
 
     While the IOM is always pleased when victims are ready 
     to testify in court, it walks a fine line. 
 
     Hotline staff are barred from passing on information to 
     authorities without a victim's permission, except if 
     they learn of an immediate threat to someone's life. 
 
     Aid groups are deeply aware of the risks for women who 
     come forward, whether violence by the traffickers, 
     deportation home, or stigma in their communities when 
     they return. 
     Danziger said that rather than preaching to women who 
     are desperate to improve their lives, hotline staff 
     explain how to minimize the dangers-as basic as never 
     handing over your passport and making sure your family 
     knows where you are going. END TEXT. 
 
MCELDOWNEY