05ANKARA4688
CFE: TURKEY SUBMITS REVISED TEXT INCORPORATING USG
Thu Aug 11 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 004688 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PARM KCFE PREL TU NATO
SUBJECT: CFE: TURKEY SUBMITS REVISED TEXT INCORPORATING USG 
SUGGESTED CHANGES 
 
REF: A. STATE 118875 
     ¶B. ANKARA 2831 
 
¶1. This is an action request.  Post received via Diplomatic 
Note on Aug. 4 Turkey's latest proposed text for a CFE Host 
Country Agreement for implementing Treaty inspections.  The 
proposed text appears to replicate the draft protocol text 
contained in reftel A, including the Article IV changes 
proposed by Turkey (ref b) -- with the exception of the final 
paragraph under Article IV regarding US mission concurrence. 
Action Request: Post requests Department confirmation of the 
acceptability of this text.  Once received, post will notify 
the MFA of USG concurrence via a Dip Note containing the full 
text of the agreement.  End action request. 
 
¶2. Begin Text of CFE Protocol Text Contained in Dip Note 
6782, received on August 4: 
 
¶I. 
 
In accordance with the CFE Protocol on Inspection the 
following procedures shall apply whenever the Republic of 
Turkey receives a notification from an inspecting State Party 
about the latter State Party's intent to conduct (an) 
inspection(s) pursuant to Section VII or VIII of the CFE 
Protocol on Inspection on the territory of the Republic of 
Turkey: 
 
- In accordance with the Section V, paragraph 2 of the CFE 
Protocol on Inspection, the United States shall provide a 
liaison team of up to three officials to the escort team of 
the Republic of Turkey at the time of arrival of the 
inspection team at the point of entry whenever the notified 
point of entry is Adana, from which an inspection could be 
declared for the equipment or facilities. 
 
- If, immediately after arrival at the point of entry an 
inspection is declared for the covered equipment or 
facilities, the United States liaison team (hereinafter 
referred to as "the liaison team") shall accompany the escort 
team through the duration of the inspection of the covered 
equipment or facilities.  In the case of challenge 
inspections, should there be any premises utilized by the 
United States by agreement with the Republic of Turkey other 
than the declared sites within the specified area, the 
liaison team will accompany the escort team only during the 
inspection of such premises.  If the inspection site(s) 
indicated by the inspecting state at the point of entry 
contain(s) no covered equipment of facilities, the liaison 
team shall depart to the nearest or most convenient location 
which contains covered equipment or facilities, and shall be 
available at such a location until the conclusion of that 
inspection to ensure the liaison team's continued 
communication with the escort team.  If a sequential 
inspection is declared by the inspecting state that involves 
a declared site or a specified area which contains covered 
equipment or facilities, the escort team leader will inform 
the U.S. liaison team and accompany it throughout that 
inspection.  The same procedures shall be followed for 
subsequent sequential inspections. 
 
- If an inspection is declared for the covered equipment or 
facilities, or in the case of challenge inspections, should 
there be any premises utilized by the United States by 
agreement with the Republic of Turkey other than the declared 
sites within the specified area, the equipment and supplies 
that the inspecting party brings into the territory of the 
Republic of Turkey pursuant to Section V, paragraphs 5, 6 and 
7 of the CFE Protocol on Inspection, will be examined by the 
escort team in cooperation with the liaison team prior to the 
pre-inspection briefing. 
 
- If an inspection is declared for the covered equipment or 
facilities, or in the case of challenge inspections, when the 
Republic of Turkey is notified by the inspecting State Party 
of the location of the inspection site, initial or 
sequential, or of the specified area, the Republic of Turkey 
shall immediately inform the United States and, if 
appropriate, the liaison team of the location of the 
inspection site or the specified area. 
 
- The United States shall confirm with the Republic of Turkey 
whether covered equipment or facilities are present within 
the declared site or the specified area. 
 
- The liaison team shall play no role on the escort team, 
except as specified elsewhere in this Note, until covered 
equipment or facilities are encountered during an inspection 
of a declared site or during an inspection within a specified 
area. 
 
- The United States shall make all necessary arrangements, in 
cooperation with the Republic of Turkey for the timely 
provision of the liaison team in order to avoid undue delay 
in the commencement of the inspection. 
 
- The liaison team shall be furnished transportation, 
communications, lodging, meals, work space, and, as 
necessary, medical care or any other necessary and available 
assistance by the Republic of Turkey.  The United States of 
America shall bear the expenses for all of the above services 
furnished by the Republic of Turkey to the liaison team. 
 
II. 
 
During inspections for the covered equipment or facilities: 
 
- The right to refuse or accept challenge inspections within 
specified areas shall be exercised by the Republic of Turkey. 
 
- The leader of the escort team shall be a representative of 
the Republic of Turkey. 
 
- Covered equipment or facilities shall not be inspected 
unless a representative of the United States is present on 
the escort team.  During the inspection of the premises 
utilized by the United States of America the representatives 
of the United States will take all necessary measures in 
accordance with the CFE Protocol on Inspection so that the 
inspection can be completed in a smooth and expeditious 
manner.  Should the inspection team split into sub-teams, the 
leader of the escort team may require the presence of a 
member of the liaison team in each sub-team. 
 
- The liaison team shall exercise the rights and obligations 
set forth in Section II, paragraph 4 of the CFE Protocol on 
Inspection of the inspected State Party with respect to 
application to the covered equipment or facilities of 
provisions such as the designation of sensitive points, 
shrouding, and other access control provisions specified in 
the CFE Protocol on Inspection.  If an inspection is declared 
for such structures and premises, or in the case of challenge 
inspections, should there be such structures and premises 
within the specified area, the members of the liaison will 
inform the leader of the escort team at least 2 hours in 
advance of the pre-inspection briefing whether any sensitive 
points may be encountered during the inspection.  As soon as 
the United States liaison officer is aware of an intention to 
inspect a location that includes a sensitive point, he will 
inform the respective Turkish sub-team leader of the 
sensitive point.  The designation of a sensitive point will 
be made by the leader of the respective escort team at the 
point in time access is requested by the inspection team. 
Additionally, any ambiguity arising between the inspection 
team and the escort team concerning the applicability of the 
principles of the CFE Treaty shall be dealt with by the 
escort team leader of the Republic of Turkey.  If such 
ambiguity is related to the applicability of the CFE Treaty 
to covered equipment or facilities, communications regarding 
the clarification of such ambiguity shall be conveyed to the 
inspection team by the escort team leader of the Republic  of 
Turkey in cooperation with the senior member of the liaison 
team. 
 
- The United States shall provide the Republic of Turkey with 
appropriate information for the preparation of site diagrams 
for the covered equipment or facilities.  In addition, the 
representatives of the United States shall provide the leader 
of the escort team with updated information in line with the 
CFE Protocol on Notification and Exchange of Information, on 
the conventional armaments and equipment subject to the CFE 
Treaty which are present at the inspection site, or located 
within the specified area in the case of challenge 
inspections, at least 2 hours in advance of the 
pre-inspection briefing. 
 
- The Republic of Turkey shall provide the liaison team a 
copy of the site diagram in advance of the inspection to 
facilitate preparation by the armed forces of the United 
States for the inspection.  Pre-inspection briefings, if any, 
shall be presented by the representatives from the Republic 
of Turkey.  Members of the liaison team shall be present at 
the pre-inspection briefing to answer any questions which 
might arise concerning covered equipment or facilities at the 
inspection site or located within the specified area, in the 
case of challenge inspections. 
 
- The language used during the inspection shall be English, 
as notified by the Republic of Turkey.  The Republic of 
Turkey shall be responsible for providing or arranging for 
all services described in section V, paragraph 8, of the CFE 
Protocol on Inspections. 
 
III. 
 
Amendments to the above procedures may be made at any time by 
mutual agreement of the Parties. 
 
IV. 
 
If the aforementioned proposal is acceptable, the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey further proposes 
that this Note, together with the reply of the Embassy of the 
United States of America to that effect and the procedures 
set out above shall apply exclusively to inspections 
conducted for the covered equipment or facilities on the 
territory of the Republic of Turkey in accordance with the 
CFE Protocol on Inspection and shall constitute an agreement 
between the two Governments which shall enter into force on 
the date of the later of the notes by which the parties 
inform each other that the legal requirements necessary for 
entry into force have been completed and shall remain in 
force so long as the covered equipment or facilities shall be 
located in the territory of the Republic of Turkey. 
 
¶V. 
 
The provisions of this Note and the reply of the Embassy of 
the United States of America, which shall constitute an 
agreement are without prejudice to the CFE and CFE Protocol 
on Inspection. 
 
End Text. 
MCELDOWNEY