05ANKARA4888
THE USE AND ABUSE OF TURKISH POLLS
Mon Aug 22 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 004888 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/22/2025 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINS TU
SUBJECT: THE USE AND ABUSE OF TURKISH POLLS 
 
REF: 2003 ANKARA 004319 
 
Classified By: POLCOUNS John Kunstadter; E.O. 12958, reasons 1.4 (b,d) 
 
 
¶1. Summary.  Turkish polls have had a tendency inaccurately 
to forecast the outcome of Turkish national elections because 
the majority of Turkish survey firms do not follow the basic 
requirements for conducting a scientific poll.  Nevertheless, 
Turkish elites --- including leaders in the governing AKP --- 
pay close attention to the results and use them to shape 
their political calculations and behavior. End Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) Turkish polls have had a tendency inaccurately to 
forecast the outcome of Turkish national elections.  In 1999, 
for example, most of the Turkish polling firms correctly 
predicted that DSP would win the plurality of the vote, but 
only one polling firm correctly predicted that 
ultranationalist MHP would receive nearly one-fifth of the 
vote and become the second largest party in parliament.  In 
2002, most polls correctly predicted that AKP would win the 
plurality of the vote, but they failed to accurately forecast 
the size of AKP,s victory. 
 
 
------------------------------------- 
HOW TO CONDUCT AN UNSCIENTIFIC SURVEY 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) One reasons Turkish polling results are often 
unreliable is that political parties sometimes commission 
polls for propaganda purposes, not objective analysis.  For 
example, Ankara mayor Gocek,s head advisor Murat Dogru 
(strictly protect) told POLOFF that prior to the November 
2002 election, Gocek,s small Democratic Party (DP) 
commissioned a poll indicating that DP would receive around 
20 percent of the vote and secure second place in the 
election.  In reality, the party received less than 1 percent 
of the vote and Gocek later abandoned the DP to join AKP. 
 
¶4. (C) The more fundamental problem, however, is that the 
majority of Turkish survey firms do not follow the basic 
requirements for conducting a scientific poll.  For a poll to 
be scientific, every member of the population to be surveyed 
(e.g. all Turkish citizens over the age of 18) must have an 
equal chance of being included in the sample. 
 
¶5. (C) The majority of Turkish firms, however, violate this 
basic tenet by conducting their surveys in only a handful of 
pre-selected (not randomly selected) provinces.  Turkish 
firms also use a quota system to select interviewees at the 
block and household level that can seriously bias their 
results.  Most Turkish polls, moreover, focus on urban-only 
samples and when the firms try to include rural residents 
they implement a methodology that simply replaces one form of 
error with another. 
 
¶6. (C) Ibrahim Uslu of the Ankara Social Research Center 
(ANAR) and Ozer Sencar of Metropoll discussed their firms 
polling methodologies with POLOFFs.  Uslu and Sencar told us 
that their firms follow a methodology prescribed by the 
Turkish State Statistical Institute (DIE).  They also 
suggested that the vast majority of Turkish polling firms 
follow variations on the same basic methodology.  (Comment: 
Their assertion is consistent with the fact that most of the 
firms have made similar bad predictions in recent elections. 
End Comment.) 
 
¶7. (C) The methodology employed by most Turkish firms was 
devised by the DIE.  There are 81 provinces in Turkey, but 
DIE has identified thirteen "representative" provinces across 
Turkey and recommends that Turkish polling firms conduct 
surveys in these thirteen regions.  Sencer also told us that 
DIE had a list of twenty-five "representative" provinces 
which firms can use to conduct "more accurate" surveys. 
(Comment: The fact that the DIE created a second, "more 
accurate" set of provinces raises red flags regarding this 
whole unscientific procedure.  End Comment.)  According to 
Uslu and Sencar, DIE has conducted extensive research and 
concluded that these provinces are similar to neighboring 
provinces and can be used as proxies to represent the entire 
region.  This step violates the basic requirement for a 
scientific survey, i.e. that all individuals in the 
population have an equal chance of being selected for the 
survey.  (Comment: Moreover, even if these thirteen or 
twenty-five provinces were representative of their 
neighboring provinces at one point in time, migration and 
variations in economic development have altered their 
representativeness over time.  End Comment.) 
 
¶8. (C) Uslu and Sencar were unable or unwilling to explain to 
POLOFFs how their firms constructed a methodology randomly to 
select individuals within the thirteen "representative" 
provinces.  Uslu and Sencar, moreover, told POLOFFs that 
their firms use a quota system to select individuals within 
households.  ANAR,s interviewers are required to conduct 
interviews that satisfy a preset age, gender, past voting 
preference, and education quota.  Metropoll uses an age and 
gender quota and then weights the data to correct for biases 
in past voting preferences.  Uslu and Sencar also admitted 
that their standard polls only interview urban respondents, 
although they have also conducted rural polls.  (Comment: We 
suspect they have no methodology at the sub-provincial level 
and their interviewers simply wander around the province,s 
capital city unscientifically conducting interviews until 
they fill their preset quota. End Comment.) 
 
 
---------------------------- 
SCIENTIFIC POLLING IN TURKEY 
---------------------------- 
¶9. (C) There are a few firms, mostly based in Istanbul, that 
conduct scientific polls.  For example, Infakto Research --- 
a firm co-founded in 2003 by Emre Erdogan, a well-trained PhD 
social scientist --- conducts scientific surveys.  Erdogan 
told POLOFF that his firm,s polls use stratified random 
samples, face-to-face interviews, and cover both urban and 
rural areas.  Erdogan showed us documentation that 
corroborated his assertion. 
 
 
---------------------------- 
ANAR'S RELATIONSHIP WITH AKP 
---------------------------- 
 
¶10. (C) Uslu reconfirmed that ANAR (REFTEL) conducts surveys 
for the governing Justice and Development Party (AKP).  State 
Minister Dr. Besir Atalay, an Islamist former sociology 
professor and university rector (dismissed from his 
rectorship of Kirikkale University for pursuing Islamist 
policies), is the founder of ANAR and Foreign Minister Gul 
had an office in ANAR,s building prior to the formation of 
the AKP.  Senior AKP leaders pay close attention to ANAR,s 
polls.  POLOFFs have repeatedly seen notebooks with ANAR,s 
logo on them sitting on AKP MPs, and senior officials, 
desks and bookshelves.  On more than one occasion, moreover, 
AKP leaders have read from these ANAR notebooks, quoting 
polling data to POLOFFs in an effort to prove a certain 
political point. 
 
¶11. (C) Uslu told us that ANAR initially conducted monthly 
polls for AKP, but after a few years of very similar results, 
the party has decided to cut back to bimonthly polls. 
Recently, AKP has asked ANAR to conduct only quarterly polls 
using its normal methodology, but it has also requested that 
ANAR supplement this with semiannual "rural" polls.  The 
methodology behind ANAR,s rural poll, unfortunately, is just 
as unscientific as its normal urban-only surveys.  They use 
ten of the same thirteen "representative regions" and they 
simply replace Ankara, Izmir, and Istanbul with neighboring 
provinces.  They then apply the same methodology, but require 
their interviewers to fill their quotas outside the 
boundaries of the provincial capitals. 
 
 
--------------------------------- 
TURKISH ELTIES AND PUBLIC OPINION 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶12. (C) As elites do in other countries, Turkish elites 
appear to pay significant attention to public opinion polls. 
In addition to AKP, POLOFFs have been in meetings with ANAP, 
DSP, DYP, MHP, and SHP leaders who refer to public opinion 
polls when discussing public policies and political 
strategies.  Journalists and newspaper columnists regularly 
refer to public opinion polls in their articles.  Moreover, 
Turkish civil society organizations, like the pro-EU ARI 
Movement and the Liberal Thinking Association (LDT), have 
commissioned public opinion polls. 
 
¶13. (C) Turkish political elites do not blindly follow the 
results of public opinion polls.  Instead, they use polling 
results to help them judge the relative popularity 
(influence) of political leader; to estimate their party's 
prospects for electoral success; to inform the development of 
their political strategy and set a policy agenda; and to 
gauge how well they are marketing their party and policy 
positions. 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
WHAT WE CAN LEARN FROM TURKEY'S POLLING COMMUNITY 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶14. (C) Comment.  AKP's decision to cut back on the number 
of polls suggests that they are unlikely to call for early 
elections anytime soon: it would be odd to reduce polling 
efforts prior to an election.  However, AKP'S decision to 
add two "rural" polls each year suggests that AKP is starting 
to worry about the level of its support in rural Anatolian 
farming communities. 
 
¶15. (C) Comment, continued.  AKP's continued patronage of 
ANAR despite the obvious errors in ANAR's methodology 
reveals a lack of expertise or inclination to carefully 
monitor how ANAR is doing its work.  This is disturbing 
because we know that AKP's leaders pay close attention to 
ANAR's poll results.  Moreover, this is part of a larger 
pattern plaguing AKP in a variety of technical fields besides 
polling.  AKP's leadership lacks the time, energy, ability, 
technical know-how, or inclination to engage in rigorous 
analysis of the advice it receives from its friends and 
so-called experts. 
 
¶16. (C) Comment, continued.  The poor state of the Turkish 
polling community is also illustrative of larger problems 
within Turkish society, e.g. 1) an over reliance and 
acceptance of state-directed solutions to complex scientific 
problems and 2) a desire to cut corners by replacing a 
tried-and-true method with a cheap, quick, and easy 
alternative. 
 
¶17. (C) Comment, continued.  Until more Turkish firms follow 
Infakto,s example and conduct scientific surveys, readers of 
Turkish polls should be skeptical of the results. 
Nonetheless, Turkish polling results can be useful if 
interpreted with an extra degree of caution.  At a minimum, 
these polls are important because many Turkish politicians, 
academics, journalists, and other elites pay close attention 
to the results.  End Comment. 

MCELDOWNEY