05ANKARA3833
TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, June 16-30,
Fri Jul 01 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 13 ANKARA 003833 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, EUR/PGI, EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD PREF TU TIP IN TURKEY
SUBJECT: TIP IN TURKEY: TURKISH MEDIA ATTENTION, June 16-30, 
2005 
 
¶1. In response to G/TIP inquiries, national and 
  international media sources published the following news 
  articles about TIP in Turkey.  Text of articles 
  originally published in Turkish is provided through 
  unofficial local FSN translation. 
 
¶2.  Published by Hurriyet on Saturday, June 18: 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Turkey in the past week evaluated all the 
     calls to the 157 hotline that was established jointly 
     by the Foreign Affairs and Interior Ministries. 
 
     In one week more than 3000 calls came to 157 but only 
     three of the callers were women from former East Bloc 
     countries asking for help.  They asked for help and 
     gave necessary information (to those who answered the 
     calls). 
 
     The remaining 2997 callers were Turks who 'assumed the 
     duty of saving women who were dragged into 
     prostitution' and who were looking for a 'lady friend.' 
     They were Turkish citizens who were curious about the 
     hotline. 
 
     It was determined that Turks were interested in the 
     hotline also because they wanted to know how the 
     hotline 157 operated in Russian and Romanian aside from 
     Turkish.  It is believed that many citizens who heard 
     Russian and Romanian on the phone thought that the 
     hotline 157 was a "900" number. 
 
     Despite this fact the officials believe that hotline 
     157 will play an important role in preventing foreign 
     women from being dragged into prostitution. END TEXT. 
 
¶3.  Published in Milliyet on Saturday, June 18 and 
subsequently reported on NTV on June 27 and 28: 
 
     TITLE:  Russian Girls React (to being called a) Natasha 
     (NOTE. "Natasha" has come to mean prostitute in Turkish 
     slang. END NOTE) 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The group Spilki, consisting of four 
     Russian girls, was upset for being called "Natasha" and 
     recorded a song called "You are a Natasha." 
 
     The Russian group Spilki wrote a funny song called "You 
     are a Natasha" in reaction to Turkish men who call 
     Russian girls "Natasha."  The video clip of the song is 
     now on the air on Russian TV stations.  This song is 
     based on an incident the four girls experienced when 
     they were in Turkey.  Varya from the group said that 
     when they traveled to Antalya last year Turkish men did 
     not leave them alone and constantly invited them to 
     places. 
 
     Varya said, "We had been warned, but still I didn't 
     expect this much."  She told papers that she was really 
     surprised to see that those in charge of security, too, 
     were behaving the same way.  The video clip was shot in 
     southern Cyprus.  In the clip Varya responds back 
     saying, "You are a Natasha" when she felt fed up for 
     being called one.  A dark complexioned Greek Cypriot 
     plays the Turk in the video. 
 
     Here are the lyrics to `You are a Natasha": 
 
     They live in south seas 
     They are very warm-blooded 
     They don't like their own girls and look at us 
     They call everyone a Natasha 
     They shout "Come here" 
     Never accept because it will be a disaster 
     You are a Natasha 
     Play with yourself on the beach 
     Make your own massage 
     END TEXT. 
 
¶4.  Reported by Kazakh Information Agency (Kazinform) 
(www.inform.kz) on June 21: 
 
     TITLE:  Experts to discuss political instability 
     factors in Central Asian Region 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  A role of US, China and Russian in Central 
     Asia is debated by the audience of the III 
     International Almaty conference on security and 
     regional cooperation. 
     It is initiated by Kazakhstan Institute of Strategic 
     Researches under the President of Kazakhstan along with 
     the Kazakhstan-Russian University, Foreign Ministry and 
     Information, Culture and Sport Ministry. 
 
     International experts from India, Turkey, Pakistan and 
     representatives of OSCE, NATO, UN European Economic 
     Commission, Carnegie Foundation for world peace and 
     other international organizations are taking part in 
     it. 
 
     Deputy Secretary of Security Council of Kazakhstan 
     Maulen Ashimbayev, head of the MFA's Chancellery of 
     Kazakhstan Agybai Smagulov, etc, shared their views on 
     the geopolitical situation in the region.  In the 
     afterlight of the recent occurrences in Kyrgyzstan and 
     Uzbekistan they stressed that the states of the region 
     are exerted a great influence from abroad. 
 
     By virtue of its odious interference, the US is 
     considered to be "neighbor of all countries worldwide." 
     China disquiets by an increase in nationalism, 
     especially among the youth.  Russia had lost its former 
     position and has no substantial political influence in 
     the region.  It would be useful for Central Asian 
     countries by now to work at political and psychological 
     trend of power structures.  It is critical to pay 
     attention not to the opposition, but to the growing 
     flows of drug, weapon and human trafficking.  These are 
     the very factors triggering off political instability 
     in the society.  END TEXT. 
 
¶5.  Published by ADNKI (www.adnki.com) on Wednesday, June 
22: 
 
     TITLE:  Turkey:  "Backdoor Constitution" Set for 
     Revision 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Turkey's National Security Council (NSC), 
     a powerful advisory body on defence issues, has delayed 
     the release of its National Security Document which is 
     set to incorporate changes in Turkey's relations with 
     Greece and Kurdish controlled-northern Iraq.  The NSC, 
     once a military-dominated panel that dictated Turkey's 
     security policy, was scheduled to discuss the revised 
     document-dubbed "the backdoor constitution" by the 
     media because of the influential nature of past 
     editions-at a meeting on Tuesday. 
 
     But the discussions were postponed until the next bi- 
     monthly meeting-the official reason being that cabinet 
     ministers had received a draft copy of the document too 
     late. 
 
     According to the Milliyet daily, the real reason for 
     the delay lies in the document's policy proposals on 
     Turkey's disputes with Cyprus and Greece that the 
     government does not want to discuss before the start of 
     Turkey's membership talks with the European Union on 3 
     October, since they are likely to rankle EU 
     negotiators. 
 
     In fact, the NSC document still firmly opposes any move 
     by Greece to extend its territorial waters in the 
     Aegean Sea from six to 12 miles, citing such action as 
     a "causus belli" or an act of war on the part of the 
     Greeks toward Turkey. 
 
     However, in a considerable shift from previous 
     editions, the document no longer lists Greece as an 
     "external threat" to Turkey. 
 
     Significantly, the revised document also no longer 
     regards the emergence of a "Kurdish State" in northern 
     Iraq as a "causus belli" requiring Turkish military 
     intervention.  A development like the Iraqi Kurds' 
     growing autonomy is instead classified as a "potential 
     crisis". 
 
     The NSC was established in 1933, initially as a 
     military watchdog over the secular nature of the 
     Turkish state.  In 2001 the council began losing its 
     sweeping power to implement military and security 
     decisions, and its membership was expanded to ensure 
     that the armed forces no longer dominated its 
     proceedings. 
 
     The reform process culminated in 2004 when the 
     previously secretive NSC first provided details of its 
     new structure and functions.  The council meets twice a 
     month and comprises the president, the prime minister 
     and the ministers of foreign affairs, defence, interior 
     and justice, while the military component includes the 
     chief of staff as well as the commanders of the army, 
     navy, air force and gendarmerie. 
 
     Unlike past editions, which were 90-pages long and 
     contained detailed policy directives, the revised draft 
     of the National Security Document is slimmer; just 25 
     pages long, and focuses mainly on outlining major 
     security threats against Turkey. 
 
     Islamic fundamentalism, separatist activities, extreme 
     leftist movements, drug smuggling, illegal immigration 
     and human trafficking are listed under the heading 
     "asymmetric threats." 
 
     National unemployment, increases in unfair internal 
     income distribution and regional rivalries and 
     differences within Turkey are listed as growing 
     domestic threats. END TEXT 
 
¶6.  Reported by The Messenger, Georgia's English Language 
Daily, on Friday, June 24: 
 
     TITLE:  You are not for sale! 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  In an effort to raise public awareness 
     about human trafficking, Tagiss Arts-World Cultural 
     Integration together with the International 
     Organization for Migration (IOM) and Council of Europe 
     Information Office in Tblisi will present a concert 
     featuring Italian classical guitarist Aniello Desiderio 
     in Tblisi on June 24. 
 
     According to Ani Lagidze, founder and CEO of Tagiss 
     Arts, the project `World artists against human 
     trafficking' should "help raise public awareness of the 
     insidious problem of human trafficking" so that people 
     can take preventative measure to avoid become victims 
     of trafficking. 
 
     IOM has been implementing its Information Campaign to 
     Prevent Trafficking of Persons in Georgia since early 
     2002 and has been undertaking various activities, 
     including the staging and sponsoring of a number of 
     outdoor events including concerts in Kutaisi and Telavi 
     last year. 
 
     However, IOM Counter-Trafficking Program Officer Tblisi 
     Marc Hulst says "this is the first time that IOM in 
     Georgia has sponsored a third party to organize a 
     cultural event of this level with an internationally 
     renowned musician such as Desiderio."  He added that 
     the message of the concert will be the same as previous 
     events-`You are not for sale." 
 
     According to IOM statistics from the Georgian General 
     Prosecutor's Office, thirty successful operations were 
     conducted against suspected traffickers from June 13, 
     2003 until March 18, 2005. 
 
     "The cases concerned a total of 66 victims of 
     trafficking, most of them citizen of Georgia, the 
     majority of whom (62 people) had been forced or were 
     intended to do some kind of sex work," Hulst told The 
     Messenger. 
 
     Among those 66 victims were 11 minors as well as one 
     man in a case of internal trafficking to Svaneti for 
     domestic slavery. 
 
     "By far the most important destination country is 
     Turkey, while the United Arab Emirates and Greece 
     follow with lower figures, Hulst said. 
     IOM has been assisting a number of other victims of 
     trafficking who have not cooperated with law 
     enforcement bodies and for that reason have not been 
     included in the statistics. 
 
     Hulst said in 2005 they have already assisted three 
     women-two Georgian women who returned with IOM 
     assistance from Turkey and one woman from Kyrgyzstan 
     forced into prostitution in Tblisi and assisted to 
     return back home. 
 
     In his message Aniello Desiderio calls human 
     trafficking a universal problem that continues to grow 
     and is one of the major concerns on the international 
     human rights agenda.  "We, the artists of the world, 
     should declare loudly and more strongly than ever that 
     we are all members of the human family," he said 
     expressing his full support of the event organizers and 
     donors. 
 
     Desiderio has won eighteen international awards in both 
     national and international competitions in Italy, Cuba, 
     Japan, and Spain.  His international career started in 
     1989 at an International Guitar Festival in Greece.  He 
     is currently performing all over the world both as 
     soloist and with orchestras such as Vladimir Spivakov & 
     Moscow Virtuosos.  In 2003 he co-founded the World 
     Guitar Ensemble uniting some of the most renowned 
     international guitarists.  END TEXT. 
 
¶7.  Published by Zaman on Saturday, June 25: 
 
     TITLE:  157 helpline saved lives 
 
     BEGIN TEXT: Financed by the U.S.A. and coordinated by 
     the Turkish government, the 157 help line has saved 
     five foreign women who were smuggled.  The 
     International Office of Migration (IOM), tied to the 
     United Nations (UN), operates the 157 help line which 
     opened for business last month.  According to IOM 
     personnel, in one month's time they have come across 90 
     occurrences falling under the human smuggling blanket. 
     Of that amount action was taken for 12 of them and five 
     of them were saved by giving information to and 
     organizing with the Turkish police.  One Ukrainian and 
     one Moldovan were returned to their countries.  A house 
     in Ankara where 1w foreign women were being held was 
     identified and effort is being made to save the women. 
     IOM Turkey's Chief of Mission, Marielle Sander- 
     Lindstrom explained that work with the Turkish police 
     was harmonious and she thanked them.  END TEXT. 
¶8.  Published by Newsday.com on Sunday, June 26: 
 
     TITLE:  Crackdown impacts workforce in Israel 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  In a response to rising unemployment 
     numbers, government officials call for massive 
     deportation of foreign laborers.  TEL AVIV-- - retrieve 
     drugs from his shoe and a large rat waddles across the 
     street. 
 
     The low rents of Tel Aviv's Neve Shaanan district draws 
     drug dealers, prostitutes and foreign workers, said a 
     man from Nigeria who identified himself only as David, 
     but the foreign workers are the only ones routinely 
     hunted by the police. 
 
     Since the early 1990s, when Israel reduced the number 
     of Palestinian workers it would allow in the country, 
     it has relied on large numbers of foreign workers from 
     developing nations and Eastern Europe to do manual 
     jobs.  The workers come hoping for relatively high 
     wages, but many say they find their promised land 
     offers little more than exploitation and, according to 
     Israeli human rights activists, "slavery conditions." 
 
     And, in response to high unemployment rates in Israel 
     in 2002, the government of Ariel Sharon decided to send 
     home 263,000 foreign workers-10 percent of Israel's 
     workforce. 
 
     David watched nervously from a caf recently as a van 
     of immigrant police drove past.  The two officers 
     normally stop suspicious people and demand their papers 
     and, if not satisfied, put them in a van and drive on 
     until it is full.  At the police station, they verify 
     the identity of the detainees and let them go or deport 
     them. 
     40,000 entering annually 
 
     The majority of foreign workers arrived in the years 
     after the first intifada began in 1989, when 
     Palestinians were prevented from entering Israel to 
     work.  By last year, with the help of 460 immigration 
     police-acting legally-Israel had repatriated 116,000 
     people. 
 
     Hanan Zohar, director of the foreign workers' pressure 
     group Kav LaOved, said: "In spite of this, there are 
     around 40,000 foreign workers entering the country per 
     year, coming from Eastern Europe, Turkey, Nepal, China, 
     the Philippines and other countries."  The foreign 
     workers pay Israeli middlemen, who link them to an 
     employer and provide them with a visa.  Zohar said the 
     Chinese pay $10,000 to come to Israel, while the Turks 
     pay only $2,000. 
 
     "It is a big business and the immigration police are 
     the servants of this business," she said.  "They ensure 
     a constant cycle of workers." 
 
     Zohar believes the African community was particularly 
     targeted because they came to Israel independently 
     without paying a fee.  This meant they were able to 
     choose where they worked.  Their conditions were better 
     than other workers.  Because they were not tied to 
     employers, they were not slaves," she said, referring 
     to the fact that most foreign workers are tied to 
     employers by the fees they have to pay, regardless of 
     how they are treated. 
 
     David, 35, says he is one of the few Africans to have 
     avoided detection.  His wife and two children were 
     arrested and deported after a raid on their apartment 
     last year.  "I will stay here until I have provided for 
     my children's education," he said.  "That's why I am 
     here-to sustain my family.  I can't sleep easy or walk 
     the streets normally, but what else can I do?" 
 
     David, not his real name, has a degree in drama and 
     philosophy from Nigeria but cleans houses in Israel for 
     $6.73 an hour.  In a good month, he sends $570 to his 
     family in Nigeria. 
 
     Thriving commercial center 
 
     Aziz Diouf, 37, a now-legal immigrant from Senegal, 
     said the Neve Shaanan district was once a thriving 
     commercial center that catered to non-Jewish immigrants 
     from the Soviet Union, south Asia and Africa.  "In this 
     area you could not move for Africans; now there are 
     virtually none.  To have avoided detection, you have to 
     be invisible," he said. 
 
     The police have targeted Africans, Indians and South 
     Americans because they stand out from the crowd, he 
     said.  "There are thousands of new illegal Russian 
     immigrants from the Ukraine, Belarus, Moldova.  They 
     blend in.  With other groups like Filipinos, if they 
     arrest 20, they might find one who is illegal so they 
     don't bother." 
 
     Diouf, who writes about foreign workers for an Israeli 
     weekly newspaper, said the police initially used heavy- 
     handed tactics, which encouraged people to volunteer 
     for deportation.  Now, the authorities rely primarily 
     on informers who are themselves illegal immigrants. 
 
     The crackdown on immigrants has not been popular in 
     Israel.  Even the right-wing Jerusalem Post described 
     it as a disgrace and cited the Jewish commandment from 
     the Book of Deuteronomy:  "Thou shalt not oppress a 
     hired servant that is poor and needy, whether he be of 
     thy brethren or of they strangers that are in they land 
     within thy gates." 
 
     Israelis generally do not want the jobs the workers 
     do-care giving, agriculture and construction-and the 
     policy of expelling the foreigners is seen as state aid 
     for a people-trafficking industry that one former 
     interior minister said had a turnover of $1.5 billion. 
     A U.S. State Department report said immigrants can pay 
     as much as $10,000 for the privilege of going to 
     Israel.  If the worker breaks a contract, or the 
     contract expires, the worker becomes illegal. 
     Meanwhile, new foreign workers are imported. 
     David's furtive life continues.  Even his visits to 
     church are loaded with danger as police have been known 
     to arrest workers leaving a service.  "Even when you 
     are praising your God, you have to look around you," he 
     said.  END TEXT. 
 
¶9.  Published by the International Herald Tribune on Monday, 
June 27: 
 
     TITLE:  Turkey's sex trade entraps Slavic women 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Trabzon, Turkey.  The women arrive here by 
     ferry from across the Black Sea, sometimes dozens at a 
     time.  Whatever their real names, they are known in 
     Turkey as Natashas, and often end up working as 
     prostitutes in this country's growing sex trade, 
     sometimes against their will. 
 
     Turkey, with its now booming economy and lax visa 
     requirements, is becoming the world's largest market 
     for Slavic women, one of the most visible exports of 
     the former Soviet Union's struggling new states. 
 
     "Think of many rivers flowing into one sea," said Allan 
     Freedman, who coordinates counter trafficking programs 
     at the Ankara bureau of the International Organization 
     for Migration, an independent body that works closely 
     with the United Nations.  "That sea is Turkey." 
 
     Most of the women come of their own free will but many 
     end up as virtual slaves, sold from pimp to pimp 
     through a loosely organized criminal network that 
     stretches from Moscow to Istanbul and beyond. 
 
     Prostitution is legal in strictly secular Turkey where 
     the government licenses brothels, known as "general 
     houses," and issues prostitutes identity cards that 
     give them rights to some free medical care and other 
     social services.  But women working in general 
     houses-there is usually one in each large city-tend to 
     be older, and the demand for young, slender women has 
     outstripped supply as Turkey's economy has improved. 
     Slavic women are meeting that need. 
 
     "Women are recruited at home with the promise of 
     employment," Freedman said.  "But once they are across 
     the border their passports are taken away and they are 
     beaten and raped and forced into prostitution."  The 
     women are typically kept locked in an apartment except 
     when they are taken out to customers. 
 
     The trade is not hard to find.  Outside Istanbul's 
     general house, a collection of tiny brothels in a 
     warren of alleys behind a guarded metal gate, touts 
     accost visitors with whispered promises of beautiful 
     young Russian girls at not much more than the price of 
     the older Turkish women waiting for customers inside. 
 
     "I can bring you any kind of girl you want," promised 
     an eager man in a black shirt and pants with a gold- 
     faced watch, saying that his girls were kept in a 
     building in the city center. 
 
     Part of the reason Turkey has become a magnet is that 
     the more lucrative markets of Western Europe are 
     protected by increasingly strict visa requirements that 
     take weeks to work through, with only uncertain 
     results.  A young woman from Moldova can be in Istanbul 
     in a day by paying just $10 for a month long visa at 
     the border. 
     Turkey is also becoming a staging area for illegal 
     migration elsewhere.  "This is one of the reasons why 
     the EU is so worried about Turkey," said Freedman, 
     referring to European resistance to Turkey's quest to 
     join the bloc.  "It's increasingly a migrant hub." 
     Turkey has been working over the past two years to stop 
     the trafficking and get off the U.S. government's 
     blacklist.  In 2003, the State Department listed Turkey 
     in its report on trafficking as a "Tier 3" country, 
     meaning that it had taken no significant action to 
     eliminate the trade.  The status jeopardized American 
     financial aid to Turkey and helped spur it to act. 
 
     In the State Department's most recent report, issued 
     this month, Turkey was moved up to "Tier 2," which 
     means it is making significant efforts but still falls 
     short of U.S. government expectations. 
 
     Turkey lists trafficking as a separate crime in its new 
     penal code, which took effect this month.  A one-year, 
     $600,000 grant is being used to train police officers 
     to recognize trafficked women among the unlicensed 
     prostitutes they arrest. 
 
     The money is also paying for a hot line to help women 
     caught in a trafficker's grip.  A campaign to publicize 
     the phone number includes billboards in the country's 
     international airports and inserts that immigration 
     officers slip into the passports of women arriving at 
     Turkish border crossings. 
 
     Freedman said the hot line led to the rescue of a 
     Moldovan woman in Antalya, a southern city, within days 
     of its inauguration this month.  Her captor was 
     arrested. 
 
     Turkey's Interior Ministry has also enlisted 
     nongovernmental organizations to provide support for 
     women identified as victims. 
 
     Because of that support, Turkey's independent Human 
     Resources Development Fund opened the country's only 
     shelter for trafficked women last October in central 
     Istanbul.  But the shelter, which has helped 74 women, 
     holds only 12 people. 
 
     "That's nothing when compared with the number of 
     victims," said Berna Eren, president of the 
     organization.  More than 200 trafficked women were 
     identified in Turkey last year but the authorities said 
     they represented as little as 10 percent o the women 
     bought and sold during that time. 
 
     Most of the women Eren's organization has seen are from 
     Ukraine and Moldova, but the group has also helped 
     women from Russia, Azerbaijan, Kyrgyzstan, Romania, 
     Georgia and Iran. 
 
     "Some girls in the shelter say they have been sold more 
     than once," she said, but added that as the women are 
     sold "from city to city, the traffickers are hard to 
     trace." 
 
     Every victim identified by police is interviewed by a 
     psychologist and referred to a psychiatrist if needed. 
     Eren said that women living in the shelter were kept 
     under constant watch by a counselor and, when 
     eventually repatriated, were met by a protective 
     authority in their home country in an effort to keep 
     them from falling back into the hands of traffickers. 
 
     "In the past they were simply deported as a prostitute 
     and would arrive in their home countries with no 
     money," Eren said.  "Traffickers would pick them up, 
     get them new passports and send them back." 
 
¶10.  The New York Times published the above story, but with 
the following added, and the Taipei Times picked up the 
story on June 30: 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The most attractive women move on to 
     Istanbul or the tourist resorts of the country's 
     southern coast. At the Hotel Seranda in the Aksaray 
     district of Istanbul on a recent night, 50 women sat 
     crowded into booths while the basement ''disco'' filled 
     with men. The women periodically got up to dance on a 
     small dance floor, beckoning to the men seated around 
     it. Once they found a customer, they would lead him 
     upstairs. 
     Trabzon is one of four or five major centers of 
     trafficking in the country, according to the 
     International Organization for Migration. Kemal Uzun, 
     who owns a storefront shipping agency beside Trabzon's 
     small port, said hundreds of women arrived each week at 
     the height of the tourist season. 
     His business partner, Gokhan Yilmaz, said the trend 
     began shortly after the breakup of the Soviet Union 
     when the so-called luggage trade flourished -- women 
     from the old Soviet states would travel to Turkey and 
     fill their suitcases with goods bought from wholesalers 
     for resale in Russia and neighboring countries. As 
     Turkey's economy improved, many of the women turned to 
     prostitution. 
     The men have watched the industry grow. Hotels acting 
     as illegal brothels have sprung up along the Black Sea 
     coast controlled, they said, by organized crime 
     networks. ''We've also heard about women brought here 
     by force,'' Mr. Yilmaz said. 
     The hotels are periodically raided and closed but 
     quickly reopen under new names. East of Trabzon, the 
     former Zirve Hotel has been renamed the Elegante. A 
     young Slavic woman sat in the dim lobby of the hotel 
     one afternoon this month staring at mottled goldfish 
     turning circles in an aquarium while half a dozen 
     middle-aged Turkish men waited in armchairs across the 
     room. One eventually got up and gave his identity card 
     to a clerk at the front desk. After a curt nod from a 
     man who appeared to be the boss, the woman rose and 
     followed the man into an elevator. 
     Despite the apparent transaction just witnessed, the 
     clerk denied to a reporter that there were any Russian 
     women there. ''You've been misinformed,'' he said. 
     Elena, a bottle blonde with frosted blue nails drinking 
     pale pink, cherry flavored water in a cafe next to the 
     rundown Ural Hotel in town, said she had also heard of 
     women who had been beaten and forced to work as 
     prostitutes. She counted herself lucky because, she 
     said, she had a boyfriend. Given the availability of 
     women, the practice of keeping paid mistresses has 
     blossomed anew. 
     But most of the women lead more desperate lives. At the 
     Dilek Cafe, a small storefront room decorated with 
     strings of colored lights in an area of Trabzon known 
     as the Russian Bazaar, a half-dozen garishly made up 
     women sat beckoning passers-by. 
     One woman in four-inch platform shoes agreed to talk to 
     a reporter, but her smile froze when asked about 
     trafficked women. A Turkish man approached, shooed her 
     back to her spot by the door and told the reporter to 
     leave. END TEXT. 
¶11.  Published by Aksam on Monday, June 27: 
     TITLE:  The New York Times:  Slavic Women Pour Into 
     Turkey 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The American newspaper The New York Times 
     carried a long report on the "sex trade" in Turkey.  In 
     the report entitled "Growing sex trade entraps many 
     Slavic women," it was stated that Slavic women, who are 
     called "Natashas" by the Turkish people, enter Turkey 
     from the Black Sea and many of them end up in brothels. 
     The New York Times noted that prostitution was legal in 
     secular Turkey and that Turkey, with its growing 
     economy and relaxed visa requirements, became the 
     largest market in the world for Slavic women, one of 
     the most prominent exports of the Newly Independent 
     States of the former Soviet Union.  Allan Freedman, the 
     IOM representative in Ankara, made a general evaluation 
     on the sex trade and said, "Imagine many rivers pouring 
     into a sea.  Turkey is that sea." 
     The report noted that brothels are licensed and 
     prostitutes have access to free health and social 
     security services.  It went on to say that Turkey 
     turned into a magnet when western European countries 
     imposed strict visa requirements.  It was said that a 
     Moldovan woman can arrive in Istanbul in one day by 
     paying $15 at the border.  The paper noted that the 
     most attractive women go to Istanbul and the shores in 
     the South.  Trabzon became one of the four or five 
     major immigration centers of the country.  Allan 
     Freedman also noted that Turkey turned into an 
     immigration center and that this was one of the reasons 
     why Europe was so concerned about Turkey. 
     The New York Times wrote that in the last two years 
     Turkey has been working to stop human trafficking and 
     as a result it got a better rating in the most recent 
     Human Trafficking Report by the U.S. State Department. 
     But it added that these efforts fall far less than the 
     expectations of the U.S. administration. 
     The paper noted that the U.S. provided a $600,000 grant 
     to Turkey for training police and also for contributing 
     to the establishment of a hotline that helps victims of 
     human trafficking.  The assistance of the Interior 
     Ministry and NGOs was also obtained, the paper wrote. 
     END TEXT. 
¶12.  Reported by Vatan on Monday, June 27: 
     TITLE:  Women are sold at a market in Turkey 
     BEGIN TEXT:  Craig Smith of the respected American 
     newspaper the New York Times looked into the woman 
     trade in Turkey.  Smith traveled to Istanbul and 
     Trabzon to see with his own eyes the situation.  He 
     wrote that the heart of the sector was in the Black 
     Sea.  Here is his impression: 
     I went to Turkey to look into the woman trade.  Here 
     prostitution is not banned.  Indeed the government even 
     licenses brothels.  I went to one of them in the 
     Karakoy district of Istanbul.  But all of those working 
     there were old.  I learned that the Slavs were covering 
     the "fresh blood" deficiency because as soon as I got 
     on the street, a man wearing black pants and shirt 
     approached me.  Extending his hand with a gold 
     bracelet, he said, "We can find the type of girls you 
     want.  We keep them all in a building here."  I 
     accepted and followed him. 
     In the building 40 young girls were sitting in a room. 
     They were surrounded by men watching them. When those 
     men indicated to the boss which girl they wanted, they 
     were disappearing into rooms in the back.  I learned 
     that most of these women were Slavic and the center of 
     the trade in women was Trabzon.  When I traveled to 
     this Black Sea town, I realized that I was not wrong. 
     Women are being sold openly in many hotels and cafes. 
     These women wait at a caf called Russian Caf just 
     like in Istanbul and whoever likes one, takes her and 
     goes out with her. 
     The system is rather different at the hotels.  When I 
     went to such a hotel, I saw that 40-50 women were 
     dancing together in a "disco."  There were men standing 
g 
     along the stage.  They picked one from those who were 
     dancing and going upstairs to a room.  Even if these 
     hotels are closed following a raid, in two weeks they 
     are in operation again.  For example, "Zirve" hotel 
     shuts down and after a while "Elegante" hotel opens up 
     in the same place.  When I tried to talk to some of the 
     women in these places, initially they agreed, but as 
     soon as I asked a question about women trafficking, 
     they were afraid and wanted me to leave because most of 
     these women are forced to work after they are brought 
     from the former Soviet republics. 
     The fast-growing economy and relaxed visa requirements 
     of Turkey have turned the country into one of the 
     biggest markets of the world for Slavic prostitutes. 
     The Slavic women sometimes sail through the Black Sea 
     in dozens on a boat.  When getting a visa from another 
     country takes weeks, they need to pay only $15 at 
     customs to enter Turkey.  But those who bring them here 
     take away their money and passport as soon as they step 
     on the soil.  They beat and rape them.  They also make 
     them work as prostitutes whether they like it or not. 
     They are not allowed to leave the house unless they are 
     going to a client.  Actually, this tradition began with 
     the "suitcase trade" in the 1990s.  Later it turned 
     into prostitution.  END TEXT. 
¶13.  Published by Cumhuriyet on Monday, June 27: 
     TITLE:  The New York Times:  Turkey is a big 
     marketplace for Slavic women 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The New York Times published an article 
     titled "Turkey's Growing Sex Trade Traps Many Slavic 
     Women."  It was said, "the growing economy and relaxed 
     visa laws for Slavic women has made Turkey the biggest 
     market in the world" in the article.  It was stated 
     that these women, called "Natasha" come to Turkey by 
     the Black Sea and mostly end up working in brothels. 
     It was reported that "in secular Turkey prostitution is 
     legal." 
     Allan Freedman with IOM in Ankara said, "Think of many 
     rivers emptying into a sea.  That sea is Turkey." 
     Turkey became a magnet due to the stricter visa laws of 
     Western European countries.  It was reported that "a 
     young Moldovan woman can, in one day, pay $15 and be in 
     Istanbul."  END TEXT. 
¶14.  Published by Hurriyet on Tuesday, June 28: 
     TITLE:  Is Turkey Pleased With Becoming a Market for 
     Women? 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  New York Times reporter Craig Smith 
     arrived in Turkey and conducted research. 
 
     The result of his research was terrible for Turkey, 
     "There is a market in Turkey where women are sold." 
 
     This is a well-known fact in Turkey and I wrote about 
     this scandal many times but could not obtain any 
     results.  The NYT brought it to our attention from the 
     U.S. 
 
     Turkey unfortunately turned into a woman market with 
     "perestroika." 
 
     The incident initially was at a small scale, but in 
     recent years it has turned into a full "slave trade." 
 
     The prostitution sector reached even the remotest 
     Anatolian cities and took over some towns altogether, 
     mostly Trabzon, Istanbul and Antalya. 
 
     Things are totally out of hand in Istanbul.  The night 
     clubs where Russian women are sold are packed.  "Night 
     club" certainly is the "official" name.  These places 
     are actually brothels.  The most famous ones are in 
     Aksaray.  Indeed one of them is 50 meters from the 
     police station. 
 
     When I ask how this can happen, I see sarcastic smiles. 
 
     Girls from Commonwealth of Independent States and 
     former Soviet Republics are brought (to Turkey) and 
     kept in groups in houses or are employed.  The girls 
     receive very little money.  The real money is earned by 
     those gangs who bring them here and employ them. 
 
     The situation is no different in Antalya.  Ornekkoy in 
     Lara is almost under the occupation of these gangs. 
     Girls who do a good job are being sold and bought. 
     Indeed there are groups that kidnap girls and sell them 
     to other gangs.  Guns are fired in Ornekkoy each night. 
     What is amusing is that the police station is only 100 
     meters from this site. 
 
     The situation in Trabzon is so bad that local women 
     staged a mass demonstration. 
 
     When all these things are happening, what does the TNP 
     do?  As far as I can see, nothing, except a few so- 
     called operations. 
 
     I would say both sides of the trade (those who are sold 
     and those who are buyers) are happy, but that is not 
     the case because the incident has turned into a full 
     slave trade.  Here are girls who commit suicide and who 
     are killed.  Meanwhile, Turkey's image gets tarnished. 
 
     I don't have anything to say if those who govern this 
     country are pleased with this image of a country that 
     sells women.  But I'm not pleased. END TEXT 
 
¶15.  Published by Sabah on Thursday, June 30: 
 
     TITLE:  Sabah Series on Sex Trade 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  "Mass-appeal "Sabah" began a series on 
     Slavic sex slaves in Turkey. 
 
     PART 1 (June 30, 2005) 
 
     DURING DAYLIGHT "AKSARAY," AT NIGHT "PROSTITUTION 
     PALACE" 
     By Zulfikar Ali Aydin 
 
     I was given the assignment to feel the pulse of the 
     prostitution in Aksaray, where people pour into when 
     they find money.  I called a friend who is experienced 
     with Aksaray and who lives in my district. 
 
     Using the premise of planning "a favor" for another 
     friend before he leaves to do his military service, I 
     decided to follow the women trafficked from Moldova, 
     Bulgaria, Ukraine, Russia, Azerbaijan and Romania to 
     Turkish night clubs and discos. 
 
     We agreed to meet in front of the Malibu Disco Bar at 
     midnight.  It was necessary to check the neighborhood 
     during daylight before going to the sites.  These 
     buildings were from 1960s and now their ground floors 
     and basements are converted into night clubs.  I wanted 
     to inquire how much I would pay at the bars from the 
     500 YTL (NOTE: approximately $360) I got for the 
     assignment.  The first thing I learned was the names of 
     the night clubs that one should never step into. 
 
     I talked to a friend who has a clothing shop and he 
     told me the following on the night clubs that are on 
     the same street with the Fatih Sub-provincial Police 
     Station in Aksaray.  "A week ago I got my shop painted. 
     The two painters came in late afternoon and said that 
     they were robbed.  They went to a night club.  They 
     were served alcohol, nuts and slices of melon and 
     watermelon.  Then the bill came: 350 YTL ($250).  When 
     they would not pay the bill, five waiters charged for 
     the two-hour entertainment by beating them up and 
     taking their credit cards and IDs.  So don't enter the 
     clubs, except one, on the Mustafa Kemal Pasa Street, 
     where the Fatih Police Station is also located." 
 
     I arrived at Gabardi around 22:00 hrs along with the 
     friend who supposedly would go to do his military 
     service.  At the door we were received with respect and 
     affection.  This ended at the check point inside.  A 
     man with a moustache and wearing a suit asked as he 
     checked out my cell phone and cigarettes, "Do you carry 
     a gun?"  I responded, "No.  We came for entertainment." 
     After the check, a waiter asked us to follow him.  When 
     I tried to divert my path and not follow the waiter, I 
     was warned, "Where are you going?  You are forbidden to 
     go there." 
 
     It reportedly is up to the waiter whether he gives you 
     a table closer to the women.  As two friends we were 
     seated at a tiny table and we ordered two beers.  Later 
     strawberries, watermelon, nuts and olives were brought 
     to our table.  Around the dance floor there were mostly 
     middle-aged, bald men with moustaches and big bellies. 
     After a while Russian, Moldavian, Ukrainian, Bulgarian 
     and Kyrgyz women came in.  They were all six-foot tall 
     and most of them were blond.  They were between 17 and 
     ¶25. 
 
     TOMORROW: Bargaining over sitting down and getting up 
     at the night club and maneuvering for bringing down the 
     price that starts at $100.. 
 
     HOTLINE 157 ESTABLISHED FOR WOMEN FORCED INTO 
     PROSTITUTION 
 
     When one says "immigration" in Turkey, the first thing 
     that comes to mind is those who emigrated to Germany. 
     But after the collapse of the East Bloc, there has been 
     an influx from these countries to Turkey.  The reason 
     for the influx is "woman trafficking."  It was covered 
     by the New York Times the other week.  Meanwhile, 
     Turkey is a Tier 2 country in the U.S. annual "Human 
     Trafficking" report.  Turkey has established a 157 
     hotline for foreign prostitutes (to improve its image). 
     This line was established six months ago.  The 157 
     Hotline served as a mediator for saving 14 women from 
     the prostitution sector until now. 
 
     IOM and the MFA Consular Affairs jointly carry out this 
     project and the goal is to help women who realize that 
     they were deceived and who are victims and to make 
     organized crime networks collapse. 
 
     Turkey, which is a destination country in human 
     trafficking, is very popular.  Marielle Sander 
     Lindstrom, the Turkey rep of IOM, explained that this 
     was because of the two reasons: Turkey's economic 
     situation is much better compared to neighboring 
     countries and it is easier to obtain a visa.  The 
     networks face difficulty in getting visas to European 
     countries so Turkey is an easy country for human 
     traffickers to enter.  When networks in countries such 
     as Ukraine, Moldova, Georgia and Uzbekistan that sell 
     women receive a demand from Turkey, they sustain their 
     ties on both sides. 
 
     TOMORROW: Women who are saved through Hotline 157 speak 
     out.. 
 
     BARGAINING CARRIED OUT ON THREE FRONTS 
 
     No matter which street you enter in Aksaray you see 
     foreign women.  The bargaining over sex begins at mid- 
     day in Aksaray, the heart of the prostitution sector. 
     Such bargaining which used to be done freely on the 
     streets and under the bridges in Aksaray, now are 
     conducted mostly in covered areas. 
 
     Azeri prostitutes who cannot find a place in night 
     clubs in general stroll the streets where automobile 
     spare parts are sold in Aksaray.  Azeris said that they 
     were using this method because there is not much demand 
     for them but they are aware of the tricks that are 
     played. 
 
     Aksaray is a prostitution paradise, but those who guide 
     the sector are always cautious.  As a resident of 
     Aksaray put it, there are three types of prostitution: 
     One way, is taking women out of the night club.  This 
     is the most expensive method. 
 
     Second option is the brothels that foreign women 
     established with 3-5 friends in Aksaray and adjacent 
     provinces. 
 
     The third is conducting the bargaining on the phone.  A 
     prostitute gives away her cell phone number through her 
     clients.  Thus, she determines her own clientele. 
     After nightfall the bargaining that was conducted in 
     secret places comes on the streets. END TEXT. 
 
¶16.  Published by Sabah on Thursday, June 30: 
 
     TITLE:  IS THE CONSCIENCE CLEAR? by Ergun Babahan 
 
     BEGIN TEXT:  The collapse of the Socialist Soviet 
     Republics made people enter a fight for existence. 
 
     Thousands of people with education and professions were 
     forced to do the jobs that they did not deserve. 
 
     As is the case during crisis periods, during this 
     period, too, those who paid the heaviest price were 
     again women.  Tens of thousands of women from Russia to 
     the Ukraine were forced to sell their bodies in order 
     to make ends meet for their families that they left 
     behind. 
 
     Certainly there were those who selected the path to 
     earn easy money.  Poverty and desperation were the main 
     reasons behind the booming prostitution in Turkey. 
 
     A human drama took place in front of our eyes.   And it 
     is continuing.  The human body is being sold as if it 
     is a commodity. 
 
     The sector is so big and the money involved is so 
     lucrative that it creates its own sub-sectors. 
 
     These women face no difficulty entering Turkey.  In 
     Turkey people from Iraq, Pakistan and Africa who want 
     to go to Greece or Italy are captured, but women who 
     are brought on boats for prostitution cannot be 
     captured. 
 
     The city centers in Trabzon and Istanbul turn into a 
     "meat market" where women sometimes are forced to work, 
     and nobody turns around and looks (into the problem). 
 
     But there is a party in government that claims to be 
     conservative democrat.  They, too, remain indifferent 
     to such a human drama. 
 
     Everybody discusses the turban, but nobody is 
     interested in this tragic incident that young women 
     from our neighboring countries suffer. 
 
     In fact we, as the media, are responsible on this 
     issue.  As "Sabah" we were mobilized because of the 
     report in the "New York Times."  Only then we felt like 
     looking into what was going on in the prostitution 
     sector. 
 
     Anybody with a conscience should oppose it and fight 
     against this human drama that we are facing.  Also, 
     mostly the officials and ordinary people in the street 
     know what has been going on. 
 
     We are witnessing a woman trade that destroys the 
     values of society and human dignity, as well as all the 
     other values accumulated over the years and we are not 
     moved at all. 
 
     The report that our friend Ceren Akdag filed from 
     Ankara showed that Turkey was rated Tier 2 in human 
     trafficking.  Turkey is preferred because its economy 
     is better compared to its neighbors and getting a visa 
     is easy. 
 
     Fifty percent of the women brought to Turkey are young 
     girls aged 19-25.  A great majority of them come from 
     the Ukraine and Moldova.  Also these young girls are 
     brought to Turkey with promises that they would serve 
     as nannies or household help but later are forced into 
     prostitution. 
 
     Their passports are being taken away.  If they do not 
     want to be involved in prostitution, they are beaten 
     and subject to torture. 
 
     In short, scenes that would make us weep in a movie are 
     taking place in our country. 
 
     This is one of the gravest versions of human rights 
     violations.  Time has come and even passing to open a 
     full-fledged war on this crime against humanity.  END 
     TEXT. 
 
MCELDOWNEY