05ANKARA861
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Feb 15 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000861 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, FEBRUARY 14, 2005 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Shiites win Iraqi polls, Kirkuk goes to Kurds - Hurriyet 
Shiites emerge out of Iraqi ballot box - Vatan 
Shiites, Kurds Iraq's new bosses - Aksam 
Talabani the real winner of Iraqi elections - Vatan 
Sunnis poorly represented in Iraqi parliament; Turkmen have 
3 seats - Milliyet 
Kurds are key to a coalition in Iraq - Sabah 
Grossman promises Iraq's integrity - Sabah 2/13 
CNN's Jordan loses job for accusing US soldiers in Iraq - 
Milliyet 2/13 
`Old Europe' was uttered by `old Rumsfeld' - Hurriyet 2/13 
Greek Cypriots threaten US with economic sanctions - 
Hurriyet 
Palestinian workers allowed into Israel - Sabah 
German defense minister implies end approaching for NATO - 
Aksam 2/13 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Shiites get 48 percent of Iraqi votes - Radikal 
Shiites to power in Iraq - Cumhuriyet 
Violence on the rise after Iraqi elections - Zaman 2/13 
Grossman: We are still friends with Turkey - Yeni Safak 2/13 
US delegation to visit `TRNC,' Greeks furious - Cumhuriyet 
Greek Cypriots threaten US - Yeni Safak 
Washington makes business `gesture' to `TRNC' - Radikal 2/13 
US to send business delegation to `TRNC' - Cumhuriyet 2/13 
Hamas accepts ceasefire with Israel - Yeni Safak 2/13 
Rumsfeld calls on Europe for cooperation against terror - 
Cumhuriyet 2/13 
Turkey takes ISAF command again - Radikal 
Howard Dean new leader of US Democrats - Yeni Safak 
Perle: Iran crushed group formed by CIA in late 1980s - 
Radikal 2/13 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
FM Gul on the Visit of Secretary Rice to Ankara:  FM 
Abdullah Gul told "Milliyet's" Taha Adyol that he explained 
Turkey's concerns over the fate of Kirkuk to Secretary of 
State Condoleezza Rice during their ride together from his 
residence to Ankara's airport at the conclusion of her 
recent visit.  My worries decreased after the conversation, 
Gul said.  Responding to "Milliyet" columnist Taha Akyol's 
questions, Gul explained how impressed he was with Secretary 
Rice's biography and her academic background.  Rice is 
ambitious, consistent, and open, and speaks in a transparent 
manner, Gul noted, adding that he has established a warm 
friendship with Secretary Rice.  Responding to the 
possibility of Kurdish leader Talabani becoming Iraq's 
president, Gul said Turkey would respect any decision taken 
by the Iraqis: `Iraqis know their internal balances better 
than anyone else,' Gul emphasized, and advised all groups in 
Iraq to `turn to Baghdad.'  The US, too, knows that Iraq's 
integrity is of crucial importance, Gul stressed. 
Washington regards the PKK as no different than Al-Qaida, 
Gul said, and claimed that Americans were uncomfortable 
about not having taken concrete actions against the PKK 
presence in the region.  Gul also said it is important that 
Secretary Rice stressed the Turkmen factor in Iraq during 
 
SIPDIS 
her meetings in Turkey and elsewhere on her trip.  The 
Turkish FM regards the upcoming visit of American business 
representatives to northern Cyprus as an initiative launched 
by Secretary Rice.  He expects the US and EU to increase 
pressure on the Greek Cypriots.  Gul was happy to hear, 
after a long time, Secretary Rice describe U.S- Turkish 
relations as a `strategic partnership.'  On the Incirlik 
Airbase, Gul said Ankara is evaluating new requests put 
forward by the US. 
Grossman Reiterates Friendship With Turkey:  Undersecretary 
of State Marc Grossman told a gathering of the American- 
Turkish Society in New York that ties between the two allies 
were strong enough to withstand disagreements, Turkish 
papers report over the weekend.  Grossman recalled US 
pledges regarding Iraq's territorial integrity, and said the 
US would work with Turkey against all terrorist groups in 
Iraq, including the PKK.  The US is taking some steps to 
ease the economic isolation of the Turkish Cypriots, he 
noted.  Grossman also advised Turkey to reopen the Halki 
Seminary and protect the rights of non-Muslim minorities in 
the country.  Turkey, is today a more democratic and 
prosperous country than ever before, Grossman reportedly 
said. 
 
Ankara Unhappy With Iraqi Election Results:  Turkey has 
complained to the United Nations that the recent Iraqi 
elections were subject to manipulation and do not reflect 
the real wishes of the Iraqi people.  `The low turnout by 
some groups in the elections and  manipulations in some 
regions, including Kirkuk, led to unbalanced results,' the 
MFA said in a statement on Sunday.  `It has become clear 
that certain elements in Iraq tried to manipulate votes in 
the elections and obtained unjustified gains from this,' the 
statement added, noting that Ankara expected Iraqi 
authorities to examine claims of irregularities. 
 
US Carries Out Secret Operations Against Iran From Turkey - 
US analyst:  US defense analyst William M. Arkin told daily 
"Vatan" that US military special forces and the CIA have 
intensified activities against Iran from the airbases in 
Batman and Diyarbakir in southeastern Turkey.  `The CIA has 
used these bases against Iraq and Al-Qaida, but this is not 
anything extraordinary,' Arkin said.  He added that the CIA 
and US military special forces have intensified work against 
Iran from these bases.  Batman is particularly important for 
establishing contact with pro-American groups in Iran, which 
are mostly Iranian Kurds, Arkin stressed.  Turkish 
government and intelligence units are aware of Americans' 
activities in the country, he noted.  Arkin believes that a 
so-called crisis between US and Turkey had been exaggerated 
by the Turkish press: `US and Turkish special forces have 
recently done many joint operations in Afghanistan,' he 
claimed. 
 
Turkey Takes ISAF Command:  Turkey took command Sunday of 
the NATO-led peacekeeping force in Afghanistan for another 
six months, during which the force will expand to the west 
of the country and oversee security preparations for 
upcoming parliamentary polls, papers report.  Turkish 
General Ethem Erdagi took over leadership of the 
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) from French 
General Jean-Louis Py, who heads Eurocorps.  General Erdagi 
said terror is no longer a major fear in Afghanistan. 
 
Nicosia Reacts to Upcoming US Business Delegation Visit to 
North Cyprus:  The Greek Cypriot government is angered by 
the upcoming visit of representatives of several leading US 
companies to northern Cyprus in an effort to relieve the 
economic isolation of Turkish Cypriots, papers report. 
Papadopoulos said the visit would be a violation of UN 
Security Council resolutions, and threatened a boycott of 
American goods in south Cyprus if the businesses go ahead 
with investment plans in northern Cyprus, papers report.  In 
retaliation, Cyprus will seek closer ties with enemies of 
the US in the region, such as Syria and Iran, Papadopoulos 
is quoted as saying.  Meanwhile, PM Tayyip Erdogan invited 
Papadopoulos to resolve the Cyprus problem over coffee in 
northern Cyprus, says "Hurriyet."  Sunday papers quote State 
Department Spokesman Boucher as confirming that a private US 
business delegation would explore business opportunities in 
the Turkish Cypriot sector of the divided island. 
 
Greek Cypriot Opposition Delegation Visits Turkey:  Greek 
Cypriot opposition DISI leader Nicos Anastassiades met with 
PM Tayyip Erdogan on Saturday for what he called `useful' 
talks on the division of Cyprus, papers report over the 
weekend.  Anastassiades added that peace on Cyprus would 
also help Greece and Turkey: `These three countries have a 
common home and that is the European Union,' he said. 
Erdogan made no comment after the meeting.  Greek Cypriot 
opposition leader Anastassiades and his delegation later 
attended a church service in Istanbul Sunday, which was 
presided over by Patriarch Bartholomew.  Anastassiades is 
the first Greek Cypriot political leader to visit Turkey 
since the island's partition in 1974.  Anastassiades and his 
delegation came to Turkey Wednesday on the invitation of the 
ruling AK Party, and held talks with FM Gul, PM Erdogan and 
senior AKP leaders. 
 
Erdogan Due in Kosovo, Bosnia:  PM Tayyip Erdogan will make 
official visits to Albania and Bosnia next week to improve 
bilateral relations with the two Balkan countries, Erdogan's 
office said Friday.  Erdogan will visit Albania on Tuesday 
and will travel on Wednesday to Sarajevo, where he is 
scheduled to hold meetings with Bosnian leader Adnan Terzic 
and other officials. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Rice in Europe; Afghanistan/Iraq; Middle 
East 
 
"Trouble of the Tongue" 
Ali Aslan wrote from Washington in the Islamist-intellectual 
"Zaman" (2/14): "The Bush administration used to give harsh 
responses to anyone, particularly the Europeans, who did not 
support the US plan in Iraq.  However, Washington is now 
intensifying its efforts to restore relations with Europe by 
correcting its rhetoric. . Both Rice and Rumsfeld took a 
decidedly soft tone during their recent visits to Europe. 
They did everything possible to take back the harsh U.S. 
rhetoric and sustained a nearly apologetic tone in their 
messages. . Secretary Rice's itinerary included Paris and 
Ankara, which was a clear indicator of the `restoring ties' 
message.  Washington tried to tell Ankara that the US cares 
about Turkey and Turkish public opinion.  The carefully- 
scripted diplomatic message from Washington to Ankara can be 
summarized as follows: `We [the US] are sorry about what 
happened in the past.  We may have made some rhetorical 
mistakes during the Iraq war.  Yet we always pursued good 
intentions.  We take seriously Turkey's concerns regarding 
Iraq's territorial integrity and the Kurdish issue.  And 
from now on we will care even more than before.  Please take 
our concerns seriously too.  We urge you not to discuss 
Turkish-American bilateral issues in a manner that provokes 
anti-Americanism.'  Naturally, the US is now asking for a 
change in our rhetoric since Washington has changed its 
rhetoric. . Turkish officials should analyze their messages 
very carefully.  Turkey is a big power but this does not 
mean our politicians should speak publicly in an 
unconsidered manner.  Turkey should adopt a mature, well- 
balanced, and soft tone, particularly when addressing the 
international public.  Otherwise, Turkey could fall into an 
`unsympathetic' category similar to that which the U.S. 
occupied before." 
 
"Afghanistan and Turkey's help" 
Erdal Safak wrote in the mass appeal "Sabah" (2/14): "Turkey 
assumed the ISAF command from France.  Afghanistan has been 
overshadowed by developments in Iraq, but the fact is that 
there are many tasks waiting to be completed in Afghanistan. 
Turkey will face important challenges, including the 
extension of the ISAF mission to the whole country, 
collecting arms from militia, and paving the way for 
parliamentary elections. . If Turkey achieves the extension 
of the ISAF-controlled area and manages to cover 
Afghanistan's east and south regions, the US military there 
will be able to move from Afghanistan to Iraq.  This is an 
indirect way of helping and supporting US on the Iraq issue. 
Whether this is good enough in the eyes of Washington 
remains to be seen." 
 
"Peace?  Maybe!" 
Zafer Atay commented in the economic-political Dunya (2/14): 
"If the terms of the Sharm Al-Sheikh agreement are 
implemented, the Palestinian and Israeli leaders will meet 
again this week.  Thousands of Palestinians will be freed 
from Israeli prisons.  Thousands of Palestinians suffering 
from unemployment in Palestine will be able to fill vacant 
jobs in Israel.  The US and the EU will release all kinds of 
assistance after the `cease-fire' agreement, and the people 
living in poverty will achieve prosperity.  The leader of 
Palestine, Mahmoud Abbas, believes that an independent 
Palestinian state can only be created through dialogue.  For 
many years, Abbas worked as Arafat's deputy, but no one ever 
seen him with a gun on his belt.  Sharon, on the other hand, 
is a warrior.  In the past, he took part in many bloody 
incidents.  But, lately, he realized that guns and tanks 
cannot solve any problems.  The whole world is waiting 
cautiously and acting with optimism.  I wish peace would 
come immediately.  But, in a region where logic is in short 
supply, even to wait for a possible peace gives one hope." 
 
EDELMAN