05ASUNCION1026
INITIAL REACTIONS TO NEWS OF SECRETARY RUMSFELD'S
Sat Aug 13 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Asuncion
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L ASUNCION 001026 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/BSC 
DOD FOR OSD PARAGUAY DESK OFFICER LTC DAN MCDONALD 
SOUTHCOM FOR POLAD DAN JOHNSON 
NSC FOR SUE CRONIN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/13/2015 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MARR MASS PA VE CU BR AR
SUBJECT: INITIAL REACTIONS TO NEWS OF SECRETARY RUMSFELD'S 
VISIT TO PARAGUAY 
 
REF: A. ASUNCION 1015 
 
     ¶B. ASUNCION 1011 
 
Classified By: PolOff Mark A. Stamilio, reason 1.5(b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: In response to news of Secretary Rumsfeld's 
planned visit to Paraguay, local media reported heavily this 
week that the visit marks a further shift in policy for the 
Duarte Frutos administration, towards the U.S. and away from 
leftist governments in the region.  Some sectors of the 
population would welcome such a shift, while others would be 
displeased.  Reportedly, the Government of Brazil falls 
within the latter group.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Throughout the week, local daily "Ultima Hora" 
published articles and opinion pieces claiming that Secretary 
Rumsfeld's planned visit to Paraguay was further evidence of 
an "about face" in policy for the Duarte Frutos 
administration -- a shift in alignment towards the U.S., and 
away from the left-wing governments of Hugo Chavez and Fidel 
Castro and left-leaning MERCOSUR partners Brazil, Argentina 
and Uruguay.  In further support of its claim, the paper 
pointed to Vice President Castiglioni's visit to Washington, 
the Senate's approval of multiple U.S.-Paraguayan military 
exercises over the course of the next 18 months, and the 
conclusion of an Open Skies agreement with the U.S.  In 
juxtaposition, the paper noted that, earlier in his 
administration, Duarte Frutos had taken a more "rebellious" 
and "autonomous" stance vis a vis the U.S. by declining to 
send troops to Iraq, ratifying the Treaty of Rome, and 
supporting a "non-U.S." candidate for OAS Secretary General. 
The paper claims that the U.S. is asserting its influence 
over Paraguay in order to block consensus within MERCOSUR and 
create divisions within Latin America, to thereby advance our 
own interests in the region. 
 
¶3. (C) The editors of all three major dailies raised the 
issue in conversations with the Ambassador at an Embassy 
function on August 11.  Pointing to the number of 
U.S.-Paraguayan military exercises scheduled to take place 
during the next 18 months and FBI plans to open an office in 
Paraguay, the editors asserted that there appeared to be a 
growing "special relationship" between the U.S. and Paraguay 
and asked why the U.S. was "paying so much attention to 
Paraguay."  (Note: The volume of U.S.-Paraguayan military 
exercises in Paraguay is relatively high for the region, but 
that has been true for years.  It has increased this year but 
not significantly.  Rather, for purposes of efficiency, and 
to ensure approval while Congressional leadership was in 
hands favorable to us, the Embassy this year submitted a 
consolidated request for immunities for all exercises that 
fall within the 18-month period, rather than submitting them 
piecemeal as in the past.  Due to tendentious, heavy 
publicity given to Congressional approval of the immunities 
agreement by those opposed to it, there is a perception in 
Paraguay and neighboring countries that our military ties 
have qualitatively strengthened.  End Note.) 
 
¶4. (U) Other key figures, including FM Rachid and several 
pro-U.S. Senators such as Sen. Carlos Mateo of the Liberal 
Party and Sen. Alejandro Velazguez, Vice-President of the 
Senate, are delighted by the prospect of a closer 
relationship between the U.S. and Paraguay.  In response to 
media suggestions that such a shift in the administration's 
policy marks a surrender of the country's autonomy, they 
counter that closer ties with the U.S. would better enable 
Paraguay to assert its independence from Brazil and 
Argentina, countries that dominate the MERCOSUR bloc.  Many 
other members of Paraguayan society also would welcome 
greater distance between the GOP and the governments of 
Chavez, Castro and Kirchner. 
 
¶5. (C) Uruguay's ambassador to Paraguay confided in the 
Ambassador this week that the local Brazilian Ambassador told 
him the GOB is displeased that Paraguay is securing closer 
military and security ties to the U.S. 
KEANE