05ASUNCION669
PARAGUAY: FM ON OAS, ARTICLE 98, BRAZIL, ECUADOR,
Thu May 19 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Asuncion
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ASUNCION 000669 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/BSC 
STATE ALSO FOR L/LEI 
NSC FOR KIM BREIER 
SOUTHCOM FOR POLAD DAN JOHNSON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/16/2015 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KCRM KJUS BR PA OAS
SUBJECT: PARAGUAY: FM ON OAS, ARTICLE 98, BRAZIL, ECUADOR, 
PENDING RESIGNATION 
 
 
Classified By: Polcouns James P. Merz for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (C)  Summary.  On 5/13, the Ambassador and FM Rachid 
discussed machinations over OAS appointments -- past and 
future, holding Article 98 negotiations on the margins of the 
upcoming OAS Ministerial, the GOP's support for the U.S. 
position on the OAS Social Charter, concerns about Brazil's 
trade and foreign policy, the GOP's views on Ecuador, and the 
FM's impending resignation.  End Summary. 
 
 
OAS SYG and DSYG Elections 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U)  FM Rachid expressed her satisfaction with the 
election of Chilean FM Insulza as the next OAS SYG.  She was 
particularly impressed with the Secretary's engagement on and 
management of the process leading up to this decision by 
consensus. Rachid conveyed her interest in meeting with the 
Secretary on the margins of the June OAS General Assembly in 
 
SIPDIS 
Ft. Lauderdale. 
 
¶3. (C)  Rachid conveyed Paraguay's support for Ernesto Leal 
of Nicaragua to be the next Assistant SYG.  She remarked that 
Surinam was actively lobbying in support of its candidate. 
Noting she had not yet received a phone call from the 
Nicaraguan FM on behalf of Leal, she recommended Nicaragua 
undertake a more active campaign if it hoped to gain support 
for its candidate. 
 
¶4.  (C)  Ambassador called attention to the importance of 
Insulza's pledge to monitor human rights situations including 
Cuba, and to hold countries to a democratic governance 
yardstick, with Venezuela in mind. 
 
Article 98 Negotiations 
----------------------- 
 
¶5.  (U)  Rachid said that she was free to meet with A/S 
Rademaker to discuss Article 98 on 6/6 while in Ft. 
Lauderdale for the OAS General Assembly.  She planned to 
bring along MFA lawyer Ernesto Velasquez to participate in 
negotiations. 
 
GOP Shares Views on OAS Social Charter 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (C)  Rachid shared our view that it would be 
inappropriate for Venezuela to chair the Charter Working 
Group.  She agreed this exercise should be realistic and 
pragmatic.  She welcomed news the Central American states may 
introduce an alternative to Venezuela's draft text. 
 
Concerns about Brazilian Policies 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (C)  Rachid conveyed her desire to talk to the Secretary 
about concerns she has about Brazil's approach on trade and 
foreign policy.  She complained that Brazil had cut quotas on 
Paraguayan exports.  She was also worried about Brazil's 
ambition to become the leading political voice in the region 
and urged the U.S. to assert itself to counter Brazil. 
 
¶8.  (C)  Ambassador conveyed concern about the recent 
Arab/Latin American Summit.  Among other issues, he noted 
that it may gratuitously have sown tension between the Jewish 
and Arab communities in Brazil.  Among other issues, he noted 
that it.  I added that it was inappopriate and needless for 
the Summit Declaration to laud Sudan's cooperation with 
humanitarian assistance in Darfur when everyone knows the 
opposite is true.  Rachid maintained that Brazil had had a 
"big fight" with a number of foreign ministers, including 
most prominently Colombian FM Barco and Chilean FM Walker, 
when Brazilian FM Amorim asked them to lower their rhetoric 
over objections they had to language pertaining to Sudan and 
the Middle East peace process. 
 
No Decision on Ecuador 
---------------------- 
 
¶9.  (C)  Rachid was familiar with the OAS report on Ecuador 
but was still waiting on a recommendation from her Mission in 
Washington on next steps.  She noted that Paraguay had not 
yet formally established relations with the new Ecuadorian 
government as it sought to base its decision on an OAS 
recommendation. 
 
FM on the Way Out? 
------------------ 
¶10. (C)  Rachid confided to the Ambassador, and then 
subsequently revealed publicly, that she has put her job at 
the disposition of President Duarte.  On May 17, the Foreign 
Ministry announced that Rachid will step down in September 
2005 and join her husband in the U.S.  She said that she 
believes Duarte has not decided on a successor but thinks he 
may be leaning slightly towards his Private Secretary Jose 
Maria Ibanez.  Rachid has recommended Duarte not select one 
of the MFA's older veterans such as Paraguay's Ambassador to 
Brazil, Luis Gonzales Arias, among others, because they were 
already senior officials during the Stroessner era and have 
"human rights" baggage. 
KEANE