05AUCKLAND329
COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR LOURITHA GREEN TO AUCKLAND, NEW
Wed Aug 24 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Auckland
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AUCKLAND 000329 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SINGAPORE FOR ICE ATTACHE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA NZ
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR LOURITHA GREEN TO AUCKLAND, NEW 
ZEALAND 
 
REF: USCUSTOMSA 08191825 
 
¶1. AMCONGEN Auckland welcomes Louritha Green, Attorney and U.S. 
Customs and Border Protection Offical, to Auckland 29 August - 
05 September 2005. The purpose of the visit is to participate in 
an APEC regional movement alert list multi-lateral legal 
framework workshop. 
 
¶2. Post understands no assistance is required. 
 
¶3. Point of contact at Consulate General Auckland is Consul 
General, Siria Lopez.  Contact details are as follows: 
Office Tel: 64-9-303 2724 ext.295 
Cell Tel: 027-434 3140 
Fax: 64-9-366 0870 
E-mail:  LopezSR@State.gov 
 
¶4. Visitors should use the local taxi service, which is 
generally safe, reliable and frequent.  Taxi fare from the 
airport to downtown Auckland hotels is approximately NZD55-65. 
A commercial shuttle service is also offered at the airport. 
 
¶5. Travelers can exchange currency at the airport upon arrival 
and ATM machines are readily available throughoutNew Zealand. 
 
¶6. Biosecurity Fines: 
The government of New Zealand instituted fines for non-declared 
biosecurity hazards on travelers entering New Zealand with 
undeclared plant, animal or food material.  Travelers found 
carrying these undeclared items will be immediately fined NZ$200 
(~US$135).  Biosecurity is a serious issue in New 
Zealand and fines will be administered immediately and without 
warnings. 
 
¶7. Security Information: 
a. The U.S. Mission in New Zealand currently rates the threat 
from transnational and indigenous terrorism as low.  There are 
no terrorist groups or support groups believed to be operating 
in New Zealand at this time.  In light of the worldwide security 
alert all visitors should heighten their security awareness and 
report any unusual incidents to the regional security office. 
 
b. Anonymous telephonic threats and obscure threat mail have 
occasionally targeted U.S. diplomatic missions in New Zealand. 
In response to U.S. policies and actions, various groups in New 
Zealand have demonstrated occasionally at the Embassy in 
Wellington and at the Consulate in Auckland.  These 
demonstrations are usually small and are peacefully conducted. 
During these demonstrations, the host country police and 
protective services normally provide adequate protection to the 
Embassy and Consulate. 
 
c. New Zealand is considered a medium threat crime environment. 
As such,  Wellington and Auckland have experienced an increase 
in violent and petty crimes, and it is usually 
non-confrontational in nature.  However, home invasion, 
robberies and assaults, once very rare, are becoming more 
frequent. Burglaries and thefts occur countrywide but primarily 
in the large cities of Auckland and Wellington, and visitors 
should be aware that street crime, such as scams and pickpockets 
is a daily occurrence in these cities. Common sense precautions 
should be taken, especially at night, to avoid becoming a target 
of opportunity. 
 
d. All forms of public transportation are generally safe at all 
times of the day; however, at night visitors should use common 
sense precautions so as to not become a target of opportunity. 
 
 
 
 
LOPEZ