05BAGHDAD3935
DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING - September 22, 2005
Thu Sep 22 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 003935 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING - September 22, 2005 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion on the constitutional referendum was the 
major editorial theme of Iraqi, Arabic language websites on 
September 22, 2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------ 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------ 
 
¶A. "Iraq. . .What Is After the Constitution?" (Al-Jeeran, 
9/22) 
¶B. "Voting Yes on the Constitution Is a Weapon Against Its 
Rejecters" (Soat Al-Iraq, 9/22) 
--------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
 
 
¶A. "Iraq. What Is After the Constitution?" 
(Editorial by Karim Al-Hazaa - Al-Jeeran - 
http://www.aljeeran.net/viewarticle.php?id=22 823&pg=articles 
) 
 
"Here, in the Arab homeland, laws are similar to a spider's 
web, where small birds are hunted while large birds can 
escape. There are many countries that have constitutions and 
laws but they are ineffective due to the absence of 
monitorial institutions and political freedoms. In addition, 
the community does not have a clue about what is going on 
behind the scenes. This is the ignorance of the state and 
individual. 
 
"In Iraq, we have many difficult questions. We want to know 
if the new Iraqi constitution will become a phenomenon 
throughout the Arab homeland and the Middle East. Will 
globalization and the new texts of constitutions be 
advantageous for Iraq? Will the complexity of ego and 
identity result in Iraq's isolation? 
 
"There are many voices that fear dilution due to internal 
problems. Those voices argue whether or not Iraq is an Arab 
or Islamic country. Is Iraq going to be free of all this 
supervision so that it can breathe freely? Is Iraq destined 
to be forever subjected to evil? Mahatma Gandhi said that 
refusing to cooperate with evil is more important than 
cooperating with good. For this reason, we say men should 
ask themselves if they are cooperating with evil. The 
question is still unanswered. What will happen to Iraq after 
the constitution?" 
 
¶B. "Voting Yes on the Constitution Is a Weapon Against Its 
Rejecters" 
(Editorial by Showki Al-E'isa - Soat Al-Iraq - 
http://www.sotaliraq.com/articles-iraq/nieuws .php?id=15906 ) 
 
"Iraq is heading towards a constitutional referendum that 
guarantees all rights and freedoms for Iraqi people - rights 
and freedoms that were previously absent under tyrannical 
governments. After successfully passing through all previous 
political stages, we have reached the constitutional 
referendum. We should vote for this constitution to thwart 
all schemes and conspiracies against our people. We should 
make our "Yes" for the constitution, a giant hammer to use 
against those who issue fatwas, those who campaign against 
the constitution, and those who are turning this country 
into chaos. 
 
"Iraqis have become accustomed to these cries and sounds 
before approaching any new stage; during this stage talented 
and qualified people should call for Iraqis to make Iraq's 
constitution successful; this requires that people vote for 
it. This is a political battle in which the average Iraqi 
should engage before savvy politicians do because it is for 
the future, will, and prosperity of the people. We need to 
study the constitution, including its principles and 
freedoms; after that we can decide to reject it or accept 
it. 
 
"The constitution guarantees men, women, and children 
rights. It prevents tyranny and it prevents Ba'athists from 
joining the political scene. It allows Iraqis to play a role 
in running their own affairs and allows them to enjoy their 
resources and wealth. And it protects minorities. This is 
Iraq's constitution. How can we vote against it? It is 
Iraq's true protection that will smash the heads of those 
hypocrites who reject it. We will vote yes, yes for the 
constitution..." 
 
KHALILZAD