05BAGHDAD2471
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQ NATIONAL ASSEMBLY,
Sun Jun 12 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 002471 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, 
INR/P 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQ NATIONAL ASSEMBLY, 
GOVERNMENT; BAGHDAD 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: The major themes in the daily newspapers on 
June. 12 were the preparations for drafting the 
constitution and the developments of the security 
situation. END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
----------------- 
 
¶A. "National rights are red lines that should not be 
crossed" (Al-Ittihad, 6/12) 
¶B. "In order to root out terrorism" (Al-Bayyan, 6/12) 
 
---------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------- 
 
¶A. "National rights are red lines that should not be 
crossed" (Al-Ittihad, 6/12) 
 
Al-Ittihad (affiliated with the PUK led by Jalal Talabani) 
published a third-page editorial by Abdul Hadi Mahdi about 
Kurdish rights: 
 
"All parties should work to remove the anxiety that 
currently exists in the Iraqi political field. There are 
many factors that have contributed to this rise of anxiety 
that should be contained by simply instituting logical 
practices. One way to move forward is to hold meetings that 
are characterized by transparency. Iraq has many wise 
politicians and religious figures that are prepared to 
offer their assistance and advice. Today, unfortunately, a 
new trend has emerged in our society that is attempting to 
pass over the Transitional Administrative Law (TAL) -- the 
document that all parties agreed to use as the foundation 
for the permanent constitution. Through the issuance of 
statements, this attempt is aimed at depriving the Kurds of 
their national and political rights. 
 
It is strange that the majority of these statements have 
come from members of the Unified Iraqi Alliance (UIA). 
Perhaps the figures making such statements are unaware of 
the agreement that was reached between the UIA and the 
Kurdish list concerning the transitional government. These 
statements have taken many different forms, including the 
deletion of the three main words from the government 
swearing in ceremony and the Prime Minister not mentioning 
the Kurdish demands to the National Assembly with regard to 
the political program. In addition, statements on Kirkuk 
have appeared which contradict the previous agreement on 
this issue between the UIA and the Kurds and also oppose 
what is stated in the TAL. The Kurdish leadership has been 
clear on the Kirkuk issue and has demanded the necessity of 
implementing Article 58 from the TAL. 
 
These statements indicate either a lack of understanding 
for the Kurdish political position or an ignorance of the 
history and facts of the Iraqi situation. Such 
unintelligent statements are only the fault of those who 
made them in the first place. However, there could also be 
an intentional campaign to prevent the Kurds from achieving 
their political and national demands, which will only lead 
to a national disaster. We hope that such statements are 
not being made intentionally and that they will not be 
repeated in the future, especially in an environment where 
everyone refuses to get caught up in sectarianism." 
 
 
¶B. "In order to root out terrorism" (Al-Bayyan, 6/12) 
 
Al-Bayyan (affiliated with the Islamic Dawa Party led by 
Al-Jafari) published a front-page editorial about the 
developments of the "Lightning" military operation in Iraq: 
 
"The terrible crime that occurred last Friday night in As- 
Shua'la was not the first of its kind. There have been many 
other similar crimes not only in this area but also in 
other areas throughout Iraq. The goal of these criminals - 
to create sectarian sedition that will ultimately spark a 
civil war -- has become clear to the Iraqi people. However, 
these criminals have begun to realize that their crimes 
will not achieve their objective and that it will be 
impossible for them to create a civil war that will fulfill 
the wishes of Abu Musab Al-Zarqawi. 
 
It is clear that the Lighting operation has had a 
successful impact, despite the continuance of attacks like 
that which recently occurred in As-Shua'la. Attacks such as 
this serve to indicate that the terrorists have reached 
their end in Iraq. Nonetheless, it is important for all 
Iraqi citizens to support the ongoing operations that are 
cleansing Iraq from the terrorists. Expressing condemnation 
is not enough. Everyone must make an active contribution in 
this important operation. 
The crime that occurred in As-Shua'la did not differentiate 
between any particular nationality or denomination. 
Instead, this crime was inflicted against all Iraqis and 
therefore demonstrates that no one is safe from being 
targeted by the terrorists as they continue the road of 
their demise. All Iraqis must contribute to this final 
stage of eradicating terrorism from our society. Serious 
and determined efforts are required by everyone so that we 
can end this terrible phenomenon in our society and return 
stability and security to Iraq." 
 
JEFFREY