05BAGHDAD5067
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, DECEMBER 15th
Tue Dec 20 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 005067 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, DECEMBER 15th 
ELECTION, TRANSPARENCY; BAGHDAD 
 
SUMMARY: The major theme of today's editorials was 
Thursday's parliamentary election. 
 
Analysis: While the majority of the day's editorials 
addressed the election the treatment varied greatly 
depending on the nature of the press. Independent Al- 
Fourat's editorial, "My Country, My Country" hailed the role 
of Iraqis in their new democracy and emphasized the unity of 
the country. Allawi's mouthpiece Baghdad had the editorial, 
"Iyad Allawi and His Vision for National Unity" which lauded 
his plans for the country's future. 
 
The Hezb'allah in Iraq newspaper, Al-Bayna's editorial, "The 
Purple Revolution, the Paupers' Revolution" celebrated the 
success of the election and condemned those who questioned 
its integrity. 
 
Independent Al-Sabah Al-Jadeed's, "Hard Times" addressed 
unemployment and criticized government officials for being 
preoccupied with personal interests. The Ad-Dawa party's 
eponymous newspaper published an editorial, "This Is How a 
Loving Person Addresses Iraqis," praising Al-Ja'afari for 
his speech to Iraqis during a visit to Najaf. Al-Bayyan, 
also affiliated with Ad-Dawa, published, "The Aftermath of 
Victory" which examined the role of the United Iraqi 
Alliance following a successful election. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Lining Up" (As-Sabah, 12/20) 
¶B. "Comprehension" (Al-Adala, 12/20) 
¶C. "Post Elections" (Al-Ittihad, 12/20) 
¶D. "A Result of the Elections: A Fivefold Increase in Fuel 
Prices" (Al-Mada, 12/20) 
¶E. "What Follows the Elections?" (Ad-Dustoor, 12/20) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Lining Up" 
(As-Sabah - Iraqi Media Network, government financed, pro- 
coalition, published this front-page editorial by Muhammad 
Al-Shaboot that dealt with how religious, ethnic and 
sectarian divisions dominated the elections. In part the 
editorial reads) 
 
"Sectarian and ethnic lineups in the last election were far 
more evident than the previous one held in  January--then 
you could have found Arabic names on Kurdish lists and 
Sunnis on Shiite lists with a few Christians here and there. 
Matters have changed in the last election with almost 
entirely Kurdish and Shiite lists, with other new lists 
based solely on religion and ethnicity, which explains the 
increasing number of political entities from 112 in January 
to 300 in the last election. Some might find this ethnic and 
sectarian division in the elections appealing, while some 
may not, but the problem remains that this trend might not 
be the best way to form the basis of a modern state." 
 
¶B. "Comprehension" 
(Al-Adala, affiliated with SCIRI, led by Abdul Aziz Al- 
Hakim, no bias, published this page-three editorial by Dr. 
Ali Khalif. The columnist stressed the need for Iraq to 
flourish once again and urged citizens not to complain about 
the government's decisions for the sake of the country. In 
part the editorial reads) 
 
"After the major political changes in the new Iraq, 
undoubtedly there are major economic changes that will 
follow this political achievement. The Iraqi economy has 
suffered a lot due to the errant policies of the former 
regime; there wasn't even a real economy that could maintain 
the state and citizen's rights. Iraq is heading towards a 
market economy and will be open to investment. Citizens will 
have a real role in building their country's economy and 
Iraqi citizens will comprehend this in the near future after 
they get rid of the remainders of the former regime and 
begin dealing with the new Iraq full of thoughts and 
ambitions." 
 
¶C. "Post Elections" 
(Al-Ittihad - affiliated with the PUK, led by Jalal 
Talabani, pro-coalition, published this front-page editorial 
promoting accord among the political blocs, especially in 
this sensitive post-election stage. In part the editorial 
reads) 
 
"The Elections are over and perhaps in less than a week the 
IECI will announce the results. The major blocs will begin 
negotiating with each other to agree to a new political map 
for Iraq, the first stage of which will be electing a 
president, two vice-presidents and the formation of a new 
government that will run the country's affairs for the next 
four years. Preliminary results show the Kurdish Alliance 
will be a strong bloc in the Iraqi parliament and it will 
negotiate to shape the governmental and parliamentary map. 
Consensus is one of the primary Iraqi principles and 
electing a political Kurdish figure for one of the two 
senior ministerial posts is one of the first Kurdish 
priorities." 
 
¶D. "A Result of the Elections: A Fivefold Increase in Fuel 
Prices" 
(Al-Mada - independent, no bias, published this page-three 
editorial by Rahman Al-Jawari that dealt with the 
government's unpopular decision to increase fuel prices. In 
part the editorial reads) 
 
"Iraqi's ink-stained fingers didn't have time to dry, nor 
did their feet have the chance to recover from long distance 
walks to polling stations before receiving the gift of fuel 
prices increasing--fivefold.This decision was made three 
days prior to the election, and was put into effect three 
days after Election Day to add a new burden to the elected 
government and a new concern for people who already fear for 
their future in the era of a new democratic government. 
Iraqis should be glad as they float over a lake of oil but 
can't provide petrol for their vehicles, kerosene for their 
heaters or meet their children's needs." 
 
¶E. "What Follows the Elections?" 
(Ad-Dustoor - independent, no bias, published this back page 
editorial by Hashim Hassan that questioned the likely 
competence of the new government and whether it will serve 
the public's interest. In part the editorial reads) 
 
"Millions of Iraqis participated in the elections to confirm 
their commitment to democracy that claimed many lives along 
its path; until now the fruits of those sacrifices have been 
harvested by others who monopolize parliamentary seats and 
divide ministries and embassies leaving the people with no 
idea of what is happening.We have the right to question what 
will follow the election and what kind of struggle will 
ensue to seize government posts. Will the interests of Iraq 
and the people be the basis of power sharing or will we see 
incompetent ministers and officials lacking the lowest level 
of required qualifications?" 
 
KHALILZAD