05BAGHDAD4025
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION,
Thu Sep 29 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 004025 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION, 
TERRORISM, ELECTIONS, POLITICAL PARTIES; BAGHDAD 
 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion on the Constitution, Terrorism, 
Elections, and Political Parties were the major editorial 
themes of the daily newspapers on September 28, 2005. END 
SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Why Was Article 44 Struck from the Draft Constitution?" 
(Az-Zaman, 9/28) 
¶B. "New Political Parties and Sudden Competition" (Al-Sabah 
Al-Jadeed, 9/28) 
¶C. "The Wise Opinion" (Al-Adala, 9/28) 
¶D. "Who Rejects the Cessation of Bloodshed in Iraq?" (Al- 
Ittihad, 9/28) 
¶E. "Childhood and Terrorism" (Al-Fourat, 9/28) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Why Was Article 44 Struck from the Draft Constitution?" 
(Az-Zaman, independent, anti-coalition published this page- 
four editorial by Ali Dhiya' Al-Din) 
"The first version of the draft constitution that was 
published in local newspapers on August 30th seemed to 
reflect a triumph for the principles of freedom and 
democracy; the first draft included several articles and 
paragraphs that reinforce democracy and freedom. Since then, 
Iraqi intellectuals have feared that such triumphs would 
disappear and unfortunately those fears have multiplied 
since the final draft was published-a draft that annuls 
Article 44 that committed Iraq to abide by international 
agreements. 
 
"Why has this article been annulled? It has no deficiencies 
and it deals with human rights in accordance with 
international law. Why did the constitution's drafters 
cancel it if they wanted to draft a standard constitution? 
It is our understanding that international laws and 
agreements do not violate, tyrannize, or discriminate 
against nations, sects, and religions. International laws 
and agreements have granted independence to colonized 
countries, prevented all types of racial and gender 
discrimination, and protected people from torture and abuse. 
If we read the texts of international laws and agreements we 
would observe that they were written to promote humanity and 
protect dignity and honor. For all these reasons, we would 
like to know why the constitution's drafters wanted to 
marginalize those noble values and protections that all 
developed countries enjoy." 
 
¶B. "New Political Parties and Sudden Competition" 
(Al-Sabah Al-Jadeed, independent, published this page-eight 
editorial by Mu'ayyad Abdul Zahra) 
 
"The Independent Electoral Commission in Iraq (IECI) has 
announced that there are 67 (of a total of 122) political 
parties registered to contend in the coming election, none 
of whom participated in the previous election. This number 
illustrates that there are many parties vying for power in 
the next government. This wide variety of political parties 
and alliances is working hard to prepare for the coming 
election and this represents the spirit of openness and 
democracy. This pluralism will enable Iraqi voters to elect 
their desired candidates. 
 
"However, this variety of political parties and entities may 
raise several questions: 
What are the platforms of these political parties? Moreover, 
who is supporting and funding these new political entities 
and why has the number of parties increased as the deadline 
for the election approaches? Some people may say that those 
new political entities have the right to form, participate, 
or compete in the political process but is it right to have 
such a large number of political parties? This large number 
reminds us of the past election and its results. Some people 
think that some of these parties represent hidden 
organizations scheming to gain power. On the other hand, 
some people believe that establishing electoral alliances is 
the best way to ensure that the large political parties will 
not engulf smaller parties--the upcoming election will 
witness new political alliances and political advertising. 
We all hope that the coming electoral process will absorb 
lessons learned from the former election for our own 
interests." 
 
¶C. "The Wise Opinion" 
(Al-Adala, daily, no bias, affiliated with SCIRI led by 
Abdul Aziz Al-Hakim, published this page-three editorial by 
Dr. Ali-Khalif) 
"Some who have specific agendas to implement in Iraq have 
become upset following the recent progress of the Iraqi 
political process. Those disgruntled groups went on to 
address the Iraqi people in such a provocative way that they 
forgot that Iraqis follow their wise religious authorities. 
Those groups became frenzied when they heard that the 
religious authorities issued a statement on the referendum 
and began looking for an explanation on what the statement 
meant; they later saw it was a fatwa which declared it was 
not a legal imperative to participate in the upcoming 
referendum. 
"On the other hand, they point out that the religious 
authorities did not recommend voting `Yes' in the 
referendum. Those groups started to report news about the 
religious authorities, thinking that such information would 
deceive the Iraqi people. This does not mean that the 
religious authorities control the rights of Iraqis and 
prevent them from expressing their free opinions; in fact, 
it means that the Iraqi people believe the religious 
authorities know better how to analyze the legislative and 
legal texts in the constitution. At the same time, it is up 
to citizens to choose what they think is best for them. 
Without a doubt, the religious authorities care about 
citizens' interests, particularly concerning the 
constitution. 
"The religious authorities have said that the current 
constitution does not satisfy all ambitions but it is the 
best solution under the present circumstances. The current 
Iraqi constitution was drafted, harmoniously, to satisfy all 
Iraqi sects. For this reason, the religious authorities have 
recommended Iraqis vote `Yes' to the constitution and 
ordered them to participate in the referendum. The religious 
authorities realize that rejecting the constitution will 
take Iraq backwards and allow terrorists to kill more 
Iraqis. 
"The religious authorities are legally obliged to provide a 
decisive answer about this issue. Some people have become 
upset about such statements because they see that the Iraqi 
people respect and follow their religious authorities who 
have been the first voices that have called for holding 
elections and drafting a constitution that guarantees the 
rights of all Iraqis. Additionally, the religious 
authorities have encouraged people to participate in the 
election and today it encourages all Iraqis to take part in 
the referendum. The religious authorities have also been the 
first voices that have called for the rights of Iraqi people 
and they will play such a role until a free Iraqi country is 
established where all citizens live freely and fairly." 
¶D. "Who Rejects the Cessation of Bloodshed in Iraq?" 
(Al-Ittihad, affiliated with the PUK, published this page- 
three editorial by Abdul Hadi Mahdi) 
"History has described Iraqis as peaceful people who reject 
violence and adore freedom and peace. Since the 
establishment of the Iraqi state, many political, social and 
economic changes have happened in this country. However, the 
Iraqi people were able to stay united despite the many 
attempts made to break apart an Iraq which is characterized 
by multiple ethnicities and religions. But, all those 
attempts have been unsuccessful. During previous decades, 
former Iraqi regimes adopted a policy that was aimed at 
destroying Iraqi national unity. More than ever, this 
destructive policy increased during the last decade when the 
Iraqi people were exposed to oppression and tyranny. Iraqi 
voices were clear at that time, rejecting violations against 
human rights. 
 
"After April 9, 2003 [the fall of Baghdad], we noticed that 
the culture of violence has increased unexpectedly. This 
violence is a result of the former errant policies which 
have achieved nothing but massacres and bloodshed against 
innocent Iraqis. This recent series of violent episodes has 
become so intensive that it has started to affect all 
Iraqis. In addition, this violence has begun to target 
Iraqis based on their national or sectarian identity. 
Indeed, all Iraqis condemn these crimes. Recently, As-Sabah 
newspaper called for holding a `covenant of honor' that 
forbids the shedding of Iraqi blood. I think such an 
initiative will engender widespread Iraqi support. Today, 
there are many attitudes by Iraqis against violence and I 
think these attitudes represent a consensus. 
"But, it is very important that we must put those attitudes 
into practice. We must ask this question: Who can refuse 
such a covenant? I believe that those who do not belong to 
Iraq [i.e. non-Iraqis] and those who have accepted to become 
a tool used by foreigners to kill the Iraqi people, will 
reject this noble covenant. This initiative has come at an 
important time and stage in Iraq's history. Iraq is moving 
forward toward the referendum and the upcoming election. For 
this reason, all Iraqis must implement this initiative and 
put it into practice in order to protect Iraqi blood from 
being shed every day." 
 
¶E. "Childhood and Terrorism" 
(Al-Fourat, independent, anti coalition, published this page- 
three editorial by Abdul Zahra Al-Talkani) 
 
"Children comprise a tremendous humanitarian power capable 
of standing up to any superpower no matter how strong its 
weapons. They represent a peaceful power armed only with 
innocence. Childhood represents a very pure and spiritual 
world that is close to divine principles, that's why 
children are much safer and happier than others. 
 
"If we can imagine excluding them from humanity, then our 
community would be transformed into a wild monster living in 
a real jungle. Therefore, children have prevented the 
proliferation of this monster's violence--most of the time, 
and sometimes children have even sacrificed their lives. 
It's like the case of Abdullah, the baby son of Imam 
Hussein, who was slaughtered by a criminal long ago. 
 
"And now, thirty children were assassinated in Baghdad 
because one of the notorious mujahideen, who bore a 
recommendation signed by one of the two `prophets' (bin 
Laden or Al-Zarqawi), was in a rush to reach paradise at the 
expense of thirty children's bodies. And that's in addition 
to the children who have died in Kadhumya, Al-Nahdha, 
Hillah, Najaf, Tal Afar and all other areas where terrorists 
have extended their reach. 
 
"There are always children that stand against terror with 
their tender faces and soft bodies, and most of the time 
they have died with innocent smiles that mock their 
murderers. Children go to school in clean white uniforms 
wearing book-bags on their shoulders; daily they are 
challenging the death and terror that is pervasive 
everywhere in Iraq. They don't mind the danger, hiding 
behind school walls or dodging the car bombs in the streets, 
they only cower in silence, terrified when the hears bombs 
they react like doves responding to a loud sudden noise-- 
they then resume laughing and playing, active and full of 
energy. They go home to narrate their experiences to their 
families and return to school the next day in a daily cycle 
of life that terrorists are trying to extinguish. Sooner or 
later terrorists will be defeated because they cannot defeat 
Iraqi children-so how can they defeat the men and women of 
Iraq who have become experts in dealing with death since the 
time of Adam and Eve?" 
 
KHALILZAD