05BAGHDAD3501
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION;
Sun Aug 28 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 003501 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ BAGHDAD
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION; 
BAGHDAD 
 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion on the Constitution was the major 
editorial theme of the daily newspapers on August 28, 2005. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------ 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------ 
 
¶A. "The Constitution is the Fruit of the Political Process" 
(As-Sabah al-Jadeed, 8/28) 
¶B. "The Constitution--Between Harmony and Veto" (Al-Bayyan, 
8/28) 
¶C. "Our Iraqi Efforts and Our Kurdish Hopes" (Al-Taakhi, 
8/28) 
¶D. "We Are Waiting for the Good News" (Ad-Dustoor, 8/28) 
¶E. "Harmonious Agreement Is A Healthy Sign in the March 
Toward Democracy" (Al-Ittihad, 8/28) 
¶F. "The Constitution and Political Memory" (As-Sabah, 8/28) 
 
--------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "The Constitution is the Fruit of the Political Process" 
(As-Sabah al-Jadeed published in Arabic a page-eight, un- 
attributed editorial on the constitution) 
 
"After the downfall of the dictatorial regime, freedom rose 
like the sun in Iraq and the country began to move forward 
towards security, advancement, and prosperity. Today, the 
Iraqi people have to play a big role to make this process 
successful. All Iraqis, whether they agree or disagree with 
the current political process, need to work towards Iraq's 
national interest. The Iraqi people challenged and crushed 
terror when they headed for the ballot boxes during the 
elections on the 30th of January. Now, it is time to 
complete this process by drafting a constitution for this 
country and its people. It is time for Iraqis to now harvest 
the fruits they have been waiting for. They will not be 
affected by terror as long as the constitution will open the 
door to hope and progress. The development of the political 
process means that we are defeating terror in Iraq. So, we 
call on all Iraqis to bring their containers to collect the 
fruits of the political process." 
 
¶B. "The Constitution--Between Harmony and Veto" 
(Al-Bayyan published in Arabic a back-page editorial by Adel 
Al-Rubai'ee on the constitution) 
 
"All civilized countries have their own democratic and 
constitutional experiments that were developed over years 
before reaching their final forms and many countries' 
experiments are similar. However, establishing democratic 
communities does not come from nothing but is developed 
through years of political work and effort. Indeed, the 
constitutions of other countries have taken years to 
develop. Concerning our draft constitution, I believe that 
current disagreements and disputes amongst Iraqi politicians 
in the National Assembly represent a healthy debate to build 
a new Iraq. The Iraqi people will have their final say about 
the constitution during the referendum. But, the most 
important matter now is to solve all pending issues in 
accordance with national interests. These issues must not be 
resolved according to a minority veto at the expenses of the 
majority because this does not benefit the political process 
or national interests." 
 
¶C. "Our Iraqi Efforts and Our Kurdish Hopes" 
(Al-Taakhi published in Arabic a front-page editorial by 
Sa'ad Badr Khan on the constitution) 
 
"The Iraqi constitution is being drafted amid disputes, 
disagreements, and harmony amongst Iraqi politicians. This 
represents the proper way to reach the goal that is to make 
the constitutional process successful. This constitution can 
make Iraq's two main nationalities, Arabs and Kurds, in 
addition to other sects, feel they are real Iraqi citizens. 
The Kurdish list insists on defending Iraq as one country 
and at the same time it defends Kurdish rights through this 
constitution. When the Kurds insist on not making Iraq an 
Islamic republic this means that they want to build a modern 
state for all Iraqis. When the Kurds demand women's rights 
they call for guaranteeing all Iraqi women's rights without 
discrimination. The Kurds believe in democracy and in a new 
Iraq and they also think that it is necessary to install 
federalism throughout Iraq. We know that federalism is an 
optional choice that has its own justifications. These are 
the Kurdish orientations that represent purely Iraqi 
viewpoints. The Kurdish attitude was characterized with 
transparency and insistence on making all Iraqis participate 
in the current constitutional process. The Kurds have played 
a vital role in encouraging dialogue about the constitution. 
History will record the great Kurdish role in making the 
draft constitution successful. History also must appreciate 
the Kurdish National Assembly's decision on approving the 
draft constitution. This approval came after Barazani worked 
hard to make all dissenting opinions come together to 
prevent Iraq's enemies from disrupting the political 
process. The upcoming stage following the referendum will be 
more dangerous and sensitive. The next period requires more 
wisdom, attention, accuracy, and objectivity to make the 
referendum successful and to pass the constitution's 
articles. This is the main goal of any honest Iraqi." 
 
¶D. "We Are Waiting for the Good News" 
(Ad-Dustoor published in Arabic a front-page editorial by 
Bassim Al-Sheikh) 
 
"We are expecting the National Assembly to approve the draft 
constitution today by two-thirds of its members. A 
promotional campaign will begin to educate Iraqis about the 
basics and principals of the constitution, in spite of those 
who are working against Iraq's unity and trying to create 
crisis and sectarianism among Iraqi sects; those who are 
singing for civil war and division will never relent in 
their mischievous plots against Iraq.The draft constitution 
was submitted to the National Assembly by the deadline of 
the first extension and now members are having discussions 
and making amendments to the last draft to vote for final 
approval. Hence, everyone should be aware today that there 
is no way to go back--the political process should move 
forward and we should all work together to help it succeed. 
We should all work for the benefits of our Iraq and work 
against our enemies' will and make this day a day of good 
news." 
 
¶E. "Harmonious Agreement Is A Healthy Sign in the March 
Toward Democracy" 
(Al-Ittihad published in Arabic a page-three column by Abdul 
Hadi Mahdi about the constitution) 
 
"The structure of Iraqi society is considered complicated 
compared to other societies. Iraqi society consists of 
pluralistic nationalities and a diversity of religions and 
sects that have uniqueness that must be respected.Despite 
all that, Iraq's society seems to be more united than other 
societies which lack such diversity. Therefore, this must be 
considered during the drafting of the 
constitution.Harmonious agreement is considered a healthy 
sign in the democratic march, because Iraq's foundation 
cannot withstand a certain group imposing its will on 
others. The time of marginalizing others has gone; all 
Iraqis must assert their political and national rights and 
this cannot happen without a permanent constitution drafted 
through harmony. 
Today, Iraqis hope to reach harmony through their political 
leaders' announcement of a final draft for the permanent 
constitution." 
 
¶F. "The Constitution and Political Memory" 
(As-Sabah published in Arabic a page-two editorial by Falah 
Al-Mish'al about the constitution) 
 
"An observer of the constitutional committee's work can find 
some relevance in the political memories of committee and 
TNA members. Those members recall their disasters and 
sacrifices while they are drafting the constitution phrase 
by phrase. The majority of TNA members are Shiites and Kurds 
and they share joint obsessions, due to their suffering 
under the former regime. Therefore, you can find their 
demands in line with their political memories.The Sunnis are 
against the others because they represent the ruling class 
in Iraq from the establishment of the Iraqi state in 1921 
until Saddam's toppling in 2003. Therefore, they act with a 
ruler's logic and not that of one who has been ruled. And 
their political memory functions in the past more than it 
does in the future.The question is: will the draft 
constitution define Ba'athist ideology as a terrorist one 
that propagated real criminal activity, started wars, and 
triumphed in the comprehensive destruction throughout Iraq 
because of Saddam's policies? This trail of destruction will 
require more than decades in order to be forgotten. It is 
etched in the memories and the spirit of Iraq more than 
merely being mentioned in a document made of paper." 
 
 
Khalilzad