05BAGHDAD4199
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION,
Tue Oct 11 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 BAGHDAD 004199 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION, 
 
REFERENDUM, NATIONAL RECONCILIATION, ARAB LEAGUE; BAGHDAD 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion on the Constitution, Referendum, 
National Reconciliation, and the Arab League were the major 
editorial themes of the daily newspapers on October 11, 
¶2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Objections to the Constitution Confirm the Contrary" 
(Asharq Al-Awsat, 10/11) 
¶B. "The Right" (Al-Sabah, 10/11) 
¶C. "The Constitution Represents Security, Stability, and 
Progress" (Al-Muatamar, 10/11) 
¶D. "We Are Going to Implement Our Principles" (Al-Dawa, 
10/11) 
¶E. "The Referendum" (Al-Taakhi, 10/11) 
¶F. "You'll Find them Fond of Conflict Rather Than 
Reconciliation" (Al-Mashriq, 10/11) 
¶G. "The Best Word" (Al-Adala, 10/11) 
¶H. "No to the Boycott. No to the constitution" (Al-Fourat, 
10/11) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Objections to the Constitution Confirm the Contrary" 
(Asharq Al-Awsat, independent, London-based pan-Arab, Saudi 
owned, published this page-nine editorial by Abdul Rahman Al- 
Rashed) 
 
"In Iraq, emotions have divided the populace into two groups 
on the eve of the referendum. The majority of people, 
whether they vote for or against the constitution, do not 
understand the details of the disagreement [over the 
document]; there is no equitable discussion amongst 
dissenting groups because each tries to accuse the other of 
terrorism and extremism. 
 
"The overwhelming Shiite majority supports the current 
constitution as do the Kurds, while the Sunnis, some secular 
Shiite groups and other small minority groups reject the 
constitution. In spite of hysteria concerning the 
constitution, disagreements have been reduced to a few 
articles, thus the majority of the constitution is 
acceptable. I think the UIA (United Iraqi Alliance) and the 
current government insist on categorizing provinces 
according to sectarianism and this idea frightens the 
minority. We understand that the majority does not need to 
group provinces to receive a larger share of the vote 
because the majority is sure that it will win the vote, 
whereas constitutional guarantees are necessary for all 
individuals and minorities. 
 
"Representatives of those who call themselves the 
`opposition' continue arguing and they lack united 
leadership. All results have indicated that the Sunnis have 
not represented their minority by insisting on boycotting 
the political process. I even think that their objections to 
the constitution are illogical. They speak about Arabism and 
insist that it be included in the constitution. It seems 
that they do not know that there are 15 Arab countries that 
have this word only in their internal laws [not in their 
constitutions]. We know that only Saudi Arabia, the United 
Arab Emirates, Egypt, Libya and Syria can be labeled Arab 
countries and that it impossible to impose Arabic on other 
minorities. The language of a majority cannot dominate the 
constitution but it can be achieved through national 
reconciliation. 
 
"Moreover, it is very strange that the Sunnis rejected the 
constitutional article that regards children of an Iraqi 
mother as Iraqi. This indicates that they are bigots because 
most countries' constitutions state that children enjoy 
equal rights from both parents. Nevertheless, amid these 
marginal objections to the Iraqi constitution, it seems that 
it generally has fair and sound principles." 
 
¶B. "The Right" 
(Al-Sabah, independent, published this front-page editorial 
by Muhammad Abdul Jabbar) 
 
"If everything in our country worked in accordance with the 
law, citizens, and in particular voters, would have the 
right to complain about the delay in the distribution of the 
draft constitution. Citizens have the right to know--this is 
one of the main principles of democracy. However, I have not 
found any mention of such rights in the constitution. 
 
"Some officials say time is short and this caused an 
inability to distribute the five million copies of the draft 
constitution. Those officials say that they may be able to 
distribute only three-and-a-half million copies but what 
about the other one-and-a-half million copies? This failure 
will result in 11 million voters being unable to see the 
draft constitution--and they will have to vote without 
knowing what the current constitution contains. Accordingly, 
they will vote based on political, factional or religious 
affiliations. 
 
"Citizens have the right to complain but I do not know who 
is to be blamed for this delay. I suspect it's the National 
Assembly that is responsible for such a delay because it 
hindered the constitutional committee's meetings which 
delayed the draft constitution's completion, its printing 
and distribution. The political process is moving forward 
according to its timetable but, it is very important that 
citizens know their rights and they must have the right to 
complain if these rights are not respected." 
 
¶C. "The Constitution Represents Security, Stability, and 
Progress" 
(Al-Muatamar, affiliated with the Iraqi National Congress 
led by Ahmad Al-Chalabi, published this page-fifteen 
editorial by Muslim Al-Mi'mar) 
 
"The Iraqi people have lived fearful lives during the period 
of the deposed regime where freedom was confiscated. Today, 
the enemies of the new Iraq are upset about our new 
constitution that includes and guarantees rights for all 
Iraqis. The referendum is approaching and the Iraqi people 
will determine their future and we hope that they will vote 
for the constitution. 
 
"Drafting a constitution is a very important issue and it is 
also a national accomplishment because it establishes a 
democratic system for the political process in Iraq. At the 
same time, all Iraqis must participate in political-decision 
making in order to build new Iraq. The Iraqi people have 
played a significant role in building the first democratic 
experiment that led to the establishment of an elected 
National Assembly and the drafting of the first legitimate 
constitution for Iraq. It is a mistake to say that this 
constitution was drafted by non Iraqis because all Iraqis 
voluntarily celebrated in the streets on the occasion of the 
announcement of the draft constitution. 
 
"The Iraqi people believe that this constitution will 
improve security and help achieve peace, stability and 
advancement. We all know that the dictatorship's time is 
over and now we must rebuild the new democratic Iraq. The 
constitution is the only solution to unify our wounded 
people. We must move forward to successfully progress with 
the political process for the sake of our country's 
interest. We have to give the Iraqi people a chance to hold 
and attend constitutional forums and discussions if we want 
them to give their opinions on the constitution. However, we 
hope that the people will have the final say on referendum 
day and say `Yes,' so that this word represents a scream 
against every enemy. Let us all say `Yes' to the 
constitution so that we can rebuild our country." 
 
¶D. "We Are Going to Implement Our Principles" 
(Al-Dawa, affiliated with Islamic Al-Dawa Party, led by Al- 
Anzi, published this back-page editorial by Haitham Al- 
Fraiji) 
 
"When the barbarian attacks intensified in an attempt to 
prevent the Iraqi people from voting and electing a national 
government, Iraqis gravitated toward ballot boxes for the 
sake of their country--tears of affection mingled with the 
blood of martyrs who sacrificed themselves for the sake of 
Iraq. 
 
"Crimson-colored fingers were raised to bring an end to the 
era of killers inside and outside of Iraq. Hands were lifted 
happily, proclaiming this is the day of victory. The Iraqi 
people were sure that their pink fingers would defeat all of 
the terrorists and killers who commit crimes in the name of 
religion. 
 
"The Iraqi people have proved to the religious authority 
that they are moving forward to implement the principles 
they sacrificed for, they do not fear the knives of 
deceitfulness and terrorism. Today, we need to remind our 
people that they have a national and religious duty to 
participate in the referendum. The constitution is a 
guarantee for our souls and dignity for humans and for this 
reason we have to go to ballot boxes to vote for the 
constitution. We must say `Yes' to the constitution because 
it represents our Iraqi identity and confirms our commitment 
to our religion." 
 
¶E. "The Referendum" 
(Al-Taakhi, affiliated with the KDP led by Al-Barzani 
published this page-three editorial by Dawoud Salman Al- 
Ka'bi) 
 
"Soon Iraqis will go to vote in a democratic march to say 
`Yes' or `No' to the constitution. Each Iraqi has the 
opportunity to cast his vote.his national duty obliges him 
to exercise this responsibility. 
 
"The Iraqi people have waited too long for this 
constitution-the people's dream was to get a permanent 
constitution as any other country has; they have lived under 
a temporary constitution for the last four decades and 
suffered from the dictator's regime. The time has finally 
arrived and the Iraqi people were able to rid themselves of 
that dictatorial regime which split them. On referendum day 
Iraqis will challenge terrorists and Saddam's remnants, 
those criminals who are supporting chaos, creating 
instability, battling the democratic process and freedom 
that Iraqis are working hard to implement throughout the 
country. 
 
"The constitution is the basis for building a new Iraq that 
will be secure and stable, ruled by an elected 
government-all a result of approving this constitution, 
which is a group of regulations for the country equivalent 
to the Bible that good people observe and don't neglect." 
 
¶F. "You'll Find them Fond of Conflict Rather Than 
Reconciliation" 
(Al-Mashriq, independent, anti coalition published this 
front-page editorial by Dr. Hameed Abdullah) 
 
"Some Iraqi political groups dislike the idea of 
reconciliation as if they would lose their rights if it 
happens. They have explained their position by saying that 
it is impossible to sit at the same table with executioners. 
If we dwell on the notion of the executioner and the victim, 
then we will encourage more bloodshed for a few of the 
reasons that we all know and for many reasons that we don't 
know. 
 
"The Secretary General of the Arab League has sent his envoy 
to Iraq, but this envoy was surprised when some Iraqis told 
him that Iraq doesn't need any Arab mediation. As a result, 
the envoy will return to the Arab League's Secretary General 
and say, `Our Iraqi brothers are in harmony and agree with 
each other, so there is no need for a national 
reconciliation conference, and they don't need Arab forces 
because Iraqis are no longer familiar with the Arabic 
language due to the large number of foreigners in Iraq;' 
therefore it will be difficult for these Arab forces to deal 
with Iraqis. 
 
It has become clear to the Arab League that there are 
political groups in Iraq that are fond of wrestling and that 
hate reconciliation, so they are in need of a referee not 
mediation toward reconciliation and peace." 
 
¶G. "The Best Word" 
(Al-Adala, affiliated with SCIRI led by Abdul Aziz Al-Hakim, 
published this page-three editorial by Dr. Ali Khalif) 
 
"Iraqis will vote on the constitution this Saturday and they 
are currently discussing its articles and details. Political 
negotiations are underway among different political blocs in 
an attempt to reach a final resolution to satisfy all sides. 
So, with these political, official, and popular 
negotiations, Iraqi citizens should realize the importance 
of participating to express their wishes. When we encouraged 
[i.e. in their editorials] participants to vote during the 
referendum we did not make any endorsements or use our 
influence to try to get the referendum approved, as some 
groups have suggested, but a `Yes' vote will mean that we've 
traversed a long distance along the road to success and are 
moving forward with giant strides; we'll have one level 
built in the construction of a new Iraq. In addition, voting 
for the constitution will defeat a large segment of 
terrorists and Saddamists while blocking those who aim to 
move Iraq backwards and prevent it from achieving its dream. 
 
"Iraqi citizens have many dreams and aim to achieve them 
all. Actually they think about materialistic things more 
than about moral issues, and so they demand services before 
making demands about the constitution, and they have the 
right to do that. Saddam's followers have used this issue, 
and are still doing so, to drive a wedge in the political 
process and turn the public against the government. In order 
to achieve security, stability, and provide essential 
services as soon as possible, we need to vote `Yes' to the 
constitution-anything else will return Iraq to zero and 
Iraqis will need to wait another year to reach the same 
level while suffering from terrorism which doesn't 
distinguish between men, women, children, or the elderly-the 
political process will collapse in light of security 
breakdowns. So the Iraqi people have to choose to vote for 
or against the constitution but they need to think deeply 
about their choice before voting and they need to recognize 
the word that represents the future of Iraq-the other word 
will only lead to more murder, sabotage, and chaos. 
 
"There is no doubt that Iraqis will comprehend that the word 
`Yes' will give them more benefits and will hasten progress, 
but those who call on people to vote negatively wish to see 
more innocent Iraqi blood spilled and aim to reinstate the 
same equation of injustice that was consolidated under 
previous decades.Voting should reflect realism and logic and 
not be based on emotions or materialism." 
 
¶H. "No to the Boycott. No to the constitution" 
(Al-Fourat, independent, anti coalition, published this back- 
page editorial by Dawoud Al-Farhan) 
 
"Opposition groups such as the Muslim Scholars' Association, 
the National Dialogue Council, the Iraqi Islamic Party, the 
Arab Nationalist Party, and the People of Iraq Conference, 
have gathered to grant their supporters freedom in 
participating in the referendum (by voting `No' to the 
constitution or boycotting the referendum process) on 
October 15. Such a decision will lead us through another 
dark tunnel similar to the one we passed through during the 
last election on January 30. Much criticism of the draft 
constitution has emanated from Muqtada Al-Sadr who objected 
to articles on federalism and the division of Iraq. He 
ultimately left the decision on how to vote up to his 
supporters while the UIA (United Iraqi Alliance) and the 
Kurdish parties encouraged their people to vote `Yes' to the 
constitution to realize their ambitions. 
 
"Those parties are trying to divide Iraq's land and wealth 
according to ethnic power sharing and sectarianism and to 
marginalize the centralized government for the benefit of 
small entities, and to create small states inside one state 
with no power or authority left to the centralized 
government. Iraq's future is in danger, if the situation 
during the upcoming referendum is similar to what happened 
in January's elections. 
 
"Hesitation in making correct decisions and lack of national 
will to reject the `forged' draft constitution, through 
intensive participation in referendum and to topple the 
forged draft constitution the same way of their forged 
democracy, may result in its passage. Intensive 
participation to vote `No' will reject the draft 
constitution and all fake slogans about democracy, freedom, 
pluralism, and federalism established by certain dubious 
politicians who are trying to gain benefit from the chaos 
caused by the occupational forces. 
 
"Opposition organizations and parties released the following 
statement: `Individuals are free to decide their 
participation in the coming referendum. This is the nation's 
future and we should unanimously vote against the premature 
constitution by saying `No" in the coming referendum.' 
 
"The American administration wrote the draft constitution 
and we all know that. Any news about meetings held in the 
U.S. between President Bush and Barzani concerning disputed 
articles, and rumors about amendments are not true. The 
Iraqi government and all its parties and clerics are working 
to gain approval for this constitution. National Iraqi 
forces should unify their position and vote against the 
constitution. Our people in Ninewah, Salahuddin, and Al- 
Anbar (the heroes' provinces) must participate in the coming 
referendum and vote against this crippled constitution." 
 
KHALILZAD