05BAGHDAD4371
IRAQ MEDIA SILENT ON AFGHAN CREMATIONS
Mon Oct 24 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS BAGHDAD 004371 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC PREL MOPS KPAO IZ
SUBJECT:  IRAQ MEDIA SILENT ON AFGHAN CREMATIONS 
 
REF:  SECSTATE 193560 
 
¶1.  Iraqi media monitored by the coalition forces, FBIS, and 
U.S. Embassy offices in Iraq devoted practically zero 
coverage to the reported burning of two Taliban fighters' 
bodies by U.S. troops in Afghanistan. 
 
¶2.  Iraqi media, instead, are closely following expected 
results of the recent constitutional referendum, and the 
first "Saddam trial," including the assassination of the 
defense lawyer of one of Saddam's co-defendants.  In the 
four days since the Taliban story broke in the Australian 
media, Iraqi media have also covered the UN report on 
Lebanese PM Hariri's assassination and the visit to Iraq of 
Arab League chairman Amre Mousa.  No major Iraqi newspaper, 
however, had commented on the body burning incident as of 
October 23.  UK consulate coverage of Kurdish media outlets 
noted similar disinterest.  Political contacts have not 
raised the issue with the embassy either. 
 
¶3.  Comment:  Iraqi media generally reflect the views of 
associated political parties, and their reporting is 
generally a good barometer of their current relations with 
coalition forces.  Stories critical of the U.S. or 
highlighting the presence of U.S. forces outside Iraq are 
rare in media outlets of the major Shia and Kurdish parties. 
News seekers in predominantly Sunni areas are believed to be 
more likely to turn to pan-Arab satellite TV for 
international and political news.  Pan-Arab Al-Jazeera, and 
Al-Arabiya, according to FBIS, did cover the Afghan story on 
their respective websites.  According to U.S. military 
monitors, Al Jazeera carried balanced factual reporting, 
including U.S. military comments that such actions were 
repugnant and that they would be investigated.  Based the 
low visibility of this issue in Iraq so far, post does not 
plan to divert PD resources from its ongoing engagement on 
Iraqi issues. 
 
SATTERFIELD