05BAGHDAD3402
SPECIAL MEDIA REACTION: DELAY OF THE IRAQI CONSTITUTION
Wed Aug 17 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 003402 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: SPECIAL MEDIA REACTION: DELAY OF THE IRAQI CONSTITUTION 
 
 
SUMMARY: The major editorial theme of Iraqi daily newspapers on Augus 
was the delay of the constitution.  END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
----------------- 
 
¶A. "The Constitution Should be Against Federalism" (Al-Furat Newspape 
¶B. "Federalism and the Unified Iraq" (Al-Zaman Newspaper) 
¶C. "The Constitution Kitchen Again" (Al-Itihaad Newspaper) 
¶D. "Don't Leave the Ship in the High Sea" (Al-Mashriq Newspaper) 
¶E. "Seven Days" (Al-Adala Newspaper) 
¶F. "The Meaning of Drafting the Constitution on Time" (Al-Zaman Newsp 
¶G. "About the Constitution Too" (Al-Sabah Al-Jadeed Newspaper) 
¶H. "The Constitution Between Patriotism and Democracy" (Al-Mada Newsp 
¶I. "Those Who Rejoice at Our Misfortune Need to Leave, We Drafted Our 
with Our Blood" (Al-Bayaan Newspaper) 
 
--------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
--------------------- 
 
¶A. "The Constitution Should be Against Federalism" 
(Al-Furat Newspaper in Arabic P 2 Editorial by Majed Fadhel Alzaboon) 
 
The author states that the postponement of the constitution means tha 
involved in the negotiations are still insisting upon their demands a 
the people.  He says that they act as though their demands are holy r 
from heaven.  He understands that the National Assembly has the autho 
deadline but they should have included the people of Iraq in their de 
Constitution is the most important national compact in Iraq's history 
maintains, Iraqis don't want their country to be divided by federalis 
want their leaders to be out for themselves alone.  Federalism, ethni 
autonomous regions will destroy the national unity of Iraq and will a 
enemies of Iraq could never achieve. 
 
¶B. "Federalism and the Unified Iraq" 
(Al-Zaman Newspaper in Arabic P 6 Editorial by Jassim Al-Sagheer) 
 
The author emphasizes that for any state to be democratic it must pas 
difficult stages and make many reforms.  He stresses that democracy e 
establishment of constitutional institutions and committees.  These a 
in the constitutional building of the state.  He urges all Iraqis to 
setting up the constitutional traditions that feed into the creation 
system. 
 
¶C. "The Constitution Kitchen Again" 
(Al-Itihaad Newspaper in Arabic P. 5 Editorial by Feryad Rawandoozy) 
 
The author states that the Iraqi leaders made a mistake when they did 
deadline for the constitution back at the beginning of August.  He th 
probably American pressure that made the government stick to the orig 
maintains that seven days is not long enough to resolve the differenc 
Shia'a, Kurds and the Sunnis 
 
¶D. "Don't Leave the Ship in the High Sea" 
Al-Mashriq Newspaper in Arabic P 7 Editorial by Dr. Hameed Abdulah 
 
The writer states that since the government could not finish the Cons 
months seven more days will not solve anything.  He says that even if 
does submit a draft it will not be complete and that will have dire c 
However, he believes that there is no justification to be committed t 
deadline.  It will not solve Iraq's problems like security or corrupt 
 
¶E. "Seven Days" 
(Al-Adala Newspaper in Arabic P3 Editorial by Dr. Ali Khaleef) 
 
The author believes that Islam should be a source for the constitutio 
source.   All Iraqis, he says, are anxiously waiting for the historic 
the National Assembly that the constitution is finished and is ready 
However, they understand that the issues of the constitution needed m 
says that the National Assembly took a brave step when it postponed t 
proved to all those who are working against Iraq that the deadline wa 
and not an American deadline.  It also proved that the decision was I 
because it is an Iraqi constitution and not an American one.  He want 
know that all Iraqis are standing with them and supporting their effo 
 
¶F. "The Meaning of Drafting the Constitution on Time" 
(Al-Zaman Newspaper in Arabic P2 Editorial by Mouayed Abdul Zahra) 
 
The author states that the achievements of the Constitutional Draftin 
represent a huge advancement for Iraq, even with the postponement.  W 
he says, is that the political groups have come together for the sake 
proves that the Iraqis are wise enough and civilized enough to run th 
They are ready for the challenges of the future.  The author says tha 
Iraqi politicians are working to building a new Iraq that is not held 
discrimination or tyranny.  He maintains that the National Assembly's 
decision on the amendment of Paragraph A of Article 3 of the TAL give 
more time to discuss the issues, and reach a united decision on the c 
¶G. "About the Constitution Too" 
(Al-Sabah Al-Jadeed Newspaper in Arabic P. 6 Editorial by Ismael Zayy 
 
The author states that next Tuesday the Constitution will be ready fo 
it.  The Constitutional process represents true democracy.   The infl 
not understand why the process has been delayed.  However, he says, t 
there all of the various political groups must agree in order to draf 
It is not a big problem if the constitution is delayed for another we 
the delay gives the political leaders an opportunity to solve other p 
electricity, unemployment and security.  After August 22nd there will 
justifications to delay pending projects.  The entire world sees the 
beautiful picture.  In spite of chaos and terror in this country the 
together for the important goal of patriotism. 
 
¶H. "The Constitution Between Patriotism and Democracy" 
(Al-Mada Newspaper in Arabic P 2 Editorial by Shamil Abdul Qadir) 
 
The author states that despite the lack of electricity, fuel and secu 
following the developments of the Constitution with bated breath.  Th 
discussions have given the people the opportunity to freely express t 
through their Parliamentary blocks and political parties.  However, h 
of any disruption that might threaten the unity of the country.   And 
by the fact that some political groups want to impose their opinions 
maintains that such attempts will destroy the national unity. He call 
be wise and work together. 
 
¶I. "Those Who Rejoice at Our Misfortune Need to Leave, We Drafted Our 
with Our Blood" 
(Al-Bayaan Newspaper affiliated with the Hezbollah movement in Arabic 
Editorial Un-attributed) 
 
The author opines that the new Iraq should take its first steps on th 
thousand mile" and complete the constitution.  However, that constitu 
the rights of all of Iraq's sects.  The author says that unlike Sadda 
depended upon the rule of law to get their points across.  The Shi'a 
unreasonable demands or conditions on the constitution.  In that way 
they were dedicated to the constitution being successful.  Iraq does 
the controversial issues surrounding the constitution.  Completing th 
discussion, constructive initiatives and compromise. 
 
 
Khalilzad 
 
 
 
 
 
Sylvia Blackwood 
Information Office 
Public Affairs Section 
U.S. Embassy - Baghdad