05BAGHDAD3549
PLANS FOR IRAQ PUBLIC SECTOR REFORM
Tue Aug 30 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS BAGHDAD 003549 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV EAID ELAB IZ KCRS
SUBJECT: PLANS FOR IRAQ PUBLIC SECTOR REFORM 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Representatives of British, Canadian, 
United Nations, and US missions met on August 27 to discuss 
efforts to raise the profile of public sector reform. 
Participants shared the perception that the Government of 
Iraq (GOI) has yet to take any initiative to ensure the 
emerging public sector becomes professional and free from 
cronyism and corruption.  The central government is 
pre-occupied with other pressing concerns and there is no 
apparent Ministry to call for or lead reform efforts.  End 
summary. 
 
¶2. (U) The Department for International Development (DFID) 
representative at the British Embassy organized a meeting on 
August 27 to discuss the status of civil service reform in 
Iraq.  Present were DFID Iraq governance expert Dr. Richard 
Thomas, DFID Iraq Public Administration Reform Project Team 
Leader Tony Laurence, and DFID Development Officer Dr. Lorna 
Hall.  UN Assistance Mission to Iraq (UNAMI) Deputy 
Reconstruction and Humanitarian Coordinator Yacoub El Hillo 
and UNAMI Advisor Kishore Mandhyan were present along with 
Canadian Embassy Development Counselor Heather Cruden.  Post 
was represented by IRMO Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations 
Martha Hudson and Poloff. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The participants described public sector reform 
efforts currently being conducted in Iraq as fragmented, 
irregular and disorganized.  All recognized the need to 
establish firm principles and practices of merit staffing, 
ethical behavior, and professionalism in Iraq's emerging new 
civil service before bad habits (such as cronyism, 
corruption, etc.) develop and become entrenched.  Many Iraqis 
have residual positive memories of the UK public sector and 
had their own Civil Service Board until it was disbanded by 
Saddam in the late 1960's, and may be receptive to reform 
efforts which will contribute to Government stability and 
improve service delivery and accountability. 
 
¶4. (SBU) DFID and UNAMI representatives said that their 
efforts to initiate civil service or public sector reform 
projects were brushed aside by the PM's Chief of Staff Adnan 
Ali because the GOI is currently "too busy" working on other 
issues.  UNAMI efforts to insert mention of a Civil Service 
Commission into the draft Constitution were also 
unsuccessful.  There is no clear candidate Ministry that 
would serve as a focal point for a public sector reform 
project though good candidates include the Ministry of 
Finance, the Ministry of Public Works, or the Ministry of 
Policy. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The participants agreed to continue to consult 
closely and will devise an approach on how to proceed. 
Representatives of the World Bank, the European Union, and 
other donor organizations will be asked to participate in the 
next meeting as a workplan is developed. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Comment:  It is important that reform be initiated 
in the near future with significant GOI backing,  This will 
require that the need for public sector reform be stressed to 
GOI senior officials while projects are developed and funded. 
 End comment. 
Khalilzad