05BAGHDAD3984
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION,
Mon Sep 26 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 003984 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION, 
SOVEREIGNTY, FOREIGN RELATIONS; BAGHDAD 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion on the Constitution, Iraqi Sovereignty, 
and Foreign Relations were the major editorial themes of the 
daily newspapers on September 26, 2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A.   "Let Us Say Yes to Our New Constitution" (Al-Taakhi, 
  9/26) 
¶B. "Voting Yes During the Referendum Represents Freedom and 
Iraqi Willpower" 
(Al-Ittihad, 9/26) 
¶C. "A Late Saudi Awakening" (As-Siyada, 9/26) 
¶D. "The Constitution Will Defeat Terrorism" (Al-Adala, 9/26) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "Let Us Say Yes to Our New Constitution" 
(Al-Taakhi, affiliated with the KDP led by Masoud Al- 
Barazani, published this page-five column by Hussein Al- 
Jaff) 
 
"The new constitution is neither a typical document nor the 
best one in the world. In fact, it is a man-made item. 
However, it is the best constitution that was ever drafted 
in Iraq, by far--we know that it has not satisfied all 
Iraqis or the aspirations of every political party. But, at 
least, it has satiated many Iraqi demands and ambitions. In 
addition, we understand that constitutions can be changed 
according to conditions and needs. The constitution is a law 
for life that regulates the rights and duties of citizens. 
 
"Most of the constitution's articles are similar to each 
other because many of them call for justice, equality, 
freedom and welfare for citizens. Without a doubt, there is 
a big plot attempting to thwart the new Iraqi constitution, 
which is the most important accomplishment for Iraqis since 
the downfall of the dictator. I believe that there are 
internal and external Arab and regional powers in our 
neighborhood that are scheming against us. These groups are 
supported and funded by Saddam's wife and daughter, who 
stole the Iraqi people's assets; they've allied themselves 
together to disrupt the constitutional process and reject 
the constitution. 
 
"But, they won't succeed because honest Iraqis, who've 
suffered and struggled for the last 83 years, would never 
let that happen. According to the Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, Hoshiyar Zebari, two-thirds of the votes that are 
required to reject the constitution will only be achieved in 
Al-Anbar province. Hence, the progress of the constitution 
will move forward amid an exercise in democracy and freedom. 
This constitution will put an end to all crises facing the 
Iraqi people. I am sure that the people of Kurdistan, our 
people in the south of Iraq, and informed citizens in the 
western areas of Iraq will definitely say `Yes' to the 
constitution. This sincere and affirmative word will become 
a covenant of honor that unites all Iraqis under the banner 
of the new Iraq." 
 
¶B. "Voting Yes During the Referendum Represents Freedom and 
Iraqi Willpower" 
(Al-Ittihad, affiliated with the PUK led by Talabani, 
published this back-page editorial by Jamal Al-Hamundi) 
 
"Since the establishment of the Iraqi state in 1921 none of 
the Iraq regimes, in either the royal or republican eras, 
considered democracy as a way to govern the country. Tribal 
dictatorship has exhausted the Iraqi people and led to a 
series of internal and external wars.The Iraqi opposition 
was unable to topple the dictator Saddam Hussein's regime 
due to numerous factors. However, the WTC bombings in 
September 2001 put the U.S., which is the bearer of freedom 
and democracy in the world, at the forefront of an enormous 
challenge against terrorism and for this reason, the U.S. 
had to wage war on terror. 
 
"The deposed Iraqi regime, along with some countries in the 
Middle East, was responsible for fostering terrorists and 
encouraging terrorism; those countries have been an obstacle 
in the fostering of democracy in the Middle East. In spite 
of all this terrorism, a National Assembly and a 
transitional Iraqi government were established with Jalal 
Talabani elected as the first Kurdish president of Iraq. 
Moreover, the new constitution was drafted through harmony 
amongst all Iraqis. 
"This constitution will be put to Iraqis to vote on and to 
begin pursuing the right path toward establishing democracy 
in the new federal Iraq. In the federal territory of 
Kurdistan, political parties and movements that represent 
Kurds, Turkmen, Chaldeans, Assyrians, and Yazidis, gathered 
on September 22nd to prepare for ensuring a successful 
referendum throughout Kurdistan. This success will be 
achieved by saying yes to the Iraqi new constitution. Our 
Shiite and Sunni brothers in Iraq will also say yes to the 
constitution." 
 
¶C. "A Late Saudi Awakening" 
(As-Siyada, affiliated with Iraqi Republican Gathering led 
by Sa'ad Assem Al-Janabi, published this back-page editorial 
by Abdul Karim Mahmud) 
 
"The Saudi Foreign Minister's criticism of U.S. policy in 
Iraq confirms the ugliness and hypocrisy of the crime that 
was committed by our Arab brothers against Iraq. Saudis, 
like many others in the Arab world are witnessing Iranian 
interference in Iraq and we know that the knives that have 
slaughtered Iraqis in the past are being used again to 
slaughter Arabs one by one. Saud Al-Faisal felt obliged to 
make such statements when he found that the U.S. failed to 
heed its friend's advice. 
 
"Did the Saudis believe that the goal of the occupation of 
Iraq was to rid Iraq of the alleged weapons of mass 
destruction and establish democracy in Iraq? Actually, the 
Saudis are the first ones who let the Americans use their 
land to invade Iraq resulting in the American death machine 
killing hundreds of thousands of innocent Iraqis. Those 
statements by the Saudi foreign minister were far too late. 
However, they represent a loud warning against the danger of 
the disgraceful Iranian infiltration of Iraq--the Iranians 
interfere in Iraq's issues under the watch of the Americans. 
 
"Saud Al-Faisal's statement confirmed this [Iranian 
infiltration] when he said that the Iranians operate in 
areas that are under American control and that they fund 
people and appoint officials. He added that they have also 
infiltrated police units and equip militias with weapons. 
For this reason, Saudi Arabia and all Arabs must apologize 
to the Iraqi people for every crime they committed against 
us. They must take a unanimous stance that leads to the end 
of the American occupation and terminates Iranian 
interference in Iraqi affairs. This Iranian intervention 
hinders the achievement of national unity and it is also the 
main instigator of sectarian sedition that will fracture 
Iraq's national unity and lead neighboring countries into 
wars and conflicts that may consume everything." 
 
¶D. "The Constitution Will Defeat Terrorism" 
(Al-Adala, affiliated with SCIRI led by Abdul Aziz Al-Hakim, 
published this page-three column by Dr. Ali Khalif) 
 
"After the recent decline of sharp statements condemning the 
constitution, before the majority of Iraqis even read it and 
before its distribution through pamphlets, the majority of 
people have realized that the new Iraqi constitution 
represents a real birth. They also understand that a vote 
against it will take Iraq backward and this will give 
terrorists the chance to perpetrate more killings. Terrorism 
has failed to abort the constitutional and political process 
and we must increase security procedures in order to create 
a more secure environment to enable our people to vote in 
the upcoming referendum. 
 
"We know that the most complicated stage in post-war Iraq 
has been the constitutional process due to the demands and 
different perspectives that were at play--viewpoints that 
nearly demolished the whole process. Some of the 
[opposition] parties participated in constitutional 
discussions despite their preconceived stances against the 
draft document. As a result, we have to work hard in order 
to make the constitutional process successful, to be 
faithful to the martyrs, our principles, and to all of the 
Iraqis who have struggled for the sake of freedom and 
justice. 
 
"Some small groups are demanding that the Iraqi people 
reject the constitution. Actually, they have the right to 
express their opinions in our democratic society and we 
respect that but we want assurances that the Iraqi people 
know the right path and have recognized their interests. Our 
people have gotten fed up with the voices that allegedly 
represent the Iraqi people's interest and at the same time 
have failed to take a real stance against terrorist attacks 
and killings. I am sure that in a few days the ballot boxes 
will be filled with the word `Yes' because this word will 
carry the Iraqi people forward." 
 
KHALILZAD