05BAGHDAD3413
NEW PRODUCT - DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING, August 18, 200
Thu Aug 18 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS BAGHDAD 003413 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: NEW PRODUCT - DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING, August 18, 200 
 
SUMMARY: The major editorial theme on Iraqi, Arabic language websites 
on August 18, 2005 was discussions on the constitution. END SUMMARY. 
 
----------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
----------------- 
 
¶A. "Cautious Anticipation" (Iraq Shabab Website in Arabic) 
¶B. "The Iraqi Interim Government Law...Who will Guarantee its Continu 
All Website) 
¶C. "Iraq...No to Postponing the Constitution" (Iraq Shabab Website) 
¶D. "For You, We Will Complete the Constitution.  We Will Stamp it wit 
(Al-Nahrain Website) 
¶E. "In the Terminology of the Constitution...Danger and the Horizon" 
On-Line) 
 
--------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
--------------------- 
 
¶A. "Cautious Anticipation" 
(Iraq Shabab Website in Arabic Editorial by Raid Salam) 
 
The author states that there is only five days left in the constituti 
However, it does not appear that the crisis is over, so the National 
to extend the deadline for another week.  He doesn't believe that eit 
will make any difference.  The author believes that the final result 
is in the hands of the Iraqi people.  The Constitution should serve t 
of the Iraqi people, he says even if the process drives away the trib 
be served in a fair and balanced way. 
 
¶B. "The Iraqi Interim Government Law...Who will Guarantee its Continu 
(Iraq 4 All Website in Arabic Editorial by Mohammed Abed Al-Wahab Al- 
 
The author thinks that it's obvious that the current Iraqi law is in 
pretend to be the representatives of the Iraqi people.  However, he s 
proud of pretending to represent the people who voted in the election 
wonders why they are trying to change the law.  He sites various reas 
such as the National Assembly trying to prove that they are not takin 
Americans, while others say that it is just people presenting their o 
the law there is no government.   He understands that it is very diff 
government to change the law.  But Iraq is currently getting the oppo 
democracy it was promised, it is getting another vision of Saddam Hus 
 
¶C. "Iraq...No to Postponing the Constitution" 
(Iraq Shabab Website in Arabic Editorial by Mohammed Said Al-Shakarji 
 
The author states that some of the officials working on the Constitut 
the deadline and extend the Interim Government Law for four or five y 
believes that it would not be legal or politically logical to grant t 
 
¶D.  "For You, We Will Complete the Constitution.  We Will Stamp it wi 
(Al-Nahrain Website in Arabic Editorial by Hayder Al-Hassnawie) 
 
The author considers that both the Al-Nahdhah massacre and the Baghda 
massacre were planned and executed by the same group.  That group, he 
same people and had the same goal to alienate the people from the gov 
the political process.   He expects that during the final days of wri 
and the referendum there will be many more similar attacks. 
 
¶E.  "In the Terminology of the Constitution...Danger and the Horizon" 
(Iraq Shabab On-Line in Arabic Editorial by Dr. Muhanned Al-Barak) 
 
The author believes that despite terrorism and the lack of power and 
thinking about the issues surrounding the Constitution.  One of the i 
involves the people living in areas without oil.  They are now wonder 
their share of the wealth.  The author also talks about the fury over 
Hakim's speech on federalism.  That speech, he says, should have no e 
process especially since his negotiations were not done in public. 
 
 
Khalilzad