05BAGHDAD3473
DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING - AUGUST 24, 2005
Thu Aug 25 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 003473 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: DAILY IRAQI WEBSITE MONITORING - AUGUST 24, 2005 
 
SUMMARY: Discussions on the Constitution was the major 
editorial theme of the daily websites on August 24, 2005. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------ 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------ 
 
¶A.  "Free Opinion for Iraq Will be for Iraqis Without 
Dispute" (Sotal Iraq, 8/24) 
¶B.  "Constitutional Difference and Involved Parties"  (Al- 
Rafidayn, 8/24) 
¶C.  "Important Date, More Important Clearness"  (Iraq 4 all 
news, 8/24) 
¶D.  "What Constitution and For Which Iraq?!" (Elaph, 8/24) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A.  "Free Opinion for Iraq Will be for Iraqis Without 
Dispute" 
(Editorial by Wedad Fakher, 
http://www.sotaliraq.com/articles-iraq/nieuws .php?id=14585) 
 
"At last the National Assembly received a copy of draft 
constitution right before the deadline, and foiled the 
attempt of those who want the political situation to return 
back to square one.  Their goal is exacerbate the challenges 
created by the constitutional vacuum and further spread fear 
and anxiety.  They hoped that the NA would be forced to 
dissolve, allowing the evil powers freedom to move and kill 
the democratic experience . . . So many people, including 
Salih Al Matlag, think that their era of dominance still 
exists.  They believe that their threats of violence will 
make Iraqis hesitate in taking a strong and determined 
course of action . . . Al Matlag should be ashamed to call 
his fellow Sunnis "Absentees" of the political process. 
Nobody forced them to be absent during this process, rather 
they chose shamelessly to boycott the elections, turning 
their backs on the Iraqi people, and now find themselves 
outside of the political game. He should know that when he 
criticizes the two sides that insisted on submitting the 
draft constitution, he is criticizing representatives of the 
Iraqi people, Kurds and Arabs who are engaging in the 
process according to democratic principles . . . At last we 
want to tell them whoever claims he loves Iraq, he should 
work to build it. On the other hand, whoever wants power and 
wealth should search for a substitute home." 
 
¶B.  "Constitutional Difference and Involved Parties" 
 (Editorial Mohammed Issa, Al-Rafidayn (www.alrafidayn.com) 
 
"In the last minutes before the national assembly session, 
right before Hachim Al-Hasani opened the session, it was 
clear to Iraqis that no agreement was reached over the 
constitution.  If we go back to the three debated issues 
mentioned by Mr. Al-Hasani after the session we find they 
are federalism, the proper formation of respective regions, 
and the Ba'ath party. Some Sunnis, but not all of they 
oppose Federalism.  Regional formation mechanisms are 
opposed by some Sunnis since relates to the issue of 
federalism.  The third point is the prohibition of the 
"Saddam Ba'ath," mentioned in item 9 of the draft 
constitution.  Sunnis, who demand it to be omitted, despite 
its non-general nature, also oppose it.  The United Alliance 
and Kurdish parties see the language as a concession, since 
it focuses only on the Saddam led Ba'ath.  Previously they 
had supported the prohibition of any Ba'ath related visions 
. . . What is the reason behind insistence over omitting 
this phrase since it only mentions Saddam's Ba'ath, the 
party that led to Iraq's catastrophe?  Could it be to re- 
open the way for the return of Saddamist Ba'ath members to 
the political life? The answer is yes, but this position 
does not represent the main Sunni population.  Even if the 
phrase was taken out of the draft constitution, it cannot be 
removed from the memory of all Iraqis." 
 
¶C.  "Important Date, More Important Clearness" 
(Editorial by Rai al-Bayan, Iraq 4 all news 
(www.iraq4all.org) 
 
"The process of developing the Iraqi constitution seems to 
be coming to an end, according to indicators coming from 
Baghdad.  Legal considerations and US pressure have 
seemingly imposed more rapid bargaining and deeper 
concessions among the factions, opening the way for broader 
acceptance among Iraqis . . . Any understanding among Iraqi 
parties is welcomed in today's Iraq, especially if it 
assists in completing an important document such as the 
constitution.  However, it might lead to a hasty 
constitution, leaving ambiguous debated issues such as 
federalism and the role of religion, only to save face for 
the involved parties . . . Many issues have been unclear in 
the constitution regarding representation abroad, a unified 
currency, as well as the structure of the armed forces and 
disposition of natural resources.  If would be preferred to 
build a constitution based on conscientious decision-making 
and clarity of purpose." 
 
¶D.  "What Constitution and For Which Iraq?!" 
(Editorial by Aziz Al-Haj, Elaph (www.elaph.com) 
"They have finally done it.  They have formed a religious 
state.  The sections in the Constitution that state, "People 
are the source of legislation", shouldn't fool us.  The 
decisive factor here is what is mentioned in the "Principles 
" of the draft.  It states that Islam is the main source for 
legislation and laws cannot conflict with its standards . . 
. The temporary constitution mentioned that Islam is" a 
source of legislation" meaning it represents only one of the 
source, while today's draft classifies it as a main sources. 
This makes all other sources secondary in importance . . . 
Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad is dancing with joy since this 
mutated constitutional birth took place under his 
sponsorship while Bush and Rice express optimism for Iraq's 
future . . . The main losers in this process turn out to be 
Iraq's democracy, Iraqi women, and other religions . . . 
While other loser happens to be Washington even though they 
don't know it yet.  The history books will place a question 
mark over the effects of its liberation war on democracy in 
this region . . . If this draft were to be ratified, we will 
send out our condolences to the democratic experiment in 
Iraq." 
 
 
Khalilzad