05BAGHDAD4298
MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION,
Tue Oct 18 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

181810Z Oct 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 004298 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, NEA/PPD, NEA/PPA, NEA/AGS, INR/IZ, INR/P 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO IZ
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: IRAQI GOVERNMENT, CONSTITUTION, 
REFERENDUM; BAGHDAD 
 
SUMMARY: Discussion on the Constitution and Referendum were 
the major editorial themes of the daily newspapers on 
October 18, 2005. END SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------------- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "The Referendum Experience" (Al-Dustoor, 10/18) 
¶B. "The Referendum" (Al-Sabah Al-Jadeed, 10/18) 
¶C. "National Unity Conference... National Dialogue 
Conference" (Baghdad, 10/18) 
¶D. "The Right Step to Establish Democracy: Resorting to 
Ballot Boxes" (Al-Ittihad, 10/18) 
¶E. "The Constitution Prevails" (Al-Dawa, 10/18) 
¶F. "Predictions and Unique Truths" (Al-Adala, 10/18) 
 
---------------------------------------- 
SELECTED COMMENTARIES 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. "The Referendum Experience" 
(Al-Dustoor, no bias, independent, published this front-page 
editorial by Bassim Al-Sheikh) 
 
"The referendum process represents a victory for democracy 
whether the result is positive or negative. We will feel 
satisfied not because of the results, but because we can 
deal with the situation in a tolerant manner, like civilized 
people. The draft constitution may fail, but what is more 
important is that everyone now has the motivation to seek 
representation in the next parliament, which means that 
important groups are aware that the channels of dialogue and 
participation in the political process are more effective 
than all the world's weapons. 
 
"It is a new beginning for those who have opposing opinions 
towards the changes in Iraq-they are trying to reconstitute 
their ideology in a different way; they need to move away 
from negative opinions and develop effective and positive 
ideologies." 
 
¶B. "The Referendum" 
(Al-Sabah Al-Jadeed, independent, pro-coalition, published 
this front-page editorial by Ismael Zair) 
 
"The situation is the same no matter what the results of the 
referendum are because the most important thing is that 
millions of Iraqis went to the ballot boxes to express their 
opinions freely and without fear. Whatever the result, it 
will never change this fact. No one can take away this honor 
from Iraqis; they are honorable people because of their 
courage and their commitment to constitutional rights. 
 
"There are some facts that have resulted from this 
referendum day; one of them is the rebuke of Iraq's enemies 
who have attempted to raise the specter of civil war. No one 
has the right to interfere with a great people like the 
Iraqis, because no one understands or really knows the 
interests of our people better than us. " 
 
¶C. "National Unity Conference... National Dialogue 
Conference" 
(Baghdad, affiliated with the Iraqi National Accord led by 
Iyad Allawi, published this second--page editorial by 
Hussain Omran) 
 
"Under the auspices of the Iraqi National Accord, hundreds 
of local, Arab and international participants met yesterday 
to discuss the truth and to reinforce national unity and the 
rights and duties of citizens. 
 
"Delegations from throughout Iraq responded to Mr. Iyad 
Allawi's call for the conference to discuss: the vital needs 
of the Iraqi people, the deterioration of security and life 
in Iraq, and the impotence of citizen rights that must be 
respected by the government. 
 
"They all came to ensure their support for national unity in 
Iraq and to back the call of the National Accord. They will 
talk about their goals and objectives, which focus on our 
bright-unified Iraq, and with national unity we will rebuild 
our Iraqi economy, and fulfill Iraqi's dreams of freedom and 
democracy. National unity is one of the Accord's main aims. 
Let us unite our efforts for the benefit of our great Iraq." 
¶D. "The Right Step to Establish Democracy: Resorting to 
Ballot Boxes" 
(Al-Ittihad, pro-coalition, affiliated with the PUK led by 
Jalal Talabani, published this page-three editorial by Abdul 
Hadi Mehdi) 
 
"Regardless of results emerging from the constitutional 
referendum, those supporting the `Yes' or `No' vote will 
accept the results determined by ballot boxes and Iraqis 
will again prove to the world that despite all critical 
circumstances, they all contributed to define their 
country's future, and reflected this through their 
participation in the referendum. 
The wide range of Iraqi participation in this process has 
confirmed the unity of Iraqis under the severest 
circumstances; engaging through a peaceful struggle that 
guarantees an opportunity for each citizen to participate in 
the democratic process. 
 
"So regardless of the final result, the language of ballot 
boxes has prevailed over that of weapons, threats, and 
intimidation. These are the rights steps to be taken on the 
path towards a democracy that was nowhere to found on the 
Iraqi scene for many decades, and it is a message sent out 
to those opposing participation in the new Iraq, making 
clear that this is the only acceptable way for Iraqis and 
reinforcing that the era of oppression is over and that it 
will not return. 
 
"Within less than a year Iraqis were able to record two 
epics, the first was the January 30 elections where Iraqis 
took part despite security threats and difficulties--the 
will of Iraqis to rebuild their country formed the basis on 
which the success of the elections was built. 
 
"The other epic came on referendum day on Oct. 15, 2005 when 
Iraqis participated in another patriotic battle where no 
incidents affected the process or its outcome. The two `Yes' 
and `No' teams will accept the results because it represents 
the outcome of a democratic process Iraqis are trying to 
maintain. This courageous and responsible stance 
demonstrated by Iraqis has gained them the respect the 
world's nations, and established an example to follow." 
 
¶E. "The Constitution Prevails" 
(Al-Dawa, affiliated with Al-Dawa party led by Al-Anzi, 
published this page-two editorial by Jasim Al-Sayid) 
 
"Regardless of the obstacles enemies have placed along the 
path to democracy (especially those with permanent seats on 
despicable Arab satellite news channels who glorify 
everything that brings harm to the Iraqi people) and in 
spite of the artillery professionals targeting us, 
regardless of all this. Iraqis have freely had their say 
rejecting slavery and the division of their country 
(formerly oppressed by tyrants) and rebuking those whose 
hands are stained with Iraqi blood. We have endorsed the 
constitution, rule of law, human and women's rights, and 
everything new that will serve Iraq. 
 
"Iraqis set out on the glorious dawn of Oct. 15, 2005, to 
mark a day remembered in this country by coming generations, 
to approve the constitution written with pride and defiance 
of those seeking endless power who were unable to stop the 
people from marching towards ballot boxes despite threats 
and explosions, and despite the daily scenes of blood and 
violence claiming lives of women, children, and the elderly 
from a variety of different religious and sectarian 
backgrounds. 
 
"People marched towards the one common goal of making the 
democratic process a success; even those voting `no' have 
exercised their right to express their opinion. The main 
thing is that Iraqis have agreed to participate in the 
political process, renounce all forms of violent struggle, 
and instead resort to logic, negotiation, and persuasion. 
The will of the people has prevailed and foiled the attempts 
of those involved in disgraceful bargains. There remains 
only one step to be taken within the next two months; Iraqis 
will embark on new elections at the end of the year to 
conclude a new stage in Iraq that will set an example for 
the region and the whole world." 
 
¶F. "Predictions and Unique Truths" 
(Al-Adala, affiliated with SCIRI led by Abdul Aziz Al-Hakim, 
published this page-three column by Dr. Ali Khalif) 
 
"All media outlets are talking about voting percentages 
among Iraqi provinces for the referendum on the draft 
constitution. Nothing is sure until the IECI announces 
results of the referendum--initially through preliminary 
results followed by final results. Several media outlets 
claim that they represent the Iraqi media but I suspect they 
represent Ba'ath party institutions and are trying to 
broadcast poisoned news about the referendum results. 
If Iraqis in western provinces voted `yes' to the 
constitution it's the truth because they are tired of 
terrorism and terrorists using their land to conduct 
operations-if that's the case it will be the unique truth 
that Iraqis want a better future and a secure Iraq. 
 
"There are those who swore that majority in western Iraq 
would vote `no' to the constitution and others who confirmed 
that a big surprise was coming from Al-Anbar and Mosul. The 
TAL states that two-thirds of Iraqi provinces can reject the 
constitution therefore UIA (United Iraqi Alliance) members 
protested the article and declared their reservations to the 
anti-democratic article. 
 
"The fact is,  Iraqis voted `yes' to the constitution, even 
those who live in western areas in Iraq--they all said yes 
to the constitution. Iraqis are looking forward and working 
hard to achieve their goals, they are determined to make the 
political process succeed and defeat terrorism in Iraq. The 
unique truth we are censoring here is that terrorism was 
defeated and Iraq will soon become more secure." 
 
KHALILZAD