05BRASILIA1577
BRAZIL:  ENHANCING COOPERATION WITH BRAZIL IN
Fri Jun 10 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRASILIA 001577 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREL BR AO MZ
SUBJECT: BRAZIL:  ENHANCING COOPERATION WITH BRAZIL IN 
LUSOPHONE AFRICA 
 
REF: A. STATE 102443 
     ¶B. BRASILIA 1199 
     ¶C. PRAIA 268 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  On June 6, Brazilian Ministry of External 
Relations (MRE) Africa Division Chief Joao Ignacio Padilha 
and poloff discussed a number of joint USG/GOB coordination 
projects in Lusophone Africa.  Poloff and Padilha also talked 
about assistance projects that NGOs and other Brazilian 
organizations provide to Lusophone Africa and discussed the 
strong economic ties between Cape Verde and northeastern 
Brazil.  End Summary. 
 
The GOB's Proposal for Joint Cooperation 
---------------------------------------- 
¶2. (SBU) During a June 6 meeting, Padilha told poloff that 
the GOB is interested in coordinating a number of development 
assistance projects in Guinea Bissau and other Lusophone 
African countries with the USG.  The GOB is aware of USG 
development assistance programs worldwide, and Padilha 
expressed the GOB's interest in working with us to implement 
our existing projects in Latin America and Africa to Guinea 
Bissau to begin these projects quickly. 
 
¶3. (SBU) In Guinea Bissau, the GOB is interested in working 
with us to implement a USG assistance program currently 
underway in Senegal, Mauritania, and Niger to alleviate the 
effects of last year's plague of locusts.  Padilha noted that 
the GOB provided crop duster airplanes, technical assistance, 
and training to Senegalese government officials and aviation 
specialists, and believes that the GOB could provide similar 
assistance to Guinea Bissau.  Padilha also expressed interest 
in a USG project that promotes government transparency and 
good governance in Nicaragua, Peru, Georgia, and Nigeria, and 
asked if the USG and the GOB could implement this program in 
Guinea Bissau. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Padilha reported that the GOB is interested in 
coordinating a congressional reform and political institution 
building project in Guinea Bissau.  He noted that the USG has 
implemented a similar project in a number of foreign 
countries and thought that the USG and GOB would be 
successful in this area. 
 
Brazilian NGOs and Institutions in Lusophone Africa 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
¶5. (SBU) There are a number of Brazilian organizations and 
NGOs in Guinea Bissau and other Lusophone African countries 
that provide development assistance to local institutions. 
 
--The Brazilian Agency for Cooperation (ABC):  According to 
Padilha, ABC is implementing rice cultivation, professional 
development, and AIDS awareness and prevention programs in 
Guinea Bissau.  Padilha told PolOff that the USG could 
collaborate with ABC on these projects. 
 
--The India, Brazil, and South Africa Dialogue (IBSA):   The 
first project of the IBSA fund, approximately $550K, will 
promote agricultural development and sustainable farming and 
rice cultivation techniques (ref B).  Padilha told PolOff 
that the USG is welcome to participate in this project once 
the preliminary work has been completed. 
 
--IPEA:  The Institute for Applied Economic Research at the 
Brazilian Ministry of Planning, Budget, and Administration is 
developing a government transparency and financial 
responsibility program for Lusophone Africa. 
 
Other Brazilian organizations such as the Brazilian Institute 
for Municipal Administration, the Getulio Vargas Foundation, 
and the Superior School for Farm Administration provide 
development assistance and work to strengthen local 
infrastructures in Lusophone Africa. 
 
--Ceara state government:  The Ceara state government, 
located in northeastern Brazil, has developed strong economic 
and cultural ties with Cape Verde (ref C).  A popular 
non-stop commercial flight between Fortaleza, Ceara and Ilha 
do Sal in Guinea Bissau has created strong economic ties 
between the two countries.  Since the non-stop flight began 
in 2001, Fortaleza has become one of the preferred travel 
destinations for Cape Verdians, including many 
micro-entrepreneurs who purchase clothing and household goods 
in bulk to resell in Cape Verde. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
¶6. (SBU) The GOB expressed interest in working with us to 
provide development assistance to Guinea Bissau and Lusophone 
Africa.  There are a number of Brazilian NGO and government 
officials active in Lusaphone Africa, and the USG would 
benefit from their expertise.  Padilha's suggestion to 
implement already existing USG assistance projects in Guinea 
Bissau could reduce project development and implementation 
stages and would allow us to implement our projects quickly. 
DANILOVICH