05BRASILIA1973
BRAZIL SCANDAL:  THE "OFFICIAL STORY" CRUMBLES AS
Fri Jul 22 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRASILIA 001973 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS USTR; NSC FOR CRONIN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/22/2015 
TAGS: PGOV PREL BR
SUBJECT: BRAZIL SCANDAL:  THE "OFFICIAL STORY" CRUMBLES AS 
INVESTIGATIONS INTENSIFY 
 
REF: A. BRASILIA 1494 
     ¶B. BRASILIA 1544 
     ¶C. BRASILIA 1622 
     ¶D. BRASILIA 1631 
     ¶E. BRASILIA 1819 
     ¶F. BRASILIA 1867 
     ¶G. BRASILIA 1849 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Dennis Hearne. Reasons 1.4 
(b)(d) 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary:  The scandals (reftels) affecting the 
government of President Lula da Silva and his PT party 
reached a serious new level in recent days.  Former PT 
officers implicated in the alleged financial improprieties 
have now attempted to present suspect financial transfers 
managed by a private sector facilitator on the PT's behalf as 
being used solely for off-the-books contributions to cover PT 
campaign debts, and not as illegal payoffs to mercenary 
politicians to secure votes.  As such, the transfers would be 
confessed violations of electoral regulations, but not 
criminal offenses.  In a TV interview on 17 July President 
Lula da Silva essentially blessed this version of events. 
But congressional investigating committees (CPIs), judicial 
and media inquiries are uncovering information daily that 
give the lie to that "official story," and point to the 
probable existence of schemes whereby huge quantities of 
public moneys were diverted by PT officials and their private 
sector moneymen into potentially criminal transactions, 
including bribes to secure votes.  As bank records are 
unsealed by investigators, revealing the breadth of the 
schemes, the immense amount of money involved, and names of 
prominent politicians from various parties, questions are 
intensifying about Lula's personal vulnerability and the 
potential for a full-blown institutional crisis that could 
largely paralyze the executive and legislative branches for 
months to come.  End summary. 
 
The "Official Story"... 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Over the past several days, senior figures in the 
PT and GOB have tried to establish a consolidated line of 
defense against the mushrooming scandals dominating Brazil's 
political class and media (reftels).  Last weekend, following 
careful rehearsal with PT attorneys, ex-PT treasurer Delubio 
Soares and Marcos Valerio, an advertising businessman 
implicated as a money man working for the PT in suspect 
financial activities, presented the following account to 
Brazilian judicial authorities:  Funds "loaned" by Valerio's 
firms to the PT were destined for the party's "caixa 2" 
(Brazilian political slang for off-the-books operating funds) 
to pay party debts from 2002 and 2004 election campaigns. 
They claimed that moneys were not used for monthly payoffs to 
coalition congressmen to secure votes, as former PTB party 
leader Roberto Jefferson and others have alleged (refs); such 
payoffs would constitute bribery, a criminal act. Rather,the 
transactions were violations of legal reporting requirements 
for political parties in Brazil, but not violations of 
criminal statutes.  The moneys were transferred in direct 
loans to the PT or drawn down by "authorized persons" from 
bank accounts established by Valerio's firms using loans 
which Valerio apparently secured by presenting as collateral 
lucrative contracts his advertising firms had won with state 
entities.  Jose Dirceu and ex-PT Secretary General Silvio 
Pereira were aware of the transactions, according to Soares 
and Valerio, but Lula was not (former PT President Jose 
Genoino's role is not clear). 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  In a television interview with a Brazilian 
journalist on 17 July in Paris, Lula endorsed this account, 
saying the affair is limited to some elements of the PT 
falling into unsavory practices that are "systematic" among 
Brazilian parties, specifically use of the "caixa 2."  He 
expressed regret but tried to place the problem in the 
broader context of structural defects in Brazilian politics 
and distanced himself and his government from mistakes made 
by party members of a PT that had "grown too rapidly" and 
whose "best elements" had migrated to the government. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  That is now the "official story" and Lula and 
those close to him seem rallied around it, even as rank and 
file PT members fume at their party's fall into disrepute and 
erstwhile Lula confidants like Genoino find themselves cast 
off a listing boat.  This version --if it sells-- could armor 
the president against direct connection to the admitted 
impropriety, which would be relegated to the arcane area of 
Brazilian electoral regulations rather than criminal law. 
The PT would be penalized by the electoral officials, Delubio 
and others would go into the political wilderness, the fate 
and direction of the party would remain unclear until 
September's party convention, but the crisis might be 
contained. 
... That is Falling Apart 
 
¶4. (SBU)  But the story isn't selling, it is falling apart 
rapidly.  Reiterating the "official" version before 
congressional investigating committees on 20 and 21 July, 
Delubio Soares and Silvio Pereira were met by expressions of 
exasperation and incredulity by their questioners, and the 
men repeatedly refused direct answers on key points, invoking 
the right to avoid self-incrimination.  In the face of 
continuing revelations in the media of the long and varied 
list of persons "authorized" to make cash withdrawals from 
Valerio's accounts, it is becoming impossible to plausibly 
claim the moneys were going only to cover PT campaign debts. 
Throughout the week Brazilian newspapers published names from 
Valerio's unsealed bank records that include senior party 
figures from not only small coalition parties but from the PT 
itself, as well as congressional staff members and even 
relatives of politicians (including the wife of former 
president of the Chamber of Deputies, Sao Paulo PT deputy 
Joao Paulo Cunha).  The impression is being reinforced daily 
that the suspect moneys were, in fact, being used for monthly 
pay-offs for votes, and quite possibly for other illegal 
purposes, and not just for PT debts.  Reportedly huge amounts 
of money - perhaps as much as Reals 60 million (about 30 
million dollars) in total or more -- were withdrawn, with use 
of armored cars to transport the cash required in some 
instances. 
 
Comment: 
 
¶5.  (C) Throughout the growing scandals, the government, much 
of the opposition, and the Brazilian public have seemed to 
want to avoid a full-blown institutional crisis.  The 
government obviously fears demolition; the leading PSDB and 
PFL opposition want to appear responsible, playing the role 
of a worthy government in waiting ready to take on a weakened 
Lula at the 2006 polls; the public worries about political 
paralysis.  All fear damage to Brazil's image abroad that 
could torpedo Brazil's hard-won economic stability. But it 
seems likely that investigators and Brazil's aggressive media 
will continue to tear the "official" story to shreds.  There 
are just too many opportunities to find inconsistencies and 
uncover new facts, as implicated parties scramble to divert 
blame or to cut deals.  Hence the executive branch will 
continue to find itself preoccupied with damage control and 
the congressional scene will remain lurid and frenetically 
focused, with competing CPIs serving up sensational 
revelations and self-righteous pruning by those legislators 
who are not themselves under scrutiny.  In this environment, 
and given the Lula government's already abysmal record in 
dealing with the congress, it is difficult to imagine 
progress in the next months on major agenda items, with the 
possible exception of political reform.  This unproductive 
interregnum will also be followed in short order by 
distractions of the 2006 campaign season, leading many 
commentators to opine that the Lula government, in terms of 
ability to address major domestic issues, is now virtually 
over.  Such a completely pessimistic prediction may be 
premature, but the trends are not encouraging. 
 
¶6. (C) Comment continues.  Then there is the question of Lula 
himself.  He is a fighter and continues to enjoy deep 
reserves of good will in Brazil and abroad; recent polls show 
his personal popularity remains strong.  Yet the sheer 
dimension of a scandal that involves senior PT members 
diverting huge sums of public money into what looks 
increasingly like a carefully constructed artifice for 
bribery on a grand scale is mind-boggling even for a 
Brazilian public that is often cynical and stoic about 
corruption.  In this light, it seems folly on the part of the 
president's advisors to have allowed him to associate himself 
so clumsily with an account that is already perceived as a 
cover story, one that will not survive even a few days of 
scrutiny. There is intensifying concern that Lula will not 
remain untouched by the crisis.  The worst case scenario of 
impeachment investigations still seems very remote to us -- 
more concrete proof would need to be produced than that 
presented to date that Lula was complicit in wrongdoing or 
omissive in taking action against it once he became aware. 
Moreover, the public and congress are loath to confront such 
a national trauma.  But we could face a situation in which 
Lula's governance capacity becomes deeply eroded and he 
personally is increasingly seem as a distracted, disconnected 
and even negligent leader. The next few weeks will be a 
crucial time and we will provide regular updates and analysis 
on major developments. 
 
MANGANIELLO