05BRASILIA698
AMBASSADOR'S MEETING WITH BRAZILIAN WORKERS' PARTY
Mon Mar 14 00:00:00 +0100 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRASILIA 000698 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/14/2015 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR SOCI BR US
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S MEETING WITH BRAZILIAN WORKERS' PARTY 
PRESIDENT JOSE GENOINO 
 
 
Classified By: POLOFF RICHARD REITER, REASON 1.4B AND D. 
 
¶1. (C) SUMMARY.  On March 9, Ambassador Danilovich met with 
Jose Genoino, the President of Brazil's Workers' Party (PT) 
and the PT's Secretary for International Relations, Paulo 
Ferreira.  Genoino noted that the PT is now celebrating its 
25th anniversary and has evolved into a modern nationwide 
institution that, after two years in power, is engaged in the 
country's challenging social agenda.  Genoino agreed with the 
Ambassador's comments on the importance of US/Brazil dialogue 
both on areas of agreement and on differences.  Clearly 
involved in the day-to-day issues of the Lula administration, 
he thanked the Ambassador for the excellent meetings arranged 
in Washington (including with the Secretary and the National 
Security Advisor) for President Lula's Chief of Staff, Jose 
Dirceu.  The Ambassador agreed that Dirceu's meetings were 
productive and expressed hope that the GoB will take the next 
steps to reinvigorate the FTAA talks.  The Ambassador offered 
to assist the PT in developing contacts with US political 
parties.  END SUMMARY. 
 
JOSE GENOINO - PT PRESIDENT 
--------------------------- 
¶2. (C)  On March 9, Ambassador Danilovich met in the embassy 
with Jose Genoino, President of Brazil's Workers' Party (PT). 
 Genoino was joined by the PT's Secretary for International 
Relations, Paulo Ferreira.  Like President Lula, Genoino's 
biography is a window onto Brazil's recent history.  Born in 
the impoverished interior of Ceara state, he migrated to Sao 
Paulo and became active in union politics.  He joined the 
Communist Party of Brazil and in the 1970s was captured by 
the military dictatorship while involved in guerilla 
activities in the Amazon jungle.  He was tortured in prison 
before being released in 1979.  In 1980, he co-founded the 
Workers' Party and served five terms in Congress.  He is now 
among the PT's most moderate leaders and is one of Lula's 
closest confidants. 
 
IMPORTANCE OF DIALOGUE 
---------------------- 
¶3. (C) The Ambassador stressed that while our two countries 
may have different approaches on issues, and that there may 
be anti-American sentiment from some sectors, we have many 
common values and goals, so it is important to maintain an 
open dialogue to coordinate and cooperate on those areas. 
Genoino responded that the PT has great respect for the US, 
and has no anti-American philosophy or agenda.  He agreed 
that cooperation is essential and looks forward to a 
continued dialogue with the Ambassador and the USG. 
 
STATE OF THE WORKERS' PARTY 
--------------------------- 
¶4. (C) Genoino told the Ambassador that, aside from losing 
city hall in Sao Paulo and Porto Alegre, the PT did quite 
well in last October's municipal elections and has a presence 
in all 5,500 of Brazil's municipalities.  Now  celebrating 
its 25th anniversary, the party has matured into a national 
institution and is growing stronger at the grass-roots level. 
 He also noted that after two years in power and GoB fiscal 
austerity, the Lula administration --and the party-- are 
redoubling their efforts on economic development and the 
social agenda. 
 
WARM WELCOME IN WASHINGTON FOR BRAZILIAN OFFICIALS 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
¶5. (C)  Genoino thanked the Ambassador for the fact that 
Lula's Chief of Staff Jose Dirceu had excellent meetings in 
Washington (including with Secretary Rice and NSA Hadley). 
Genoino added that Dirceu's trip, along with Luiz Dulci's 
(Secretary General of Lula's Presidency) trip this month to 
speak at US universities, exemplifies the PT's desire for a 
good --and broad-- exchange with the US.  The Ambassador 
agreed that Dirceu's meetings were successful, highlighting 
his discussion with Secretary Rice on Brazil's role in 
serving as a constructive voice in the region.  Genoino noted 
that the Workers' Party policy recognizes the importance of 
external dialogue, particularly constructive contacts with 
the US, as well as a role as a mediator in regional affairs 
--to include the possibility of exerting a moderating 
influence on Chavez.  The Ambassador said that he was happy 
that Dirceu made a strong statement in support of the FTAA, 
and that he hopes Foreign Minister Amorim will support the 
FTAA as well.  (Note, Genoino was not to be drawn out on the 
perceived role of Amorim and the Foreign Ministry in slowing 
FTAA talks, over the objections of others in the Lula 
administration and the Brazilian private sector who strongly 
support an accord.) 
 
CHALLENGING DOMESTIC AGENDA 
--------------------------- 
¶6. (C) Turning to domestic affairs, Genoino said that the PT 
is also focused on Brazil's social agenda, confronting the 
challenges of unemployment, income disparity, rural and urban 
violence, and crime in general.  He said the task is to 
strengthen democracy while addressing social problems. 
Genoino observed that Brazil's democracy is but 20 years old, 
so there remains a need to consolidate democratic 
institutions while promoting economic development. 
Politically, the PT is looking to strengthen the 
administration's performance in the remaining two years of 
Lula's term, and to that end is now working to solidify the 
PT's coalition of allied parties.  The Ambassador noted that 
with economic improvement, the GoB might now be in a position 
to direct more resources to the social agenda.  Genoino said 
that elements of the PT's agenda have already been addressed 
in Congress in the past two years in the series of reforms 
(tax, pension, judicial, etc.) already passed.  But that 
there is still a lot of work to be done, for example, on 
infrastructure and elsewhere. 
 
¶7. (C) In response to the Ambassador's question about who 
Genoino would most like to see run against Lula in the 2006 
elections, Genoino said Sao Paulo Governor Geraldo Alckmin 
(PSDB) is the most likely opponent.  He added that Brazilian 
politics are evolving into two large and loose coalitions: 
one led by the PT and the other by the PSDB. 
 
PARTY RELATIONS 
--------------- 
¶8. (C) Genoino said that the Workers' Party has good 
relations with other parties around the world, including in 
Japan, Europe, and elsewhere.  But to date, it has not 
developed a strong relationship with either of the main US 
parties.  The Ambassador said that as a political appointee, 
he would be glad to assist in facilitating meetings for the 
PT in the US, but that he might prove more  useful with the 
Republican party, with whom he has more contacts.  Genoino 
and Ferreira will remain in touch with the embassy to pursue 
these contacts. 
DANILOVICH