05CAIRO4159
PROPOSAL FOR FY-06 SINGLE COUNTRY PROGRAM FOR
Thu Jun 02 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS CAIRO 004159 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR ECA/ECA/PE/V/R/N; ALSO FOR NEA/PPD, NEA/ELA 
 
E.O. 12958: NA 
TAGS: OEXC KPAO EG
SUBJECT:  PROPOSAL FOR FY-06 SINGLE COUNTRY PROGRAM FOR 
EGYPT:  "ARTS MANAGEMENT IN THE UNITED STATES" 
 
 
¶1.  Embassy Cairo requests a Single Country Program be 
organized for five to seven Egyptian participants on 
the topic of "Arts Management in the United States." 
This program is intended for young Egyptian artists 
who lack practical experience in the management of the 
arts, but who are currently involved in the formation 
of new, private sector, artistic entities that will 
influence the professional development of other young 
men and women involved in independent and creative 
expression.  The nominees will come from a variety of 
fields, including dance, photography, opera, music, 
film and theater. 
 
¶2.  The project goals will be to: 
 
-- Encourage and empower a new generation of artists 
to pursue artistic expression, independent of 
government control. 
-- Examine leadership strategies used to manage 
artistic productions. 
-- Review ideas and techniques related to alternative 
sources of funding, volunteerism, scheduling, 
community involvement, marketing, and IPR issues. 
-- Meet with leaders of the artistic management 
community in America, including art managers, agents, 
promoters, and government and private sectors funding 
agencies. 
-- Meet with musicians, artists, and other arts 
practitioners. 
-- Visit performing arts companies, performing arts 
centers and theaters, galleries, and museums. 
-- Learn about American artistic productions and how 
they operate as private entities. 
-- Enable participants to experience American art and 
artistic expression in its various forms by attending 
performances and concerts and by visiting galleries 
and museums. 
 
¶3.  This program will familiarize young Egyptian 
artists with American artistic management techniques. 
Through meetings, discussions, and visits to art and 
performance centers, the group will examine methods 
for organizing the arts and identify how they can 
employ these strategies in their efforts to establish 
more private arts entities in Egypt. 
 
¶4.  The project should begin in Washington, D.C. and 
continue to five additional cities as appropriate. 
Post is flexible on dates; and however, non-summer 
months work best for the Egyptian participants.  Post 
confirms that translation will not/not be required for 
this program.  All participants will be proficient in 
English. 
 
¶5.  Post anticipates it will have IV grants from its 
FY06 allotment available to fund subject program. 
 
¶6.  Please advise concurrence and possible program 
dates. 
 
GRAY 
 
#4159