05CARACAS1842
FREEDOM HOUSE WORKING WITH VENEZUELA HUMAN RIGHTS
Fri Jun 17 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Caracas
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

172124Z Jun 05UNCLAS CARACAS 001842 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL EAID KDEM PHUM VE
SUBJECT:  FREEDOM HOUSE WORKING WITH VENEZUELA HUMAN RIGHTS 
ORGANIZATIONS 
 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
¶1. USAID Venezuela entered into a cooperative agreement with 
the US-based human rights organization Freedom House in 
September 2004.  Through this project, Freedom House is 
increasing the capacity of Venezuelan human rights defenders 
to document and report on the human rights situation in 
Venezuela.  Freedom House's efforts to-date have included 
periodic visits to Venezuela and workshops in Mexico 
(January - Reftel 000921), Guatemala (March), and Peru 
(May).  The next workshop is scheduled for Argentina in 
August.  End Summary 
¶2. The two-day workshop in Guatemala reviewed and analyzed 
ways to improve the physical and institutional security of 
human rights (HR) defenders and organizations in Venezuela. 
These included measures to be taken in-country as well as 
international support mechanisms, such as procedures for 
contacting the Inter-American Commission for Human Rights, 
and procedures for requesting protective measures from the 
Inter-American Court.  This workshop brought together 11 HR 
organizations from Caracas and the interior, 5 members of 
media/press organizations, and representatives of 3 
universities.  It was hosted by the Guatemalan HR 
organization "National Movement for Human Rights". 
¶3. The workshop in Peru provided training to 10 Venezuelan 
HR lawyers on strategies and tactics for legal defense in 
the event of human rights violations.  This was followed by 
a weeklong exchange for representatives of 7 Venezuelan HR 
organizations with counterparts in Peruvian organizations. 
¶4. Venezuela's HHRR community is marked by strong leaders, 
backed by weak organizations.  Venezuelan HHRR organizations 
work individually and most often not as part of a solid 
network.  Freedom House training provides additional 
linkages between HHRR NGOs.  One example is that a group of 
HR lawyers has decided to form a network of HR defenders 
focused solely on civil and political liberties, rather than 
including economic and cultural rights. Another example is 
that several media HR organizations have been meeting to 
discuss the creation of a Freedom of Information Act for 
Venezuela. 
¶5. Freedom House - through the workshops and visits to 
organizations around the country - has developed important 
relationships with many HR organizations, both in Caracas 
and the interior.  Because of the Freedom House rep's 
experience, expertise, and contacts with HHRR defenders the 
NGO has become a link between organizations which normally 
have little contact with one another. 
BROWNFIELD 
 
 
NNNN 
      2005CARACA01842 - UNCLASSIFIED