05CARACAS527
LULA COMES TO CARACAS
Wed Feb 16 00:00:00 +0100 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Caracas
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L  CARACAS 000527 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
NSC FOR CBARTON 
HQ USSOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/30/2010 
TAGS: ECON ETRD PREL ENRG MASS BR VE
SUBJECT: LULA COMES TO CARACAS 
 
Classified By: ECONOMIC COUNSELOR RICHARD M. SANDERS FOR REASON 1.4 D 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) Brazilian President Luiz Inacio Lula Da Silva 
concluded a 24-hour visit to Venezuela on February 14.  His 
visit included public appearances at a conference of business 
leaders along with a joint Brazilian-Venezuelan declaration 
and signing ceremony for more than two dozen agreements.  The 
Brazilian leader's visit provided President Hugo Chavez with 
another opportunity to promote his own "Bolivarian" political 
and economic agenda while thumbing his nose at the U.S. in 
the process.  The big winner however is Brazil, which comes 
away with a series of commitments (albeit mainly at the 
"letter of intent" level) aimed at increasing trade with 
Venezuela and access to the lucrative Venezuelan petroleum 
sector. End Summary 
 
------------- 
Feel the Love 
------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Mutual admiration was definitely high on the agenda 
at Caracas' Miraflores Palace on February 14.  Brazilian 
President Luiz Inacio Lula Da Silva publicly characterized 
the relationship between Brazil and Venezuela as a "strategic 
alliance" across a number of areas including petroleum, 
military purchasing and cooperation, and infrastructure 
projects.  The agreements signed by the two countries, Lula 
said, are "a model of integration that we want to practice 
with other colleagues in the region."  Lula's visit to 
Venezuela comes soon after the ratification of the "economic 
complementation agreement" between Mercosur, the South 
American Common Market, and the Andean Community on February 
1, which envisions a slow liberalization of trade between the 
two entities, but has as many as 6000 footnotes and 
exemptions which limit its application. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez, who has been 
calling loudly for Latin American integration said that 
Brazil's support for uniting Latin America against the U.S. 
was "vital" and that the process of integration had "come to 
the point of no return."  In a meeting with Venezuelan and 
Brazilian businessmen at the presidential palace, both 
leaders alluded to the U.S. saying that the solution to the 
economic problems of South America is "not in the north." 
Chavez also said that that integration of South America is 
more important "than ever because of the many threats." 
Complementing Chavez, Lula said that he was happy with what 
was occurring in Venezuela "where we are seeing a government 
concerned with the industrialization of the country." 
 
----------------------- 
Sign on the Dotted Line 
----------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) During the Brazilian leader's visit, the two 
governments signed a joint declaration that included a 
reported 26 bilateral agreements, accords, memoranda of 
understanding and letters of intent.  The majority of these 
agreements were petroleum related, but also included accords 
on agriculture, science and technology, and military issues. 
 
¶5. (C) One agreement calls for the two state oil companies, 
PDVSA and Petrobras, to jointly explore, pump, and sell 
natural gas and crude oil.  The agreement envisions joint 
participation in the Mariscal Sucre and Deltana Platform 
natural gas projects as well as gas extraction in the Gulf of 
Venezuela and heavy oil extraction in the Orinoco belt.  A 
U.S. executive whose company has an investment in a field now 
operated in Venezuela by Petrobras discounted the seriousness 
of much of the "letter of intent" oil agreements.  With 
respect to the Mariscal Sucre and Deltana Platform project 
references; however, he noted that the agreement could block 
the access of other companies to those projects. 
 
¶6. (U) According to Brazilian media reports, Brazil's largest 
petrochemical firm, Braskem, and Venezuela's PDVSA have 
signed a memorandum of understanding which covers a joint 
project to build a petrochemical plant in Venezuela.  Chavez, 
who this month signed an agreement in Argentina to establish 
a PDVSA branch and open a chain of service stations in the 
 
country, is also reported to be interested in having PDVSA 
purchase the petrochemical unit and nationwide service 
station chain of the Brazilian Iparanga Petroleum Company. 
 
¶7. (C) An American mining executive told Econcouns that of 
all the deals mentioned, the most likely to come to fruition 
were those for the Brazilian construction firm Odebrecht to 
build an additional bridge across the Orinoco, and mining 
giant CVRD's joint venture in coal with Venezuelan state 
entity Carbozulia. 
 
--------------- 
The Raw Numbers 
--------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Trade between Venezuela and Brazil has traditionally 
been fairly minimal.  Over the last several years, an average 
of around 6% of Venezuelan imports and 2% of exports have 
been accounted for by Brazil.  Bilateral trade in 2004 was 
approximately $1.6 billion, almost double the $880 million 
level of the economically disastrous year of 2003, but still 
below the level of trade in 2000.  The large expansion in 
joint-energy projects envisioned in the agreements would, 
according to President Lula, be nearly double bilateral trade 
again this year to $3 billion. 
 
------------------------ 
F-16's and Super Tucanos 
------------------------ 
 
¶9. (U) A key area of interest to Venezuela is the purchase of 
military aircraft from Brazil.  According to media reports, 
Venezuela has been interested in purchasing 12-24 "Super 
Tucano" light-combat airplanes from Brazil's Embraer, the 
world's fourth largest manufacturer of civilian and military 
aircraft.  Such a purchase is valued at between $110 and $180 
million.  Embraer would also be involved in maintaining and 
upgrading the existing Venezuelan Tucano fleet.  Though 
Chavez and Lula did sign a military cooperation agreement, no 
sales agreement was signed. 
 
¶10. (SBU) During his weekly "Alo Presidente" television 
program that aired the Sunday before Lula's visit, Chavez 
claimed that the U.S. had repeatedly delayed delivery of 
spare parts for Venezuela's F-16 fleet, that the U.S. imposed 
"unacceptable conditions,"  and that he would have to "look 
elsewhere for the parts."  While the turboprop Super Tucano 
is hardly a substitute for the F-16, Chavez nonetheless 
praised Brazil for "not imposing those kinds of restrictions" 
on Venezuela. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Brazil has much to gain from Lula's visit.  Brazil 
is interested in a number of joint projects between Petrobras 
and PDVSA.  In addition, gaining entree for Brazilian 
industrial firms into Venezuela could help them obtain 
contracts for additional large infrastructure projects. 
Despite Lula's claim that the agreements signed during this 
visit will help to double bilateral trade this year, there 
are so few firm plans in the these agreements that it is 
doubtful that the impact in 2005 could be so substantial. 
 
¶12. (C) Lula has clearly expressed his interest and policies 
regarding South American integration and closer political and 
economic ties.  Cooperation with Venezuela has the added 
bonus of being very profitable for Brazil and Brazilian 
firms.  As with other leaders who have visited before, Chavez 
saw Lula off clutching a massive sheaf of signed papers and 
documents.  Critics are quick to point out that the dossier 
is long on intention and short on substance.  The meeting 
however served both parties well: Chavez gains a bit of 
legitimacy in regional cooperation and may get his Super 
Tucanos; Lula gains more political traction in his goals of 
continental integration and economic success in expanding 
Brazil's market access. 
Brownfield 
 
 
NNNN 
      2005CARACA00527 - CONFIDENTIAL