05CAIRO5185
EGYPTIAN MEDIA LEGEND IBRAHIM NAFEI SHOWN THE
Thu Jul 07 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 005185 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KPAO EG
SUBJECT:  EGYPTIAN MEDIA LEGEND IBRAHIM NAFEI SHOWN THE 
DOOR, REPLACED BY LOYAL PROTEGE 
 
 
Sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect accordingly. 
 
REF:  A.  CAIRO 5057 
      ¶B.  CAIRO 4127 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary:  Of all the changes to the pro- 
government press leadership announced by the Shura Council 
on July 3 (ref A), most significant is the replacement of 
media giant Ibrahim Nafei, former Editor-in-chief and Board 
Chairman of Al-Ahram.  Nafei, who was appointed Editor-in- 
chief by Anwar Sadat, leaves behind a weakened newspaper, 
allegations of corruption, and a loyal replacement, Osama 
Saraya.  His replacement was part of the Egyptian 
Government's attempt to put a 'new face' on government 
institutions and encourage an impression of reform and 
progress in anticipation of the year's presidential and 
parliamentary elections.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  The replacement of media giant Ibrahim Nafei, 
former Editor-in-chief and Board Chairman of Al Ahram, is 
the end of an era in the Egyptian pro-government press. 
Nafei, who was appointed Editor-in-chief in 1979 by Anwar 
Sadat after working his way through the ranks of Al-Ahram as 
an economic reporter and editor, was considered the most 
prominent 'mouthpiece' (some would say, 'apologist') for the 
Mubarak government for the past 25 years.  Nafei was also 
head of the Egyptian Press Syndicate, serving from 1985 to 
¶1994.  On the one hand, Nafei was known for 'taking care of 
the troops' at Al-Ahram and the syndicate - giving Al-Ahram 
journalists large annual bonuses; building new office spaces 
at Al-Ahram; and, as head of the Press Syndicate, appealing 
to the government whenever a journalist was arrested or 
imprisoned, no matter the journalist's politics.  On the 
other hand, Nafei leaves behind management problems and 
allegations of corruption. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Rumors of Nafei's replacement heated up this year 
after Al-Ahram published an unprecedented "correction" on 
May 15 for having 'misprinted' an interview President 
Mubarak granted to Kuwaiti daily Al-Siyassa (reftel B).  NDP 
Secretary General and Shura Council Head Safwat El Sherif 
 
SIPDIS 
reportedly was angered with Nafei over the interview and 
began to murmur darkly about "big changes" in the pro- 
government press.  Sherif also reportedly mistrusted Nafei's 
influence with the presidency, which he felt was "out of 
bounds" of his position, according to PA contacts.  As 
rumors of changes in the media continued the past two 
months, PA contacts at Al-Ahram reported that Nafei believed 
his position was safe, given his relationship and long 
history with the presidency. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Nafei leaves behind a loyal replacement, Osama 
Saraya, as Editor-in-chief.  (The Al-Ahram Board Chairman 
position went to Salah Al-Ghamri, the former head of Al- 
Ahram's distribution.)  Saraya was previously Editor-in- 
chief of the weekly magazine Al-Ahram Al-Arabi and is pro- 
reform.  Nafei 'discovered' Osama Saraya through Saraya's 
uncle, a former managing editor with Al-Ahram.  Saraya began 
as a trainee in Al-Ahram's economic section, where he gained 
Nafei's trust.  (Note:  Embassy Cairo helped Saraya 
extensively in the early years of his career, providing him 
with many exclusive stories and contacts.  Saraya has always 
had an open door policy with Embassy officers and visiting 
USG officials.  End note.)  A senior Al-Ahram journalist 
told PA LES on July 5, "Osama is like Nafei's son.  He sees 
Ibrahim as his idol and role model."  The journalist 
commented - as have other Al-Ahram contacts - that Nafei, 
who will continue to write a column for the newspaper, will 
exercise behind-the-scenes influence at Al-Ahram through his 
relationship with Saraya. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Comment:  Nafei's legacy is a weakened newspaper, 
Al-Ahram having seen its influence wane with the rise of pan- 
Arab satellite TV channels and pan-Arab newspapers such as 
Lebanon's Al-Hayat and the Saudi-owned Al-Sharq Al-Awsat. 
Nafei has also been dogged by persistent allegations of 
corruption, with PA contacts alleging that Nafei used his 
position to enrich himself through questionable property and 
publishing deals.  Additionally, overemployment and 
mismanagement plague Al-Ahram.  PA contacts report that too 
many Al-Ahram editors spend too little time at their desks, 
writing an occasional column rather than actively managing 
their oversized staffs. 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  Despite the bad blood between Sherif and Nafei, 
the latter's replacement was likely part of the Egyptian 
Government's attempt to put a 'new face' on government 
institutions.  The word on the Egyptian street is that pro- 
government newspapers like Al-Ahram are too pro-Mubarak and 
cannot be trusted.  By putting newer faces in leadership 
positions, the government may be attempting to encourage in 
the public a sense of reform and progress in anticipation of 
the year's presidential and parliamentary elections. 
However, Saraya, who is known for his pro-reform arguments 
on pan-Arab satellite TV, will likely continue Nafei's 
legacy of Mubarak-friendly coverage and commentary.  It 
remains to be seen if Saraya has the skills to successfully 
shake-up Al-Ahram and reposition it as the region's leading 
Arabic newspaper.  End comment. 
 
CORBIN