05CARACAS1703
MEDIA PLAY 6/1-7:  BUSH-MACHADO (SUMATE) MEETING
Mon Jun 06 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Caracas
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

062045Z Jun 05UNCLAS  CARACAS 001703 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PDA LEBENS/GALLEGOS, WHA/AND CUE 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OPRC PGOV PREL VE
SUBJECT: MEDIA PLAY 6/1-7:  BUSH-MACHADO (SUMATE) MEETING 
RAISES OPPOSITION HOPE AND BOLIVARIAN BACKLASH IN PRESS 
 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
¶1. The May 31 meeting between Maria Corina Machado, the 
director of Venezuelan pro-democracy NGO SUMATE and 
President Bush has created outraged reactions from Chavez 
supporters. Comments made by senior government officials 
claim Machado is trying to garner support from the U.S. in 
preparation for a presidential run in the next election. 
Further, they claim that Machado is allying herself with the 
U.S. for financial support in order to get Chavez out of 
office while trying to detract attention from Posada 
Carriles. Most members of the opposition say that Machado 
should be praised for strategically attracting more 
attention to Chavez's abuses of power so that international 
organizations can intervene, such as the OAS.  However, a 
few have expressed disappointment.  Government owned VTV is 
running commercials mocking the meeting between President 
Bush and Maria Corina Machado.  They are using a photo of 
the meeting with graphics showing President Bush giving 
Machado money from a suitcase.  The voiceover has her 
promising that they will get Chavez this time and Bush 
responding in Spanish that he already has given her enough 
money to build a condominium. The government is also running 
newspaper ads claiming Machado is a paid agent of the U.S. 
¶2. EL NACIONAL (liberal/opposition, circ. 120,000) June 3 
lead editorial headline: "Diplomacy and a Local Comedy" 
QUOTE: "It is surprising to see Venezuelan government 
officials' reaction to Maria Corina Machado's meeting with 
President Bush.  As relations between Venezuela and the 
United States stand, it should not be a surprise that the 
U.S. President wanted to see a personality from the 
political opposition to the Venezuelan regime, in order to 
get first-hand information on the frequent obstructions to 
democracy in Venezuela." 
June 2  "Maria Cristina, What Bother!" column by Milagros 
Socorro 
QUOTE: "Why does Maria Corina Machado have to go and tell 
Bush that we, Venezuelans, `wish to live in freedom and 
democracy'?   Doesn't she believe in the results of our 
democratic struggles; she has to go and seek a sort of 
father or referee that serves as an intermediary to solve 
our problems?" 
¶3. EL UNIVERSAL (conservative/opposition/paper of record, 
circ. 120,000) June 4 opinion column by Agustin Blanco Munoz 
"amBUSHed" 
Quote:  ".for now this has nothing to do with trying to 
promote presidential candidate but rather promote a reaction 
in favor of Sumate so that it will become linked to [Bush's 
own] `policy of democracy and liberty,' which the Bush 
administration will promote for Venezuela." 
June 3 column by Argelia Rios, "Change of Scene?" 
QUOTE: "Venezuelan democracy is interested in having 
everyone concerned about it.  Perhaps, Sumate can channel 
that desire. It is clear that the ruling party is afraid 
there is something behind her: the Bolivarian diplomacy has 
just received a defeat." 
 
Column by Political analyst Carlos Blanco, "Maria Corina is 
Driving the Government Officials Crazy" 
QUOTE: "Of course, the meeting between Maria Corina Machado 
and George Bush is highly symbolic; it means that the world 
superpower recognizes Venezuelans' democratic fights.  And, 
most importantly, it has put these fights in the world 
spotlight.  Most of the opposition felt that this meeting 
meant some recognition of their struggle." 
¶4. DIARIO VEA (pro-government, circ. 25,000) June 6 lead 
editorial headline "The Imperial Threat" 
QUOTE: "Venezuela has escaped from the corral and Mr. Bush 
will do all in his power, without scruples or limits, in 
order to bring it back to the fold.  That is what is behind 
the White House's message in meeting with Maria Corina 
Machado." 
June 6 Stumbling Block column by (pseudonym) `Marciano' 
title: "Lessons of an interview" 
QUOTE: "[in inviting] the director of Sumate they presumably 
thought they were giving a rebuff to Chavez.  What balls 
Bush and his advisors have!  How clueless they are.  If that 
is the reason for the meeting in the White House you can see 
that they do not know Chavez.  These provocations roll off 
his back..." 
June 3 Stumbling Block column by (pseudonym) `Marciano' 
title: "Shaking Hands" 
QUOTE: "Mr. Bush must be thinking that his meeting with her 
at the White House was a master move.  Maisto and Noriega 
must have been exultant: they have just built the 
alternative to Chavez.. The empire now had its Violeta 
Chamorro..  Surely that night Miss Rice went to sleep 
 
 
peacefully, dreaming of Uncle Tom." 
June 3 lead editorial headline: "They Simply Stink" 
QUOTE:"Telling the world: `This is our agent,' is what 
happened with the Sumate director, Maria Corina Machado's 
visit to the oval office of the White House..  In addition, 
admitting, like U.S. senator (sic) Frank Wolf did, to the 
fact that Sumate is funded by the United States and that 
they are going to increase its funds is the straw that broke 
the camel's back...Bush and his followers prepared the scene 
at the oval office of the White House with premeditation and 
treachery." 
June 2 lead editorial headline: "Sumate in the Oval Office" 
QUOTE: "Maria Corina Machado's visit to President Bush in 
Washington shows who Sumate works for.  There's no room for 
doubt, now.  Maria Corina Machado and Sumate directly 
represent US interests.  Without a mask; Sumate is funded 
and sponsored by the American government." 
¶5. EL NUEVO PAIS (opposition sensationalist, circ. 4,000) 
June 2 "Maria Corina Machado's Second Round" column by 
Journalist Patricia Poleo (opposition journalist appealing a 
conviction for criminal libel for her reporting on the 
Minister of Interior). 
 
QUOTE: "Without a doubt, Maria Corina Machado has dealt a 
blow on Chavismo and they cannot dissemble about how much it 
hurts them.  The meeting between Maria Corina Machado and 
the US President, George Bush, is important because she has 
precise information on why there is no democracy in 
Venezuela.  Besides, the meeting has had a psychological 
impact for both sides.  Hugo Chavez has never been received 
by Bush and neither has any member of the National 
Executive." 
June 3 column by MAS (opposition) legislator, Leopoldo Puchi 
"Maria Corina Machado and George Bush" 
QUOTE: "In this sense, the fact that Sumate representative 
has been received at the White House, is not simply a 
demonstration of support but it is also an expression of a 
strategic line of action, structured around the issue..  At 
first blush, the Venezuelan opposition might feel 
satisfaction because this meeting could be interpreted as 
greater interest by Washington in the Venezuelan situation. 
However, US efforts could be more problematic than positive 
if the Venezuelan opposition appears as a US geopolitical 
chess piece and if a confrontation posing a threat to the 
integrity of the nation breaks out." 
REPORTE (economy-orientated, circ. 5,000) June 2 "Ohh,.a 
Woman!" column by Rodolfo Schmidt 
QUOTE: "A significant detail: the interview was the product 
of a surprise invitation from the White House and not the 
product of a complicated diplomatic move.  Stephen Hadley, 
National security advisor, and Andrew Card, chief of staff 
of the White House, participated in the meeting.  In other 
words, the United States already did what it had to do 
during this phase: to show its unequivocal support to 
democracy in Venezuela." 
¶6. QUOTES FROM GOVERNMENT OFFICALS:  Interior Minister Jesse 
Chacon: "The U.S. has two ways of intervening in other 
countries: one is armed intervention and the other is 
through.non-governmental organizations, that are front 
maintained by the U.S. government." 
 
Foreign Minister Ali Rodriguez: "This could be said to be a 
launching pad for Mrs. Machado for the next elections with 
the full support of the American government." "Sumate is 
simply an agency of the United States in Venezuela."  "It is 
a way for the U.S. to intervene in the internal affairs of 
Venezuela." 
 
Pro-Chavista deputy Iris Varela: "[Washington] is trying to 
distract attention from its efforts to protect Luis Posada 
Carriles." 
Jorge Valero, Venezuelan Ambassador to the OAS: "Machado is 
well known is political circles in Venezuela as a 
discredited person without real leadership, who is financed 
by the Department of State." 
Saul Ortega, ruling party MVR deputy and head of foreign 
affairs committe of Parliament: "The Bush-Machado meeting 
confirms the thesis that the United States was behind the 
April 2002 coup d'etat." 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶7. Both government and opposition have reacted predictably, 
including the government funded attack ads and the dismay of 
some in the opposition over Machado's suddenly high profile. 
Some of the more interesting comments come from the pro- 
Chavez daily Diario Vea's column "Stumbling Block" by 
 
 
`Marciano.'  Marciano indicates that Machado is now 
Venezuela's Violeta Chamorro and assures that Chavez was not 
bothered by the meeting.  Many Venezuelan news executives 
believe that Marciano is really Vice President Rangel. 
Chavez made no mention of the meeting nor Machado in the 
June 5 Alo Presidente. End Comment 
 
Brownfield 
 
 
NNNN 
      2005CARACA01703 - UNCLASSIFIED