05CAIRO7946
PARLIAMENTARY ELECTION COVERAGE REVS UP: EGYPTIAN
Mon Oct 17 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS CAIRO 007946 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/PD FOR FRANK FINVER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KPAO KMDR OPRC IZ SY EG
SUBJECT:  PARLIAMENTARY ELECTION COVERAGE REVS UP: EGYPTIAN 
MEDIA THEMES, OCTOBER 11 TO 16 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  The Egyptian media intensified parliamentary 
election coverage with several announcements about the NDP 
and opposition parties' candidate lists, along with the 
announcement, on October 15, that President Mubarak would 
be personally leading the NDP's parliamentary campaign.  An 
unsigned editorial in the leading pro-government daily, Al- 
Ahram, encouraged voters to go to the polls.  While 
coverage of preparations for Iraq's October 15 
constitutional referendum received criticism from 
columnists who alleged it would "divide Iraqis," coverage 
of the conduct of the referendum itself mentioned the high 
turnout and showed images of smiling Iraqi families casting 
their votes.  Several commentators alleged that the U.S. 
might use the death of Syria's Interior Minister to connect 
Syria with Hariri's death in order to "divert attention 
from the Iraqi quagmire."  End summary. 
 
¶2.  Egyptian parliamentary elections:  On October 11, the 
media reported that President Mubarak had issued a decree 
setting the date for the first round of parliamentary 
elections for November 9.  Later in the week, on October 
14, the media reported that Mubarak had approved the list 
of ruling National Democratic Party (NDP) candidates for 
November's parliamentary elections.  The headline of 
ardently pro-government Al-Gomhouriya (circulation: 
200,000) on October 15 read, "Mubarak himself is leading 
the campaign for the parliament of the future."  Egyptian 
TV also reported on October 15 and 16 that Mubarak would be 
"personally leading the NDP campaign."  Unsigned editorials 
in Al-Ahram on October 15 urged people to vote, noting that 
"the NDP and the opposition are showing seriousness in the 
campaign."  All major Egyptian newspapers reported on 
October 12 that the Muslim Brotherhood would field 170 
candidates and coordinate its electoral campaign with 
several opposition parties. 
 
¶3.  Iraq:  Iraq's constitutional referendum came in for a 
wave of criticism by Egypt's print commentators during the 
week leading up to October 15.  In opposition daily Al-Wafd 
(circulation: 50,000), a columnist wrote on October 11 that 
the constitution "is a plot to divide and eliminate Iraq." 
The same day, reflecting the dark view of the constitution 
held by many Egyptian commentators, a columnist wrote in 
pro-government daily Al-Ahram (circulation: 750,000) that 
"civil war in Iraq has already begun," claiming the 
constitution would "continue to divide Iraqis."  Another 
columnist opined on October 15 in pro-government Akhbar Al- 
Youm (circulation: 1,000,000) that the constitution "will 
not change the situation in Iraq, which is on the verge of 
civil war."  Opinions became more cautiously optimistic 
after the referendum; on October 16, Egyptian TV reported 
that over 60 percent of Iraqis had voted on the 
constitutional referendum in "peaceful" voting.  The print 
media also reported the referendum's high turnout on page 
one with images of smiling Iraqis voting with their 
families. 
 
¶4.  Death of Syrian Interior Minister:  On October 14, the 
Egyptian media  historically friendly and non-critical of 
the Asad regime  reported Syria Interior Minister Kenaan's 
death as a "suicide," although it noted that the Lebanese 
media doubted that assessment.  The same day, several 
commentaries in pro-government Al-Akhbar (circulation: 
800,000) eschewed discussing Kenaan's death in any detail, 
and focused instead on alleged U.S. plans against Syria. 
"The U.S. is only using Syria to divert attention away from 
the Iraqi quagmire," wrote Al-Akhbar's Editor-in-chief, 
, 
Mohamed Barakat, in a long commentary on October 14.  "One 
must wonder if the U.S. will use the minister's suicide to 
prove its allegations of Syrian involvement in Hariri's 
death," mused another Al-Akhbar columnist the same day. 
The former Editor-in-chief of Al-Gomhouriya, Samir Ragab, 
wrote on October 14 that he also expected the U.S. "would 
use Kenaan's death to connect Syria with Hariri's death." 
Ragab also wrote that he hoped "the Syrian people did not 
suffer any more violence, as happens in Palestine, Iraq, 
Lebanon, and Darfur.  Otherwise, terrorism will increase." 
 
RICCIARDONE