05CAIRO8933
EGYPTIAN MEDIA THEMES, NOVEMBER 13-20: IRAQI
Tue Nov 29 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS CAIRO 008933 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KPAO IS IZ LE EG
SUBJECT:  EGYPTIAN MEDIA THEMES, NOVEMBER 13-20: IRAQI 
RECONCILIATION CONFERENCE IN CAIRO 
 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. In contrast to the Egyptian media's previous distancing 
itself from coverage of Iraqi developments, this week's 
Arab League-organized Iraqi reconciliation conference 
received remarkably thorough coverage.  Pro-government 
papers endorsed the conference warmly, while independent 
papers treated it matter-of-factly and reported on the 
disagreements among the Iraqi participants.  Opposition 
papers took due note of the conference, but in the main 
reserved the brunt of their coverage for the run-off 
elections for the people's assembly. End summary. 
 
¶2. Headlines in pro-government newspapers on November 20 
blared: "President Mubarak inaugurates the Iraq 
conciliation conference held at the Arab League" (Al-Ahram, 
circulation: 750,000). "Mubarak: National reconciliation 
ensures gradual ending of foreign presence in Iraq" 
(Akhbar, circulation: 780,000).  "Mubarak: Iraq's unity is 
the path to success" (Al-Gomhouriya, circulation: 200,000). 
"Mubarak: "Iraq's unity and people are above all 
considerations" (Rose Al-Youssef magazine, circulation: 
50,000).  Independent print media headlines were slightly 
less ebullient: "Iraqis set off on the road to 
reconciliation in Cairo" (Nahdat Masr, circulation: 
20,000); "Differences among Iraqi parties threatens Cairo 
meeting" (Al-Ahrar, circulation: 20,000).  Opposition 
newspapers reported on the conference but only on 
tangential issues, as they were preoccupied with covering 
the latest round of parliamentary elections. 
 
¶3. Coverage: Pro-government papers Al-Ahram, Al-Akhbar, and 
Al-Gomhouriya, on November 20, gave the conference full 
coverage and published the entire transcripts of the 
speeches of President Mubarak, Iraqi President Jalal 
Talabani and Arab League Secretary General Amr Mousa.  A 
walk-out of the 24-member delegation of the Unified Iraqi 
Coalition led by Dr. Hamam Baqer Abdul-Majeed Hamoody, 
protesting statements made by Menas Ibrahim Al-Yousefi, who 
had asserted that the Iraqi constitution was largely 
drafted by the United States and that the members of the 
current Iraqi government had come to power through the 
occupation forces, received prominent coverage, as did Amr 
Mousa's admonition to the session to "act in a responsible 
manner."  Iraqi Prime Minister Al-Jaafari's warning about 
the return of the Baath being a "red line" and the Chairman 
of the Muslim Scholars Board calling for a timetable for 
withdrawal of occupation forces were highlighted in pro- 
government Rose El-Youssef magazine. 
 
¶4. Commentaries: In Al-Ahram, on November 20, the Iraqi 
writer Dawood El-Farhan wrote that the conference should 
have focused on building an Iraqi-Iraqi dialogue to stop 
the bloodshed first, and that all other political issues 
could be settled through continuing dialogue.  Commentator 
Emad Galal wrote in the same paper that despite clear 
differences at the opening session, Iraqis should find 
common ground for reconciliation, including a timetable for 
withdrawal of foreign forces; a position on the role of the 
Baath and the armed militias; and the problem of 
terrorists.  Former editor of Al-Ahram and highly respected 
commentator, Ibrahim Nafie, wrote in Al-Ahram that Egypt 
and the Arab League have given maximum support to the 
conference and that it is now the responsibility of the 
Iraqis to have the courage to reach a common understanding. 
In Al-Akhbar newspaper, columnist Badr El-Din Adham 
welcomed the fact that it was the Arab League that had 
convened the conference saying that it is the "House of all 
the Arabs," and that despite differences of opinion, the 
meeting was a first step toward reconciliation.  Highly 
respected columnist and former editor of Al-Akhbar 
newspaper Galal Duweidar criticized recent statements by 
Secretary Rice in which she stressed that the United States 
 
SIPDIS 
is offering aid to rebuild Iraqi infrastructure, saying it 
would be better to announce a timetable for withdrawal from 
Iraq. Editor in Chief of the opposition paper Al-Wafd 
(circulation: 180,000), Abbas Tarabily, welcomed the 
conference and wished it success, but noted that Ahmed 
Chalabi  "America's man in the early days of the American 
occupation of Iraq"  was not present.  He also noted that 
the conference coincided with demands by the American 
Congress to withdraw American forces from Iraq.  In Al- 
Osboa magazine (circulation: 50,000), known for its harshly 
anti-U.S. line, writer Mahmoud Tamimi, criticized the 
conference saying that the main focus should have been on 
solving the "core" problem in Iraq, which is the "criminal 
American occupation." 
RICCIARDONE 
E