05DAMASCUS6040
Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Saudi Arabia,
Sun Nov 20 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 DAMASCUS 006040 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT 
VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND AFERNANDEZ, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O.12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Saudi Arabia, 
Syria/Brazil, Al-Hariri Investigation, Iraq, Lebanon, 
Palestinian Territories, (11/18-20) 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Syrian papers over the weekend reported visits 
to Damascus by Prince Bandar Bin Sultan, Secretary General 
of the Saudi Security Council, carrying a letter from King 
Abdullah to President Asad, and Renato Rabillo, Leader of 
the Brazilian Communist Party. 
 
Papers on 11/19 quoted a diplomatic source as saying that 
Riad al-Daoudi, legal adviser of the Syrian Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, has conferred with Mehlis in Barcelona, but 
did not elaborate further about the meeting. 
 
On 11/18 papers featured a statement by Russian FM Lavrov, 
in the wake of his meeting with Secretary Rice in South 
Korea, that he has reached an agreement with Rice to 
continue direct dialogue with Syria to solve technical 
issues to carry out UNSC resolutions. 
 
As for Iraq, papers reported the inauguration of the Arab 
League conference on Iraqi National Reconciliation held in 
Cairo and cited statements by Iraqi politicians warning 
against excessive optimism about the outcome of the 
conference. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2. Selected Headlines: 
"President Asad receives Prince Bandar Bin Sultan, Secretary 
General of the Saudi Security Council, who carries a letter 
from King Abdullah on latest developments in the region and 
bilateral relations" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 11/18) 
"President Asad lauds Brazil's supportive positions on Arab 
causes and discusses bilateral cooperation and the current 
situation in the region with Renato Rabillo, leader of the 
Brazilian Communist Party" (government-owned Al-Ba'th, 
11/18) 
"Al-Shara in Cairo today to participate in the preliminary 
meeting for the Iraqi Reconciliation Conference" (Government- 
owned Tisheen, 11/19) 
"Riad al-Daoudi [legal adviser of the Syrian Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs] confers with Mehlis in Barcelona" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 11/19) 
"Lavrov: I reached an agreement with Rice on continuing 
direct dialogue with Syria to solve technical issues" 
(Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 11/18 
"Syrian and Palestinian flags are raised in Gaza. Steadfast 
Gaza announces absolute support for Syria against pressure 
and threats" (Government-owned Tishreen 11/19) 
"Lebanon calls for complete pullout from Shaba Farms" 
(Government-owned Syria Times, 11/20) 
"The five Lebanese fishermen arrested for not carrying a 
permit to sail and fish in Syrian territorial waters are 
released" (Government-owned Syria Times, 11/20) 
"The Iraqi Reconciliation conference is inaugurated with 
attendance of 60 Iraqi figures. Al-Shara emphasizes Iraq's 
territorial integrity and Arabism and denounces the killing 
of innocents" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 11/20) 
"Washington and London acknowledge use of white phosphorous 
in Iraq. The Independent: Bush has sold out established US 
values. The Assembly of Muslim Scholars accuses Iraqi 
security of liquidating its members" (Government-owned Al- 
Ba'th, 11/18) 
"Two terrorist blasts target two mosques in Khanaqin, 
Eastern Iraq: 70 killed, 150 injured. Iraq warns against 
excessive optimism regarding the outcome of the Iraqi 
National Reconciliation Conference" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 11/19) 
"The US Congress receives first official demand for 
immediate withdrawal from Iraq" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 
11/18) 
"Bush rejects timetable for Iraq pullout" (Government-owned 
Syria Times, 11/20) 
"As percentage of popular confidence in President Bush 
declines, the US Congress loses confidence in war on Iraq. 
Controversy on invasion is on the rise. The Pentagon 
interrogates Feith on charge of misleading" (Government- 
owned Tishreen, 11/19) 
 
¶3. Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
"What Is behind the News: We are not alone?" 
 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (11/19): "All hell broke loose when Damascus said 
that there are in neighboring states people who are plotting 
against Syria, implementing US policies, and contributing to 
the campaign of pressure and threats. It is as if we are 
required to receive the daggers of treachery in our sides 
and backs, kiss the hand that stabs us, and face the plot 
complacently rather than resist it because it is bigger than 
us and those involved in it.... 
"But there are limits and red lines that one must not cross, 
regardless of his relationship to us and how close to or far 
from us he is. The matter is no longer one of talk, 
statements, and hidden grudges, that have found the right 
climate to grow their thorns and ooze their poison, but is 
now secret plotting and sometimes open plotting. In such a 
situation it is no longer possible to remain silent or 
tolerate lies, agitation, and deception.... 
"In the face of this onslaught, in which some brothers and 
some Arabic-speaking media have a role, unfortunately, we 
had to speak the truth, take an honorable stand for the sake 
of history and future generations, choose the path of honor 
and dignity, and reject the path of cheap compromises and 
deals that are clinched in dark, closed chambers that 
Damascus is not used to and will not get used to. 
"Whoever thinks he can affect Syria and its stand by relying 
on outsiders is definitely deluded. Syria will remain 
difficult to overcome; and if it depends in its 
steadfastness on its domestic front and national unity, it 
also depends on free men in the Arab world and the world at 
large. Syria is not alone in confronting this dangerous, 
unprecedented plot against Arab identity and civilization. 
The plotters will discover that they are the first victims 
of this plot, in which they are taking part willingly or for 
the eyes of the US Administration and its allies!" 
"Democracy of White Phosphorous " 
Samir al-Shibani, a op-ed writer in government-owned 
Tishreen, wrote (11/19): "The tragedy the Iraqi people are 
experiencing is bigger than words.... It is difficult to say 
that Iraq has moved from an era of dictatorship to an era of 
democracy. 
"Everyone agrees that 32 months of American-British 
occupation have conclusively proven that the occupation 
forces have a very precise scenario to loot Iraq's 
resources, undermine its territorial integrity, and sow the 
seeds of domestic sedition among its people.... Due to the 
American hegemony over the United Nations, the US violations 
in Iraq go unpunished.... 
"No matter how long it takes the international conscience to 
wake up, the democracy of white phosphorous will not succeed 
in proud Iraq." 
"Correcting Mistakes with Mistakes" 
Hanan Hamad, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, 
wrote (11/19): "It is obvious that President Bush has 
started to pay the price for his mistakes in the invasion of 
Iraq and its repercussions. He is paying the price from his 
popularity and the popularity of the Republican Party in 
general. But this does not mean he and his administration 
officials and the majority of Republicans intend to revise 
the American policy. 
"But what is more serious than the administration's 
insistence on its positions is its hostile offensive and 
attempts to open new fronts in more than one direction.... 
[In an attempt to escape from its trouble in and over Iraq, 
the US Administration] might make more mistakes." 
"What Is Important Is the Investigation, not its Venue" 
Ahmad Dawwa, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
commented (11/18): "It has become obvious in the past few 
days that those who are supposed to seek to uncover Al- 
Hariri's killers are busy creating a problem regarding the 
venue of the interrogation of the Syrian witnesses. 
Meanwhile, Syria has made several suggestions to avoid such 
a problem because its basic objective and interest lie in 
uncovering these criminal murderers and preserving the 
security and stability of the region that some international 
forces are trying to undermine as they exploit the crime.... 
"It is obvious that some forces that wish to continue to 
exploit Al-Hariri's assassination are trying to create a 
problem over a purely procedural matter that should not be 
given such importance, since the proposed alternatives 
respond to the basic end, namely, finding Al-Hariri's 
killers. Syria's acceptance of the investigation 
commission's conditions on the method of interrogation and 
other matters related to it should put aside the fabricated 
problem regarding the venue of the interrogation. This is 
especially true since the alternatives proposed by the 
Syrian side meet the terms of the interrogation, grant to 
the commission the guarantees it has asked for, and remove 
Syrian apprehensions about conducting the interrogation in 
Lebanon.... 
"The charge of obstructing the investigation and of not 
cooperating should be leveled at those who wish to create a 
problem regarding the venue of the interrogation despite the 
presence of alternatives that meet the demands of the 
international commission. What is more important and the 
essence of the issue is to find the culprits and to take 
them to court rather than looking for problems on procedural 
matters. The international commission should take seriously 
Lebanese Prime Minister Fu'ad al-Saniora's remarks that he 
prefers that the interrogation of the Syrian witnesses be 
done outside Lebanon, with or without coordination with the 
commission." 
"Positions Raising Hundreds of Questions" 
Izz-al-Din al-Darwish, an editorialist in government-owned 
Tishreen, wrote (11/17): "The investigations into Al- 
Hariri's assassination have publicly turned into a tool of 
political pressure on Syria and Lebanon for reasons that 
have absolutely nothing to do with the assassination 
crime....  The US Administration is taking advantage of the 
assassination to settle old scores with Syria, especially 
over Iraq.  The daily US accusations and threats to Syria 
are happening while the investigation commission has not yet 
issued its final verdict, and while Syria cooperates with 
the commission, urges it to continue its work, and stresses 
that there will be no limits to its cooperation if the aim 
is to uncover the perpetrators of the assassination crime." 
"Finding the truth about Al-Hariri's assassination is 
clearly and undisputedly a Syrian demand. Everybody knows 
that this truth is a Syrian interest. But what can Syria do 
if the others want to keep this issue as a card for 
political pressure and settlement of scores?" 
"Yet Syria, which seeks the truth, remains open to 
cooperation with the international investigation commission 
and to objective and balanced ideas and views, provided 
there are no preset positions and inclinations, and provided 
that the aim is not deliberate harm to sovereignty and 
dignity." 
"Syrian Cannot Be Isolated" 
Muhammad Khair Al-Jammali, an editorialist in government- 
owned Al-Thawra, wrote (11/17): "Condoleezza Rice and Ari'el 
Sharon have called for isolating Syria.... Syria is too 
strong to be isolated for two reasons: First, Syria is 
defending a just cause linked to its right to protect its 
national, Arab, and regional role and safeguard its 
independence, stability, and sovereignty against the plans 
of marginalization, cancellation, and national and pan-Arab 
fragmentation that target it and the countries of the region 
under false slogans of freedom and democracy, slogans that 
the democracy of death, destruction, and chaos in Iraq 
proved to be lies. Second, the nature of the tendentious 
campaign against Syria has been exposed as a campaign aimed 
at distorting Syria's role and support for just and rightful 
causes. It is a bald attempt to blame Syria for the failure 
of American policy in the region and make Israel the 
strongest power in the region, capable of controlling the 
region's present circumstances and future developments.... 
"Many countries and peoples in Asia, Africa, Europe, Latin 
America, and the Middle East have expressed solidarity with 
Syria.... The powers that are trying to isolate Syria are 
themselves isolated by most of the world...." 
Seche