05DAMASCUS5908
Damascus Media Reaction: Asad's Speech, Al-Hariri
Sun Nov 13 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 DAMASCUS 005908 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT 
VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND AFERNANDEZ, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O.12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Asad's Speech, Al-Hariri 
Investigations, Syria/Israel (11/10-13) 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Syrian papers over the weekend focused on 
President Asad's speech. Government-owned Tishreen and Al- 
Ba'th, which are usually not published on Fridays, appeared 
on Friday 11 November, along with the third official 
government-owned paper, Al-Thawra, to report on President 
Bashar Al-Asad's speech and the demonstrations in Damascus 
and other Syrian cities in support of Al-Asad and his 
positions. The papers published the full text of the speech 
and detailed reports and pictures from the various 
governorates on the solidarity demonstrations. 
 
Papers cited Syrian, Arab and international reactions to the 
speech, including that of UN SecGen Kofi Annan, who 
expressed happiness at President al-Asad's pledge to 
cooperate with the UN inquiry into the killing of former PM 
Al-Hariri. 
All papers carried a story about Louai Saqqa, a Syrian 
detainee in Istanbul reported to have received a proposition 
to give false testimony regarding the assassination of 
former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri in exchange for 
a large sum of money. His lawyer, Osman Karahan, said in a 
televised program broadcast by al-Jazeera that some 
foreigners visited the detainee at his prison and asked him 
to tell the international investigator of the Hariri 
assassination that a Syrian security official asked him to 
bring an Iraqi suicide bomber to declare his responsibility 
for the crime. 
Papers reported President Asad's message of condolences and 
solidarity to King Abdullah of Jordan, condemning the 
terrorist attacks in Jordan. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2. Selected Headlines: 
"Arab and international interest in President Asad's speech. 
The speech diagnosed the current situation and expressed the 
nation's aspirations" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 11/13) 
"At the second session of the Forum For the Future in Manama 
Foreign Minister Farouk al-Shara meets Bahraini Premier 
Sheikh Khalifa Ben Salman Al Khalifa, Arab League Secretary 
General Amr Mousa, High Representative for EU Foreign Policy 
and Security Javier Solana, Turkish Deputy Premier and 
Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul, Deputy Italian Foreign 
Minister and Head of the Italian Delegation Alfredo Mantika. 
Al-Shara underscores the importance of preventing any 
deviation from the main mission of the international 
investigation" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 11/13) 
"Day of Cohesion Between the People and the Leader; we 
refuse to bargain over dignity and sovereignty; the price of 
resistance is much lower than the price of chaos" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawa, 11/11) 
 
"Al-Asad makes a call of dignity and brave Syria responds; 
the age of tutelage is over; Bashar will not be the one who 
lowers his head or the head of his people to anyone" 
(Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 11/11) 
 
"The leader puts the nation face to face with the facts. 
President Bashar will not be the one who lowers his head or 
the head of his people to anyone. Campaign against Syria is 
an episode in a series that targets all Arab countries 
without exception. The Israeli element is present in all 
events in the region. Developments prove that Israel is the 
most prominent beneficiary" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
11/11) 
 
"Attorney of Louai Saqqa, a Syrian detainee in Istanbul: My 
client received an offer to give false testimony regarding 
former Lebanese PM Rafik Hariri's assassination in exchange 
for a large sum of money" (Government-owned Tishreen, 11/11) 
 
"UN SecGen Kofi Annan welcomes President al-Asad's pledge to 
cooperate with the UN inquiry into the killing of former PM 
Al-Hariri. No sanctions are mentioned and no evidence of 
infiltration through the Syrian-Iraqi border" (Government- 
owned Tishreen, 11/12) 
"Arab member of the Kenesset, Talab al-Sane': The 
Palestinian masses raise voices high in solidarity with 
Syria. The US threat targets all Arabs." (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 11/12) 
"The Russian Liberal-Democratic Party organizes solidarity 
march with Syria. Chairman of the Party Vladimir 
Zhyrinovsky: We support what was in President Al-Asad's 
speech" (Government-owned Tishreen, 11/12) 
"Jordanian security forces arrest 12 persons for questioning 
in connection to Wednesday night bombing attacks in Amman. 
News circulated that 4 Iraqis carried out the blasts 
including a woman" (Government-owned Tishreen, 11/12) 
"President Asad talks on the phone with President Mubarak 
and reviews with Arab League Chief Amr Mousa current 
developments and the importance of unified Arab solidarity 
with Syria. Mousa: Syria is cooperating fully with the 
International Investigation Committee. Mubarak and Annan 
underscore the importance of dealing wisely with Resolution 
1636" (Government-owned Tishreen, 11/10) 
 
"Judge Murad invites Mehlis to visit Syrian to sign a 
protocol of understanding and to discuss the best means and 
mechanisms of cooperation" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
11/10) 
 
"Scores of casualties and hundreds of injuries in three 
explosions that rocked three hotels in Amman. Syria: We 
condemn the terrorist explosions and express solidarity with 
Jordan" (Government-owned Tishreen, 11/10) 
 
¶3. Editorial Block Quotes: 
"Unity of Blood" 
Samir al-Shibani, a commentator in government-owned 
Tishreen, wrote (11/12): "Syria has always supported the 
Iraqi people and their unity and Arab role.... Damascus 
opened its doors to the Iraqis when they had no other place 
to go. Syria embraced the Iraqis who rebelled against 
Saddam's dictatorship and many of the current Iraqi 
political forces were born in Damascus and allowed to work 
without interference, dictates, or orders.... 
"Despite all the fabrications and accusations, Syria is 
determined to continue its fraternal constructive role, 
which places the interests of the Iraqi people above every 
other interest, and which views the blood of any Iraqi as 
the blood of any Syrian. Syria will do everything in its 
power to bury any domestic sedition in Iraq and will do 
anything to maintain the unity of Arab Iraq -- land, people, 
and heritage -- so that the country can regain its civilized 
role after it breaks free from the shackles of the 
occupation and its supporters...." 
"Al-Asad's Speech" 
Ahmad Dawwa, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
said (11/12) "Al-Asad accurately diagnosed the circumstances 
in the region, the challenges and threats it is facing, and 
the foreign schemes that target its geopolitical status.... 
Al-Asad shed light on basic issues in the history and social 
fabric of the region, issues that anti-Arab forces are 
trying to distance or delete from the Arab memory, using 
media and political means and raising slogans that appeal to 
people's sentiments. The aim is to invade minds and hearts 
before invading countries, and sweep away cultural identity 
and national existence before sweeping away borders, as the 
president said. 
"Western plans and deals ultimately seek to bring the Arab 
peoples to their knees and turn them into puppets in the 
hands of their enemies.... 
"President Al-Asad's speech stressed adherence to national 
and pan-Arab principles and to international legitimacy. It 
accurately and elaborately explained regional developments. 
It showed utmost firmness against anything that threatens 
the security of the citizen and the homeland. It expressed 
willingness to deal with the current circumstances in a 
flexible manner so as to serve national and pan-Arab 
interests and to expose the objectives of the covetous ones. 
The speech will create the required effect in Arab society 
and help inject further blood into the bodies of the 
nation's sons, fighters, and men of resistance, who stood 
fast in the past and will stand fast in the future." 
"Fear about the Loss of Truth" 
Izz-al-Din al-Darwish, an editorialist in government-owned 
Tishreen, commented (11/10): "Those who accuse Syria of not 
cooperating with the international investigation commission 
into Al-Hariri's assassination have bad intentions. They 
will keep saying the same thing whether Syria cooperates or 
not.... Syria wants the truth about Al-Hariri's 
assassination and is cooperating with the commission in a 
professional and judicial manner.... But what can Syria do 
if the US Administration, which dominates the Security 
Council and the investigation into Al-Hariri's 
assassination, has already passed judgment against Syria, 
asked its followers to support this judgment, and moved its 
lackeys in Lebanon to stir this wave of demagogy, sectarian 
sedition, and slander against Syria? 
"Judge Mehlis was greatly influenced by the anti-Syria 
climate in Lebanon following the assassination.... Although 
Mehlis did not accuse any Syrian, those who benefited from 
Al-Hariri's assassination in the West and Israel, and even 
in Lebanon, regrettably, rushed to make up stories, level 
accusations, and drive Mehlis to say things he is not 
convinced of and that the investigation has not proved.... 
"The investigation is not yet over. Syria is ready to do 
anything that will help reveal the truth and make the 
international community shoulder its responsibility. Syria 
fears nothing but politicization, which will bury the truth. 
If it makes some requests and presents some views regarding 
the investigation, it is because it really wants the 
international commission to arrive at sound results and 
issue a fair judicial verdict." 
"Fishing in Disturbed Water" 
Muhammad Khair Al-Jammali, an editorialist in government- 
owned Al-Thawra, commented (11/10): "Israeli PM Sharon, in 
his statement that Israel will not negotiate with Syria or 
withdraw from the Golan Heights, is wagering on the current 
international pressure and threats against Syria.... The 
Golan will always remain an integral part of Syria. 
"In the past Syria came under much stronger -- declared and 
undeclared -- campaigns of pressure, threats, and sieges, 
and it confronted them with a firm national unity that 
enabled it to emerge stronger than before. And Sharon will 
soon discover how wrong and fruitless is his wager on the 
current campaign of pressure.... 
"Syria is a key player in the region.... No force can cancel 
or curb its regional role.... Sharon's statements show that 
the party that threatens the stability of the region and the 
security and peace of the world is Israel, not Syria...." 
Seche