05DUBLIN1196
ORGANIZED CRIME IN IRELAND (C-CN5-00417)
Tue Sep 27 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Dublin
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 DUBLIN 001196 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/27/2014 
TAGS: PINR PREL PTER
SUBJECT: ORGANIZED CRIME IN IRELAND (C-CN5-00417) 
 
REF: SECSTATE 146246 
 
Classified By: POL/ECON CHIEF MARY DALY, FOR REASONS 1.4 (B), (D) 
 
¶1. (C)  Summary.  It is unlikely that there is large scale 
involvement of non-nationals in organized crime activities in 
the Republic of Ireland.  According to the EU's 2004 
Organized Crime Report, Ireland is unique in that its 
organized criminal elements are comprised almost entirely of 
Irish nationals, most of whom are known to each other.  Any 
involvement they may have with foreign criminals is suspected 
of taking place outside of the country.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (C)  The following answers are keyed to reftel questions: 
 
¶A.  Are there organized crime groups present in the host 
country that originated in the following countries? 
 
Russia, Ukraine, Italy, The Balkans (Albania, Serbia, 
Bosnia), Japan, Greater China (China, Hong Kong, Macau, or 
Taiwan), or West Africa?  What is the extent or nature of 
their presence? 
 
--According to Criminal Assets Bureau Detective Inspector 
Denis O'Leary, if there is any organized criminal activity in 
Ireland of Ukrainian, Russian, Chinese, and Nigerian 
nationals, it would likely take place in terms of involvement 
in their respective ethnic migrant communities.  Irish 
nationals are the primary suspects in organized crime in 
Ireland.  According to the 2004 European Union Organized 
Crime Report (EUOCR), non-Irish involvement occurs mainly 
outside of Ireland, principally with contacts of Irish 
criminals living abroad. 
 
¶B.  What types of criminal activity are these groups engaged 
in?  What is the economic impact of the criminal activity? 
 
--There is little evidence that these groups operate in 
Ireland.  However, it is suspected that domestic groups may 
network with foreign organizations abroad to source narcotics 
for Ireland. 
 
--According to the EUOCR, domestic organized crime groups 
engage primarily in drug trafficking, and to a lesser extent, 
cigarettes.  The most common types of drugs smuggled into 
Ireland are cocaine, heroin, and cannabis.  The main suspects 
in the smuggling of cannabis and cocaine are Irish nationals 
residing in Spain. Likewise, Irish nationals residing in the 
UK are suspected of organizing the heroin trade into the 
Republic.  Ecstasy, another drug on the rise, is sourced 
mainly through Irish criminals residing in Holland. 
 
--According to O'Leary and Gerardine Rowley of Ruhama (an NGO 
involved in the rehabilitation of prostitutes and victims of 
trafficking) there is anecdotal evidence that the 
above-mentioned foreign groups operate in Ireland.  These 
groups are suspected of having low-scale involvement in human 
trafficking, but there has yet to be a successful linkage to 
these groups in such cases. 
 
¶C.  What front companies do the groups use?  What 
relationship, if any, is there between the criminal groups 
listed above and crime groups indigenous to the host country? 
Are there indications that the groups listed above cooperate 
with each other or other international criminals? 
 
The EU Organized Crime Report suggests that Ireland is unique 
among European countries, in that organized crime elements in 
Ireland are Irish, know each other and cooperate in efforts, 
therefore creating a monopoly. 
 
¶D.  Are there indications of links or connections between 
these groups and terrorist organizations in the host country? 
 
There are no indications that these groups play a prominent 
role in Ireland.  The IRA, the Continuity IRA (CIRA), and the 
Real IRA (RIRA) are terrorist groups.  However, the IRA 
announced July 28, 2005 that it would lay down its arms.  On 
September 26, the Independent International Commission on 
Decommissioning confirmed the IRA had put its arsenal of 
weapons, explosives and ammunition beyond use.  Each of these 
groups is suspected of being heavily involved in organized 
crime.  Any connection to the above-mentioned foreign groups 
is tenuous and would suggest associations outside of Ireland. 
 
 
¶E.  Is there evidence of corrupt relationships between these 
groups and host country businessmen or government officials? 
What is the nature of these relationships? If possible, 
please provide examples of these crime groups coercing 
business or government officials. 
 
There is no evidence of corrupt relationships between the 
foreign organized crime groups mentioned in para A and Irish 
businessmen or officials. 
KENNY