05GABORONE560
SADC SECRETARIAT STANDS BY ITS ZIMBABWE
Thu Apr 21 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Gaborone
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GABORONE 000560 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM ZI BC SADC
SUBJECT: SADC SECRETARIAT STANDS BY ITS ZIMBABWE 
ELECTION ASSESSMENT 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  In an April 7 meeting with AF/S 
Director Mozena, SADC Executive Secretary Ramsamy was 
adamant that he stood by the SADC observer assessment 
of the Zimbabwe election as `peaceful, well managed, 
credible and transparent.'  Ramsamy suggested cost 
sharing between donors and public and private sector as 
ways to circumvent the mutual U.S. and SADC bans on 
development assistance without Zimbabwe.  He seemed to 
regret the minimal degree of US-SADC engagement.  End 
summary. 
 
¶2. (U) AF/S Director Dan Mozena and SADC Executive 
Secretary Dr. Prega Ramsamy met on Thursday, April 7, 
 
SIPDIS 
2005, at the SADC Secretariat. Also attending were DCM 
Aroian and Pol/Econ Chief Butterman as note taker. 
Ramsamy emphasized that he attached sufficient 
importance to this meeting that he had in fact 
specifically delayed his departure to Cape Town for a 
SADC defense issues meeting. 
 
------------------------------- 
DEFENDING THE ZIMBABWE ELECTION 
------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) They first discussed the recently-concluded 
Zimbabwe elections. Ramsamy defended SADC's assessment 
of the elections as "peaceful, well managed, credible 
and transparent."  Ramsamy's argued that two weeks had 
been plenty of time for the 55 SADC observers to assess 
the elections.  Moreover, ambassadors from SADC 
countries had witnessed the run-up.  He refused to be 
drawn into a discussion as to whether they were "free 
and fair," saying this was charged language from the 
West.  He further continued that "the Americans and 
Europeans already declared the Zimbabwe election in 
advance as unfree and unfair."  Ramsamy insisted the 
SADC-Parliamentary Forum had been invited, under the 
larger SADC umbrella invitation.  Any complaints about 
irregularities in the election process had recourse to 
a court of appeal, said Ramsamy. In any case, he stated 
the elections were a great improvement over those of 
¶2000. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) When Mozena suggested the 2000 elections 
might not be the best benchmark to use, Ramsamy grew 
visibly annoyed. He did admit, however, that some 
voters were turned away for valid technical reasons and 
that there is `much to be done' with regard to access 
to state media by the opposition.  Ramsamy also thought 
further investigation needed to take place on the role 
of food as a political weapon during the election. 
"Appropriate action must be taken," he said. 
 
 
 
SADC-U.S.COOPERATION: AROUND THE ZIMBABWE OBSTACLE 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The impasse on U.S.-SADC cooperation came up. 
Ramsamy maintained what has been SADC's stance for 
several years: SADC favored closer collaboration with 
the U.S. only if the entire membership of SADC was 
included, calling it "our unchangeable position." 
Mozena mentioned current areas of cooperation, such as 
counter-terrorism, combating trafficking in persons, 
and HIV/AIDS, as well as enhancing food security.  How 
best to expand these was the creative challenge. 
Ramsamy regretted that the U.S.-SADC Forum, which he 
had helped to launch, had lapsed.  He urged that SADC 
and the U.S. find a way of "helping each other without 
flouting regulations."   He cited the example of the 
SADC region upper air space study, where private sector 
funding is used to support the Zimbabwe component while 
USG funding is utilized for the other countries.  He 
suggested that joint financing, with the EU, or other 
cooperating partners, might be a useful mechanism. 
 
---------------- 
Trade Agreements 
---------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Free trade agreements, as well as food security and 
ITC, were also discussed as areas in which the U.S. could 
assist SADC.  Ramsamy reiterated that the SADC FTA is scheduled 
for 2008 implementation and a customs union by 2012, but 
because of supply problems in the region, implementation of 
both might be staggered.  Mozena reminded Ramsamy that the U.S. 
was unlikely to support a sequential approach to the U.S. - 
Southern African Customs Union FTA currently under discussion. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Ramsamy, a Mauritian, pointed to Mauritius, which is 
turning itself into a virtually duty-free country as a possible 
regional model.  He noted that SADC will soon have a forum with 
India, and consultations with China are to take place in the 
future.  The discussion concluded cordially, with Mozena 
expressing his appreciation for the frank exchange.  Ramsamy, 
alluding to Zimbabwe, stated that by trying to be more 
flexible, situations could change.  "It doesn't help to push 
people against the wall." 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Comment: Ramsamy is finishing out the last five 
months of his contract as SADC Executive Secretary but, to our 
knowledge, has never before so strongly defended his 
organization on the topic of the Zimbabwean election.  We 
suspect that, always cautious about speaking for SADC, Ramsamy 
knows well that the SADC observation exercise in Zimbabwe was 
flawed and sought to make the best of a difficult situation in 
which Zimbabwe did not ease the path for the SADC observers. 
Ramsamy favors enhanced US-SADC engagement but has no mandate 
from SADC governments to do more.  End comment. 
HUGGINS