05HALIFAX168
RUNWAY CONSTRUCTION LEAVES HALIFAX AIRPORT IN THE FOG
Tue Aug 02 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Halifax
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HALIFAX 000168 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR ECON CA
SUBJECT: RUNWAY CONSTRUCTION LEAVES HALIFAX AIRPORT IN THE FOG 
 
¶1.  Summary: A series of foggy days in July caused the 
cancellation or diversion of hundreds of flights to and from 
Halifax International Airport and stranded thousands of 
passengers, sullying the airport's once-sterling reputation for 
customer service.  In response, the Halifax International 
Airport Authority (HIAA) recently held meetings with 
stakeholders to explain the causes of the delays which include 
work on the runways and Instrument Landing System (ILS).  With 
the airport undergoing a four-year expansion and upgrade program 
the worst may be yet to come for travelers.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  Halifax International Airport is in the process of major 
runway construction as part of a four year, C$40 million 
expansion program.   The airport welcomes more than three 
million passengers each year.  In the 2004 annual survey done by 
the International Air Transport Association and co-sponsored by 
the airports council, HIA landed three top-place finishes in the 
customer satisfaction survey and third in best improvement of 
overall satisfaction.  However, as a result of poor weather 
conditions (dense fog) and an inoperable ILS, the airport has 
slipped in public confidence due to the significant disruption 
to flights.  To try to control the damage, HIAA has been more 
proactive in alerting travelers to potential delays and has 
arranged meetings with the airlines, regulators, associated 
agencies and community leaders to brief them and receive 
feedback. 
 
¶3. At the beginning of May, HIAA embarked on a major five-month 
airfield reconstruction program that it says is vital to the 
integrity and operation of the airport, allowing the airport to 
continue to meet regulatory standards and to ensure the safety 
of passengers, crew, and staff.  The reconstruction involves 
extensive improvements to the airport's electrical and paving 
work, including in-pavement and side-pavement lights.  This 
construction affected the airport's ILS.   HIAA noted that 
contrary to press claims, there are no portable ILS or other 
alternative precision approach navigation aids that meet 
regulatory standards available -- military ILS is not certified 
in Canada for civilian aviation use. 
 
¶4.  HIAA, although sympathetic to its passengers, said that 
there had been no way to avoid a project of this nature and 
length without including the month of July, even though July and 
August are two of the busiest tourism months for Nova Scotia. 
Before beginning the project, a survey of weather conditions, 
prevailing winds, temperature, and runway usage was conducted 
and HIAA had consulted with Transport Canada for recommendations 
of the best timeline for the project.  Unfortunately, unusually 
dense fog during the month of July has caused many, and at times 
all, flights to be diverted to Moncton or cancelled. 
 
¶5.  HIAA argued that before commencing the project, it met with 
many of the major players potentially impacted by the 
construction of the runways, including media, airlines, and 
travel agents.  While HIAA expressed sympathy for the public and 
agreed that it should take responsibility for the impact the 
delay has had on passengers and airlines, it also stated that 
accountability must also come from the airlines, media, and 
travel agents.  HIAA has now put in a communications plan to 
publish daily travel/weather advisories on its website, which 
also contains information on the reconstruction of the airport 
along with frequently asked questions about the reconstruction 
program.  Further, HIAA will meet regularly with the airlines 
and work with them in putting together a contingency plan for 
any future diverted flights due to inclement weather.  HIAA also 
plans to meet with Transport Canada and NavCanada with respect 
to the remaining phases of the construction, to examine any 
options for more flexibility in the system to allow them to 
respond to potential weather impacts.  One of the two runways 
reopened July 14, 2005, temporarily shortened in length, but 
with a fully operational navigational system in service.  HIAA 
expressed optimism that operations would be back to normal by 
early October.   HIAA reinforced that there number one priority 
is the safety of passengers. 
 
¶6.  Comment:   While the consensus of the attendees at the HIAA 
briefing was that more should have been done to make the public 
aware of the reconstruction of the runways and the potential 
effect it could have on travelers, there was no way that HIAA 
could have anticipated the severity of the weather.   The 
question of who had the responsibility for advising airline 
travelers of the possible disruption of flights was left 
unanswered.  In the end, attendees from the travel industry, 
airlines, and government offices all agreed that the runway 
reconstruction was much needed. 
 
HILL