05HALIFAX158
BALANCING TRADE, TOURISM, AND SECURITY ON THE MAINE BORDER
Mon Jul 18 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Halifax
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HALIFAX 000158 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD PBTS ELTN PREL CA
SUBJECT: BALANCING TRADE, TOURISM, AND SECURITY ON THE MAINE BORDER 
 
REF: Halifax 113 
 
¶1.  Summary:  At the Maine-Canada border, disparities between 
U.S. and Canadian border security initiatives and processes are 
particularly evident in the areas of customs and immigration 
unification, technological surveillance capabilities, and border 
screening priorities.   Border officials also voiced sharply 
differing views on the impact of a proposed new bridge in Calais 
and the effect of tighter border controls on food shipments to 
Campobello Island.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  Halifax consular staff visited with CBP (U.S. Customs and 
Border Protection) and CBSA (Canadian Border Services Agency) 
July 8-10 on both sides of the Maine-Canada border, at 
Yarmouth-Bar Harbor, St.Stephen-Calais, and Houlton-Woodstock. 
 
Integration 
 
¶3.  Both CBP and CBSA are the result of the respective 
governments' post 9/11 decisions to unify customs and 
immigration functions at the border.  Overall, CBP seems to be 
well on its way in the unification of immigration and customs at 
the ports of entry.   Cross-training initiatives appear to be 
fairly successful with border agents of both legacy agencies 
working well together in the screening of both passenger and 
cargo traffic.  Some port directors indicated that there was 
some hesitancy in working towards full integration among those 
with a long institutional experience; however, retirements 
combined with influxes of new staff post-9/11 have eased the 
transition.  Most, if not all, supervisors and directors 
appeared to be making complete unification a priority. 
 
¶4.  CBSA seems to be lagging behind on unification.  Although 
technically under the umbrella institution of CBSA, immigration 
and customs are still located in separate offices and wear their 
traditional uniforms.   While customs has just recently assumed 
the management of immigration, few supervisors appear to have 
had any training in immigration issues.  Although the Canadians 
emphasized the priority of security, U.S. customs and border 
patrol appeared much closer to a number of their border security 
goals than their Canadian counterparts.  (Comment:  It should be 
noted that CBP had a head start on unification of nearly two 
years.  End Comment.) 
 
Infrastructure and Technology 
 
¶5.  Border delays remain an issue of great concern at all the 
border crossings.  Barriers were largely due to infrastructure 
restraints rather than staffing numbers.  This is particularly 
apparent at Calais, Maine, where a one-lane bridge causes 
traffic bottlenecks leading to average wait times of one to 
one-and-one half hours.  This has been particularly troublesome 
for commercial traffic, but will hopefully be resolved with the 
construction of a new bridge and border crossing, which Calais 
believes will increase truck traffic.  (Note:  Ambassador 
Wilkins will visit the Calais - St. Stephen crossing at the end 
of July.  End note.) 
 
¶6.  However, Houlton and Woodstock border officials said they do 
not believe the construction of the Calais bridge will result in 
a diversion of  traffic to Calais.   Rather, they expect traffic 
through Houlton-Woodstock would increase from current levels, in 
spite of the new bridge.  The officials noted that insurance 
companies already charge higher rates to trucking companies who 
use the St. Stephen-Calais route, vice Woodstock-Houlton, due to 
the condition of the Route 9 on the Maine side of the Calais 
border.  (Comment:  Officials in Calais and St. Stephen stressed 
the efforts of Maine DOT to keep Route 9 clear in winter months, 
but made no mention of the subject of insurance.  While Maine 
DOT recognizes the need to further improve Route 9, the State 
lacks funding to do so.  End Comment.)    Houlton officials 
talked of plans for a two-lane expansion to allow for more rapid 
processing of FAST-pass holders and commercial trucks. 
Woodstock officials noted the New Brunswick government has 
already started upgrading the last 30 kilometers of two-lane 
road on the Canadian side to four lanes.    Both agreed that 
Houlton-Woodstock is, and will continue to be the preferred 
route for commercial traffic now and in the future. 
 
¶7.  Consulate personnel were given the opportunity to view the 
processing of both passenger and commercial vehicles at all US 
POE (ports of entry) and were quite impressed with the 
technological advances in surveillance and processing.  Of 
paricularinteet wee he vido an udio urveillance 
technology covering some 20 Maine POE's, which gives Houlton 
border officials the ability to monitor numerous land ports of 
entry remotely.  Holton, unlike Calais, does not yet have 
US-VISIT and could state no timeframe for acquiring such. 
Woodstock officials noted they had had a great deal of success 
in enrolling Canadian truckers in FAST, but that US 
participation levels lagged far behind. 
 
Revenue vs. Security:  zero or positive sum? 
 
¶8.   A recent report from the Canadian Senate calling for arming 
of CBSA personnel and raising of the personnel exemption for 
Canadian residents was the cause of much speculation amongst 
Canadian and U.S. border officials.   The report proposed a 
major increase in the amount of allowable goods for returning 
Canadian residents, freeing expensive resources from the task of 
revenue collection and reassigning them to strengthening border 
security.   CBSA officials, nevertheless, were quick to point 
out that border security, and not revenue collection, is always 
the first priority for Canadian customs officers.  U.S. officers 
were also receptive to this proposal believing that with the 
strong Canadian dollar this would lead to increased cross-border 
shopping by Canadians. 
 
Campobello 
¶9.  U.S. officials in Calais presented a vastly different 
picture of the effect of tighter border controls on food 
shipments to Campobello Island than that conveyed by New 
Brunswick officials (reftel).  CBP officers said traffic to 
Campobello was flowing normally.  They acknowledged there had 
been growing pains - many on Campobello did not even own 
computers prior to the regulations implementation.  CBP 
explained they had devoted several officers time over a 
considerable period, familiarizing Islanders with the new rules 
and assisting them in complying.  The net result, they said, is 
that traffic is flowing smoothly.  During a recent visit to 
Campobello Island CG noted that the grocery stores seemed to be 
well-stocked with fresh food and beef. 
 
¶10.  Comment:  It is evident that CBP and CBSA are operating 
under different budgetary restraints - a distinct lack of 
funding on the Canadian side - and that the CBP is further along 
in its technological surveillance capability.  Nonetheless, 
Canadian officials were quick to point out that their number one 
priority remains border security and continued and close 
cooperation with U.S. Department of Homeland Security officials. 
 Despite significant differences in terms of levels of 
integration of the customs and immigration branches and 
different screening processes the post was impressed with the 
overall efficiency and quality of both countries border security 
operations.  At the end of each meeting an open invitation was 
extended to both CBP and CBSA officials to visit Consulate 
Halifax in order to facilitate a continued dialogue and 
understanding of post's consular operations.  Both CBP and CBSA 
responded positively to the invitations. 
 
HILL