05HANOI2265
AMBASSADOR DISCUSSES IRAQI CONSTITUTION, APEC
Wed Aug 31 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Hanoi
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HANOI 002265 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT PASS TO EAP/MLS; EAP/RSP; EAP/EP 
 
State for USTR E. Bryan 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ETRD AMGT OVIP IZ VM APEC CVR WTO
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR DISCUSSES IRAQI CONSTITUTION, APEC 
EXPORT CONTROLS, WTO ACCESSION, NEW EMBASSY, CATFISH 
 
Reftel: State 158420 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) During an August 30 meeting with Vice Foreign 
Minister Le Van Bang, Ambassador Marine raised the USG 
desire to know whether GVN will co-host the APEC Export 
Controls Conference and Post's hope to sign a contract 
within weeks for land for the new embassy compound. The 
Ambassador also delivered reftel's points on the new Iraqi 
Constitution and noted National Security Advisor Hadley's 
agreement to meet with the Vietnamese Foreign Minister on 
September 23.  VFM Bang raised the GVN's desire to make 
progress in its bilateral WTO accession negotiations and 
explained that the GVN will inform Post soon of its 
desiderata for the FM's proposed meeting with the Secretary. 
He reiterated that the GVN understands the importance of the 
APEC export controls meeting but wants to proceed carefully 
before committing to a conference because of its possible 
impact on U.S./Vietnam/China relations.  He expressed GVN's 
desire to work with the USG to conclude a contract for land 
for a new embassy.  VFM Bang also raised the issue of the 
recent ban on catfish imports from Vietnam by three southern 
states.  The Ambassador and VFM Bang also discussed at 
length religious freedom issues and the USG decision not to 
lift Vietnam's designation as a Country of Particular 
Concern for religious freedom violations (septel).  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) In an August 30 meeting with Vice Foreign Minister 
Le Van Bang, the Ambassador raised several areas of USG 
concern.  On the subject of the APEC Export Control 
Conference, the Ambassador reminded Bang that the United 
States would like to know whether or not the GVN will act as 
co-host and emphasized that this remains a high priority for 
the USG.  He urged the GVN to provide a positive response 
this week to the Deputy Secretary's recent message on this 
subject.  The Ambassador also noted the USG's desire to 
receive an answer this week regarding Vietnam's willingness 
to negotiate and sign a contract for land for the new 
embassy compound (NEC).  He warned that the GVN's tardiness 
in agreeing to reserve the Ciputra property for the NEC 
might cause years of delay in building a proper embassy here 
in Hanoi. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The Ambassador also informed Bang of National 
Security Advisor Hadley's agreement to meet with Foreign 
Minister Nguyen Dy Nien when he visits Washington on 
September 23.  He advised Bang that we are exploring a 
possible meeting between FM Nien and Secretary Rice, but her 
availability is not yet clear.  The Ambassador also 
delivered Reftel points on the new Iraqi Constitution, as 
well as the fact sheet and the Secretary's statement.  VFM 
Bang had no official comment in response to the Ambassador's 
presentation on Iraq. 
 
¶4. (SBU) For his part, VFM Bang expressed the GVN's 
determination to make progress in its WTO accession 
negotiations.  The GVN has concluded negotiations with India 
and China, along with a host of others, but the Vietnamese 
understand that everything depends on the United States. 
For example, Latin American countries and Australia and New 
Zealand will not proceed until the United States gives the 
"green light."  "If the United States continues to block 
accession, there will be negative feelings here," Bang 
asserted. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Continuing, the Vice Minister said that FM Nien 
originally did not wish to visit Washington.  However, after 
PM Khai's visit, the MFA decided that Nien should meet 
personally with Secretary Rice to continue discussing issues 
raised in the PM's visit, particularly plans for APEC 2006 
and the CPC designation.  The GVN will inform Embassy Hanoi 
of the exact desiderata for FM Nien's visit soon.  On the 
APEC Export Control Conference, the GVN considers this the 
most important current issue in relations among itself and 
the United States and China.  As such, the GVN wants to 
proceed "meticulously" and "do more homework" before 
committing to co-hosting the conference.  The GVN 
understands its obligations as next year's APEC host, but 
the possible impact of this conference on U.S -China - 
Vietnam relations makes it a tough decision. 
 
¶6. (SBU) On the NEC, VFM Bang said that the GVN is delighted 
that the USG has dropped the idea of the Russian property 
for the new Embassy.  The new location will eventually be 
more central, hence better, and the GVN will work with the 
USG to close the deal.  In closing, Bang raised the issue of 
the recent ban on catfish imports from Vietnam by three 
southern states, questioning whether these were "politically 
motivated."  The Ambassador responded that we are seeking 
more information on the measures taken by Louisiana, 
Mississippi, and Alabama.  He stressed that the FDA ban on 
shipment from some companies is based on a scientific study 
that showed contamination in recent shipments.  He 
encouraged the GVN to urge the Vietnamese seafood industry 
to better monitor itself.  Bang countered that the recent 
tests were suspect, but the Ambassador assured him that the 
FDA's tests are impartial and scientific. 
 
MARINE