05HOCHIMINHCITY1299
VIETNAMESE BRIDES TO TAIWAN
Tue Dec 20 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Ho Chi Minh City
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 HO CHI MINH CITY 001299 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREF PREL CVIS KWMN ELAB SMIG SOCI TW VM TIP
SUBJECT: VIETNAMESE BRIDES TO TAIWAN 
 
REF: 04 HCM 1494 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: During a December 6 meeting with DPO and 
PolOff, representatives of the HCMC Taipei Economic and Cultural 
Office (TECO) said that in 2005 they had instituted a system of 
one-on-one interviews with prospective Vietnamese brides and 
their Taiwanese fiancees in response to mounting fraud concerns. 
 TECO estimates that some 90,000 Vietnamese women have been 
issued marriage visas to Taiwan, but once in Taiwan there is no 
effective control or monitoring of the women.  One Taiwanese 
immigration study found that nearly 50 percent of Vietnamese 
brides in Taipei County are not living with their husbands and 
are unaccounted for.  Preliminary research suggests that these 
women have "disappeared" into the unofficial economy.  However, 
additional monitoring of Vietnamese overseas migration trends 
and programs to counsel prospective Vietnamese brides -- for 
those headed to Taiwan as well as to emerging destinations such 
as South Korea -- is warranted.  End Summary. 
 
Vietnamese Brides to Taiwan 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Increasingly common over the past decade, the 
phenomenon of young Vietnamese women from poor communities in 
the Mekong Delta marrying Taiwanese men has drawn increasing 
scrutiny from HCMC officials and media outlets.  Over the past 
year, local HCMC officials have taken some limited steps to 
address the issue.  For example, the HCMC Women's Union launched 
a self-funded initiative to create a counseling center for 
Vietnamese women who plan to marry foreign husbands.  The Union 
hoped to help the fiancees avoid situations such that faced by a 
number of Vietnamese women who unknowingly were married to 
disabled men to be their caregivers. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Last year, the Women's Union representatives told a 
visiting State Department official that from 1993 through May 
2004, 41,900 women from Vietnam's southernmost 13 provinces 
became overseas brides.  A large percentage of these went to 
Taiwan.    According to the Women's Union data, 69 percent 
married men who were at least 20 years their elder; 80 percent 
were unemployed prior to marriage; and 75 percent had low 
education levels -- some were illiterate.  Many did not speak 
their future husband's language.  On average, the brides' 
families received 6 million Vietnamese Dong (USD 375) from 
marriage brokers, according to Women's Union statistics. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) To follow up on the issue, on December 6, DPO and 
PolOff met with Taipei Economic and Cultural Office (TECO) 
Director General Sonny Chen, Deputy Director General Chen 
Borshow and Director of the Consular Division Larry Su.  The 
officials estimated that since 1995, TECO had issued spousal 
visas to 90,000 Vietnamese women from its offices in Hanoi and 
HCMC.   TECO officials first started tracking the numbers of 
Vietnamese brides to Taiwan in 1995, when they processed 1,476 
applicants.  The number rose to 13,863 in 2000, and remained 
over 10,000 per year from 2001-2004.  The TECO officials stated 
that Vietnamese brides constitute 70% of foreign brides coming 
to Taiwan, excluding mainland Chinese brides. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The majority of these brides met their grooms through a 
highly evolved marriage brokerage system in Vietnam and Taiwan. 
Since marriage brokers are illegal in Vietnam, the brokers 
routinely pose as "travel agents" who "facilitate" the travel of 
the Taiwanese men to Vietnam.  The TECO officials told us that 
the typical groom pays USD 6,000 to 10,000 for a "full package," 
which includes one or multiple trips to Vietnam, the opportunity 
to pick a bride from a lineup of young women, and any marriage 
ceremonies and paperwork needed to complete the migration 
process in both countries. 
 
¶6. (SBU) While the migration of brides to Taiwan traditionally 
was a southern Vietnam phenomenon, increasing numbers are coming 
from northern provinces, with 1,200 spousal visa applications 
received in Hanoi this year, according to Consular Division 
Director Su.  DG Chen noted that whereas Vietnamese families in 
the South may receive some money (typically USD 200-300) for the 
marriage of their daughter to a Taiwanese, he has heard that 
families in northern provinces pay as much as USD 600 for their 
daughter to marry a Taiwanese. 
 
Once In Taiwan 
---------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) The TECO officials cited a survey conducted by police 
in Taipei County in March 2005 which showed that 47 percent of 
Vietnamese brides in that county were not living with their 
husbands.  The Taiwanese authorities have no statistics about 
the current status of these women.  Although hard data is 
difficult to obtain, the TECO officials said that domestic abuse 
can be a problem in these marriages, and cited age differences, 
language barriers and cultural norms common to Taiwan and 
Vietnam of dominant men and subservient women as contributing 
factors.  They also noted that no one performs a criminal or 
domestic abuse check of the prospective Taiwanese groom prior to 
the marriage. 
 
¶8. (SBU) A limited number of interviews conducted by the 
Mobility Research and Support Center (MRSC), a local HCMC NGO, 
indicated that perhaps 10 percent of Vietnamese women who 
returned to Vietnam from Taiwan claimed that they were in 
abusive marriages, although none of those interviewed said they 
were trafficked for sexual or labor exploitation.  The TECO 
officials told us that Taiwan has set up hotlines for women to 
report domestic abuse, with accompanying Vietnamese-language 
advertisements to inform women how to report mistreatment. 
 
¶9. (SBU) DG Chen said there is no effective system for tracking 
immigrants once they enter Taiwan.  Vietnamese brides receive a 
6-month resident visa upon entry to Taiwan.  They are 
subsequently required to register with the police for their 
Alien Resident Certificates and re-entry permits, which are 
valid for one year.  After three years, a bride can apply for 
Taiwanese citizenship if she renounces her Vietnamese 
citizenship.  Theoretically, during those three years, if a 
bride does not live with her husband, the marriage would be 
considered fraudulent and her stay in Taiwan rendered illegal. 
In reality, the police do not have the resources to monitor 
whether these brides live with their husbands.  Consular 
Division Director Su initially estimated that there were over 
10,000 Vietnamese living illegally in Taiwan; Deputy DG Chen 
Borshow shook his head and said there were "many, many more than 
10,000." 
 
TECO's response 
------------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) The TECO officials told us that in response to growing 
concern in Taiwan, TECO HCMC in January 2005 initiated 
one-on-one spousal visa interviews with prospective Taiwanese 
brides and their fiances.  Previously, TECO had held group 
"interviews" with 100 to 120 couples, where general information 
was provided and visas approved almost automatically.   Prior to 
2005, only a handful of cases were refused, typically when the 
Vietnamese woman had a communicable disease, a police record in 
Vietnam, or a prior illegal stay in Taiwan.  In 2004, 10,912 
spousal visa cases were processed and approved.  In contrast, 
through November 2005, 5,170 spousal cases have been approved in 
HCMC.  DG Chen estimated that thousands more -- 30 to 35 percent 
of cases -- had been rejected outright since initiation of 
one-on-one interviews. 
 
¶11. (SBU) According to Su, couples rarely admit during the 
interview that they met through marriage brokers.  Instead, he 
typically hears that a "relative"  introduced them.  None of the 
TECO officials with whom we spoke would say what criteria they 
used to determine whether a relationship was legitimate.  They 
explained that the lack of a common language was not sufficient 
reason for rejection.  Although Chen maintained that "99% of 
these marriages are for financial reasons," this too was not 
grounds for disqualification.  They implied that they reject a 
large number of cases of disabled Taiwanese men who seek young 
Vietnamese women as brides.  Beginning in 2005, TECO has 
required couples receiving visas to attend a mandatory two-hour 
information session where women are informed about their rights 
under Taiwanese law. 
 
No Visa, No Marriage Certificate 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶12. (SBU) Couples applying for spousal visas at TECO are not 
legally married at the time of the visa interview.  If the 
spousal visa is approved, TECO will issue a certificate of 
unmarried status to the Taiwanese citizen, a document required 
by GVN for a couple to apply for a marriage certificate.  The 
TECO officials expressed surprise that USG practice is to issue 
Affidavits of Single Status to U.S. citizens without an 
interview, asking how we know they are legitimate.  PolOff 
explained that consular officials serve as notaries in these 
instances, not as authenticators, which was how Director General 
Chen characterized the process of issuing the certificate of 
unmarried status for Taiwanese.  Deputy DG Chen Borshaw added 
that TECO found it easier to justify rejecting cases if the 
couple is not yet legally married. 
 
Immigration Laws Needed 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) DG Chen fretted that Taiwan currently has no 
Department of Immigration or equivalent and few laws addressing 
immigration directly.  Chen indicated that he had long lobbied 
for legislation to implement a comprehensive immigration law, 
but only recently has the influx of foreign brides and the 
accompanying social implications caught the attention of 
political leaders.  Legislation may be drafted in 2006.  In this 
context, TECO officials were eager to hear about our visa 
issuance and immigration processes and policies.  They were 
especially interested in our fingerprinting process in which 
fingerprints taken at the visa interview are accessed by 
immigration officials when the approved visa applicant enters 
the U.S.; TECO HCMC does not fingerprint visa applicants. 
 
¶14. (SBU) Comment:  Survey data indicating that nearly half the 
Vietnamese women in Taipei County are not living with their 
husbands, and the high rejection rates of TECO one-on-one 
interviews in 2005, suggest that many Vietnamese women have 
fallen -- intentionally or unintentionally -- through the 
cracks.  More research is needed to examine the motives of the 
brides and grooms entering into marriage contracts and what 
actually happens once the women arrive in Taiwan.  Similarly, 
continued monitoring of Vietnamese overseas migration trends and 
counseling for prospective Vietnamese brides appear warranted. 
For example, TECO's more rigorous interviewing process for 
spousal visas may push more Vietnamese women towards marriage 
with South Koreans, which MRSC reports is increasing from a low 
base very rapidly, perhaps by as much as 75 percent in 2005. 
 
¶15. (SBU) Comment, continued:  The International Organization 
for Migration (IOM) is seeking funding to launch a program to 
distribute contact cards to prospective brides with information 
about Vietnamese-speaking NGOs in their destination country at 
the Office of External Relations in HCMC, where the women go for 
pre-departure registration. This program aims to provide a 
contact for women in abusive situations, particularly those 
where the husband seeks to maintain control of the relationship 
by isolating or confining his wife.  IOM also proposes to run a 
one-day pre-departure orientation for Vietnamese women marrying 
Taiwanese men that would provide basic cross-cultural 
information as well as data on social assistance networks in 
Taiwan.  IOM is currently awaiting approval from the Women's 
Union for this project.  However, some GVN officials reportedly 
have expressed concern that requiring all women marrying 
Taiwanese to take this course might be viewed as too 
authoritarian.  End Comment. 
CHERN