05KABUL5176
INAUGURATION OF AFGHAN PARLIAMENT
Tue Dec 20 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KABUL 005176 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INL/FO AND SA/FO AMB QUINN 
NSC FOR AHARRIMAN/KAMEND 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PTER PREL KCRM KDEM AF
SUBJECT: INAUGURATION OF AFGHAN PARLIAMENT 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: The inauguration ceremonies for Afghanistans 
first Parliament in over 30 years began shortly after 10 a.m. 
on the cold and cloudy morning of 19 December.  The city was 
under strict security, with most roads and even pedestrian 
traffic strictly controlled.  Both the upper and lower houses 
of the new Parliament, together with the Cabinet and foreign 
representatives, assembled in the Wolesi Jirga Plenary Hall 
at the recently renovated Parliament building.  Darulaman 
Palace - the future home of the Parliament  is still under 
reconstruction, but the present temporary quarters gave a 
feeling of closeness and camaraderie to the assembly.  The 
Parliamentarians, men and women who personified all facets 
of modern Afghan history - from ex-communists to mujaheddin 
fighters to old aristocrats to former Taleban and many ex- 
refugees who had fled Afghanistan to Iran, Pakistan and the 
West  were all joined together in their new roles as 
representatives of the Afghan people.  The mood was dignified 
but excited, befitting the solemn occasion and the presence 
of so much political history and past conflict.  The American 
delegation included Vice President and Mrs. Cheney, the 
Ambassador and LTG Karl Eikenberry.  A major portion of the 
ceremony was taken by President Karzais State-of- the-Union 
Address to the new Assembly.  END SUMMARY. 
 
A DIGNIFIED OPENING 
------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) The ceremonies inaugurating the new Parliament on 
December 19 were opened by Dr. Aziz Lodin, Provisional 
Secretary General of the National Assembly, who welcomed the 
 
SIPDIS 
assembly and thanked all those who had contributed towards the 
successful inauguration.  He was followed by Qazi Ramin, 
Provisional Speaker of the Wolesi Jirga (Lower House), and ex- 
King Zahir Shah, whose welcoming remarks were also very brief. 
President Karzai was then called to administer the oath of 
office to both houses, first in Pashtu and then in Dari. 
 
KARZAIS LENGTHY SPEECH 
----------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) In a one-hour speech to the assembly which was 
reminiscent of a state of the union address, Karzai touched on 
a wide range of topics. He began by noting that the convening 
of Parliament marked the completion of the process of 
establishing the government of Afghanistan.  He assured the 
assembly that he and the government were committed to the law 
of the land.  He vowed to put an end to foreign intervention 
in Afghanistan, to fight against terrorism, poppy cultivation 
and government corruption, and to overcome the problem of 
poverty. He said that none of this would be possible without 
the assistance of friendly foreign countries.  When the 
Interim Administration was first established, the government 
had been in shambles and the treasury was empty.  The new 
government had tried to implement the Bonn Agreement as 
well as possible, but the country depended completely on 
international assistance. 
 
¶4. (U) Karzai reminded the assembly that the constitution was 
the chief law of the land, and said that all other laws and 
decrees should be referred to the Parliament.  The success seen 
thus far had shown the commitment by the Afghan people to 
rebuilding their nation. Disarmament had been crucial while 
the new army and police forces were being built, and the 
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration (DDR) process 
helped the general security of the country and provided jobs 
for those who laid down their weapons. The police and the army 
were being rebuilt slowly but surely. Government leadership 
and administration had improved.  In the past there had been a 
lack of schools and universities, but this situation had 
improved to the point where there were 10 functioning 
universities in the country.  Millions of students both male 
and female  were busy at their studies.  Before the 
establishment of the Interim Administration, women had had no 
rights, but now they could be leaders.  There were now five 
television stations and many radio stations broadcasting in 
the country.  The President stressed that creation of a modern, 
developed economy was a government priority.  Foreign investors 
had been afraid to come to Afghanistan in the past, he said, 
but now there was foreign investment and the economy was 
growing year by year.  Since last year, for example, the 
economy had grown by 13 percent.  Many roads are being built, 
and many towns are now being linked to each other.  He 
mentioned that a survey to construct new power plants was in 
process, and 13,000 villages have benefited from the National 
Solidarity Program.  Four years ago, Afghanistan did not have 
a reliable currency and Afghans had to deal with foreign 
currencies.  The new Afghan currency was a crucial element in 
the economy, and had proven to be stable. Land has been 
distributed to 25,000 families throughout Afghanistan, and, 
he said, Afghanistan belonged to the Afghans once again. 
 
¶5. (U) Karzai declared that the governments biggest step was 
to bring Afghanistan out of isolation and to have it 
recognized by the international community.  It now had a 
position of dignity in the world community.  He thanked 
Pakistan for receiving Afghan refugees in the past, and said 
Afghanistan had much in common with Pakistan, including 
their common fight against terrorism.  Both countries were 
committed not to interfere in each others affairs.  Afghanistan 
owed thanks to Iran as well, a country which also assisted 
Afghan refugees and has also helped rebuild Afghanistan. 
 
¶6. (U) The President thanked the United States for its 
strategic partnership with Afghanistan, which he said saved the 
country from terrorism and brought it peace.  The US and 
Afghanistan were committed to economic development and the fight 
against terrorism. Afghanistans relations with Europe and Japan 
were very good, and they had assisted and supported Afghanistan 
on many occasions.  Strategic partnerships with the UK, NATO 
and Europe were very important.  He said that India was a 
friend to the Afghans, had assisted with USD 550 million in 
rebuilding costs and had provided an opportunity for Afghan 
students to continue their studies with Indian government 
scholarships. China had been very effective in the 
reconstruction process.  Karzai said that the people of China 
were the strongest power in Asia, and having good relations 
with such an important country was crucial.  He referred to 
Afghanistans long relationship with Middle Eastern countries 
and with Turkey, and thanked them as well for their efforts 
in the reconstruction process.  Finally, he noted that the 
Russian Federation should play an important role in rebuilding 
Afghanistan. 
 
¶7. (U) Karzai declared that the future road was a long one, 
and that everyone must work together.  The Parliamentarians 
role was a key one. Sacrifices were required to resolve the 
countrys problems. Success had not yet been achieved, and 
much remained to be done. Historic monuments had to be 
preserved. Mosques and cultural institutions had to be built. 
Illegal narcotics production had to be prevented.  The 
National Museum had to be rebuilt. Political parties had to 
be strengthened. 
 
¶8. (U) The fight against terrorism was a difficult challenge, 
and could only be successful if Afghanistan had foreign 
assistance. Terrorism in Afghanistan had a foreign root, and 
that root had to be eradicated. 
 
¶9. (U) He said that young Afghans were being victimized by 
the drug trade, and that the profits from this drug trade 
fed terrorism. Claiming that terrorists used drug money in 
order to survive, Karzai asked that everyone work together in 
order to eradicate this phenomenon, so that foreign countries 
would not hold the president, the father of the nation and the 
Parliamentarians culpable for illegal narcotics. 
 
¶10. (U) The President admitted that there were people who 
misused their official positions and who were corrupt, saying 
that fighting against corruption was another priority and his 
government failed to meet expectations. The help of Parliament 
would be crucial in this area.  He reminded the assembly that 
administrative reform needed time and was not easy to 
accomplish.  All three branches of the government had to work 
together to achieve all these goals.  Creating employment and 
fighting poverty were also priorities.  Foreign assistance had 
not created sufficient job opportunities, and the government 
had to pave the way for private investors to come to 
Afghanistan.  This would only happen when they felt 
themselves secure and safe. 
 
¶11. (U) Karzai thanked the international community for its 
assistance, but said that this help should be channeled 
through government institutions.  He added that attention 
to the agricultural and livestock sectors in the country was 
necessary, and that creation of job opportunities for 
returning refugees and resolving their problems were 
important.  He said the government had plans to improve the 
conditions for the nomads (kuchis) of the country, that the 
education system should be modernized and a new curriculum 
implemented, and that vocational schools should be created. 
 
¶12. (U) Noting that internal security was an integral part of 
the countrys defense, he said that the governments policy of 
strengthening peace (the GOAs reconciliation program for ex- 
Taleban and HiG fighters) should pave the way for those who 
who wanted to return to live a normal life.  He noted that 
that Afghans had experienced the brutal intervention of 
foreign countries which had resulted in the destruction of 
Afghanistan and its army.  The countrys present policy, he 
claimed, was based on non-intervention in other countries 
affairs, and was tied to unbreakable loyalty, strategic 
cooperation with the West, and loyalty to the countries of 
the region.  The London Conference will be a vital next step 
following the Bonn Agreement. 
 
¶13. (U) Karzai ended on an emotional note which resonated 
through the assembly.  He said that his wish was to have a 
strong Afghanistan. Afghans would - and must - show the 
world that Afghanistan was a strong country, and that it 
would remain strong.  Afghans would show the world that 
they were able and committed to helping Afghanistan get back 
on its feet. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶14. (U) Although the Presidents speech was received in solemn 
silence almost until the very end, his final sentences were 
delivered with such emotion that his eyes began to mist, and 
many in the assembled crowd could be seen wiping their own 
eyes. The applause was large. 
 
NEUMANN