05KABUL5120
CN MEETING WITH GOVERNOR OF BADAKHSHAN IN KABUL
Sat Dec 17 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 005120 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INL/FO AND SA/FO AMB QUINN 
NSC FOR AHARRIMAN/KAMEND 
 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: SNAR PREL PGOV PTER KCRM AF
SUBJECT: CN MEETING WITH GOVERNOR OF BADAKHSHAN IN KABUL 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: At a December 6, 2005 meeting at the 
Ministry of Counter Narcotics (MCN), Badakhshan Governor 
Majeed spoke about rural development assistance and 
reduction of opium cultivation with MCN Minister Qaderi and 
representatives of the MCN, UK Embassy, and US Embassy. 
Several members of the Badakhshan Provincial Council, as 
well as newly-elected parliamentarians attended the meeting. 
End Summary. 
 
DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE NEEDED 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2.   (SBU) The governor and other provincial representatives 
agreed that Badakshan was neglected and poverty-stricken 
with no social services and infrastructure.  The governor 
said that no visible or large-scale projects were evident in 
Badakhshan; such projects are needed to convince the 
populace that the GOA and donor community are addressing 
their needs. Consensus was reached on the need for roads, 
health care, education, potable water and electricity. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) All parties agreed that the donors and the GOA 
need to consult and coordinate activities. The Governor 
mentioned one example where he did not support a recent 
canal cleaning project but decided not to counter the idea 
as he didn't want to be seem as being in conflict with the 
donor or international community.  The fact that the 
population does not usually appreciate the scale of 
donations also arose.  MCN Minister Qaderi was himself 
startled to hear that DFID has committed USD 30 million to 
projects in Badakhshan over three years. 
 
PROBLEMS WITH POPPY 
------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Counter Narcotics Task Force (CNTF) Director Doug 
Wankel stressed to the governor the dangers of opium 
production, highlighting the impact that it has on the local 
population, both in terms of addiction and health, as well 
as damage to the environment through the use of chemicals in 
the heroin labs.  Wankel congratulated the Governor on 
achieving a 50% reduction in poppy cultivation from the 
previous year, but cautioned that he can not afford to be 
complacent, particularly when reports exist that growth is 
on the rise this year. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The Governor said that he also believed that 
production was increasing and was prepared to conduct 
eradication this year and highlighted the importance of 
eradication being comprehensive. He added that leaving one 
field untouched while eradicating an adjacent field was 
problematic. The Governor ended the discussion by pledging 
his unconditional support to the fight against poppy: "I am 
all against this evil." 
 
CN JIRGA PLANNED 
---------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) A CN jirga (a tribal assembly which takes 
decisions by consensus) in Feyzabad, was held on November 20 
but without high-level participation. A subsequent jirga is 
planned for late December or early January. This jirga 
meeting format presents a good opportunity for the UK and 
USG to continue their outreach to the Afghan public. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Comment:  As we have seen on earlier occasions, 
the Afghan public and its government leaders do not fully 
realize or appreciate the scale of donations and development 
assistance from the international community.  While the GOA 
must do a better job of coordinating with the Provincial 
Governors on development programs, the USG, along with UK as 
the lead nation on CN, must continue to improve its public 
outreach so that the local population has a better 
appreciation of what the international community is doing 
for the Afghan population. End comment. 
 
NEUMANN