05KABUL5188
Poetry and Motion - Sikhs and Hindus Return to
Wed Dec 21 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 005188 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA/FO, SA/A, S/CT, EUR/RPM 
NSC FOR AHARRIMAN, KAMEND 
CENTCOM FOR POLAD, CG CFA-A, CG CJTF-76 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER PHUM AF
SUBJECT: Poetry and Motion - Sikhs and Hindus Return to 
Paktia Province 
 
¶1.   (SBU) Summary:  A November 11 poetry reading hosted by 
the Paktia Literary Society not only opened Gardez's new 
Afghan Government-built Marriage Hall but also revealed 
significant progress in the faith of the people in the GOA. 
A three hour gathering of some 300 Pashto men in Gardez's 
unheated Marriage Hall revealed little if any fear of the 
Taliban or other insurgents and provided the surprising 
revelation that some 60 Sikh and six Hindu families intend 
to return to Paktia from long exile in India.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Poetry Against Violence - The Pen takes on the Sword 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
¶2.  (SBU) In Gardez, a well-attended meeting of the Paktia 
Literary Society featured some 20 poets reciting their 
latest works.  In attendance were some 300 Pashto men from 
Gardez as well as the more remote districts of Paktia 
province.  The gathering included provincial notables such 
as Governor Taniwal and members of the newly elected 
Provincial Council.  In a short speech Dr. Abdul Hadi, the 
head of the Literary Society, explained they were gathered 
to encourage the people to embrace their own culture in the 
Pashto language.  He stressed that this was a culture of the 
pen, not of the weapon.  Poets spoke movingly of their love 
for Paktia and Afghanistan and at least one repeatedly 
ridiculed the former rulers of Afghanistan, including the 
Taliban.  In a surprising turn an Afghan Sikh recited a 
moving poem about his love for the mountains of Paktia and 
his desire to return from exile in India to the land of his 
birth. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Love of Country and Ridicule of Taliban 
--------------------------------------- 
¶3.   (SBU) The poetry focused on two main themes: love of 
country and ridicule for past governments including the 
Communists, Mujahideen and Taliban. Several poets spoke 
movingly of the destruction of the country, its people, 
natural resources, and infrastructure.  One especially 
articulate poet, Fiazullah Zazi, from Jaji District located 
on Paktia's border with Pakistan, exploded with humorous 
ridicule of Afghanistan's past rulers, especially the 
Taliban.  Resembling more of a standup comedian than the 
serious poet he clearly is, Fiazullah spoke for over 30 
minutes of the three-hour session.  His popularity was 
clearly demonstrated by the intense and long-lasting 
laughter that repeatedly disrupted his oration and the 
standing ovation given him as he stepped down from the 
podium.  Displaying the raw intelligence and courage of the 
Afghan people, Faizullah, who is 29 years old and a tire 
repairman by trade, is also illiterate, keeping the 
repertoire of his poems in his head. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Sikhs and Hindus Return to Paktia 
--------------------------------- 
¶4.  (SBU) Dia Singh, a 40 year old Sikh born and raised in 
Paktia province, recited a poem about his love for his home 
in the mountains of Paktia.  Well accepted and roundly 
applauded, Dia Singh was very clear about his intention to 
return to Gardez after two decades of exile in New Delhi. 
In a private conversation, Dia Singh related that 60 Sikh 
and six Hindu families intend to return to Gardez in 2006. 
Governor Taniwal has approved 84 parcels of land (housing 
plots) just south of Gardez city for them. 
 
¶5.   (SBU)   COMMENT:  That poet are now willing to standup 
in a public forum, in rural eastern Afghanistan, and openly 
ridicule the leadership of the former Taliban government is 
a strong indicator of the success of the Karzai government 
and the Coalition efforts in Paktia and Afghanistan. That 
laughter and applause are liberally applied to these 
comments also provides strong evidence the public no longer 
has much, if any, fear of what remains of the Taliban.  The 
planned return of 66 Hindu and Sikh families from India to 
Paktia province also shows that trust in the present Afghan 
government to provide peace, security, and stability is 
growing more widespread.  If these events are possible in 
the more turbulent areas of eastern Afghanistan, it bodes 
well for other, more developed and stable areas in the north 
and west of the country.  END COMMENT. 
 
 
 
NEUMANN