05LIMA2376
MORE COCALERO INFIGHTING; BOMBS SIGNAL
Fri May 27 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Lima
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 LIMA 002376 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR INL/LP, WHA/AND, DS/IP/WHA, DS/DSS/ITA; DEPT FOR 
ONDCP FOR D GETTINGS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: SNAR EAID ETRD PGOV ASEC PE
SUBJECT:  MORE COCALERO INFIGHTING; BOMBS SIGNAL 
RADICALIZATION 
 
REF:       A) LIMA 1418 
 
      B) LIMA 1062 
      C) 03 LIMA 5254 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: Monzon cocaleros' highly publicized 
rejection of Huallaga cocalero leader Nancy Obregon (for 
allegedly being too conciliatory to the GOP) is a parable 
for the fact that continued cocalero fragmentation is going 
hand-in-hand with a new radicalization.  There are other 
disturbing signs of radical and violent trends in the areas 
where coca eradication or alternative development is ongoing 
or planned.  Credible threats have resurfaced against 
Alternative Development (AD) projects, and there have been 
several recent explosions near GOP or NGO facilities.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (U) Tocache (San Martin Department) cocalero leader Nancy 
Obregon appeared on 5/12 in the town of Monzon, Huanuco 
Department to speak before farmers that had mobilized 
against the proposed U.S./Peru Free Trade Agreement (FTA). 
Despite Obregon's past popularity with cocaleros, the crowd 
booed and pelted her with projectiles. 
 
¶3. (U) Extensive press coverage suggested that Obregon's 
recent tribulations were a sign of increasing cocalero 
radicalization.  Iburico Morales labeled Obregon a traitor 
because of her past statements that gradual eradication of 
illegal coca was appropriate.  (Note: Despite such 
statements, Obregon has persistently and loudly said that AD 
is and has been a failure.  She has been one of the 
cocaleros falsely claiming that the U.S. was fumigating coca 
- see Ref B. End Note.) 
 
¶4. (U) While cocaleros pelted Obregon, Tingo Maria cocalero 
leader Elsa Malpartida, in a seminar entitled "Coca Zones: 
Challenges and Alternatives" organized by a local 
university, claimed that there was unity among the cocalero 
movements.  Reportedly licit growers of potatoes and other 
crops as well as coca farmers attended the seminar. 
Malpartida then traveled to the Tingo Maria airport on 5/17 
with lawyers and press in tow, claiming that the U.S.-owned 
Thrush aircraft was fumigating coca fields (Septel). 
 
¶5.  (U) Press articles reported the continuing cocalero 
divisions while warning that the real threat of 
radicalization is from the increasingly violent plans by 
cocaleros, allied with narcotraffickers and Sendero Luminoso 
(SL), to defend coca fields.  The local media continues to 
ask cocaleros hard questions.  Morales tried to negate his 
image as a radical allied with narcotraffickers by 
announcing on 5/19 that his Monzon cocaleros would initiate 
a strike (road blockage) against transporters of precursor 
chemicals (Note: used to make cocaine base and toxic to the 
environment. End Note.)  When leading daily "El Comercio" 
reporter asked him to name names, Morales refused and said 
it was the government's fault that the chemicals were 
reaching his valley. 
 
¶6. (U) Cocalero groups in the Huallaga and VRAE areas keep 
trying to unite without much success.  Tocache cocaleros 
announced a strike (road blockage) for 6/27, hoping for 
cocaleros in other areas to follow suit.  Such efforts have 
by and large failed in the past (Refs A and B). Iburico 
Morales announced on 5/21 that his Monzon growers would not 
participate in the 6/27 strike.  San Francisco (VRAE) 
cocaleros announced an international coca festival for 
August; it is not yet clear who plans to attend. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Several unexplained explosions in and around Tingo 
Maria once again suggest radicalization of the cocalero 
movement and a link to SL.  During the 25th Anniversary week 
of SL's armed "struggle," the distribution of pro-Sendero 
pamphlets and the SL's trademark red swatches throughout 
Tingo Maria and Aucuyacu towns preceded the explosions.  In 
Aucuyacu one explosion targeted a USAID-funded NGO that is 
not directly related to the Alternative Development Program 
(ADP) and another targeted a sub-contractor to USAID's 
primary ADP contractor.  A third explosion took place in 
Tingo Maria on the street where the Regional Director of the 
GOP's counterdrug agency (DEVIDA) resides.  The worsening 
security situation has caused USAID's ADP to evacuate its 
regional offices in Tingo Maria several times since January 
¶1. 
 
¶8. (SBU) COMMENT:  The fight between Monzon cocalero leader 
Morales and Tocache cocalero leader Obregon is less about 
substance than power.  Since the arrest of Nelson Palomino 
(Ref C), whose leadership was generally respected and 
accepted by all the coca federations, regional cocalero 
leaders have been unwilling to play second fiddle to anyone 
else.  (No doubt old-fashioned sexism plays a role in this, 
given that two of three main contenders are women.) 
 
¶9. (SBU) For all of that, the reason Morales cited for 
running Obregon out of town under a hail of rocks is 
significant: that she had once tacitly endorsed the position 
that illegal coca could be eradicated in a "gradual and 
consensual fashion."  As much as Obregon denies it, she and 
some other cocaleros did toy with this position three years 
ago - and why not, given that it gave them ample opportunity 
to delay eradication.  Obregon has long since, however, 
moved to a hard line position that is virtually 
indistinguishable from that of Morales.  This vignette thus 
serves as an allegory for the extent to which the cocaleros 
have hardened their position despite continuing regional 
divisions. 
 
¶10. (SBU) The apparent bomb blasts are further evidence of 
radicalization, and the Mission will continue to reevaluate 
security for AD workers. This radicalization is making coca 
eradication - both voluntary and programmed - ever more 
challenging throughout the coca zones. In 2005 alone, 
USAID's AD implementer has had to suspend work in its four 
regional offices for 54 days due to security threats.  The 
Monzon attempt to rally cocaleros with licit farmers against 
the FTA would be troubling if it had been more successful or 
replicated elsewhere.  Morales' attempt to distance himself 
from narcotraffickers is a smokescreen in an area where 
narcotrafficker money dominates local politics and economic 
activity.  Media coverage of late has been generally 
constructive, and the Mission will continue working with the 
press to get the real stories told.  As eradication efforts 
get under way in the hard-core areas, we expect desperate 
moves by cocaleros and will prepare accordingly.  END 
COMMENT. 
STRUBLE