05LIMA3983
Eradication and Interdiction Program Status -
Wed Sep 14 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Lima
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 LIMA 003983 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
PASS TO INL FOR J FARRAR; ONDCP FOR D GETTINGS; DEPT FOR 
CNC; NSC FOR C BARTON; WHA FOR MONSERRATE 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: SNAR PE KPRP
SUBJECT:  Eradication and Interdiction Program Status - 
September 2005 
 
 
------------- 
Summary 
------------- 

¶1.  (SBU)  With a backdrop of increased coca hectarage and 
cocaine production in Peru, NAS is facing challenges to step 
up eradication levels in a more conflictive environment. 
There have been two distinct phases in eradication and 
interdiction efforts this year.  From January until the end 
of May, active cocalero opposition held progress in the 
field to low numbers of hectares eradicated.   However, 
since May, several changes, particularly the infusion of 
trained and motivated DIRANDRO recruits and unified 
operational control have discouraged active opposition and 
have led to a nearly five-fold increase in hectares 
eradicated and increased interdiction of drugs, coca leaf 
and chemicals.   End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Eradication January to May 
--------------------------------- 

¶2.  (SBU)  For the first five months of the year, when 
confronted by rock-slinging cocaleros using quasi-military 
tactics around eradication sites, the police backed off 
causing a halt in operations.  During this period, the PNP 
were unprepared for violence, including the Sendero Luminoso 
ambush on April 19 that damaged NAS helicopters, and other 
rock-throwing attacks on the last unprotected helicopter 
extracting the police from an eradication site.  The damage 
to 5 helicopters delayed operations and called for a review 
of our security procedures.  The resulting eradication for 
these months was an average of only 248.63 hectares 
eradicated per month. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Eradication May to the Present 
-------------------------------------- 

¶3.  (SBU)  A second more productive phase was triggered by 
the graduation of 200 police cadets from the NAS-sponsored 
Training Academies in May.  As per NAS guidance, all the new 
police were assigned to one Special Operations Unit that 
focused on support for eradication efforts, destruction of 
cocaine laboratories and vehicle search operations.  This 
critical mass under a unified command now had the training 
and motivation to confront and disperse mobs and make 
arrests, allowing eradicators to stay in the field 
overnight.  Currently, approximately 300 police provide 24/7 
protection to 500 eradicators and the supporting helicopter 
assets.   Another major improvement has been the 
consolidation of all helicopters/operations under one police 
colonel, allowing for more coordinated and efficient use of 
aviation assets both for eradication and interdiction.  This 
has allowed the PNP to work on as many as five fronts 
simultaneously.   As a result, the average of hectares per 
month has risen to 1191.82, an increase of 479%. 
 
--------------- 
Interdiction 
--------------- 

¶4.  (SBU)  Interdiction efforts are taking place on two 
fronts.  In both the VRAE and Upper Huallaga/Monzon Valleys, 
police have been staging interdiction operations that have 
resulted in the destruction of more than 300 base  cocaine 
laboratories and ton quantities of essential chemicals with 
an estimated value of nearly 2 million dollars, keeping an 
estimated 4 tons of cocaine off the market.    In the VRAE, 
a Mobile Road Interdiction Group has been using a gamma-ray 
machine that identifies chemicals used in processing coca 
leaf into cocaine base.  To date the Group has intercepted 
150 kilos of chemicals and several vehicles, but, more 
significantly, their presence on a major drug highway has 
caused disruption and a major fluctuation in prices.   As a 
result of these efforts, the cost of the chemicals has 
doubled while the price of coca leaves has dropped by half. 
Drug traffickers have been forced to transport chemicals via 
mules on back roads and via rivers. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  A further example of the more dangerous security 
environment occurred August 27 when a DIRANDRO based Special 
Operations Unit was destroying a cocaine lab, with our 
helicopter support, near the NAS-constructed base at Palma 
Pampa in the VRAE.   Police received fire from automatic 
weapons, requiring them to shoot back.  The attackers 
retreated and no injuries were reported.  Police resolve has 
not been affected. 

---------------------------- 
Upcoming Challenges 
--------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  Counter-narcotics operations will, by necessity, 
take place in areas where we anticipate resistance.  In late 
September, the eradication operations will move to San 
Gaban, where last year's unexpected resistance hobbled 
operations.  We understand that the local population is 
aware that CORAH is coming and are somewhat resigned to the 
eradication.  The police will use the strategy developed 
after the difficult operation in San Gaban last year: soften 
the areas through interdiction efforts, expose the 
illegality of cocalero activities through media coverage, 
enter with large numbers, and sweep areas of operation 
(including with bomb squads and canines) before CORAH begins 
to eradicate.  Police will camp in the field to provide full 
security for people and helicopters.   Although the 2006 
plans are yet to be decided, hard-core coca growers in areas 
where Sendero Luminoso columns are known to operate will be 
the next targets.  It is likely that the very hostile Monzon 
valley will be on the list with its nearly 13,000 hectares 
of coca.   As more cadets graduate in the coming year, 
dedicated to counter-narcotics operations East of the Andes, 
we anticipate NAS's relations with the police will continue 
to improve as will police capabilities.  By 2008 we expect 
2,000 new police will be operating in areas previously 
devoid of law enforcement - for the first time in memory, 
willing to stand up to threatened cocalero violence and 
attacks from subversive groups. 
STRUBLE