05LIMA3419
Letter of Agreement of Narcotics Control between
Tue Aug 09 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Lima
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 LIMA 003419 
 
SIPDIS 
 
INL FOR MATANO; WHA FOR MONSERRATE, BISCHOFF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR PREL PGOV PE
SUBJECT:  Letter of Agreement of Narcotics Control between 
the USG and the GOP 
 
REF:  04 Lima 4638 
 
1....


id: 38253
date: 8/9/2005 15:22
refid: 05LIMA3419
origin: Embassy Lima
classification: UNCLASSIFIED
destination: 
header:
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.



----------------- header ends ----------------

UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 LIMA 003419 
 
SIPDIS 
 
INL FOR MATANO; WHA FOR MONSERRATE, BISCHOFF 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR PREL PGOV PE
SUBJECT:  Letter of Agreement of Narcotics Control between 
the USG and the GOP 
 
REF:  04 Lima 4638 
 
¶1.  Post has completed discussions with the GOP on the text 
for an amendment to the 1996 Operating Agreement for the 
Project for Control of Narcotics last amended in September 
2004 (Reftel).   The amendment would incorporate Fiscal Year 
05 funds in the amount of 57,932,000 dollars.  We have 
agreed to a one-year continuation of the 1996 Operating 
Agreement until September 30, 2006. The manner of concluding 
the agreement would be an exchange of diplomatic notes.  The 
diplomatic notes would incorporate into the Operating 
Agreement the amendments whose text is provided in this 
message.  The bilateral umbrella Agreement To Combat the 
Illegal Use, Illicit Production and Trafficking of Drugs 
Between the Government of the United States of America and 
the Government of Peru would remain in force as specified in 
Article IX of that Agreement. 
 
¶2.  Post requests Authorization to sign the Letter of 
Agreement (LOA) and that INL provide the appropriate fiscal 
data. 
 
¶3.   Text of the Diplomatic Note: 
 
The Embassy of the United States of America presents its 
compliments to the Ministry of Foreign Relations of the 
Republic of Peru and has the honor to propose amending the 
1996 Operating Agreement for the Project to Control of 
Narcotics, as amended in September 2004, in the following 
manner: 
 
Article III:  Replace the language with the following text: 
 
SPECIFIC PROJECTS & MEASUREMENT CRITERIA 
 
 
Specific projects and their respective goals and measures of 
performance for Fiscal Year 2005 funds provided by the USG 
are contained in the Annex which is part of this amendment 
that describe this year's activities. 
 
For the period from October 1, 2005 to September 30, 2006 
the targets and measures of performance for this LOA will be 
the following: 
 
(1) Coca Reduction:  The goal of this project is to reduce 
the number of hectares of coca under cultivation through 
eradication of illegal coca to 27,000 hectares.  The Crime 
and Narcotics Center (CNC) of the Government of the United 
States of America is responsible for measuring progress 
toward this goal. 
 
(2) Police counter-narcotics enforcement:  The goal of this 
project is to develop police operations to combat illicit 
drug trafficking and associated crimes, to eradicate opium 
poppy and its by-products and to support eradication of 
illegal coca cultivation.  Criteria for measuring progress 
toward this goal shall be the increased presence of Peruvian 
law enforcement authorities in drug-growing regions with a 
concurrent increase in law enforcement operations; the 
dismantling of drug trafficking organizations, increased 
arrests of drug traffickers, and greater seizures of illegal 
weapons, illicit drugs, precursor chemicals and goods as a 
result of these operations.  Funds will be used by Peruvian 
institutions to implement the Chemical Control Law approved 
by Peru's Congress in 2004 through the establishment of 
checkpoints on major roads and a mobile unit that will 
operate in the drug producing zones.  One goal will be an 
increase in arrests of drug traffickers and seizures of 
chemicals. 
 
Another goal shall be to increase the number of PNP DIRANDRO 
troops deployed in drug production zones from a baseline of 
570 troops in 2004 to 1350 troops in 2006. A third police 
academy shall be opened in Ayacucho in 2006. 
 
3) Counter-narcotics Police Aviation Support:  The goal of 
this project is to optimize the operating capability of the 
anti-drug units of the PNP Aviation police. The criteria for 
measuring progress toward this goal is the number of counter- 
drug missions undertaken in cooperation between the PNP 
Aviation Police (DIRAVPOL) and the anti-narcotics police 
(DIRANDRO). 
 
Another goal is to use 24 UH-2 helicopters that have or will 
be turned over to the PNP during the term of this amendment 
for eradication and interdiction missions.  With the 
increase of the PNP helicopter fleet by 8, the number of 
flight hours will increase from 5,000 to 7,200 hours. 
 
(4) Prosecutions by the Public Ministry:  The goal of this 
project is to train senior prosecutors throughout Peru and 
integrate the prosecutors that they supervise into anti-drug 
operations.  The measurement criteria shall be the increase 
in the participation of prosecutors to support counter-drug 
operations. 
 
(5) Demand Reduction:  The goals of this project are to halt 
the increase in drug abuse and, in the longer term, to 
reduce the incidence of drug abuse in Peru; to increase 
popular support for effective action against narcotics 
production and trafficking; and to protect youth from the 
dangers of drug abuse through community activities. Criteria 
for measuring progress toward this goal include a reduction 
in the number of drug-abusers; results of public opinion 
surveys that measure changes in public sentiment toward the 
production and trafficking of drugs; community activities to 
protect the population from drug sales in their 
neighborhoods; and the reduction in public tolerance of 
narcotics production and trafficking. 
(6) Policy and Institutional Development:  The goal of this 
project is to strengthen the process of counter-drug 
policymaking and its implementation within the Peruvian 
Government.  Criteria for measuring progress towards this 
goal are set forth in Peru's National Strategy for the Fight 
Against Drugs.  Another measure will be progress by the GOP 
in implementing its anti-money laundering laws and anti- 
corruption programs related to narco-trafficking. 
 
(7) Airports and Seaports: The goals of this project are to 
interdict the flow of illicit drugs, people suspected of 
drug trafficking, illegal weapons and illicit precursor 
chemicals passing through airports, seaports and lakes 
to/from Peru. A key element of this project is to establish 
fully functioning Manifest Review Groups and canine teams in 
2006 at Jorge Chavez International Airport, and in the ports 
of Callao, Paita, and in two other ports to be determined by 
mutual agreement.  The target for measuring progress towards 
this goal will include the number of cargo manifest reviews, 
inspections and operations conducted by Peruvian Coast 
Guard, Customs, and Police units.  Another goal is to 
establish a capability at Jorge Chavez airport to inspect 
air cargo that is suspected of containing narcotics or other 
contraband. 
 
Article XI, point a.  Replace the language with the 
following text: 
 
This Operating Agreement will continue in effect until 
October 1, 2006, unless the Parties decide to extend it. 
 
Replace the language in Annex 2 of the Operating Agreement 
with the following text: 
 
Narcotics Affairs Section (NAS) Programs in Peru with FY 
2005 Funds ($57,932,000) 
 
Law Enforcement Support, ($18,400,000) 
 
The goal of this project is to strengthen the operational 
capabilities of the Counter-narcotics Police in Peru (PNP - 
DIRANDRO) in order to seize chemicals and illicit drugs.  A 
significant number of law enforcement operations are planned 
during the term of this Amendment in the major coca-growing 
valleys as well as in the transit zones, to interdict 
illicit chemicals and drugs.  These operations are essential 
to discourage these activities including the cultivation of 
coca. These operations will be conducted in the air, on land 
and on rivers and along the coast, and will include road 
stops and the use of canines.  Funding will be used to 
provide training and field exercises for DIRANDRO troops to 
enhance their capabilities to conduct operations, as well as 
to provide security for CORAH eradication teams.  These 
enhanced law enforcement efforts will require additional 
vehicles, communications equipment, field gear, 
emergency/safety reaction gear, and drug detector dogs. 
 
These funds will also be used to support basic police 
training academies in Santa Lucia and Mazamari as well as 
the training at WHINSEC.  The FBI, DEA and other 
institutions will also conduct training. 
 
The funds will also be used to provide DIRANDRO with 
necessary infrastructure at police bases in the Huallaga and 
Apurimac/Ene Valleys.  The funds will also be used to 
enlarge the Special Operations Unit of DIRANDRO. 
 
Aviation Police Support, ($18,517,000) 
 
Aviation support for law enforcement covers operating and 
maintenance costs for the National Police Aviation Division 
(DIRAVPOL).  It provides funding for pilots, aircrews, and 
support personnel for up to 24 USG-owned helicopters and 2 
fixed wing aircraft, which will be used to support coca 
eradication and law enforcement actions.  Funding will be 
used to support the counter-narcotics operations of the USG- 
owned helicopters, providing fuel, maintenance, hangars, 
aircraft rental and operational support for DIRAVPOL 
personnel.  Funds will be used to acquire and operate an 
additional C-208 aircraft that can carry out transport and 
reconnaissance missions. 
 
Riverine and Port Security Support, ($992,000) 
 
The goal of this project is to strengthen Peruvian 
capabilities to conduct counter-narcotics law enforcement 
operations at Peru's seaports and airports.  These funds 
will be used to strengthen the capabilities of the Ministry 
of Transportation and Communications, the Peruvian Coast 
Guard, the National Port Authority, Peruvian Customs and the 
Peruvian National Police to carry out operations against 
drug trafficking and related crimes.  The Port Security 
Project will support the activities of Manifest Review 
Groups to examine cargo manifests in the Port of Callao, at 
the Jorge Chavez International Airport and at three 
additional Peruvian ports to identify cargo containers 
suspected of containing contraband.  Funds will also be used 
to maintain USG-provided riverine infrastructure and 
facilities and provide support to Peruvian institutions for 
counter-narcotics activities designed to disrupt and 
dismantle illegal trafficking. A third objective is support 
the Peruvian government authorities that undertake counter- 
narcotics operations in Peru's coastal waters. Six 40-foot 
Sea Ark boats will be used to intensify port security and 
carry out patrols and the inspection of vessels suspected of 
carrying contraband. 
 
Coca and Opium Poppy Eradication, ($7,640,000) 
 
The objective of eradication efforts is to reduce the amount 
of coca leaf destined for drug trafficking as well as to 
eliminate coca being grown in national parks and other areas 
protected by the State of Peru.  Funds will also be provided 
to DIRANDRO to provide security protection to CORAH 
eradication operations.  CORAH will also support programs 
that identify and eradicate opium poppy that will be carried 
out by DIRANDRO.  Funding will support CORAH to build, 
improve and/or maintain facilities used by the PNP and the 
military that are involved in counter-narcotics operations. 
 
Support to the Armed Forces, ($2,140,000) 
 
The Peruvian Air Force will use funding to support counter- 
narcotics operations.  These funds may be used to improve 
facilities, for construction, operational costs and aircraft 
modifications, communications equipment, fuel and refueling 
facilities and training. 
 
Peruvian Customs, ($1,500,000) 
 
The purpose of this project is to support the Customs 
Service, a component of the Ministry of Economy and Finance, 
which is responsible for the control and inspection of cargo 
arriving and departing Peru through its ports and borders at 
airports and maritime terminals.  Funds will be used to 
support expanded Customs operations at Jorge Chavez 
International Airport to improve the control and inspection 
efforts directed against drug trafficking via air cargo. 
 
Crop Monitoring and Research, ($3,970,000) 
 
CADA (Coca Survey and Verification) is a branch of CORAH. 
CADA prepares maps, and monitors the amount of coca and 
opium poppy being grown in Peru in order to measure the 
growth trends, identify areas for eradication and to verify 
the extent of coca reduction.  It also supports and verifies 
gradual and concerted reduction of coca eradicated 
voluntarily.  Initially founded to track the reduction of 
coca in certain areas where there were Alternative 
Development programs, CADA has expanded its coverage to all 
coca-growing zones.  The measurement of coca and the 
verification of crop reductions that CADA undertakes is a 
key component to the gradual and concerted reduction of the 
coca crop. 
 
This project will also be used to support the Tropical Crop 
Institute (ICT), whose task is to provide research and 
extension services for alternative crops to coca that form 
part of the Alternative Development program.  This project 
will continue to undertake activities designed to raise the 
profitability of alternative crops in alternative 
development areas.  The ICT will provide agricultural 
extension services with a variety of training and technical 
assistance programs to farmers who stop growing coca. 
 
Administration of Justice/Prosecutors, ($1,685,000) 
 
Funds will be used to support prosecutors with the Public 
Ministry of the Peruvian Government that have jurisdiction 
to intervene in operations directed against drug trafficking 
and related crimes.  This project will provide training and 
support to Public Ministry prosecutors working in drug 
growing and drug transit zones.  Funds will be used to 
provide equipment and to support prosecutors working outside 
of Lima. 
 
Money Laundering and Anti-Corruption Programs ($496,000) 
 
Funds will be used to strengthen the operational capability 
of Peruvian government institutions that have responsibility 
for money laundering and combating corruption related to 
drug trafficking.  The goal is to increase their ability to 
carry out investigations for reference to the Public 
Ministry. 
 
A portion of these funds will be provided to the Financial 
Intelligence Unit of Peru to strengthen its technical 
capacity in combating money laundering.  The remaining funds 
will be used to support other institutions that develop 
programs directed against money laundering and corruption 
related to drug trafficking. 
 
Chemical Diversion Control, ($124,000) 
 
The purpose of this project is to reduce the availability of 
chemicals that could be diverted to make illegal drugs. 
These funds will be used to finance activities to implement 
the Chemical Control Law 28305 and its regulations. 
 
The funds will be used to support the Ministry of Interior - 
DIRANDRO, Customs, and the Public Ministry to develop 
national training programs for authorities in the legal, 
technical and enforcement aspects of chemical control. 
Funds will also be used to rehabilitate a computer-based 
registry for the chemicals industry and users.  Resources 
will also be used to establish chemical controls checkpoints 
on the major roads connecting Lima to the source zones using 
a mobile unit. 
 
Institutional Development, ($248,000) 
 
The purpose of this project is to strengthen the capacity of 
DEVIDA to fulfill its mandate to coordinate the 
implementation of GOP drug policy set forth in the National 
Strategy to Fight Drugs.  Funds will be used to support 
development of national drug control policies and to enhance 
communication and coordination between the various GOP 
agencies involved in the counter-narcotics effort.  Another 
goal is to promote multilateral and bilateral coordination 
of counter-narcotics programs. 
 
Drug Awareness/Demand Reduction, ($1,585,000) 
 
The program is directed at supporting the Ministry of 
Education and other state institutions, the Municipal 
Council and other civil society entities that operate drug 
demand reduction and prevention programs through public 
relations and community action activities that include: 
 
     -    conducting surveys on drug abuse to identify groups 
       requiring assistance, 
-    meetings and other activities related to demand 
reduction and prevention 
-    promotion of community coalitions to protect vulnerable 
populations from drug trafficking and consumption. 
 
Public Relations/Media Engagement, ($635,000) 
 
This project is designed to fund information campaigns 
compatible with the National Strategy to Fight Drugs about 
the problems and incidence of the illegal drug trade in 
Peru. 
 
NGO partners selected to inform the Peruvian public about 
the dangers of narcotics trafficking will use funding to 
continue supporting efforts.  Funds will also be used to 
raise public media's awareness of and engagement in the 
fight against drugs and related crimes. 
 
¶3.  If your Government agrees with this text, the Embassy 
proposes that this note together with its reply, signaling 
that the above text is accepted, would constitute an 
agreement between our Governments that will enter into 
effect from the date of the reply. 
 
Complimentary closing 
 
End text of Diplomatic note 
STRUBLE 

=======================CABLE ENDS============================