05MANAMA1490
WOMEN'S SYMPOSIUM GETS POSITIVE REVIEWS BUT MODEST
Sun Oct 16 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

160706Z Oct 05UNCLAS MANAMA 001490 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM KMPI PREL BA
SUBJECT: WOMEN'S SYMPOSIUM GETS POSITIVE REVIEWS BUT MODEST 
TURNOUT 
 
 
¶1.  The University of Bahrain hosted a symposium October 1-2 
entitled "Reinforcing the Role of Arab Women in Economic 
Development."  The symposium brought together civil society 
representatives from several Arab and European countries in a 
preparatory event for the November 11-12 Forum for the Future 
Conference to be held in Bahrain.  The symposium's focus was 
on increasing opportunities for women in business and 
entrepreneurial ventures; it also included discussion of 
other social issues. Although there was strong early interest 
when the event was announced in mid-summer, the 50 
participant turnout was lighter than expected.  Attendees 
praised the content and presenters, telling Poloff that they 
felt inspiration from the activities of pioneering women in 
the Arab World. 
 
¶2.  The symposium was opened by the President of the 
University of Bahrain, Dr. Mariam Bint Hassan Al Khalifa who 
said, "the Kingdom is heading towards development and is 
giving women opportunities to achieve leadership positions in 
all local associations."  But turning to shortcomings, she 
said, "Women are more aware of their rights and are seeking 
amendments to various laws, but social aspects stand in the 
way.  Women need to be given equal opportunities."  The 
gathering received substantial media coverage, being featured 
on local evening television broadcasts and covered by the 
print media. 
 
¶3.  The symposium organized sessions into four main topic 
areas, each of which featured speakers highlighting different 
issues within the topic.  The areas were Education and 
Training, Laws and Legislation, Cultural and Economic 
Awareness, and Women in the Workplace.  Among the overall 
goals of the gathering were to build awareness about the 
social status of Arab women, build solidarity among 
participants, and work to end discrimination. 
 
¶4.  Eighty percent of attendees were Bahraini; several of the 
presenters were from other Arab countries and Europe.  Poloff 
met with several organizers, presenters and participants to 
discuss the impact of the gathering.  In general, 
participants found illustrative personal case studies most 
valuable.  In addition to providing inspiration to 
participants, presenters gave practical ideas and suggestions 
that may be replicated in Bahrain and elsewhere.  One 
particularly interesting study outlined the activities of 
five Bahraini women who started businesses with micro loans. 
Another presentation was given by a Bahraini woman who built 
a small roadside stall selling homemade perfume into a 
successful personal care products business. 
 
¶5.  Another stated goal of the symposium was to create a 
network of groups at the local, national and international 
levels.  One presenter/participant expressed disappointment 
with the networking possibilities at the symposium.  She told 
Poloff it is not sufficient to create a network among 
individual women or between women's organizations in 
different countries; rather, there needs to be a concerted 
effort to establish contacts in the mainstream male-dominated 
business sector.  She had hoped that the symposium would 
provide such an opportunity.  She recognized that cultural 
limitations in Arab countries inhibit such contacts, but 
thinks more effort should be made. 
 
MONROE