05MADRID1577
SPAIN'S VIEWS IN ADVANCE OF APRIL 25 FOREIGN
Fri Apr 22 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MADRID 001577 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAL IZ LE ZI SU SP EUN CGEN
SUBJECT: SPAIN'S VIEWS IN ADVANCE OF APRIL 25 FOREIGN 
AFFAIRS MEETING (GAERC) 
 
REF: STATE 72185 
 
¶1.  (C)  SUMMARY:  Poloff discussed Iraq, the Middle East 
Peace Process, Lebanon, Sudan, Zimbabwe, and the Great Lakes 
with Carlos Fernandez-Arias, MFA EU Policy Coordinator (and 
Special Assistant to MFA Political Director Dezcallar) on 
April 21.  Fernandez-Arias did not expect detailed discussion 
on Iraq and Lebanon at the April 25 GAERC meeting.  Spain 
believes that the Middle East Peace Process should be 
re-energized and currently has concerns at the pace of 
movement by both the Israelis and Palestinians. 
Fernandez-Arias said that the U.S. abstention on the UNSC 
resolution referring Sudanese war crimes suspects to the 
International Criminal Court was helpful.  Spain shares 
doubts of U.S. and other EU nations concerning Zimbabwe's 
commitment to free and fair elections, but will likely seek 
compromise solutions to allow lower and mid-level Zimbabwean 
officials to participate at future EU - African Union 
summits.  Development and security initiatives focused on the 
Great Lakes region remain a priority for Spain.  END SUMMARY. 
 
//IRAQ// 
 
¶2.  (C)  Fernandez-Arias welcomed further details on the 
proposed June U.S.-EU conference on Iraq.  He did not 
anticipate any new discussions on Iraq on April 25. 
 
//THE MIDDLE EAST PEACE PROCESS// 
 
¶3.  (C)  Spain believes that the Middle East Peace Process 
must be re-energized and supports Gaza disengagement efforts. 
 The GOS is a little less optimistic about the process than 
in previous months, as they have concerns that both the 
Israelis and the Palestinians have not advanced enough on 
coordination efforts. 
 
//LEBANON// 
 
¶4.  (C)  The GOS was a firm supporter in the Security Council 
of UNSCR 1559 and all of its provisions, including the 
withdrawal of Syrian military and intelligence forces, 
stopping Iran's military supply of Hizballah through Syria, 
and strict respect for the sovereignty and political 
independence of Lebanon.  In principle, Spain agrees with all 
of our points, although Fernandez-Arias questioned our view 
on the unacceptability of possible delays of Lebanese 
elections beyond May.  He said the GOS is pessimistic that 
Syria will withdraw all of its forces in a timely manner. 
Fernandez-Arias did not anticipate much discussion of Lebanon 
at the April 25 meeting. 
 
//SUDAN// 
 
¶5.  (C)  Fernandez-Arias told Poloff that the U.S. abstention 
on a UNSC resolution referring war crime suspects to the 
International Criminal Court will help to move things forward 
in Sudan.  The EU is committed to working with the U.S. to 
resolve problems in the Sudan.  The EU would like to see a 
strong role for the African Union in helping to improve the 
security situation on the ground. 
 
//ZIMBABWE// 
 
¶6.  (C)  Spain shares doubts of the U.S. and other EU nations 
about Zimbabwe's commitment to free and fair elections. 
Fernandez-Arias noted that this would be a new issue at the 
GAERC meetings and that many governments were currently 
evaluating their positions on Zimbabwe.  He said that 
although the election was heavily tilted towards Mugabe's 
ZANU-PF party, one "positive" result from the election was 
that there were no reports of politically motivated violence. 
 When Poloff expressed surprise at his discussing "positive" 
results from rigged elections, Fernandez-Arias assured Poloff 
that Spain supported EU efforts to bring about fair elections 
in Zimbabwe, but he also expressed concerns over future 
dialogue between the European Union and the African Union. 
During future summits between the EU and the AU, Spain would 
be interested in reaching a compromise solution where lower 
to mid-level Zimbabwean delegates could be present at the 
meetings. 
 
//GREAT LAKES// 
 
¶7.  (C)  African issues remain a top priority of EU states at 
the GAERC.  According to Fernandez-Arias, the EU agrees with 
U.S. goals in the Great Lakes region, and the EU is currently 
pursuing development and security initiatives in the region. 
The EU will continue to look for political and military 
reform, and the EU looks forward to working with the U.S. on 
Disarmament, Demobilization, Repatriation, Reintegration and 
Resettlement (DDRRR). 
//OTHER ISSUES// 
 
¶8.  (C)  Fernandez-Arias said that preparations for the May 
10 EU-Russia summit in Moscow would be discussed at the 
GAERC.  He said that technical and administrative issues 
related to Serbian cooperation with the International 
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia would also be 
discussed. 
 
 
MANZANARES