05MADRID1496
SPAIN:  WORST NUCLEAR INCIDENT SINCE 1992
Tue Apr 19 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

190910Z Apr 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MADRID 001496 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR OES/EGC, EB/ESC/IEC, AND EUR/WE; NRC FOR 
INTERNATIONAL PROGRAMS: ROSALES BUSH; DOE FOR INTERNATIONAL 
PROGRAMS: BHAT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG SP
SUBJECT: SPAIN:  WORST NUCLEAR INCIDENT SINCE 1992 
 
REF: 04 MADRID 4241 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY:  Recent discovery of corroded cooling tubes 
inside the Vandellos II nuclear reactor near the Catalonian 
city of Tarragona appears to represent the worst nuclear 
incident in Spain since the 1992 discovery of faulty sensors 
in the cooling system of the Trillo nuclear reactor near 
Guadalajara.  The Vandellos II incident was first publicized 
earlier this year by Greenpeace Spain, but received greater 
publicity after a highly critical report by the Nuclear 
Security Council (CSN - Spain's Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
equivalent) was leaked to pro-government daily "El Pais" in 
early April. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Julio Barcelo, one of the CSN's Commissioners, 
told ESTHOFF April 13 that while the Council continues to 
analyze the events at Vandellos II, it was almost certain 
that the incident would be officially characterized as a 
"level 2" accident (on a scale of 1 to 7, with 7 being the 
most serious).  Press reports that the reactor's owners 
(energy sector giants IBERDROLA and ENDESA) could face fines 
of up to three million euros.  Barcelo, while not trying to 
minimize the reactor operators' transgressions, argued that 
the CSN's strong reaction shows that Spain's nuclear 
regulatory framework remains effective.  He said that though 
the issue would likely stay in the public eye until the CSN's 
final report (and fine) are unveiled in the fall of this 
year, the incident at Vandellos II would not likely have a 
lasting impact on the "whither nuclear energy" debate in 
Spain.  End Summary. 
 
¶3.  (U)  The April 8 edition of "El Pais" reported that the 
CSN had issued a "devastating" report criticizing the 
Vandellos II nuclear power facility for attempting to 
minimize and cover up the discovery of severe corrosion of 
several pipes feeding Mediterranean waters to cool the 
"primary circuit" of its nuclear reactor.  The pipe corrosion 
itself reportedly caused no immediate danger, but could have 
eventually facilitated a failure of the overall reactor 
cooling system.  The CSN report, which represents the public 
opening of its investigation, accuses the reactor's 
operators, electricity sector giants ENDESA and IBERDROLA, of 
"insufficient vigilance over the cooling pipes," a "lack of 
general sensitivity ... about the importance of security," 
putting "emphasis on production over security," and "hiding 
and delaying handing over information to the CSN."  The 
report notes that the facility's owners had changed reactor 
maintenance companies in 2002 and that the new company had 
significantly reduced maintenance efforts, thus facilitating 
the pipe corrosion. 
 
¶4.  (U)  "El Pais" reports that ENDESA and IBERDROLA have 
admitted maintenance deficiencies, but have tried to shift 
the blame to the company (unnamed) holding the reactor 
maintenance contract.  It quotes an owners' spokesman saying 
"since we did not know of the problem, we could not inform 
the CSN."  Both the owners and the CSN have stressed that 
there was never a serious risk of radiation release.  The 
corrosion was reportedly detected after the cooling pipes 
began to leak in May, but the reactor operators did not 
inform the CSN until August (after the end of the summer 
season of peak electricity demand).  The reactor is currently 
shut down for refueling and for implementation of 60 
"corrections" demanded by the CSN.  Four CSN inspectors are 
supervising the implementation of the "corrections." 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  The CSN has initially deemed the incident to be a 
"level 1" accident on its scale of 1 to 7 (with 7 being the 
most serious).  However, CSN Commissioner Julio Barcelo (U.S. 
NRC Commissioner equivalent) told ESTHOFF April 13 that the 
CSN would almost certainly raise the incident's status to 
"level 2" when it releases it final report (which he thought 
would be in September or October).  Barcelo did not minimize 
the operators' transgressions, but claimed that the CSN's 
strong reaction demonstrates that Spain's nuclear regulatory 
framework remains effective.  He expected that IBERDROLA and 
ENDESA would receive a "serious" fine, which media reports 
could mount to up to three million euros.  Barcelo expected 
intermittent media interest until the final report/fine is 
announced this fall.  He did not think the accident would 
have a serious impact on the "whither nuclear energy" in 
Spain debate, which he noted would not really get going until 
2008 (when the next reactor permit renewal decision must be 
made -- see reftel). 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  COMMENT:  The CSN has been criticized by 
Greenpeace and some "Green" politicians for its lack of 
transparency.  In fact, Greenpeace's efforts forced the CSN 
to release the April 7 interim report.  Barcelo said the CSN 
would have preferred to finish its investigation before going 
public.  Trying to take advantage of the situation, some 
"Green" politicians have proposed "whistleblower" legislation 
that would protect nuclear sector workers who go public with 
safety-related concerns.  But we have detected little 
enthusiasm within the ruling Socialist Party (PSOE) to take 
on CSN reform.  The PSOE does not like public attention 
focused on the nuclear sector.  During its 2004 national 
election campaign, the PSOE publicly called for the gradual 
phase-out of nuclear energy in Spain.  However, it now 
realizes that Spain cannot effectively fight global warming 
(i.e., reduce greenhouse gas emissions), without the roughly 
24 percent of current Spanish electricity consumption 
provided by the country's nine greenhouse gas-free nuclear 
reactors.  Thus, while the CSN will likely take a hard line 
regarding Vandellos II (to show that it is effectively 
carrying out its oversight mandate), we doubt that either of 
Spain's two leading political forces will attempt to exploit 
the nuclear safety issue for political gain.  Spain's 
reliance on nuclear power is a "clean little secret" that few 
want to reveal. 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  NOTE:  The CSN report and other 
investigation-related materials provided by Barcelo have been 
pouched to the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (attention 
Cindy Rosales Bush, Office of International Programs). 
MANZANARES