05MUSCAT765
ENCOURAGING SUPPORT FOR THE IRAQ TRANSITIONAL
Wed May 11 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Muscat
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS MUSCAT 000765 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR IIP/FO (PENGLAND), NEA/I, NEA/ARPI, NEA/PPD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC PREL OIIP IZ MU
SUBJECT: ENCOURAGING SUPPORT FOR THE IRAQ TRANSITIONAL 
GOVERNMENT 
 
REF: A. SECSTATE 79107 
 
     ¶B. MUSCAT 581 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request for IIP, NEA/PPD - see para 
¶6. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary: Omani Foreign Minister Bin Alawi offered in 
a May 11 meeting with the Ambassador to give an interview in 
Muscat to the Al Hurra channel to voice public support for 
the new Iraqi Transitional Government.  He expressed 
disappointment that the elections and new government, 
however, appear not to have brought an improvement in Iraq's 
security conditions, wondering if the government were strong 
enough and security services adequately armed and equipped. 
He reviewed some limited Omani training assistance for 
Iraqis, and indicated Oman could disburse its reconstruction 
assistance pledge during a future visit by the Iraqi Foreign 
Minister.  End summary. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Eager for Al Hurra Interview on ITG 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) The Embassy provided ref A demarche material to the 
Foreign Ministry May 3 requesting Oman's public support for 
the Iraqi Transitional Government (ITG).  In a May 11 meeting 
with the Ambassador, Minister Responsible for Foreign Affairs 
Yusuf bin Alawi responded, noting that he had previously 
spoken out in praise of the new Iraqi government (ref B), and 
that Oman likewise publicized the letters of congratulation 
that the Sultan had sent to the new Iraqi leadership.  Asked 
by the Ambassador if there were more Oman could do to voice 
its support of the ITG, the Minister voluntarily offered to 
give an interview on the topic with Al Hurra.  He requested 
the Embassy to pass his offer along, saying that he will "be 
happy" to do the interview in Muscat.  He praised Al Hurra 
for its moderate tone and journalistic ethics, complaining 
that the correspondents from regional networks such as Al 
Jazeera and Al Arabiya seek only to "provoke" their 
interviewees. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Omani Aid, Disappointment with Security Situation 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶4. (SBU) With regard to following through on Oman's prior 
commitment to contribute up to $5 million for Iraqi 
reconstruction, the Minister replied that he believes the 
Cabinet has approved the amount, and said Muscat is waiting 
for a future visit by the Iraqi Foreign Minister to provide 
the opportune time to disburse the funds.  Bin Alawi also 
noted that the Ministry of Health will soon take on 5 Iraqis 
to begin a 2-year medical training program.  There are also 
two Iraqi diplomats currently enrolled in the MFA's 
Diplomatic Institute.  (Note: The Iraqi diplomats attended 
the Ambassador's May 10 address to the Diplomatic Institute - 
septel.  End note.) 
 
¶5. (SBU) Asked whether Oman might pitch in with training on 
the security front, Bin Alawi claimed that Egypt has offered 
to train 20,000 Iraqi security personnel but thus far only 
170 Iraqis have taken them up on the offer.  The Minister 
likewise cited increasing complaints from Iraqi military and 
police personnel who claim they are not given adequate arms 
and other equipment to defend themselves or protect the 
public.  He was disturbed that the Iraqi elections and 
formation of the ITG have apparently done nothing to quell 
the number of car-bombings and other violence, suggesting 
that the ITG may be too weak to govern effectively.  The 
Minister stated frankly that he had expected more improvement 
by now. 
 
-------------- 
Action Request 
-------------- 
 
¶6. (U) The Embassy requests the Department's assistance in 
facilitating an interview on Al Hurra for Minister Bin Alawi. 
BALTIMORE