05OTTAWA2649
CANADA'S VIEWS ON DEVELOPMENT ISSUES IN TEH UN
Fri Sep 02 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

022056Z Sep 05UNCLAS OTTAWA 002649 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID ECIN PREL CA UNGA
SUBJECT: CANADA'S VIEWS ON DEVELOPMENT ISSUES IN TEH UN 
HIGH LEVEL GENERAL ASSEMBLY 
 
REF: STATE 160880 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  The GOC shares our views on the problems 
of length, coherence, and balance in the draft "outcome" 
document, as well as our commitment to reform and opposition 
to creative financing measures for ODA.  We differ on the 
goal of 0.7% of GDP, with Canada still thinking it is an 
important goal, albeit one they have not set a time-frame for 
meeting.  The GOC also think references to Kyoto and Beijing 
are important.  While expressing the hope that we can find 
language that reflects both our views, Greenhill said it is 
extremely important not to undermine and destabilize 
institutions in the process of reforming them.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Ambassador Wilkins met September 2 with Robert 
Greenhill, President of the Canadian International 
Development Agency (CIDA), to stress the importance we place 
on the views expressed reftel and to solicit Canada's 
perspective.  Greenhill was accompanied by Bruce Montador, 
Vice President for Multilateral Affairs and Stephen Wallace, 
Vice President for Policy.  We also provided the points to 
Michael Small, acting Assistant Deputy Minister for Global 
Affairs at the Department of Foreign Affairs and to contacts 
at the Department of Finance. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Greenhill, after conveying condolences for the 
damage caused by hurricane Katrina and reiterating the GOC's 
desire to provide assistance, said the the U.S. and GOC are 
reading from much the same page with regard to the outcome 
document, although there are some differences.  We share a 
desire for meaningful reform and want the document to reflect 
the reality of what we want to build together.  The Paris 
Declaration and work in the DAC and OECD is real.  Both the 
U.S. and Canada commit only to what we can deliver on, and 
then deliver on our commitments.  Canada agrees with our 
points on length, lack of coherence, and lack of balance in 
the current draft. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) On the substance of the draft text, Canada shares 
our views on front-loading assistance and the IFF.  Regarding 
the airline tax, the text would be "improved by having it 
left out."  It is also important to stress levers of 
devlopment beyond ODA. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The U.S. and Canada have taken different positions 
regarding the goal of committing 0.7% of GDP to assistance. 
Although the GOC has not specified a time frame, they still 
think it is an important goal but recognize that our position 
is not going to change.  The GOC also thinks that references 
to Kyoto and to Beijing and the rights of women are 
important, that we are looking for reform within the active 
engagement of global agreement. Canada considers the 
Millenium Development Goals to be a useful and meaningful 
measure (Greenhill) used the poster on his wall to review 
them with the Ambassadord).  They are not the only focal 
point, but are critical and the specific targets for 2015 are 
good. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Greenhill concluded by saying that, other than our 
views on the 0.7% target, they hope we can find language that 
reflects both our views.  Reform is important, but it is 
extremely important not to undermine and destabilize the 
institutions. Wallace noted that there is a lot of hard work 
ahead, and not much time, but we need to agree on the whole 
before tackling specific parts. 
 
¶7. (SBU) The Ambassador thanked Greenhill for his frank 
analysis, and reiterated the importance we place on 
successful negotiation of the development outcome document. 
Greenhill, after reviewing CIDA's overall priorities in the 
coming months, said he would like to spend some time with the 
Ambassador to discuss our mutual interests in Haiti, which he 
described as at a tipping point.  We both want to avoid a 
chaotic Chavez and Cuba-linked Haiti near Florida and 
Greenhill would appreciate exchanging views on what we should 
both be doing.  Note:  Haiti's Ambassador to Ottawa was 
leaving Greenhill's office as we entered.  End Note. 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
WILKINS