05OTTAWA329
CANADA: PREPARATIONS FOR CICTE
Thu Feb 03 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS OTTAWA 000329 
 
SIPDIS 
 
INL FOR CARROLL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC PREL PTER CA OAS CICTE
SUBJECT: CANADA: PREPARATIONS FOR CICTE 
 
REF: STATE 17684 
 
¶1.  Foreign Affairs Canada, Director for International Crime, 
Evelyn Puxley told poloff on February 2 that the Government 
of Canada is in full agreement with the US on the importance 
of CICTE's role in strengthening hemispheric political will 
to combat terrorism and enhance OAS member states' 
counterterrorism capacity.  In response to reftel, Puxley 
noted that during the January 24-27 US-EU consultations in 
Washington, her counterterrorism policy officer, Helene Viau 
had told US officials that Canada is in favor of keeping the 
language of the upcoming Fifth CICTE Regular Session in line 
with previous declarations and insisted that the term quote 
connections unquote between terrorism and illicit 
transnational activity (e.g., narcotrafficking, arms 
trafficking, contraband smuggling, document fraud, etc.,) 
should remain in this year's texts.  She stressed that by 
doing so the OAS members would leave no doubt that the 
campaign against terrorism must be waged on all fronts. 
 
¶2.  Puxley reiterated that Canada is also of the mind that to 
be effectual the OAS Secretariat must have regular funding, 
primarily through voluntary contributions from member states. 
 As a result, she said that Canada intends to provide an 
annual contribution of some USD 90,000, beginning in December 
(pending approval of Canada's Treasury Board). 
 
¶3.  Canada's head of delegation to the Fifth CICTE Regular 
Session shall be Senior Coordinator for International Crime 
and Terrorism, Ruth Archibald.  The Canadian delegation shall 
also include Andrew McAlister of the Department of Public 
Safety and Emergency Preparedness - Canada (a cyber-crime 
specialist), Helene Viau, Foreign Affairs Canada, Doug 
Fraiser, Canada's OAS permanent representative and three 
other counterterrorism specialists. 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
CELLUCCI