05OTTAWA3448
Avian Influenza Report 1: Low Pathogenic Virus
Mon Nov 21 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 OTTAWA 003448 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR OES/IHA (CRODDY, FOSTER, SINGER, DALEY), 
WHA/CAN (NELSON), M/MED/DASHO (TRIPLETT) 
 
DHHS FOR KAREN BECKER 
 
DHHS FOR BILL STEIGER AND ROSE BROWNRIDGE, OFFICE OF 
GLOBAL HEALTH 
 
CDC FOR ROBERT BALDWIN, OFFICE OF GLOBAL HEALTH 
 
USDA FOR APHIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TBIO KSCA SOCI PREL CA WHO KSTH
SUBJECT: Avian Influenza Report 1: Low Pathogenic Virus 
Found in British Columbia 
 
Ref. Ottawa 2827 (Public Health Emergency Governance) 
 
¶1. Summary: Avian influenza virus detected on November 
18 in a domesticated duck from a farm in British 
Columbia has been confirmed as a low pathogenic H5 
North American strain.  An estimated 67,000 ducks and 
other fowl from the farm and surrounding area will be 
euthanized.  A national wild bird survey conducted over 
the past weeks has identified low pathogenic North 
American subtypes of Avian Influenza in ducks from 
Quebec, Manitoba and British Columbia - the birds were 
free of the strain of highly pathogenic avian influenza 
responsible for animal and human illness in Southeast 
Asia. Wild birds from Ontario are currently being 
examined to identify the H5 avian influenza subtype 
they are carrying.  End summary. 
 
¶2. On November 20, 2005 the Canadian Food Inspection 
Agency (CFIA) announced that the avian influenza virus 
detected on November 18 in a duck from a farm in 
British Columbia has been confirmed as a low pathogenic 
H5 North American strain (as of November 21 the CFIA 
has not indicated precisely which particular low 
pathogenic strain it is, whether H5N1, N3, N2 or N7). 
The confirmation means that the particular virus 
subtype would cause only mild disease, if any at all, 
in exposed birds. It also means that this subtype is 
not the strain currently circulating in Asia. According 
to Canadian authorities there is no new risk to public 
health. 
 
¶3. The CFIA is implementing preventative and 
precautionary control measures to limit and prevent the 
spread of the virus to other commercial premises. 
Preparations are underway to euthanize all birds on the 
premises from which the duck originated. The CFIA's 
actions are consistent with the recommendations agreed 
to by governments and industry following the 2004 
Abbotsford, British Columbia outbreak and reflect the 
guidelines of the World Organization for Animal Health. 
The virus is different than the H7N3 strain found 
during the 2004 Abbotsford outbreak in which 
approximately 17 million domesticated fowl were 
euthanized. 
 
¶4. Surveillance is being conducted to monitor the 
health of domestic birds in the immediate area. 
Specifically, samples are being tested from a number of 
other premises that may have been exposed to birds from 
the farm. In addition, all commercial premises within 
five kilometers of the farm are being tested for any 
signs of disease. According to APHIS, because this is 
an H5 virus, the USG has placed temporary trade 
restrictions on birds and bird product from mainland 
British Columbia. These will be in place at least until 
Canada has completed their epidemiological evaluation 
and APHIS has conducted its own evaluation of the 
information. 
 
¶5. The GoC is examining whether there is any link 
between the infected duck and avian influenza virus 
found in migratory birds during a recent wild bird 
survey. According to CFIA, although it may not be 
possible to conclusively identify the origin of 
infection, the ongoing presence of avian influenza in 
wild birds reinforces the importance of maintaining 
strict Biosecurity controls in all domestic bird 
operations. 
 
¶6. A national wild bird survey conducted by the 
Government of Canada earlier in the autumn had found 
Avian Influenza virus in wild birds from Quebec, 
Manitoba and British Columbia.  Molecular testing of 
samples collected from the three provinces ruled out 
the Asian strain of avian influenza and confirmed that 
the viruses are low pathogenic. Further analysis 
definitively identified the presence of low-pathogenic 
North American subtypes H5N3 in Quebec birds, H5N1 in 
Manitoba, and H5N9 and H5N2 in British Columbia. That 
is, they are free of the strain of highly pathogenic 
avian influenza responsible for animal and human 
illness in Southeast Asia. 
 
¶7. According to CFIA, all these subtypes have been 
previously observed in North America and none are of 
significant concern from an animal health perspective, 
given the bio-security measures already in effect. The 
Public Health Agency of Canada has been working with 
the CFIA on the testing and has determined that there 
is no information in these findings suggesting a new 
threat to human health. 
 
¶8. The national wild bird survey includes samples taken 
from migratory birds along significant flyways in seven 
provinces, Manitoba, Quebec, British Columbia, Nova 
Scotia, New Brunswick, Ontario and Alberta. Ontario has 
completed preliminary screening, and samples identified 
as H5 are now undergoing confirmatory testing at the 
National Centre for Foreign Animal Diseases in 
Winnipeg.  Animal and human health specialists from the 
federal government will examine subtypes from the four 
remaining provinces to rule out the Asian H5N1 strain 
and determine how pathogenic they are. 
 
¶9. According to the CFIA, these findings are not 
surprising given the natural prevalence of the virus in 
the wild population.  The World Health Organization 
characterizes this natural reservoir as benign and 
stable.  Previous North American wild bird findings 
indicate H5 can be present at rates of zero to 7.4 per 
cent in wild birds.  These recent Canadian findings are 
within that range. 
 
Wilkins