05OTTAWA3698
CANADA: 2005 COUNTRY REPORT ON TERRORISM
Fri Dec 16 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 OTTAWA 003698 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR S/CT RHONDA SHORE AND ED SALAZAR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC CA KCRM KHLS PGOV PHUM PINR PTER KPAO
SUBJECT: CANADA: 2005 COUNTRY REPORT ON TERRORISM 
 
REF: STATE 193439 
 
¶1.  Unclassified entire text. 
 
GENERAL ASSESSMENT 
------------------ 
 
¶2.  The Government of Canada remained steadfast in 2005 in 
partnering with the United States and other like-minded 
states to support the international fight against terror. 
With a 5,200 mile undefended border, Canada is one of the 
most important partners the U.S. has in the war on terror and 
the level of integration and cooperation has a very direct 
impact on U.S. security.  Overall, antiterrorism cooperation 
with Canada remains excellent and may be unique in the world 
for the depth and breadth of contact between our two 
countries. 
 
¶3. Canada has contributed steadily to military activities in 
the global war on terror, through participation in coalition 
maritime interdictions in the Arabian Sea and Operation 
Enduring Freedom and NATO's International Security Assistance 
Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan.  As of December 2004, 
approximately 700 CF troops were stationed in Kabul in 
support of the NATO-led ISAF VI. In August 2005, Canada 
augmented its contribution under OEF with a Canadian 
Provincial Reconstruction Team comprised of military, 
civilian and police personnel, in Kandahar.  Approximately 
200 Canadian personnel are located in the United Arab 
Emirates, where they provide airlift and logistics support to 
deployed troops in the Southwest Asia theater. Although 
Canada chose not to join Operation Iraqi Freedom, it has 
pledged USD 280 million to the reconstruction of Iraq and has 
also given USD 18 million to help with the January 2005 Iraq 
transitional elections.  In addition Elections Canada led the 
international monitoring effort for all three rounds of the 
Iraqi elections. 
 
¶4.  Canada has been proactive in all international fora which 
deal with terrorism.  It has signed and ratified all 12 UN 
conventions and protocols and has listed all terrorist 
entities designated by the UN.  Canada was instrumental in 
drafting and negotiating the Inter-American Convention 
Against Terrorism in December 2002, and was the first country 
to ratify the treaty.  Canada has been an active participant 
in the Inter-American Committee Against Terrorism (CICTE), 
most recently promoting the international UN conventions and 
protocols on terrorism and working closely with other 
hemispheric partners to develop and provide capacity-building 
assistance and training at the last CICTE meeting in Trinidad 
& Tobago in February 2005. 
 
¶5. Canada implements terrorist finance listings in compliance 
with UN requirements and coordinates closely with the United 
States on plans to freeze assets.  Efforts to counter 
terrorist financing include implementing UNSCR 1373, 
promoting the Special Recommendations on Terrorist Financing 
of the Financial Action Task Force, and actively 
participating in the G-7, G-8, G-20, and Egmont Group.  In 
July 2006 Canada will assume the presidency of the Financial 
Action Task Force.  Canada has its own financial intelligence 
unit, FINTRAC, which was created in 2000 to collect, analyze, 
and disclose financial information on money laundering and 
terrorist activities.  FINTRAC has reported some two dozen 
cases but no criminal prosecutions have been undertaken. 
 
¶6.  U.S.-Canadian cooperation on counter-terrorism is 
excellent, with extremely close contact from the ministerial 
level all the way down to provincial and state law 
enforcement officials.  There are a number of established 
bilateral fora for coordination, including the Cross Border 
Crime Forum's Terrorist sub-group and the Security and 
Prosperity Partnership of North America, and large-scale 
counter-terrorism exercises such as Topoff 3.  There is also 
extensive cross-border cooperation at the local level between 
state and provincial authorities and between border towns. 
 
¶7. Amidst this close cooperation there is one area that 
requires attention.  Since the removal of Canadian terrorist 
suspect Maher Arar to Syria after his interception by U.S. 
authorities in New York in 2002, Canadian sharing of 
information with the United States has been restricted.  Some 
Canadian authorities were blamed for facilitating Arar's 
deportation and subsequent torture in Syria and officials at 
all levels have since been reluctant to proactively share 
information, especially on Canadian citizens, that was 
previously part of a routine background exchange.  The U.S. 
and Canada need to develop a mechanism to ensure Canadian 
concerns are satisfied in such a way that information can 
continue to be freely shared and disseminated. 
 
INFORMATION ON TERRORIST GROUPS/SAFE HAVEN 
------------------------------------------ 
¶8. An August 2002 report by the Canadian Security 
Intelligence Service states that "with the possible exception 
of the United States, there are more international terrorist 
organizations active in Canada than anywhere in the world." 
It divides terrorist threats in Canada into four categories: 
1) religious extremists, "with various Sunni Islamic groups 
being the most serious threat at present"; 2) state-sponsored 
terrorism; 3) secessionist violence, "which encompasses Sikh 
extremism, and separatist movements in Sri Lanka, Turkey, 
Ireland and the Middle East; and 4) domestic extremism, 
including some anti-abortion, animal rights, 
anti-globalization, and environmental groups, "a small but 
receptive audience for militia messages from the U.S., and 
white supremacists." 
 
¶9. The report suggests that the reasons for the plethora of 
terrorist groups in Canada are "Canada's proximity to the 
United States which currently is the principal target of 
terrorist groups operating internationally; and the fact that 
Canada, a country built upon immigration, represents a 
microcosm of the world."  It goes on to say that "terrorist 
groups are present here whose origins lie in regional, 
ethnic, and nationalist conflicts, including the 
Israeli-Palestinian dispute, as well as those in Egypt, 
Algeria, Sudan, Afghanistan, Lebanon, Northern Ireland, the 
Punjab, Sri Lanka, Turkey, and the former Yugoslavia." 
 
¶10. According to CSIS, among the specific groups that have 
front organizations acting on their behalf or have active 
supporters in Canada, are: "Hizbollah and other Shite Islamic 
terrorist organizations; Hamas; the Egyptian Al Jihad and 
various other Sunni Islamic extremist groups from across the 
Middle East and Maghreb; the Provisional Irish Republican 
Army (PIRA); the Tamil Tigers (LTTE); the Kurdistan Workers 
Party (PKK); and all the world's major Sikh terrorist 
groups."  Finally, the CSIS report states that "some 
supporters of the international Islamic Jihad cause are also 
present in Canada, with a few of them possibly linked to Al 
Qaida." 
 
¶11. CSIS points out that most terrorist activities in Canada 
are "in support of actions elsewhere linked to homeland 
conflicts," and that Canada is primarily a base for terrorist 
supporters, many of whom "use the refugee stream to enter 
Canada, or immigrant smuggling."  Their activities include 
"fund-raising, lobbying through front organizations, 
procuring weapons and material, coercing and manipulating 
immigrant communities, and facilitating transit to and from 
the United States and other countries." 
 
¶12. Some 38 terrorist groups are officially banned in Canada 
(full list at www.PSEPC.gc.ca), including prominent Middle 
Eastern organizations, Latin American groups, and Sikh 
movements, among others.  Prominently missing from the list 
is the Tamil Tigers (LTTE).  This has been a matter of 
considerable debate in the government of Canada, and appears 
to some analysts to be based on political considerations, as 
the 200,000 person Tamil community in Canada is one of the 
largest in the world, and is centered around Toronto in 
ridings currently held by the Liberal Party.  While the GOC 
does not allow known LTTE members to enter Canada, and the 
LTTE has been officially listed in Canada in support of UN 
Security Council Resolution 1373 since 2001, the Government 
of Canada has not banned the group under Canada's 
Anti-Terrorism Act. 
 
FOREIGN GOVERNMENT COOPERATION 
------------------------------ 
 
¶13. The Government of Canada actively seeks to improve its 
own counter-terrorism capabilities and its cooperation with 
the United States through a series of policy, legislative, 
judicial, and operational measures. 
 
Policy 
------ 
 
¶14. In December 2003, the Government of Canada established 
the Department of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness 
(PSEPC), Canada's closest equivalent to the US Department of 
Homeland Security, and gave it the mandate of protecting 
Canadians from criminals and terrorists.  This was followed 
in April 2004 with the release of the federal government's 
national security statement -- "Securing an Open Society: 
Canada's National Security Policy."  This policy statement 
identified three key goals and the means to support them: 1) 
Protecting Canada and Canadians at home and abroad; 2) 
Ensuring Canada is not a base for threats to allies; and 3) 
Contributing to international security.  The security policy 
statement also allowed for consultative mechanisms to be 
established to allow for a permanent, high-level 
provincial-federal forum on emergencies with a regular 
strategic discussion on emergency management issues among key 
players; a National Security Advisory Council; and a 
Cross-Cultural Roundtable on Security, to better engage 
Canada's ethnic minorities and religious communities on 
security-related issues.  The latter was strengthened and 
utilized in the wake of the London bombings.  In general, 
Canada's program for integrating minorities and new 
immigrants socially and economically is one of the best in 
the world, which is why the country does not appear to have 
the large numbers of potentially disaffected youth and 
radicalized communities that are common elsewhere. 
Legislative 
----------- 
 
¶15. In the wake of the September 11 attacks, Canada passed on 
December 18, 2001, an Anti-Terrorism Act, which strengthened 
its ability to identify, deter, disable, prosecute, convict, 
and punish terrorist groups.  It also provided investigative 
tools for Canadian law enforcement agencies while building in 
substantial safeguards to privacy and due process.  Because 
of the rapid passage of the bill in the wake of the 9/11 
attacks, certain sunset clauses were built in (e.g. a 
five-year limit on the clause regarding preventative arrest 
and investigative hearing powers in section 83.32).  A 
requirement for review after three years was also part of the 
legislation.  The House of Commons adopted a motion on 
December 9, 2004 authorizing the subcommittee on Public 
Safety and Public Security (SNSN) to undertake a review of 
the legislation, and the Senate on December 13, 2004 set up a 
Special Committee to review the law.  These committees have 
started their work, which will take over a year to complete. 
Additionally, the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency 
Preparedness (PSEPC) is required under subsection 83.31 (3) 
of the Criminal Code to prepare and submit to Parliament an 
annual report on its power under the Anti-Terrorism 
legislation to engage in preventative arrest.  This power has 
not yet been used. 
 
¶16. Only one person has been arrested under the 
Anti-Terrorism legislation to date -- Mohammed Momin Khawaja 
-- who was charged on March 30, 2004 of terrorist activity in 
Canada and England.  The investigative hearing provisions of 
the Act have been used once -- in the Air India case -- but 
the witness in that case challenged the requirement to 
provide compelled testimony.  Because of the sparse 
application of the bill its supporters contend that it is not 
being used as effectively as it might and believe it should 
be made retroactive in order to cover offenses committed 
before the Act was passed.  Critics, especially in the Arab 
and Muslim communities, believe it could be used to target 
certain groups based on ethnicity or background and seek its 
repeal.  At the heart of the debate are questions about the 
definition of terrorism, and how to define "intent," in a way 
which does not clash with Canada's Charter of Rights and 
Freedom, which aggressively defends political and religious 
expression. 
 
¶17. An additional piece of legislation that deals with 
aspects of terrorism is the Public Safety Act of 2002, which 
received Royal Assent on May 6, 2004.  This act has raised 
some privacy concerns and Canada's federal Privacy 
Commissioner has charged that the government has used the 
issue of terrorism to intrude on the lives of Canadian 
citizens by gathering information such as flight passenger 
data and electronic surveillance.  The government introduced 
new legislation in the fall of 2005 that would require 
advanced communications companies to build into their 
commercial systems the means to tap and record conversations 
and transmissions.  The measure also raised privacy concerns 
and was not passed before the Parliament dissolved in 
November 2005 for national elections. 
 
¶18. The government was successful, however, in passing 
Trafficking in Persons legislation, which received Royal 
Assent on November 25, 2005.  The amendment makes trafficking 
in persons a specific criminal offense and prohibits global 
trafficking in persons, benefiting economically from 
trafficking, and withholding or destroying documents to 
facilitate trafficking in persons. 
 
Judicial 
-------- 
 
¶19. The most significant terrorist act in Canadian history 
was the June 23, 1985 bombing of Toronto origin Air India 
Flight 182 off the Irish coast.  The attack resulted in 329 
deaths and was blamed on Sikh terrorists fighting for an 
independent homeland.  The Air India case dragged on for 
years, a victim of bureaucratic squabbles and investigative 
missteps.  On March 16, 2005, a British Columbia Supreme 
Court Justice found Sikh separatists Ripudaman Singh Malik, 
and Ajaib Singh Bagri not guilty of planting the bomb, 
largely because of credibility problems with witnesses.  The 
outrage from families of the victims led to calls for a 
commission of inquiry into the bombing, which will be led by 
former Ontario Premier Bob Rae.  He will have until March 31, 
2007 to submit his final report.  Rae has been directed not 
to look into the misconduct of individual officials, but 
rather the systemic issues that need to be addressed, among 
them: was the pre-1985 assessment of Sikh terrorism adequate; 
was the response of Canadian agencies to the bombing well 
coordinated; are terrorist financing laws adequate; are there 
problems in RCMP and CSIS coordination; and how should the 
government manage the issue of security intelligence that is 
also criminal evidence?  The issue of coordination and 
information-sharing between the RCMP and CSIS had largely to 
do with how to utilize information gathered in an 
intelligence case as evidence in a criminal prosecution. 
This remains an unresolved issue for Canadian law enforcement 
and counter-terrorism officials. 
 
¶20. Another high-profile judicial terrorism case in 2005 was 
that of Ahmed Ressam, the "millennium bomber," who was caught 
by an astute American border guard in December 1999 
attempting to bring bomb-making materials into the U.S. from 
Canada.  The Algerian-born immigrant had been denied asylum 
in Canada but had been living in Montreal for seven years and 
used false identification to obtain a Canadian passport under 
an assumed name.  Ressam was identified as a member of the 
Algerian Armed Islamic Group (GIA), and convicted in 2001 on 
nine counts associated with the bomb plot.  Sentencing was 
repeatedly delayed because he provided information against 
other suspects, notably Samir Ait Mohamed.  On July 27, 2005, 
he was sentenced to 22 years in jail. 
 
¶21.  Many suspected terrorists who do not possess full 
Canadian citizenship, have been dealt with by the issuance of 
security certificates issued under the Immigration and 
Refugee Protection Act (IRPA), which has been a part of 
immigration policy since 1978.  Since 1991, 27 certificates 
have been issued, of which five were issued since September 
11, 2001.  These five are: 
 
--    Mohammed Mahjoub, member of Vanguards of Conquest 
(VOC), a radical wing of the Egyptian Islamic Jihad. 
--    Mahmud Jaballah, senior member of the Egyptian Islamic 
terrorist organization al-Jihad and Al Qaeda. 
--    Hassan Al Merei, suspected Al Qaeda member. 
--    Mohammed Harkat, suspected Al Qaeda member. 
--    Adil Charkaoui, suspected Al Qaeda member.  Charkaoui 
was released in February 2005 on C$50,000 bail, and is 
fighting deportation to his native Morocco.  Charkaoui denies 
ties to terrorists, but al-Qaeda members Abu Zubaida and 
Ahmed Ressam claim they met him at an Afghan training camp in 
¶1998.  Charkaoui's claim that the security certificate 
violates the Charter of Rights and international law was 
dismissed by a Federal Court judge but the Canadian Supreme 
Court agreed in August to hear the case. 
 
¶22. Canada's most prominent terrorist family is the Khadrs, 
whose father Ahmed Said indoctrinated his children to be 
jihadis, taking them to Afghanistan to train with and 
ultimately fight with, the Taliban.  Ahmed Said was killed by 
Pakistani security forces in South Waziristan in 2003.  His 
youngest son Omar was detained after a shoot-out with U.S. 
forces in Afghanistan in July 2002 in which a U.S. soldier 
was killed and another soldier seriously wounded.  He is 
currently being held in Guantanamo.  Khadr's second son 
Abdurahman, 22, was detained by U.S. security forces in 2001 
in Afghanistan and was held in Guantanamo before being 
returned to Canada in 2003.  He is currently living in 
Scarsborough, and was denied the issuance of a Canadian 
passport on national security grounds, which he is in the 
process of appealing.  The eldest son, Abdullah, 24, recently 
returned from Pakistan where he was being held by Pakistani 
security forces.  He is suspected of once running a training 
camp in Afghanistan. 
 
Operational 
----------- 
 
¶23. Day-to-day cooperation between the US and Canadian law 
enforcement and intelligence agencies on counterterrorism is 
close and continuous, and plays out in joint planning, 
exercises, and operations.  Canada cooperates closely with 
the United States on investigations, and there is a heavy 
volume of extradition requests between the two countries. 
Canadian privacy laws, limited resources, and criminal 
procedures are more favorable to the defendant than in the 
United States, however, which could occasionally inhibit a 
more full and timely exchange of information and may benefit 
supporters of terrorism. 
 
¶24.  Canada and the United States engage in a wide range of 
ongoing planning discussions on counterterrorism.  The US 
Attorney General and Canada's Minister for Public Safety and 
Emergency Preparedness and Minister of Justice coordinate key 
policy initiatives through the Cross Border Crime Forum, 
whose Terrorist sub-group met in June 2005 in Ottawa and 
December 2005 in Washington.  There are also ongoing efforts 
to improve implementation of provisions of the Smart Border 
Accord.  Finally, there are discussions at multiple levels 
through the Security and Prosperity Partnership of North 
America, which provided an extensive report to leaders in 
June 2005 that outlined a detailed work plan for all aspects 
of hemispheric security and has led to the establishment of a 
series of working groups to manage individual issues. 
 
¶25. As part of the Ridge-Manley 30 point "Action Plan for 
Creating a Secure and Smart Border," the U.S. and Canada 
agreed to expand pre-existing Integrated Border Enforcement 
Teams (IBETs) to more fully cover the length of the border. 
By 2005 there were 15 IBETs in operation on both sides of the 
border, which included participants on the Canadian side from 
the RCMP and Customs and Border Security Agency, and on the 
U.S. side from Customs and Border Patrol, Immigration and 
Customs Enforcement, and the U.S. Coast Guard.  The 
capabilities of the IBETs are progressing, but are hampered 
by lack of adequate funding, integrated communications, and a 
legal framework that solves the problem of cross-border 
weapons carriage by enforcement officers.   Resolution of 
these issues would allow these units to move beyond a 
platform for information exchange to fully functional joint 
operations. 
 
¶26. There were a number of exercises in 2005 to test our 
joint response to terrorist attack.  In April 2005, Canada, 
the U.S. and the U.K. held a large-scale exercise -- Topoff 3 
-- which brought together 10,000 participants from more than 
200 federal, state, local, and private sector agencies and 
organizations to review policies and procedures for managing 
a large-scale, multipoint bio-terrorist attack.  Other small 
exercises, such as a cross-border drill between Quebec and 
Vermont in October 2005, revealed communications problems and 
provided local and state/provincial officials the opportunity 
to improve their ability to respond jointly to an emergency. 
There is also extensive cross-border cooperation at the local 
level between state and provincial authorities and between 
border communities. 
 
¶27. Canada has also been active in international efforts to 
improve the capacity of key countries to respond to 
terrorism.  In the fall of 2005 it began the 
Counter-Terrorism Capacity Building (CTCB) program under 
Foreign Affairs Canada.  This program will bring together 19 
federal departments and agencies to share Canadian expertise 
in areas such as border security, transportation security, 
anti-terrorism financing, legislative drafting, legal policy 
and human rights, and counter-terrorism and intelligence 
training. 
 
¶28. To better coordinate its own efforts to monitor and 
control terrorist activity, the GOC in October 2004 
inaugurated the Integrated Threat Assessment Centre (ITAC). 
ITAC's primary objective is to produce comprehensive threat 
assessments which are distributed within the intelligence and 
law enforcement communities and to first responders.  These 
assessments are based on intelligence and trend analysis, and 
evaluate both the probability and the potential consequences 
of threats.  ITAC is housed within CSIS headquarters in 
Ottawa and includes representatives from PSEPC, CSIS, CBSA, 
Foreign Affairs, DND, and the RCMP.  ITAC has liaison 
arrangements with the U.S., UK, Australia, and New Zealand. 
 
¶29.  Embassy POC is Keith Mines, Political Officer, 
telephone: 613-688-5242, 
e-mail: Mineskw@state.sgov.gov. 
 
 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
WILKINS