05OTTAWA2766
TFUS01 - CANADA:  STATUS OF ASSISTANCE SEPTEMBER
Wed Sep 14 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS OTTAWA 002766 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR R, WHA/CAN; WHA/EPSC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON AEMR ASEC CASC MARR AMGT US CA
SUBJECT: TFUS01 - CANADA:  STATUS OF ASSISTANCE SEPTEMBER 
14, 2005 
 
REF: A. OTTAWA 2741 AND PREVIOUS 
     ¶B. STATE 162270 
 
¶1.  Archival assistance:  The National Librarian and 
Archivist of Canada, Ian Wilson, offered the Ambassador 
assistance in restoring historic documents, manuscripts, 
maps, artwork, that may have been damaged by flooding of 
archives or museums.  He notes that his conservators have 
experience with flood damaged items and are very willing to 
help when the US can use their assistance.  Contact:  Embassy 
Ottawa 
 
¶2.  Education:  Ryerson University in Toronto offered 
condolences and asked how they could best help students and 
colleagues whose lives have been disrupted by the hurricane, 
and how they can assist sister colleges and universities.  We 
told them we have provided the task force with the web 
address for the Association of Universities and Colleges of 
Canada, which lists Katrina assistance offered by members, 
and are suggesting that interested students or professors 
contact Canadian schools directly. 
 
The web site is  www.aucc.ca/katrina/index e.html 
 
Other offers and donations 
-------------------------- 
¶3.  A Francophone school near Ottawa offered home hospitality 
and classroom space for teachers and students affected by the 
disaster.  We advised them that the embassy is not 
coordinating such offers but referred them to the FEMA 
website. 
 
¶4.  A Canadian federal bureaucrat who manages a Klezmer band 
is holding a benefit concert September 28 at a downtown 
coffee shop. 
 
¶5.  The Jacques Whitford company of Nova Scotia has donated 
$10,000 to the US Red Cross and is matching employees 
donations. 
 
¶7.  A private citizen sent the embassy a check for C$50, 
which FMC will transmit to the Katrina relief fund. 
 
Condolence notes 
---------------- 
 
¶6.  The Ambassador has received messages from: 
 
-- the Coalition of Muslim Organizations, an umbrella group 
of 35 Muslim groups in Canada, noting that they have 
requested members to donate generously to NGOs and other 
humanitarian organizations; 
 
-- Sheldon Levy, the President of Ryerson University, with a 
request to hear from us on how they can best help the 
victims.  (Post will call Mr. Levy to respond and let him 
know that we have informed the task force of offers on the 
Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada website at 
www.aucc.ca/katrina/index e.html  .) 
 
-- John G. Williams, Member of Parliament from edmonton-St. 
Albert in Alberta, on behalf of his constituents; 
 
-- the Embassy of the Republic of Korea; 
 
-- the Embassy of the Republic of Iraq, noting that "We know 
that the great generousity and indomitabel spirit of 
Americans, which we Iraqis have experienced at first hand, 
will inspire you as your nation rebuilds." 
 
 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
DICKSON