05OTTAWA1244
MISSION CANADA 90 DAY GOALS - 3RD QUARTER
Tue Apr 26 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 OTTAWA 001244 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR WHA 
 
CALGARY PLEASE PASS WINNIPEG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT PREL PGOV CASC ECON CA ETRA
SUBJECT: MISSION CANADA 90 DAY GOALS - 3RD QUARTER 
 
¶1.  Summary - Over the next three months, Mission Canada 
commits to supporting the SPP, finalizing our budget and 
continuing our enhancement of our SIPRnet site.  In this 
next period, we also expect to prepare for the arrival of a 
new Ambassador and to follow-up on our project to design an 
emergency outreach plan for American citizens in Canada. 
End Summary 
 
¶2.  Goal 1 - Support the Security and Prosperity Partnership 
initiative 
 
Background - Three North American leaders launched the 
Security and Prosperity Partnership in Texas in March.  Over 
the next three months, working groups in each of the three 
capitols will elaborate a plan of action to detail those 
concrete steps which will improve security and economic 
performance in the region.  Those principally responsible 
for the plan in each of the three countries are already in 
constant contact.  Our participation will be to complement 
this work by promoting the SPP publicly and by offering our 
views and those of our contacts to the Washington-based 
working groups. 
 
Steps to be taken (POL, ECON, DHS, FCS, FAS, PAS, 
CONSULATES): 
 
--Arrange public affairs activities to promote the SPP and 
to encourage Canadian stakeholder engagement in the process. 
--Engage Canadian government participants in the working 
groups to assess their progress, their evolving thinking on 
measures under consideration 
--Reporting on Canadian government progress and implications 
of political developments on their ability to deliver 
 
 
¶3.  Goal 2 - Align Embassy operations with available funding 
from Washington 
 
Background - With only projected targets, Mission Ottawa has 
faced serious budget shortfalls throughout this fiscal year. 
We have taken various steps including a hiring freeze and a 
reduction of ORE staff in order to ensure post is best 
prepared to meet our anticipated budgets this year and next. 
Our goal is develop a plan through the end of this year, 
which will put us on a footing to avoid a repeat of our 
budget crisis next year. 
 
Steps to achieve the goal: 
 
Determine funding available from Washington. (FMC) 
 
Produce spending plan for balance of funding. (FMC, GSO, 
MGMT) 
 
Finalize ORE staffing reductions (HR) 
 
Develop buyout package and offer buyouts as affordable. 
Goal is to reduce annual personnel costs. (HR) 
 
Finish CAJE appeals and implement all CAJE results. (HR) 
 
Begin better utilization of $1 million LES health benefits 
program. (HR) 
 
Produce plan to utilize proceeds of sale of either DCM 
residence or 46 Rockcliffe. (GSO) 
 
¶4. Goal 3 - Implement new reporting strategies to broaden 
use of the SIPRNet and further incorporate our classified 
web site into Mission Canada's reporting program. 
 
Background:  The outreach of the Secret Internet Protocol 
Router Network (SIPRNet) continues to play a central role in 
expanding Mission Canada's information collaboration 
capabilities.  Post Management is committed to making the 
Mission Canada classified website the premier resource for 
current and historical information on U.S.-Canadian 
bilateral relations and key U.S. issues in Canada. 
 
Steps to be taken: 
 
--Develop a daily report to highlight the key issues of 
strategic and regional importance.  SUCCESS MEASURE:  The 
daily report is updated on the Mission Canada classified web 
site by 1:00 PM daily. (POL lead, All Sections, Consulates) 
 
--Activate the Net-Centric Diplomacy Telegram portlet and 
migrate substantive reporting from the legacy telegram 
archive portlet.  SUCCESS MEASURE:  All substantive 
reporting is migrated to the NCD portlet. (IMO) 
--Enhance Net-Centric Diplomacy Biographic reporting with 
information not available in the public domain or through 
open sources.  SUCCESS MEASURE:  Reporting officers are 
formally notified to begin annotating biographic files with 
personal notes. (POL) 
 
--Expand the regional reporting MPP Goal Paper portlets to 
include a document that summarizes reporting officer 
portfolios and contact information.  Currently, there's no 
reliable method of directing external site visitors to the 
appropriate action officer.  SUCCESS MEASURE:  Content 
managers are instructed to populate their respective 
portlets with contact and portfolio information. (POL lead, 
All Sections, Consulates) 
 
DICKSON