05OTTAWA1972
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY COMMITS TO MAINTAIN
Wed Jun 29 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 OTTAWA 001972 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: HA MOPS PGOV PREL KPKO CA
SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY COMMITS TO MAINTAIN 
MOMENTUM ON HAITI IN MONTREAL CONFERENCE 
 
 
 ¶1. (SBU) Summary: Approximately 90 senior level officials 
from Haiti, international organizations, and donor 
governments met June 17 in Montreal to discuss the future of 
Haiti.  The conference's key theme was the importance of 
maintaining momentum in the lead-up to the November 
elections.  Participants agreed on the need for more 
aggressive actions to neutralize political and criminal 
gangs.  They expressed that to do so will necessitate 
considerable material and advisory assistance for the police 
and better integration between Civ/Pol, the HNP, and the 
MINUSTAH Force.  There was a call for a better public 
information campaign, both to bolster support for MINUSTAH 
and to prepare the people for elections.  While Haiti's 
material needs were acknowledged to be considerable, special 
attention was given to short-term high-impact projects which 
would demonstrate real improvements in daily life as a way to 
underwrite stability in places such as Cite Soleil.  The 
report on election preparation was encouraging, with 257 
registration sites expected to be opened in the coming week, 
and a positive sense of continued progress thereafter. 
Several participants also made a pitch for continued close 
coordination among donors so that scarce donor dollars are 
put to the best use.  End Summary 
 
IMPETUS 
------- 
 
¶2. (U) On June 17 approximately 90 officials gathered in 
Montreal to discuss international assistance for the future 
of Haiti.  The Government of Canada organized the conference 
to provide a bridge between the Cayenne 
Conference in March 2005 and the elections in November. 
Representatives from Haiti included Minister of Planning 
and External Cooperation Roland Pierre, Minister of Economy 
and Finance Henry Bazin, Minister of Foreign Affairs Herard 
Abraham, Provisional Electoral Council Max Mathurin, and HNP 
Spokesperson Dr. Cameau Coicou.  MINUSTAH was 
represented by SRSG Valdes and Civ/Pol Commissioner Beer. 
The OAS, World Bank, IMF, IDB, and the Francophone 
Organization had senior representatives, and bilateral donors 
represented included Spain, Mexico, France, Japan, 
the EU, the Dominican Republic, Brazil, and Chile. 
 
OPENING STATEMENTS 
------------------ 
 
¶3. (SBU) Three Haitian ministers captured the sense of the 
conference in their opening statements.   Minister Bazin 
said that Haiti is at a critical juncture and must move 
forward quickly to maintain the momentum of Cayenne.  While 
Haiti needs help from many quarters, the responsibility is 
Haiti's alone.  He called for an integrated program that 
would synergize efforts to improve security, the economy, and 
the political dialogue.  Minister for Planning Pierre 
said he initially believed the conference was too soon after 
Cayenne, but with the deterioration in security 
over the past several weeks now believes the timing is right. 
 He called for short term actions with a 
long-term focus.  Minister for Foreign Affairs Abraham 
reviewed the long deterioration that brought Haiti to this 
point, and stressed the commitment of the transitional 
government to fully focus on turning over power to a new 
government chosen through free and fair elections. 
 
MINUSTAH 
-------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) MINUSTAH SRSG Ambassador Juan Gabriel Valdes opened 
by saying that there is a need to recapture momentum 
among donors.  This conference, he said, is more critical 
than Cayenne because of the recent "drama" in Haiti, and 
there is an urgent need to bring to bear all available tools 
to produce stability.  He outlined three key goals: 
 
-- Reduction in violence 
-- Valid elections acceptable to all parties 
-- Fully legitimate government by February 
 
¶5. (SBU) To achieve this, Valdes said, five conditions must 
be met: 
 
-- First, cohesive leadership and better coordination must be 
developed between the security forces in Haiti 
(MINUSTAH, Civ/Pol, and HNP). 
 
-- Second, there should be greater strength in confronting 
gangs, ex-military, and criminal elements.  Valdes 
suggested the need to review the MINUSTAH mandate 
contextually, such that it allows for more intrusive 
operations when necessary, in coordination with the HNP. 
 
--  Third, there is a need to undertake social programs along 
the way, especially in key barrios e.g. 
Belair, Martison, and Cite Soleil.  Valdes reported that many 
people are seeing no improvement in their daily lives 
and are beginning to despair.  Without an infusion of 
resources in these areas, he said, applying force is like 
inoculating a body that is already diseased.  He also 
mentioned the problem of NGOs that cannot work where there 
are military forces present because they so value their 
neutrality, thus creating worse problems in the very areas 
that need the most help. 
 
--   Fourth, there must be a mobilization of the Haitian 
people against violence and in favor of elections. 
There is currently a negative sense about the UN in Haiti 
which needs to be reversed.  There is a need to show that 
the country will move forward in the long term because it is, 
in fact, moving forward in the short term.  MINUSTAH 
must be seen as not only providing security but also helping 
people. 
 
--   Fifth, there is a need to strengthen the electoral 
process.   Things are largely on track but 
continued effort is needed, and there must be a mobilization 
of public opinion in support of the process. 
 
STRENGTHENING THE POLICE 
------------------------ 
 
¶6. (SBU) Civ/Pol Commissioner Beer then briefed the delegates 
on the security environment, which he described 
as "fragile" because of in upsurge in violence (although the 
violence is localized in Port au Prince).  The threat is of 
increasingly organized anti-democratic elements which are 
attacking the political and economic heart of the country, 
and increasingly a shift in attacks from the government and 
MINUSTAH to the business community. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Beer expressed a basic problem with how MINUSTAH 
organizes itself.  This type of operation, he said, has not 
been done before and leaders are wrestling with how to do it. 
 He talked about the challenges of coordination between 
the HNP and MINUSTAH, and the lack of coordination among 
donors for police programs, complaining that donors, with 
the exception of the U.S., are not prepared to spend money 
expeditiously.  Of importance, Beer said, are the small 
projects which could be implemented quickly to improve 
morale.  Beer said there are 800 new members of the HNP 
completing academy courses and 800 more in training, with the 
key short-term goal of being ready to provide security for 
the elections.  Beer went on to praise the HNP, which are 
being killed at the rate of one every 5 days.  There is a 
core of officers, Beer said, who are willing to go out and 
serve every day, despite their lack of equipment and limited 
evidence that the international community will be there with 
them to make sustainable change. 
 
¶8. (SBU) HNP Spokesperson Dr. Marie Gessy Cameau Coicou 
discussed the challenges and development of the police force. 
 She described the social-political context as extremely 
challenging and getting worse.  There is increasing violence, 
the growing presence of armed groups, widespread criminality, 
kidnappings (which are new to Haiti and now include the rape 
and torture of hostages), car theft, arson, and murder.  A 
key threat is of Lavalas instigators seeking destabilization. 
 Since 30 September the gangs have perpetrated Operation 
Baghdad, in which they killed 50 HNP, two of which in the 
past several weeks were also mutilated.  The HNP is beginning 
to see alliances among criminal groups, and Cameau said there 
is a need for demobilization and re-entry programs for 
ex-soldiers and gang members to get them   off the streets 
and working productively.  She also mentioned the problem of 
the deportation of violent criminals from the US which then 
join gangs in Haiti. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Cameau then described the context for international 
support.  Past police programs, she said, 
such as the 7,000 police trained between 1995-1997, have 
suffered from the mix of trainers from various countries 
who brought different models to the force.  In any event, the 
police largely crumbled in February 2004, with many 
fleeing the force and taking their weapons with them.  The 
current HNP has basically started from scratch to rebuild 
the force. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Cameau said there are currently not enough officers 
to manage the elections.  The HNP originally 
planned to train 3,600, but has scaled that down to 2,400. 
There is a need for 7,000 officers for the elections, with 
a long-term requirement for 12,000, although 18,000 would 
provide the best ratio of officers to citizens, given the 
youthfulness of the Haitian population.  There is a chronic 
lack of resources -- when the former regime fled, police 
took communications gear and weapons, much of which is now in 
the hands of former regime members.  The police have 
insufficient vehicles and many stations have been destroyed. 
The HNP received USD 2.6 million from the U.S., 
which is helpful, but there remain considerable needs. 
 
¶11. (SBU) MINUSTAH has helped to fill the gap, but language 
barriers have hindered effectiveness -- the 6,000 mostly 
Spanish and Portuguese-speaking troops cannot communicate 
with the populace, and among the 1,600 police advisors 
there are few French speakers.  MINUSTAH is also hindered by 
very tight rules of engagement.  Cameau also said there 
is a basic misunderstanding among the Haitian people of the 
role of MINUSTAH, which is often not well received by 
people who do not see improvements in their day to day lives. 
 She expressed a need for stronger coordination 
between MINUSTAH, the HNP, and Civ/Pol, especially with 
regards to planning operations.  Military planning, Cameau 
complained, often slowed the effectiveness of operations. 
She also said that there is a basic lack of intelligence for 
the police, and thanked Canada for its help in this area. 
 
 
¶12.  (SBU) Cameau outlined a series of imperatives needed to 
restore the police to operational effectiveness: 
 
--   First, recover operational capacity.  As of February 
there were 5000 police, 800 are now in courses, 
600 more will enter training in August.  There are also 37 
new commissioners and 49 new inspectors.  The HNP will 
create an Operational Unit for the West, fully equipped with 
65 police. 
--   Second, depoliticize the HNP.  They will seek to 
transfer or release officers with political influence in 
order to purge the institution. 
--   Third, fix the personnel and career structure.  A 
program is being developed to fix the salary structure 
and pay system, ensure two meals per day for police officers 
on duty, improve the career development structure, 
offer bonuses for deserving police, implement a large-scale 
program for rehabilitation of equipment and infrastructure 
in collaboration with the United States, improve work 
conditions for officers, and rework the logistical 
system. 
--   Fourth, develop synergy and partnership between police 
and populace through community policing activities 
with certain communities. 
--   Fifth, improve morale. 
--   Sixth, fight corruption through a strong campaign at all 
levels. 
 
¶13. (SBU) The required resources to carry out these 
improvements are: 
 
--   Transport:               $6.7 million 
--   Communication:           $1.3 million 
--   Infrastructure:          $8.9 million 
--   Protective Equipment:    $2 million 
--   Arms and Munitions:      $3.8 million 
--   Total                    $22.7 million 
 
PREPARATION FOR ELECTIONS 
------------------------- 
 
¶14. (SBU) Max Mathurin, Provisional Electoral Council (CEP) 
President, briefed the group on preparations for the 
elections.  He expressed satisfaction with the information 
exchange June 16, which was needed to accelerate the 
electoral process.  He said there is concern with the 
deteriorating security situation and slippage of 
international support which is leading to fiscal, logistical, 
and security delays.  In short, Mathurin said 
the conditions under which the CEP functions are challenging 
-- it has started from the ground up with no 
personnel, infrastructure, or equipment, and needs constant 
assistance. 
 
¶15. (SBU) MINUSTAH Head of Electoral Assistance Gerardo Le 
Chevelier reported that one half of the registration 
centers are open.  With the US commitment of USD 8 million 
and the EU commitment of 8 million euros, the deficit for 
running the election is now down to USD 4 million. 
 
¶16. (SBU) Mr. Pierre-Richard Duchemin, Head of the 
Registration Committee of the CEP, reviewed the status of 
the registration process.  While not a panacea for Haiti's 
ills, Duchemin said that elections will help with 
stability.  He mentioned difficulty with i.d.'s and the 
challenges of insecurity and limitations in staff and 
equipment.  He sought a stronger partnership with civil 
society and expressed the need for more civic educators at 
all levels, something which would especially help with 
getting to remote areas for the vote.  Duchemin also 
suggested the need for a clear commitment for funding and 
security, and for the support of the parties. 
 
¶17. (SBU) For the OAS, Elizabeth Spehar stressed the 
importance of breaking the cycle of big, dramatic elections 
that leave nothing in their wake.  This time, she said, we 
must leave in place an electoral structure.  She also 
stressed the importance of coordination, saying that while 
there has been an acceleration in the opening of 
registration offices, there will be challenges to keeping the 
process on track. 
 
¶18. (SBU) With regards to election observation, Pauris Jean 
Baptiste, head of the CEP Observation Committee, stressed 
the need for outsiders to help point out errors and make 
corrections.  This, he said, would be critical to help 
validate the results of the elections for the Haitian people. 
 
 
¶19. (SBU) Elections Canada's Jean Pierre Kingsley expressed 
satisfaction with the Steering Committee meeting held on 
June 16 with representatives from 8 countries, the HNP, 
MINUSTAH, and the OAS.  He talked of the basic role to 
monitor the elections, but also to offer assistance in terms 
of validation.  His office is ready to offer advice 
and has established a list of 15 validation criteria.  One 
key piece of this process, Kingsley said, is ensuring the 
elections have credibility with the Haitian people.  He 
mentioned that there had been additional funding from 
Canada announced by Ministers Carroll and Pettigrew earlier 
that day. 
 
ECONOMIC REFORM AND STABILIZATION 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶20. (SBU) Minister of Economy and Finance Bazin chaired the 
economic discussion.  Bazin said that Haiti 
inherited a very difficult situation from the previous 
government, facing extraordinary challenges.  He seeks to 
clean up public finances.  The 2004 growth rate of 2%, Bazin 
said, is better than expected.  In March 2005 the government 
prepared an amended budget which took account of several 
unexpected expenses, such as the flood in Gonaives and 
pensions for ex-soldiers.  The 2005/2006 budget, prepared in 
conjunction with civil society, will focus heavily on basic 
services, education and fighting poverty.  Barzin also noted 
the persistent challenge of revenues lost to border 
contraband, estimated at $250 million annually. Streamlining 
and new leadership at the customs agency will aim to stem 
this financial bleeding. 
 
¶21. (SBU) Haiti has been working with the IMF, Barzin said, 
which has given it reasonably good grades.  He hopes this 
will help reassure donors, as donor support is essential in 
the short to medium term.  For energy supplies alone, Haiti 
needs some USD 8 million per month in support.  Haiti must 
also begin to deal with corruption.  It was recently tagged 
by Transparency International as the most corrupt country in 
the world. 
 
¶22. (SBU) Minister of Planning and Economic Cooperation 
Roland Pierre discussed implementation of the Interim 
Cooperation Framework (ICF), suggesting that from Cayenne to 
Montreal there has been progress in the structure of 
support, if not in actual numbers.  With regards to current 
priorities, Pierre said that Haiti seeks a minimum of USD 
24 million for the police (although more may be required when 
a full assessment is made).  He also stressed the need 
for USD 60 million to improve power generation, which must 
continue to be subsidized because of its centrality to the 
economy and security.  He said that USAID provided 23 million 
for fuel last year but that funding is now exhausted.  More 
needs to be done to make this sector more efficient.  The GOH 
would like to get power generation up to 12-18 hours a day. 
 
 
¶23. (SBU) World Bank representative Caroline Anstey said that 
the Bank pledged $150 million for Haiti during last 
year's donor conference.  Funds will come from the Bank's 
international development association (IDA), which is the 
concessional window that provides very low-interest loans to 
the poorest countries.  Two-thirds of that amount would be in 
grants and not re-payable to the Bank.  This amount is 
extraordinary because Haiti would not have otherwise 
qualified for this assistance, but the Bank saw this an 
opportunity to support reform and Haiti during a crisis. 
This 
was highly unusual, she said, as Haiti would have otherwise 
only qualified for a maximum of USD 45 million over 3 years 
in assistance versus $150 mn over two years from IDA.  Some 
USD 54 million has been disbursed to the IGOH, much of it in 
long term assistance, and 51% of the disbursements are in 
grants.  Anstey made a pitch to participants to encourage 
their governments to include Haiti in the HIPC initiative and 
the G8 Agreement on 100% debt relief. 
 
¶24. (SBU) Anstey sounded a cautionary note, however, 
reminding participants that 10 years ago the international 
community committed to Haiti USD 1.4 billion, which was later 
reduced to USD 200 million due to donors' lack of trust in 
the government on transparency and poor donor coordination. 
She stressed that donor communication is paramount.  She also 
suggested that donors should not just assess progress based 
on raw numbers (e.g. disbursements), 
but also on what actually is being accomplished in Haiti. 
Anstey pressed all to highlight tangible accomplishments 
(e.g. 2,000 children inoculated, 47 schools built, rather 
than simply recounting the amounts of aid). 
 
¶25. The IMF representative said that overall aid coordination 
seems to be better.  He credited the interim 
government with following a credible process for the new 
budget, and for maintaining financial stability through a 
difficult period.  He urged donors to pay attention to the 
need for adequate resources which would keep inflation low 
by maintaining adequate foreign exchange reserves to ease 
pressure on the exchange rate.  He said the IMF agrees with 
the Bank of the inclusion of Haiti in the HIPC and G8 debt 
relief initiatives. 
 
DELEGATE COMMENTARIES 
--------------------- 
 
¶25. (SBU) Throughout the conference there were interventions 
by national and IO delegates: 
 
--   The IDB rep supported the move to improve security 
during elections and said the Bank has fulfilled 
its commitment with USD 260 million by July 2004. 
 
--   Mexico said it would be focused on supporting the 
socio-economic framework with technical assistance and 
believes that security is the key to successful elections. 
 
--   The French representative expressed concern regarding 
the deterioration of the security situation over the past 
year, especially in Port au Prince.  He suggested that we 
must act on a priority basis to link security to economic 
development.  A newly empowered HNP with MINUSTAH support 
must take charge of security, and MINUSTAH's image will 
improve if security gets better.  He urged better 
coordination between HNP - Civ/Pol - and MINUSTAH on an 
urgent basis.  He was heartened by progress on registration 
centers for the elections, and saw success in the elections 
as critical for overall success on other fronts. 
 
--   The EU representative decried the perception of a 
climate of impunity and expressed concern with security of 
the border.  Nothing, he said, can stand in the way of the 
electoral calendar.  He urged strict adherence to the 
current calendar and accelerating support to that end.  The 
EU could be sending an independent observer mission, which 
would be coordinated with the general observers.  The EU will 
disburse EU 126 million by the end of the ICF in an 
accelerated disbursement. 
 
--   The OAS rep suggested that MINUSTAH needs a new approach 
to security, a more muscular capacity that could 
credibly disarm the gangs and provide security in slum areas. 
 But he added that MINUSTAH could be worse, and the 
constant criticism by its enemies on the ground is unhelpful. 
 The OAS will undertake small projects with the 
media to help prepare for the elections. 
 
--   The Spanish representative reiterated the importance of 
better coordination on security and a rapid 
response on the economic front.  He expressed the importance 
of the Haitian people not being passive and 
actively helping with the effort.  He also urged MINUSTAH to 
pay attention to the daily needs of the people, and the 
importance not only of elections but of the development of a 
national dialogue that would outlast the elections. 
 
--   Representatives of Haitian Society appealed to donors to 
help increase the size of the HNP to 15,000. 
They also urged the development of specialized units provided 
with the appropriate weapons and training to accomplish the 
security tasks they are given.  They suggested more attention 
be paid to the funding of new police stations, and weapons 
and ammunition for the police, and further focus on 
demobilization and follow-on training 
for demobilized gang members. 
 
--   The representative of Brazil urged consideration of 
quick impact economic projects to combat the pervasive 
poverty which is causing instability.  He suggested looking 
at economic improvement, security, and the political 
process in an integrated way.  He said Brazil strongly 
supports the extension of MINUSTAH.  On elections, he 
suggested that the vote must be free, fair, and transparent, 
but also must be fully accepted as such by the 
Haitian people. 
 
--   Canada highlighted its disbursement of USD 154 million 
to the ICF as of May 3.  The Canadian 
representative also encouraged donors to keep up the data 
base which Canada developed for the conference and will 
maintain, to help track and coordinate funding  (Note:  The 
Canadian tracking mechanism focuses on disbursements by 
quarter under each ICF axis, and is separate from the IGOH 
tracking mechanism used currently by donors.  End Note. 
 
--   Chile's representative expressed concern with the slow 
progress on voter registration and on demobilization. 
He mentioned one group of individuals whom his soldiers 
disarmed but for which there was not a viable follow-on 
retraining program. 
 
--   The Japanese representative said that Japan is 
considering an offer of support for a public awareness 
campaign. 
 
PETTIGREW ATTACKED 
------------------ 
 
¶26. (SBU) FM Pettigrew offered the keynote speech at dinner 
on June 16, and then arrived on the day of the conference 
for a press conference and brief speech to the delegates.  As 
he began the press conference with key heads of 
delegation, however, a demonstrator attacked him with a red 
dye before he was pulled out by police.  The incident caused 
the FM to cut his remarks to the delegates short so that he 
could go to the police station and file a complaint.  He 
simply reiterated to the delegates the importance of 
maintaining momentum and not allowing enthusiasm for the 
Haiti project to drop off. 
 
¶27. (SBU) All through the day there was a modest 
demonstration in front of the hotel by supporters of 
Aristide.  The demonstrators held anti-occupation, 
anti-Bush/Martin placards and gave speeches with a Haitian 
band in the background.  The Pettigrew attacker was not a 
Haitian exile, but rather a failed student with a record of 
participation in violent demonstrations.  He apparently made 
his way into the press conference with a false press 
pass. 
 
¶28. (SBU) PM Martin's Special Coordinator for Haiti Denis 
Coderre wrapped up the conference by stating that the 
international community must be firm in not allowing any 
intimidation by criminal groups or political parties as 
Haiti moves towards elections.  The time for words is over, 
and it is time to deliver, he said.  To the Haitian people 
he sent the message "you are not alone, we are all Haitian." 
 
Visit Canada's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/ottawa 
 
WILKINS