05PARIS8318
USUNESCO: COUNTRY CLEARANCE USGS DEVINE+1
Thu Dec 08 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 008318 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM USMISSION UNESCO PARIS 
FOR INT/USGS/RESTON/JSAFFER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KSCA TPHY OTRA ECON SENV TBIO AORC FR
SUBJECT: USUNESCO: COUNTRY CLEARANCE USGS DEVINE+1 
 
REF:  STATE 215862 
 
¶1.  As requested in reftel, country clearance is 
granted for Senior Advisor for Science Applications 
James F. Devine and acting Director Patrick Leahy to 
travel to Paris (12/15-12/17) to meet with UNESCO 
Science Staff and U.S. Mission to UNESCO. 
 
¶2.  Control officer is Science Attach, Nancy 
Cooper. She may be reached by phone or fax (tel: 
33-1-4524-8491; cellphone:  06-20-43-71-57, fax: 
33-1-4524-7458) and by e-mail at 
coopernj@state.gov. 
 
¶3.  IN THE EVENT OF A CRISIS OR SERIOUS 
INTERNATIONAL INCIDENT INVOLVING THE UNITED 
STATES, YOU SHOULD IMMEDIATELY CONTACT YOUR 
CONTROL OFFICER. 
 
¶4.  EMBASSY MEDIA POLICY STIPULATES THAT ANY 
CONTACT WITH VISITORS WITH THE MEDIA BE 
COORDINATED THROUGH THE EMBASSY PRESS OFFICE AT 01- 
4312-2833. 
 
¶5.  EMBASSY WISHES TO REMIND VISITORS THAT VISAS 
ARE REQUIRED FOR HOLDERS OF U.S. DIPLOMATIC OR 
OFFICIAL PASSPORTS ON OFFICIAL BUSINESS IN FRANCE. 
 
 
¶6.  Action request:  each visitor must bring a copy of 
his/her travel orders (or forward fiscal data) to cover 
costs of visit.  Each agency, organization, or visiting 
delegation will be charged for the actual costs 
attributed to their visit.  These costs include, but 
are not limited to, American and FSN overtime, field 
travel by Embassy employees, vehicle rentals, long 
distance telephone calls, equipment rentals, 
representational events and all other costs that are 
directly attributable to the visit.  Airport pickup is 
provide only for employees at the rank of Assistant 
Secretary or above.  Other visitors should take a taxi 
 
SIPDIS 
or Air France bus. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Information specific to USUNESCO 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  New office address:  the U.S. Mission to 
UNESCO is located at 12, avenue Raphael, in the 
16th arrondissement, phone: (33-1) 45.24.74.56 and 
fax: (33-1) 45.24.74.58. 
 
¶8.  U.S. mission control officers are responsible 
for notifying heads of visiting delegations in the 
event of an emergency.  Heads of delegations (or 
his/her designate) are responsible for relaying 
emergency information to their delegation members 
and should request local contact numbers from 
members.  Members of delegation, in turn, are 
responsible for providing contact information to 
their delegation leader (or designate). 
 
¶9.  If applicable, heads of delegation are 
responsible for ensuring proper coordination of 
all U.S. delegation activities and for submitting 
reporting cables of conference results prior to 
departure. 
 
¶10. U.S. mission accommodation exchange is 
available (from 10:00 a.m. To 11:00 a.m. On 
Monday, Wednesday and Friday only) for cashing 
U.S. dollar checks for euros at the official rate 
upon presentation of a passport and social 
security number.  Exchange limit is 2,000 U.S. 
dollars per day.  Delegates may also bring 
ATM/debit/credit cards or cash/travelers' checks 
for exchange on the local market. 
 
¶11. The U.S. Mission to UNESCO is a lock-and-leave 
facility, open from 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.  After- 
hours access to the mission, which requires the 
presence of a cleared US UNESCO employee, must be 
arranged in advance with the control officer. 
 
¶12.  All mission voltage is 220v and wall plugs 
are standard European round plugs.  The Mission 
does not provide transformers, or u.s.-to-European 
plug adapters.  Please plan accordingly if you are 
bringing your own electronic devices. 
 
------------------------------- 
Non-USUNESCO specific information 
------------------------------- 
 
¶13.  Following is current security information for 
France: 
 
(A) Current situation:  Travelers should be aware that 
the significant unrest that began in the northern 
suburbs of Paris Oct. 27 has now spread to several 
locations within the city limits of Paris, and to many 
other cities throughout France.  Check the Embassy 
website for the latest Warden Message: 
http://france.usembassy.gov 
 
Travelers using the Charles de Gaulle Airport in Paris 
should be aware that the train between the airport and 
Paris passes through an affected area and has 
occasionally been disrupted.  Travelers should rely 
instead on airport buses or taxis to downtown Paris. 
 
(B) Terrorism:  The current terrorism threat in France 
mirrors the general worldwide threat.  Trans-national 
terror groups such as al-Qaida likely have a presence 
in France and do present a general threat.  French law 
enforcement and intelligence services are effective in 
responding to this threat and remain in a heightened 
state of alert, but cannot completely negate it.  For 
this reason American citizens should practice good 
personal security when visiting France.  Remaining 
unpredictable is perhaps the simplest but most 
effective way of ensuring personal safety.  This is 
particularly true when departing or arriving at your 
place of residence.  Being aware of your surroundings 
and suspicious persons or activities is also critically 
important.  Do not accept packages, do not open hotel 
doors to strangers and immediately report any 
suspicious activities to the police (telephone 17) and 
Regional Security Office (telephone 33 1 43 12 27 96). 
 
(C) Crime:  Street crime in French cities is similar to 
that in most large metropolitan areas.  The two most 
frequent crimes are pick pocketing and snatch/run 
theft.  These criminals most often ply their trade on 
public transportation routes used by tourists and at 
tourist sites.  In Paris, visitors should be 
particularly alert when using Metro lines numbers one 
and two, in addition to the RER trains serving the 
airports.  Tourist sites such as the Eiffel Tower, 
Montmartre, the major museums and the Avenue des Champs 
Elysees are all areas of heavy activity.  Visitors 
should use hotel safes whenever possible to store 
valuables and excess cash.  Awareness should go up when 
conditions are crowded.  Maintain control of cameras 
and bags; do not carry these items behind you. 
Criminals on metros often push into you for distraction 
and pickpocket while doing so.  Another technique is to 
grab valuables and escape just as the metro doors are 
closing.  If credit cards are stolen, proceed to the 
nearest telephone and immediately notify the card 
issuer.  Stolen credit cards are used immediately. 
Whenever possible, take a seat or keep your back to a 
wall when on the metro system.  It is also recommended 
that a photocopy of your passport identification page 
be carried in lieu of the passport itself.  Report any 
incidents to the Regional Security Office as soon as 
possible. 
 
(D) Electronic devices: privately owned laptops and 
personal computers are prohibited in controlled access 
areas (CAAs) of the Mission and consulates.  Travelers 
with USG unclassified and classified laptop or notebook 
computers should review '95 State 244394 (classified 
machines) and '95 State 243825  (unclassified machines) 
and notify the Information Management Office (IMO) 
before bringing these machines into a CAA.  Cellular 
telephones are also prohibited in the CAA and must be 
left outside this area.  Questions concerning other 
types of electronic devices may be directed to the 
Information Management Office or Regional Security 
Office. 
 
(E) Travelers planning to stay longer than 30 days are 
required to schedule a security briefing with the RSO. 
For additional threat assessment information regarding 
France and/or Europe, you may contact DS/ITA in the 
State Department at (202) 663-0787. 
 
¶14.  Health Concerns:  For current information on 
health precautions for France, the U.S. Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) website contains 
an analysis at 
 
http://www.cdc.gov/travel/diseases.htm. 
 
KOSS