05PARIS7688
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iraq Social Unrest in France
Thu Nov 10 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 007688 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iraq Social Unrest in France 
European Expansion - France and the EU 
PARIS - Thursday, November 10, 2005 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Iraq 
Social Unrest in France 
European Expansion - France and the EU 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
The triple suicide bombings in Amman make the front pages of 
Le Figaro, Liberation and Le Parisien, despite the fact the 
information arrived late for editorial commentaries. Le 
Parisien reports that the UN Secretary General, who had 
planned to visit Jordan, has cancelled his trip and that the 
United States has offered its assistance to help track down 
the perpetrators. 
 
The Dalai Lama's visit to Washington is presented in Le Figaro 
as a slight for China, "days before President Bush's trip to 
Beijing" and as Hu Jintao pursues his world-wind tour. The 
same article mentions the Religious Freedom Report and its 
condemnation of China and its treatment in the Himalayan 
province. Yesterday's Le Monde also noted the publication of 
the Report: "The report pins Belgium, France and Germany `for 
their restrictive legislation' concerning minority religious 
groups." 
 
The tug of war between the White House and the CIA is "getting 
tougher" according to Le Figaro: "This is a common practice: 
attack the messenger in order to divert attention from the 
message. The investigations will address not the existence of 
`black sites' but the origin of the leak." 
 
Iraq, the assassination of another of Saddam's lawyers and the 
allegations of the use of white phosphates by the U.S. army in 
Fallujah are covered, the latter extensively in a two-page 
report in France Soir which announces on its front page: "In 
Iraq, The WND Were American." (See Part C) Le Monde carries a 
report on the "awful environmental legacy of Saddam" and the 
"improving situation." 
 
On the domestic front most reports indicate that violence has 
subsided in the Paris region after the implementation of 
curfews. Analyses abound on the strengthened Chirac-Villepin 
relationship and Sarkozy's loss of glitter. The editorial in 
Liberation suggests that "the exceptional measures brandished 
to fight social unrest could fan the raging fires. The 
measures give more power to a police which has rarely 
concentrated so much power as it is." Le Figaro's editorial 
criticizes France as a welfare state. (See Part C) 
 
Correspondent Philippe Gelie writes an op-ed explaining "How 
America Has Dealt With Urban Violence." "The answer in the 
U.S. was: repressive measures, responsibility, rehabilitation. 
But the results had a price in terms of police errors and 
unwarranted searches." (See Part C) 
 
Europe's decision to open its doors to the Balkans elicits a 
commentary from La Croix which sees "Europe as an element of 
appeasement for the Balkan populations and a way to keep them 
away from excessive nationalism." (See Part C) 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Iraq 
 
"After Latest Assassination, Saddam Trial Suspended" 
Adrien Jaulmes in right-of-center Le Figaro (11/10): "The 
latest assassination of one of Saddam Hussein's lawyers is re- 
enforcing the climate of fear that has prevailed since the 
beginning of the trial and this despite exceptional security 
measures taken around the `green zone.' Whatever the identity 
or the motives of the perpetrators, the death of these two 
lawyers is re-igniting the criticism about having chosen to 
try Saddam in Iraq. The prevailing insecurity makes each 
movement inside Baghdad a dangerous endeavor. Other such 
trials have taken place outside the countries where the crimes 
were perpetrated. In this case the decision by the new Iraqi 
government was part of a desire to re-enforce its national 
image. But the counterpart may be that the trial will lose its 
credibility in a court threatened by retaliation." 
"The Horrible Crimes of the U.S. Army" 
Thomas de Rochechouart in right-of-center France Soir (11/10): 
"Weapons of mass destruction have been found in Iraq, but not 
necessarily where expected. According to Italian television, 
the U.S. Army used chemical weapons in Fallujah. The same 
weapons which the Bush administration said had become a threat 
in the hands of Saddam Hussein. While the assault on Fallujah 
and the casualties it caused have been extensively reported, 
much less is known about the weapons used by the U.S. Army in 
the assault. According to Maurizio Torrealta who has led the 
investigation, `the wounds on the bodies could not have been 
made by conventional weapons.' While the U.S. has never made a 
commitment regarding the use of Napalm, the use of white 
phosphates is banned by the treaty on WMD signed by 
Washington. Donald Rumsfeld yesterday made a remark that could 
be construed as a semi-admission of guilt, when he said that 
`white phosphate is a conventional weapon.' This could lead to 
a battle of experts. The pictures of Fallujah are showing us 
today the reality of a war waged to `export democracy and 
civilization.'" 
 
Social Unrest in France 
 
"The Welfare State" 
Nicolas Barre in right-of-center Le Figaro (11/10): "The 
French tax and social system tends to favor the upper and the 
lower classes, forgetting the middle ones: the state welfare 
system increases by 60 % the income of 20 % of the population. 
It would be hard to imagine a more `social' system. In the 
U.S. polls show that 8 out of 10 Americans believe they can 
one day be part of the wealthiest 10 percent of the 
population! Hence their rejection of the French system. Could 
it be that too much redistribution of the nation's wealth is 
harming our economic activity? France must be the only country 
in the world to still be asking itself this question." 
 
"The Dangers Lurking Behind a Return to Normalcy" 
Guillaume Goubert in Catholic La Croix (11/10): 
"Paradoxically, there is great danger behind this return to 
normalcy. That of letting out a big sigh of relief, while we 
go back to our daily business and turn our backs to the needs 
of the suburbs. Everything can easily shift with the burning 
of a single car. The job at hand is a longwinded one. It will 
not end with the last car burning." 
 
"How America Dealt With Urban Violence" 
Philippe Gelie in right-of-center Le Figaro (11/10): 
"Repressive measures, responsibility and rehabilitation were 
the three R's that the U.S. implemented after the Los Angeles 
riots in answer to the worst confrontation it experienced on 
its territory since the Civil War. Many other cities have 
adopted the three R's, sometimes with excessive zeal. In New 
York, the deployment of more police brought crime down by 60 
percent. but there was a price to pay: preventive arrests and 
searches targeting minorities, something new for the U.S." 
 
European Expansion - France and the EU 
 
"Europe and the Balkans" 
Jean-Christophe Ploquin in Catholic La Croix (11/10): 
"Europe's logic of expansion continues despite the `no' last 
spring from France and the Netherlands. After the opening of 
the negotiations with Turkey, it now appears that positive 
signs are being sent towards the Balkans. Yesterday, Macedonia 
received the green light from the European Commission and last 
Monday the EU-25 approved an agreement for negotiations with 
Bosnia-Herzegovenia. This process is good for peace in Europe. 
The nations of former Yugoslavia are going through a delicate 
phase. Europe will be playing a major role in the future of 
the region. The prospect of EU membership is going to be an 
element of appeasement. It represents a pole towards 
prosperity, and respect for the right of law, something that 
will detract from those who are pushing for a return to 
nationalism." 
 
"France Loses Ground in Brussels" 
Jean Quatremer in left-of-center Liberation (11/10): "France's 
influence in Brussels continues to dwindle. Jose Manuel 
Barosso yesterday nominated to key trade and EU expansion 
positions a number of liberals who more often than not are 
either British or Irish. The battle behind the scene for these 
positions is particularly harsh. France has played its pawns 
and managed to save a key position in agriculture, which 
leaves most observers thoughtful because agriculture will 
progressively be less of a dominant portfolio." STAPLETON