05PARIS7314
GOF PROGRESS ON SARBANES OXLEY WHISTLEBLOWER DRAFT
Wed Oct 26 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

260952Z Oct 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 PARIS 007314 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
PASS SEC FOR SBOONE 
PASS FEDERAL RESERVE 
STATE FOR EB/IFD AND EUR/WE 
TREASURY FOR DO/IM MSOBEL AND LHULL 
TREASURY ALSO FOR DO/IMB AND DO/E WDINKELACKER 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
USDOC FOR 4212/MAC/EUR/OEUR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN ECON FR
SUBJECT: GOF PROGRESS ON SARBANES OXLEY WHISTLEBLOWER DRAFT 
GUIDELINES 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  NOT FOR INTERNET DISTRIBUTION 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY AND ACTION REQUEST: We have received draft 
French guidelines that would permit companies to use anonymous 
hotlines per Sarbanes Oxley requirements, and would welcome 
Washington views on the draft, ideally before November 8.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Staff members from the French privacy protection agency, 
CNIL, which blocked firms from implementing whistleblower 
hotlines in France, have issued draft guidelines that would allow 
hotlines under certain conditions.  CNIL has circulated the draft 
informally to interested parties, to get input before presenting 
the draft to its Board of Commissioners for final approval.  The 
next Board meeting is expected to occur on November 8. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Separately, we met with Marc Guillaume, Director of 
Civil Affairs in the Ministry of Justice (upon which the CNIL 
depends).  His view is that Sarbanes Oxley requirements are 
illegal under international law, inasmuch as they have 
extraterritorial effects that are not based on the concepts of 
personal or territorial jurisdiction.  He suggested the best 
solution would be to amend the US law, citing a number of other 
laws that had been deemed extraterritorial and subsequently had 
been amended. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) We have also met with a number of interested parties to 
discuss at length the draft text.  Most are encouraged by the 
possibility that hotlines will be permitted.  Some remain 
concerned that the French guidelines still are too narrow to 
accommodate reporting obligations that arise outside of the 
accounting and auditing areas covered by Sarbanes Oxley.  Others 
expressed concern about a German decision that struck down a 
hotline set up by Wal-Mart, because it had failed to have its 
code of conduct approved by the German Works Council prior to 
implementation. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The draft text, in its English translation, reads as 
follows: 
 
BEGIN TEXT: 
Draft guidelines for the implementation of whistleblowing schemes 
under the French Data Protection Act of January 6th, 1978, as 
amended on August 6th, 2004 
 
Warning : This document was prepared by the CNIL's internal 
departments, under the supervision of Mr. Hubert Bouchet, 
commissioner in charge of the sector of labor affairs. It has not 
been submitted to, and is not binding on, the Commission (CNIL). 
It will be submitted to the Commission for approval after 
official consultation of public authorities, professional 
organizations, trade unions and expert associations. 
 
The Commission nationale de l'informatique et des libertes (CNIL) 
has noted the recent development in France of procedures enabling 
employees to report their colleagues' allegedly law- or corporate 
policy-breaching behaviors in the office ("whistleblowing 
schemes"). 
 
Such schemes are neither allowed nor banned under current Labor 
Code provisions.  They rely on the processing of personal data 
and therefore, are subjected to the provisions of the January 6, 
1978 Act, whether the processing is computer- or paper-based. 
 
The CNIL in May 2005 refused to authorize two specific 
whistleblowing schemes .  However, it has no objection in 
principle to such schemes, provided the rights of individuals 
directly or indirectly incriminated through them are guaranteed 
with regard to personal data protection rules.  Indeed, such 
individuals, in addition to the rights which they are granted 
under labor law if disciplinary actions are initiated against 
them, are entitled to specific rights under the Data Protection 
Act or under European directive 95/46/CE of October 24, 1995 when 
data relating to them are processed : right to such data being 
collected fairly; right to be informed that such data is being 
processed; right to object to such processing for legitimate 
reasons, right to have any inaccurate, incomplete, ambiguous or 
outdated information rectified or removed. 
 
The CNIL has established the following guidelines in order to 
contribute to the implementation of whistleblowing schemes that 
comply with the principles set forth by the law and the 
directive. 
 
1) Impact of whistleblowing schemes : subsidiary nature, limited 
scope, non-mandatory use 
 
Obviously any normally operated organization requires that an 
alert concerning any professional problem should reach management 
through the natural channel of the line of command or by open 
reporting methods involving personnel representatives or account 
auditors, the latter enjoying appropriate protection and 
independence under French law, for that matter. However, the 
implementation of a whistleblowing scheme may be justified under 
the assumption that these information channels may not work in 
some circumstances. 
 
Due to its inherently subsidiary nature, the scope of such a 
whistleblowing scheme should be limited. Schemes with a general 
and indiscriminate scope (such as those intended to ensure 
compliance with legal requirements, corporate policies or 
internal rules on business conduct, for instance) raise an 
automatic difficulty with regard to the Data Protection Act due 
to the risk of abusive or disproportionate incrimination of the 
professional, or even personal integrity of the employees 
concerned. 
 
However, the legitimacy of whistleblowing processes implemented 
for the sole purpose of meeting a French legal requirement aimed 
at establishing reinforced internal control procedures in 
specific areas is indisputable. Such a requirement clearly 
results, for instance, from provisions relating to the internal 
auditing of credit institutions and investment companies (order 
dated March 31, 2005 amending the Banking and Financial Policy 
Committee ("Comite de reglementation bancaire et financiere") 
regulation number 97-02 dated February 21, 1997). 
 
It appears that, under the Data Protection Act, such legitimacy 
may not result from the mere existence of a foreign legal 
provision by virtue of which a whistleblowing scheme would be 
implemented. This specifically applies to the provisions of 
Section 301(4) of the Sarbanes Oxley Act, which provide that the 
employees of an issuer may raise any concern with the audit 
committee as to questionable accounting controls or auditing 
matters while being assured that their reports will be processed 
under conditions of confidentiality and anonymity. 
 
On the other hand, one cannot disregard the benefits of 
implementing whistleblowing schemes concerning financial and 
accounting matters to French companies directly listed in the 
United States or to French subsidiaries of US companies listed in 
the United States, which must accordingly comply with a 
requirement to certify their accounts to the US national 
securities exchanges. Obviously, ensuring that information 
relating to financial embezzlement and account rigging properly 
reaches the Board of directors is a critical concern for any 
issuer. 
 
Far from being limited to the United States, initiatives were 
also taken in Europe (including the European Commission 
recommendation of 15 February 2005 on the role of non-executive 
or supervisory directors of listed companies and on the 
committees of the (supervisory) board), which are aimed at 
achieving the same objective as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, i.e. 
reinforcing the safety of financial markets. In this context, 
whistleblowing schemes which are restricted to auditing and 
accounting issues are acceptable. 
 
The same applies to whistleblowing systems whose purpose is to 
combat bribery of foreign public officials in international 
business transactions (OECD convention dated December 17, 1997, 
ratified by Act Nr.99-424 dated May 27, 1999). 
 
In order to prevent a whistleblowing scheme from being abused 
into reporting facts unrelated to such specific pre-determined 
areas, the data controller responsible for the scheme should 
clearly state that its use is strictly reserved for such areas 
and should refrain from following on an alert made on facts that 
fall outside its scope. 
 
More generally, using a whistleblowing scheme that may be deemed 
as legitimately put into operation should not be made compulsory 
for employees.  Indeed the French Department for Employment, 
Labor and Professional Integration ("ministere de l'emploi, du 
travail et de l'insertion professionnelle") has stated, in a 
letter sent to the CNIL, that  the use of whistleblowing systems 
should be not a requirement, but only be encouraged. (.) Making 
reporting mandatory would result in passing on to employees 
employers' duties in terms of ensuring compliance with corporate 
policy. It can be argued also that the reporting requirement 
would breach article L120-2 of the Labor Code as a requirement 
out of proportion with its objective . 
 
2) Limited categories of individuals to be involved in a 
whistleblowing scheme 
 
In accordance with the proportionality principle, the categories 
of personnel likely to be incriminated through a whistleblowing 
scheme should be determined accurately, in accordance with the 
purposes of the implementation of the scheme. Though it is not 
ruled out that any member of the personnel may be involved by an 
alert, it is disproportionate that a whistleblowing scheme 
focusing e.g. on financial and accounting matters result in the 
incrimination of employees with no responsibility in that area. 
 
The categories of personnel likely to make use of a 
whistleblowing scheme should also be determined accurately based 
on their ability to avail of information about the specific area 
concerned by the scheme. For instance, it would probably be 
disproportionate to allow factory workers employed at an 
industrial production center to have access to a whistleblowing 
scheme dedicated to raising concerns as to financial embezzlement 
or account rigging. 
 
3) Restrictive processing of anonymous reports 
 
The right to file anonymous reports can only increase the risk of 
slanderous reports. Conversely, requesting an individual's 
identification prior to let him/her make a report can only help 
increase the responsibility of the users of the process and thus 
reduce such a risk. As a result whistleblowing schemes should 
imply that the data necessary to identify the whistleblower is 
collected. 
 
Protecting the whistleblower is a requirement inherent to the 
whistleblowing scheme. It is not the CNIL's responsibility to 
appreciate the means used to ensure such protection, except for 
one area that results clearly from the Data Protection Act. The 
individual's identity should be processed in a confidential 
manner. Specifically, it should not be disclosed to the 
incriminated individual based on the latter's right to access 
data concerning him/her specified in article 39 of the said Act. 
 
The existence of anonymous reports, even and especially if there 
is no organized confidential whistleblowing system, is an 
unavoidable fact. It is also difficult for company officials to 
disregard such reports. The processing of such reports should be 
subject to specific precautions, particularly as to their 
circulation within the organization. At any rate, the 
organization should not encourage individuals who are likely to 
use the system to do so anonymously and the publicity made of 
such schemes inside the organization should take that point into 
account. This requires not to make anonymous reports easy, 
including by opening a dedicated telephone line that would not 
require the identification of the whistleblower at the beginning 
of the call. 
 
4) Communication of clear and extensive information on the 
whistleblowing scheme 
 
Clear and extensive information to potential users of the 
whistleblowing scheme should be conveyed by any appropriate 
means. 
 
In accordance with article 32 of the Data Protection Act, such 
information should in particular include the identification of 
the entity in charge of the scheme, the purposes and the scope of 
the scheme, its optional nature, the fact that employees will not 
be sanctioned for not using it, the recipients of the reports, as 
well as the right of incriminated individuals to access and 
rectify their data. 
 
Going through the line of command should be described as the 
normal and preferred method for handling cases where professional 
rules established by the law are allegedly not complied with. 
 
Lastly, it should be clearly stated that any abuse of the system 
will result in disciplinary action and criminal proceedings being 
filed against the author of the abuse. 
 
5) Collecting reports through dedicated means 
 
The reports may be collected by any data processing means, 
whether electronic or not. 
 
Such means should be dedicated to the whistleblowing scheme in 
order to prevent any diversion from its original purpose and for 
added data confidentiality. 
 
6) Relevant, adequate and non-excessive data in reports 
 
The medium on which data collected through a whistleblowing 
scheme is recorded should only mention objective data that is 
directly related to the scope of the scheme and is strictly 
required for verifying the alleged facts. 
 
The wording used to describe the nature of the reported facts 
should express that the facts are alleged. 
 
7) Processing of internal reports reserved for specialists in a 
confidential framework 
 
SIPDIS 
 
The reports should be collected and processed by an entity 
dedicated to those issues, within the organization. There should 
be a limited number of individuals in charge of taking action in 
the report management process. These individuals should be 
specially trained and subjected to special, contractually- 
defined, confidentiality duties. 
 
Data confidentiality should be ensured both when the data are 
collected and when they are disclosed or stored. 
 
The data should not be disclosed to other legal entities unless 
such disclosure is required for processing the report (ex : 
involvement of another organization's employee, or a high-level 
member or management body of the respective company). In that 
case, the data should only be provided, in a secured manner, to 
the relevant body of the legal entity if it offers equivalent 
guarantees for the processing of such reports. 
 
Specifically, the fact that several legal entities belong to the 
same group alone does not justify that a report made within a 
subsidiary implementing a whistleblowing scheme be necessarily 
disclosed to its parent company. Additionally, in the exceptional 
cases - mentioned in the paragraph above - where such disclosure 
is required to a legal entity based in a non European Union 
country that does not ensure an adequate level of protection in 
the meaning of directive 95/46/EC of October 24, 1995, the 
specific provisions of the Data Protection Act relating to 
international transfers of data should be applied (specific legal 
framework and information to reported individuals that the data 
will be transferred to such a country). 
 
Lastly, if the organization envisages to call upon a service 
provider to handle the whistleblowing scheme, the latter should 
undertake by contract that it will not use the data for diverted 
purposes, that it will ensure the confidentiality thereof, meet 
limited data retention periods, and inform the individuals 
identified by the whistleblowing processing system. The company 
will in any case remain responsible for the processing carried 
out by the service provider. 
 
8) Circulating anonymous business reports 
 
For the purpose of evaluation of the whistleblowing scheme, the 
company may provide entities in charge of processing such reports 
within the group with any statistical information useful for the 
performance of their duties (such as data relating to the types 
of reports made and corrective action taken). 
 
Such information should not directly or indirectly disclose the 
identity of the individuals mentioned in the reports. 
 
9) Limited data retention periods 
 
Data relating to a report found to be unsubstantiated by the 
entity in charge of processing such reports should be deleted 
immediately. 
 
Data relating to reports that required verification should not be 
kept more than two months after the verification work is closed, 
unless disciplinary action is taken or court proceedings are 
filed against the individual incriminated or the author of an 
abusive report. 
 
10) Accurate information provided to incriminated person 
 
In accordance with articles 6 and 32 of the Data Protection Act, 
an identified individual that was incriminated by a report should 
be notified by the person in charge of the process as soon as 
data concerning him or her is recorded, whether electronically or 
not, so as to enable him or her to object promptly to his or her 
data being processed. 
 
At any rate, the reported individual should not be informed 
before indispensable protective measures have been taken. 
 
The information is given in a way which ensures that the reported 
person is properly notified. 
 
Such information to the reported employee should include the 
identification of the entity in charge of handling the system, 
charges brought against him or her, what departments will receive 
the report as well as how to exercise his or her right of access 
and rectification. 
 
11) Complying with rights of access and rectification 
 
In accordance with articles 39 and 40 of the Data Protection Act, 
any person identified in the professional whistleblowing process 
may access his or her data and request the rectification or 
deletion thereof, if applicable. 
 
His or her right of access does not entitle him or her to request 
the disclosure of information about third parties, such as the 
whistleblower's identity. 
END TEXT. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Post would appreciate any guidance on the draft. 
STAPLETON