05PARIS6116
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Katrina
Fri Sep 09 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 006116 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Katrina 
UN Reform 
PARIS - Friday, September 09, 2005 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Katrina 
UN Reform 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
Ambassador Stapleton is quoted in Agence France Press in a 
dispatch titled: "Katrina: the U.S. Thanks the French for 
their Help." "On Thursday the U.S., through its Ambassador, 
thanked the `government and the people of France' for `their 
generous assistance' to the victims of Hurricane Katrina. 
Speaking in French before a group of journalists, Ambassador 
Craig Stapleton also recalled the historic ties that link 
France and New Orleans." Le Figaro, under the title: 
"Washington Thanks Paris for Its Support" also quotes 
Ambassador Stapleton. Reporting from Dallas, William Raymond 
of Le Parisien who lists the various French efforts present in 
the region, writes: "This surge of solidarity was saluted by 
the U.S. Ambassador to France, Craig Stapleton." 
 
Although front pages are devoted to a wide variety of domestic 
stories, coverage of Katrina continues to hold a prominent 
place in all dailies, with many commentaries devoted to the 
political impact of the hurricane on the Bush administration 
and beyond, on U.S. policy in general. A front-page commentary 
by political analyst Daniel Vernet of Le Monde is titled 
"Katrina Shakes Up U.S. Diplomacy" while editorialist Patrick 
Sabatier of Liberation entitles his column: "The Anti 9/11." 
In the regional press, one editorial also on Katrina points to 
"America's lack of readiness." (See Part C) But in his weekly 
round up in Le Figaro, Ivan Rioufol criticizes French coverage 
of the Katrina tragedy: "Granted that President Bush did not 
measure up to the situation. But it is indecent to jubilate 
while describing the details of a humiliated super power. Not 
only would France not have done better in a similar situation, 
we also have our poor." 
 
UN Reforms are also a major topic of debate. An op-ed in 
Liberation by three members of the Committee in favor of 
canceling the debt of poor nations is titled "Against 
Sabotaging the UN." (See Part C) 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
Katrina 
 
"Katrina Shakes Up U.S. Diplomacy" 
Daniel Vernet in left-of-center Le Monde (09/09): "All the 
deficiencies revealed by Hurricane Katrina - the many victims, 
the obvious ineffectiveness of the authorities, negligence due 
to lack of funds - all of this could lead U.S. public opinion 
as well as the administration to rethink America's priorities 
and return to a policy more centered on domestic issues and 
the immediate needs of its citizens, including the needs 
regarding security. What is the use of looking to safeguard 
America's security by going to battle in Iraq and seeking to 
establish democracy, if Americans cannot be protected from 
natural tragedies.? The majority Americans no longer believe 
their President when he flaunts the successes of the war in 
Iraq. After having spent several years fighting against 
external threats, the Americans may, under the impulse of 
other leaders, turn to dealing with their domestic weaknesses, 
so as to avoid giving the image of a super power harboring in 
its midst pockets of the third world. The U.S. would be 
reverting to a form of `jeffersonism,' serving the universal 
cause of democracy through example rather than by exporting a 
model." 
 
"After Katrina" 
Nicolas Barre in right-of-center Le Figaro (09/09): "Four 
years after 9/11, the tragedy of New Orleans has underscored 
the troubling inability of the U.S. authorities to quickly 
react to a blow of massive destruction which had previously 
been announced. The chain of command, in the event of a 
serious crisis, remains a source of confusion which everyone 
thought had been sorted out after 9/11. If Katrina was able to 
cause so much damage, one dares not imagine what a surprise 
chemical attack might do. While a hurricane gives advance 
notice of its trajectory, terrorists do not announce 
themselves on a radar screen." 
 
"The Anti 9/11" 
Patrick Sabatier in left-of-center Liberation (09/09): "It was 
inevitable to make the comparison between the ravages of 
Katrina and those of 9/11. America's vulnerability to the 
forces of nature has been compared to its vulnerability to 
terrorism. But on the eve of the anniversary of 9/11, August 
29 looks more like the opposite of 9/11. The Al-Qaeda attack 
gave President Bush an opportunity to show his `leadership.' 
The country was united in a reflex of patriotism. The effect 
of Katrina has been the exact opposite. The hurricane has 
shown a President without `leadership' and an impotent federal 
government, unable to fill its position as protector of its 
citizens. The political debate in the U.S. appears suddenly to 
have shifted towards domestic issues, and possibly for a long 
time to come." 
 
"A More Humble America" 
Jacques Hubert-Rodier in right-of-center Les Echos (09/09): 
"The country hosting next week's major UN summit looks more 
humble and less arrogant than it did four years ago. leading 
some to speak of an `American decline.' This is far from being 
the case. But as the world continues to navigate in un- 
chartered waters, there are new questions arising from China 
and India's emergence. As America suddenly faces an internal 
disaster, it must remain vigilant on the international scene. 
All the while dealing with the tragedy in New Orleans, it must 
resist the temptation to turn inward. This attitude could lead 
to losing ground everywhere." 
 
"America's Lack of Readiness" 
Jean-Claude Arbona in regional La Nouvelle Republique du 
Centre Ouest (09/09): "Money, glory and honor to he who makes 
it. But what about the others? They are abandoned like the 
Blacks of New Orleans, too poor to leave or find housing 
elsewhere. The pictures are hurting America and the Americans. 
Had the federal government planned their evacuation? No. Has 
President Bush announced a federal plan for after the tragedy? 
No. He called for donations. While private donations are 
colossal, they also illustrate to what extent the federal 
government is strong when it comes to dealing with matters 
abroad, yet remains weak in the social protection of its 
citizens. Can this be tolerated?" 
 
UN Reform 
 
"Against the Sabotaging of the UN" 
Julie Castro, Damien Millet and Eric Toussaint in left-of- 
center Liberation (09/09): "For the past several years the 
U.S. has been launching a veritable offensive against the UN, 
where the Americans cannot operate as freely as they can 
elsewhere. The latest is Ambassador Bolton's attempts to 
drastically limit the impact of the next UN summit. His many 
amendments to the UN reform plan aim to go back on certain 
issues, and setting them in stone. This game plan by the Bush 
administration is part of a wider design to protect, at all 
costs, America's dominance as well as the dominance of its 
companies and that of major powers supporting the U.S. . A 
number of world events help to shed light on the logic behind 
the actions of President Bush who seems to be taking a certain 
pleasure in trampling the UN: The invasion of Iraq where the 
U.S. and its allies are now mired was led in complete 
violation of the UN charter. Similarly, President Bush's 
opposition to international treaties, including on the 
environment, juxtaposed to the destruction caused by Katrina, 
illustrates the destructive aspects of a neo-liberal doctrine 
which assigns billions to an imperialist war and pays no 
attention to social and environmental needs." STAPLETON