05PARIS2415
UNESCO/International Oceanographic Commission
Mon Apr 11 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 PARIS 002415 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM USMISSION UNESCO PARIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TPHY AORC OTRA PBTS WWT UNESCO
SUBJECT: UNESCO/International Oceanographic Commission 
Meeting coordinates Indian Ocean tsunami warning system 
 
Ref:   STATE 33352 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY and Introduction: 
The Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) 
convened The International Coordination Meeting for the 
development of a Tsunami Warning and Mitigation System for 
the Indian Ocean within a Global Framework, at UNESCO 
Headquarters in Paris, 3-8 March 2005.  The meeting Its p 
reinforced the IOC's lead role in coordinating efforts to 
set up global and regional tsunami warning systems; (b) , a 
primary USG goal.  (The USG supports expanding the Pacific 
Tsunami Warning network -- which exists under the auspices 
 
SIPDIS 
of the IOC -- to the Indian Ocean and other at risk areas, 
within the framework of the Global Earth Observation System 
of Systems (GEOSS)).  The meeting also resulted in the 
agreeing to eestablishment of an International Coordination 
Group for the Tsunami Warning and Mitigation System for the 
Indian Ocean, whose terms of reference will be approved at 
the IOC's General Assembly in June; (c) , as well as in the 
setting up of a process and timeline to design a basin-wide 
Indian Ocean Tsunami Warning System (IOTWS). 
 
¶2.  The meeting concluded with a The U.S. played a key role 
in the meeting.  Its policy statement, made by Head of 
Delegation and U.S. Representative to the IOC Executive 
Council, NOAA Assistant Administrator Dr. Richard Spinrad, 
was well received (full text at end of cable).  U.S. 
technical agency experts (USGS, USAID, NOAA) made formal 
presentations, intervened on key points and participated 
actively in all working groups. The experience of the U.S.- 
hosted Pacific Tsunami Warning Center was highlighted three 
times and U.S. interventions helped to establish a short 
term process to complete the IOTWS design outline and work 
plans perhaps as soon as June. 
 
cCommuniqu that underscored national responsibility for 
establishing and managing national warning systems, 
including the emphasized the critical role of education in 
for community preparedness, , and and the role of urged all 
countries to engage in capacity building and technology 
transfer in the Indian Ocean region to help build tsunami 
warning and mitigation systems.  It was decided that the 
Indian Ocean Tsunami Warning System (IOTWS) would consist of 
a coordinated network of national systems; though several 
countries vied for serving as the regional coordinator, 
there was no consensus on the matter.  The communiqu also 
recommended that all Member States "make every endeavor" to 
share seismic, sea-level and other data relevant to 
tsunamigenic events at or near real-time.   Within the IOC, 
 
SIPDIS 
the US has consistently supported open and free exchange of 
data, including in the context of tsunami warning systems; 
this is likely to remain a contentious issue as the IOTWS 
moves forward.  The Communiqu and all presentations are 
available at http://ioc.unesco.org/indotsunami. 
 
¶3.  IOC will sponsor a follow-up meeting in Mauritius, 14-16 
April, with the aim to develop the draft design and work 
plan for presentation to the June IOC General Assembly.  For 
additional information, contact Liz Tirpak (DOS/OES, 
tirpakej@state.gov, 202-647-0238)  End Summary and 
Introduction.   The Communiqu and all presentations are 
available at http://ioc.unesco.org/indotsunami. 
 
 
 
MEETING OVERVIEW 
---------------- 
 
 
 
 
 
¶4.  The IOC hosted the International Coordination Meeting 
for the Development of a Tsunami Warning and Mitigation 
System for the Indian Ocean within a Global Framework, in 
light of the tragic loss of life and massive destruction 
caused by the Indian Ocean tsunami of 26 December 2004. 
 
 
¶5.  The U.S. policy statement, made by Head of Delegation 
and U.S. Representative to the IOC Executive Council, NOAA 
Assistant Administrator Dr. Richard Spinrad, was well 
received (full text at end of cable).  U.S. technical agency 
experts (USGS, USAID, NOAA) made formal presentations, 
intervened on key points and participated actively in all 
working groups.  The experience of the U.S.-hosted Pacific 
Tsunami Warning Center was acknowledged by several speakers. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
¶6.  Many U.S. delegation goals were reinforced in the 
opening statement by UNESCO Director-General Koichiro 
Matsuura, made a strong opening statement that who 
emphasized IOC's role in in the governance structure to 
linking internationally- run detection/alert systems with 
nationally- run warning systems.  He underscored that a 
tsunami warning system should be fully embedded in the 
 
SIPDIS 
global , operational ocean observing system (GOOS) that is 
regularly used for other hazards, such as storm surges and 
tropical cyclones.  Following the February Global Earth 
Observation System of Systems (GEOSS) meeting and third 
Earth Observation Summit in Brussels, Mr. Matsuura noted 
that "synergies between existing and new systems will make 
possible a multi-hazard approach that should improve the 
cost-effectiveness and long-term sustainability of the 
overall system."  Lastly, he drew substantially on the 
experience of the Pacific Tsunami Warning Center IOC in 
designing and operating a warning system TWS, providing for 
open, free and unrestricted exchange of data and 
information, and highlighting promoting the three components 
of a TWS: tsunami hazard assessment of tsunami hazards; 
detection/warning system; and adoption of preparedness 
measures. 
 
¶7.  Twenty IOC member states offered various levels of 
support for the creation of an Indian Ocean tsunami warning 
system. No nation rejected the idea, but no nation pledged 
support without conditions.  (Note:  Australia, India, 
Indonesia, and Thailand appear to have the most advanced 
planning with funding to back their plans.  All three plans 
are based on the Pacific Ocean Tsunami Warning System (PTWS) 
of an integrated approach of hazard assessment, warning 
guidance, and preparedness, with India's plan being the most 
comprehensive.  End Note.) 
 
¶8.  Data Exchange Issue - Several participants acknowledged 
that "immediate, free and open distribution of raw data from 
observing systems in real time" should serve as the founding 
principle for all regional and global tsunami warning 
systems, while India could offer only "international product 
sharing."  Other participants suggested that the IOC Data 
Exchange Policy, adopted by the Assembly in 2003, should 
serve as the "guiding principle" for IOTWS.  (Note: Though 
the U.S. endorsed the IOC Data Exchange Policy, the Policy 
refers only to oceanographic data, not to seismic or other 
types of data crucial to an effective tsunami warning 
system.)  The Communiqu ultimately recommended that all 
Member States "make every endeavor" to share seismic, sea- 
level and other data relevant to tsunamigenic events at or 
near real-time. 
 
¶9.  The Pacific Tsunami Warning Center and the Japan 
Meteorological Agency agreed to provide interim tsunami 
alerts to the Indian Ocean region based on existing 
facilities until adequate warning capabilities are 
established within the region.  Four nations in the region 
(Australia, India, Indonesia, and Thailand) confirmed their 
plans to establish systems and capacities to detect and 
measure tsunamigenic events and issue appropriate warnings 
to forecast their impacts.  Until and unless a regional 
center is identified, the national centers agreed to supply 
product and services to other national centers in the 
region. 
 
¶10.  Discussions were organized by topic, addressed first in 
panel and later in three separate working groups.  The three 
main topics were technical aspects, organizational aspects, 
awareness and preparedness. 
 
Technical Aspects 
----------------- 
DATA EXCHANGE 
Data exchange policy and practice was a recurrent theme in 
throughout the meeting.  Several participants (name the 
countries?) acknowledged that "immediate, free and open 
distribution of raw data from observing systems in real 
time" is a founding principle for all regional and global 
tsunami warning systems, while others suggested that the IOC 
 
SIPDIS 
Data Exchange Policy, adopted by the Assembly in 2003, 
should serve as the "guiding principles" for IOTWS.  Though 
the U.S. endorsed the IOC Data Exchange Policy, it refers 
only to oceanographic data, not to seismic or other types of 
data crucial to an effective tsunami warning system.  The 
Communiqu ultimately recommended that all Member States 
"make every endeavor" to share seismic, sea-level and other 
data relevant to tsunamigenic events at or near real-time. 
 
 
BEYOND THE INDIAN OCEAN 
The final session on "The Indian Ocean System within a 
Global Framework" provoked substantial debate as to how 
other region's tsunami warning systems (e.g., Mediterranean 
and Northeast Atlantic, Caribbean and Central West Atlantic, 
and Southwest Pacific) would be reflected in the Communiqu. 
India and other IO members provided text that limited 
examples to areas adjacent to the Indian Ocean, such as 
South-East Asia and the South China Sea. 
 
Responding to prior U.S. correspondence, The IOC Executive 
Secretary Dr. Patricio Bernal outlined his interest in 
 
SIPDIS 
discussing potential FY 05 financial support via extra- 
budgetary U.S. contributions for...(letter to be available 
tomorrow). 
 
OTHER SPECIAL TOPICS? 
? 
  -    roles of India, Japan, other key delegations 
-    anything on donor concerns 
-    During the meeting, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban 
Treaty Organization (CTBTO) announced: ...... 
-    ???? 
 
 
¶11.  The panel on the technical aspects of tsunami warning 
systems (TWS) was chaired by the representative from 
Indonesia who presented some graphical material on the 
effects of the recent tsunami and the need for improvement 
of monitoring and warning technologies in the Indian Ocean. 
The panel was made up of scientific and technical 
presentations by experts from the Russian Federation and 
Japan.  The Russian expert presented statistics on tsunami 
occurrence and likelihoods of tsunami generation and their 
severity from earthquakes of various magnitudes.  The 
Japanese experts covered the current technologies used in 
Japan to detect tsunami and issues warnings, with particular 
emphasis on the challenges of warnings of local tsunamis 
compared to those caused by distant earthquakes. 
Presentations also reviewed the factors controlling tsunami 
height and on-shore run-up.  The Chair of the IGC/ITSU gave 
the most scientifically controversial presentation by 
describing "emerging technologies" for tsunami detection and 
warning, including perturbation measurement from the 
ionosphere, infrasound  measurements, satellite-based ocean 
height measuring systems, and on-shore radar. 
 
¶12.  Dr. Neville Smith (Australia) chaired the technical 
aspects a working group, which was tasked to identify and 
recommend: (1) the technological basis for a tsunami warning 
system (measurements and telecommunications, analysis, 
processing and hazard/risk assessment); (2) design elements 
of an IOTWS, (3) the strategy for building an IOTWS, and (4) 
new technologies and research and development needed.  The 
resulting report consists of provided both general and 
specific a series of bulleted points recommendations that 
will be considered in for the preparation of the design plan 
: 
      a necessary condition for the success of any design for 
     an IOTWS is the free and immediate flow of raw observational 
     data, in real time over robust communication links, to all 
     national and regional participants in the system is a 
     necessary component for TWS. 
    common approaches to data processing, hazard and risk 
modeling, and warning dissemination and message format are 
essential. 
      coastal bathymetry, sea floor configuration, topography 
     and land mapping are essential and must be carried out and 
     be made available in high resolution format for all at-risk 
     national coastal regions. 
      utilization of new technologies should be explored. 
      the requirements for use of space technology for 
     tsunami applications must be defined. 
    network must enable the all data, as well as the 
results of the real-time analysis, need to be made available 
to all analysis/warning centers in real time for the rapid 
rapid 
verification of tsunami waves from sea-level and ocean- 
bottom sensors. 
      geostationary communication satellites operating in the 
     Indian Ocean region and the use of Global Telecommunication 
     System (GTS) of WMO, which is currently operational used for 
     the Pacific Tsunami Warning System (PTWS) for collection of 
     sea-level observations and distribution of bulletins and 
     warnings, should be upgraded within 6 months and fully 
     operational to address needs of the Indian Ocean region in 
     the interim and longer-term be explored. 
    broadband is needed for real-time distribution of 
seismic data. 
    telecommunication systems that meet these requirements 
should be identified and utilized. 
    risk management framework should be employed and 
complemented by robust models and scenarios of historical 
and potential tsunami events that can be used in the 
formation and dissemination of warnings. 
      for both seismic and sea level networks - upgrades must 
must 
     be identified and prioritized. 
    establishment of deep ocean buoys useful for tsunami 
monitoring is needed. 
    cable-based systems should also be assessed as these 
instruments are important for slumping events and other 
events that are not seen in seismic measurements. 
    network planning should start with identifying and 
mapping the tsunami prone areas.  This should be based upon 
a historical study of earthquake and tsunami occurrences. 
    robustness and durability of the instruments and the 
system as a whole to the impacts of the earthquakes needs to 
be considered 
    emerging technologies should be considered in the 
overall strategy, to ensure the evolution of the system 
relative to best practice. 
¶12.  In addition, further rationalization of the technical 
aspects is required because, particularly in During the 
instrumentation and communication discussions, vocal 
participants with narrow interests often held the floor and 
carried their positions forward.  Nevertheless, there was 
 was 
the recognition that many of the pieces for the ITOTWS are 
in place or in progress; the challenge rests in putting the 
pieces together in a structure that has the needed 
telecommunication, data processing, and warning 
dissemination capacities. 
 
¶13.  The seismic network was reviewed and strengths and 
weaknesses were identified. 
For both seismic and sea level networks, upgrades must be 
identified and prioritized, and data must be made available 
in real-time to centers designated for processing and 
analysis via satellites that are immediately retransmitted 
over the WMO Global Telecommunication System to appropriate 
warning centers.  A need for the establishment of deep ocean 
buoys useful for tsunami monitoring and warning was also 
identified, and cable-based systems should also be assessed 
as these instruments are important for slumping events and 
other events that are not seen in seismic measurements. 
 
The general strategy of the IOTWS was defined to include: 
immediate, free and open distribution of raw data from the 
observing systems in real-time must be acknowledged as a 
founding principle for all regional and global tsunami 
warning systems.  , since Without suchwithout, both the 
timeliness and effectiveness of the system may be severely 
compromised and the risk may be greater than would otherwise 
be the case.  Any network planning should start with 
identifying and mapping the tsunami prone areas.  This 
should be based upon a historical study of earthquake and 
tsunami occurrences.  It was noted that Mmany of the 
 
SIPDIS 
standards that underlie the systems for open data collection 
and exchange can be adopted (or adapted) from already 
established international systems.  A sustained and reliable 
Indian Ocean measurement network will require responsible 
national and international actions and cooperation, 
including sustained investment, national and commitments, 
and international cooperation.  There is need to develop the 
networks within a consistent integrated framework for 
systems of systems. 
 
¶14. In terms of the technological implementation, it was 
agreed that the tsunami warning system as a whole should 
build on and be a part of a multi-purpose system, since . 
The the sustainability of the observing system including 
cost effectiveness and efficiency are also enhanced with 
such an approach.  National and international agencies need 
to invest in a coordinated centralization approach to build 
an integrated tool for earthquake and tsunami surveillance 
and scientific research.  The robustness and durability of 
the instruments and the system as a whole to the impacts of 
the earthquakes needs to be considered. 
 
¶15.  As the tsunami early warning system will be based upon 
various data sourcesacquisition and dissemination platforms, 
in-situ ocean and land stations, and networks, it is it was 
emphasised that the 
 
      network of stations for tsunami early warning should be 
     constantly monitored to guarantee its reliability and 
     effectiveness. 
    data must be quality controlled, and archived for post- 
event assessment and research. 
    observation systems should be qualified and certified. 
    warning criteria and standards need to be established 
drawing from recognizing the PTWC protocols (4: advisory, 
watch, warning...). . 
The legal responsibility for issuing warnings (that may lead 
to evacuation) are assumed by national centers (unless other 
arrangements are agreed upon by countries). 
The group also briefly considered the requirement for 
information and technology transfer, from those nations with 
capability (including from beyond the region) to Indian 
Ocean nations desiring enhanced technical capabilities. 
 
emerging technologies should be considered in the overall 
strategy, to ensure the evolution of the system relative to 
best practice. 
 
Organizational Aspects 
---------------------- 
 
¶16. 
The Session on The panel on "Organizational and Practical 
al 
Arrangements for a Regional Tsunami Warning and Mitigation 
System" featured presentations by the national programs of 
Chile and Japan.  Dr. Charles McCreery, Director Pacific 
Tsunami Warning Center, and Dr. Laura Kong, Director, 
 
SIPDIS 
International Tsunami Information Center (ITIC) presented 
regional dimensions. 
 
¶17.  It was noted that Nnational centers are responsible for 
interpreting warning guidance from regional center(s), 
issuing local warnings, and issuing alerts for local events, 
while regional centers provide efficiency of operations, 
access to a larger suite of observations, and sharing of 
services.  Regional centers also provide serve as a focal 
point for mitigation activities, communications between 
stakeholders, products (e.g., tsunami travel and height 
maps), se services (e.g., testing of communications systems, 
expertise exchange, quality control), and can provide backup 
functions for national centers.  Long-term sustainability - 
rRegional commitment and support and support from , national 
support, and international support levels can - guarantee 
long-term sustainability of regional centersis a 
prerequisite for a regional center. 
 
¶18.  Dr. Laura Kong, provided an overview of the ITIC's role 
and capabilities.  The ITIC  described how the ITIC monitors 
the international tsunami warning system for the Pacific to 
improve operations,; assists member states with technology 
transfer,; and provides technical assistance and training to 
improve national and community-level preparedness.  Dr. Kong 
also noted the importance of hazard reduction strategies, 
including preparation of inundation maps, evacuation maps, 
simulations and drills, to facilitate an effective response 
to tsunami warning.  ITIC has developed a substantial amount 
of training programs and outreach materials that it uses in 
its training programs to were offered to help prepare both 
national emergency management agencies and local communities 
to respond appropriately to tsunami warnings. 
 
¶19. 
Twenty IOC member states offered various levels of support 
for the creation of an Indian Ocean tsunami warning system. 
No nation rejected the idea, but no nation pledged support 
without conditions. India, Indonesia, and Thailand appear to 
have the most advanced planning with funding to back their 
plans. All three plans are based on the Pacific Ocean 
tsunami warning system of an integrated approach of hazard 
 
SIPDIS 
assessment, warning guidance, and preparedness with India's 
plan being the most comprehensive. Calls for unrestricted 
data sharing were voiced by several nations while the plans 
presented by India offer international product sharing. Ten 
organizations made presentations on their capabilities to 
help implement an IO tsunami warning system. The most 
promising presentations to make a functional tsunami warning 
system were by WMO, IRIS, GLOSS, and GEOSS. If IOC can work 
effectively with these organizations the probability of 
success is high. 
 
 
Conclusions of Working Group 2the working group on the 
organizational aspects of an IOTWS are were captured 
reflected in the CCommuniqu. 
 
The Pacific Tsunami Warning Center and the Japan 
Meteorological Agency have agreed to provide interim tsunami 
alerts to the region based on existing facilities until 
adequate warning capabilities are established within the 
region.  Four nations in the region (Australia, India, 
Indonesia, and Thailand) have plans to establish systems and 
capacities to detect and measure tsunamigenic events and 
issue appropriate warnings to forecast their impacts.  The 
products and services of these centers will be made 
available to other national centers in the region. 
Guidelines addressing the responsibilities of national 
centers were developed. In conjunction with the designation 
of a national contact point is the necessity for each 
country to develop a response plan to warnings. 
 
 
AWARENESS AND PREPAREDNESS 
-------------------------- 
 
 
¶20.  Session 5 The panel addressed on Ttsunami aAwareness 
and pPreparedness includrevieweding national preparedness 
pPlans (New Zealand and Indonesia), community-based early 
warning systems (ISDR, Red Cross), awareness building and 
public information (Asian Disaster Reduction Centre), and 
institutional capacities for moving forward (UNDP). 
 
¶21.  A The corresponding third working group chaired by 
________considered:   reviewed (1) risk and vulnerability 
assessment; (2) public awareness and education; and (3) 
preparedness and emergency response. 
To address risk reduction, the the WG 3 group called for 
preparation of hazard risk, inundation and evacuation maps 
that identify escape routes, safe areas and shelters.  The 
group acknowledged Oother methods of reducing risks - beyond 
the scope of ITSU - includinge land-use planning, structural 
interventions (building codes, coastal structures, elevated 
shelters), and non-structural interventions (protection, 
rehabilitation, and conservation of coastal ecosystems, 
including mangroves and coral reefs that help buffer coastal 
communities). 
 
¶22.  Working Group Three highlighted the importance of 
aAwareness, education, and public outreach as were noted as 
essential ingredients in tsunami early warning systems, 
using recognizing that innovation and local knowledge to can 
be used to build a culture of safety.  The group also called 
for special attention to building national and local 
preparedness and emergency response capacities, with clear 
and careful delineation of functions and responsibilities. 
 
 
 
A session on the Technical Aspects of TWS was chaired by the 
representative from Indonesia who presented some graphical 
material on the effects of the recent tsunami and the need 
for improvement of monitoring and warning technologies in 
the Indian Ocean.  The body of the session was made up of 
scientific and technical presentations by experts from the 
Russian Federation and Japan.   The Russian expert presented 
statistics on tsunami occurrence and likehoods of tsunami 
generation and their severity from earthquakes of various 
magnitudes.  The Japanese experts covered the current 
technologies used in Japan to detect tsunami and issues 
warnings, with particular emphasis on the challenges of 
warnings of local tsunamis compared to those caused by 
distant earthquakes.  Their presentations also covered the 
factors controlling tsunami height and on-shore run-up.  The 
Chair of the IGC/ITSU gave the most scientifically 
controversial presentation, whichdescribed various "emerging 
technologies" that might be applied to tsunami detection and 
warning; measuring perturbations in the ionosphere, the use 
of infrasound measurements, the use of satellite-based ocean 
height measuring systems, and the use of on-shore radar in 
tsunami warning systems. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
 
BEYOND THE INDIAN OCEAN 
----------------------- 
 
¶23.  The final session on "The Indian Ocean System within a 
Global Framework" provoked substantial debate as to how 
other region's tsunami warning systems (e.g., Mediterranean 
and Northeast Atlantic, Caribbean and Central West Atlantic, 
and Southwest Pacific) would be reflected in the Communiqu. 
India and other IO members provided text that limited 
examples to areas adjacent to the Indian Ocean, such as 
South-East Asia and the South China Sea. 
 
Participating Organizations 
--------------------------- SESSION 4 
 
 
 
¶24.  Several organizations were invited to make 
announcements during the proceedings:: 
 
  Asian Disaster Preparedness Center (ADCP) - Described 
experience in regional disaster projects and described a 
regional TWS that includes earthquake and tsunami 
monitoring. 
 
     Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization 
(CTBTO) - Offered to share data archival technology 
     Global Earth Observational System of Systems (GEOSS) - 
Guy Duchossois described program and presented Tsunami 
Communiqu. 
     GLOSS (IOC global sea level program) - Described 
d 
current contribution in IO and recommended expansion of real 
time reporting stations. 
     International Maritime Organization (IMO) - Described 
how warnings might be disseminated via ships. 
     Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology - 
David Simpson described the standardized, real-time global 
seismic network, how it detected the Dec 26 earthquake, and 
how it could contribute to a global TWS. 
     International Telecommunications Union (ITU) - 
Described their role in communications for all aspects of 
TWS. 
     UN/ESCAP- - Described capabilities as they relate to a 
regional of global TWS. 
     WMO - Described operational role in world weather 
forecasting and recommended that the TWS use their Global 
Telecommunications Networks to deliver tsunami warning 
information to ION nations. 
 
OLIVER 
  IOC - Organized meeting and is committed to lead the 
  development of IO and global TWS.