05PARIS6418
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Nuclear Issues: Iran - North
Wed Sep 21 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 006418 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Nuclear Issues: Iran - North 
Korea Iraq - British Operation in Basra NATO 
PARIS - Wednesday, September 21, 2005 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
¶1. Nuclear Issues: Iran - North Korea 
¶2. Iraq - British Operation in Basra 
¶3. NATO 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
Le Monde prominently features an interview with A/S Dan Fried 
about the German elections, Europe and France's role in the 
negotiations with Iran. The interview is announced on the 
front page: "Dan Fried Thanks France." Inside, A/S Fried says: 
"The message of determination sent to Tehran by France was the 
message that needed to be sent." And on Europe: "An 
introspective Europe is not good for the world, no more than 
an isolationist America. We have the responsibility of working 
together for the good of humanity, not to look inward and make 
believe that our prosperity and democracy can exist 
independently, outside the world." 
 
Iran, and North Korea's sudden turn-around on its decision to 
end its nuclear program are two major international stories. 
Liberation carries an op-ed by Therese Delpeche of CERI who 
wonders if the Americans might not have been too eager in 
accepting a text with "vague" wording, which in turn led to 
North Korea's turn around. (See Part C) 
 
The NASA space program elicits an editorial commentary in Le 
Monde titled "The Moon Before Mars": "NASA is offering 
Americans a strange deal. A heavier budget . in exchange for a 
dream that might help to forget the nightmares of Iraq and 
Katrina." In its satirical column titled "the American Dream," 
Liberation comments: "Even the American dream has become hard 
to sell to a disillusioned public. And the dream of adding one 
more star to the American flag is more pathetic than exalting. 
Not so much because of the cost, but because of a quest for a 
dream in order to hide the bad taste left by Baghdad and 
Katrina. `Apollo on steroids' is no joke. Once again, America 
under the influence is showing its muscle but it's just pumped 
up." 
 
Several articles and editorials are devoted to the death of 
Simon Weisenthal and his relentless search for Nazi war 
criminals. Liberation's editorial comments: "If the 
international collective legal arm had done its job, his 
little homebred enterprise might not have been necessary. 
Simon Weisenthal proved that an individual could act in his 
own name and with little means to accomplish effectively what 
organizations and institutions could not accomplish, because 
they were either too cumbersome or weighed down by a double 
language." Catholic La Croix devotes its lead, editorial and 
several articles to "Justice Against Forgetfulness." 
 
Le Figaro carries a report on the British operation in Basra 
to rescue its soldier. Adrien Jaulmes raises several questions 
about the relationship between the Iraqi police and the local 
militia. (See Part C) 
 
In its op-ed pages Le Figaro carries an op-ed by Kofi Annan 
titled "The Glass Half-Full" previously published in its 
English-language version, and an op-ed by Michael Hanlon of 
the Brookings Institute on NATO, titled: "Let's Not Expect Too 
Much From NATO." (See Part C) 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Nuclear Issues: Iran - North Korea 
 
"The Agreement That Wasn't" 
Therese Delpeche of CERI (European Center for International 
Research) in left-of-center Liberation (09/21): "An American 
expert on Monday, carried away by his enthusiasm cried 
`victory in the Korean Peninsula.' Twenty-four hours later the 
`victory' had turned into a quarrel. Was the American 
negotiator too quick when he accepted the vague wording of the 
first point in the agreement, accepting to leave for later the 
details of the light water nuclear plant? It is legitimate to 
ask this because Washington was quick to retort that what this 
meant was: after the dismantling of the North-Korean nuclear 
sites. Whereas Pyongyang clearly said that Washington should 
not even dream of it unless it first delivered the plant. This 
is what happens when one is too eager to reach an agreement 
with a partner known for its turn-arounds... After two years 
of negotiations the skies cleared as if by magic and a Chinese 
diplomatic breakthrough was announced. But China's primary 
objective is not to settle the North Korean issue, but to 
prolong the discussions and avoid a major crisis with the U.S 
and/or Japan. In short, negotiations will continue but it is 
too early to cry victory." 
 
"Tehran Threatens" 
Left-of-center Liberation (09/21): "The tone is escalating 
between the Iranians and the Europeans. In a very harsh draft 
resolution, the EU is asking the IAEA to bring the Iranian 
nuclear issue before the UNSC, without mentioning sanctions, 
and accused Iran of `violating' its commitment. As a response 
the Iranians are threatening to withdraw from the NPT and to 
limit their oil supply to any country that would oppose Iran 
in this dispute." 
 
Iraq - British Operation in Basra 
 
"A Commando Operation in Basra" 
Adrien Jaulmes in right-of-center Le Figaro (09/21): "The 
complete impunity which surrounded the delivery of the two 
British soldiers to the militia by the Iraqi police and the 
level of street violence against the British tanks suggest 
that the alleged calm in the Shiite regions of Iraq remains 
doubtful. The incident is one more worrisome sign of the 
degrading situation in Basra, which had until now been spared 
the violence spreading in the rest of Iraq. It also stands as 
proof of the growing influence of the radical militia led by 
Moqtada al-Sadr. Because of a situation that is increasingly 
looking like an Iraqi civil war, because of a central 
government overwhelmed by events, the Shiites are increasingly 
turning to religious militia for protection. According to 
certain sources, the local police forces in Basra are 
completely controlled by al-Sadr's men." 
 
NATO 
 
"Let's Not Expect Too Much From NATO" 
Michael O'Hanlon of the Brookings Institute in right-of-center 
Le Figaro (09/21): "While it is indisputable to say that NATO 
has indeed a future, it is less easy to ascertain how the 
organization could become more effective, politically or 
militarily. NATO has its merits, but also its weaknesses. 
These are not to be considered as failings but rather as a 
result of its inherent limitations, due to an organization 
based on integration of conventional military power. NATO has 
not contributed to a coherent western response to terrorism. 
It is not equipped to deal with the Iranian and North Korean 
nuclear issues. In the U.S., where NATO is considered as 
indispensable, everyone is equally aware that NATO is limited 
in its capacity to deal with certain problems. It is obvious 
that NATO has done little in Iraq. First and foremost NATO is 
a military alliance whose main objective is to protect its 
members. The Atlantic Alliance may try to do something in 
Sudan and the Congo. Its non-American members may improve 
their military forces. But to expect more from NATO is to 
misinterpret the nature of the organization and presume of its 
capabilities." STAPLETON