05PARIS2552
French Regional Paper Slams American Presence Post
Thu Apr 14 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 002552 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
Department for EUR/WE, EUR/PPD, EB 
 
¶E. O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON PINR KPAO EIND FR ADIP ODPC
SUBJECT: French Regional Paper Slams American Presence Post 
as "Economic Intelligence" Post 
 
 
1.(U)  On April 12, the Toulouse-based, left-of-center 
regional daily "La Depeche du Midi" published an article on 
alleged U.S. economic intelligence gathering in Europe, 
with a short sidebar article entitled "The True Role of the 
American Presence Post."  The front page headline, "When 
America Plunders Europe, " featuring a picture of President 
Bush standing on the CIA seal, announced the story which 
ran on page 3.  The sidebar alleges that the "discreet" 
APP, with its "maximum security measures" dedicates itself 
to "economic intelligence and lobbying" for American 
businesses.  It goes on to say that APPs in France should not 
be confused with the "consulates" in Marseille and Strasbourg. 
Noting the "antenna" in Toulouse was opened in 1999, the 
article goes on to name the other APPs, noting that the 
"infiltration" of the APPs is such that one, Bordeaux, is 
co-located with the Chamber of Commerce and Industry. 
 
2.(U)  The feature article is entitled "America's Other War." 
It asserts that besides being on a war-footing over Iraq and 
Bin Ladin, the United States is leading a "secret war" 
across five continents to "maintain the political and 
economic leadership of America in the world." It notes that, 
since President Clinton's administration,the United States has 
"made economic security its number one objective in its 
foreign policy."  Another sidebar article interviews Bernard 
Carayon, a French UMP deputy who is a member of the National 
Assembly's Finance Commission and mayor of the southwestern 
town of Lavaur.  In 2003, he headed a Ministry of Interior 
committee and authored a report on economic intelligence issues. 
He is currently working on a parliamentary report on "tools of 
industrial policy." In the "Depeche" interview, he states that 
all of the subcontractors of Airbus (which is based in Toulouse) 
are the targets of Americans who wish to "catch up on its 
technology lag by any means." 
 
3.(U)   With a circulation of just over 200,000, "La Depeche du 
Midi" is the only daily published and sold in Toulouse.  It 
is sold in ten departments of southwest France as well.  It 
has been directed by the Baylet family for the past fifty 
years.  Senator Jean-Michel Baylet, who is president of the 
Radical Party of the Left (PRG), is its president.  The 
senior editor, Jean-Christophe Giesbert, is a dual French 
and American citizen.  He is a son of an American GI who 
landed on Normandy on D-Day and the co-author of a book on 
D-Day entitled "The Heros of June 6." 
 
4.(U)   The Ambassador has written a letter to Mr. Giesbert to 
express disappointment with the article on the APP, 
stressing the transparent mission of the APPs to better 
communicate with France's people, provide American citizen 
services and commercial advocacy in key French cities.  He 
points out that the ten French consular offices in the 
United States have similar missions.  The English text of 
his letter follows below. 
 
5.(U)  "Dear Mr. Giesbert, 
 
I was disappointed to read your newspaper's April 11th 
article regarding "The Real Role of an American Presence 
Post."  Past meetings with Depeche du Midi editorial staff 
and previous articles in your paper had led me to believe 
you clearly understood the mission of these "little 
Consulates."  That mission does not include economic 
intelligence as alleged in your newspaper's article. 
 
As we have explained, these posts focus on service to U.S. 
citizens, public diplomacy, and assistance to U.S. 
companies interested in working in the region and those 
wishing to do business with the United States.  American 
Presence Posts issue passports to U.S. citizens, register 
births abroad, and work with organizations promoting mutual 
understanding through cultural and educational exchanges. 
On the commercial side, they speak to U.S. companies 
wishing to partner with local French businesses, providing 
them with contact information for relevant executives and 
public information about the business and legal climate. 
 
American companies in the region have developed strong 
cooperation with numerous French businesses, providing 
significant investment and jobs in both of our countries. 
Every business day, the United States and France transact 
approximately $1 billion in business with each other, and 
the affiliates of American and French companies employ many 
of each other's citizens.  French investment in the United 
States generates 515,000 jobs for Americans, while U.S. 
investment in France provides 583,000 jobs. 
 
Business promotion is a normal priority for all diplomatic 
offices around the worldU.S. and French.  France maintains 
consulates in nine U.S. cities, in addition to its Embassy 
in Washington, and all ten offices promote French trade and 
investment interests across the United States. 
 
The transparent nature of our five American Presence Posts 
in France is a testament to the dynamism of Franco-American 
relations.  In the early 1990s, we were forced to close 
Consulates throughout the world, including those in Lyon 
and Bordeaux, as new Embassies opened in the former Soviet 
Republics.  Realizing the importance of France, we 
developed the idea of creating one-officer posts in 
important French centers with minimal staff and 
administrative burdens.  Because the term Consulate carries 
certain bureaucratic requirements, the American Presence 
Post concept was born, and the first U.S. post in Toulouse 
was opened. 
We encourage you to come visit the APP, meet its staff, and 
better learn about "the real role of an American Presence 
Post." 
 
6.(SBU)  The PAO has spoken directly with the editor, who 
assured her that he saw no problem with printing the 
Ambassador's letter.  Mission officers will meet with Mr. 
Giesbert to discuss further the allegations of American 
commercial espionage and the alarming characterization of the 
APPs. 
Leach