05PANAMA1102
PANAMA COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
Tue May 17 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Panama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PANAMA 001102 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ELAB OTRA AFIN PM NU
SUBJECT: PANAMA COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR U.S. DEPARTMENT OF 
LABOR CONSULTANT KJELL ENGE 
 
REF: SECSTATE 085481 
 
¶1. Country Clearance is granted to Department of Labor 
Consultant Kjell Enge, from Juarez and Associates, for 
travel to Panama June 1-5, 2005. 
 
¶2. Purpose of this visit is to provide technical assistance 
and conduct workshops with USDOL grantees on project 
performance monitoring issues concerning two USDOL-funded 
Child Labor Education Initiative projects. The USDOL 
grantee for the Education Initiative in Panama is Creative 
Associates. 
 
¶3. As per reftel, no Embassy assistance is required. 
 
¶4. Embassy point of contact will be Political Officer Debra 
Steigerwalt, telephones: office (507) 207-7122, residence 
(507) 321-0742, cell (507) 616-5271, fax (507) 207-7418, 
email:SteigerwaltDA@state.gov. 
 
¶5. The American Embassy in Panama is located on Avenida 
Balboa and Calles 37 and 38, and the Clayton Building is 
located on Demetrio Basilio Lakas Street (formerly Building 
520, Clayton).  (Note:  When taking a taxi to the Embassy, 
please be sure to specify the exact address where you 
intend to go.  If your business is in the Chancery, you 
should ask to be taken to the Avenida Balboa location.  The 
Consular Section, FCS, MGT, PD, and CIS (formerly INS) are 
located on Demetrio Basilio Lakas Street, Clayton.  Taxi 
drivers have sometimes taken our visitors to the Clayton 
Building when in fact they wanted to go to the Chancery. 
The Embassy telephone number is (Country Code (507) 207- 
7000 during duty hours.  After duty hours, the telephone 
number is (507) 207-7200.  End Note.) 
 
¶6. Use taxis for transportation between the Embassy and the 
hotel unless other arrangements are made.  Taxis in Panama 
do not use meters and fares should be agreed upon in 
advance. 
 
¶7. U.S. currency is accepted in Panama and major credit 
cards are widely accepted.  However, visitors are warned 
that large denominational bills ($50 and larger) are often 
closely scrutinized or refused due to counterfeiting fears. 
 
¶8. During the May-to-December rainy season, Panama City 
experiences heavy rain most days, often with brief flooding 
in the streets or walkways.  During the rest of the year, 
rains are less frequent.  The temperature is warm. 
Travelers are advised to pack accordingly. 
 
¶9. All official USG travelers to Panama should enter on 
passports with appropriate diplomatic or official visas. 
 
¶10. American visitors or TDYers departing from Tocumen 
International Airport must pay a 20 USD user fee.  However, 
officials accredited to the American Embassy in Panama are 
exempt. 
 
¶11. Security Assessment: There is no specific information to indicate that criminals or terrorists target official or private American travelers to Panama. Criminal statistics indicate a steady increase in drug use and related criminal activity to include robbery, assault, auto theft, larceny, and sexual assault. The emergence and establishment of youth gangs, in specific areas of Panama City and Colon, has been noted, yet has not reached the critical levels that it has in other countries in Latin America. Armed violence in the high crime areas of metropolitan Panama is not uncommon; a curfew enacted for juveniles remains in place. Police checkpoints have become commonplace on weekends in Panama City and Colon, checking for everything from drunken driving to valid drivers licenses, to searching for weapons. Based upon reported incidents, the high crime areas around Panama City are: Chorrillo, Ancon, Curundu, Rio Abajo, Veracruz Beach, Panama Viejo, and the Madden Dam overlook. In addition, U.S. citizens should exercise caution when visiting the campus of the University of Panama. Despite improved policing and more police officer visibility on the streets during business hours, urban crime continues to be a problem akin to what one would find in most mid-sized cities in the U.S. The border region of Panama and Colombia, the Darien, is unstable - and sometimes violent - due to narcotics trafficking and spillover from the Colombian civil conflict. The region is not developed and there is no ready access. All travel for official Americans to the area is restricted, and travel for pleasure is not allowed. Advice to American travelers: Exercise good personal security practices and always be aware of your surrounding environment. Minimize the amount of cash, credit cards, jewelry, and other personal valuables you carry with you and avoid going out alone, particularly after dark. Choose restaurants and establishments that have adequate security. Radio taxis are safe and recommended. Contact the RSO to report any security-related incident. For updated security information, contact the U.S. Embassy's Consular Section.
 
MCMULLEN