05PARIS6349
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - German Elections Katrina and
Mon Sep 19 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 006349 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - German Elections Katrina and 
the U.S. Model Iran 
PARIS - Monday, September 19, 2005 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
German Elections 
Katrina and the U.S. Model 
Iran 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
Ambassador Craig Stapleton is interviewed in Sunday's Le 
Journal du Dimanche in a lengthy interview, which covers 
Franco-American relations, America's image in France, Katrina 
and the President's `mea culpa', and the situation in Iraq. 
The interview is picked up in wires from Agence France Presse 
and AP. 
 
Today's front pages and editorials are overwhelmingly devoted 
to this weekend's German elections. The tone is best 
illustrated in the analysis of Le Monde: "The Germans have 
chosen not to chose." The lack of a clear winner and the 
political consequences for Germany, but beyond Germany to 
Europe, are the subjects of today's commentaries. "Confusion" 
in Germany is Le Figaro's take, while Liberation headlines: 
"Two Losers For One Seat." Financial La Tribune titles its 
editorial: "Fog Over Berlin." (See Part C) 
 
Nuclear threat from Iran after President Ahmadinejad's UN 
speech elicits several articles in Le Figaro, (See Part C) 
which also interviews Hans Blix: "Negotiations with Iran are 
at a standstill. While negotiations is the answer, negotiating 
under threat of UN sanctions make things difficult. We must 
not forget that for the Iranians this is also a matter of 
pride. They resent the West's non-recognition of their 
achievement. Expanding the circle of nuclear nations poses a 
danger. I would prefer for Israel to abandon nuclear weapons 
rather than accept a new member into the club. The more people 
have a finger on the trigger the bigger the danger. Including 
America's finger on the trigger." 
 
The Afghan elections are widely reported, mostly factually, 
with Le Figaro noting that "50 percent of registered voters 
participated in the elections which the Taliban were unable to 
sabotage." Liberation reports on the war against the Taliban, 
"who are like ghosts, appearing and then disappearing." 
Popular Le Parisien devotes a two-page report to Islamic 
terrorists recruited in France and sent for training in Syria 
and then to serve as suicide bombers in Iraq. Says Christophe 
Chaboud of the anti-terrorist cooperation unit: "To date, we 
have identified seven Frenchmen dead in Iraq, three of them in 
suicide attacks. As long as the conflict lasts, the recruiting 
should continue. We are not talking about massive recruiting, 
but it is a reality that is a source of concern." 
 
A number of commentaries are devoted to the U.S., the fallout 
from Katrina, and the suggestion that the American model will 
need to change. (See Part C) Le Figaro interviews philosopher 
Alain Finkielkraut: "Everyone who talks about Katrina has 
focused on the President and his administration's negligence. 
But everyone is missing the main point: these tragedies will 
increase because of climate change. If I have one criticism to 
make against the Americans it is this: I regret their 
obstinacy in their rejection of the Kyoto protocol. even if 
Europe has no lessons to give America." 
 
Le Figaro carries an op-ed by U.S. professor Ezra Suleiman in 
which he analyzes French criticism of the U.S. in light of 
Hurricane Katrina: "Certain political forces in France are 
using the tragedy not only to criticize American society. but 
also to ask for more Welfare state in France. But a Welfare 
state is not synonymous with effectiveness. The Americans, 
more so than the French, think in terms of the cost/advantage 
ratio. The bigger the role of the State, the less room there 
is for creativity and wealth. France's aspirations for 
equality are an illusion if there is nothing to re- 
distribute." 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
German Elections 
"A Blockage in Germany" 
Pierre Rousselin in right-of-center Le Figaro (09/19): "One 
hoped that the German elections would have given new momentum 
to European reforms. But political Europe, which is stalled 
since the French referendum, could be more paralyzed than 
ever. With anticipated elections Schroeder hoped to implement 
his reform program. After the elections it is to be feared 
that Germany has indeed become un-governable. This is too bad 
for Europe in general." 
 
"Paralysis" 
Jean-Michel Helvig in left-of-center Liberation (09/19): 
"Beyond the oddity of these elections, what stands out is that 
Europe is emerging as even more undecided. The Franco-German 
engine is sure to trigger more pity than envy. with nothing 
changing until the French presidential elections of 2007." 
 
"Negotiations" 
Francois Ernenwein in Catholic La Croix (09/19): "Germany's 
uncertainties prior to the elections have been made even worse 
with the election results. And the negotiations will be 
arduous before the proper alchemy to govern Germany can be 
found." 
 
Katrina and the U.S. Model 
 
"Time to Choose for President Bush" 
Sylvie Kauffmann in left-of-center Le Monde (09/19): "The 
tragedy has unleashed Colin Powell's criticism of the Bush 
administration. and in passing he revisited the war in Iraq 
and the `blot' on his reputation. With just a few words, Colin 
Powell has shifted into the opposition and this is not good 
for President Bush. Not because he represents a political 
threat, but because he stands as a moral authority in the U.S. 
. Powell touched on two of President Bush's failures: 
`compassionate conservatism' and the war in Iraq. President 
Bush has been shaken by the fallout from Katrina. The natural 
disaster has opened a breach in which the media and the 
opposition have entered with the outrage of those who have 
kept silent for too long. Katrina has tarnished the image 
which President Bush wanted to promote by including ethnic 
minorities in his administration. The hurricane has shed new 
light on the lack of progress made in the U.S. in fighting 
poverty. The Americans, for their part, are beginning to have 
the answer: 45 percent think that to repair the damages caused 
by Katrina, the U.S. needs to reduce the costs of financing 
the war in Iraq." 
 
"Bush and Katrina: Fatal Attraction" 
Gilles Delafon in right-of-center Le Journal du Dimanche 
(09/19): "In spite of taking responsibility for his 
administration's failings, President Bush is caught in a zone 
of great turbulence. While he previously saw his role as that 
of a global missionary promoting democracy, domestic issues 
are now calling for his attention. Like 9/11, Katrina has been 
a trauma for America. And the shame felt by America's public 
opinion is fueled by the anger generated by the situation in 
Iraq. Two U.S. polls show that the situation is a dire one: 
the war is squandering money which the country needs 
desperately. And so a majority of Americans would like to see 
the reconstruction of the Gulf States financed by a reduction 
in military spending in Iraq. One thing is certain: in the 
last years of his term, President Bush will not be able to use 
the emotion triggered by Katrina the way he used 9/11 and the 
feelings it generated." 
 
"Towards the End of the American Model" 
Michel Drancourt in Catholic La Croix (09/19): "The French are 
defending a French model which no longer attracts anyone and 
which is on the wane. American officials flaunt the American 
model, which is greatly imitated, but do not acknowledge that 
its foundation is sinking. Of the French model we will say 
little because it is failing. Let us talks about the American 
model whose future is uncertain. The American model is based 
on the exploitation, without caution, of natural energies. The 
Americans have been the masters of productivity. To remain the 
masters they will have to modify their habits and accept to 
finance the long term rather than the short term. In time it 
will be necessary to include in the price of all goods and 
services the cost of using nature. Changes will have to be 
implemented in the daily life of all Americans. For the time 
being President Bush's America does not appear ready to 
implement these changes. But the growing cost of energy could 
change this." 
 
Iran 
 
"Iran Challenges the International Community" 
Philippe Gelie in right-of-center Le Figaro (09/19): "Is Iran 
on the way to becoming a second North Korea? On Saturday, in 
New York, Iran's President challenged both the U.S. and Europe 
as he proclaimed Iran's `inalienable right' to develop its 
commercial nuclear capabilities. The `proposals' everyone 
awaited to defuse the crisis were disappointing: he did not re- 
open the door to negotiations. The EU-3 have begun to draft a 
resolution to bring the issue before the UNSC, even if a new 
deadline was set to give Iran time to come out of the 
stalemate. And the U.S., which has been pushing for the issue 
to be brought before the UN, surprised everyone by accepting 
the new deadline. Both the EU and the Americans are showing 
their determination. but behind the determination what 
transpires is a feeling of awkwardness. Meanwhile, Iran is 
everyday more isolated in its race for the bomb." STAPLETON