05PARIS6994
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Oil for Food Scandal
Wed Oct 12 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 006994 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Oil for Food Scandal 
Earthquake in Kashmir - Geopolitical Considerations Harriet 
Miers Nomination 
PARIS - Wednesday, October 12, 2005 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Oil for Food Scandal 
Earthquake in Kashmir - Geopolitical Considerations 
Harriet Miers Nomination 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
A wide variety of domestic stories dominate today's front 
pages, except for right-of-center economic Les Echos, which 
devotes its lead to Washington's "Strong-Arming Policies With 
Beijing." "The Secretary of the Treasury's visit will be an 
opportunity to increase the pressure on China, with Secretary 
Snow asking that China re-evaluate the Yuan." Left-of-center 
Liberation leads with the latest arrest in the "Oil for Food" 
scandal in France, that of former UN Ambassador Jean-Bernard 
Merimee. The editorial suggests that ultimately 
"responsibility lies at the highest level of the State." (See 
Part C) 
 
Right-of-center Le Figaro devotes an editorial to "Earthquake 
Diplomacy" in the wake of the earthquake in Kashmir. (See Part 
C) France 2 Television announced this morning that Secretary 
Rice would be stopping in Islamabad after visiting 
Afghanistan. In an article on President Chirac's return to 
diplomacy after his recent health problems, Le Figaro notes 
that he will be meeting with Secretary Rice on Friday. 
 
Popular right-of-center France Soir devotes a full-page report 
to a recent article in Newsweek, which alleged that Secretary 
Rice was responsible for thwarting a Washington plan to invade 
Syria. Thomas de Rochechouart quotes Secretary Rice in 
Kyrghizstan: "Do not believe everything you read." 
 
The nomination of Harriet Miers to the Supreme Court elicits 
two opposing commentaries. In Liberation, Barthelemy Courrmont 
of the Institute for International and Strategic Relations 
writes: "Her nomination raises once more the question of 
Supreme Court Justices who are designated more because of 
their political affiliation than their experience. More than 
ever the question of impartiality is becoming an issue. The 
credibility of the American justice system is becoming a key 
element in the structural debates in the U.S." But Catholic La 
Croix carries an opinion piece by Pierre de Charentenay, 
editor in chief of the magazine `Etudes,' titled "The New 
Supreme Court." (See Part C) 
 
Right-of-center les Echos carries an op-ed by Stephan Richter 
of "The Globalist" titled: "American Royalism." "Faced with 
incredible challenges, President Bush has made one daring 
declaration after another. But behind the words, one soon 
realizes that nothing concrete follows. One example is 
America's African aid policy. America's new political strategy 
could in fact be renamed the `execution of a Presidential 
policy through press releases.' The advantage is that there is 
always an official text one can refer to. But abroad, this 
attitude is perceived as being regressive. and becoming 
counter-productive: it undermines the American desire to serve 
as a democratic model." 
 
Ironically, left-of-center Liberation carries an op-ed about 
President Chirac's own "Diplomatic Monarchy" by Alain Duhamel: 
"France is hostile to Turkey's EU membership. But the 
President is in favor. When it comes to diplomacy, defense and 
cooperation, the President acts like a Monarch. In foreign 
policy, the French Head of State acts as absolute master. In 
this regard, French democracy is an absolute myth. This is 
both shocking and dangerous." 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Oil for Food Scandal 
 
"The Big Heist" 
Patrick Sabatier in left-of-center Liberation (10/12): "The 
blood-stained chaos that reigns in Iraq could lead one to put 
in perspective the fallout from the `oil for food' affair that 
seems outdated. But that would be a mistake. First, because 
France, and its diplomacy, therefore its image, are in the 
line of fire of the investigation into wrongdoings in the `Oil 
for Food' scandal. The amounts of money embezzled make it the 
biggest heist ever! All those who participated in this heist 
worked hand in hand with a dictator who will soon be on trial 
for his crimes. The arrest of French diplomats who have 
influenced France's foreign policy, including its so-called 
Arab policy, casts doubts on this same policy. The 
responsibility lies at the highest level of the State, where 
the truth was necessarily known." 
 
Earthquake in Kashmir - Geopolitical Considerations 
 
"Earthquake Diplomacy" 
Pierre Rousselin in right-of-center Le Figaro (10/12): "As 
opposed to other recent natural disasters, the earthquake in 
Kashmir is centered exactly where the world's geo-political 
equilibrium is most threatened. The geo-political consequences 
of the disaster will depend on how the post-crisis management 
is handled. The fact that Pakistan has accepted India's offer 
of assistance is an encouraging sign. A rapprochement between 
Greece and Turkey had followed the 1999 earthquake. Let us 
hope that India and Pakistan, who have already initiated steps 
towards their re-conciliation, will be similarly inspired. In 
Kashmir, the devastation is such that survival overtakes 
political considerations. If rescue efforts are successful, 
they can reduce the influence of Islamic radicals. Conversely, 
if they are not, President Musharaff will come out weakened 
and the extremists will regain new power. These stakes are 
well understood by all: in Islamabad as well as Washington. 
This is why the U.S. is mobilizing all its means available in 
the region." 
 
Harriet Miers Nomination 
 
"The New Supreme Court" 
Pierre de Charentenay in Catholic La Croix (10/12): "The two 
new judges to the U.S. Supreme Court are indeed Republicans, 
but they are far less conservative than initially feared. The 
equilibrium of the Supreme Court is overall preserved. The 
American press has noted that President Bush has shown a 
certain degree of caution in making these nominations. He 
wants to avoid an ideological war as well as costly political 
adventures at a time when he is greatly weakened politically, 
including within his own party. The negative effects of the 
war in Iraq have cost the U.S. President much support. 
Arrogance and haughtiness have disappeared from a White House 
which is no longer taking any risks." STAPLETON