05PARIS400
CODEL Sensenbrenner
Fri Jan 21 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 000400 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR CA/EX, CA/VO, CA/PPT, EUR/WE, CA/FPP, TSAX 
ROME FOR DHS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP CMGT CVIS CPAS KFRD AMGT AORC FR
SUBJECT:  CODEL Sensenbrenner 
 
REF:  (A) State 003694, other 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  Congressman F. James Sensenbrenner, Jr.,  Mrs. 
Sensenbrenner  and Chief of Staff Phil Kiko  visited  France 
from  January 9 to 17 to conduct a review of French  actions 
to  enhance the security of their passports, cooperate  with 
the U.S. in combating terrorism and secure their borders and 
shipping  against  those  who  would  perpetrate   acts   of 
terrorism.  The visit included a number of opportunities for 
open  exchanges with senior officials at the  Ministries  of 
Foreign  Affairs  and the Interior.  In addition  the  group 
visited the ports at Le Havre and Strasbourg, and held  very 
informative  meetings  regarding biometric  passports,  with 
both  the  Belgian Embassy and a private French  contractor, 
Thales.  The visit concluded Monday, January 17, 2005 with a 
comprehensive tour of the security operations at Charles  de 
Gaulle Airport.  End summary. 
 
¶2. The stated objectives for the visit included discussions 
regarding three key areas:  Franco-American cooperation in 
the fight against terrorism, protection of US borders 
overseas, and biometric documentation.  At each meeting 
Chairman Sensenbrenner shared his positive opinion of French 
cooperation on all judicial and law enforcement levels.  He 
remained firm in his demands that the French government 
needs to comply with the requirement for biometric 
passports.  The border controls at the port of Le Havre and 
at the airport appeared to meet his approval; the inland 
port at Strasbourg did not appear to him to be at the same 
standard, although he was in general positive about Franco- 
German border cooperation. 
 
¶3. Chairman Sensenbrenner has a comprehensive knowledge of 
all the legislation concerning these areas, and was able to 
answer the questions posed to him by various parties, based 
on his authorship of both the USA PATRIOT Act (H.R. 
3162)Patriot Act and the Enhanced Border Security and Visa 
Entry Reform Act (H.R. 3525)Visas and Borders Bill of 2003. 
This latter bill requires the implementation of biometric 
passports for all Visa Waiver Program (VWP) countries (both 
France and Belgium are a part) prior to October 24, 2005. 
The Belgium Director General of Consular Affairs, Mr. Rudi 
Veestraeten, who traveled to Paris just to meet with the 
visitors, demonstrated their new biometric passport to great 
approval, . France repeatedly stated that because of 
technical requirements and delays in the development of 
Schengen Group standards, they would be unable to meet the 
deadline. 
 
¶4. Although the Chairman agreed that the USG is currently 
behind schedule, there are no biometric passport readers at 
ports of entry, and that a postponement of the next deadline 
is possible, he hardened his position somewhat when the 
outside contractor, Thales, indicated that the French have 
not yet requested bids on their biometric passports.  This 
change in the Congressman's attitude came after he learned 
that Belgium is not only ahead of the deadline by almost a 
year, but is purchasing their biometric passports from a 
French company. Chairman Sensenbrenner repeatedly stated 
that he believes that deadlines motivate people.  He was 
equally consistent in asserting that the Department of State 
was slow to inform the VWP countries of the requirements to 
have the biometric passport to remain eligible for the VWP. 
 
¶5. At the Port of Le Havre Chairman Sensenbrenner was given 
a thorough tour, and had an opportunity to see the Container 
Security Initiative (CSI) program in operation.   That 
program, and the French operation of the port, satisfied 
many of his concerns regarding US border security with 
respect to cargo shipments. 
 
¶6. During his visit to Paris there were two incidents 
reported of passengers traveling to the US who were on the 
No-Fly list.  He asked numerous questions about this, 
followed the progress of each case, and was able to witness 
the successful operation of the system. 
 
¶7. COMMENT:  After an absence from France of many years, 
Chairman Sensenbrenner will be back for his third visit in 
three months.  His stated objective is to keep pressure on 
the French to meet the biometric passport deadline required 
in the Enhanced Border Security and Visa Entry Reform Act 
(H.R. 3525)Visa and Border Act.  He plans to communicate his 
concern about French inaction directly to their Ambassador 
in Washington.  It is probable that he will also express his 
disappointment with the Department of State for its 
inability to more quickly deploy our own biometric 
passports.  He repeatedly expressed his opinion that the 
efforts of the Department of State to inform the VWP 
countries about the provisions of the Borders and Visa bill 
were inadequate and tardy.  End comment. 
 
Wolff