05PORTAUPRINCE928
UPDATE ON HNP TRAINING AND CONTROL SYSTEMS
Tue Apr 05 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Port Au Prince
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 PORT AU PRINCE 000928

SIPDIS

WHA/EX PLEASE PASS USOAS
SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD
DEPT FOR DS/IP/WHA
DS/DSS/ITA
DSERCC

E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/25/2014
TAGS: PGOV PREL KCRM HA
SUBJECT: UPDATE ON HNP TRAINING AND CONTROL SYSTEMS

REF: PAP 470

Classified By: Ambassador James B. Foley, reasons 1.4 (B) and (D)

¶1. (C) Summary: In a set of written answers to questions submitted by post to the Director General (DG) of the Haitian National Police (HNP) on March 7, Leon Charles confirmed the process under which 200 ex-FADH were to integrate into the 17th promotion in April, and outlined the verification process the international community and the HNP have for monitoring the testing, training and deployment of graduating cadets. The fleeting reply to requests for updates on human rights investigations demonstrate the HNP's inability to perform internal investigations. Charles also updated on weapons registration and HNP payroll. End summary.

Charles reiterates IGOH line on ex-FADH in the HNP
--------------------------------------------- -----

¶2. (U) Charles verified that the 16th promotion would have roughly 370 graduating cadets, none of whom had a history of ex-FADH activity. (Note: According to post's liaison advisor to the HNP, the graduation of the 16th class has been delayed until April 18. End note). The DG reiterated that the IGOH planned to include roughly 200 ex-FADH in the 17th promotion, and stated again that those ex-FADH recruits would be expected to pass the entry examination, the same vetting standards, and undergo and successfully complete the same training as all the other recruits in the 17th promotion. The DG pledged that the ex-FADH members of the class will, upon graduation from the Police Academy, be deployed throughout Haiti on an individual basis, not kept together as a group.

¶3. (U) Charles said the verification process for the testing, vetting, training of HNP cadets was a shared effort between the HNP and the international community. Members of the OAS team conduct the vetting of all applicants, he said, and oversee the entry exams. The team (which is funded by the U.S.) reports on the process directly to the Embassy Police Advisor. Training is carried out under the direction of MINUSTAH CIVPOL, while the HNP Chief of Staff and Director of Personnel oversee the deployment of cadets following graduation, including field verification to ensure cadets report to where they are posted.

¶4. (U) The DG flatly denied rumors that the IGOH was creating a separate fighting force, saying there were no plans he was aware of to create a "military police" of any kind. He acknowledged that there had been suggestions of creating security officer or forest ranger positions as a way to supply employment for the ex-FADH entering the DDR process, but he said there had been no action taken to date on these suggestions.

Internal Investigations
-----------------------

¶5. (C) Charles restated his support for Inspector General (IG) France Jean Francois, who also serves as the number two within the HNP organizational structure. There are six inspectors general who work together with investigators from UN CIVPOL to conduct joint investigations of sensitive incidents. The DG reported, for example, that the IG office finished two preliminary reports regarding the December 1 prison riot and were expected to release a final report in March. (Note: The final report was not, in fact, released in March. UN CIVPOL investigators detailed to the HNP IG unit have told us before that the section is totally unable to complete thorough and professional crime scene investigations or respond to human rights allegations due to poor reporting and control (reftel). End note). Charles said the HNP had not concluded any investigation into allegations the HNP fired on peaceful protesters on February 28 and that he could not comment on the incident until a report was filed.

Weapons control
---------------

¶6. (C) Post requested Charles provide the policies and procedures the HNP is using to track the weapons (38 caliber pistols) the USG donated to graduating cadets. During training, the pistols are kept in a bunker near the Police Academy from where they are checked out and returned by each cadet during training. (Note: A member of the US CIVPOL contingent oversees the bunker and check-out process. End note). Once a cadet graduates, a weapon is assigned to him, and Charles states simply that the office of the Inspector General has the responsibility to periodically inspect and verify the weapons assigned. The DG says he has tasked the Director of Logistics to create a separate weapons inspection and maintenance program.

¶7. (C) Note: UN CIVPOL has designed a weapons registration database system it intends to implement soon. Post has assisted in the creation of the process and the USG has provided funding for a ballistics tank that will be used to fingerprint all new weapons acquired by the HNP - and eventually current weapons as well. The HNP maintains a list of the serial numbers of weapons issued to all current officers, but at present there is no forensics system in place to match ballistics to any individual weapon. Officers who "lose" their weapons are not issued a new weapon until an investigation, approved by the DG, exonerates the officer. End note.

HNP Payroll
-----------

¶8. (U) Finally, Charles reported that there are approximately 5,200 people on the HNP payroll and the HNP is in the process of vetting the payroll to match the actual number of active officers in the field. He estimated that there are probably 500-800 people on the payroll who will be "dismissed" at the conclusion of the investigation. The entire HNP received pay increases in July 2004 ranging from approximately 80% for agents to 65-70% for the commissar categories.

FOLEY