05QUEBEC26
QUEBEC:  PREMIER CHAREST ANNOUNCES NEW CABINET
Fri Feb 18 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Quebec
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

181920Z Feb 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUEBEC 000026 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINR ETRD CA
SUBJECT: QUEBEC:  PREMIER CHAREST ANNOUNCES NEW CABINET 
 
 
¶1.  With security breaches at Hydro Quebec installations 
dominating the media and popular support for his government a 
record low of 17 percent, embattled Quebec Premier Charest 
announced a long awaited Cabinet reshuffle.  Given the outcry 
over security at Hydro Quebec, it is no surprise that both 
energy minister Sam Hamad and public security minister Jacques 
Chagnon were given the axe (although they were both on the outs 
even before this latest energy scandal).  The new minister for 
Natural Resources and Wildlife, Pierre Corbeil, will handle two 
portfolios of importance to us, energy and softwood lumber. 
Michel Audet, who up to now was minister of Economic 
Development, moves over to Finance and the young Claude Bechard 
will fill in behind him.  Yves Seguin, Quebec's most popular 
liberal politician, is now out of Charest's cabinet, reportedly 
because of frequent clashes with Charest over budget policy.  In 
a speech following today's announcement, Charest said the 
objectives of the Quebec government are "the economy, 
development, and innovation" with an emphasis on sustainable 
development.  Charest said the two big challenges for Quebec are 
righting finances and demographics.  The new cabinet of 27 
ministers includes three beneficiaries of the Department's 
International Visitors Program. 
 
¶2.  Following is the new Quebec cabinet line up, in order of 
precedence, as announced by Premier Jean Charest on Friday, 
February 18, 2005: 
 
Jean Charest,  Premier and Minister of Youth 
 
Jacques Dupuis is new Deputy Premier and Minister of Public 
Security; he remains Parliamentary Leader of Government 
 
Monique Jerome-Forget stays on as President of Treasury Board 
 
Michel Audet becomes new Finance Minister 
 
Monique Gagnon- Tremblay, stays on as Minister of International 
Relations and Francophonie, but is no longer Deputy Premier 
 
Philippe Couillard, holds on to Health and Social Services 
portfolio 
 
Jean-Marc Fournier becomes Education Minister while keeping 
Recreation and Sports (Fournier is a former IVP) 
 
Yvon Marcoux, ex-Transport Minister becomes new Minister of 
Justice 
 
Claude Bechard is promoted to new ministry of Economic 
Development, Innovation and Exports 
 
Yvon Vallieres becomes Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and 
Food, taking over from Francine Gauthier.  (He is our new point 
man on BSE) 
 
Thomas Mulcair takes on new Ministry of Sustainable Development 
and Parks 
 
Pierre Corbeil is new Minister Natural Resources and Wildlife, 
replacing Sam Hamad (he will be taking on the softwood lumber 
issue) 
 
Michel Despres upgraded to Transport Minister, and new Minister 
responsible for Quebec City region 
 
Nathalie Normandeau (rising star and former Quebec City IVP) 
Minister of Municipal Affairs and Regions 
 
Line Beauchamp stays on as Minister of Culture and 
Communications, new minister responsible for the Montreal region 
 
Benoit Pelletier, in addition to his responsibilities of 
Canadian Intergovernmental Affairs 
becomes minister Responsible for Canadian Francophonie and 
Electoral Reform 
 
Pierre Reid, demoted from Education to Minister of Government 
Services 
 
Lawrence Bergman remains Minister of Revenue 
 
Michelle Courchesne is now Minister of Employment and Social 
Solidarity 
 
Francoise Gauthier is Minister of Tourism, from previous 
responsibilities at Agriculture 
 
Carole Theberge, Minister of Family, Elderly and Status of Women 
 
Laurent Lessard becomes Minister of Manpower 
 
Lise Theriault (just returning from an IVP project) is Minister 
of Immigration and Cultural Communities 
 
Julie Boulet becomes Junior Minister of Transportation 
 
Geoffrey Kelly is Minister responsible of Native Affairs 
 
Henri-Francois Gautrin is new Minister responsible for On-Line 
Government 
 
Margaret F. Delisle is Minister of Protection of Youth and 
Rehabilitation 
 
Two other important, but non-ministerial positions are: Norman 
MacMillan as new Liberal Party Whip and David Whissel, President 
of Party Caucus. 
 
 
 
 
 
FRIEDMAN