05QUITO1352
PUSHING FOR PROGRESS ON THE 60-DAY PLAN
Fri Jun 10 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS QUITO 001352 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PPC, WHA/AND, AND G/TIP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV PREL EC
SUBJECT: PUSHING FOR PROGRESS ON THE 60-DAY PLAN 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  On June 7, the Ambassador explained the 
importance to the United States of the new anti-trafficking 
law to General Jose Vinueza (the national chief of police), 
who promised to conduct raids and arrest traffickers.  First 
Lady Maria Beatriz Paret responded enthusiastically on June 8 
to the Ambassador's suggestions that she publicly discuss 
trafficking in persons (TIP) and distribute posters to 
educate the public about this scourge.  We are planning a TIP 
conference with the OAS for late August and will focus on 
implementation of trafficking legislation, victim assistance, 
and underage prostitution.  UNICEF launched a campaign 
against the TIP-related crimes of child abuse and 
exploitation on June 10 and publicized the changes in the 
criminal code.  End Summary. 
 
Ambassador Discusses TIP with Police Chief and First Lady 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶2.  (SBU) On June 7, the Ambassador congratulated General 
Vinueza on his work to combat TIP, in particular DINAPEN's 
(the police that protect children) weekly raids.  The 
Ambassador encouraged Vinueza to take advantage of the 
anti-trafficking law, which Congress passed on June 1, once 
the president has signed it.  Vinueza pledged his commitment 
to fighting trafficking, promising to conduct raids on 
prostitution houses and make arrests using the new law. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The Ambassador met with the First Lady on June 8 
and reiterated her concern that the GOE needs to take 
significant steps forward against TIP in order to avoid cuts 
in aid.  The Ambassador suggested the First Lady discuss the 
evils of trafficking and child prostitution in upcoming 
speeches and design and distribute educational posters.  The 
First Lady said she was very interested in these ideas and 
also wanted to help street children (potential TIP victims) 
through the organization she heads, the National Institute 
for Children and Families (INNFA). 
 
OAS-Funded TIP Conference in August 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) The OAS has offered to largely fund a TIP conference 
in August with international trafficking experts.  The 
conference will focus on implementation of the legislation 
Congress approved on June 1, victim identification and 
assistance, the connection between alien smuggling and 
trafficking, and commercial sexual exploitation of minors. 
Participants will represent the GOE, NGOs, international 
organizations, and civil society to total approximately 100 
people. 
 
UNICEF Campaign to End Child Sexual Abuse and Exploitation 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶5.  (U) UNICEF launched a media campaign against the 
TIP-related crimes of child sexual abuse and exploitation on 
June 10.  Representatives from the government, including 
INNFA and the National Commission on Women; civil society; 
the private sector; and the media were present.  UNICEF 
director Paul Martin spoke out against child pornography and 
child sexual abuse, mentioning the penal code reforms 
Congress recently approved and the need to penalize the 
clients of underage prostitutes. 
 
Next Steps 
---------- 
 
¶6.  (U) Just a week into the 60-day period, we are giving the 
GOE specific suggestions on how to proceed and emphasizing 
the need to act quickly.  We are gathering information to 
help the First Lady make the poster campaign a reality in the 
near future.  During the week of June 13, we will meet with 
the President's advisors on the anti-trafficking law, which 
he must sign or modify by June 17, and host a public forum on 
TIP with GOE officials speaking about the problem.  The 
International Law Enforcement Academy is sponsoring a TIP 
conference, beginning June 13, that includes participants 
from throughout the hemisphere. 
Kenney