05QUITO1671
MEDIA REACTION:  ECUADOR FOREIGN POLICY AND
Fri Jul 15 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS QUITO 001671 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, WHA, WHA/AND, WHA/PDA 
DIRONDCP FOR PA 
EMBASSIES FOR PAO/IO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL OPRC KIRC KPAO EC
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION:  ECUADOR FOREIGN POLICY AND 
RELATIONS WITH VENEZUELA 
 
¶1.  Newspapers have reported widely on visits to 
Caracas of the foreign affairs and economics 
ministries, which included meetings with Chavez,  and 
increasing ties between Ecuador and Venezuela.  An 
article in the July 15 El Universo is entitled 
"Change in foreign policy" and includes an interview 
with foreign minister Parra in which he makes the 
following points: 
       ¶1.   Although Ecuador will respect the agreement 
          establishing the Manta FOL, if Parra were minister in 
          2009 when the agreement terminates, he would "cut off 
          his hand" before renewing it." 
¶2.   Plan Colombia began as a war against drugs but 
became a U.S. intervention in Colombia with effects 
in Ecuador, Venezuela, and Panama. 
¶3.   Ecuador has "magnificent" relations with 
Venezuela, Brazil, and the U.S.  Ecuador now has a 
different foreign policy.  If Venezuela offers good 
proposals for cooperation, Ecuador will accept, just 
as it would do with the U.S. 
Papers also reported that economics minister Correa 
met with Chavez and other officials to discuss 
financing of Ecuadorian debt to cover an anticipated 
budgetary shortfall.  Following are two editorials 
dealing with Ecuadorian foreign policy. 
 
¶1.  "Pragmatism or External Improvisation," an 
editorial (07/15) in Quito's leading centrist "El 
Comercio" (circ. 90,000) 
 
Quote:  ". . .we hope there is a global strategic 
plan for security, one that would establish adequate 
priorities and maintain the coherence needed for the 
respectability of a sovereign republic. . . It is 
possible .that the Government's foreign policy 
attempts to be pragmatic and discreet.  In that line, 
it is trying to cooperate with Colombia in providing 
strict security along the border by turning over an 
alleged guerrilla, it is attempting a financial and 
political rapprochement with Venezuela, and it is 
maintaining a cordial but formal relation with the 
U.S.  Will this idyllic scheme work in the present 
continental scenario? 
 
¶2.  "Hunger and Need," an "Analysis" column in 
Quito's center-left "Hoy" (circ. 38,500) 
 
Quote:  "A relationship [of Venezuela] with the 
Ecuadorian government modifies the axis of 
international relations in the region; after the 
Lucio Gutierrez regime's unconditional support for 
State Department policies, an alliance of Argentina, 
Brazil, and Venezuela that is not to Washington's 
liking and that inclines towards trade alliances 
opposed to the U.S. FTA, seems to add a new partner. 
 
"This Chavist need of consolidating a Bolivarian 
alliance, or offering the image that such an alliance 
is a reality, encounters the pressing liquidity 
issues faced by [Ecuadorian president] Alfredo 
Palacio and his Minister of Economy, Rafael Correa, . 
to patch a hole of at least US$ 484 million in the 
general state budget and support almost US$ 700 
million in Treasury Certificates (internal debt) that 
are to expire. 
 
"It is understood that in international relations and 
in negotiations between governments, there are only 
interests. . . If to that it is possible to add 
elements of a common shared history.then Rafael 
Correa might tell international organizations that it 
is possible to resolve short term problems without 
their tutelage.  What is difficult to affirm though, 
at this time, is if that is a solution to long term 
challenges." 
 
HERBERT