05QUITO89
GUTIERREZ:  BILATERAL RELATIONS REMAIN STRONG
Thu Jan 13 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS QUITO 000089 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ECON ETRD EFIN EC
SUBJECT: GUTIERREZ:  BILATERAL RELATIONS REMAIN STRONG 
 
 
¶1.  Concerned that sensationalistic media play alleging the 
Embassy was reconsidering its support of President Lucio 
Gutierrez was damaging heretofore excellent bilateral 
relations, the Ambassador January 13 telephoned the 
Ecuadorian leader to clear the air.  She opened by discussing 
Gutierrez's upcoming travel to New York and President George 
H.W. Bush's January 15 visit to Ecuador.  At both events, 
Gutierrez would likely be grilled over perceptions he was 
acting dictatorially.   His interlocutors undoubtedly would 
reference the Embassy spokesman's recent remarks that we were 
troubled by Congress's December move to remake Ecuador's high 
courts.  The Ambassador cautioned Gutierrez not to succumb to 
a point-by-point rebuttal, but instead offer his future plans 
to fortify Ecuadorian democracy, promote freer trade, and 
address growing social needs. 
 
¶2.  Gutierrez thanked the Ambassador for the Embassy's 
continued support, her timely advice, and the frank and open 
communications the two enjoyed.  He knew the media had taken 
liberties with Embassy statements, and above all wanted to 
avoid public battles.  Ecuador valued its friendship with the 
United States, the president asserted; he hoped it would grow 
stronger during the remainder of his tenure.  In New York, 
Gutierrez intended to justify his administration's 
court-cleaning, calling it constitutional and imperative to 
ensure judicial security.  He would also promote an Ecuador 
"open for business." 
 
¶3.  COMMENT:  Not one hour after the call ended, media 
contacted us to confirm the conversation, the Presidency 
having leaked the news.  Gutierrez clearly continues to 
consider Embassy support vital for the survival of his 
administration, a belief we hope to employ to further U.S. 
interests.  END COMMENT. 
KENNEY