05QUITO2903
MEDIA REACTION:  BOLIVIA; QUITO
Tue Dec 20 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS QUITO 002903 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, WHA, WHA/AND, WHA/PDA 
DIRONDCP FOR PA 
EMBASSIES FOR PAO/IO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL OPRC KIRC KPAO EC
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION:  BOLIVIA; QUITO 
 
¶1.  "Latin American Trend," an editorial (12/20) in 
Guayaquil's (and Ecuador's) leading center-right "El 
Universo" (circ. 140,000) 
 
Quote:  "Ten years ago, Bolivia was showcased by the 
IMF and the World Bank as the model, the recommended 
recipe from the Washington Consensus. the Bolivians 
radically transformed their economy, adapting it to 
the neo-liberal model.The experiment worked. but only 
for a while. 
 
"Now let's return to the present.We don't know how 
Bolivia's immediate future will unfold.  We wish her 
the best.  But her example corroborates for us that 
while the region has finally abandoned the free 
market model, it doesn't yet know in which direction 
to go, and considers at times proposals whose value 
is not yet known." 
 
¶2.  "The Bolivian Surprise," an editorial (12/20) in 
Quito's leading center-right "El Comercio" (circ. 
70,000) 
 
Quote:  ".In the face of a radically changed 
panorama, the analyses and predictions should focus 
on the possibilities of governability by a regime 
that was legitimately born by a great popular demand. 
In this context, the extreme psychosis that 
predominates in the State Department and the opinions 
that are inscribed in the religion of rightist 
ideology are just too much.  Instead, we should be 
focusing on the three basic challenges facing the 
future Bolivian president:  energy policy, foreign 
relations, and the complex relationship with [the 
province of] Santa Cruz de la Sierra ... 
 
"With regard to foreign policy, the alliance with the 
government of Venezuela, the elections in Peru, and 
the institutional destiny of Ecuador will be the crux 
that will outline the hard and firm attitude of the 
U.S., which, thanks to the fact that we no longer 
live in the era of the Cold War, shouldn't turn out 
like the experience of Salvador Allende. 
 
"Finally.the separatist or autonomist tendency in 
regards to the province of Santa Cruz de la Sierra, 
in extreme moments, will create a complex challenge 
for this untested administration; it should be aware 
of the distance that exists between the government 
and the constant insurgency." 
 
JEWELL