05QUITO540
GUTIERREZ TAKES REINS ON GALAPAGOS
Wed Mar 09 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 QUITO 000540 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID ECON EFIS ETRD PGOV PREL SENV EC
SUBJECT: GUTIERREZ TAKES REINS ON GALAPAGOS 
 
REF: QUITO 0440 
 
¶1.  Summary.  President Gutierrez convoked a March 4 meeting 
with donors and other political players in the Galapagos 
(Reftel).  Gutierrez struck a surprisingly balanced tone in 
his remarks, calling for a sustainable solution to the 
Galapagos crisis that provides economic alternatives to local 
fishermen while protecting the unique environment there.  He 
dispatched his newly minted Minister of the Environment to 
come up with a plan in 30 days for dealing with the crisis 
(Septel).  The Ambassador followed up with President 
Gutierrez on March 7, reiterating the work the USG has done 
in the Galapagos and supporting the President,s 30-day 
initiative.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
President Convenes Meeting in Galapagos 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. President Gutierrez, in order to show his concern for the 
Galapagos, convoked a meeting of donors (Reftel) that was to 
coincide with his general cabinet meeting in the Galapagos on 
March 4.  Events leading up to the meeting led donor 
representatives to believe that the proposed meeting was 
meant to be more dog-and-pony than nut-and-bolts. 
 
¶3. First, the agenda for the &donors8 meeting was changed 
at the last minute to include representatives from the 
fishing sector. 
 
¶4. Second, on the flight to the Galapagos (Quito players 
traveled on the Presidential plane), diputado Vinicio Andrade 
circulated to donor representatives a copy of his proposal to 
establish a USD $3 million fund to help fishermen move into 
other income-generating alternatives.  He said he would 
present this proposal at the donor (now to include fishermen) 
meeting for Gutierrez and the Presidents of the fishing 
cooperatives to sign.  While the proposal was good in theory, 
it lacked detail and we requested that Andrade not present it 
until we could fully review it.  For whatever reason (more 
likely President Gutierrez had sticker shock), he acceded and 
the proposal was not presented for signature. 
 
¶5. Third, the night before our meeting, a huge political 
rally was held on San Cristobal.  Approximately five hundred 
people attended (roughly 10 percent of San Cristobal,s 
population) and the tone was definitely pro-fishing. 
Minister Camacho spoke passionately at the meeting and called 
for Diputado Andrade to continue fighting for the fishermen - 
an interesting comment for one charged with overseeing 
environmental matters. 
 
¶6. Despite the events indicating a one-sided meeting aimed at 
castigating donors and mollifying fishermen, President 
Gutierrez was remarkably balanced as he presided over the 
meeting. 
 
¶7. The Presidents of the four fishing cooperatives in the 
Galapagos all gave impassioned speeches to the President 
calling on him to support them and their efforts to make a 
living.  Specifically, they called upon President Gutierrez 
to support long-line fishing in the Galapagos and presented 
proposals for projects to support this and other 
fishing-related activities.  They denounced the GNP and 
Charles Darwin Foundation as corrupt institutions and derided 
conservationists for focusing only on animals.  At one point, 
a fishing cooperative President even accused the Spanish 
Ambassador of being a meddling foreigner, confusing him with 
the often outspoken director of WildAid in the Galapagos. 
The fishing representatives also pointed out that the tourism 
sector also shares responsibility for damaging the 
biodiversity of the Galapagos. 
 
¶8. Rene Mauricio Valdes, Director of the UNDP in Ecuador, 
spoke on behalf of the donor community and gave a very 
pointed, measured and thorough response.  He highlighted the 
three concerns donors have in the Galapagos ) GNP 
instability, the need for alternatives to fishing, and the 
problem of illegal immigration ) and called upon the GOE to 
take urgent action.  He clearly noted that the crisis in the 
Galapagos was Ecuador,s responsibility and that the donor 
community stood by to assist.  However, continued involvement 
by the donor community, he added, would require clear, 
positive and constructive commitment by the GOE, free of 
political interference.  (This has been our consistent 
message to the GOE on the Galapagos.) 
 
¶9. President Gutierrez gave a remarkably balanced and 
statesmanlike response.  His response focused on alternatives 
to fishing, but he commented that the Galapagos problem 
required a sustainable solution, taking into account the 
needs of all the parties and the long-term requirements of 
the islands. President Gutierrez then instructed Minister 
Camacho to meet with the donors the following week and to 
immediately begin working on a 30-day plan to formulate 
viable, sustainable solutions to the Galapagos problems. 
 
--------------------- 
Ambassador Follows Up 
--------------------- 
 
¶10. The Ambassador discussed the Galapagos with President 
Gutierrez at a March 7 meeting.  The President started by 
lamenting the plight of the fishermen who he claimed have not 
received any benefit from the millions of dollars channeled 
into the Galapagos through NGOs.  The Ambassador pointed out 
that the USG has in fact funded many small development 
projects ) e.g., a marmalade factory, equipment to smoke 
fish and package it for sale to tourists ) and that there 
were recently emergency medical response exercises in the 
Galapagos.  Gutierrez conceded that there have been 
socio-economic projects, but he said that we needed to better 
publicize our efforts.  Perhaps, the Ambassador noted, but 
nonetheless we have contributed to the socio-economic 
development of the islands. 
 
¶11. President Gutierrez ended his Galapagos discussion 
reiterating that a viable, sustainable long-term solution was 
needed.  He told the Ambassador that he had instructed his 
new Minister of the Environment to come up with a plan in 30 
days for dealing with the Galapagos crisis.  She applauded 
his initiative and offered assistance in formulating the plan. 
 
--------------- 
The 30-Day Plan 
--------------- 
 
¶12. The DCM and USAID Director paid a courtesy call on Juan 
Carlos Camacho, the new Minister of the Environment (Septel). 
 The donor community will also begin a series of meetings 
with Camacho to begin formulating the 30-day plan.  We will 
take advantage of Gutierrez,s call for action to press 
Camacho to depoliticize the GNP Director,s position, 
formulate truly viable alternatives for fishermen (not just 
long-line fishing), and to start focusing on illegal 
immigration to the Galapagos. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶13.  We are encouraged by Gutierrez's new efforts to put 
Galapagos policy back on track, after a long period of 
self-acknowledged presidential neglect and political 
expedience.  The president's emphasis on sustainability is 
important, and could help shift the political debate towards 
consensus.  In concert with other donors, we will continue 
our efforts to educate and work with the new Environment 
Minister to promote stability in the park leadership and new 
opportunities for fishermen. 
 
KENNEY