05RABAT2266
DIALOGUE, DIVERSITY AND CRITICAL THINKING AT
Fri Nov 04 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXRO9006
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDE RUEHKUK RUEHLH RUEHMOS RUEHPW
DE RUEHRB #2266/01 3081126
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 041126Z NOV 05
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1991
INFO RUCNISL/ISLAMIC COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 RABAT 002266 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/PPD - FERNANDEZ, R, IIP, PA, DRL/IRF, NEA/MAG, 
ECA/PE/V/G/N SABED-KOTOB 
 
E.O.12958:N/A 
TAGS: KIRF KPAO PREL OEXC SCUL MO
SUBJECT: DIALOGUE, DIVERSITY AND CRITICAL THINKING AT 
MOROCCAN IFTARS 
 
REF: A) RABAT 2100; B) STATE 166527 
 
RABAT 00002266  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Morocco's Ramadan public affairs strategy is to 
adapt to the pace of Ramadan and listen to Moroccans in the 
context of iftar and post-iftar events. Our observations 
confirm Moroccan support for "institutionalized dialogue" as 
well for critical thinking in order to overcome stereotypes 
and to support moderate Islam. This first Ramadan report 
discusses three iftars: one with religious figures at the 
Ambassador's residence, one with youth at an NGO, and one 
with community leaders at a Rotarian meeting in Tangiers. 
The Ambassador's iftar for religious scholars including 
returnees from ECA IVL program "Promoting Religious 
Dialogue" prompted discussion of Moroccan Islam, religious 
versus cultural dialogue, and media stereotypes. PAS 
attendance at an iftar of the "Friends of the Coast," an 
Association of "Reseau Maillage" (roughly, "umbrella 
network" of Moroccan NGOs targeting disadvantaged youth) 
expressed our support for their volunteer work in the 
context of an iftar religious and cultural celebration. 
Serendipitously, we joined Reseau Maillage staff in their 
proclamation that post-9/11 work with youth is a statement 
against terrorism and received their thanks for post and 
MEPI English language programs targeting these youth. The 
Rotarian iftar demonstrated the vibrant, moderate nature of 
Moroccan Islam and the interest of the business community in 
religious education and in community development. End 
summary. 
 
¶2. On Wednesday, October 12, Ambassador Thomas Riley hosted 
an iftar for religious scholars highlighting the return from 
the September IVLP "Promoting Religious Dialogue" of: Mrs. 
Ikram Bennani, a journalist who produces religious programs 
for RTM TV; Mrs. Fatima El Kabbaj Benbachir, a member of the 
Supreme Council of Ulema; and Dr. Mustapha Samadi, professor 
of Islamic Studies and producer of religious programs on 
Moroccan TV "2M." Other guests included: a specialist with 
the Islamic Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization (ISESCO); a writer; three representatives from 
the Ministry of Endowments and Islamic Affairs; and a 
professor of Islamic law who was, 2 years ago, the first 
woman to give a lecture in front of the King in his Ramadan 
Darus al-Hasssaniyya series. 
 
Islam as a Religion of Dialogue and Tolerance 
--------------------------------------------- 
¶3. After breaking the fast, and praying in the living room 
(men) and a guest room (women), the guests returned to iftar 
to discuss the nature of Islam and how, according to Mrs. El 
Kabbaj, the Prophet Mohammed is a model of tolerance and 
modernism.  Several ministry members briefed the Ambassador 
on the difference between the Quran and Prophetic Sayings 
("Hadith") and how Hadith were collected by the Prophet's 
Companions and followers, passed from generation to 
generation, and judged as genuine or not.  Both sources 
command Muslims to dialogue with nations of other faiths, a 
dialogue highly valued by Muslims. 
 
The Need for Pious Wise Men and Women in Reconciliation 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
¶4. There is an urgent need for communication, in a larger 
arena than that restricted to intellectuals, to enhance this 
dialogue.  The prevailing view among discussants was that 
political struggles among several Muslim societies and 
Western societies, as well as the Palestinian-Israeli 
conflict, have yielded not dialogue but rather barriers, 
misapprehensions, and stereotypes that instill bitterness 
and block communication.  During the iftar, one of the 
Ministry of Islamic affairs guests expressed the need for 
more spirituality in the world and for more wise men and 
women to intervene in the resolution of political conflicts 
-- including conflicts as difficult as the Israeli- 
Palestinian one. 
 
Overcoming Stereotypes via Critical Reasoning, Diversity 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
¶5. But what kind of communication do we need?  The ISESCO 
expert said that respect for other's piety is important, but 
that more important than religious dialogue (where everyone 
agrees to disagree) is cultural dialogue.   "Westerners know 
us better than we know them."  The guests reviewed western 
anthropologists from Westermarck to Geertz and his Sefrou 
project, which probed such topics as religious knowledge and 
power.  The ISESCO textbook project aims to change 
stereotypes of Muslims in western texts and stereotypes of 
westerners in Islamic texts. "We must communicate to put an 
end to prejudices," commented one participant.  Another 
opined, "Countries must revise history textbooks."  Still 
another asserted, "Media must moderate rather than fan the 
flames of prejudice." 
 
 
RABAT 00002266  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶6. IVLP participants mentioned over iftar that they were 
impressed with the diversity in the U.S. and the ability of 
everyone to practice personal piety and conviction of dress 
unhassled.  Mr. Samadi made a daring geographical and 
intellectual short-cut, putting together Mecca and the U.S. 
as the two places on earth where one can find a diversity of 
cultures and peoples. Mrs. El Kabbaj noted that U.S. schools 
teach such skills as leadership and communication and 
suggested these topics be taught in Morocco simultaneously 
with Islam and ethics. The ISESCO expert proclaimed that it 
is high time to think about creating Moroccan satellite 
religious educational T.V. programs that would explain Islam 
to the West. 
 
Don't Touch My Country: Train Teens to Stem Terrorism 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
¶7. The Reseau Maillage 14 October iftar in the suburbs of 
Rabat in the new "Friends of the Coast" Center brought 
together leaders of some twenty NGO leaders associated with 
this umbrella organization, along with some of the student 
members and volunteer teachers for a festive iftar followed 
by a program of music and dance. Throughout the iftar, film 
clips of the NGOs tutoring students, after-school programs 
and summer camps flashed on the television screen.  Students 
enjoyed seeing their friends featured.  After iftar, the 
President of Reseau Maillage provided a synopsis of how the 
group sprung up after the events of 9/11 as an effort to 
reach the disadvantaged youth of the "bidonvilles" (slums) 
and, after thanking the group's leaders and volunteers, also 
thanked the Americans for offering English language training 
(ACCESS Micro-Scholarships) to Moroccan youth.  NOTE: This 
umbrella group helped identify young candidates for the 
ACCESS program from the bidonvilles they serve. 
 
¶8. During his welcome to guests, the President of Reseau 
Maillage pointed to a display on the wall of the Moroccan 
anti-terrorist poster featuring the red "Hand of Fatima" (a 
popular and ancient symbol to ward off harm and the "evil 
eye") with the words of warning to terrorists "Don't Touch 
My Country" - saying the poster signifies that Moroccans are 
standing with the West against terrorism.  The PAO spoke in 
Arabic to thank the volunteers for their work (teachers 
included an American student on an internship) and to affirm 
America's commitment to cooperate with their network to 
reach out to the youth.  PAS presented books and "Hi" 
magazine.  The evening program then began in earnest with a 
Quranic reading by a young boy, followed by Arabic classical 
songs presented by young female students accompanied by a 
guitar and keyboard. 
 
Rigorizing a Moderate Islamic Program 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. Tangiers American Legation Museum Director and PAO 
attended a Tangiers Rotarian club iftar and religious 
instruction on October 19. Held weekly, the event draws 
leading businessmen, professionals, and officials from the 
north--including Christian and Jewish Rotarians.  This one, 
hosted by a real estate developer in his top floor apartment 
overlooking the Mediterranean, included several wealthy 
developers, the former head of a bank, former ministers, the 
President of Tetouan University, and family members visiting 
from Europe for Ramadan.  The speaker, a professor of 
Islamic studies from Tetouan, gave an hour presentation 
closely followed by all, with another 45 minutes of 
questions and discussion, followed by recitation by all 
Muslim participants of the Fatiha. 
 
¶10. The theme of the professor's speech was the need for 
Muslims to rigorize their own concept of religion.  He said 
that the West is interested in Islam and in a dialogue, but 
Muslims should first hone their religious thinking in order 
to differentiate themselves from errant trains of thought. 
He further asserted that Islam is a religion of free choice; 
in the Prophet's time there were Christians, Jews, and 
animists; the Prophet did not win them over by force, but by 
reason.  There are three main levels, which must not be 
mixed up, from which to understand Islam:  values (qiyum); 
judgments (ihkam); and history (tarikh).  Regarding values, 
he observed that Islam and major religions share such values 
as justice, human rights, and respect for human life.  When 
one sees anti-war demonstrations in the west, they include 
demonstrators from many religious backgrounds because they 
all share values and can unite against war.  Regarding 
judgment, Islam is distinguished from other religions by 
certain qualities.  Even so, Islam incorporates much of the 
other "religions of the book" i.e. Christianity and 
Judaism.  Regarding history, the professor maintained that 
everything has a time and place, and interpretations 
(ijtihad) are tied to this.  Decisions made in the 18th 
century about religious interpretation might not be 
 
RABAT 00002266  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
appropriate now.  This point prompted several more questions 
as the men listened intently.  Finally, the historical 
perspective provides crucial demographic and social 
variables. 
 
Calibrate Our Religious Message to Educational Levels 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
¶11. The professor's religious lesson outlined a view of 
Islam that is open to interfaith dialogue without any 
pretense that all monotheistic religions can be one.  It was 
consonant with the main stream religious thought in Morocco, 
which aims to maintain Islam for the average Muslim and 
discourage radicalism.  Picking up this theme, one Rotarian 
disparaged "youth whose brains are washed by those who would 
advocate violence." 
 
 
¶12. Participants talked about the need to convert Morocco's 
Quranic radio station (the "Mohammed VI Radio for Holy 
Koran" which is part of the Moroccan national radio and TV 
network) to provide better religious interpretation.  The 
Jewish member noted the need for religious instruction to be 
adapted to the various levels of the Quranic radio station 
audiences, and that the uneducated needed a simpler message. 
There was a genuine attempt to include the Christians and 
Jew (this evening only one attended) in the discussion by 
intermittent translation of the Arabic into French, but it 
was clear that even the French speaking Moroccans preferred 
to make their comments about religion in Arabic.  The 
university president and a businessman took turns 
translating. 
 
¶13. COMMENT: Post proposed to match the rhythm of Ramadan 
and to listen to Moroccans.  All three events accomplished 
this goal as they allowed us to explore inter-faith dialogue 
from a Moroccan perspective, rather than leading with our 
own programs or ideas.  The participants in the Ambassador's 
iftar exclaimed their appreciation for being invited to 
pray, and expressed their commitment to dialogue.  This 
thought on the need for dialogue was recast in a follow-up 
thank you letter to the Ambassador, in which one guest 
wrote:  "There is (currently) no sustained dialogue; we need 
to understand each other more and to communicate even more. 
If today the image of America is tarnished amongst masses in 
the Muslim world, the blame lies first with the American 
Government for lack of public diplomacy on its part.  At 
some point in the past only the Peace Corps did that 
successfully.  What is needed with America is the 
institutionalization of its dialogue.  Believe me, it is a 
must for this millennium."  The evening emphasized how 
committed the average Moroccan Muslim is to resist the 
radical stream of Islam, while at the same time retaining 
the core of their religion.  The message for us is clear: 
continue to reach out and continue to respect the integrity 
of Moroccan mainstream, moderate Islam. 
 
RILEY