05RIODEJANEIRO1248
AFRO-BRAZILIAN LEADERS DEBUNK MYTH OF RACIAL
Thu Dec 15 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Rio De Janeiro
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 RIO DE JANEIRO 001248 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL SOCI PGOV BR
SUBJECT:  AFRO-BRAZILIAN LEADERS DEBUNK MYTH OF RACIAL 
DEMOCRACY IN BRAZIL 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  Two prominent members of the Afro-Brazilian community 
sat down with members of the Hyde CODEL (septel) on December 
1 to discuss the business and political climate for black 
Brazilians.  In a wide-ranging discussion, they explained 
how Brazil's electoral and educational systems work to 
prevent Afro Brazilians from accumulating political and 
economic power. The legacy of slavery also has hurt, 
depriving entrepreneurial blacks of family inheritances with 
which to launch businesses. Societal discrimination has 
limited job opportunities as well, because blacks are rarely 
hired for publicly-visible jobs, they said. Nevertheless, 
the participants identified numerous areas in which Afro- 
American and Afro-Brazilian businesses can forge stronger 
trading links, to help bring wealth and success to 
struggling communities. Overall, race in Brazil is a complex 
subject, in part because miscegenation (racial mixing) over 
subsequent generations has made it difficult to identify and 
categorize individuals according to skin color.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2.  Jurema Batista, the first Afro-Brazilian woman to serve 
in the Rio de Janeiro State Assembly, and Giovanni Harvey, 
director of an institution assisting young Afro-Brazilian 
entrepreneurs, sat down with members of the Hyde CODEL on 
December 1 to discuss business opportunities and the 
political climate for Brazil's black population.  American 
participants included Representative Mel Watt (D-NC), Tom 
Lantos (D-Cal), Diane Watson (D-CAL), Luis Fortuno (R-PR), 
Eni Faleomavaega (D-AS), their staff members, as well as the 
Charge d'Affaires, the Consul General, Poloff, Commercial 
Officer, and Conoff, note taker. 
 
Electoral System, Legacy of Slavery Impede 
----------------  ------------------------ 
 
¶3.  After introductions, Rio State Assemblywoman Batista 
opened by noting the disproportionately low numbers of 
blacks in business and politics. (Note: Estimates of the 
overall number of Brazilian blacks vary. Our participants 
offered the figure of 45 percent of the total population - 
an estimate at the high end of the spectrum. End Note.) The 
electoral system presents an informal barrier to the 
accumulation of political power, Batista explained. Because 
Brazilians tend to vote according to name recognition rather 
than party affiliation, candidates need to have access to 
wealth in order to be able to disseminate their name and 
publicize their platform to the masses. As a result, 
electoral winners are the ones who can "buy" the most votes 
by carrying out short-term community programs during the 
campaign.  These programs are naturally targeted at poorer, 
more populated areas, which tend to be black.  Such 
communities are the most vulnerable to this type of 
campaigning, since state-provided services are often lacking 
there.  The longer-term result is that wealthy candidates, 
who are almost always white, are able to propagate 
themselves in power. 
 
¶4.  Both Brazilian participants said that the legacy of 
slavery has hurt Afro-Brazilian entrepreneurship.  "We have 
no legacy of inheritance," explained Harvey, whose business 
development firm is called the Brazilian Business Incubator. 
"Most people from my generation have no inherited resources, 
so how can they start their own businesses?" Discriminatory 
hiring practices are an additional barrier, as blacks are 
often passed over for jobs with visibility because, 
according to Harvey, employers prefer individuals with 
lighter skin tones in positions that interface with the 
public. "Racial democracy is a myth," declared Batista. 
"What we have here is non-formal apartheid." 
 
Education System Favors the Wealthy 
---------------- ------------------ 
 
¶5.  In response to a question from Representative Watt about 
educational opportunities, the participants explained how 
Brazil's peculiar education system disadvantages the poor. 
Because of low pay, Brazil's public secondary schools do not 
tend to attract the best teachers. As a result, middle and 
upper class Brazilians usually send their children to 
private schools, which better prepare their graduates for 
Brazil's rigorous university entrance examination, the 
vestibular. Those who excel on the test tend to enroll in 
public universities, which are considered the best in Brazil 
- and they are tuition-free. The ironic result of this 
system is that the students who pay the least for a 
university education tend to be from families who can afford 
to pay the most. Intelligent, hard-working black students 
are placed at a disadvantage if their families cannot send 
them to private secondary schools; if they cannot get into a 
public university, they suffer a double whammy, because now 
they must pay for a private university education.  Many 
cannot afford it. 
 
Forging Stronger Links With Afro-American Business 
---------------------- --------------------------- 
 
¶6.  Several CODEL members asked Harvey to identify areas in 
which Afro-American and Afro-Brazilian businessmen could 
forge stronger trade relationships. "We've been looking for 
U.S. partners for 15 years, but earlier we did it the wrong 
way," he responded. Tourism and arts-and-crafts have the 
most potential, he explained, but "initially I was resistant 
because I wanted high value-added products.  But this isn't 
the reality of Brazil. These areas have been successful. and 
we have to be pragmatic." Other areas worth exploring 
include gastronomy, civil construction, beauty products, 
retail businesses, transportation, and education and non- 
governmental organization (NGO) initiatives. 
 
¶7.  "Brazil is often mentioned as a country of the future," 
Harvey concluded.  "This will only come true when the black 
segment can share power.  We want a more comfortable place 
here.  We want to take the future in our hands." 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8.  Racial discrimination definitely exists at the societal 
level in Brazil. Laws are on the books prohibiting it, and 
many Brazilians note that Brazil has tried harder than many 
multi-ethnic countries to foster a sense of racial equality. 
Members of different races mix in relaxed fashion and 
interracial relationships are common. Nevertheless, as our 
participants noted, significant (and in some cases systemic) 
impediments remain.  Even getting a firm grip on the issue 
is a challenge; the historical mixing of groups dating back 
to colonial times makes it far more difficult to determine 
one's race here than in, say, the United States. Millions of 
Brazilians who in the U.S. might be considered blacks 
identify themselves as of mixed-race (or "mulatto") origin, 
for a number of reasons.  Finally, many individuals of all 
colors reject state- or societal-imposed racial 
categorization schemes, preferring to identify themselves 
simply as Brazilians. The CODEL conversation illuminated 
many of the challenges Afro-Brazilians face, but some of the 
opinions expressed did not necessarily represent unanimously- 
held views - even among non-white Brazilians. 
 
LIST