05SANJOSE2564
DEMARCHE RESPONSE: IRAN EXTREMISM
Fri Nov 04 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy San Jose
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SAN JOSE 002564 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN JASON MACK 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PTER PHUM CS
SUBJECT: DEMARCHE RESPONSE: IRAN EXTREMISM 
 
REF: STATE 199225 
 
¶1.  Poloff delivered reftel talking points to Carlos Cordero, 
Chief of Multilateral Affairs at the MFA, on October 31. 
That same evening, Foreign Minister Roberto Tovar released a 
statement to the press and diplomatic community condemning 
the inflammatory rhetoric of Iranian President Mahmoud 
Ahmadinejad.  The GOCR expressed its belief that 
Ahmadinejad's statements are contrary to international law 
and the precepts of the United Nations, and expressed its 
hope for peace and a negotiated settlement in the Middle 
East.  Poloff followed up with Cordero on November 1, and 
expressed our appreciation for the GOCR statement against the 
Iranian rhetoric.  Cordero told us that the text of the GOCR 
statement had been circulated as a diplomatic note to all 
members of the U.N. and had been presented directly to the 
Iranian delegation there. 
 
¶2.  Begin text of Post's unofficial translation of the 
statement: 
Minister of Foreign Affairs Roberto Tovar Faja expressed that 
the Government of Costa Rica has received with deep concern 
the declarations of the President of the Islamic Republic of 
Iran, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, at the forum, "A World Without 
Zionism," held in Teheran, urging that the State of Israel be 
"wiped off the map." 
 
The Government of Costa Rica views the statements of the 
Iranian president as contrary to the essential principles of 
international public law, as well as inconsistent with the 
core principles of the United Nations, of which both Iran and 
Israel are member states.  It is not acceptable for a member 
state of the world body to express, through its chief of 
state, such grave and unacceptable statements, which attack 
the values of international peace and security and against 
the sovereign existence of another member state. 
 
Costa Rica rejects these statements and reaffirms its hope 
that the situation in the Middle East can be solved in a 
negotiated way, which respects the rights of the involved 
parties and permits a peaceful and constructive coexistence 
of the Israelis and Palestinians. 
End text. 
FRISBIE