05SANJOSE2692
SIGNIFICANT CRIMINAL INCIDENTS IN SAN JOSE
Mon Nov 21 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy San Jose
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SAN JOSE 002692 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR DS/IP/WHA, DS/IP/OPO/FPO, DS/DSS/OSAC AND DS/ITA; 
MANAGUA FOR RSO; PANAMA FOR RSO AND LEGATT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC
SUBJECT: SIGNIFICANT CRIMINAL INCIDENTS IN SAN JOSE 
 
REF: SAN JOSE 2435 
 
 ¶1. In the past several weeks, significant criminal acts have 
been committed near the Embassy or near areas where most 
Mission personnel live and work that merit reporting at this 
time.  Following is a summary of recent events in San Jose: 
 
¶A.  Armed robbery and shooting of Czech diplomat:  On 
November 14, 2005 a Czech diplomat was shot and robbed while 
in his vehicle, shortly after departing a local bank in 
Pavas. The diplomat was shot in the arm while sitting in his 
vehicle then robbed of USD 5,000.  The location of the crime 
was within .5 kilometers of the Embassy. The police captured 
the three men suspected of the crime on the same day. 
 
¶B.  Armed robbery of restaurant Il Pomodoro in Escazu - On 
November 10, 2005 four armed men robbed the restaurant and 
its customers at approximately 2100 hours.  There were no 
injuries reported in the armed robbery, but the incident 
occurred less then one kilometer from the U.S. Ambassador's 
residence and in an area where most Embassy personnel live. 
The suspects in this robbery have not yet been apprehended. 
 
¶C.  Armed invasion of Dutch diplomat's residence:  On 
November 10, 2005 armed individuals entered the residence of 
a Dutch Embassy family in a gated community called Villa 
Real.  This community is very new and is located 
approximately 4 miles outside of the areas approved by RSO 
for U.S. Embassy personnel.  The doors to the diplomat's 
residence were unsecured and the robbers simply walked into 
the residence. The family was fortunate - they were not 
injured nor was much stolen due to the fact their household 
effects had not yet been delivered to their home. 
 
¶D.  Stolen briefcase of Embassy officer:  Embassy officer had 
his briefcase stolen from his unsecured vehicle while 
dropping off laundry.  Subsequent to the theft of the 
briefcase, the officer had charges made on his credit/debit 
card in San Jose. 
 
¶E.  Armed robbery and shooting at bank across the street from 
U.S. Embassy on 17 October - Previously reported in reftel. 
 
¶2.  These criminal events do not appear to have any 
particular pattern, but their occurrence in locations close 
to our Embassy and Mission residences is of interest.  It is 
not uncommon for the Christmas season to bring an increase in 
crime in San Jose, with criminals from other parts of the 
country coming to San Jose to prey on those who receive the 
13th month Christmas bonus, which is almost always paid in 
cash. Of concern is most of these events involved multiple 
persons and weapons.  There is no indication at this time 
that diplomats are being targeted in these crimes, but this 
does not change the fact that diplomats were involved in some 
of these incidents. 
 
¶3.  RSO will continue to monitor and report significant 
criminal events in San Jose as the holiday season approaches. 
 
LANGDALE