05SANAA3514
COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR TREASURY REGIONAL
Sun Dec 18 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

181255Z Dec 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 003514 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EINV KMPI YM
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR TREASURY REGIONAL 
REPRESENTATIVE GEORGE MULLINAX 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Embassy Sanaa grants country clearance and welcomes 
the visit of Mr. George Mullinax from o/a December 18, 2005 
to o/a December 20, 2005 to provide assistance to the Central 
Bank of Yemen. Please make sure that Post has Mr. Mullinax's 
SSN and security clearance on file. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Control Officer for the visit will be Econoff Noah 
Siegel,who can be contacted at all times through the Embassy 
at (967) (1) 755-2152; cell phone (967) 73-3292608.  The 
number for emergencies only is 755-2170 (Post One). 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Reservations:  Hotel reservations have been made at 
the Taj Sheba Hotel: phone: (967) (1) 272-372; Fax: (967) (1) 
274-129.  An Embassy driver will meet and assist at the 
airport. 
 
¶4.  (U) Fiscal Data:  Each visitor must bring/forward fiscal 
data to cover costs of the visit.  Each agency, organization, 
or visiting delegation will be charged for the actual costs 
attributed to their visit.  These costs include, but are not 
limited to: American and Locally Employed Staff overtime, 
field travel by Embassy employees, vehicle rentals, long 
distance telephone calls, equipment rentals, office supplies, 
expediter services, representational events and all other 
costs that are directly attributable to the visit. 
 
¶5.  (U) Visas:  All travelers must obtain a Yemeni entry visa 
prior to their arrival.  This is a priority and is the 
responsibility of the traveler.  If there is no Yemeni 
Embassy or Consulate in your location, please contact post. 
Although Yemen has recently begun issuing airport visas 
(USD$70 at the airport) we recommend that you obtain your 
visa prior to departure, as some airlines have refused to 
board travelers who do not have a visa. 
 
¶6.  (U) Customs:  To assist with customs, visitors should 
inform the Embassy by fax (967-1-303-182) of any special 
tools or equipment which they plan to bring into Yemen.  The 
importation of special electronics or tools must be 
coordinated with local military and customs authorities. 
TRAVELERS IGNORING THIS REQUIREMENT RISK THE CONFISCATION OF 
SUCH ITEMS UPON ARRIVAL.  All baggage, including that 
belonging to diplomats, is subject to x-ray and hand search 
upon arrival in Yemen.  If the traveler must carry a radio or 
electronic equipment, it can be carried in as a non-pro 
courier hand-held (i.e., carried aboard the plane in an 
orange classified diplomatic pouch). 
 
¶7.  (U) Work Hours:  Embassy Sanaa's normal workweek is 
Saturday through Wednesday; office hours are 8:00 a.m. to 
4:30 p.m. 
 
¶8.  (U) Crime Situation in Yemen:  A security briefing by the 
Regional Security Officer (RSO) is mandatory upon arrival. 
The incidence of street crime is very low throughout Yemen, 
and violent crimes against foreigners are rare.  Because of 
continuing terrorist threats against U.S. interests on the 
Arabian Peninsula and the increased tensions in the entire 
Gulf region, the Embassy advises all visitors to remain 
vigilant with regard to their personal security and to 
exercise caution.  Avoid large crowds and gatherings, 
maintain a low profile, and vary routes and times of all 
required travel.  Travelers should read the latest State 
Department Travel Information or Warning, available at 
(http://travel.state.gov/travel warnings.html#wxyz) or visit 
the Sanaa web site containing Consular warden messages 
(http://usembassy.state.gov/yemen/citizen services.html). 
 
¶9.  (U) Money:  Travelers must bring sufficient funds or have 
sufficient funds in personal checking accounts to cover costs 
of entire TDY.  THERE ARE NO ATM'S IN COUNTRY, AND ACCEPTANCE 
OF CREDIT CARDS IS LIMITED - BRING CASH/CHECKBOOK.  TDY cash 
advances should be taken prior to travel to Yemen - Embassy 
does not issue cash advances for TDY personnel.  Embassy 
offers check-cashing service and will cash personal checks of 
official travelers. 
Cashier will exchange dollars for Yemeni Riyals.  Many local 
merchants and businesses accept U.S. currency for purchases. 
The current exchange rate is YR 194 to USD 1. 
 
¶10.  (U) Weather:  The weather in Sanaa is generally warm 
during the day, though a sweater may be necessary at night. 
Weather in Aden and along the Red Sea coast is normally very 
hot and humid.  Business suits are preferred for meetings 
with Yemeni officials.  All clothing should be modest and 
conservative. 
 
¶11.  (U) Health Precautions:  Bring a supply of any needed 
medications sufficient to cover the proposed stay in Yemen. 
Practice food and water precautions as in other developing 
nations.  Begin immunization for hepatitis A and B, rabies, 
typhoid, tetanus, and polio prior to departure.  Yellow fever 
vaccination is required if entering from a country at risk. 
If you spend more than a few days outside Sanaa, malaria 
prophylaxis may be required and you will be required to have 
G6PD blood testing.  Local hospital care may be required for 
emergencies. Local medical providers expect immediate cash 
payment.  Travelers should contact their administrative 
offices before departure to ensure they are fully covered for 
overseas emergencies.  Each traveler should check in with the 
Medical Unit for a short medical briefing as soon as possible 
after arrival.  Individuals with 
sickle cell trait should carefully consider the altitude of 
this post before applying for assignment here.  Short-term 
(TDY) assignments carry an added risk because of the lack of 
time for acclimatization.  Dehydration and stress from 
exercise or illness compound the basic risks of high 
altitude.  For more information, contact your health unit or 
the medical clearance section of the Offices of Medical 
Services. 
 
¶12.  (U) Special Restrictions:  The Republic of Yemen 
prohibits the import of sexually oriented material, weapons, 
and alcohol; videocassettes are also likely to be 
confiscated.  Photography of military installations, 
individuals in uniform, government buildings and industrial 
facilities are strictly forbidden.  Photography of Yemenis, 
especially women, should be done only after receiving 
explicit permission.  We repeat -- All baggage, 
including those belonging to diplomats, is subject to x-ray 
and hand search upon arrival in Yemen. 
 
¶13.  (U) Travel Restrictions:  Travel outside Sanaa will only 
occur with COM/RSO approval. 
Khoury