05TAIPEI4479
MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN IDENTITY
Fri Nov 04 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

040811Z Nov 05UNCLAS TAIPEI 004479 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC 
BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN IDENTITY 
 
 
Summary: Major Chinese-language Taipei dailies gave 
extensive coverage on November 4 to President Chen Shui- 
bian's decision to withdraw two honorary medals awarded to 
former Presidential Office Deputy Secretary-General Chen Che- 
nan due to his inappropriate appointment of an accountant in 
the Presidential Office to deal with his own personal 
finances.  Coverage also focused on other alleged scandals 
involving two high-ranking finance officials and the 
aftermath of the Government Information Office's probe into 
the ownership structure of TVBS, a local station whose talk 
show programs tend to be critical of the ruling DPP 
government.  The pro-independence "Taiwan Daily," however, 
is the only Chinese-language newspaper that reported on its 
front page President Chen's remarks on Tuesday that he will 
focus on four core issues during the rest of his term to 
promote Taiwan's position in the international community. 
An editorial in the newspaper also discussed Chen's four 
major policy objectives, urging the government to replace 
the national title of "Republic of China" with "Taiwan" in 
an attempt to help the island walk out of its current 
diplomatic predicament.  End summary. 
 
"[The Government Should] Strive to Enhance the Island's 
Participation in the International Community In the Name of 
Taiwan, Which Shall Replace the Useless [Name of] Republic 
of China, in an Attempt to Walk out of the Diplomatic 
Predicament It Is In." 
 
The pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" [circulation: 100,000] 
asserted in an editorial (11/4): 
 
"President Chen Shui-bian, when receiving a visiting 
delegation from the North American Taiwanese Medical 
Association on Thursday, said he will focus on four core 
issues during the rest of his term: "expanding [Taiwan's] 
participation in the international community," "constructing 
political order," "improving public welfare," and "defending 
security and peace."  Chen said he hopes Taiwan can use its 
assets in trade, democracy, humanitarianism, and security to 
participate more actively in the international community. . 
 
"Just as Chen stated on Thursday, Taiwan's `love for 
democracy and honor for human rights' is a very important 
cornerstone for the island's democratic development.  We 
need to cherish this democratic achievement, which did not 
come about easily.  Likewise, since the [name of] Republic 
of China has turned out to be a burden and negative point 
for Taiwan's foreign relations, we need to educate our 
younger generations that the [name of] Republic of China is 
not conducive to winning international recognition and that 
the Republic of China is thus [considered] dead; we must 
make sure that they have no confusion about their national 
identity.  Internationally, we should start from scratch by 
using the [national] title of Taiwan to play a more 
proactive role in participating in international activities 
and organizations involved in economics, trade, relief, 
public health, environmental protection, culture, science 
and technology.  Taiwan needs to raise its visibility in the 
international community via substantive means of diplomacy, 
seek to improve its foreign relations, and walk out of the 
diplomatic predicament it is currently in." 
 
KEEGAN