05TAIPEI5
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Mon Jan 03 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 000005 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
 
A)  "No Warning in Armitage Comments" 
 
Washington-based journalist James Wang said in the pro- 
independence, English-language "Taipei Times" 
(12/31/04): 
 
". When the US cooked up its `one China' policy, it 
imposed its opinion on the Taiwanese people.  Taiwan 
has become a more democratic country since the 
localized Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) came to 
power. Faced with the `one China' principle, which is 
endangering the interests of the country, we can no 
longer tolerate it. . 
 
"Political friction between Taiwan and the US may occur 
if the `one China' principle is challenged.  To Taiwan, 
the dispute with the US will incur some `warnings,' 
which are not fatal.  If we do not stand firm on 
challenging the `one China' policy, Taiwan will become 
another Hong Kong.  The US should understand that while 
it may not have to recognize Taiwan as a country, it 
cannot force Taiwan to negate itself as a country. 
 
"The KMT, gloating over the DPP's troubles, thinks Chen 
has overstepped the red line drawn by the US.  It is an 
overstatement to say [Deputy Secretary of State 
Richard] Armitage was warning Taiwan when he said the 
US is not required to defend Taiwan under the TRA. 
 
"First, while Chen has pushed for constitutional reform 
and to uphold the sovereignty of Taiwan, he has not 
totally ignored the interests of the US and the 
security and stability of the region.  Otherwise he 
would not have put forward the `four noes' pledge 
earlier this year.  Second, it is impossible for China 
to be unaware of the fact that the right to declare an 
act of war resides with the US Congress and that there 
is no requirement in the TRA that forces the US to 
defend Taiwan.  Third, no one can precisely say the US 
will come to Taiwan's defense if China attacks. 
However, the leadership of the Chinese government has 
to presume that the US will be present if China tries 
to take Taiwan by force. . 
 
"Armitage's remarks were perfectly clear.  The US' 
strategy is to `deter,' using a demonstration of power 
to warn China not to utilize military force as the 
first step to `defend Taiwan.'  To deter, however, does 
not amount to declaring war.  In 1996, China launched 
missiles toward Taiwan as part of military maneuvers 
and the US deployed two aircraft carriers to nearby 
seas. . 
 
"To study the meaning of the TRA, China should include 
past examples of similar situations.  Armitage brought 
discussions up to the constitutional level when 
touching on the right to declare a war.  The fact is 
that he would not and could not answer such a question. 
He would rather choose an ordinary constitutional 
procedure to explain how a war would be declared. 
Considering a remark like this is to be a `warning' to 
Taiwan is sheer overreaction." 
 
B) "Chen's Pledges Must Go" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" 
editorialized (1/3/05): 
 
". In this sense we cannot but be disappointed - once 
again- with President Chen Shui-bian's New Year's 
address.  All we had was a rather empty warning to 
China `not to underestimate the will of the Taiwanese 
people.'  Since China believes that the Taiwanese 
people have no will and can be intimidated into voting 
for the pan-blues by Beijing's saber-rattling, Chen 
might as well not have bothered.  Once again Chen spoke 
about Taiwan's `olive branches.'  What he might have 
pointed out is that these olive branches have simply 
been used as switches for giving Taiwan a good 
whipping. 
 
"When are Chen and those around him ever going to 
realize that appeasement does not lead to security? 
When are they going to learn the lessons of Munich, 
which is that aggressive governments with plans for 
territorial expansion have to be challenged?  Enough of 
Taiwan playing Mr. Nice Guy.  It has got to the stage 
where the country is being endangered by the lack of a 
resolute strategy.  Of course, getting tough is going 
to annoy people in Beijing and Beijing's clients in the 
State Department in Washington, but that can't be 
helped.  China's latest move is too serious to be taken 
with the Panglossian stoicism that has characterized 
the last four years. . 
 
"Taiwan has been intimidated by such nonsense for long 
enough.  For too long, it has tried to make room for 
the dubious concerns and often contemptible motives of 
others.  It must now look after its own interests.  The 
speech in which Chen made his pledges was called 
`Taiwan Stands up.' Well it certainly didn't then.  It 
is about time it did." 
 
PAAL