05TAIPEI4343
MEDIA REACTION: KMT CHAIRMAN MA'S OP-ED ON TAIWAN
Wed Oct 26 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

260901Z Oct 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 004343 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC 
BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: KMT CHAIRMAN MA'S OP-ED ON TAIWAN 
RETROCESSION DAY 
 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: (U) The lead story in Taiwan dailies October 26 
is passage of the National Communications Commission bill in 
the Legislative Yuan, the reactions from the pan-Green 
alliance, and the consequences of the passage of the bill. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Taiwan dailies October 26 covered the issue of the 
"Taiwan Retrocession Day," i.e. October 25.  In contrast to 
the DPP government's plan to downplay the significance of 
this day, KMT Chairman Ma Ying-jeou placed October 25 a full- 
page op-ed article in the centrist, pro-status quo "China 
Times" to mark the 60th anniversary of Taiwan's return to 
China after World War II.  Sources at the China Times told 
AIT Public Affairs that this "op-ed" was in fact a paid 
placement by the KMT, although nothing in either the print 
or Internet version betrayed the fact. 
 
¶3.  (U) In the op-ed, Ma accused the governing DPP party of 
intentionally ignoring the significance of the anniversary. 
Ma dismissed the long-held assertion by the DPP that the 
"228 Incident" and KMT's "White Terror" crackdown on pro- 
Communists intellectuals after the 1947 incident were the 
driving forces for the Taiwan independence movement. Ma said 
the government's land reforms in the 1950s prompted some 
wealthy Taiwanese to seek Taiwan's independence. Citing 
examples from historical events, Ma criticized Chen's 
administration for promoting change in Taiwan's official 
name and urged the DPP to respect the spirit of DPP pioneers 
that allows rotation of political power in Taiwan - 
suggesting Ma's strong intention for KMT to regain its rule 
in Taiwan. President Chen Shui-bian, on the other hand, said 
Tuesday the retrocession of Taiwan after World War II does 
not equal the return of Taiwan to China. 
 
¶4. (U) EDITORIALS AND COMMENTARIES.  The pro-independence 
"Taiwan Daily" editorialized that Ma's October 25 op-ed 
article serves only the purpose of helping him win the 2008 
presidential elections.  The pro-independence "Taipei Times" 
editorialized that China has nothing to do with the Taiwan 
Retrocession Day, and added that China's commemoration of 
the day was part of its "United Front" work.  End summary. 
 
¶1. "Ma Ying-jeou Distorted History, Embarrassed the Deceased 
Wise Men in Order to Get Rid of the Ugly Name of `Foreign 
Political Party.'  Ma's Efforts are Destined to be in Vain." 
 
The pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" [circulation: 150,000] 
said in its editorial (10/26) that: 
 
".  Ma Ying-jeou asked scholars working for him to write an 
article, and he used his name to publish that article 
entitled `In Remembrance of the 60th Anniversary of the 
Retrocession of Taiwan: Remember the Paradigms of the 
Deceased Wise Men, and Rebuild the Spirit of Taiwan' in the 
`China Times.' . The names of the deceased wise men 
mentioned in the article are stepping-stones for Ma Ying- 
jeou to link the KMT to Taiwan.  The purpose [underlying the 
article] aims to not only clear the name of the KMT 
government as a `non-native regime,' but also to establish 
the mainstream position of the KMT in Taiwan society.  [Ma 
hopes that] the article would give the KMT legitimacy for 
`mainland Chinese [in Taiwan (read: Ma)]' to take part in 
the 2008 presidential elections." 
 
¶2. "An Odd Event Across the Strait" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (10/26): 
 
"China's `United Front' campaign against Taiwan moved into 
new territory when Beijing marked Retrocession Day 
yesterday.  For decades, China has ignored this day, but 
this year Beijing invited members of Taiwan's opposition 
parties and senior Chinese leaders to take part in three 
days of festivities. 
 
"When the Chinese Nationalist Party (KMT) was in power, 
Retrocession Day was a big event in Taiwan, but after the 
Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) took the presidency, this 
changed.  The new government's interpretation is that Oct. 
25 signifies no more than the end of the Sino-Japanese War, 
and is not related to Taiwan's sovereignty.  For this 
reason, commemorative activities in Taiwan were much more 
low key this year. 
 
".In fact, the sovereignty of Taiwan and that of China are 
completely unrelated.  The 1951 San Francisco Treaty states 
that Japan renounces all right, title and claims to Formosa 
and the Pescadores.  But nowhere does it specify that 
sovereignty was returned to the Republic of China (R.O.C.), 
let alone the People's Republic of China. ." 
 
¶5. (U) COMMENT: Commemoration of Taiwan Retrocession Day in 
Taiwan was marked by political competition between the pro- 
independence Pan-Green parties and the pro-unification Pan- 
Blue parties, reflecting the rising temperature of Taiwan 
politics in the run up to the December 3 local elections. 
President Chen Shui-bian took advantage of his meeting with 
participants in the "U.S.-Japan-Taiwan Strategic Dialogue" 
conference the same day, Oct 25, to both deny that Taiwan 
retrocession meant the return of Taiwan to China and to call 
for closer security cooperation among Japan, the U.S. and 
Taiwan.  END COMMENT 
 
KEEGAN