05TAIPEI4457
Southern Taiwan Labor Unions Remain Solidly in
Thu Nov 03 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

030824Z Nov 05UNCLAS TAIPEI 004457 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
DEPT FOR EAP/TC, INR/EAP 
 
FROM AIT KAOHSIUNG BRANCH OFFICE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL TW
SUBJECT: Southern Taiwan Labor Unions Remain Solidly in 
Green Camp 
 
 
¶1.  Summary. Representatives of local labor unions in 
southern Taiwans Pingtung, Kaohsiung, and Tainan 
Counties said that, despite recent scandals involving 
senior DPP members, their membership would support DPP 
candidates in the coming elections.  The representatives 
said that laborers believe that the DPP is more 
enthusiastic than the KMT in promoting their welfare. 
The representatives predicted that the DPP would maintain 
its dominance in these three counties.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  President Wang Hsin-chi, of the Tainan County Labor 
Union, stated that the countys laborers are more focused 
on local labor issues than island-wide politics.  The 
union membership hopes that the County Government can 
find a solution to frequent flooding in the area.  He 
noted that the pan-Blue controlled legislature had 
blocked funding for flood control projects.  Wang stated 
that Tainan County labor recognizes incumbent Magistrate 
Su Huan-chis hard work on their behalf.  According to 
Wang, labor will continue to support Magistrate Su. 
However, Wang pointed out that Sus support among 
government workers is weak due to their dissatisfaction 
with his management style.  He said that, despite this 
fact, Su was likely to be reelected, especially in light 
of the weakness of his opponent. 
 
¶3. Secretary General Gu Ming-yiaw, of the Kaohsiung 
County Laborers Union, noted that the recent KRTC scandal 
and alleged corruption on the part of DPP officials will 
have an impact on younger voters.  However, he predicted 
ed 
that his membership and most older voters will continue 
to support the DPP.  Gu said that attempts to paint the 
entire DPP as corrupt were unfair. 
 
¶4.  Secretary General Yang Yu-ying, of the Pingtung 
County Labor Union pointed out that the rank and file 
were long dissatisfied with neglect by previous KMT 
administrations.  Yang said the workers believe that they 
have received better treatment from DPP administrations. 
Yang went on to say that overall sentiment in Pingtung 
County favors the DPP.  He said that he fully expected 
the DPP to remain firmly in control in Pingtung County. 
 
¶5.  Comment.  AIT/K solicited comments from major labor 
groups in Kaohsiung, Tainan and Pingtung counties.  Labor 
is an insignificant demographic in Chiayi, Taitung and 
Penghu counties.  Solid labor support is particularly 
important in Tainan and Kaohsiung counties due to heavy 
industrialization in those areas.  End Comment. 
 
 
 
 
Thiele 
 
Keegan