05TAIPEI2641
TORENTIAL RAINS POUND SOUTHERN TAIWAN
Wed Jun 15 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 002641 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO AIT/W AND EAP/RSP/TC 
 
STATE PLEASE ALSO PASS TO USEPA/OIA 
 
FROM AIT KAOHSIUNG BRANCH OFFICE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT SENV ECON KSCA KPAO TW ESTH
SUBJECT: TORENTIAL RAINS POUND SOUTHERN TAIWAN 
 
¶1. Summary.  Torrential rains have pounded southern Taiwan 
for several days, severely damaging agricultural operations 
and disrupting both air and ground transportation.  At least 
seven people have died in storm related incidents and 2,000 
people are trapped in mountainous areas in Pingtung County 
due to landslides cutting off road access.  Officials expect 
damage to mount as rains are expected to continue for 
several more days.  There is worry that damage may spread to 
central Taiwan as the heavy rains move northward.  Political 
infighting has stalled funding for proposed government flood 
control programs.  End Summary 
 
 
Heavy Rain and Landslides 
------------------------- 
 
¶2. Torrential rains continue to batter southern Taiwan as a 
storm front has lingered over the island for several days, 
causing severe flooding in southern Taiwan.  Daily rainfall 
amounts for each of the last five days have exceeded the 
historical averages for a normal month of June.  Flooding 
was worst in Pingtung and Kaohsiung Counties, with 
additional major crop damage in Tainan County.  At least 
seven people have died in the floods, which local officials 
describe as the worst in 30 years.  Schools in Pingtung 
County and some southern cities were closed on June 13. 
 
¶3. Heavy rains have severely disrupted air and ground 
transportation, with many flights being cancelled and major 
roads closed.  Tainan and Hengchun Airports were closed for 
most of June 12 and 13.  Route 17, and major connector in 
Pingtung County has been closed in several locations due to 
flooding and landslides.  Major bridges in Kaohsiung, 
Pingtung and Chiayi counties have been closed to traffic. 
 
¶4. About 40,000 households in Pingtung County lost 
electricity, but most had power restored quickly.  The 
Central Weather Bureau continues to issue warnings against 
heavy rains island wide.  The Council of Agriculture has 
also issued a red alert landslide warning for 116 creeks in 
southern Taiwan.  Residents of these areas have been 
cautioned to be on alert for more landslides and flooding as 
it is estimated that the rain will last until next week. 
Emergency authorities have called in military troops and 
equipment to aid in rescue and evacuation efforts.  Local 
weather officials expect the heavy rain to gradually move 
into central Taiwan over the next few days, prompting fears 
of more flooding there.  Central Taiwan suffered heavy 
flooding earlier in the year during another period of heavy 
rainfall. 
 
Agricultural and Economic Impact 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶5. The Council of Agriculture estimates damage to 
agricultural losses at approximately NT$170 million, 
including NT$107 million in crops, NT$66 million in 
livestock and NT$0.5 million in fisheries.  Kaohsiung County 
suffered the most agricultural damage, with NT$17.2 million 
in losses, but Agricultural officials say those figures will 
be revised upwards as the rains are expected to continue for 
several days.  An estimated 2,474 hectares of crops have 
been flooded, with 27 percent of these fields having their 
crops completely destroyed. 
 
¶6.  Rice, leafy vegetables and various seasonal fruits were 
the hardest hit.  Prices for these items in Kaohsiung 
markets are five to ten times normal levels, and leafy 
vegetables are particularly scarce.  On 13 June, heavy rains 
concentrated in Tainan County had a severe impact on 
agricultural operations there.  Agricultural officials are 
still estimating the damage, but expect most farmers in the 
region to quality for government assistance.  They said that 
estimated damage will likely double as new assessments come 
in.  The Department of Finance stated that those who 
suffered from the flooding could apply for government 
subsidies as well as several tax exemptions.  Agriculture 
officials say that the damage to livestock was limited due 
to the fact that most hog raising operations in the Kaoping 
River basin, the area hardest hit by the flooding, had been 
relocated to other areas in 2003.  Their relocation was part 
of a government-led effort to reduce pollution from farm 
runoff in order to clean up the Kaoping River, which 
supplies most of the drinking water for Kaohsiung City. 
 
Government Reaction 
------------------- 
 
¶7. In response to the flooding, on June 13 Premier Frank 
Hsieh urged the Legislative Yuan (LY) to pass a bill for an 
eight-year NT$80 billion flood-control project.  That bill 
was forwarded to the LY by the Executive Yuan is in limbo as 
it awaits the next LY session in September.  Earlier this 
month, the Democratic Progress Party (DPP) suggested holding 
a special LY session in July to focus on bills such as this 
which it claims are urgent.  Opposition parties have yet to 
agree to the plan.