05TAIPEI2430
MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS, PRESS
Fri Jun 03 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TAIPEI 002430 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ROBERT 
PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS, PRESS 
FREEDOM 
 
SUMMARY: 
 
¶1. Taiwan dailies June 3 carried reports on President Chen 
Shui-bian's intention to meet with China's President Hu 
Jintao.  Pro-unification "United Daily News" carried a 
banner headline on its front page that read: "Bian Expects 
to Attend APEC to Meet with Hu Jintao."  The banner headline 
on the front page of the pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" 
read: "Bian is Willing to Meet Hu Jintao in a Third 
Country."  Both pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's 
largest daily, and the pro-status quo "China Times" 
downplayed the report with placement of coverage of Chen's 
intention on their inner pages. 
 
¶2. Most of the editorials and commentaries in the June 3 
papers focused on local politics:  e.g. tax reform, the 
National Assembly, etc.  The pro-independence "Liberty 
Times," however, did look across the Taiwan Strait -- its 
editorial said the Taiwan government should not fall victim 
to "China fever" and not open the Chinese market to local 
companies.  The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei 
Times" also commented on China.  Its editorial focused 
China's violation of press freedom as a violation of human 
rights. 
 
¶1. Cross-Strait Relations 
 
A) "[If the Government Insists on] Any More Plans to 
Proactively Open [to the Chinese Market], Any Measure [to 
Manage this Trade] Will Be Empty Words." 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 800,000] 
editorialized (6/3): 
 
". One cannot understand [why], when China has legislated 
the `Anti-Secession Law,' Taiwan government officials still 
consider opening the Chinese market to local companies, such 
as naphtha cracking plants, IC packaging plants, and LCD TFT 
plants that produce panels under four inches.  The officials 
also plan to enhance the upper limit of the net-value ratio 
regarding private investments in China, and to identify 
loosely the qualifications for companies that are funded by 
Chinese investment.  One does not know whether to cry or to 
laugh at the fact that these officials obviously accept the 
viewpoints of the unification activists to lean toward 
China, and to view `openness' and `investment in China' as 
`appeals for the economy;' and they totally leave behind 
`effective management,' one of the seven conclusions reached 
by the Presidential Office, the Executive Yuan, and the DPP 
to counter China's `Anti-Secession Law.' 
 
"We can not agree with Premier Frank Hsieh's statement that 
`We can profit from the China fever,' because apparently he 
sees only the part where merchants could profit, but he 
ignores the consequent loss to society as well as the 
country.  All that being said, we consider as long as 
economic officials, the Presidential Office, and the 
Executive Yuan do not change their wrong thinking, the China 
fever (in terms of investment) will not be dampened, and the 
fever will become more serious.  Taiwan's economic growth 
will thus surely decline. ." 
 
¶2. Press Freedom 
 
B) "Beijing Tramples Rights - Again." 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized  (6/3): 
 
". Many people who hold unrealistic ideas about China often 
conveniently forget, or consciously choose to turn a blind 
eye, to its notorious violations of basic civil rights - 
freedom of the press being just one of them.  It should not 
be forgotten that in China the news media is state- 
controlled and is essentially a puppet, allowed to parrot 
government propaganda only. 
 
". If Beijing genuinely wishes to change the impression that 
it has absolutely no respect for the rule of law and human 
rights, start by according these detained journalists open 
and transparent legal due process." 
 
PAAL