05TELAVIV670
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Fri Feb 04 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 TEL AVIV 000670 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Iraq 
 
¶3.  President Bush State of the Union Address 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Yediot (Shimon Shiffer) quoted a senior Israeli source 
as saying that Sharon and Secretary of State 
Condoleezza Rice will disagree on the definition of 
contiguity for the Palestinian sate, on the extent of 
the expected prisoner release, and the continuation of 
the IDF pullout.  Shiffer quoted Israel's Ambassador to 
the U.S. Danny Ayalon as saying that Secretary Rice's 
move to State will not influence her basic perception 
of Israel's high-ranking place as a reliable U.S. ally. 
 
The extent of prisoner release as part of Israel's 
gestures to the PA dominated the major media.  Leading 
media quoted PA Chairman Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen) as 
saying Thursday that the PA will announce a formal 
cease-fire with Israel at the summit, and that Israel 
must do the same thing.  Leading media cited Israeli 
officials as saying that what counts are gestures, not 
declarations. 
 
Ha'aretz and Jerusalem Post printed medium-length 
reports about President Bush's State of the Union 
address.  Both newspapers highlighted the President's 
remarks on his pledge to contribute USD 350 million to 
the PA, the advancement of democracy in the Middle 
East, and criticism of Syria and Iran.  Ha'aretz noted 
that Bush made a "surprising" demand of Egypt for 
democratic reforms.  Both newspapers mention Bush's 
remark that the U.S. would "not set an artificial 
timetable for leaving Iraq." 
 
Leading media reported that last night, during talks 
headed by top Sharon aide Dov Weisglass and PA 
Negotiations Minister Saeb Erekat, Palestinian 
negotiators rejected a decision by the restricted 
cabinet Thursday to release "only" 900 prisoners. 
Ha'aretz and other media detailed the cabinet's 
decision: the prisoner release; the transfer of 
responsibility over five West Bank cities; the PA will 
pledge to gather the weapons of wanted Palestinians and 
to supervise them, as Israel will refrain from pursuing 
them; Israel will refrain from offensive activity in 
the territories, except in cases of "ticking bombs"; 
the Karni Crossing will reopen within 48 hours, 
conditional upon security measures by the Palestinians; 
the main road in the Gaza Strip will be fully reopened, 
and the closure of Gaza City lifted; and the PA might 
be authorized to build a seaport in Gaza; Gaza Airport 
will remain closed.  Maariv quoted PM Sharon as saying 
that this could be an opportunity he did not want to 
lose without having tried it.  Ha'aretz and other media 
reported that cabinet ministers Shimon Peres and Haim 
Ramon (Labor), and Shaul Mofaz (Likud) had advocated 
more generous concessions to the Palestinians. 
 
Yediot and Maariv led with a controversy between the 
IDF and the Shin Bet.  Yediot bannered IDF Chief of 
Staff Moshe Ya'alon as saying that even prisoners who 
have murdered Israelis must be released.   Maariv 
bannered a remark by Shin Bet chief Avi Dichter that 
Israel is making concessions too early.  Maariv 
reported that Marwan Barghouti's son is expected to be 
released, but not Barghouti himself.  Israel Radio 
quoted Jordanian FM Hani Fawzi al-Mulki as saying that 
his country will send an ambassador to Tel Aviv only if 
Israel releases the Jordanian prisoners it detains. 
 
Israel Radio reported that Hamas leader Khaled Mashal 
told the Israeli-Arab newspaper Kul-el-Arab that he 
supports the Sharm el-Sheikh summit as a gauge of 
Israel's intentions. 
 
Leading media reported that a 16-year-old Palestinian 
boy was caught at a Nablus checkpoint with a bomb belt 
on Thursday.  Four IDF soldiers were wounded last night 
when Palestinian gunmen opened fire on their jeep 
southwest of Hebron.  Two others were wounded in a Gaza 
Strip attack.  Israel Radio reported that an 
unspecified terrorist attack was thwarted Thursday in 
Jerusalem. 
 
In an interview with Jerusalem Post, Pinchas 
Wallerstein, an influential member of the Yesha Council 
of Jewish Settlements in the Territories, blasted an 
initiative by some settler leaders to move communities 
from the Gaza Strip's Katif Bloc to Israel. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that a special committee set up to 
review the issue of civilian national service will 
submit its conclusions to Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz 
on Sunday, and the government is expected to adopt the 
panel's proposal to make voluntary civilian service 
open to all Israelis who do not serve in the IDF. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that on Thursday, President Bush 
hosted Mikhail Brudno and Vladimir Dubov, two Israeli- 
Russian businessmen who are wanted by Russia for 
alleged tax offenses.  The two men, who are 
shareholders in the giant Russian oil enterprise Yukos, 
were invited to a White House breakfast as guests of 
Congressmen Tom Lantos and Christopher Cox. 
 
Ha'aretz quoted A-G Menachem Mazuz as saying Thursday 
that he intends to allow the use of administrative 
detentions for Jews, as part of the public struggle 
over disengagement.  Jerusalem Post reported that a 
national referendum could be introduced into the 
Disengagement Plan Implementation bill now being 
debated by the two Knesset committees in advance of a 
plenum vote set to take place within the next two 
weeks. 
 
Leading media reported that the High Court of Justice 
on Thursday rejected a petition by Palestinian local 
councils against the paving of a by-pass road from 
Jerusalem to Rachel's Tomb (on the outskirts of 
Bethlehem).  The petitioners claimed that the road 
could impede their freedom of movement. 
 
Ha'aretz reported on a joint, German-funded project of 
the Israeli local council of Emek Hefer and the 
Municipality of Tulkarm, to clean up the polluted 
Alexander River (between Netanya and Hadera). 
 
A Maariv/Teleseker poll: 
 
-"Do you believe Sharon will be able to implement his 
disengagement plan?"  68 percent: yes; 24: no; 8 
percent are undecided.  The poll found that right-wing 
supporters also believe that the disengagement move 
will be carried out. 
-"Do you believe that following the implementation of 
the disengagement, Israel will evacuate additional 
settlements in the coming years?"  59 percent: yes; 29 
percent: no; 12 percent are undecided. 
-" Do you believe that following the implementation of 
the disengagement, terror will weaken, increase or 
remain at the same level?"  38 percent: it will weaken; 
30 percent: it will remain the same; 24 percent: it 
will increase; 8 percent are undecided. 
-"What is the risk of violence erupting between 
disengagement opponents and the police and IDF?"  51 
percent: the risk is great, but not to the point of a 
civil war; 26 percent: the risk is great -- to the 
point of a civil war; 18 percent: there is no great 
risk; talk about violence is meant to frighten; 5 
percent are undecided. 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: "The 
turnabout that Sharon has proclaimed opens a real door 
to regional change. And it must be hoped that everyone 
who seeks a solution will support him." 
 
Washington correspondent Orly Azolai wrote in mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "Rice would 
very much like to grant him a gift -- a significant 
diplomatic achievement that is not painted with the 
colors of war." 
 
Extreme right-wing columnist Caroline B. Glick wrote in 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post: "Here we are 
again, at the dawn of a new peace process which ... 
will engender scorn for America and faith in Israel's 
eventual destruction in the hearts of millions of 
people who today waver between support for freedom and 
support for terror." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "Sharon Is Effecting Regional Change" 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized 
(February 4): "The summit meeting that will take place 
in Sharm al-Sheikh on Tuesday between Prime Minister 
Ariel Sharon, Palestinian Authority Chairman Mahmoud 
Abbas (Abu Mazen) and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak 
may not be a historic event, but it must be viewed in 
the context of the optimistic atmosphere that currently 
pervades the three parties' relations, and as a 
catalyst that will move the region's leaders in the 
right direction.... The Americans may be more 
interested in the next stage of the process, and view a 
commitment to implementation of the road map as the 
most important thing.  But from the standpoint of 
Israelis and Palestinians, who have endured more than 
four years of blood and fire, even the success of the 
disengagement is no small matter.... The turnabout that 
Sharon has proclaimed opens a real door to regional 
change. And it must be hoped that everyone who seeks a 
solution will support him." 
 
II.  "A Gift From Condoleezza" 
 
Washington correspondent Orly Azolai wrote in mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (February 4): 
"Rice is arriving in Ramallah and Jerusalem as the 
level of expectations on both sides climbs to new 
heights.... Her primary mission is to allow Bush to 
turn into a president of peace.  The low ratings he 
earns among the American public prove how much he needs 
an impressive ceremony on the White House lawn.  Rice 
would very much like to grant him a gift -- a 
significant diplomatic achievement that is not painted 
with the colors of war.  Even his associates admit that 
he would very much like to enter history as a Nobel 
Peace Prizewinner." 
 
 
III.  "The Peacemongers Are Back" 
 
Extreme right-wing columnist Caroline B. Glick wrote in 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post (February 4): 
"American supporters of both Bush and Israel are now 
backing Sharon's plan to withdraw from Gaza and 
northern Samaria [i.e. the northernmost part of the 
West Bank], claiming the world has changed since 
Oslo.... What they don't seem to remember is that the 
world had also changed after the fall of the Soviet 
Union and the 1991 Gulf War.  Then, as now, there was 
an expectation that the Arabs would be forced to change 
the way they treated Israel and America.  Then, as now, 
the reactionary forces in the region were saved by one 
thing -- the peace process with Israel.... So, here we 
are again, at the dawn of a new peace process which 
will bring no peace; will legitimize terrorists and the 
authoritarian regimes that support them; will weaken 
Israel's democratic institutions while endangering its 
citizenry; and will engender scorn for America and 
faith in Israel's eventual destruction in the hearts of 
millions of people who today waver between support for 
freedom and support for terror." 
 
--------- 
¶2.  Iraq: 
--------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Editor-in-Chief David Horovitz wrote in conservative, 
independent Jerusalem Post: "Trouble is that none of 
these forthcoming ostensible steps toward democracy 
will genuinely enable the citizens of such countries 
[Saudi Arabia, Lebanon, and Egypt] to fully determine 
who governs them and how." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Inspiration From Iraq" 
 
Editor-in-Chief David Horovitz wrote in conservative, 
independent Jerusalem Post (February 4): "What a blow 
those millions of resolute Iraqi citizens struck on 
Sunday against terrorism.  What a confounding of the 
doomsayers' bleak expectations.   And what a challenge 
to our region's Arab dictatorships.  In what might be 
ascribed to a rash of regional euphoria, I've read 
article this week rather fancifully placing the Iraqi 
vote in a wider Middle Eastern context, as a purported 
mere second among many indications of burgeoning 
democracy in the Arab world, the first having been the 
January 9 vote that confirmed Mahmoud Abbas as Arafat's 
successor.... The trouble is that none of these 
forthcoming ostensible steps toward democracy will 
genuinely enable the citizens of such countries [Saudi 
Arabia, Lebanon, and Egypt] to fully determine who 
governs them and how." 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
¶3.  President Bush State of the Union Address: 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Washington correspondent Nathan Guttman wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "The elections in 
Iraq, at which Bush pointed [in the State of the Union 
address] ... serve the President as evidence of the 
rightness of his international policy." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"What the Iraqi Elections Allow Bush To Do" 
 
Washington correspondent Nathan Guttman wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (February 4): "The 
elections in Iraq, at which Bush pointed [in the State 
of the Union address], as well as to democratic moves 
in the Palestinian Authority, Afghanistan and Ukraine, 
serve the President as evidence of the rightness of his 
international policy.  They have also given him the 
political resource that allows him to point, for the 
first time, an accusing finger at Egypt and Saudi 
Arabia -- among the most important U.S. allies in the 
Middle East, and to demand that they do something in 
the field of democracy." 
 
KURTZER