05TELAVIV6186
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Wed Oct 26 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

260837Z Oct 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 TEL AVIV 006186 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
USCINCCENT MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
All media stories follow the Qassam attacks from Gaza 
and the IDF's retaliation over the past two days. The 
Qassam fire came following the killing of Luai Saadi, 
the commander of Islamic Jihad's armed wing in the West 
Bank on Sunday.  Saadi was responsible for two suicide 
bombing attacks in Natanya and Tel Aviv this year, 
causing the death of 1- Israelis.  Islamic Jihad 
spokesman responded with threats of "painful revenge" 
of Saadi's death.  A total of six rockets were fired 
from northern Gaza strip into Israel, causing neither 
casualties nor damage.  The last of these rockets was 
fired last night. 
 
All media reported on President Bush's speech at U.S. 
Air Force Base, accusing Syria of enabling terror and 
radical Islam. 
 
Leading media intensively covered Secretary Rice's 
remarks in a joint press availability with the Canadian 
Foreign minister, on issues involving crossing between 
Israel and the PA, and the freedom of movement with in 
the West bank, which would facilitate the economic 
programs initiated by the Wolfensohn plan and the G-8. 
 
Ha'aretz and other media reported that an Israeli 
aircraft fired at least one missile at an open field in 
the northern Gaza Strip early Wednesday, about two 
hours after Palestinian militants launched a homemade 
rocket into the Negev town of Sderot, but caused no 
damage or injury.  The air strikes, which landed in the 
Beit Hanun area, caused no injuries nor damage, Israel 
Radio reported.  An IDF source said the strikes were 
"warning shots" into an open area from where Qassam 
rockets were launched in an effort to prevent further 
attacks.  The PA said Tuesday it had deployed troops to 
areas in northern Gaza to stop rocket fire into Israel. 
Unnamed Israeli officials are cited as pointing a 
finger at Damascus, blaming Syria for encouraging 
Palestinian attacks. 
 
IDF troops arrested three wanted Tanzim and Islamic 
Jihad militants in the West Bank before dawn Wednesday, 
IDF Radio reported. 
 
 
Ha'aretz carries an extensive interview with Dr. 
Mahmoud al-Zahar, HAMAS leader in the Gaza Strip, who 
says his organization "will increase the number of 
kidnappings of Israelis if Israel does not release 
Palestinian prisoners." He added that the group will 
not extend its participation in a cease-fire among 
Palestinian organizations beyond the end of 2005, if 
the PA reneges on its promise to hold elections in 
January.  Al-Zahar stated that the present cease-fire 
is not a change of position, noting that though "there 
is Palestinian consensus regarding the 1967 borders and 
some people think this is a strategic alternative and 
the end of the story, Hamas regards these borders only 
as a stage in the struggle." 
 
Ma'ariv and other media report that Defense Minister 
Mofaz is leaving this morning for Egypt, where he will 
meet with President Mubarak and other officials.  While 
there, Mofaz will raise issues such as security 
arrangements along the border and attempts to prevent 
HAMAS from taking part in PA elections.  Having settled 
differences between them, Mofaz and Shim'on Peres 
devided responsibility over the Gaza crossings so that 
the defense establishment is in charge of the land 
crossings from the Gaza Strip to Israel and Egypt, 
while Peres' office will be in charge of the Gaza-West 
Bank transportation project, the seaport, and regional 
development. 
 
 
In a related story, Kol israel and Ha'aretz Internet 
edition reported that ahead of the visit, MK Yuval 
Steinitz (Likud), chairman of the Knesset Foreign 
Affairs and Defense Committee, called on Defense 
Minister Shaul Mofaz on Wednesday to tell the Egyptians 
that Cairo was not meeting its obligation to keep 
Palestinians from smuggling weapons into the Gaza 
Strip.  "Egypt is, in effect, assisting the 
strengthening of Hamas, not just regarding Israel," 
said Steinitz. 
 
 
Ha'aretz reports that U.S. Secretary of State 
Condoleezza Rice suggested Tuesday that Israel must 
loosen controls at border crossings to allow free 
passage for Palestinians and economic development in 
areas that would one day be an independent Palestinian 
state.  She did not specifically call on Israel to 
change its border policies, but did not dispute the 
findings of envoy James Wolfensohn that Israel was 
stalling in the restoration of movement across the 
borders. 
 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Israel is worried about possible 
new Russia-Syria arms deals.   Israel has expressed 
concern over Russia's intention to sign new arms deals 
with Syria, following the already completed deal to 
provide Syria with SA-18 anti-aircraft missiles. 
Foreign Minister Silvan Shalom, who is scheduled to 
meet Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov on 
Wednesday in Israel, will tell him of Israel's 
objection to the sale of more weapons to Syria, a 
political source in Jerusalem said Tuesday.  He added 
that Syria was undermining the stability in the area. 
"We believe sanctions should be imposed on any state 
that supports terror," he said.  Israel welcomes 
pressure on Syria, which may change its conduct and 
even lead to the closure of Hamas and Islamic Jihad 
headquarters in Damascus.  However, Israel's leadership 
is at odds over whether Syrian President Bashar Assad's 
continued rule would serve Israel's interest or whether 
Israel should strive to topple his regime, Ha'aretz 
said. 
 
 
Ha'aretz said James Wolfensohn, the Quartet's special 
envoy for the disengagement, has criticized Israel for 
holding up agreements on opening Gaza Strip border 
crossings to the passage of people and goods and on 
improving Palestinian mobility in the West Bank.  In a 
letter sent last week to United Nations Secretary 
General Kofi Annan and the foreign ministries of 
Britain, Russia and the United States, Wolfensohn 
wrote: "The Government of Israel, with its important 
security concerns, is loath to relinquish control, 
almost acting as though there has been no withdrawal, 
delaying making difficult decisions and preferring to 
take difficult matters back into slow-moving 
subcommittees." The letter, a copy of which was 
obtained by Ha'aretz, indicated that Israel is 
preventing the implementation of a proposal by 
Wolfensohn and the World Bank to introduce a temporary 
system for allowing people and goods to move between 
Gaza and the West Bank in convoys. 
The letter also criticized the Palestinian Authority - 
for worsening the economic crisis by deciding on a 
salary hike in the public sector, for the internal 
anarchy and the decline in the PA's functioning. He 
warned that these factors, combined with the lack of 
Palestinian mobility, will take a toll on donor 
countries' willingness to honor their pledges.  Sources 
in Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's bureau said in 
response that Wolfensohn's letter would be studied 
after the Sukkot holiday. Other government officials 
said that the letter points to poor functioning by the 
defense establishment in conducting negotiations with 
the Quartet envoy.  "It's nothing to get worked up 
about," a senior defense official said. 
 
 
Ma'ariv reported that two Israeli Arabs have been 
arrested on suspicion of joining Hamas in the 1990s, 
while they were studying dentistry in Romania, and then 
carrying out assignments for the armed group, the 
police and the Shin Bet security service said 
yesterday.  The two, who were arrested about a month 
ago by the Shin Bet and the Central Unit of the Galilee 
Police, are said to have confessed to Hamas 
involvement. 
 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that lawyers representing 
Steve Rosen and Keith Weissman, the two former American 
Israel Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC) staffers 
accused of communicating classified information, wish 
to call to the stand three Israeli diplomats that 
received information from the defendants as well as 
from the third defendant in the case, Pentagon analyst 
Larry Franklin.  All three Israelis mentioned in the 
Rosen-Weissman indictment are no longer in Washington 
and all have diplomatic immunity, which prevents them 
from being subpoenaed by either side in the case. 
 
All media report on Microsoft CEO Bill Gates 24-hour 
visit to Israel.  Gates was quoted as praising in his 
media interviews the local high-tech community for its 
achievements and talents, calling Israel part of 
Silicon Valley in the U.s. 
 
Ha'aretz and Israel Radio noted that the Defense 
Ministry's travel advisory against the Sinai peninsula 
is still in effect. 
 
 
------------- 
Mideast 
------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: 
".Wolfensohn's letter took a dramatic tone, intended to 
wake the decision-makers from their apathy..  Arrogant 
responses" by the Prime Minister's Office and the 
Defense Ministry "do not evince an overabundance of 
diplomatic wisdom.  When it comes to the relationship 
of Israel with the Palestinians, Israel's primary 
interest is a significant improvement in the standard 
of living of the Palestinians in Gaza and the West 
Bank." 
 
Right-leaning Jerusalem Post editorialized:  "The 
United States is calling for urgent UN Security Council 
action following a UN report implicating senior Syrian 
officials in the assassination of former Lebanese prime 
minister Rafik Hariri on February 14.  That such action 
is warranted should go without saying...This time, we 
hope, Damascus may have taken its 'misunderestimation' 
of the international community one step too far." 
 
Pluralist Yedi'ot Aharonot carries a commentary by 
military correspondent Alex Fishman who, referring to 
the most recent Qassam rockets fired into Israel and 
the IDF's use of a "psychological package" in 
retaliation," says that "in the absence of a political 
lever and the lack of an effective, long-term military 
solution, the political-security leadership think hard 
to find a way out of the trap that the Gaza terror is 
leading us to once more." 
 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                    --------------- 
 
¶I.  "Lift the siege of Gaza" 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: 
".Wolfensohn's letter took a dramatic tone, intended to 
wake the decision-makers from their apathy, warning 
that 'if we miss this opportunity for change, we will 
regret it for the next decade.'  The Prime Minister's 
Office responded that the letter 'would be studied 
after Sukkot,' while the Defense Ministry said there 
was 'no need to get excited.'  These arrogant reponses 
do not evince an overabundance of diplomatic wisdom. 
When it comes to the relationship of Israel with the 
Palestinians, Israel's primary interest is a 
significant improvement in the standard of living of 
the Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank. 
If Wolfensohn's letter prompted Shaul Mofaz and Shimon 
Peres to divide up their responsibilities in this 
matter, it will have served a purpose.  The Sharon 
government might mistakenly think that fences, targeted 
killings and shootings are a recipe for calm.  It might 
also be tempted to think that cutting off Gaza from the 
West Bank is possible.  However, the Qassams fired at 
Sderot in response to the killing of the Islamic Jihad 
activist in Tul Karm shows that the Palestinians in the 
West Bank and Gaza are one entity.  If normalcy is 
desired with this entity, the basic conditions must be 
created for economic recovery that will strengthen the 
moderates and make terror less popular.  The task of 
disengagement from Gaza has not been completed, let 
alone been successful.  Only half the work has been 
done so far.  Lifting the economic embargo from Gaza is 
a necessary precondition to this success." 
 
 
 
II.  "Catching Rogues" 
 
Right-leaning Jerusalem Post editorialized:  "The 
United States is calling for urgent UN Security Council 
action following a UN report implicating senior Syrian 
officials in the assassination of former Lebanese prime 
minister Rafik Hariri on February 14.  That such action 
is warranted should go without saying.  It is critical 
that this become just the first step on a long road 
toward holding rogue states accountable for egregious 
acts of international aggression.. The United States 
and Israel know full well that Iran and Syria have for 
years either supported or directly organized terror 
attacks and bombings against the military personnel of 
both countries.  The level of evidence implicating 
these regimes in such barbaric acts must, in some 
instances, be no less than that implicating the Syrian 
regime in the Hariri case.  Yet the United States, let 
alone Israel, has never - except in the Lockerbie case 
against Libya - bothered taking these regimes to court, 
so to speak, in the Security Council.  We and the 
United States have never bothered because we knew that 
the forum that was created to protect innocent nations 
against international aggression instead could be 
counted on to protect the aggressors themselves.  The 
critical question now is whether this situation is 
finally changing..  Syrian protestations regarding 
flimsy evidence and the presumption of innocence are, 
of course, risible coming from a brutal police state 
whose idea of justice has infamously included carpet- 
bombing its own citizens.  Yet the fact that the regime 
would even attempt such a defense shows that it still 
believes that there are no limits to Western 
gullibility and weakness.  This time, we hope, Damascus 
may have taken its "misunderestimation" of the 
international community one step too far." 
 
III.  "Qassams on Damascus' Orders" 
 
Writing in pluralist Yedi'ot Aharonot, Military 
correspondent Alex Fishman states that the order to 
fire Kassam rockets at Israel came from Islamic Jihad 
headquarters  in Damascus.  From the moment top Islamic 
Jihad wanted man in the West Bank Luai Saadi was 
assassinated, the Damascus headquarters put heavy 
pressure on its activists on the ground to step up the 
mortar shell fire and Kassam rocket fire at any price 
and within a short time.  The administration in 
Damascus could not even pretend it had no idea what was 
going on under its nose, after Israel relayed to the 
Syrians-by means of various channels-a message that 
this was exactly what was about to happen.  Neither 
does the Palestinian Authority take us seriously. A few 
hours before the fire two days ago, Israel informed the 
PA that Kassam rockets were about to be fired. PA 
officials were asked to take a number of steps to 
prevent the fire. The Palestinian security 
organizations did not even bother to pretend they were 
doing something...What we learned from the last round 
of shooting in the Gaza Strip is that in fact, there 
are no means of putting effective pressure on terror. 
Israel was unable to create a situation in which it is 
"worth it" for persecuted Damascus and for the PA to 
become the address to which Israel appeals to prevent 
terror.  And the second lesson: once again the 
limitations of Israel's force have been revealed. When 
there are no real targets-we make a lot of noise. This 
is exactly what happened: helicopters hit two 
buildings, eight artillery shells fell in the northern 
Gaza Strip, the Navy fired flares from the sea, and the 
Air Force caused five sonic booms over the Gaza Strip. 
This psychological package can work once, twice, three 
times. After that the population gets used to it. 
Without diplomatic leverage, and without an effective 
military response over time, the security-police 
echelon must sit down and figure out what to do: how to 
get out of the trap to which terror from Gaza Strip is 
again leading us. 
JONES