05TEGUCIGALPA887
MEDIA REACTION REMOVAL OF ECUADOREAN PRESIDENT,
Tue Apr 26 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tegucigalpa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

262122Z Apr 05UNCLAS TEGUCIGALPA 000887 
 
SIPDIS 
 
INFO WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE 
EMBASSY QUITO 
 
STATE FOR WHA/PD, WHA/AND, AND WHA/CEN 
STATE FOR DRL/PHD, INR, AND IIP/G/WHA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OIIP KPAO PHUM PREL KDEM EC HO
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REMOVAL OF ECUADOREAN PRESIDENT, 
APRIL 25, 2005 
 
 
¶1. On 4/22 an editorial in Tegucigalpa-based moderate daily 
"El Heraldo", titled "Ecuadorian Lesson." "The fall of Lucio 
Gutierrez in Ecuador is another example that many Latin 
Americans are not willing to respect presidential terms if 
the governors are incapable to fulfill their promises and 
act as if they hold a blank authorization to do as they 
please. 
 
To maintain control of the country, he dismissed Supreme 
Court judges who weren't obedient.  But on May 31 that same 
Court dropped the corruption charges of two former 
presidents and a vice president. 
 
To avoid more violence, Congress decided to fire Gutierrez 
and swear in Alfredo Palacio, who hopefully will end his 
governance January 2007.  Towards this example, our 
politicians should `learn from other peoples mistakes'." 
 
The San Pedro Sula-based liberal paper "Tiempo" carried an 
editorial entitled "Coup d'etat."  "With the presidency of 
Alfredo Palacio, it has been formally resolved 
constitutional succession, even though it will not guarantee 
the end of the political crisis in that country. 
 
In reality, it seems that we are developing new ways of 
`coup d'etats,' saving the constitutional appearance, and 
giving an illusion of democratic evolution.  If we look back 
we will see that the lack of governance phenomenon will lead 
us to different kinds of `coups'." 
 
Editorial in San Pedro Sula-based liberal daily "La Prensa" 
entitled, "In coma."  "Ecuador came out of a political 
tornado, spinning out the president Lucio Gutierrez, who 
received protection from the Brazilian government, after his 
frustrated attempt to abandon the country. 
 
The demonstrations haven't stopped.  The popular demand 
synthesizes in the phrase: `Out to all.'  The question of 
the moment is how long will President Palacio last? 
 
Due to its president's profession, Ecuador was qualified as 
a country `in coma' attended by a `head doctor.' 
 
The OAS has delayed its reaction that no doubt will demand 
institutional normality, internal stabilization and 
recovering of social peace and honesty in the administration 
of the public resources. 
 
¶2. On 4/25, the Tegucigalpa-based liberal daily "La Tribuna" 
published an editorial entitled "Stepping on a government:" 
"Ecuador, wins an Oscar because no one can finish a full 
term, and Cuba, a star in long-film acting, for lasting 
longer than any of the popes. 
 
The last word to determine who stays and who leaves is the 
army.  The army ends up allying with the forces that plot 
against the government and justify it as a constitutional 
ouster,' the new formula that substitutes `coup d'etats.' 
 
That is the way to step on a government, with constitutional 
ousters." 
 
Op-ed in "El Heraldo" by Roberto Valladares, titled 
"Corruption and Popular reaction in Ecuador."  "The recent 
events in Ecuador should be a motive for worry by corrupt 
governors in Latin America. 
 
Honduras is like other countries where corruption exists, 
our corruptors should `learn from other peoples mistakes', 
if they want to avoid what happened in Ecuador." 
 
Pierce