05WARSAW3627
POLISH MFA STATEMENT ON IRAQ REFERENDUM
Tue Oct 18 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Warsaw
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WARSAW 003627 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KDEM IZ PL
SUBJECT: POLISH MFA STATEMENT ON IRAQ REFERENDUM 
 
REF: STATE 189909 
 
¶1. In response to reftel demarche, the Polish MFA released 
October 18 the following public statement in support of the 
Iraqi constitutional referendum. 
 
¶2. Begin text of embassy translation of statement. 
 
"Poland has welcomed a nationwide referendum on the new 
constitution that was conducted on October 15, 2005 in Iraq 
in cooperation with the United Nations.  This fact is another 
important step in the process of rebuilding Iraqi statehood. 
It is proof that democracy in Iraq is being strengthened and 
that Iraqis themselves are taking over responsibility for 
their country.  Thanks to the referendum, a key point on the 
political calendar foreseen by the provisions of UN Security 
Council Resolution 1546 has been carried out. It strengthens 
our conviction that the date of parliamentary elections set 
for December 15 this year and the date of the appointment of 
a new constitutional government in Iraq will be kept. 
 
"A compromise on the main assumptions of the constitution 
that was reached just before the date of the vote confirmed 
the will to reach agreement among major political and 
ethnic-religious powers in Iraq.  With particular 
satisfaction we have welcomed a high turnout in the 
referendum, also on the part of the Sunni community.  It will 
make it possible for this community's representatives to 
participate in the political process more broadly. 
 
"Poland is following the course of changes in Iraq with 
attention, directly participating in international efforts to 
stabilize and reconstruct this country.  We deeply believe 
that the ensuring of security and a full normalization of 
Iraq are only the matter of time.  We declare our will to 
further support the Iraqi government and nation in their 
effort to build a democratic and united state.  We will also 
continue actions to develop and strengthen a partnership 
cooperation between our two countries based on a plan of 
rebuilding the bilateral relations that was initiated during 
the government delegation's visit to Iraq in July this year." 
 
¶3. End text of statement. 
ASHE