05WARSAW4079
PIS MAKES PLAY FOR PUBLIC MEDIA
Tue Dec 20 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Warsaw
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WARSAW 004079 
 
SIPDIS 
 
EUR FOR ACE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS KPAO PGOV PREL PL
SUBJECT: PIS MAKES PLAY FOR PUBLIC MEDIA 
 
REF: WARSAW 3720 
 
SUMMARY 
--------- 
 
¶1. (U) On December 16th Law and Justice (PIS) moved to change 
the National Broadcasting law and effectively seize political 
and, consequently, editorial control of Polish Public 
Television (TVP) and Radio (PR).  The amendment was 
fast-tracked through Parliament (same day reading and voting 
with no discussion) by PIS with support from LPR (League of 
Polish Families) and Samoobrona (Self-Defense).  The amended 
law will reduce the National Broadcasting Council (NBC) from 
nine to five members. Members will be appointed thusly: two 
from the presidency (PIS's Lech Kaczynski), two from the 
Parliament (likely from the unofficial PIS, LPR, Samoobrona 
coalition), and one from the Senate (PIS majority).  This 
will provide PIS with a clear three member majority on the 
five member council with two members likely representing the 
interests of coalition minority members LPR and Samoobrona. 
PIS spokesmen argue that the move is strictly "economical" 
and aimed at streamlining bureaucracy while current NBC 
member Lech Jaworski said that the changes represent 
"domination replaced by monopolization." 
 
Structural Changes 
------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Each public media outlet in Poland is governed by a 
Board of Directors nominated by Supervisory Boards.  The 
Supervisory Boards are nominated by the National Broadcasting 
Council.  The NBC is hence the source for all appointments in 
the public media sphere and wields enormous influence.  The 
original (1990) broadcasting law created a shelter to prevent 
media manipulation on the premise that no one party would 
control all of the bodies that nominate to the NBC; i.e. the 
Presidency, the Parliament, and the Senate.  With its 
decisive victories in the parliamentary and presidential 
elections, PIS has control of all three bodies, and thus is 
in exactly that position.  TVP channel 1 (the most watched 
news in Poland) news director Robert Kozak, formerly BBC 
Program Director for Poland, noted with skepticism that "this 
could provide the opportunity for Poland to move towards the 
British system of apolitical, technocratic appointments 
outside of political pressure" but that "we are a long way 
from that practice in our nascent democracy." 
 
Political Reality 
----------------- 
 
¶3.  (U) TVP 1 Current Affairs Director Andrzej Godlewski said 
that he was certain "our chairman will go."  He casually 
mentioned that his current slate of tasks had a heavy 
emphasis on Belarusian programming of "a political nature" 
which may suggest that upper managers at TVP can feel the 
political winds changing and want to adjust accordingly.  Per 
reftel Post has observed that PIS was not happy with the 
election coverage of state public media, and since assuming 
office the new government notably has chosen the 
ultra-conservative, Catholic Radio Maryja (recently 
exceptionally granted license renewal without application) as 
its medium of choice for important policy announcements. 
Educated observers feel that this move is a concerted effort 
by the "conservative coalition" to push what they feel is an 
overtly liberal public media back in line with Poland's moral 
character. 
 
Two Steps Forward... 
-------------------- 
 
¶4. (U)  Comment:  For the competitive professionals at TVP 
this change could signal taps.  TVP has undergone rapid 
change to remain competitive with private, cutting-edge 
broadcasting firms TVN and Polsat.  Despite still holding 
over 50% of the broadcast market TVP is losing the race for 
the next generation with over 75% of youth aged 18-30 tuning 
in to TVN and Polsat.  As Godlewski noted in reftel, this 
"politicization" of TVP may hasten its demise even faster...a 
"PBS styled" state channel focusing on nationalistic 
programming of Polish heritage and culture, with 
pro-government directors chosen by the Kaczynskis setting the 
tone. 
 
 
HILLAS