05WELLINGTON618
NEW ZEALAND POSITION AT CODEX AD HOC TASK FORCE
Mon Aug 15 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WELLINGTON 000618 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/ANP/RICCI AND EB/BOBO 
USDA FOR FAS/ITP/CLAUS AND MIRELES, FAS/BIG/WILLIAMS, AND 
FAS/FAA/YOUNG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD TBIO EAGR ECON NZ
SUBJECT: NEW ZEALAND POSITION AT CODEX AD HOC TASK FORCE 
ON BIOTECHNOLOGOY 
 
REF:  SECSTATE 147159 
 
¶1. Summary: New Zealand will participate in the fifth 
Session of the Codex Ad-Hoc Intergovernmental Task Force 
on Foods Derived from Biotechnology (Task Force) in 
Chiba, Japan September 19-23, 2005.  New Zealand will be 
generally supportive of U.S. positions.  New Zealand 
agrees with the United States that the Task Force should 
focus on the development of international science-based 
guidance for foods derived from modern biotechnology that 
is relevant to the health of consumers and the promotion 
of fair practices in the food trade.  New Zealand further 
agrees with the United States that the work of the Task 
Force should not include safety assessments of crops 
developed as non-food products and that issues such as 
labeling and the environment should be excluded from its 
scope of work.  New Zealand will place a priority on work 
related to transgenic animals.  It recognizes the 
importance of the U.S. work proposals shared per reftel 
and looks forward to considering U.S. priorities as well 
as those submitted by other Codex members.  End Summary 
 
¶2.  The New Zealand delegation to the Chiba meeting will 
include Dr. Graeme King, Manager Innovation Policy, 
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, and Dr. Paul 
Dansted, Principal Adviser (chemicals), New Zealand Food 
Safety Authority. 
 
¶3.  New Zealand will propose work on transgenic animals 
(including fish) as its only priority work area for the 
Task Force.  New Zealand finds acceptable the U.S. 
suggestion that work proceeding in this area follow a 
step-wise approach.  This approach would be based on 
available science and capability to develop an 
appropriate international guidance text, with clear 
decision points on proceeding with additional work.  New 
Zealand agrees with the U.S. view that work by the Task 
Force on such a project should first identify elements of 
the existing Guidelines that are relevant to food from 
recombinant-DNA animals.  This would be followed by the 
identification of additional concepts that are relevant 
to the safety assessment of foods derived from 
recombinant-DNA animals, and any topics that might 
require additional scientific input. 
 
¶4.  New Zealand seeks additional clarification on the 
U.S. work proposal related to food safety issues specific 
to staple food crops for developing countries.  New 
Zealand appreciates the importance of including in the 
Task Force's work agenda issues of importance to 
developing countries and requests information regarding 
specific crops to be considered. 
 
¶5.  New Zealand recognizes the importance to the United 
States of including work related to low-level presence in 
food of plant material derived from recombinant-DNA 
plants.  It is, however, not a priority work area for New 
Zealand.  New Zealand anticipates receiving additional 
documentation being prepared by the United States on its 
proposal and will give it careful consideration. 
 
¶6.  New Zealand concurs with the U.S. assessment that the 
consideration of work by the Task Force related to animal 
clones is not appropriate.  Work related to plants 
expressing bioactive substances or nutritionally enhanced 
plants is not a priority for New Zealand.  New Zealand 
generally supports U.S. views regarding this subject as 
conveyed in reftel, but is willing to consider positions 
and work priorities in this area promoted by other 
countries.  New Zealand generally agrees with the U.S. 
position regarding work on plants with stacked genes, but 
again will carefully consider positions of other 
countries regarding this potential work area.  New 
Zealand shares the U.S. view that work proposals related 
to biopharming/plants expressing pharmaceutical or other 
non-food substances do not fall within the mandate of the 
Task Force. 
BURNETT