05WELLINGTON837
FORMER NEW ZEALAND IV TO LEAD US - NZ BUSINESS
Wed Oct 26 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WELLINGTON 000837 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR ECA/PE/V/G/F- TBLATT, JHATHAWAY 
INFO ECA/PE/V/C/N; EAP/PD-AGRIMES, EAP/ANP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OEXC SCUL KPAO NZ
SUBJECT: FORMER NEW ZEALAND IV TO LEAD US - NZ BUSINESS 
RELATIONS COUNCIL. 
 
¶1. Former participant on the IVLP program Mr. Stephen Jacobi 
(grantee from June 2003) has been appointed Executive 
Director of the New Zealand United States Council.  The 
Council is an influential lobby group that enjoys the ear of 
NZ officals.  Within days of his appointment, Jacobi wrote a 
newspaper piece calling on the Government to strengthen ties 
to the United States. 
 
¶2. In 2002, Mr. Jacobi was identified by the Political 
Economic Section of US Embassy Wellington and nominated for 
the program as a future leader in US-NZ business relations. 
This has proved to be an excellent nomination. 
 
¶3. A NZ US Council press release states: "The New Zealand 
United States Council is a non-partisan body funded by both 
business and government to promote New Zealand's 
relationship with the United States.  Stephen Jacobi, a 
member of the Council's Advisory Board since 2002, was 
formerly Chief Executive of the New Zealand Forest 
Industries Council. "When it comes to securing New Zealand's 
future, the United States is an indispensable nation and 
this is clearly recognized by the major political parties as 
well as the business community" said Rt. Hon. Jim Bolger, 
Council Chairman, "the Council is determined to see the 
already significant relationship further developed and we 
are delighted to have attracted someone of Stephen Jacobi's 
caliber and reputation to help us achieve this". 
 
¶4. On 25 October 2005 Stephen Jacobi wrote a column in the 
business section of the Dominion Post newspaper (the 
Wellington daily which has the second largest circulation 
and the most political coverage) in which he outlines the 
aims and objectives of the NZ US Council and the future 
prospects for closer economic and trade relations. A full 
transcript of the piece can be found at: 
http://www.stuff.co.nz/stuff/0,2106,3454580a1 865,00.html 
 
¶5.  In his column, Jacobi reminds readers of the firm and 
positive relationship between New Zealand and the United 
States, ".there's no getting past the fact that New Zealand 
has a key interest in the strongest possible relationship 
with the United States" and, that the NZ US Council was, 
"prepared to stand up for the importance of a strong 
relationship between the two countries". Regarding a free 
trade agreement, he says, "Whether or not an FTA can be 
achieved, New Zealand's best interests in the US remains. 
Now that the new (NZ) government has been finalized, the 
council stands ready to work for a relationship that 
reflects New Zealand's values and interests, and contributes 
to our broader economic goals". 
 
¶5. Post has enjoyed a positive relationship with Mr. Jacobi 
since his return from the IV Program.  We will continue to 
work constructively with him in his new role. 
 
BURNETT