05WELLINGTON157
REQUEST FROM AMBASSADOR SWINDELLS FOR INTERAGENCY
Tue Feb 22 00:00:00 +0100 2005
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 04 WELLINGTON 000157 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
FOR EAP/FO SCHRIVER; EAP/ANP KRAWITZ, ALLEGRA AND RAMSEY 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/22/2015 
TAGS: PREL PGOV NZ
SUBJECT: REQUEST FROM AMBASSADOR SWINDELLS FOR INTERAGENCY 
REVIEW 
 
REF: WELLINGTON 56 (NODIS) 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR CHARLES J. SWINDELLS, 
FOR REASONS 1.4 (B) AND (D). 
 
¶1.  (S/NOFORN) After the horrific earthquake and tsunami in 
our region, there are far weightier U.S. foreign policy issues 
to manage in Asia than our relationship with New Zealand. 
But 
I am writing to request that U.S. Government agencies 
nevertheless conduct a quick review of our policies here, 
specifically with regards to New Zealand's anti-nuclear 
legislation.  Conducting a review at this time could pay off, 
as I believe that this country's upcoming elections and its 
desire for a Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with the United 
States 
make 2005 the best opportunity we have had in twenty years to 
convince New Zealand to reconsider its ban on 
nuclear-propelled 
vessels.  At the very least, a review would develop a clear, 
comprehensive, and consistent message to set the stage for 
the 
next four years of the Administration as well as the new 
Government of New Zealand. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
A review should examine what we want from the relationship 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶2.  (S/NOFORN) The nuclear ban has since its inception 
colored 
and limited our relationship with New Zealand.  Over time, 
the 
United States has lifted some of its limits on bilateral 
military and intelligence cooperation we imposed after the 
ban was implemented in 1984. Our sense is that we have gone 
as far as we can go on our own.  A review should determine, 
first and foremost, whether we should accept this status quo, 
and if so, whether we should broaden the relationship in 
other 
ways or make it clear to New Zealand that no deepening of 
ties are possible if the ban remains in place.   And we must 
decide how best to convey our message. 
 
¶3.  (S/NOFORN) As of now, New Zealand officials effectively 
determine the issues for discussion in our bilateral 
relationship.  An example is their aggressive "forum 
shopping" 
among USG agencies and Congress to press for a US-New Zealand 
FTA.  At the same time, these officials argue that the 
nuclear 
issue is too sensitive even to discuss; that as the world's 
only superpower we should just get over it and stop 
"bullying" 
this small country.  The past is the past, they say.  The 
problem is, this is not about the past.  Were other countries 
to adopt policies similar to New Zealand's and forbid our 
nuclear-powered ships to enter their ports, our efforts to 
create a more mobile military would be seriously impaired 
in Asia and beyond. 
 
¶4.  (S/NOFORN) Other red herring arguments that New Zealand 
officials use to keep the nuclear issue off the table can be 
similarly rebutted.  For example, when I recently raised the 
ban with Foreign Minister Goff, he argued that the New 
Zealand 
government is unable to revisit its nuclear policy because 
the 
public "will know we are only doing it because you asked us 
to." This message makes painfully clear that the government 
does not consider a U.S. request in itself a reason for 
taking 
action, a stance that both springs from and feeds into 
deepening anti-Americanism here. 
 
¶5.  (S/NOFORN) A Foreign Ministry staffer later clarified 
that Mr. Goff really meant that the public would oppose any 
"bullying" from the United States on this issue.  Those of us 
familiar with New Zealand know that in this context "to 
bully" 
means "to publicly call for."  But if the government has 
already said publicly and privately it will not conduct any 
review of the ban, what alternative remains for us if not an 
overt call for them to reconsider? 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
A review should examine the cost to us and others of 
New Zealand's Nuclear Ban and its declining 
willingness/ability to work with us 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
¶6.  (S/NOFORN) Other countries in the region, notably Japan 
and Australia, have invested considerable political capital 
in their alliance with the United States and do not bar our 
nuclear-powered vessels despite formal anti-nuclear policies 
and significant domestic opposition.  We should not reward 
our Kiwi friends at the cost of undercutting these important 
allies.   They and others in the region -- even tiny Fiji -- 
also contribute far more to support our military capabilities 
around the world than does New Zealand. 
 
¶7.  (S/NOFORN) New Zealand's nuclear ban is concurrent with a 
20-year failure to invest adequately in its military 
infrastructure.  In just the latest example, both of the 
New Zealand Air Force C-130 aircraft that the government 
generously sent to help carry aid and personnel to tsunami 
victims broke down and were forced to undergo repairs before 
resuming operations.  While New Zealand officials point 
proudly 
to the large numbers of peacekeeping and other operations in 
which their military participate, in most cases these 
deployments consist of one or two liaison officers. 
New Zealand benefits from our deterrence as much as do 
others in the region, yet has been unwilling to be anything 
approaching a true partner in the effort. 
 
¶8.  (S/NOFORN) In fact, the policies that have caused 
New Zealand to avoid pulling its weight internationally 
reflect ideological drift and lack of vision.  The government 
articulates no clear definition of non-economic foreign 
policy 
interests other than a stated commitment to international 
organizations and peacekeeping, especially in the region. 
Even on these stated interests, New Zealand's practical 
contributions often fall short of the mark. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
A review should examine whether and how to raise our desire 
for a review of the nuclear ban 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
 
¶9.  (S/NOFORN) I simply do not consider credible New Zealand 
officials' insistence that the public will not tolerate any 
discussion of a repeal of the ban.  It is true that if you 
asked them today, a majority of New Zealanders probably would 
oppose a reversal of the nuclear policy.  But I have found 
many senior citizens and younger Kiwis are actually open to 
the idea.  To the extent others are not, it is largely 
because 
the Government has for its own ideological and political 
reasons been unwilling to discuss the issue honestly. 
 
¶10.  (S/NOFORN) After U.S. aircraft carriers were called into 
assistance after the recent tsunami, readers' letters to a 
major local newspaper highlighted the fact that because of 
the country's nuclear ban similar U.S. assistance would not 
be possible here in the wake of a natural disaster.  These 
readers called for the ban to be lifted. 
 
¶11.  (S/NOFORN) In fact, there has been some preliminary 
debate about the ban here.  Two previous reviews -- one 
commissioned by the National Party-led Government in 1992 
and one by the National Party in early 1994 -- found there 
was no scientific basis on which to bar nuclear-powered 
vessels from New Zealand.  As Dr. Andrew McEwan, the 
country's 
foremost nuclear scientist has pointed out in a recent book, 
New Zealand's "nuclear free" status is something of a 
fiction, 
given that there are about 2500 importations of nuclear 
reactor-produced material into New Zealand each year for 
x-rays, radiation treatments, and other purposes.  (This 
does not include imports of things such as smoke detectors 
and certain watches that also contain radioactive materials.) 
 
 
¶12.  (S/NOFORN) Although the National Party has been the only 
party to examine seriously the possibility of ending the 
country's nuclear ban, in my view Labour is best placed to 
reverse the legislation.  When in power in the '90s, National 
failed to take any action on the ban, preferring not to spend 
political capital to do so.  As an opposition party, they can 
do even less.  At this time, polls continue to show Labour as 
the likely victor in the general election that will probably 
be held this September.  But the real reason we should urge 
the Labour government to reexamine the ban is that, as the 
original authors of the law, it is their party that would be 
most likely to win a public mandate to change it.  Many of 
the original players who created the ban in all its 
inflexible 
glory are in power today, including Prime Minister Clark. 
 
¶13.  (S/NOFORN) The Prime Minister has shown that she can 
push 
through highly sensitive pieces of legislation.  During my 
time in New Zealand, she has carried the day on laws as 
controversial as nationalization of the foreshore and seabed 
and a Civil Union Bill.  She has called for a review of the 
country's constitution that could profoundly alter New 
Zealand's relationship to the UK.  All these issues created 
heated debates and dominated the front pages, yet the 
government prevailed throughout.  In short, where this 
Prime Minister has the will, she finds the way.   In the 
case of the nuclear ban, she does not have the will because 
she does not think she needs to reopen this issue.  I have 
begun to include in my speeches a request that New Zealand 
reconsider its policy, and I will continue to do so.  But 
only a move by the government in this direction is likely 
to gain traction with the public. 
 
¶14.  (S/NOFORN) This election year may be the best time to 
convince New Zealand officials it is in their interest to 
reconsider the ban.  Significantly, the Prime Minister and 
her team have not hesitated to raise the nuclear issue 
themselves, when stating publicly in implicit election 
promises to local businesses that an FTA with the United 
States 
is inevitable and that New Zealand's bans on nuclear arms 
and propulsion simply don't matter to us anymore.  Indeed, 
PM Clark made this link at a recent speech to the pro-FTA 
U.S.-New Zealand Business Council.  In this election year, 
the Prime Minister and her cabinet doubtless also see a 
U.S.-New Zealand FTA as a valuable means to counter criticism 
from both the right and left that the government is 
negotiating 
FTAs primarily with developing countries (such as Thailand) 
and 
those who abuse human rights (notably China). 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
A review would enable us to consider what 
New Zealand does contribute, and how long 
even these small efforts can be sustained: 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶15.  (S/NOFORN) As noted, I have stressed both in public and 
in private to New Zealanders that the nuclear ban does still 
matter to us. But frankly, messages from Washington to 
New Zealand officials are not always consistent with this 
long-term view.  Policymakers have been understandably 
focused 
on soliciting New Zealand's cooperation in the war on 
terrorism, 
Iraq, World Trade Organization (WTO) talks, and other issues. 
 
While these are all obviously of the greatest importance, our 
failure to at the same time honestly tell New Zealand that 
the 
nuclear ban remains important to us has enabled New Zealand 
officials to claim that the issue is irrelevant in light of 
their other contributions.    Meanwhile, they continue to 
lobby heavily for an FTA, including through the New Zealand 
Caucus that will be launched in the U.S. House of 
Representatives next month. 
 
¶16.  (S/NOFORN) In their approaches to the Embassy, to 
Administration officials, and the Congress, New Zealand 
Government officials stress that because of their country's 
efforts in areas of interest to us, New Zealand should be 
considered for a trade agreement.  We are likely to soon hear 
 that New Zealand is to extend its contribution to Operation 
Enduring Freedom, for example.  We are of course grateful for 
all of New Zealand's contributions.  But in my view 
New Zealand has benefited already from its actions. 
For example, New Zealand's own interest in WTO talks is 
obvious, given the country's dependence on exports and its 
low domestic trade barriers.  Sending combat engineers to 
Iraq has enabled the giant New Zealand dairy exporter, 
Fonterra, 
to bid on lucrative Iraq-related contracts.  New Zealand and 
U.S. troops in Afghanistan can participate in joint training 
and exercises that we have not otherwise allowed since 
New Zealand pulled out of ANZUS. 
 
¶17.  (S/NOFORN) I don't mean to imply that New Zealand has 
participated in these efforts solely for its own gain.  But 
I believe that pushing them harder on the nuclear issue would 
have little impact on New Zealand's already limited 
willingness 
to engage with us around the globe.  The cost to us if 
New Zealand were to pull out from these efforts would be 
another thing an interagency review would need to consider. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
A review should examine what we could offer in return for a 
credible review/lifting of New Zealand's nuclear ban: 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
¶18.  (S/NOFORN) U.S. officials have strenuously avoided 
linking New Zealand's proposal for an FTA with our desire 
that the nuclear ban be ended.  And indeed, the two are 
linked only in the sense that if our countries are truly 
friends, New Zealand should not expect it can press hard 
for an FTA and prevent us from even mentioning the nuclear 
ban.  But in practical terms I have observed that our 
preferences for FTA partners are often made along a continuum 
of countries' economic and trade potential and our overall 
foreign policy interests.  Certainly, if there were 
significant economic benefits I would strongly support a 
U.S.-New Zealand FTA, and have told this to the government 
here.  An interagency review might consider whether it 
would make sense to conduct a feasibility study for an 
FTA if New Zealand removes its nuclear ban. 
 
¶19. (S/NOFORN) We could also have a review to determine 
what changes in language in the New Zealand legislation 
would be enough to satisfy our concerns, as well as what 
possible changes in our "neither confirm nor deny" policy 
we might be willing to consider were the ban lifted. 
The interagency group might also consider allowing a 
non-nuclear naval ship visit to New Zealand, for example 
to support our operations in Antarctica, if the government 
announces a formal review of its nuclear policy.  The 
Prime Minister has long encouraged such a visit, but we 
have rightfully resisted the invitation in light of the ban. 
 
¶20.  (S/NOFORN) We must be realistic.  Even if New Zealand 
lifted its nuclear ban, it will not return any time soon to 
being the ally it once was.  For example, political officials 
here fear a loss of popular support if New Zealand returned 
to ANZUS, and those at the senior levels worry about the 
budgetary and personnel requirements needed to rejoin the 
alliance.  But New Zealand's agreement to take a second 
look at its nuclear ban would at least open the door to 
exploring where both sides want the relationship to go. 
 
----------- 
Conclusion: 
----------- 
 
¶21.  (S/NOFORN) These are just some of my ideas of what an 
interagency review might accomplish, and what we should 
be aiming to do here in New Zealand.  I would very much 
like to come to Washington and discuss this idea further, 
ideally before the upcoming interagency review of the 
Administration's FTA negotiating agenda for the next four 
years.  Please let me know if my staff and I can provide 
any more information to you in the meantime. 
 
¶22.  (S/NOFORN) New Zealand may be small, but with a little 
bit of time and teamwork, I think we can steer the bilateral 
relationship in a direction that is more positive to U.S 
interests.   Now is the time to try. 
 
 
 
Swindells