05WELLINGTON309
NEW ZEALAND AND THE UN: NEW PERMREP BANKS LOOKS
Thu Apr 14 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 WELLINGTON 000309 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NP, IO/UNP AND EAP/ANZ 
GENEVA FOR AMBASSADOR SANDERS 
NSC FOR VICTOR CHA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/14/2015 
TAGS: PGOV PREL NZ UN
SUBJECT: NEW ZEALAND AND THE UN: NEW PERMREP BANKS LOOKS 
AHEAD 
 
 
Classified By: Charge David Burnett, 
For Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
 ¶1. (C) Summary:  New Zealand's new UN Permrep, Rosemary 
Banks, says that New Zealand will maintain its traditional 
opposition to permanent members' vetos in an expanded UN 
Security Council (UNSC).  Foreign Minister Goff supports the 
idea of Japan becoming a permanent UNSC  member, and also 
backs our view that the Human Rights Council must keep HR 
Violators from serving as Chair. Banks shares her 
government's view that intervention in global hotspots is 
best placed under the purview of the UN and not individual 
players.  But unlike many, she is very aware that most Kiwis 
do not appreciate how their government's foreign policy is 
diminishing New Zealand's influence in the UN despite the 
country's emphasis on the importance of the organization.  We 
predict Banks will be a very constructive player on UN 
reform.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (C) On April 5, Charge and Pol-Econ Couns met with 
Rosemary Banks, currently Deputy Secretary at the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs and Trade, to discuss her views on UN reform 
in light of her impending reassignment as NZ's UN Permrep. 
Banks was joined by Joan Mosley, Director of MFAT's United 
Nations, Human Rights, and Commonwealth Division.  Banks 
confirmed that Foreign Minister Goff supports the idea that 
Japan should be a permanent UNSC member. He also shares our 
view that the Human Rights Council must be reformed so that 
rights violators can no longer serve as Council chair.  Banks 
acknowledged that the United States had been right all along 
to oppose universalized Human Rights Council membership.  New 
Zealand had believed that giving violators a voice in the 
Council would encourage them to improve  their behavior. 
"Now we don't," Banks said.  Somewhat significantly given her 
UN and human rights portfolios, Mosley added that some human 
rights resolutions are "whackers." 
 
------------------------------ 
UN: Big Brother or Big Bother? 
------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  (C) The Charge noted that unlike New Zealand, the United 
States resists the notion of the UN as world government. 
Countries should only trade sovereignty for increased 
security, he said.  Banks acknowledged the point, but said 
the whole exercise becomes pointless without rules for 
intervention.  Pol-Econ Couns noted that the United States 
has been frustrated because of the lack of UN intervention 
where appropriate, not because there was too much of it. 
Banks asked whether Secretary Annan's draft proposal for such 
rules would create a problem for the United States.  The 
Charge said the draft language did not seem to rule out our 
acting without the UN if needed.  He noted that Congress' 
most recent declaration under the U.S. War Powers Act, on 
Iraq, focused on the UN resolutions against Saddam that had 
not been enforced. Mosley said if one only trades sovereignty 
for security, the question becomes how one defines the 
latter.  The Secretary General defines security broadly, she 
said.  We do as well, said the Charge, especially since 9/11 
had highlighted the dangers posed by failed states.  But, he 
added, if the focus is too broad attention gets diverted from 
what is most important. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Take off those Rose-colored Glasses 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) Both Banks and Mosley admitted that New Zealanders 
can be somewhat unrealistic when it comes to their confidence 
in the United Nations and the organization's potential to 
bring order to the world.  Maintaining this rosy view will be 
difficult once the UN fails to intervene where Kiwis think it 
should.  (Comment:  We already saw a hint of this when local 
media pointed out that it was the U.S. Navy that first 
reached tsunami victims late last year.) 
 
¶5.  (C) Banks added that despite the fact that New Zealanders 
take the UN very seriously, they do not yet see that their 
country has declining influence there.  Instead, they 
continue to believe that the country's history as a founding 
member and later an unofficial nonaligned country gives New 
Zealand a special status in the organization.  In reality, 
said Banks, the country's influence will continue to fall as 
that of large countries and regional groupings rise.  Kiwis 
do not want to hear that for this reason New Zealand needs to 
reach out more bilaterally, for example to engage individual 
countries in Asia in light of the changing regional 
architecture.  Banks said that even those who do see this, 
such as influential academic Terence O'Brien, believe that 
MFAT officials are too negative in their view that New 
Zealand's incompletely thought-out, multilateral foreign 
policy focus is marginalizing the country.  We (at MFAT) are 
trained to see the risks, Banks said.  Politicians are not. 
Mosley added that there is still a certain missionary zeal in 
New Zealand, and that even some diplomats do not understand 
that the country did not create and cannot fix all the 
world's problems. 
 
-------------------------- 
Background: Rosemary Banks 
-------------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) Foreign Minister Goff announced on March 1 that Banks 
would be New Zealand's next UN PermRep, replacing Don MacKay. 
 Banks, a career diplomat, has in her 30 years with MFAT 
served at the UN in both New York and Geneva, in the Solomon 
Islands, and in Australia.  She has also held senior Ministry 
posts at MFAT, including as Director of Information and 
Public Affairs and Director of the North Asia Division.  She 
was seconded early in her career to the Department of Trade 
and Industry.  As Deputy Secretary of MFAT's Programme Three, 
Banks has responsibility for managing the Ministry's 
Consular, Disarmament, Economic, Environment and Antarctic, 
Legal, UN and Commonwealth, and Human Rights divisions. 
 
¶7.  (C) Banks is hard-working and well regarded by those who 
work with her, including both NZ and U.S. Government 
officials.  Her no-nonsense approach is matched by a 
recognition that New Zealand needs to be more engaged in the 
world.  For example, we believe Banks was pivotal in 
convincing the Prime Minister that despite its opposition to 
the war in Iraq, New Zealand should provide military 
engineers to assist in post-war reconstruction.  We predict 
she will be a constructive force in promoting UN reform. 
 
 
 
Burnett