05WELLINGTON793
Proposal for U.S. Speaker at 2006 Otago
Thu Oct 13 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 WELLINGTON 000793 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR IIP/G/EA - SPRIETO; EAP/PD - AEGRIMES; 
EAP/ANP - DRICCI 
 
E.O.12958:N/A 
TAGS: OIIP OEXC SCUL
SUBJECT: Proposal for U.S. Speaker at 2006 Otago 
     Foreign Policy School 
 
 
     ¶1.   Post requests U.S. speaker Professor Susan 
     Brownell, Chair, Dept. of Anthropology at St. Louis 
     University, Missouri, in support of MPP Goal 07-03, 
     Mutual Understanding.  We would ideally like this 
     visit to be for seven program days, Wednesday, June 
     21 - Tuesday, June 27; third quarter FY2006. 
 
     ¶2. Justification and Objective: Since its inception 
     in 1966, the University of Otago's Foreign Policy 
     School (OFPS) has developed an international 
     reputation, drawing top speakers from around the 
     world. Government officials from the Prime 
     Minister's Office, Ministry of Defense, Ministry of 
     External Relations and Trade, academics, 
     journalists, diplomats, members of the private 
     sector, and interested public regularly participate. 
     The theme for 2006 is "Sport and Foreign Policy in a 
     Globalizing World," which the organizing committee 
     considers an excellent follow-on from the UN's 
     declaration of 2005 as the "International Year of 
     Sport and Education."  The OFPS believes that 
     increasing recognition is being made of the role of 
     sport in shaping identities, policies, and 
     lifestyles worldwide.  Post also recognizes the 
     importance that China places on sports in its lead- 
     up to the Olympics in Beijing and its foreign 
     relations. 
 
     Professor Brownell's expertise would dovetail 
     perfectly with the speaking topics of other keynote 
     speakers at this 41st Foreign Policy School 
     conference and would provide it with a valuable 
     opportunity to discuss relevant issues with this 
     renowned academic, who is regarded  internationally 
     as an expert on US-China foreign relations, sports, 
     and culture.  Brownell is recognized also for her 
     own sporting abilities (a nationally-ranked track 
     and field athlete in the US before she joined the 
     track team at Beijing University) and for lecturing 
     in East Asian Studies.  Post looks forward to 
     programming her with both academic and sports 
     organizations. 
 
     ¶3.   Professor Brownell is currently undertaking 
     research on "The Body in Consumer Culture in 
     Beijing." Her writings include "Training the Body 
     for China: Sports in the Moral Order of the People's 
     Republic." This is the first book on Chinese sports 
     based on fieldwork in China by a Westerner.  She is 
     a member of the Research Council of the Olympic 
     Museum in Lausanne, Switzerland.   As an expert on 
     Chinese sports, she has written for different media 
     including Sports Illustrated, The Los Angeles Times, 
     The Atlanta Journal and Constitution, "The Sports 
     Factor" (ABC), "The Ultimate Athlete" on the 
     Discovery Channel, and China Central Television. 
 
     ¶4. Activity Date, Fiscal Year, and Quarter: This is 
     an FY06 program requested for the Third Quarter 
     between June 23 and 26, 2006. 
 
     ¶5. Audience and Types of Events: It is expected that 
     the audiences for this program will be members of 
     parliament and their policy makers, economists, 
     academics, the media, members of the New Zealand 
     Institute of International Relations in three of the 
     main centers, and sports organizations.  It is also 
     anticipated that Professor Brownell will visit the 
     university campuses in Wellington, Auckland, and 
     Dunedin and undertake several media and 
     representational events while in New Zealand. 
 
     ¶6. Topics: While speech topics are to be decided in 
     consultation with Professor Brownell, it is expected 
     that the 41st Foreign Policy School would really 
     benefit significantly from the first-hand insights 
     and knowledge of such a distinguished scholar. 
 
     ¶7. Please Note: The conference conveners have been 
     in contact with Professor Brownell and confirm that 
     she is available and interested in traveling to New 
     Zealand at this time. 
 
     ¶8. Professor Brownell's contact details: 
     Email:  sbrownell@umsl.edu 
     Phone:  314-516-6451 
     Address: The Chair of the Anthropology Department 
     507 Clark Hall, UM-St. Louis 
     8001 Natural Bridge Road 
     St. Louis, MO 63121 
     USA 
 
     ¶9. Post Project Officer: Control Officer: Christine 
     Vivian. 
     Office Phone: 644-462-6112; Fax: 644-499-0490 
     Email: cvivian@actrix.gen.nz or VIVIANC@STATE.GOV. 
 
     ¶10. Funding: Post will fund the speaker's 
     international and domestic travel, per diem, and 
     honoraria.  Please advise soonest. 
     BURNETT