06ABIDJAN819
CORA INVESTMENT DISPUTE NEAR RESOLUTION?
Wed Jul 26 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Abidjan
VZCZCXYZ0031
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAB #0819/01 2071551
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 261551Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY ABIDJAN
TO RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1654UNCLAS ABIDJAN 000819 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS TO USTR/OAA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV ETRD PREL IV
SUBJECT: CORA INVESTMENT DISPUTE NEAR RESOLUTION? 
 
REF: ABIDJAN 758 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  A joint delegation of representatives of 
Cora shareholders and the Ivoirian government expressed 
strong optimism to the Ambassador July 26 that the Cora 
dispute is very close to a final resolution.  They will meet 
with the Prime Minister about this July 27.  The Ambassador 
welcomed this news, but cautioned that the government is very 
short of money and deeply preoccupied with the country's 
political crisis.   It is encouraging that Prime Minister 
Banny is apparently giving this matter his personal attention 
at this difficult moment for him politically.  However, we 
have been told before that this deal is almost done -- we 
will believe it when we see it.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) Representatives of the government of Cote d'Ivoire and 
the Cora de Comstar shareholders briefed the Ambassador July 
26 on the state of play on the Cora de Comstar business 
dispute.  Representing the government were Guy M'bengue, head 
of APEX-CI (the Cote d'Ivoire Export Promotion Agency), and 
Jared Genser, from Piper Rudnick Gray Carey, the law firm 
representing the Ivoirian government in Washington on this 
matter.  Representing the shareholders was Babatunde Soyoye, 
Managing Director from Helios Investment Partners, an advisor 
to the Modern Africa Two Fund. 
 
¶3. (SBU) M'bengue explained that there had been an internal 
Ivoirian government meeting the previous day at which all 
four agencies involved in this matter were represented: the 
Ministry of Telecommunications, the Prime Minister's Office, 
the Ministry of Finance, and the Ivoirian Telecommunications 
Agency (ATCI).  He said that it was confirmed at this meeting 
that the government will expeditiously settle the Cora 
dispute on the terms of the agreement in principle that was 
reached in February 2006, according to which the government 
is to give Cora shareholders either USD 6 million in cash or 
an irrevocable letter of credit in that amount which would 
come due on December 31, 2006 if the government is unable to 
raise the USD 6 million from the sale of Cora's license by 
then.  It was also decided at that meeting that the same 
interagency group would meet with Babatunde and Genser in the 
afternoon of July 26, and the Prime Minister would meet with 
them July 27.  Genser noted that ATCI's revocation of Cora's 
license (reftel) had been done without the knowledge of the 
other agencies involved, and that ATCI had subsequently been 
instructed to suspend the revocation.  M'bengue and Genser 
repeatedly stressed their optimism that this dispute is very 
close to a final resolution, though they could not guarantee 
that it would be resolved during Babatunde and Genser's 
two-day visit.  Genser pointed to his very presence on this 
joint mission with Babatunde, at the Finance Minister's 
request, as evidence of the sincerity of the government's 
intentions. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Babatunde expressed the same optimism, though he 
noted that if a final resolution is not reached during his 
visit, the shareholders will want a firm deadline to be 
imposed, after which the shareholders will get their license 
back if the matter remains unresolved.  He noted that Helios 
Investment Partners is a new USD 300 million investment fund, 
with half of its capital coming from the United States, which 
intends to invest 70 percent of its capital in West Africa. 
He said the fund is extremely interested in investing in Cote 
d'Ivoire, but cannot do so as long as the Cora dispute 
remains unresolved.  Genser noted that Piper Rudnick Gray 
Cary has repeatedly advised the Ivoirian government to 
resolve this dispute without delay, because it is the right 
thing to do but also because this would be an important step 
toward restoration of AGOA benefits and attracting more 
American investment.  However, he acknowledged that there are 
a number of other benchmarks to be reached before AGOA can be 
restored. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The Ambassador said he was delighted to hear that 
the Cora dispute might be close to resolution.  However, he 
cautioned that the Ivoirian government is currently very 
short of money and deeply preoccupied with the country's 
protracted political crisis.  He assured Babatunde that we 
would continue to follow this issue closely and to press the 
government to put the matter behind it. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Comment.  In Cote d'Ivoire's fractured and 
crisis-driven political environment, it is encouraging to 
hear that four government agencies are apparently working 
together in a business-like manner to resolve this investment 
dispute.  It is even more encouraging that Prime Minister 
Banny is apparently giving this matter his personal attention 
at this difficult moment for him politically.  However, we 
have been told before that this deal is almost done -- we 
will believe it when we see it.  End Comment. 
Hooks