06AITTAIPEI3453
MEDIA REACTION: DPP'S DRAFT CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM
Thu Oct 05 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #3453 2780852
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 050852Z OCT 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2496
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5743
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6958UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 003453 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: DPP'S DRAFT CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies on October 5 
printed special cover pages or reported on the front page the 
victory of Taiwan-born New York Yankees pitcher Wang Chien-ming in a 
major league playoff opening game.  On the political side, most 
major dailies highlighted criticism by DPP heavyweights, such as 
Premier Su Tseng-chang, against the party's draft constitutional 
reform.  The dailies also carried stories in page two on Deputy U.S. 
State Department Spokesman Tom Casey's comment on the U.S. position 
toward President Chen's commitment to the "Four No's."  And 
according to a [pro-unification] "United Daily News" story datelined 
from Washington, sources said it was clear that the United States 
had sent messages to Taiwan through different channels and demanded 
that Chen not "play lawyer" in his attempt to make major 
constitutional reforms. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a column in the 
mass-circulation "Apple Daily" noted that for the DPP to propose a 
major constitutional reform at this moment was like committing 
collective suicide.  An editorial in the limited-circulation, 
conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" said 
that Chen Shui-bian's proposal for constitutional reform will only 
worsen Washington's distrust of him without relieving him from the 
pressure to step down. End summary. 
 
 
A) "The DPP's Urge to Commit Suicide" 
 
Columnist Antonio Chiang commented in the mass-circulation "Apple 
Daily" [circulation: 500,000] (10/5): 
 
"... The Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) is still the ruling 
party.  However, it has long lost its sense of responsibility as a 
government because of a lack of confidence.  The DPP's draft 
constitutional reform is an indication of a kind of urge to commit 
collective suicide. 
 
"The DPP government is now in precarious times.  While the party 
should be striving for its existence and survival, its leadership is 
actively promoting its blueprint for constitutional reform with the 
knowledge that the party is facing a critical life-and-death moment. 
 There is not yet a consensus within the party over the reform, not 
to mention a ruling party - opposition accord.  In light of the 
Anti-Bian movement, there is no chance for the reform to succeed. 
But the party center is treating it as an historical mission.  It is 
as if the draft must be put forward in order to frighten people. 
 
"Bian has already lost his presidential authority.  Promoting a new 
constitution has been one of his political promises.  But Bian 
himself knows very well that his proposal for constitutional reform 
at present will never be realized.  It is one thing that the party 
center does not want to win public support.  But why does it want to 
turn the poisonous promise made by Bian into an historical mission. 
Such a move is no less than sacrificing the whole party for one 
single person.  The move is more incomprehensible than collective 
suicide." 
 
B) "Chen's Proposition for New Constitution Just a Hoax" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (10/5): 
 
"... The United States government has also expressed concern over 
President Chen's plans to overhaul the Constitution.  U.S. 
Department of State Deputy Spokesman Tom Casey issued a warning in 
public. 
 
"... The U.S. is Taiwan's staunchest ally.  Assistance from 
Washington is essential in ensuring Taiwan's success in repelling an 
invasion by the mainland's troops.  Without U.S. support, the island 
can hardly defend itself from a full-scale attack launched by 
Beijing. 
 
"... In fact, President Chen himself is probably aware that he was 
building castles in the air by proposing the rewriting of the 
Constitution.  His proposal is aimed mainly to divert attention from 
the corruption allegations that have been dogging him and his family 
over the few months. 
 
"... The President's call for a radically revised Constitution has 
deepened Washington's distrust of him and has caused new tension in 
the Taiwan Strait.  It has done little to relieve the pressure for 
him to step down. 
 
WANG