06AITTAIPEI808
MEDIA REACTION: U.S. AND CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS, 2005 HUMAN
Mon Mar 13 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0808/01 0722321
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 132321Z MAR 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9051
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 4847
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6044UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000808 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S. AND CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS, 2005 HUMAN 
RIGHTS REPORT 
 
 
¶1.  Summary: Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies centered their 
coverage March 11-13 on a major railway accident in Hualien; the 
KMT's victory in the Chiayi City legislative by-election Saturday; a 
KMT rally in Taipei Sunday to "Save Taiwan"; and the call for a new 
investigation into the 319 shooting incident, by the family of the 
man identified as the most likely would-be assassin.  The 
pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest daily, and the 
pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" both quoted Former U.S. Deputy 
Secretary of State Richard Armitage March 11 as saying the United 
 
SIPDIS 
States is pleased with Taiwan's handling of the cessation of the 
National Unification Council (NUC) and National Unification 
Guidelines (NUG).  The "Liberty Times," in the meantime, ran a 
banner headline on its front page March 13 that read: "Armitage: the 
International Community Is Concerned About Ma Ying-jeou's Anti-U.S. 
and Anti-Japan Stance."  Several papers also reported on U.S. 
Pacific Commander Admiral William Fallon's remarks when testifying 
before the U.S. House Armed Services Committee Friday that the 
United States will remain committed to helping with Taiwan's 
defense. 
 
¶2.  In terms of editorials and commentaries, journalist Sun 
Yang-ming said in the pro-unification "United Daily News" that 
Washington was actually very 'upset' with Taiwan's handling of the 
NUC and NUG matter because it suggested that the United States did 
not have as many bargaining chips as it had imagined when dealing 
with Taipei.  An editorial in the limited-circulation, conservative, 
pro-unification, English-language "China Post" questioned 
Washington's stance with regard to Chen's NUC announcement, calling 
Washington's response "strange at best and beguiling at worst."  An 
editorial in the limited-circulation, pro-independence, 
English-language "Taiwan News," on the other hand, called on 
Washington to exercise its influence on Beijing to press China to 
engage in dialogue with the Taiwan government.  With regard to the 
State Department's 2005 Human Rights report, an editorial in the 
limited-circulation, pro-independence, English-language "Taipei 
Times" called the report highly valuable as "it speaks 
authoritatively about Taiwan while standing outside the partisan 
muddying that can overwhelm local human rights discourse."  End 
summary. 
 
¶3. U.S. and Cross-Strait Relations 
 
A) "How Is the United States Going to Placate Beijing?" 
 
Journalist Sun Yang-ming said in the pro-unification "United Daily 
News" [circulation: 400,000] (3/12): 
 
"The departure of former U.S. Deputy Secretary of State Richard 
Armitage from Taiwan can be viewed as a dividing line that marked 
the ending of the first stage and the beginning of the second stage 
with regard to the Bush administration's [handling] of Chen 
Shui-bian's 'cessation of the National Unification Council and its 
guidelines. ...' 
 
"[Is there the] question as to why the United States dropped this 
matter for the time being?  Judging from the United States' 
performance so far, Washington was actually very 'upset' because [it 
suggested that] the United States did not have as many bargaining 
chips as it had imagined [it had in dealing with Taipei].  Should 
Washington make a slight move [against Chen], Chen would not care at 
all; but the United States does not feel like dealing a heavy blow 
to Chen either.  Besides, once it deals a heavy blow [to Chen], 
Beijing may likely misinterpret it as meaning that Washington has 
given up on Taiwan, and believe that it could use this opportunity 
to exploit [Taiwan]. ...  The other part that Washington has to deal 
with [now] is to placate Beijing and to discuss with it the next 
step they should take with regard to the Taiwan issue. ... 
 
"... Washington is almost sure that Chen's future constitutional 
reform plan will have a bigger impact on the cross-Strait situation. 
 The best plan Washington has in mind is to place its hope on the 
pan-Blue camp, hoping that it could block the DPP's draft version of 
the new constitution in the Legislative Yuan.  But no matter what, 
the United States is very concerned about the uncertainties ... on 
cross-Strait relations and on triangular interactions between 
Washington, Beijing and Taipei." 
 
B) "Status Quo: Unchanged or Not?" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (3/11): 
 
"The controversy over whether President Chen Shui-bian has abolished 
the National Unification Council and terminated the National 
Unification Guidelines boils down to one question: Does the NUC 
still exist? ...  Why equivocating?  Because to Washington, 
scrapping or abolishing the NUC is a breach of commitment and a 
unilateral alteration of the status quo, to which the United States 
 
objects. ... 
 
"But is Washington's objection for real or just for show?  It was 
surprising to see that right after President Chen made his bombshell 
announcement on Feb. 27, Washington said Chen's announcement did not 
alter Taiwan's status quo.  But after mainland leader Hu Jintao gave 
his stern warning, the U.S. State Department demanded Chen Shui-bian 
to 'publicly acknowledge for the record that the Feb. 27 
announcement did not abolish the NUC, did not change the status 
quo.' 
 
"Washington's response to Chen's bold move is strange at best and 
beguiling at worst.  The U.S. acted like a willing co-player of 
Chen's word game, in which Washington pretends that it's business as 
usual because Chen assures that the NUC is not 'abolished.'  With so 
many China hands and sinologists at its disposal, Washington should 
know what 'cessation' means in Chinese in the context of this 
momentous matter." 
 
C) "More Dialogue Best for U.S.-Taiwan Ties" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (3/13): 
 
"Given Armitage's status as a formerly influential high-ranking 
official who used to be in charge of Asian affairs and cross-strait 
affairs, a more constructive way to judge his visit should be 
focused on what he did for Taiwan during his term as deputy 
secretary of state and how he suggested calming down the current 
 
SIPDIS 
tactical tension in the U.S.-Taiwan relationship. ... 
 
"Clearly, the intent [of Washington] is to urge President Chen to 
avoid any complacency over the winding down of the NUC and related 
guidelines and to assure the Bush administration that there will be 
no more 'surprises' that could 'jeopardize' the mutual trust between 
Taipei and Washington.  Such a request is not unreasonable.  But in 
return, we hope that Washington can exercise its influence to press 
Beijing to engage in dialogue with Taiwan's democratically-elected 
government and respect the right of free choice of our 23 million 
people." 
 
¶4. 2005 Human Rights Report 
 
"State Department Is Right on Rights" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] said in an editorial (3/11): 
 
"This year's US State Department country report on human rights in 
Taiwan is, as always, very welcome. ... The report made no mention, 
however, of the falling number of executions, nor the failure of the 
Chen administration to eradicate the death penalty entirely.  By 
world standards, however, this is hardly a dramatic development. 
... 
 
"Overall, however, the government can find comfort in a positive 
assessment of its efforts to maintain and improve the human rights 
environment.  The state Department's report is of considerable value 
because it speaks authoritatively about Taiwan while standing 
outside the partisan muddying that can overwhelm local human rights 
discourse.  Indeed, compared with the lack of enthusiasm that many 
in the State Department feel toward Taiwan in general, the report is 
like a bouquet: It embraces Taiwanese and foreigners here as human 
beings worthy of respect and protection.  And because politicians on 
both sides are loath to openly denigrate the US for daring to pass 
judgment on their country (a comparison with China on this point is 
irresistible), the report obtains an unusual credibility. ... It is 
hoped that the measured criticisms in this report can energize those 
who aim to craft a more stable, just and dignified nation." 
 
KEEGAN