06AITTAIPEI1624
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Thu May 11 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0063
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1624/01 1310902
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 110902Z MAY 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0134
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5199
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6402UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001624 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  As Taiwan dailies continued to center their reporting 
May 11 on President Chen Shui-bian's surprise stopover in Libya, 
coverage also focused on an ammunition depot blast in Taipei County 
Wednesday and local political issues.  All major Chinese-language 
papers, with the exception of the mass-circulation "Apple Daily," 
front-paged Chen's surprise transit in Libya.  The pro-independence 
"Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest daily, ran a front-page banner 
headline that read "Bian Visits Libya and May Likely Fly to 
Lebanon."  The newspaper also ran a banner headline on page two that 
said "With Bian's Visit, It Is Expected Taiwan Will Soon Set up an 
Office in Libya."  The pro-unification "United Daily News" carried a 
news story on page three with the headline "Holding Hand with Laura 
Bush Using His Right Hand, While Shaking Hands with Qaddafi Using 
His Left; Bian [Uses] Two-Pronged Strategy to Create Diplomatic 
Exclamation Mark."  The newspaper also reported on page three poll 
results which showed that 39 percent of respondents said they oppose 
Chen's decision not to transit the United States to and from 
Paraguay and Costa Rica, while 27 percent said they agree with it. 
 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a "Liberty Times" 
editorial called Chen's transit in Libya a rare diplomatic 
breakthrough, and an editorial in the pro-independence "Taiwan 
Daily" said the transit treatment Chen received is an embodiment of 
Taiwan's diplomatic predicament.  An "Apple Daily" opinion piece 
said Chen's detour diplomacy showed that the DPP government is 
modifying its pro-U.S. line.  An opinion piece in the 
limited-circulation, pro-independence, English-language "Taipei 
Times" said Taipei should communicate more with Washington, while 
Washington should encourage Taiwan's efforts to establish good 
governance and political institutionalization.  A separate "Taipei 
Times" commentary, on the other hand, said Chen has not only 
demonstrated his ability to deal with unforeseen contingencies, but 
also told both the U.S. and China that Taiwan will not be humiliated 
and that it is an independent nation.  The "Black and White" column 
in the "United Daily News" asked whether Chen's transit of Libya is 
a diplomatic breakthrough or political suicide.  End summary. 
 
A) "Good Job, President A-bian!" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] 
editorialized (5/11): 
 
"... In fact, it is China which has blocked Taiwan's entire 
maneuvering space in the international community and put President 
Chen in an embarrassing situation.  The pan-Blue camp did not dare 
to criticize China, which suppresses Taiwan; instead, it regards 
Taiwan's elected president as a foe.  Such a weird mentality is 
unbelievable and fails to win the recognition of a majority of the 
Taiwan people.  President A-bian transited Libya on his way home and 
would discuss with the latter about bilateral trade and an exchange 
of offices.  This is a rare diplomatic breakthrough.  Chen will 
return to Taiwan today.  He not only had to face China's suppression 
and the United States' cold shoulder during this trip, but will have 
to watch out for clandestine attacks from the pan-Blue camp.  We 
thus want to cheer the President:  Good job, President A-bian!" 
 
B) "Tens of Thousands of Taiwan People Will Welcome President Chen 
at the Airport to Soothe the Mistreatment He Received and Support 
His Diplomatic Endeavors" 
 
The pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" [circulation: 100,000] 
editorialized (5/11): 
 
"... The 'transit treatment' that the Taiwan president receives is 
actually an embodiment of Taiwan's predicament on the diplomatic 
front.  The United States does not have any problem with Chen. 
Anyone who is in Chen's position today would receive the same 
treatment, unless it's those 'Chinese people' who claim to be 'pure 
Chinese' that kowtow to China like Lien Chan.  Perhaps China will 
not interfere with or exert pressure on the United States [regarding 
his transits]. 
 
C) "Crashes between Taiwan and the United States Are Now 
Unavoidable" 
 
Academia Sinica Institute of Social Science Assistant Research 
Fellow Hsu Yung-ming opined in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" 
[circulation: 500,000] (5/11): 
 
"... Even though [Chen's] detour diplomacy has its flaws, which can 
be criticized, Chen's trip has also revealed some structural 
changes:  First, the DPP is modifying its pro-U.S. line.  No matter 
if it's Lebanon, Libya or the United Arab Emirates, they are 
neutral, medium-sized countries in their regions and are facing 
isolation like Taiwan.  They are of geographical and strategic 
importance in their regions, but they are not close to the United 
States.  They are unlike Taiwan's allies in Central America or the 
South Pacific, but are new targets for the island's strategic 
alliance.  Also, in the wake of the cessation of the National 
Unification Council, the subject A-bian is wrestling with has become 
the United States.  Beijing is hiding behind the scenes, expecting 
the day when Ma Ying-jeou becomes president.  This will be a new 
challenge for the pro-independence faction in Taiwan, and the United 
States has become a big rock standing in the way of Taiwan 
independence. ..." 
 
D) "Diplomacy, Not Politics, Needed to Handle US" 
 
Liu Kuan-teh, a Taipei-based political commentator, opined in the 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] (5/11): 
 
"... While it is essential for leaders in Taipei and Washington to 
improve communication and mutual trust, and avoid adding 
unpredictability to the relationship, it is also important for 
Taiwan to earn more respect and fair treatment from the US, 
regardless of China's influence.  Nevertheless, the effort on 
Taiwan's side has not been good enough.  The Bush administration 
also must avoid incorporating a double standard in its treatment of 
Taiwan in the course of engaging with Beijing.  Bush should 
contemplate the degree to which his administration can keep a 
balance between safeguarding US interests and those of a democratic 
Taiwan, while at the same time engaging China and trying to mold it 
into a responsible stakeholder.  Looking ahead, Taipei should 
communicate more with Washington, while Washington should encourage 
Taiwan's efforts to establish good governance and political 
institutionalization." 
 
E) "The Country Must Stand Its Ground" 
 
Chin Heng-wei, editor-in-chief of the "Contemporary Monthly" 
magazine, opined in the pro-independence, English-language "Taipei 
Times" [circulation: 30,000] (5/11): 
 
"...Chen has not only demonstrated his ability to deal with 
unforeseen contingencies, but also told both the U.S. and China that 
Taiwan will not be humiliated and that it is an independent nation. 
Washington's rejection of Chen's request to transit through the US 
mainland has highlighted the predicament facing Taiwan on the 
diplomatic front.  If Chen rises to confront the US government, he 
is sure to deal a blow to US-Taiwan relations, but since Taiwan has 
gained the upper hand in this matter, we have to wait and see how 
the US will respond.  Will the US still need Taiwan as one of the 
first island-nations in its chain of security off the East Asian 
coastline?  Does it still intend to contain China's 'non-peaceful 
rise?'  What will it see as the proper way of dealing with the 
Taiwan question?  These are important issues that the US government 
and opposition will have to contemplate. ... 
 
"Will Chen's indignation at the US spur the Taiwanese to seriously 
contemplate their future?  Will it trigger a period of self 
examination in the US and cause the DPP to once again work to 
fulfill its calling to fight for Taiwan?  Maybe this really is 
matter of a crisis offering new opportunities.  This is exactly why 
Chen is staking everything on one throw." 
 
F) " Qaddafi's New Friend" 
 
The "Black and White" column in the pro-unification "United Daily 
News" [circulation: 400,000] noted (5/11): 
 
"Chen Shui-bian, who said 'he will not be a lackey of the United 
States' has made friends with Libyan madman Qaddafi. ...  The choice 
that Chen made was not only about the fact that he chose to transit 
Libya, rather than the United States, but he also pushed himself to 
the opposite side of universal values and international mainstream. 
Is this a diplomatic breakthrough or political suicide? ..." 
 
YOUNG