06ANKARA5488
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Sep 19 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO7604
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #5488/01 2621439
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 191439Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8838
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 7449
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1311
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1119
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 5448
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 5165
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1822
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 005488 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 19, 2006 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Turkish Parliament to Discuss EU Reforms 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Sabah, Cumhuriyet, Radikal, Zaman, Yeni Safak 
and others:  The Turkish Parliament is to hold an extraordinary 
meeting Tuesday to discuss EU harmonization reforms.  Article 301 
will not be raised at the assembly meeting although the EU had 
earlier asked in a letter to Foreign Minister Gul to amend or 
abolish the controversial provision, which is seen as a new tool for 
punishing free speech.  Radikal emphasizes that the penalty given to 
Armenian editor Hrant Dink for violating Article 301 by "insulting 
Turkishness" did not make the AKP government move.  EU officials 
have earlier warned that the upcoming EU Turkey progress report 
would contain strong warnings with regard to free speech. 
 
Meanwhile, Turkey's elite business group TUSIAD warned in a report 
to the government, bureaucrats and lawmakers that a failure to 
change Article 301 would negatively affect Turkey's ties with the 
EU, adding that the EU was closely watching the prosecution of 
Turkish intellectuals under Article 301.  Renowned author Elif Safak 
goes on trial on September 21 for "insulting Turkishness" in her new 
novel, just a few days before the EU kicks off discussing the Turkey 
progress report, TUSIAD stressed. 
 
Baghdad Bans PKK Activities in Iraq 
Milliyet, Sabah, Cumhuriyet, Radikal, Zaman and others report the 
Iraqi Government has decided to close the PKK offices in Iraq, 
banning all of its activities.  Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki's 
Office said in a statement many countries consider the PKK a 
terrorist organization, and that the Iraqi Constitution does not 
allow terrorist organizations on Iraqi territory.  Vatan says that 
"concrete steps" were taken after the US Special Envoy for 
Countering the PKK, Joseph Ralston, conveyed Turkey's uneasiness to 
the regional Kurdistan government president Barzani and al-Maliki 
during a visit to Iraq over the weekend. 
 
Gul Meets the Press in New York 
All papers:  Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul said at a breakfast 
meeting with press in New York that Turkey has excellent relations 
with Israel and Palestine.  "Israel's security will be established 
once the Palestinian problem is resolved," noted Gul, offering a 
two-state formula to that end.  Gul said the issue of Iran's nuclear 
program should be resolved through diplomacy.  Gul maintained 
regarding Iraq "the Iraqi people will hold the coalition powers 
responsible if their country disintegrates; in this framework, the 
United States supports the territorial integrity and political unity 
of Iraq."  Responding to a question concerning the lawsuits filed 
against Turks commenting on Armenian matters, Gul stated that the 
Turkish government has broken many taboos, and the issue was freely 
discussed in the country.  "The legal process with regard to Article 
301of the Turkish Penal Code has not been completed yet.  We are for 
the expression of all ideas as long as they do not support 
violence," said Gul.  Gul also stressed that Turkey's membership 
talks with the European Union would take a long time. "At the end of 
negotiations, Turkey will be a very different country, which, by 
then, might not want to join the EU," Gul noted. 
 
Erdogan Addresses Turkic States Congress 
All papers report Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan said the Turkic 
states cannot afford to remain as passive observers to global 
change, urging them to grab opportunities.  Addressing the 10th 
Turkic States Brotherhood and Cooperation Congress in the 
Mediterranean city of Antalya yesterday, Erdogan called for a new 
organization to represent the world's Turkish-speaking states, 
citing the British Commonwealth as an example.  Erdogan expressed 
Turkey's support to Turkish Cyprus as well as Crimean, Meskhetian, 
Iraqi and Gagauz Turks.  Trade between Turkey and Turkic republics 
is increasing, Erdogan said, adding the "Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan oil 
pipeline was open, Baku-Tbilisi- Erzurum natural gas pipeline will 
 
ANKARA 00005488  002 OF 003 
 
 
be open soon, and a project on Kars-Ahilkelek-Tbilisi-Baku railway 
will kick off next year."  Erdogan also suggested the establishment 
of a "Turkish Speaking States Community." 
 
Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev told the gathering that his 
country would not allow an Armenia to be established on Azerbaijani 
territory.  He said Armenians also demand land from Turkey.  Aliyev 
also met with Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat. 
 
Al-Kadi Court Case 
Sabah, Cumhuriyet and others:   The withdrawal of appeal initiated 
by the Prime Ministry in the controversial court case for Saudi 
businessman Al-Kadi may not be accepted by the Danistay, according 
to Danistay sources.  So far, the MFA, which had filed for an appeal 
at the same time with the Prime Ministry, did not ask to withdraw 
their request. Earlier, the Danistay had struck down a decision by 
the government freezing Al-Kadi's assets and recognizing him as a 
sponsor of terror.  The Prime Ministry's Legal Affairs Office then 
submitted an appeal of the decision without the Prime Minister's 
knowledge. On Friday when the PM learned about the appeal, he 
ordered it withdrawn and fired the Legal Office Director. 
 
Editorial Commentary on PM Erdogan's Upcoming Visit to the US 
Fehmi Koru, an influential columnist close to the ruling AK Party, 
writing from Washington in the mass appeal Yeni Safak sees a motive 
behind the recent goodwill gestures from Washington to Ankara: "The 
US has been making some favorable gestures to Turkey and they have 
all coincided on the eve of PM Erdogan's visit.  Most significant 
was the visit of General Ralston to Ankara to discuss the fight 
against the PKK.  With this visit Washington was giving a message 
that it respects Turkey's top priority issue.  In addition, the 
White House announcement of Erdogan's visit mentioned the PKK issue 
-- another gesture of the US administration.  The US has so far not 
been willing to discuss the PKK issue at the White House level. 
There is a reason for all of this: President Bush wants to be closer 
to Turkey especially as part of his expanded strategy in the fight 
against terror.  He is planning new tactics against Iran and in the 
eyes of Washington, Turkey must be on the same side as the US.  As 
part of the plan, it is hoped that Turkey will be a part of an 
anti-Iran frontline.  Therefore Erdogan's visit to Washington is 
becoming a highly risky thing for Turkey.  In the midst of such 
tough issues it will be a challenge to leave the White House in a 
win-win situation." 
 
Asli Aydintasbas, in the mass appeal Sabah, comments on the 
speculation that Erdogan's ambition to become President is one of 
his motivations for the trip: "PM Erdogan's upcoming visit to 
Washington has brought up the speculations that he will try to get a 
'US visa' for his goal to become a president in the next term. 
Defenders of this argument believe that Erdogan will use every 
positive image during his meeting at the White House in order to 
demonstrate his leadership qualities as part of a domestic political 
campaign.  In fact this argument is not meaningful because a visit 
to the White House always presents a warm and cordial image 
regardless of the visitor.  Besides there is no single voice in 
Washington circles regarding Erdogan's goal for presidency.  Some 
believe that his being president might lead to more tension in 
Turkey.  Some others, including Rice are said to think that the 
presidency issue has nothing to do with the US, and it is an 
internal matter for Turkey.  The fact of the matter is that in the 
end, the presidency issue will be discussed and decided by the 
parliament of Turkey." 
 
Rich-Poor Gap Growing in Turkey 
Radikal reports on its front page that official data exposed a 
yawning gap between the richest and poorest in Turkey.  The richest 
spend 17 times more than their poorest compatriots on education, 11 
times more on health, and 11.3 times more on culture and 
entertainment.  The richest 20 percent of Turks account for 40.8 
percent on health and 57.1 on education spending while the poorest 
 
ANKARA 00005488  003 OF 003 
 
 
20 percent spend 9.2 and 3.2 respectively, according to the 2005 
Household Spending Survey commissioned by Turkey Statistics 
Institution. 
 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV (8 A.M.) 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Turkey will send a delegation to New York next week to discuss the 
details of the Turkish peacekeeping mission in Lebanon. 
 
- Opposition parties UBP and DP have decided to veto parliamentary 
meetings in Turkish Cyprus in reaction to the political crisis 
sparked by the collapse of the CTP-DP coalition government, 
allegedly through intervention by Turkey's ruling AK Party. 
 
- UN Development Program (UNDP) head Kemal Dervis said Turkey had 
pursued the right borrowing policies and managed to improve its debt 
structure, adding Turkey still had to take measures to reduce the 
current deficit. 
 
- World Bank Regional Vice President for Europe and Central Asia, 
Shigeo Katsu, said Turkey's strong economy had given a fast response 
to market turmoil. 
 
International News 
 
- TIME magazine claims the United States might be preparing for war 
against Iran. 
 
- European Commission spokesman Johannes Laitenberger criticized 
"disproportionate reactions" to Pope Benedict XVI's controversial 
remarks on Islam as anger and protests in the Muslim world continue. 
 
 
 
  Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
WILSON