06ANKARA40
WILL THE ALAN GREENSPAN OF TURKEY BE REPLACED?
Wed Jan 04 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO2247
RR RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0040/01 0041136
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 041136Z JAN 06
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2352
INFO RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 9443
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 0185UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 000040 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS - CPLANTIER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN ECON PBIO TU
SUBJECT: WILL THE ALAN GREENSPAN OF TURKEY BE REPLACED? 
 
Ref: Ankara 7210 
 
This cable was coordinated with Congen Istanbul. 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary: Many observers have worried that the 
AKP Government may replace Central Bank Governor Sureyya 
Serdengecti when his term expires in March.  Our view -- 
supported by Serdengecti himself -- is that even if PM 
Erdogan decides not to reappoint the founding father of 
Turkey's independent monetary policy and a key figure in 
the post-2001 economic recovery, it can minimize markets' 
disquiet by announcing a qualified successor well in 
advance.  If it doesn't, or if it announces an individual 
deemed unqualified, markets will react negatively at a 
time when Turkey needs to be signaling to the world its 
commitment to continued sound monetary and fiscal 
policies.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Serdengecti's Tenure Up for Renewal 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Central Bank Governor Sureyya Serdengecti's 
tenure comes up for renewal in March 2006.  In the press 
and in the markets, speculation is building about a) 
whether the GOT will reappoint Serdengecti, and b) if 
not, who might replace him.  At this point, barring 
serious market turbulence between now and March, both the 
grapevine and the track record suggest that Prime 
Minister Erdogan will opt to replace Serdengecti with 
someone with closer ties to the AK Party Government. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  In the past, when presented with an 
opportunity to replace officials heading up independent 
agencies, like most governments around the world, the GOT 
has moved to put its own people in charge.  In 
Serdengecti's case, senior officials have often betrayed 
their irritation with the Governor's vigorous assertion 
of the central bank's independence and his readiness to 
"keep them honest" on economic policy.  Serdengecti has 
related to us more than once the guerilla war he has had 
to fight against senior officials who want to rein the 
bank in. 
 
------------------------------------- 
The GOT and Central Bank Independence 
------------------------------------- 
 
4.(SBU)  GOT leaders lack a deep understanding of the 
importance of an independent monetary policy, despite 
Turkey's disastrous history of political interference. 
Ministers such as Economy Minister Babacan, who has to 
work with the IMF, understand the issue.  Other Ministers 
-- notably Trade Minister Tuzmen -- and AK Party 
politicians often criticize the Central Bank's interest 
rate policy, which they claim has led to an overvaluation 
of the lira.  Meanwhile, Serdengecti himself has worked 
hard to achieve a modus operandi with the GOT, 
particularly with Babacan but also with some success with 
Prime Minister Erdogan.  Nevertheless, with exporters 
continuing to decry Central Bank policies, and political 
pressure on the PM to take advantage of the opportunity 
presented by the expiration of Serdengecti's mandate, the 
AK Government will most likely opt for one of its own. 
 
------------------------------- 
Serdengecti's Impressive Record 
------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU)  The former coalition government appointed 
Serdengecti in the immediate aftermath of  the 2001 
crisis.  He is widely credited by financial markets and 
international financial institutions as the man who 
brought Turkey's runaway inflation down to single digits. 
"The Banker" magazine named him 2005 Central Banker of 
the year.  Serdengecti also presided over the successful 
currency changeover to the New Turkish Lira, and in 
December 2005 announced the introduction of formal 
inflation targeting in 2006.  As a known quantity, a 
competent Central Banker and an ardent defender of the 
floating exchange rate regime, Serdengecti would 
certainly be the preferred candidate of markets and the 
IFI's. 
 
-------------------- 
Who would they Pick? 
 
ANKARA 00000040  002 OF 002 
 
 
-------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) If the GOT opts to replace Serdengecti, 
speculation is rife about who they would pick.  Among the 
leading candidates being mentioned: 
 
--Ibrahim Canakci.  Treasury Under Secretary Canakci has 
been Babacan's right-hand man, and lead economist, 
successfully pushing through (most) IFI conditionality 
and deserving much of the credit for Turkey's much- 
improved macroeconomic situation.  Having held jobs in 
three key economic agencies (Banking Supervision, State 
Planning, and Treasury) Canakci is highly respected and 
his appointment would likely be acceptable to markets. 
 
--Erdem Basci.  A Vice-Governor of the Central Bank since 
2003, Basci is the only one of the Vice-Governors 
selected by the AKP Government.  Reputedly close to 
Minister Babacan, Basci is a PhD economist who did 
graduate work at Johns Hopkins and is generally well- 
regarded by other economists, including Serdengecti 
himself.  At the Bank, Basci has been a loyal defender of 
Bank policies.  At 39, Basci is on the young side, but 
the GOT has made several high-level appointments that 
many considered too young for the job: notably Babacan 
and BRSA Chairman Tevfik Bilgin. 
 
--Adnan Buyukdeniz.  The General Manager of the Islamic 
finance house Al-Baraka Turk has been mentioned in big 
business circles as a contender.  Appointing the head of 
an Islamic finance house to manage interest rates is 
likely to raise eyebrows -- or worse--within Turkey's 
secular establishment.  Though lacking the policy 
experience of Canakci or Basci, Buyukdeniz is a graduate 
of the London School of Economics. 
 
------------------ 
Serdengecti's Take 
------------------ 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  In a recent meeting, Serdengecti said that it 
was the Prime Minister's prerogative to replace him, if 
he so desired.  However, he said the most important point 
was that the PM make a decision quickly so that 
Serdengecti could help prepare his transition. 
Serdengecti expressed admiration for the way the U.S. is 
handling the change in chairmanship at the Federal 
Reserve Board, with an early announcement of a highly 
qualified person allowing plenty of time to manage a 
smooth transition. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  Most analysts expect 2006 to be a more 
difficult year for Turkey's economy.  Meeting the 5% 
inflation target will be challenging in itself, and 
Turkey's 6% of GDP current account deficit and large 
foreign currency-linked debt stock leave it more exposed 
than other emerging markets to a contraction in global 
liquidity.  At the same time, Turkey reduces its exposure 
by signaling to world markets its ongoing commitment 
sound monetary and fiscal policy.  The IMF program and EU 
accession process are important "anchors" in this regard. 
But Serdengecti himself, who -- as is repeatedly 
reaffirmed to us by bankers and businesspeople -- is 
personally credited with "slaying the inflation dragon" 
(ref), is another key anchor of credibility.  Managing a 
transition will be delicate, and the government is well 
advised by Serdengecti to announce its intentions soon, 
whatever it intends to do. 
MCELDOWNEY