06ANKARA6118
Mission Turkey Public Diplomacy Strategy for FY-07
Thu Oct 26 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO0740
PP RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #6118/01 2991349
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 261349Z OCT 06
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9614
INFO RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 1510
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1264UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 006118 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM AMBASSADOR ROSS WILSON TO UNDER SECRETARY FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY 
AND PUBLIC AFFAIRS KAREN HUGHES; INFO EUR - A/S FRIED, DAS BRYZA, 
DAS GRAFFY, EUR/PPD, EUR/SE, ECA, IIP 
 
E.O 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO OIIP OEXC SCUL TU
SUBJECT: Mission Turkey Public Diplomacy Strategy for FY-07 
 
Sensitive But Unclassified 
 
¶1. (U)  Summary:  Public Diplomacy is a critically important 
component of our diplomatic efforts in Turkey.  In this cable, I 
describe our current public diplomacy environment, offer our 
strategy for FY-2007, and provide a list of top program priorities 
under this strategy for enhanced support and funding.  End summary. 
 
----------------- 
Introduction 
----------------- 
 
¶2.  (U)  Introduction: The German Marshall Fund's 2006 Transatlantic 
Trends poll starkly outlined the challenges U.S. public diplomacy 
currently faces in Turkey.  When asked, "How desirable is it that 
the United States exert strong leadership in world affairs," 69 
percent of Turks polled said it was undesirable, with 56 percent 
saying "very undesirable" and only 14 percent desiring such a U.S. 
role.  Eighty-one percent of Turks said they disapproved of 
President Bush's handling of international policies.  When asked to 
rate their feelings of various countries on a scale of 0 to 100, the 
Turkish respondents only gave the United States a 20 (down eight 
points from the previous year). 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  And yet, Turks consider the United States to be a 
critical country for their own nation's priorities. We are expected 
to "solve" Turkey's PKK, Cyprus and EU problems, and there is broad 
recognition that our role on Iraq, Iran, the Middle East, every 
security and other issues is essential for advancing Turkish 
interests. Over 116,000 Turks visited the United States in 2005, and 
each year Turkey sends more students to American universities and 
colleges than any other European country.  Comments about Turkey by 
almost any American - officials, journalists, academics, etc. - 
receive immediate coverage in the Turkish media.  Turks care about 
the United States - but they also are suspicious of our objectives 
and fear how American policies might affect their own nation. 
 
---------------------------- 
General Environment 
---------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Today's Turkey interacts with the world in ways which 
would have been politically taboo even five years ago.  Economic, 
political, and social reforms have strengthened Turkey's links with 
other nations.  The Turkish government and military have 
participated in international efforts in Afghanistan and the 
Balkans, and the government of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan 
won legislative approval in September 2006 to contribute Turkish 
forces to the strengthened UNIFIL operation in Lebanon. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  But the vociferous domestic debate over the UNIFIL 
decision, and over the accession process for possible admission to 
the EU, demonstrate that many Turks remain concerned over their 
enhanced interaction with the outside world.  The Turkish public 
tends to be conservative, and their deep patriotism is sometimes 
mixed with hints of xenophobic nationalism and deep skepticism over 
other nations' "real intentions" towards Turkey.  Opponents of 
Turkish engagement often cite Ataturk's "Peace at home, peace 
abroad" motto to justify isolationist policies, while launching 
legal attacks on authors or journalists who "impugn" Turkey, Turkish 
institutions, or "Turkishness."  They also play on the popular 
Turkish mistrust of other countries, expressed in the saying, "The 
only friend of a Turk is another Turk."  Opposition political groups 
increasingly use the "American hammer" to attack government 
initiatives, arguing that "doing what American wants" is 
antithetically opposed to Turkey's own goals.  This negative 
environment is exacerbated by the start of the Turkish "election 
year" for selection of the new president and parliament in 2007. 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  Nevertheless, the Turkish-American relationship remains 
important for both nations.  When we look at our own foreign policy 
priorities - in the Middle East, Europe, and Central Asia - Turkey 
often appears as a nearly indispensable partner because of where it 
is and what it is.  We need Turkey on our side when we address our 
immediate and long-term objectives concerning Iraq, Iran, Syria, the 
Broader Middle East, and energy independence capacity in Eurasia. 
Turkey's status as a secular democracy with a Muslim-majority 
population also makes it an important nation for the United States. 
The July 5, 2006 "Shared Vision and Structured Dialogue to Advance 
the Turkish-American Strategic Partnership" provided a new basis for 
further cooperation, which was enhanced by the October 2, 2006 
meeting between President Bush and Prime Minister Erdogan.  The 
appointment of General Joseph Ralston as the Special Envoy for 
Countering the PKK terrorist organization received a cautiously 
positive response from the Turkish government and public, but also 
added to expectations for prompt and effective measures against the 
PKK.  American public diplomacy in Turkey thus faces significant 
challenges - but these are accompanied by real opportunities for 
 
ANKARA 00006118  002 OF 004 
 
 
advancing our objectives and interests. 
 
-------------------- 
Strategic Goals 
-------------------- 
 
¶7.  (U)  a. FOREIGN POLICY GOAL:  Turkey supports US policies on 
major issues of mutual concern (e.g., the Global War on Terrorism, 
Iraq, Iran, BMENA, develop of alternative energy supply routes in 
region).  RELATED PUBLIC DIPLOMACY GOAL:  Key audiences receive 
accurate, effective and frequent advocacy of USG policies and 
priorities. 
 
b. FOREIGN POLICY GOAL: Maintain or strengthen commitment of Turkey 
to partnership with US and key Western institutions (NATO, EU). 
RELATED PUBLIC DIPLOMACY GOAL: Strengthen Turkish understanding of 
US values and society, in ways which enable discussion of key issues 
relevant to Turkey, and strengthen US-Turkish partnership through 
cultural programs, exchanges, and English-language programs. 
 
c. FOREIGN POLICY GOAL: Increase understanding of US policies and 
values, and support for US-Turkey relationship, among specific 
segments of Turkish society.  RELATED PUBLIC DIPLOMACY GOAL: 
Increase contact with youth audience (over 65 percent of Turkey's 
population is less than 35 years old), religious leaders and 
opinion-leaders, and population in southeast Turkey, while 
strengthening relationship with alumni of USG exchange programs and 
American universities. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Public Diplomacy Environment 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  a. There is currently deep skepticism/suspicion of US 
policies and goals in Turkey, related to current issues of top 
priority in the country. 
 
b. This negative environment is exacerbated by the start of the 
Turkish "election year" for selection of the new president and 
parliament, accompanied by a rise in xenophobic nationalist views 
and actions (especially from the opposition) which affect 
perceptions of the US, NATO, and EU. 
 
c. Turkey-specific issues concerning secularism and Islamization 
affect mission efforts to reach out to traditional leaders and 
communities. 
 
--------------------- 
Key Audiences 
--------------------- 
 
¶9.  (U)  a. Leaders in government, Parliament, media, academia, 
NGOs, culture, and business. 
 
b. Rising/future leaders in those sectors: the new generation. 
 
c. Specific target audiences for particular emphasis:  Youth, 
religious, southeast Turkey, alumni. 
 
------------------------ 
Program Priorities 
------------------------ 
 
¶10.  (U)  Given this environment, we propose a three-part public 
diplomacy strategy for FY-07: (a) programs to effectively 
communicate policy issues and priorities through a "context and 
consult" approach; (b) activities to address social and domestic 
issues of concern through the perspective of the American 
experience; and (c) initiatives that strengthen mission relations 
with specific audiences of importance. 
 
¶11.  (SBU)  POLICY PROGRAMS: Policy advocacy remains a top priority 
for this post.  In the current Turkish environment, the automatic 
tendency of our contacts is to immediately focus on American 
policies in negative and critical ways.  Our most effective policy 
programs respond to this environment by accurately presenting our 
positions and honestly addressing policy disagreements, while 
maintaining that we can sometimes have differing ideas and still be 
close and effective partners.  In these programs, we also work with 
our target audiences to look at issues of importance more broadly 
("context") and seek the views of our target audiences as to how 
these issues can best be addressed ("consult").  This approach 
forces our contacts to seriously think about the issue, and give us 
their views (rather than simply jumping on the United States for 
anything we might be doing).  It also enables us to draw from their 
own points when they support our policies, while noting reasons why 
we might differ. 
 
 
ANKARA 00006118  003 OF 004 
 
 
¶12.  (U)  "THE AMERICAN EXPERIENCE" INITIATIVE: There are a number 
of social, cultural, and political issues of importance to Turkey's 
internal situation, which also can affect Turkish-American 
relations.  Domestic sensitivities (and suspicion of foreign 
meddling) make it hard to discuss these topics by directly 
addressing Turkey's own issues.  However, we are able to implement 
programs that look at how the United States has dealt with the same 
issues.  Our representatives focus solely on the American experience 
- when asked what they would tell Turkey to do, we recommend that 
they respond, "That's for you Turks to decide.  I can tell you what 
we did in America, and talk about my nation's challenges and 
achievements."  Their talks invariably lead into discussions in 
which our Turkish participants discuss their own perceptions of the 
topic, as it relates to Turkey, while increasing their understanding 
of our own society and political system. 
 
¶13.  (U)  SPECIFIC PRIORITY AUDIENCES:  In addition to the general 
public diplomacy objectives outlined above, post's FY-07 priorities 
in Turkey will include programs specifically aimed at the following 
important audience groups:  Turkish youth (over 70 percent of the 
population is under the age of 35); religious leaders and 
opinion-makers; alumni of USG exchange programs and American 
universities; and leaders (current and future) in southeast Turkey. 
The southeast region of Turkey is distinct and important in terms of 
its population, its relative lack of development, and its intimate 
involvement in issues related to Turkey's running conflict with the 
PKK terrorist organization.  This makes it a key audience for our 
public diplomacy strategy in Turkey. 
 
---------------------------- 
Communication Tools 
---------------------------- 
 
¶14.  (U)  a. Direct outreach by Embassy and USG officials (via media 
and direct contact), speaker programs, and transmission of texts via 
Internet and web site on policy issues, using "consult and context" 
approach. 
 
b. Use of non-USG speakers, exchanges, and materials to increase 
understanding of US society and values on issues of concern - e.g., 
freedom of speech/expression, relationship between secularism and 
religion in US, US approaches for dealing with domestic violence, 
the role of the judiciary in America, minority relations in America, 
and cultural and linguistic diversity in the United States. 
 
c. Continued critical importance of exchanges (especially Fulbright, 
International Visitors, and high school exchanges), cultural 
programs, and English-language programs to achieve our goals of 
increasing Turkish understanding of US values and society, 
strengthening the US-Turkish partnership, and improving our outreach 
to Turkish youth. 
 
------------------------------- 
Programs and Initiatives 
------------------------------- 
 
¶15.  (U)   The following are Mission Turkey's top priorities for 
enhanced or new funding in FY-07.  All of them were included in 
post's submission under the pilot country initiative, with the 
exception of the final item -- that is based on the 
subsequently-announced Global Cultural Initiative: 
 
a. English-language programs:  Increase funding for English Language 
Fellows, to fund 14 fellows annually in Turkey; continue and expand 
funding for ACCESS micro scholarships; provide funding to expand 
summer camp program. 
b. Rapid Translation Capability:  Provide funding to increase post's 
capability for quick and accurate translation of texts, transcripts, 
and publications. 
c. Youth exchanges:  Maintain current funding for Fulbright program; 
increase funding for high school exchanges and International Visitor 
Leadership programs aimed at young (under 30) leaders/future 
leaders. 
d. Religious audience:  Funding for focused exchanges (including 
academic exchanges) involving religious leaders and opinion leaders, 
(including possible relationship to Hartford Theological Seminary 
program with Turkey). 
e. Sports:  Funding to bring US basketball players to Turkey (with 
particular focus on programs for girls in southeast Turkey), and to 
create American Corners-type educational collections for placement 
in youth centers and basketball programs throughout Turkey. 
f. Alumni:  Funding to establish new LES (local employee) position 
to coordinate USG exchange alumni outreach efforts, and to identify 
effective ways for Mission to reach out to the thousands of Turkish 
graduates of American universities. 
g. Southeast Turkey:  New Public Diplomacy Foreign Service Officer 
position for consulate in Adana (which currently has no PD 
officer). 
 
ANKARA 00006118  004 OF 004 
 
 
h. Global Cultural Initiative:  Funding for following GCI programs: 
(1) a Kennedy Center program focusing on public-private partnerships 
that support culture in America, featuring a two-person team from 
the Kennedy Center:  one manager who can talk about methods for 
developing private sector support for culture and one private sector 
representative who can discuss the benefits private companies and 
individuals gain from supporting cultural programs and organizations 
in the United States.  (2) An AFI exchanges project focusing on 
women in film in America and Turkey, with American and Turkish film 
professionals showing their films. Discussing their experiences, and 
developing direct links.  (3)A National Endowment for the Arts 
literary exchange focusing on works by and/or for youth, including 
translations, author DVCs and exchanges, and "Big Read" type events 
in both nations to increase awareness of these works. 
 
WILSON