06ANKARA27
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Jan 03 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1609
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0027/01 0031645
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 031645Z JAN 06
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2336
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 6824
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 9438
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 0181
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 5042
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 4750
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1365
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/CDRUSAE IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OSS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000027 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, JANUARY 3, 2006 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Turkish Ambassador In Iraq Escapes Assassination - Sabah 
US Allegedly Bribes Iraqi Clergymen - Hurriyet 
Pentagon Hires Imams in Iraq - Sabah 
UN to Question Assad on Hariri Killing - Hurriyet 
Haddam Preparing to Replace Assad - Milliyet 
Haddam: Assad Had Threatened Hariri - Tercuman 1/1 
Sharon Wants to Annex West Bank - Hurriyet 
Bush Defends Domestic Wiretapping - Milliyet 
84 Captives on Hunger Strike at Gitmo - Aksam 1/1 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Ankara Denies US Asked for Bases to Strike Iran - Radikal 
US Requests Airbase from Azerbaijan - Cumhuriyet 
Pentagon Allocates Funds for Iraqi Clergy - Cumhuriyet 
Shiites, Kurds Agree to Form Coalition in Iraq - Zaman 1/1 
US Tightens Iran `Noose' - Cumhuriyet 
Straw to Visit Turkey in January - Cumhuriyet 
Abbas Implies Election Delay in Palestine - Zaman 
HAMAS Ends Cease-Fire with Israel - Cumhuriyet 1/2 
Ahmadinejad: Zionism Amounts to `New Fascism' - Yeni Safak 
Iranian Kurds Establish `Kurdistan United Front' - Radikal 
100 Sudanese Killed by Police in Cairo - Yeni Safak 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Ankara Rejects Claims US Wants Turkish Bases to Strike Iran: 
The Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA) said on Monday that 
newspaper reports claiming that the United States has asked 
Ankara for permission to use military bases in Turkey for 
possible attacks against Iran are false.  `This speculation 
has no connection with reality.  Turkey believes the 
problems in its region should be resolved through dialogue, 
and believes that our region does not need any new 
problems,' the MFA said in a statement.  Government 
Spokesman Cemil Cicek lashed out at the press for publishing 
`wrong, unfounded and totally baseless reports' that `has 
made Turkey the target of terrorist organizations.'  `Our 
diplomats in foreign missions, who devotedly work to fulfill 
their duties, pay the cost of such speculation.  We have 
tried to explain many times that these press reports are not 
valid,' Cicek said.  Some Turkish newspapers have repeated 
stories in foreign newspapers claiming that a series of high- 
profile US visitors to Ankara in recent months have been 
preparing the ground for US strikes from Turkey against 
Iran's nuclear facilities. 
 
Turkeys' Ambassador Survives Attack in Baghdad:  Turkey's 
Ambassador to Iraq, Unal Cevikoz, survived an attack on his 
convoy by some 15 assailants in Baghdad on Monday.  The 
gunmen damaged some of the vehicles, but no injuries were 
reported.  The Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA) strongly 
denounced the attack.  Government spokesman Cemil Cicek said 
that Turkey had become the target of terrorist attacks due 
to false press reports that the US had asked Turkey for 
cooperation in a possible strike against Iran. 
 
General Ozkok Calls for Changes to Turkish Anti-Terror Law: 
 
ANKARA 00000027  002 OF 004 
 
 
The head of the Turkish armed forces, General Hilmi Ozkok, 
called for legal changes in the anti-terrorism law, 
complaining that recent changes to the law have made the 
fight against terrorist more difficult.  In an article 
published in a magazine issued by retired military officers, 
Ozkok complained that the new regulations terrorists broader 
room to maneuver.  He added that anti-terror regulations in 
Turkey should be in line with similar provisions in EU 
countries.  Cicek said after a cabinet meeting yesterday 
that changes to the anti-terror bill were possible. 
 
Turkey, Israel, Palestine to Sign Agreement on Erez 
Industrial Zone:  On Wednesday, Foreign Minister Abdullah 
Gul will sign an agreement with Israeli and Palestinian 
officials to reactivate the Erez industrial zone in the 
northern Gaza Strip.   Talks between Turkey and Israel on 
the security of the industrial zone are continuing.  The 
Turkish Union of Chambers (TOBB) will handle the management 
of the zone, a project that will provide employment 
opportunities for 10,000 Palestinians.  Goods manufactured 
in Erez factories will be able to enter the EU, the US, and 
Gulf countries duty-free. 
 
Gul on Turkey-US, EU, Pamuk Trial:  The conservative/opinion 
maker "Zaman" carried an exclusive interview with Foreign 
Minister Abdullah Gul on Sunday.  Following are excerpts 
from the interview: 
 
`Ties between Turkey and the United States are based on 
solid ground.  There is strong cooperation between the two 
countries.  There can be different opinions and tendencies 
even among family members, and Turkey and the US have had 
such differences in the past.  We share a similar vision 
with the US in terms of establishing a stable authority in 
Iraq.  It is our primary concern to see Iraq take steps 
towards democratization and stability.  We want to maintain 
these relations that date back 50 years.' 
 
`The visits by FBI and CIA officials were routine.  It is 
also routine for Turkish intelligence officials to meet with 
intelligence officials from other countries.  The visit paid 
by US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice to Turkey 
indicates that the two countries have strong ties.  However, 
this has nothing to do with such countries as Iran and 
Syria.  Such issues may be a source of speculation for the 
foreign media.  I made similar explanations at the Cairo 
meeting of the Arab League as well.' 
 
 `The AKP government is conscious of the EU process.  Many 
claim that there is a decade ahead of Turkey before it 
becomes a full member of the EU.  There will be obstacles 
and ups and downs in the course of time.  Each member 
country went through this same process.  Turkey is doing a 
good job and is covering ground rapidly.  The process has 
not been suspended or slowed down.  All our institutions are 
carrying out this work with great enthusiasm.' 
 
`There is one EU member that we do not recognize.  We will 
now see how much they will exploit this issue.  The 
important thing here is the extension of the Customs Union 
agreement in a way that will include all EU member 
countries.  We will discuss the supplementary protocol when 
it comes before the Turkish parliament. We have made the 
necessary plans regarding this issue.' 
 
`Only people who are anti-Turkish and Orhan Pamuk himself 
have benefited from the recent debates (on the issue of the 
Armenian `genocide.')  Pamuk's ratings have increased.  I 
believe these debates were intentional.' 
 
ANKARA 00000027  003 OF 004 
 
 
 
Kurdish Mayors Ask Denmark Not to Ban Roj-TV:  A prosecutor 
in Turkey's mainly Kurdish southeastern province of 
Diyarbakyr launched an investigation of 56 mayors from the 
Kurdish party DTP for sending a letter to Danish Prime 
Minister Andres Fogh Rasmussen in which the mayors asked the 
PM to resist pressure from Ankara to prohibit Roj-TV 
broadcasts.  The mayors claimed in the letter that Roj-TV is 
playing an important role in the struggle for 
democratization and human rights in Turkey, adding that 
closing Roj-TV would make it more difficult for Turkey's 
Kurds to gain access to Kurdish language broadcasting. 
Turkish papers note that four other Kurdish channels are 
being kept `on standby' to continue broadcasting if Denmark 
bans Roj-TV.  The owner of Roj-TV, the Mesopotamia Company, 
has obtained authorization from Danish authorities for the 
four new channels. 
 
Matsakis Released in Turkish Cyprus:  Marios Matsakis, a 
Greek Cypriot lawmaker in the European Parliament, has been 
released from custody in Turkish Cyprus.  Matsakis was 
arrested when he tried to enter the `TRNC' last weekend for 
violating a high-security military area in the north and 
stealing a Turkish flag early in December.  He was brought 
before a military court today.  The presiding judge decded 
to suspend the case against him until his term as a member 
of the European Parliament ends, and ordered his release. 
 
Russia-Ukraine Natural Gas Dispute:  Dailies report on 
Tuesday that the Russia-Ukraine gas dispute has drawn 
attention to Turkey's shortage of gas reserves, as there are 
no storage facilities in Turkey.  Energy experts say 
Istanbul faces the risk of being left without natural gas as 
a result of the row between Russia and Ukraine.  Government 
officials insist, however, that there is no problem at the 
moment.  Papers report that Russia and Ukraine have assured 
the Turkish Foreign Ministry that gas to Turkey will not be 
cut.  Ankara is largely dependent on Russia for its natural 
gas supply, and any crisis could leave Turkey without power. 
Turkey gets 65 percent of its gas from Russia. 
 
Turkey among Largest Exporters around the World:  Turkish 
exports rose in 2005 to a record level of 73.4 billion USD, 
pro-government "Yeni Safak" reports on its front page.  The 
record year makes Turkey the world's 22nd largest exporting 
country. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: 
 
"What is happening?" 
Gungor Mengi commented in the mass appeal "Vatan" (1/3): 
"At last, sources from the Prime Minister's office denied 
that the US requested the use of Turkish bases as a staging 
ground for attacks on Iran, as reported by the German and 
Israel press. It is not likely that the US will launch an 
operation against Iran just to end its nuclear program. 
Even if they did want to, the US would not need Turkey for 
such actions, because there are many places closer to Iran 
that the US can use with less risk.  Any pressure on Turkey 
for the use of the bases will only increase anti-American 
feelings.  Already many surveys show that Turkish people 
consider the US as one of the biggest threats to Turkey's 
security.  It is definite that the US did not request bases 
from Turkey.  But there is one question that we need to know 
the answer in order to have peace in mind -- why were the 
recent CIA and FBI visits announced so loudly while prior 
visits have always been kept very quiet?" 
 
 
ANKARA 00000027  004 OF 004 
 
 
"Why was the Turkish Ambassador to Baghdad attacked?" 
Mustafa Balbay wrote in the leftist-nationalist "Cumhuriyet" 
(1/3):  "Luckily no one was injured or killed in the armed 
attack against the Turkish Ambassador to Baghdad.  Lately, 
Turkey's Iraq policy has been rather noticeably leaning 
toward the Sunnis. The Turkish Foreign Ministry played the 
role of mediator when the US Ambassador to Baghdad Zalmay 
Khalilzad and Sunni officials meet together.  After that 
meeting it was announced that Sunnis wouldn't boycott the 
elections.  Turkey undertook an important responsibility in 
the name of the US, and the elections in Iraq were presented 
as democratic.  Turkey continued its relationship with the 
Sunnis even after this meeting in order to solidify Iraq's 
territorial integrity.  Turkish Ambassador Cevikoz was 
attacked during his return from a visit to Sunni Ulema 
Union.  This organization is very friendly with the `Hivar 
Front,' the main political resistance in Iraq.  The US' new 
Iraq policy is `if you cannot administrate it just eliminate 
it'.  The US doesn't want Turkey to have a close 
relationship with the Sunnis.  Yesterday, the MFA in an 
official statement said that `such attacks would not stop 
Turkey's support for Iraq which protects its democracy, 
political unity and territorial integrity'.  This is a very 
interesting announcement; an attack launched against the 
Turkish Ambassador while Turkey supports Iraq's territorial 
integrity!  Who could be the responsible of this attack?  Of 
course, those who do not want a united Iraq.  We are not 
after a conspiracy theory, but this attack screams that 
there is a plot." 
 
WILSON