06ATHENS1144
COUNTRY CLEARANCE AND THREAT ASSESSMENT
Thu May 04 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Athens
VZCZCXYZ0025
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTH #1144/01 1241439
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 041439Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY ATHENS
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 5330UNCLAS ATHENS 001144 
 
SIPDIS 
 
CODEL 
SIPDIS 
 
H FOR FLECK AND PARKS 
H PLEASE PASS TO CODEL PENCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT ASEC AFIN GM GR IZ OREP TU
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE AND THREAT ASSESSMENT 
FOR CODEL PENCE + 8 (MAY 5-6) 
 
REF:  STATE 66587 
 
¶1.  Embassy warmly welcomes and grants country clearance for 
the visit of the House International Relations Committee 
Delegation led by Rep. Mike Pence and including Rep. Mike 
Ferguson, Rep. Lincoln Davis, Rep. Jim Costa, Rep. Joseph 
Pitts. Control Officer for the visit will be Marielle 
Martin, who can be reached during office hours at 30-210- 
2413, at home at 30-210-674-0086 or on cellular at 30-6948- 
04-4298. Her unclassified email is MartinMH@state.gov and 
her fax is 30-210-725-3025. The Embassy's after hours duty 
receptionist can be reached at 30-210-729-4444 
 
¶2. Reservations have been made at the Hilton Athens, 46 
Vasilissis Sofias Avenue, Athens 10160,Greece. The hotel 
phone number is 30-210-728-1000; fax 30-210-728-1111. We 
understand CODEL's fiscal data cable will authorize actual 
room rates and embassy will pay for rooms out of fiscal 
data.  Room rates will be charged in euros, and these rates 
are inclusive of taxes and breakfast. Travelers are expected 
to pay their own hotel bills prior to departing.  If the 
room reserved is not to be used, the reservation must be 
canceled prior 24 hours prior to expected arrival date, 
otherwise the CODEl or the traveler is responsible for the 
cost of the unused room. 
 
¶3. The official schedule for Athens will begin on Friday May 
¶5. The schedule will include a country team briefing, a 
meeting with Deputy Foreign Minister Valinakis, and cultural 
activities. 
 
¶4.  It is important that all visitors carefully read the 
information and instructions provided below.  Post wants to 
ensure the best possible service to all official visitors 
and will work closely to arrange details of each visit. 
 
¶5. Transportation is being arranged as requested and as per 
e-mail correspondence from the control officer. 
 
¶6.  Documents required:  Diplomatic and official passport 
holders must have Greek diplomatic visas, a valid Schengen 
visa or diplomatic ID from any other Schengen country, in 
addition to their passport, in order to enter Greece.  The 
Embassy will be unable to obtain planeside visas for USG 
employees arriving in Greece without proper documentation. 
Holders of tourist passports do not/not require visas.  USG 
employees who plan to operate a motor vehicle while in 
Greece must be in possession of a valid U.S. drivers' 
license as well as a valid International Drivers' License 
and must carry proof of third party liability insurance 
while operating the vehicle. 
 
¶7.  Each visitor requiring support from the embassy, 
regardless of length of stay, must bring/forward fiscal data 
to pay for direct costs of the visit.  Each military TDYer 
requesting embassy support should be able to provide the 
sponsoring military entity at post fiscal data, even if 
staying at post less than thirty days.  Each agency, 
organization or visiting delegation will be charged for the 
actual costs attributed to its visit.  Direct charge costs 
include, but are not limited to:  American and LES overtime 
(for such services as airport expediting, cashier 
accommodation exchange, control room staffing, 
representational event support), travel and per diem costs 
incurred by post personnel in support of visitor's field 
travel, rental of vehicles and other equipment, long 
distance telephone calls, office supplies, gasoline and 
other vehicle maintenance costs, departure tax and other 
airport fees.  Post will not provide service if fiscal data 
is not provided for the direct charges. 
 
¶8.  Currency:  Greece is a member of the European Monetary 
Union, and the Euro is the currency of the country. 
Accommodation exchange is available on a limited basis 
(responsible agency/section signed authorization) at the 
Embassy cashier office - hours are M-F 0930 - 1030, 1200 - 
1300 and 1430 - 1530.  However, ATMs are readily available 
throughout the country (there is also one at the Embassy); 
they will accept U.S. debit cards.  In addition, most banks 
and major hotels provide accommodation exchange services. 
Post is unable to provide reverse accommodation. 
 
¶9.  Office space/laptops/mobile phones:  CODEL control room 
will have computer connectivity and accessibility as per 
CODEL request. Office space in both classified and 
unclassified areas is extremely limited.  For those 
 
SIPDIS 
employees planning on bringing laptops and modems to use in 
their hotels, please remember that this equipment can be 
used for processing unclassified (non-SBU) information only. 
 
Current here is 220 volt, 50 cycles, and outlets are two- 
pronged.  Bring along a plug adapter and equipment that can 
handle the voltage.  Laptops are not permitted in controlled 
access areas of the Embassy.  European GSM mobile phones 
function normally in Greece. 
 
¶10.  Presidential Directive - Trafficking in Persons:  All 
TDY personnel are reminded that President Bush has signed a 
National Security Presidential Directive to advance the 
fight against trafficking in persons.  The United States is 
committed to eradicate trafficking both domestically and 
abroad. Trafficking in persons exists in Greece.  A 
significant number of the people involved in prostitution, 
pornography and the sex tourism phenomenon, are trafficked. 
They are compelled by force, fraud and coercion to submit to 
sexual exploitation.  TDY personnel are advised that any 
involvement with the commercial sex industry is unacceptable 
in light of the diplomatic and foreign policy goals of the 
United States and the ethical standards of the Department of 
State and this Mission. Embassy Management will not tol%QaTeQ 
!&Q 3Uc( ijr)lvement by Mission per3an&ed a*d$ i. 4hiQ 
regard, will enforce a,d Re,e6a*4 2e%Qd!t)e"Q regarding 
conduct a*d 1u)T!"i,it) )f U*S. Government employeesQ 
qt!T)-f%d !bQoa$" 
 
¶11.  Security informatik& 
Q 
 
¶A.  E-"a3Qy Athens is designated "h)gh" &kr i&dig%n'U3 
terrorism.  In the pa1Q$ l)aa, Ar%ek t%Rrmrist groups have 
targ%4%d Prmm)f%.t G2ee)s as well as certain non%Ar%%k 
Mf&i#i!ls, including Americans.  Se beli%V% tha4 4(e Threat 
to official US C-VeQf-e*4 0e2Qg*fed -n short-term 
assignments to Greece or visiting for tourism is relatively 
low.  The indigenous groups historically have engaged in 
extensive operational surveillance over long periods of 
time.  In 2003 and again in 2004, the Greek Government made 
significant progress to combat domestic terrorism by 
successfully convicting the leader and key hit men of the 
November 17 terrorist organization and of the ELA.  17N was 
responsible for assassinating prominent Greeks and five 
members of the US Mission over the course of its 30-year 
history.  Convicted ELA members were responsible for several 
bombings, attempted murders and were involved in at least 
one assassination.  While these convictions likely impacted 
on the operational capabilities of 17N and ELA, it is too 
soon to assess whether the threat from domestic terrorism is 
completely eliminated.  There have been several attacks 
against Greek police over the last year, including the 
December 2004 assassination of a special police guard in 
front of the residence of the British military attach.  We 
urge vigilance and caution, as the worldwide threat from 
other terrorist groups against Americans in general remains 
high.  Official Americans should assume they are potential 
targets. 
 
¶B.  Over the past year, the U.S. Embassy has experienced 
bomb threats, protest marches, and anti-U.S. demonstrations. 
These protests are generally peaceful though a few provoked 
random acts of violence.  Travelers to Greece are advised 
that protests or demonstrations could occur at any time; 
unwitting observers or bystanders might be identified, to 
their disadvantage, as Americans.  RSO recommends that 
official U.S. travelers in Greece remain alert when moving 
about in public places and avoid certain places where 
demonstrators frequently congregate.  These places include 
the Polytechnical University area, located on 28 October 
(Patission) Street between the National Archeological Museum 
and Omonia Square; Exarchion Square, located near Kolonaki; 
Omonia and Syntagma Squares, which are often used as launch 
sites for large demonstrations; and Mavili Square, located 
near the U.S. Embassy.  Visitors should keep abreast of news 
about large demonstrations and avoid these areas and metro 
stops. 
 
¶C. The 4th European Social Forum is taking place in Athens 
all this week, with activities culminating this Friday and 
Saturday.  The Regional Security Office expects potentially 
violent and dangerous demonstrations in and around the city 
to include the U.S. Embassy on Saturday afternoon. 
Anarchists are expected to be even more active than usual, 
and a likely location for such activity is in the 
Monastiraki and Plaka areas, as well as in Exarchia. It is 
strongly advised that these areas of town be avoided this 
entire week and especially this coming weekend. 
 
 
¶D.  Crime is rated "medium" in Greece.  For TDY visitors, 
pick pocketing and purse snatching are the most common 
crimes.  Taxis are generally safe though metered cabs are 
 
recommended.  Taxis too will often pick up more than one 
passenger unless prior arrangements are made.  Crimes of 
opportunity - thefts, break-ins, and occasional scams - are 
on the rise.  Travelers should be especially cautious with 
wallets, purses, and parcels when traveling on crowded 
streets, public buses, trolleys, and/or subways.  There have 
been several instances of motorcyclists approaching cars 
stuck in traffic, reaching through open windows or smashing 
closed ones, and stealing whatever is within reach.  We have 
also recently learned of a new method in which motorcyclists 
open the trunk of a vehicle and remove the contents.  The 
Embassy recommends keeping purses, parcels, handbags, etc. 
out of sight under the seat or on the floor of the car. 
Windows should be kept closed and doors locked.  Pedestrians 
may also be confronted by beggars and other street people 
who may attempt to divert attention, then steal unprotected 
valuables - either by pick pocketing or snatch-and-grab 
techniques.  Women are generally safe from violent crime in 
Greece.  Men are aggressive by American standards however 
when pursuing women. 
 
¶D.  Traffic in Greek urban areas, especially Athens and 
Thessaloniki, is undisciplined.  Greece has a poor record 
within the European Union for traffic fatalities, mainly due 
to excessive speeding.  Road rage is always a risk. 
Accidents can result in fistfights.  Drivers in Greece 
should exercise caution and common sense.  Drivers and 
pedestrians alike should exercise extreme caution when 
operating motor vehicles or when walking along roadways. 
Moreover, tourists who rent motorbikes either on the Greek 
mainland or its islands must wear helmets and must take 
special precautions on the local roads that are typically 
poorly maintained and frequently pothole-ridden.  Greece 
also has a poor record within the European Union in 
motorcycle deaths. 
 
Ries