06ATHENS681
CYPRIOT PRESIDENT GETS BOOST FROM PM ON HANDLING
Fri Mar 10 00:00:00 +0100 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Athens
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 ATHENS 000681 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/10/2016 
TAGS: PREL CY GR CYPRUS
SUBJECT: CYPRIOT PRESIDENT GETS BOOST FROM PM ON HANDLING 
OF CYPRUS ISSUE 
 
 
Classified By: AMB. CHARLES P. RIES FOR REASONS 1.4(B) AND (D) 
 
¶1.  (C)  SUMMARY: In Athens March 7-9 on one of his frequent 
working visits, Cypriot President Papadopoulos met top party 
leaders and GoG officials, including PM Karamanlis, and got a 
boost for his handling of the Cyprus issue.  In a joint press 
conference, PM Karamanlis praised the February 28 UNSYG 
Annan-Papadopoulos meeting in Paris as a step toward eventual 
resumption of negotiations and reiterated that Turkey must 
meet its EU obligations.  Press coverage was universally 
positive with the theme that the ball was now in Turkey's 
court.  Papadopoulos was once more able to command Greek 
support in his efforts to place the onus on Turkey and the 
Turkish Cypriots.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Papadopoulos Gets Boost From PM 
------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U)  Cypriot President Papadopoulos, visiting Athens 
March 7-9, met with the top Greek leadership, including PM 
Karamanlis, President Papoulias and FM Bakoyannis, and got 
strong statements of support for his handling of the Cyprus 
issue and, implicitly, for his interpretation of his meeting 
with the UNSYG.  In a joint press conference after their 
meeting, PM Karamanlis welcomed as an "extremely important 
development" the February 28 meeting between UNSYG Annan and 
Papadopoulos, a result of which was their proposal for 
technical talks between Greek and Turkish Cypriots.  The PM 
also stressed the need to create the proper conditions for a 
resumption of talks "without constricting timelines" and 
warned that "we do not have the luxury of another failure." 
Karamanlis praised Cyprus for "once again" proving that it is 
interested in a "just, lasting and viable" solution to the 
problem. 
 
¶3.  (U)  For his part, Papadopoulos, in answering a press 
conference question, took a swipe at the U.S. interest in 
direct trade with Cyprus.  In so doing he rejected the 
argument that such trade could help ease the isolation of the 
Turkish Cypriots or equalize the economic imbalance between 
the two sides. 
 
¶4.  (U)  The visit attracted very positive and fairly 
extensive press coverage, with reports emphasizing 
Papadopoulos and Karamanlis agreeing that the ball is now in 
Turkey's court and highlighting the need for Turkey to 
implement the Ankara Protocol -- i.e., open its airports and 
seaports to Greek Cypriot vessels. 
 
Message to Papadopoulos 
----------------------- 
 
¶5.  (C)  In a March 8 meeting and in subsequent 
conversations, MFA spokesman Koumoutsakos confirmed to poloff 
that the private GoG message to President Papadopoulos was to 
push to re-start negotiations.  Asked if Greece worried that 
Turkey's EU accession process might be in jeopardy if 
negotiations do not resume, Koumoutsakos responded that it 
was first and foremost Turkey's responsibility to honor its 
EU obligations.  However, he did admit that the GoG was 
concerned that there was not a more positive environment 
regarding a resumption of talks, even though publicly the GoG 
was touting the February 28 Paris meeting as an important 
step in this direction.  Being able to indicate such 
progress, he went on, would help the atmosphere within the EU 
vis-a-vis Turkey when the Commission issues its avis in the 
fall. 
 
¶6.  (C)  Koumoutsakos rejected the notion that the GoG just 
blindly supported whatever Papadopoulos proposed, saying that 
former FM Molyviatis had been very active in moderating 
Papadopoulos' behavior in the run-up to Turkey's October 3 EU 
accession invitation.  He added that this was in line with 
the GoG's continued desire to keep its relations with Turkey 
and the Cyprus issue on two different tracks. 
 
¶7.  (C)  British Ambassador Gass told us that in his own 
conversations, MFA Cyprus Director George Papadopoulos (no 
relation) had told him that there was "understandable 
euphoria" in Athens regarding the Annan-Papadopoulos meeting. 
 George Papadopoulos explained that President Papadopoulos' 
idea for two parallel tracks -- one on 
technical issues (health, the environment) and another more 
substantial track that would deal with sensitive issues 
(returns, for example) -- had essentially breathed new life 
into efforts to resolve the Cyprus problem. 
 
Annan Plan 
---------- 
 
¶8.  (C)  Ambassador met briefly with EU Enlargement 
Commissioner Ollie Rehn, on the margins of Rehn's March 9 
speech sponsored by ELIAMEP, one of Greece's premier foreign 
policy thinktanks.  Ambassador recalled that the European 
Commission had decided in 2004 that the Annan Plan was not 
inconsistent with the EU acquis.  Lately, Ambassador said, 
Nicosia had been making repeated assertions that its 
accession to the EU in 2004 totally changed the circumstances 
for reunification (and thereby calling into question the 
Annan Plan's conformity with the acquis.)  Ambassador noted 
that, in fact, nothing had changed, and he continued to make 
this point from time to time.  Rehn took the point and said 
he would similarly look for ways to recall that in its final 
form the Annan Plan had been found to be not inconsistent 
with EU norms.  (Comment: Recently, FM Bakoyannis declared 
the Annan Plan "history," but in the context that it had been 
rejected in its current form by a large majority of Greek 
Cypriots, not because it might be inconsistent with the EU 
acquis or unable to serve as a framework for a solution.  End 
Comment.) 
 
¶9.  (C) COMMENT:  Papadopoulos used his February 28 meeting 
with Annan to leverage endorsement from PM Karamanlis and 
others here for his efforts to portray himself as truly 
interested in resuming talks under UN auspices, as well as to 
place the onus on Turkey/Turkish Cypriots to respond to the 
technical talks offer. 
Ries