06BAGHDAD2350
DESCRIPTION OF INTERNATIONAL COMPACT AGREED UPON
Tue Jul 04 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO8622
OO RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #2350/01 1851937
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 041937Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5512
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC IMMEDIATE
INFO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 0497
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 002350 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR HADLEY, TREASURY FOR RKIMMITT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EAID EINV PGOV PREL IZ
SUBJECT: DESCRIPTION OF INTERNATIONAL COMPACT AGREED UPON 
IN BAGHDAD 
 
(SBU) On July 4, the following description of the 
International Compact was agreed upon in Baghdad by the GOI 
(DPM Barham Salih), the UN (Special Representative of the 
Secretary-General Ashraf Qazi), and Embassy Baghdad for use 
 
SIPDIS 
with the invitations to the Compact launch event to take 
place later this month (date TBD). 
 
BEGIN TEXT 
 
------------------------------------ 
The International Compact for Iraq: 
A Shared Vision, A Shared Commitment 
------------------------------------ 
 
The International Compact is an initiative of the Government 
of Iraq for a new partnership with the international 
community. Its purpose is to achieve a National Vision for 
Iraq which aims to consolidate peace and pursue political, 
economic and social development over the next five years. 
 
The primary focus will be to build a framework for Iraq's 
economic transformation and integration into the regional and 
global economy. However, it is recognized that good 
governance and resolution of security and political 
challenges are pre-requisites for progress in all other 
areas, including economic revival and normalization. 
 
The Compact will aim to build on the achievements of the 
Iraqi people and Government as envisaged by Security Council 
Resolution 1546, including the holding of two national 
elections; the drafting and adoption - through a national 
referendum - of a permanent constitution; the convening of 
the elected Council of Representatives and formation of a 
government of national unity. 
 
Through the Compact the Government and the international 
community will be committed to achieving a range of policy 
objectives in support of the National Vision. Similarly, the 
Compact will take account of several initiatives and measures 
for enhancing security and economic revival, chiefly the 
National Reconciliation Plan. 
 
------------------------------- 
A Commitment to the Strategies, 
Plans and Investments That Will 
Realize This Vision 
------------------------------- 
 
The Compact will be based on a shared commitment to the 
National Vision for Iraq and to the national objectives that 
support it. With respect to socio-economic development these 
objectives will be achieved through implementation of Iraq's 
National Development Strategy.  Therefore, the Compact will 
also be based on shared commitment to iterative and 
consultative development and implementation of the National 
Development Strategy, to underlying sector-by-sector 
strategies, and to the action and investment plans that will 
be defined by these strategies. 
 
------------------------- 
A Mechanism to Ensure 
These Commitments Are Met 
------------------------- 
 
The Compact will be implemented via a consultative group 
process, around a commonly understood fiscal framework 
against which substantive commitments will be made.  As part 
of this process, progress will be measured in terms of 
achievement of key strategic benchmarks. 
 
A follow-up mechanism will also be devised to coordinate 
pledges, trust funds and disbursement of capital in support 
of the Compact. In particular, existing pledges from the 
Madrid Conference and the IRFFI will require consideration. 
The Government of Iraq is supportive of IRFFI being refocused 
to augment the Compact. 
 
This mechanism should draw on lessons learned from the 
experience of creating and operating the IRFFI. A central 
principle is that where possible, assistance should be 
channeled through the Government budget. The private sector's 
potential contribution to Iraq's development needs should 
also be considered. 
 
-------------------- 
 
BAGHDAD 00002350  002 OF 003 
 
 
International and 
Regional Partnership 
-------------------- 
 
The Government recognizes the importance of regional 
relationships in support of Iraq's development. Regional 
cooperation must therefore underpin the international 
partnership that will be formed by the Compact. 
 
----- 
Scope 
----- 
 
The scope of the Compact would be to achieve both near- and 
long-term economic goals. These will address immediate needs, 
but also, through a process of meeting commitments to reform 
and restructuring, move Iraq along an evolutionary path away 
from aid receipt to financial self-sufficiency, economic 
development and growth. 
 
The scope of the Compact will also, necessarily, need to 
consider links with Iraq's security and political challenges. 
 In particular the significant fiscal implications of the 
security issue will need to be considered within the context 
of Iraq's economic development. 
 
Initiatives to address near and long term economic goals 
would be underpinned by a fiscal framework covering the full 
program period, likely to span 5 years - equivalent to the 
electoral mandate period of the current government. 
 
----------------------- 
Linked to Political and 
Security Considerations 
----------------------- 
 
This partnership will be based on a shared recognition that 
repairing the social fabric of Iraq will be essential for 
success. This will depend on good governance, improving 
security environment and the provision of basic services; 
strengthening dialogue, reconciliation and inclusiveness; the 
development of national and local political, social and civil 
society institutions; and effective human rights protection 
and rule of law systems that are in accordance with 
international norms. Collectively they represent the sine qua 
non for sustainable progress towards realizing the objectives 
of the Compact. Consequently, periodic coordination meetings 
will be held to monitor progress in the political and 
security situation and to formulate supporting programs in 
these critical areas. 
 
-------------------- 
Multilateral Support 
-------------------- 
 
The United Nations will play a central and impartial role in 
coordinating and monitoring implementation of the Compact 
agenda. In conjunction with the World Bank it will provide 
Iraq with expert assistance in formulating its objectives 
drawing, in particular, on the Millennium Development Goals. 
The result will be a joint plan to support the efforts of the 
Government to achieve internationally supported goals. 
 
The Compact is intended to be a statement of strong regional 
and international support for the political and economic 
vision of the elected government of Iraq underscored by 
specific financial commitments.  Accordingly, the pledging of 
assistance for the reconstruction and development plans of 
the Iraqi government would be welcomed as an important 
support for meeting agreed and measurable benchmarks for the 
disbursement of assistance. 
 
-------------------------- 
Formulation of the Compact 
-------------------------- 
 
The completed Compact document would be presented by the 
Government of Iraq at a high-level event in Iraq or the 
region by NLT than November 2006.  In September, ministerial 
meetings should be convened during the UNGA in New York and 
the IMF-WB annual meeting in Singapore to report progress on 
the compact and mobilize support for it. 
 
At this time, the strategies, action and investment plans 
will be presented. These will be implemented and further 
 
BAGHDAD 00002350  003 OF 003 
 
 
developed via an iterative process spanning the planning 
period of the Compact to 2011. 
 
Formulation of the Compact will take place around 
comprehensive national consultations to assess needs and 
pathways at Governorate and National levels. Similarly, 
planning will be based on current and projected capacity at 
all levels of government. 
 
In this capacity, the UN been invited to co-chair a 
Preparatory Group. In addition, the World Bank, which is 
planning to strengthen its presence in Baghdad, will act as a 
counterpart to assist and support the government to 
successfully develop a fiscal framework based on the Compact. 
The Bank will also work closely with the UN in supporting the 
Iraqi Government to formulate the National Vision for Iraq. 
 
----------------- 
Preparatory Group 
----------------- 
 
A Preparatory Group will provide strategic advice and 
engender high level political support to the Compact. The 
Preparatory Group would negotiate an executive timetable and 
assume responsibility for the Compact preparations including 
support to the Government of Iraq in development of action 
and investment plans and commitments that it would make 
through the Compact. It will also advise the Government of 
Iraq on follow-up mechanisms, as invited. 
 
The Preparatory Group would be co-chaired by the Government 
of Iraq and the UN, substantively supported by the World Bank 
and UNDP, closely coordinated with the IMF and other 
international financial institutions. It will report directly 
to the Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq and the Deputy 
Secretary-General of the United Nations. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
Membership of the Preparatory Group should, as far as 
possible, adhere to a principle of "wide but restricted" 
participation to maintain a balance between inclusiveness and 
operational efficiency. Accordingly, it would initially be 
open to significant contributors to Iraq's development and 
technical partners, namely: UN, World Bank, IMF, EC, Arab 
Development Fund, Islamic Development Bank, France, Germany, 
Italy, Japan, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, South Korea, Spain, UAE, 
UK, and US.  In addition, the Preparatory Group would invite 
the IRFFI Chair to participate in order to ensure proper 
coordination between the Compact and IRFFI trust funds. The 
Co-Chairs will designate a small steering group to assist the 
Preparatory Group in establishing a timetable, guiding 
negotiations and overseeing implementation, including the 
role of monitoring and evaluation against benchmarks once the 
Compact is launched. 
 
Further membership of the Preparatory Group would be 
determined by due consultation. 
 
END TEXT. 
Khalilzad