06BAGHDAD1180
COALITION SUPPORT FOR RRT ERBIL
Tue Apr 11 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO9716
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK RUEHMOS
DE RUEHGB #1180/01 1011716
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 111716Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3828
INFO RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC
RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 0017UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 001180 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV ECON MOPS PREL IZ KS
SUBJECT: COALITION SUPPORT FOR RRT ERBIL 
 
¶1.  (SBU) This is an action request.  Post requests 
that the Department issue instructions to deliver the 
points in paragraph six to the government of South 
Korea both in Washington and in Seoul on the 
establishment of a Regional Reconstruction Team (RRT) 
in Erbil, Iraq. 
 
---------- 
BACKGROUND 
---------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Building the capacity of the Iraqi 
provincial governments is a critical step in ensuring 
the continued development of a decentralized and 
democratic government that is transparent and 
responsive to the needs of its citizens.  The melding 
of Coalition military and civilian assets is crucial 
in expediting Iraqi transition to self-reliance and is 
necessary to support a robust engagement at the 
provincial level.  It is most effective to have 
established teams in place and ready to engage as soon 
as possible when the new provincial governments are 
seated.  This will enable assistance during the 
critical formative stages and help ensure long-term 
success.  The Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRTs) 
and Regional Reconstruction Teams assist Iraqi 
provincial governments to develop a transparent and 
sustained capability to govern, improve security and 
promote the rule of law, promote political and 
economic development, and provide the provincial 
administration skills necessary to meet the basic 
needs of the population.  The PRT/RRT initiative is 
flexible and facilitates integration of development 
and reconstruction activities in a province.  Eight 
PRTs and four RRTs (including Erbil) are planned, with 
the possibility that Coalition partners may choose to 
establish additional teams in their areas of 
responsibility.  Four PRTs are currently operating, 
with one additional US-led and one Coalition-led PRT 
scheduled to open officially in April. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The Republic of Korea (ROK) Civil-Military 
Operations (CMO) forces in the Kurdish region operate 
under the direction of the Civil Military Coordination 
Center (CIMIC) located at Camp Zaytun.  They have 
focused on building friendships, Iraqi Security Force 
(ISF) development, humanitarian assistance programs 
and infrastructure development.  In addition, the 
CIMIC operates a vocational training center near Erbil 
to provide courses in driving, machinery repair, and 
computer skills.  The Korean International Cooperation 
Agency (KOICA) funds major infrastructure projects, 
including sewage and water upgrades, within the 
Kurdistan Region provinces of Erbil, Sulaymaniyah, and 
Dahuk.  KOICA also maintains a grant aid and technical 
cooperation program to provide assistance aimed at 
building the skills of the Kurdistan Regional 
Government (KRG) government officials and promoting 
economic development. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The Koreans have a strong foundation of 
civil-military operations and mature relationships 
within the Kurdistan Region from which to facilitate 
the rapid establishment and integration of a RRT.  The 
ROK has performed excellent work in reconstruction and 
development in the region and has achieved tangible 
progress towards enhancing stability and improving the 
welfare of the Kurdistan citizens.  The Koreans also 
have significant PRT experience gained in Afghanistan. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The U.S. goal is to maximize overall 
Coalition partner support and encourage the ROK to 
lead an RRT in Erbil, while ensuring we have maximum 
flexibility on security-related issues.  On March 20, 
the National Coordination Team (NCT) Deputy Director 
met with the ROK in Erbil.  The Koreans expressed 
strong interest in supporting an RRT; however, they 
also stressed that they must wait on a final decision 
from their national government.  Post, to date, has 
not received notification of a decision from Seoul. 
 
-------------- 
TALKING POINTS 
-------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Begin talking points. 
 
-- The Government of Korea has a strong foundation of 
civil-military operations and mature relationships 
 
BAGHDAD 00001180  002 OF 002 
 
 
within the Kurdistan Region from which to facilitate 
the rapid establishment and integration of a Regional 
Reconstruction Team (RRT). 
 
-- Your government has performed excellent work in 
reconstruction and development in the region and has 
achieved tangible progress towards enhancing stability 
and improving the welfare of the Kurdistan citizens. 
You also have significant PRT experience from 
Afghanistan. 
 
-- The USG requests the Republic of Korea to consider 
participation in the PRT initiative as a full partner 
by hosting and supporting an RRT in Erbil for the 
Kurdistan Region. 
 
-- The USG encourages the Government of Korea to make 
a decision quickly to move ahead with the 
establishment of an RRT and provide the necessary work 
and housing space at Camp Zaytun.  Space could be in 
already established Korean facilities or, if not 
available, we request an area be designated for the 
RRT where the USG could pursue options of placing 
trailers until the USAID compound on Camp Zaytun is 
completed in late July or August. 
 
-- The USG invites the Government of Korea to assume 
the lead for the RRT by providing a civilian team 
leader if it so desires, a military co-deputy team 
leader (the US would also provide a co-deputy), a 
KOICA representative, a civil affairs group, and force 
protection personnel.  If you opt not to appoint a 
civilian team leader, the USG is prepared to do so. 
 
-- The US would provide a Department of State/USAID 
officer, an IRMO Provincial Project Manager, an Iraq 
Provincial Action Officer (IPAO), a Rule of Law 
Coordinator, local governance contractors, and a U.S. 
Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) engineer for each 
Kurdish province. 
 
-- The USG believes an RRT in Erbil is necessary to 
maintain a close engagement with Kurdistan government 
officials and to assist with developing the capacity 
of the regional government.  Your government is in the 
best position to do this due to your experience and 
established ties. 
 
-- The USG believes Korean involvement in the RRT 
could provide additional private sector development 
and commercial enterprise opportunities for the ROK 
throughout the Kurdistan Region. 
 
END TALKING POINTS. 
 
---------- 
CONCLUSION 
---------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Post requests that the Department consider 
instructing a demarche to the government of the 
Republic of Korea at the earliest possible date.  We 
believe the ROK PRT experience in Afghanistan and 
their outstanding working relationship in Erbil with 
KRG officials would provide a solid foundation upon 
which the RRT could continue to build.  The Koreans' 
expertise, support, and leadership are critical to 
reaching our mutual goal of building a durable 
democracy in Iraq. 
 
KHALILZAD