06BEIJING11932
AFM LI HUI PREVIEWS SCO SUMMIT, COMMENTS ON  U.S.
Mon Jun 12 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO5555
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #1932/01 1631143
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 121143Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8521
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHTA/AMEMBASSY ALMATY IMMEDIATE 1839
RUEHEK/AMEMBASSY BISHKEK IMMEDIATE 1248
RUEHDBU/AMEMBASSY DUSHANBE IMMEDIATE
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD IMMEDIATE 6406
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL IMMEDIATE 0255
RUEHNT/AMEMBASSY TASHKENT IMMEDIATE 1075UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 011932 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PTER PINL ASEC CH KG KZ
SUBJECT: AFM LI HUI PREVIEWS SCO SUMMIT, COMMENTS ON  U.S. 
SECURITY ALERT 
 
 
BEIJING 00011932  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  The Chinese Government is currently investigating 
reports received from the U.S. Embassy on increased 
risks to U.S. citizens in China and will do its utmost 
to safeguard diplomatic personnel and facilities, MFA 
Spokesperson Liu Jianchao stated during a special June 
12 press briefing on the June 15 Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization (SCO) Summit.  AFM Li emphasized that 
remarks made at the Summit by Iranian President 
Ahmadinejad should be seen as reflecting Iran's 
position and not the position of the SCO.  Regarding 
the 2005 Astana Declaration's "relevant provisions" on 
Coalition Forces stationed in the region, AFM Li 
remarked that China respects the relevant countries' 
decisions on the issue.  Kyrgyzstan will handle 
current discussions with Coalition Forces according to 
Bishkek's needs, interests, as well as SCO 
obligations, AFM Li said.  SCO members hope to 
regularize joint counterterrorism exercises, which are 
crucial for combating the "Three Evil Forces" 
(terrorism, separatism and extremism) and maintaining 
regional security.  The SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group 
will focus largely on counter-narcotics cooperation. 
End Summary. 
 
¶2.  Assistant Foreign Minister Li Hui previewed the 
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) Summit to be 
held in Shanghai on June 15 at a specially scheduled 
June 12 MFA press briefing.  He noted that the heads 
of state of all SCO members, observers Iran, Mongolia 
and Pakistan, as well as Indian Minister for Petroleum 
and Natural Gas Deora, Afghan President Karzai, CIS 
Executive Committee Chairman Rushaylo and ASEAN Deputy 
Secretary General Villacorta will attend the event. 
 
SIPDIS 
Heads of state will review the SCO's development, 
discuss international and regional issues and sign a 
joint declaration, which represents a conclusive 
political document of the Summit proceedings.  SCO 
leaders will also hold bilateral meetings.  Officials 
from various departments will sign a large number of 
agreements in security, economic and education and 
other fields.  In addition, the Summit will feature 
the inauguration of the SCO industrialists' committee 
and business forum, AFM Li reported. 
 
Ahmadinejad's Remarks only Represent Iran's Position 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶3.  Several foreign correspondents asked about Iranian 
President Ahmadinejad's participation in the Summit 
and particularly whether China fears that the Iran 
nuclear issue will overshadow the event.  AFM Li 
stated that there have been no discussions of the 
nuclear issue within the SCO framework.  China will 
make arrangements for Iran's participation in 
accordance with relevant SCO regulations on the role 
of observers.  AFM Li noted that Iran joined two 
previous SCO events in 2005, including the Astana 
Summit and Moscow Premiers' Meeting.  China welcomes 
Iran's participation this year.  President Ahmadinejad 
will participate in the Summit's major activities and 
will deliver remarks, as will the members and other 
observers.  While it is not certain what he will say, 
Ahmadinejad's remarks will only represent Iran's 
position, AFM Li affirmed. 
 
Coalition Forces 
---------------- 
 
¶4.  Asked whether the deployment of U.S. troops in 
Central Asia will be discussed during the Summit, AFM 
Li maintained that the SCO's core objectives are to 
promote economic development and safeguard regional 
security.  Noting the Astana Declaration's "relevant 
provisions" on Coalition forces stationed in the 
region, AFM Li observed that some of the conditions 
that led to the deployment of Coalition Forces in 
relevant countries are in the process of "being 
resolved."  China respects the relevant countries' 
decisions on the issue, he said.  The Summit agenda 
will mainly focus on summarizing the experiences of 
the past five years and charting a course for the 
SCO's future development. 
 
BEIJING 00011932  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
 
¶5.  Questioned by the AP correspondent as to whether 
Kyrgyzstan is facing pressure from other SCO members 
over allowing Coalition Forces to maintain military 
facilities, AFM Li stated that Coalition Forces and 
certain host countries are now discussing the 
Coalition's military presence.  Kyrgyzstan will handle 
such issues according to Bishkek's needs, interests, 
as well as SCO obligations, AFM Li asserted. 
 
Chinese Investigating U.S. Embassy Security Concerns 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶6.  Citing the June 9 U.S. Embassy Warden Message 
warning of an increased risk to American interests in 
China, one foreign correspondent asked if China or any 
other SCO members had recently experienced a 
heightened terrorist threat.  AFM Li asserted that all 
SCO members have suffered from terrorist attacks and 
are confronted by the "Three Evil Forces" (terrorism, 
separatism and extremism).  All members are resolved 
to jointly cobating terrorism.  MFA Spokesperson Liu 
Jianchao, also present at the press conference, added 
that U.S. Embassy officials have briefed the Chinese 
Government regarding these concerns.  Chinese 
authorities are currently investigating these reports 
and will do their utmost to safeguard diplomatic 
personnel and facilities, Liu affirmed. 
 
Military Cooperation Aimed at Regional Security 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶7.  Asked about the SCO's vision for future military 
cooperation, AFM Li noted that while SCO countries 
have held many counterterrorism exercises, the SCO 
does not target any third party and is not a military 
alliance.  The only aim of continued military 
cooperation is to safeguard regional peace and 
stability and strengthen defense cooperation in 
Central Asia, particularly in member countries.  AFM 
Li explained that security cooperation comprises joint 
counterterrorism exercises, the formation of a legal 
foundation for security cooperation and the 
implementation of security agreements.  SCO members 
hope to regularize joint counterterrorism exercises, 
which are crucial for combating the "Three Evil 
Forces" and maintaining regional security.  AFM Li 
predicted that the SCO will conduct regular joint 
exercises, such as the one held in March 2006, in the 
future. 
 
SCO-Afghan Contact Group to Focus on Counter-Narcotics 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶8.  Questioned by the Reuters correspondent on why the 
SCO has seemingly not achieved greater progress in 
counter-narcotics, AFM Li noted that the 2004 Tashkent 
Summit featured the signing of an anti-narcotics 
cooperation agreement.  SCO members are all victims of 
drug-related crimes and all place tremendous 
importance on counter-narcotics cooperation. 
Afghanistan is the main source of illicit drugs in the 
region, AFM Li asserted.  The SCO is ready to help 
establish a counter-narcotics "belt" around 
Afghanistan and work with the international community 
to fight drug trafficking in Afghanistan, he stated. 
AFM Li stated that the SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group 
will focus largely on counter-narcotics coordination. 
 
Entrepreneurs to Hold Energy Discussions 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  Asked if Indian Minister for Petroleum and Natural 
Gas Deora's attendance signals that energy will be a 
major topic at the Summit, AFM Li noted that during 
the Summit entrepreneurs will hold a business forum to 
discuss economic and energy cooperation issues. 
 
Great Interest in SCO Membership and Observer Status 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶10.  Many correspondents inquired about SCO plans for 
admitting new members and observers, with one reporter 
asking if the United States has applied for observer 
status.  AFM Li stated that many countries, including 
 
BEIJING 00011932  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
some in Asia and other continents, have applied for 
membership or observer status.  Growing interest in 
the SCO demonstrates that the SCO is expanding its 
influence and strengthening its role.  Asked by the 
UPI correspondent how the SCO can claim to be a 
transparent organization while declining to disclose 
information on its applicants, AFM Li argued that 
while the SCO remains transparent, it cannot violate 
its own procedures by releasing the names of 
applicants who have asked not be publicly identified. 
The SCO is now examining applications for observer 
status.  While there is also interest in new 
membership, the SCO has not yet formulated a legal 
document that outlines the qualifications for 
additional members.  This work ought to be completed 
as soon as possible, he remarked.  AFM Li also noted 
that the SCO has signed MOUs with CIS, ASEAN and the 
EEC and will continue to explore ways to strengthen 
cooperation with these international organizations. 
 
¶11.  Stressing that the SCO is a transparent 
organization, AFM Li stated that the SCO has briefed 
affiliated international organizations on its actions 
and plans.  Liu Jianchao indicated that journalists 
will be permitted to attend a number of Summit 
activities.  AFM Li noted that according to the 
Russian alphabet, Kazakhstan is next on the rotation 
to hold the SCO Secretary General position.  The 
Secretary General's term is three years. 
 
SIPDIS 
RANDT