06BEIJING23356
NOVEMBER 2 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: NORTH KOREA, AFRICA
Thu Nov 02 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7428
OO RUEHBZ RUEHCN RUEHDU RUEHGH RUEHGI RUEHJO RUEHMA RUEHMR RUEHPA
RUEHRN RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3356/01 3061210
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 021210Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1608
INFO RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 1397UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 023356 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC TBIO KFLU AGOA JA CH KN
SUBJECT: NOVEMBER 2 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: NORTH KOREA, AFRICA 
SUMMIT, SUDAN, AVIAN FLU, THAKSIN, WHO, UNSC SEAT, CUBA, 
PROTECTING JAPANESE IPR, DALAI LAMA 
 
 
¶1.  Key Points made at the November 2, 2006 Press Briefing 
were: 
 
-- The resumption of the Six-Party Talks is a positive step 
towards insuring peace and stability on the North Korean 
Peninsula.  The Talks will resume at the parties' earliest 
convenience. 
 
-- Six African leaders will make state visits following the 
China-Africa (FOCAC) Summit. 
 
-- President Hu will meet Sudanese President Bahshir during 
FOCAC.  Resolution of the Darfur issue requires consent of 
Sudan's government. 
 
-- China did not fail to share samples of an allegedly new 
strain of avian flu with the WHO. 
 
-- Ex-Thai PM Thaksin's visit to Beijing is a purely private 
visit. 
 
-- China recommends Margaret Chan as WHO Director-General. 
It has no comment on Panama's candidacy for the UNSC. 
 
-- China opposes any blockade of Cuba. 
 
-- China stands ready to study a free trade zone with Japan 
and would protect intellectual property. 
 
North Korea: Six-Party Talks, Border Trade 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  MFA Spokesperson Liu Jianchao said the resumption of the 
Six-Party Talks is a positive step towards insuring peace and 
stability on the North Korean Peninsula.  During the informal 
three-party talks between the United States, China and North 
Korea, both the United States and North Korea exerted 
flexibility and made constructive efforts.  The goal of the 
Six-Party Talks is to implement the Joint Statement agreed 
upon on September 19, 2005. 
 
¶3.  When, where and how the Talks will resume will be up to 
all six parties to discuss, Liu noted.  Despite speculation 
about whether the Six-Party Talks will resume before or after 
the APEC meeting in Hanoi, no date has been set for 
resumption of the Talks.  They will resume at the earliest 
convenience of all parties, the sooner the better, said Liu. 
 
¶4.  When asked several times why North Korea changed its 
position and returned to talks, Liu consistently replied "the 
United States and DPRK exerted flexibility and constructive 
efforts for the resumption of the Six-Party Talks" and have 
come to an understanding to discuss financial issues within 
the Six-Party framework.  The Spokesman had no comment on 
reports that the issue of North Koreans counterfeiting U.S. 
currency had been specifically discussed during the informal 
three-party talks. 
 
¶5.  The Six-Party Talks do not affect the state of sanctions 
against the DPRK, said the spokesman, and are not an issue to 
be decided by the Talks.  UNSCR 1718 "reflects the consensus 
of the international community" and each country has a duty 
to strictly and responsibly implement it.  China is no 
exception, according to Liu.  Regarding the possibility that 
individual nations might impose sanctions, Liu responded that 
sanctions are not a goal in and of themselves, but one of the 
means to resolve the Korean Peninsula problem.  Noting that 
Chinese diplomacy does not focus on pressure and sanctions 
but on negotiations and discussion, Liu said the UNSC 
Resolution should be strictly abided by, but it is not 
appropriate to expand its scope. 
 
¶6.  Responding to a statement that Chinese border guards 
confirmed China had cut off oil supplies to North Korea in 
September, the spokesman said trade between the countries is 
normal and any specifics should be verified with the relevant 
authorities. 
 
African Summit 
-------------- 
 
¶7.  Noting that 48 African countries have confirmed 
attendance at the China-Africa Summit (FOCAC), Liu said the 
exact number of attendees will be announced tomorrow evening. 
 He noted that over 40 African leaders will be in Beijing and 
that 12 have already arrived.  During FOCAC, Beijing will 
host six state visits by African leaders. 
 
¶8.  Chiding reporters for focusing on the five African 
 
BEIJING 00023356  002 OF 003 
 
 
nations that do not have diplomatic relations with China 
rather than on the over 40 nations that do, Liu said 
representatives of the other five are welcome in China, but 
he could not confirm their attendance at the Summit. 
 
¶9.  In response to questions criticizing China's no-strings 
development assistance to African countries with poor human 
rights records, Liu said China's assistance to Africa is 
based on equality, transparency and mutual benefit. 
 
¶10.  In reply to a question regarding a Human Rights Watch 
Report criticizing China for not pressuring Somalia and 
Zimbabwe to improve their human rights records, Liu said 
China does not consult with such groups in determining 
foreign policy.  China's policies in Africa are for the 
well-being of both sides.  China does not impose its own 
ideology or values on other nations and trusts them to have 
the wisdom and the right to decide their own paths of 
development. 
 
Sudan and Darfur 
---------------- 
 
¶11.  Hu Jintao will meet with President Bashir of Sudan in 
Beijing during the FOCAC, Liu said.  Both countries place 
importance on good bilateral relations and cooperation, and 
China welcomes Bashir and other Sudanese representatives.  FM 
Li attended a ribbon-cutting ceremony with Bashir to open the 
Sudanese Embassy in Beijing, the largest African Embassy in 
China.  This indicates the importance China places on the 
bilateral relationship, Liu said.  The UN should and can play 
a role in addressing the Darfur issue.  However, specific UN 
measures require the consent of the Sudanese government, he 
said. 
 
Avian Flu 
--------- 
 
¶12.  In response to reports that China had failed to share 
samples with the WHO of a new strain of bird flu and has not 
provided samples to the WHO since 2004, Liu initially stated 
that China and the WHO have good cooperation and 
communication and efforts continue to control and prevent 
bird flu.  He referred specific questions to the Ministries 
of Agriculture and Health. 
 
¶13.  Later in the briefing, Liu read from a prepared 
statement, saying that the WHO's allegations are incorrect. 
The bird flu virus samples from South China are essentially 
the same as previous samples, said Liu.  There is no new 
strain of avian flu indicated by the samples, he noted. 
 
Thaksin in Beijing 
------------------ 
 
¶14.  Ex-Thai Prime Minister Thaksin is in Beijing for a 
private visit, according to Liu.  Thaksin has made no 
official contact with the Chinese government and the MFA has 
received no information about his plans as it is a purely 
private visit, said Liu. 
 
Margaret Chan WHO Candidacy 
--------------------------- 
 
¶15.  China recommends Margaret Chan and strongly supports her 
candidacy for WHO Director-General, said Liu.  Liu would not 
comment on plans to lobby for Chan with the nine countries 
participating in FOCAC that have a WHO vote. China is hopeful 
that she will win despite the competitive race.  Whoever 
wins, China will continue its efforts to develop good 
relations with the WHO. 
 
UNSC Nonpermanent Member Seat 
----------------------------- 
 
¶16.  Beijing had no comment in response to Panama's bid for 
the nonpermanent UNSC seat in the wake of the deadlocked 
voting between Venezuela and Guatemala.  China will undertake 
additional research and discuss the issue with other UN 
member nations, said Liu. 
 
Cuba Blockade 
------------- 
 
¶17.  In response to a question about the upcoming vote in the 
UN to recommend an end to the U.S. economic and trade 
blockade of Cuba, Liu said China is against any blockade of 
Cuba by any country. 
 
 
BEIJING 00023356  003 OF 003 
 
 
China-Japan Free Trade Zone 
--------------------------- 
 
¶18.  Responding to a question citing the need for China to 
protect intellectual property rights if a free trade zone 
with Japan were to be established, Liu stated that China 
stands ready to begin a joint study on the proposal for such 
a free trade zone.  Protecting IPR is in the interests of 
China and more administrative, legal and international 
cooperation is needed to provide better protection. 
 
Tibet and the Dalai Lama 
------------------------ 
 
¶19.  The spokesman had no information about contacts between 
the Tibetan government in exle or representatives of the 
Dalai Lama and th Chinese government, Liu said in response 
to a question. 
Randt