06BEIJING4479
MARCH 9 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: HUMAN RIGHTS  REPORT,
Thu Mar 09 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO3264
OO RUEHCN
DE RUEHBJ #4479/01 0681027
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 091027Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9890
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHLM/AMEMBASSY COLOMBO IMMEDIATE 0791
RUEHKT/AMEMBASSY KATHMANDU IMMEDIATE 3706
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO IMMEDIATE 0204
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA IMMEDIATE 0815
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA IMMEDIATE 0880
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS IMMEDIATE
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 004479 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM PARM CH JP IR KN
SUBJECT: MARCH 9 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: HUMAN RIGHTS  REPORT, 
IRANIAN AND DPRK NUCLEAR ISSUES, SINO-JAPANESE  FM COMMENTS 
AND EAST CHINA SEA DISPUTE, UN REFORM,  PUTIN VISIT 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  Key points made at the March 9 MFA press briefing 
are as follows: 
 
- The State Department's 2005 Human Rights Report 
turned a blind eye to the basic facts and made 
irresponsible remarks regarding the status of human 
rights in China. 
 
- China hopes Iran will fully cooperate with the IAEA 
and that the parties will intensify efforts to reach a 
diplomatic resolution to the Iranian nuclear issue. 
 
- Beijing hopes all the participants will continue to 
demonstrate flexibility and sincerity and work toward 
an early resumption of the Six-Party Talks. 
 
- FM Li's March 7 statement on the Yasukuni Shrine 
represented China's official position and the views of 
the Chinese people; Beijing condemns FM Aso's recent 
remarks on Taiwan. 
 
- An attempt by the Japanese Government to use the 
East China Sea issue to divert attention away from the 
Yasukuni Shrine dispute will not benefit the 
settlement of the East China Sea matter. 
 
- China welcomes UN Secretary General Annan's March 7 
report on UN reform. 
 
- Chen Shui-bian's decision to "force the NUC to cease 
functioning and the NUG to cease to apply" was a 
dangerous move opposed by people across the Taiwan 
Strait and the international community. 
 
- Russian President Putin will visit China March 21- 
¶22. 
 
- State Councilor Tang Jiaxuan will visit Sri Lanka 
and Nepal March 14-18. 
 
- Minister of Agriculture Du Qinglin will attend the 
Chilean presidential inauguration ceremony on March 
¶11.  End Summary. 
 
2005 Human Rights Report 
------------------------ 
 
¶2.  During the regular March 9 MFA press briefing, MFA 
Spokesperson Qin Gang claimed that the State 
Department's 2005 Human Rights Report turned a blind 
eye to the basic facts and made irresponsible remarks 
regarding human rights in China.  China expresses 
strong dissatisfaction and resolute opposition to the 
report.  Qin asserted that the PRC Constitution 
explicitly stipulates the requirement to safeguard 
human rights.  All levels of government have adhered 
to the principle of "putting the people first" and 
enhancing democracy and law, he maintained, adding 
that China has made much progress, which has been 
recognized by the international community.  Responding 
to a question on the report's discussion of Hong Kong, 
Qin argued that the Chinese Government has followed 
the principles of "one country, two systems," the 
governance of Hong Kong by the Hong Kong people and 
strict adherence to the Basic Law.  Beijing has 
supported the gradual development of Hong Kong 
democracy in accordance with Hong Kong's actual 
situation.  China strongly opposes irresponsible 
remarks by any foreign government, Qin stressed, 
calling on the U.S. Government to immediately cease 
its interference in China's internal affairs. 
 
Iranian Nuclear Issue 
--------------------- 
 
¶3.  Asked by the AP correspondent about UN discussion 
of Iran's nuclear program, Qin remarked that there is 
still potential to resolve the issue through 
negotiation and called on the parties to step up their 
diplomatic efforts.  China hopes Iran will fully 
 
BEIJING 00004479  002 OF 003 
 
 
cooperate with the IAEA and take confidence-building 
measures to create conditions for a peaceful 
resolution.  All parties should exercise calm, 
continue negotiations and refrain from taking actions 
that could aggravate the situation, Qin stated.  Asked 
about PRC backing for UN sanctions on Iran, he called 
for an intensification of diplomatic efforts and noted 
U.S. and EU statements in support of a diplomatic 
resolution to the Iranian nuclear issue.  China is 
prepared to work with the other parties toward that 
goal. 
 
Six-Party Talks and DPRK Missile Launching 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶4.  Asked to comment on the DPRK's recent launching of 
missiles and whether it will affect the Six-Party 
Talks, Qin simply noted reports of the incident but 
offered no further comment.  In the joint statement 
issued following the last round of Talks, he recalled, 
all the parties made solemn commitments to continue 
negotiations aimed at a nuclear-free Korean Peninsula 
and peace and stability in Northeast Asia.  Given that 
the Six Parties' positions remain unchanged, China 
hopes they will continue to demonstrate flexibility 
and sincerity and work toward an early resumption of 
the Six-Party Talks, Qin remarked.  Beijing has 
remained in contact with the participating countries 
and has been making efforts to promote the Talks 
process.  He confirmed that the new ROK delegate to 
the Six Party Talks, Deputy Foreign Minister Chun 
Young Woo, arrived in Beijing March 9 and will meet 
with Vice Foreign Minister Wu Dawei on March 10. 
 
Chinese and Japanese FMs Exchange Strong Statements 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶5.  Asked by the Kyodo correspondent about the 
Japanese Government's response to Foreign Minister Li 
Zhaoxing's March 7 strong criticism of Prime Minister 
Koizumi for visiting the Yasukuni Shrine, Qin 
maintained that FM Li was expressing China's official 
position and not his personal opinion.  This is also 
the view of the Chinese people, Qin remarked.  Japan 
should study FM Li's comments in a comprehensive 
manner and fully honor its commitment to demonstrate 
remorse over history.  Questioned by the Fuji TV 
correspondent about Japanese FM Aso's remarks on 
Taiwan reportedly made earlier in the day, Qin 
expressed Beijing's shock and strong condemnation over 
the remarks.  They contradict the Sino-Japanese joint 
declaration and interfere in China's domestic affairs. 
Qin called on Tokyo to honor its commitments on 
Taiwan. 
 
Sino-Japanese East China Sea Dispute 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶6.  Questioned about China's reported proposal to 
Japan on jointly exploring waters around the Diaoyu 
(Senkaku) Islands but not the Chunxiao gas field, Qin 
acknowledged the bilateral dispute over the Diaoyu 
Islands and asserted that joint energy exploration in 
that area serves both countries' interests.  During 
the third round of Sino-Japanese consultations on the 
East China Sea, Japan made a proposal based on the 
precondition of a median line, which China will never 
accept, he stressed.  Qin argued that China's 
exploration of the Chunxiao gas field is being 
conducted in an area not disputed by Japan.  Beijing's 
proposal is reasonable, constructive and conducive to 
shelving differences and engaging in joint exploration 
activities, and China hopes Japan will study it 
carefully.  Qin asserted that an attempt by the 
Japanese Government to use the East China Sea issue to 
divert attention away from the Yasukuni Shrine dispute 
will not benefit the settlement of the East China Sea 
matter or help improve bilateral ties. 
 
UN Reform 
--------- 
 
¶7.  China welcomes UN Secretary General Annan's March 
 
BEIJING 00004479  003 OF 003 
 
 
7 report on UN reform, Qin stated.  China wishes to 
enhance the transparency and efficiency of the UN 
Secretariat and end corruption within the body. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
Support for One-China 
--------------------- 
 
¶8.  Asked about international support for China on the 
Taiwan issue, Qin asserted that Chen Shui-bian's 
decision to "force the National Unification Council to 
cease functioning and the National Unification 
Guidelines to cease o apply" was a dangerous move 
opposed by peope across the Taiwan Strait and the 
international community.  The international community 
should remain alert of his Taiwan independence moves, 
Qin stressed. 
 
President Putin's Visit 
----------------------- 
 
¶9.  Qin announced that Russian President Putin will 
visit China March 21-22.  He will met with President 
Hu Jintao, NPC Standing Committee Chairman Wu Bangguo 
and Premier Wen Jiabao and attend the opening ceremony 
of the Year of Russia in China and the Russia-China 
Economic Forum on Industry and Commerce.  The two 
countries will sign a series of agreements.  In 
response to a Reuters reporter's inquiry, Qin stated 
that energy is an important component of bilateral 
cooperation that serves the interests of both 
countries. 
 
Upcoming Trips 
-------------- 
 
¶10.  Qin noted that State Councilor Tang Jiaxuan will 
visit Sri Lanka and Nepal March 14-18.  Minister of 
Agriculture Du Qinglin will attend the Chilean 
presidential inauguration ceremony on March 11.  Qin 
commented that China and Chile are expanding 
cooperation in various fields.  He noted that during 
the APEC Summit President Hu agreed to the 
establishment of a Free Trade Zone with Chile, adding 
that the development of China-Chile relations will 
also strengthen cooperation with the Latin America 
region. 
RANDT