06BEIJING697
U.S.-CHINA WORKING GROUP MEETS WITH NPC FOREIGN
Fri Jan 13 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO0697
OO RUEHCN
DE RUEHBJ #0697/01 0130637
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 130637Z JAN 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5507
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000697 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV CH
SUBJECT: U.S.-CHINA WORKING GROUP MEETS WITH NPC FOREIGN 
AFFAIRS COMMITTEE CHAIRMAN JIANG ENZHU 
 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) In a meeting with a visiting delegation from 
the U.S.-China Working Group led by Congressmen Mark 
Kirk, Rick Larsen and Thomas Feeney, Chairman of the 
NPC Foreign Affairs Committee Jiang Enzhu praised 
progress in U.S.-China relations in the past year. 
While noting the extensive recent progress, he 
cautioned that Taiwan is still a very sensitive issue 
and urged the U.S. Congress not to pass legislation 
that might encourage Taiwan independence.  NPC Foreign 
Affairs Committee member Li Yuanzheng affirmed China's 
cooperation on non-proliferation issues.  Jiang said 
China is moving down the path of peaceful development 
with an emphasis on economic trade and should not be 
considered a threat to the United States. 
End Summary. 
 
Positive U.S.-China Relations 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) After extending a warm welcome to 
Congressmen Kirk, Larsen and Feeney, Jiang noted the 
positive and stable development in U.S.-China 
relations in the past year.  There was effective 
bilateral cooperation in many areas, including 
political, economic and science and technology issues. 
He also highlighted the positive coordination on 
counterterrorism, the DPRK nuclear issue, Iraq, and UN 
reform and assessed President Bush's November visit to 
Beijing as very successful, setting the tone for 
constructive and cooperative bilateral relations in 
the 21st century.  Likewise, China expects Hu Jintao's 
visit to the United States in the first half of 2006 
to be successful. 
 
Taiwan 
------ 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Jiang said that both sides would discuss 
areas where the two sides had differences.  He then 
launched into familiar talking points about Taiwan. 
Taiwan relates to the sovereignty and territorial 
integrity of China.  The Chinese Government maintains 
its position of resolving differences peacefully on 
the basis of "one country, two systems."  China will 
never allow Taiwan independence.  The Mainland has 
taken steps over the past year to blunt moves toward 
secession in Taiwan and to enhance cross-Strait 
relations.  There has been a recent relaxation in the 
relationship.  The recent elections in Taiwan 
indicated a positive change in the views of Taiwan 
voters. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Despite the recent positive momentum in 
relations, Beijing is still concerned about the 
direction of cross-Strait relations, Jiang said.  Chen 
Shui-bian continues to reject one China.  During 
Chen's New Year's address, he again discussed a 
timetable for achieving de jure independence.  He 
indicated that by 2007, a referendum would help to 
realize a re-engineered constitution that could be 
implemented by 2008.  This new constitution would 
declare that Taiwan is not a part of China and is a de 
jure country.  Jiang praised the U.S. Government for 
taking measures to restrain Taiwan moves toward 
independence.  He urged the U.S. Congress not to pass 
any legislation that might encourage Taiwan 
independence. 
 
Non-proliferation 
----------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Congressman Kirk noted that Beijing's focus 
on the Taiwan issue during official meetings got in 
the way of possible opportunities to discuss other 
important matters.  He cited the 2008 Olympics as an 
example of an issue that could bring a new face to 
China.  Congressman Larsen noted his interest in non- 
proliferation and encouraged China's cooperation in 
the Proliferation Security Initiative.  NPC Foreign 
Affairs Committee member General Li Yuanzheng stressed 
that the Chinese is serious about its opposition to 
nuclear non-proliferation and its policy is not to 
help other countries acquire such technology.  China 
has extensive cooperation with other countries in the 
area of export control.  China supports the 
Proliferation Security Initiative in principle, but 
there are difficulties in its practical application. 
Taking action can be very difficult unless the 
 
BEIJING 00000697  002 OF 002 
 
 
information that China receives is ironclad. 
 
China Still Developing 
---------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Asked about the future of China as a global 
power, Jiang tried to disabuse any notions that China 
is looking to expand its influence overseas.  He noted 
problems in China's income gap, regional economic 
imbalances, workers without insurance and people with 
disabilities, suggesting that China will remain a 
developing country for years to come.  As a result of 
China's rapid growth, there is now social friction. 
China still has far to go to develop into a medium 
developed country, he asserted.  China needed "many 
tens of generations" to catch up to western 
industrialized countries.  Thus, China's future 
direction is focused on improving the economy. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Jiang paraphrased a Confucius saying that 
means roughly "do unto others as they would do unto 
you."  China has no history of aggression but has been 
a victim of outside attacks.  In China's powerful Ming 
Dynasty, the explorer Zheng He went overseas to more 
than 30 lands, but he did not seize an inch of soil 
from other countries, Jiang said.  Citing examples of 
China's pursuit of friendly relations, he said Beijing 
has resolved boundary issues with 15 countries and is 
engaging in joint exploration for energy resources in 
the Pacific.  China does not have the ability to 
challenge U.S. global dominance and certainly does not 
want to enter into an arms race with the United 
States.  Beijing appreciates that the United States 
plays a constructive role in the Asia Pacific region. 
 
China is Responsible 
-------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Asked by Congressman Kirk about the 
possibility of future cultural exchanges, such as an 
NFL game between the Chicago Bears and Seattle 
Seahawks that might be played in China, Jiang said the 
NPC favored broad exchanges including those in sports. 
Replying to Congressman Larsen's question about 
China's response to Deputy Secretary Zoellick's 
September 21 speech that referred to China's future as 
a "responsible stakeholder," Vice Chairman of the NPC 
Foreign Affairs Committee Lu Congmin expressed the 
view that China is already that.  He identified 
several areas, including counterterrorism, non- 
proliferation and trade issues where China is playing 
a responsible role.  In trade, globalization brings 
both benefits and challenges to China.  Some domestic 
industries have been dealt a blow because of China's 
membership in the WTO.  Moreover, China does not offer 
its farmers subsidies, like the United States and EU 
countries do.  Nonetheless, China is adhering to its 
commitments and in the area of services has gone 
beyond some western countries in opening up various 
sectors. 
 
¶9.  (U) Participants: 
 
U.S. Delegation 
--------------- 
Representative Mark Kirk 
Representative Rick Larsen 
Representative Tom Feeney 
Steve Orlins, President, National Committee on U.S.- 
China Relations 
Richard Goldberg, Co-Staff Director, U.S.-China 
Working Group 
Dr. Yang Hong, Bryant University 
Embassy Control Officer 
Embassy Notetaker 
 
Chinese Delegation 
------------------ 
NPC Foreign Affairs Committee Chairman Jiang Enzhu 
NPC Foreign Affairs Comm. Vice Chairman Lu Congmin 
NPC Foreign Affairs Comm. Member Li Yuanzheng 
DCM Chinese Embassy in Washington Su Ge 
Staff and Interpreter 
 
¶10.  (U) The Delegation has cleared this cable. 
Randt