06BEIJING24496
DECEMBER 13 TAO PRESS BRIEFING: TAIWAN MAYORAL
Wed Dec 13 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO3888
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #4496/01 3471239
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 131239Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2990
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 024496 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ETRD ECON CH TW
SUBJECT: DECEMBER 13 TAO PRESS BRIEFING: TAIWAN MAYORAL 
ELECTIONS, VISITS TO MAINLAND, CHARTER FLIGHTS, LOANS TO 
TAIWAN BUSINESSES, 2008 OLYMPICS, FINANCIAL COOPERATION 
 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. Key points at the December 13 Taiwan Affairs Office (TAO) 
press briefing were: 
 
-- The spokesman declined to comment on Taiwan's internal 
politics, including the recent mayoral elections and calls 
for the KMT change its name to "Taiwan Kuomintang." 
 
-- TAO welcomes any person, party or organization from Taiwan 
that accepts the One China Policy and the 1992 Consensus, Li 
sad in response to questions regarding possible vsits by 
Legislative Yuan President Wang Jin-Pyng and Taipei 
Mayor-elect Hau Lung-bin. 
 
-- Whether there is now a "window of opportunity for 
cross-Strait talks will depend on the Tiwan side. 
 
-- Cross-Strait charter flights for the Spring Festival will 
run for 28 days beginning on February 5. 
 
-- Mainland banks have begun granting loans to Taiwan 
businesses in accordance with an agreement signed with TAO, 
and TAO hopes to continue promoting financial cooperation 
with Taiwan banks. 
 
-- The spokesman rejected criticism that the process for 
choosing sponsors for the 2008 Olympics has been 
insufficiently transparent, claiming that the Beijing Olympic 
Committee has treated fairly all businesses both in China and 
abroad.  End Summary. 
 
Taiwan Internal Developments 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2. Taiwan Affairs Office (TAO) spokesman Li Weiyi deflected 
reporters' questions about Taiwan internal politics during 
the December 13 press briefing.  Asked for his opinion on 
issues such as the outcome of Taiwan mayoral elections, 
questions over the influence Chen Shui-bian's and Ma 
Ying-jeou's political activities on the Kaohsiung race, Li 
merely said the TAO is paying attention to relevant reports. 
In response to a reporter's request for comment on calls for 
the KMT to change its name to "Taiwan Kuomintang" and what 
impact that change might have on Mainland-KMT relations, Li 
said that TAO believes the KMT can make its own decisions and 
that TAO's consistent position has been to promote exchange 
in economic, cultural and other fields. 
 
Visits to Mainland 
------------------ 
 
¶3. When asked if Legislative Yuan President Wang Jin-pyng and 
Taipei's Mayor-elect Hau Lung-bin could visit the Mainland, 
Li replied that China's clear and consistent position is that 
it will welcome to the Mainland any person, political party 
or group who accepts the One China Policy and the 1992 
Consensus.  Asked separately for specifics on the visits of 
these two officials, Li said only that TAO respects the views 
of Mayor-elect Hau and that journalists can follow Taiwan 
media reports for Legislative Yuan President Wang's opinions 
and comments. 
 
¶4. Asked if there had been any change in policy toward the 
visits of persons affiliated with the DPP, Li said that TAO 
welcomes those with the proper status to visit the mainland, 
noting there is a difference between the broad majority of 
DPP members and the tiny minority of "independence" elements. 
 In response to a reporter's question about a "window of 
opportunity" for cross-Strait talks before 2007, Li said the 
window for talks "has always been open," but using the 
opportunity will depend on the Taiwan side. 
 
Cross-Strait Charter Flights Schedule 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. According to arrangements made among private cross-Strait 
airline organizations on June 14 of this year, 48 round trips 
-- a total of 96 charter flights -- will run from February 5 
to March 4 between the Mainland cities of Beijing, Shanghai, 
Guangzhou and Xiamen and Taibei and Kaohsiung in Taiwan. 
Mainland airlines personnel will be allowed to travel to 
Taiwan 10 days prior to the charter flights period.  Li 
expressed the Mainland's hope that the two sides can continue 
to increase the number of flights and passengers between 
Taiwan and the Mainland. 
 
Mainland Bank Loans to Taiwan Businesses 
---------------------------------------- 
 
 
BEIJING 00024496  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶6. The National Development Bank has already given over RMB 
three billion in loans to nearly 60 Taiwan-invested companies 
and is currently researching ways to support the development 
of small and medium-sized Taiwan agricultural enterprises on 
the Mainland, Li stated.  Loans granted by the two banks are 
going to small and medium-sized companies in a variety of 
industries including electronics, chemicals, metallurgy, 
building materials, food products and logistics.  Li said TAO 
will continue promoting this financing work established by 
the "Support Development of and Cooperation with Taiwan 
Companies" Agreement signed last year by the National 
Development Bank, Huaxia Bank and TAO to offer better service 
to Taiwan businesses. 
 
Taiwan Participation in 2008 Olympics 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. Li rejected criticism that the Beijing Olympic Committee's 
process for choosing commercial sponsors was insufficiently 
transparent.  Li argued that the Beijing Olympic Committee 
has treated domestic and international enterprises fairly, 
equally and without discrimination from beginning to end. 
 
¶8. Asked for information on how Taiwan residents can purchase 
2008 Olympics tickets that are set to go on sale next year, 
Li said TAO is concerned about this issue and will contact 
the Beijing Olympic Committee to better understand its plans. 
 
Financial Cooperation Hindered by Taiwan 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. Li agreed with a reporter's statement that opportunities 
for Taiwan banks on the Mainland following China's opening to 
full banking competition last week could be lost because of 
barriers set up by the Taiwan authorities.  Li added that TAO 
has always had positive views toward cross-Strait cooperation 
and exchange and hopes that Taiwan can remove these obstacles 
and further enhance cooperation in the financial field. 
 
Agreement on Mainland Tourists' Travel to Taiwan? 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶10. A Xinhua reporter asked if Taiwan media reports were true 
that the Mainland and Taiwan had reached consensus on opening 
Taiwan to Mainland tourists, with an agreement to be signed 
after the mayoral elections.  Li acknowledged that Mainland 
and Taiwan private tourist organizations had held technical 
consultations on numerous occasions but said that it was up 
to these organizations to determine when to reveal the 
contents of their discussions and when to sign any agreement. 
 Asked to verify reports that the Mainland had already 
approved 15 Mainland travel agencies' participation, Li said 
that those reports were not yet confirmed. 
Randt