06BEIRUT1164
MGLE01:  SCENESETTER FOR CODEL DODD
Thu Apr 13 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beirut
VZCZCXYZ0015
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHLB #1164/01 1031413
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 131413Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIRUT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3059
INFO RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 4134UNCLAS BEIRUT 001164 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR H, NEA/ELA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OREP PGOV PREL LE
SUBJECT: MGLE01:  SCENESETTER FOR CODEL DODD 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
¶1.  (SBU)  The current political situation in Lebanon is 
highly uncertain:  the National Dialogue process, which 
raised expectations for significant political progress when 
it began six weeks ago, appears to have run its course. 
The rivalry between the pro-reform "March 14" coalition 
(consisting of blocs led by Saad Hariri, Walid Jumblatt and 
Samir Ja'ja') and the pro-Syrian "March 8" coalition (led 
by Hizballah, Amal and Michel Aoun) is as heated as ever. 
Prime Minister Fouad Siniora, who leads the pro-reform 
government, claims a mandate to pursue the goals of "March 
14," but the way forward has not been easy since he took 
office in July 2005.  Lebanese sovereignty has been under 
attack during his term in office, and "governance by 
consensus" has limited Siniora's ability to push for 
closure in the Hariri assassination case.  The government 
has moved ahead gradually with plans for reform -- 
specifically on the economic and electoral fronts -- but 
there is well-organized resistance to these efforts which 
have not moved substantially forward.  Pro-Syrian President 
Emile Lahoud remains in office in defiance of UNSCR 1559 
and is an additional obstacle to reform.  PM Siniora and 
four of his ministers are visiting Washington from April 
17-20 to discuss the government's reform efforts and U.S. 
support for the country in its transition to democracy. 
End summary. 
 
A PRO-REFORM PM HEADING 
A "MADE IN LEBANON" CABINET 
--------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Fouad Siniora, longtime associate and political 
supporter of assassinated Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri, took 
office as Prime Minister in July 2005.  Supporting the 
government is a 72-member (out of 128) parliamentary 
majority, elected in May-June 2005 and led by Hariri's son, 
Sa'ad.  Commencing work just months after the withdrawal of 
Syria's military and overt intelligence personnel from 
Lebanon, Siniora's cabinet was the first genuinely "made in 
Lebanon" cabinet after nearly 30 years of de facto rule 
from Damascus. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  The pro-reform, pro-sovereignty March 14 
coalition is led by the younger Hariri, along with Druze 
leader Walid Jumblatt, and Lebanese Forces leader Samir 
Ja'ja' (this coalition takes its name from the massive 
rally held in Beirut one month after the elder Hariri's 
murder on February 14, 2005).  The coalition's stated 
political objectives are:  determining the truth and meting 
out justice in the Hariri assassination, restoring 
Lebanon's sovereignty, and pursuing much-needed, but 
long-delayed reforms. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Facing the pro-reform bloc is the "March 8" 
coalition, composed of the Shia movements Hizballah, led by 
Hassan Nasrallah, and Amal, led by Speaker of Parliament 
Nabih Berri.  Free Patiotic Movement leader Michel Aoun, 
with 21 parliamentary seats representing the traditionally 
powerful Maronite community, often sides with Hizballah and 
Amal on political issues and entered into a "cooperative 
alliance" with Hizballah on February 6, with the issuance 
of a joint communique that outlined common political 
goals.  Michel Aoun has made clear on numerous occasions 
his desire to be Lebanon's next president. 
 
AN OBSTACLE COURSE TO THE TRUTH AND SOVEREIGNTY 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Despite the government's advantage of a strong 
parliamentary majority, its room for maneuver is limited. 
The uniqueness of post-civil war Lebanese politics makes 
the Siniora Cabinet more like a miniature Parliament (minus 
Michel Aoun's bloc) than an executive body controlled by 
the parliamentary majority.  In it are ministers belonging 
to, or at least serving at the pleasure of, Hizballah and 
the Amal Movement, which are pro-Syrian and opponents of the 
"March 14" coalition. 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  This situation has made it difficult for Siniora 
to pursue closure in the Hariri case, the truth of which is 
surely not to the Asad regime's taste.  He was able to win 
grudging acquiescence from his Hizballah and Amal cabinet 
ministers in calling for an extension of the initial 
mandate of the UN International Independent Investigation 
Commission (UNIIIC).  Later, the Amal/Hizballah alliance 
answered him with a crippling, seven week boycott of the 
Cabinet from December 12 until early February.  Their 
pretext was that the Prime Minister had asked the UN, 
without full Cabinet approval, for a broadening of the 
UNIIIC mandate to include all terrorist incidents since 
October 2004 and for the creation of an international 
tribunal to try suspects in the Hariri assassination. 
Since February, the full Cabinet has met but friction is 
never far below the surface. 
 
CAUSES OF INSTABILITY 
--------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  Throughout 2005, Lebanon faced an ongoing 
terrorist campaign that appeared aimed at eliminating some 
of Syria's critics, spreading fear, discrediting the 
Lebanese government, and ultimately rolling back Lebanon's 
recent gains in sovereignty.  The September 2005 attempted 
assassination of television broadcaster May Chidiac, the 
December 2005 assassination of MP and leading journalist 
Gebran Tueni, and three other bombings in Beirut and its 
surroundings since July undercut confidence in the 
government.  The response of the security sector has been 
slow, and a deadlock between Siniora and President Lahoud 
prevents it from more effective action. 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  By closing its border crossings with Lebanon in 
August 2005, the Syrian regime demonstrated its willingness 
to put an economic stranglehold on Lebanon when it saw 
fit.  Even more importantly, Syria's ally Hizballah remains 
a state-within-a-state, with an armed force that is a match 
for the Lebanese Armed Forces.  Hizballah has ignored UNSCR 
1559's requirement for disarmament of all militias and 
reserves the right to make decisions on inciting violence 
through its conduct of paramilitary operations along the 
Blue Line between Lebanon and Israel.  Hizballah justifies 
its violent actions by claiming that is a legitimate 
"resistance" to Israeli occupation of the Shebaa Farms, 
which it and many other Lebanese parties claim to be 
Lebanese territory.  This claim is not widely shared by the 
international community. 
 
PUSHING AHEAD ON REFORM... 
-------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  Prime Minister Siniora, seeing an opportunity to 
break a deadlock on economic policy that existed for years 
between President Lahoud and then-Prime Minister Rafiq 
Hariri, assembled a capable economic team and forged ahead 
in drafting a detailed reform program.  Its goal is to 
bring under control Lebanon's mammoth debt-to-GDP ratio, a 
problem that cannot afford to wait.  Beyond fiscal 
adjustment, the government's plan also aims at increasing 
economic growth and employment by making Lebanon an easier 
place in which to do business.  Finally, it aims at 
building social safety nets that make sound economic policy 
politically viable over the long term. 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  The "Core Group" of friends of Lebanon -- 
including the United States, France, the United Kingdom, 
the UN, and the World Bank -- has made it clear that 
Lebanon enjoys an unprecedented window of opportunity for 
support for a credible and sustainable reform program.  The 
government's economic team appears to understand this well, 
and has worked, on the one hand, to develop a detailed 
program that meets Core Group expectations.  On the other 
hand, it has steadily sought domestic political "buy-in" to 
the program, starting within the Cabinet and with the goal 
of including all political players capable of blocking it. 
One significant problem is that President Lahoud can throw 
a monkey wrench into these many moving parts, in economic 
reform as well as the security sector. 
 
¶11.  (SBU)  The Siniora government recognizes that political 
reform must accompany economic reform, and the prime 
minister has made reform of the electoral system a 
priority.  While still a work in progress, the draft 
electoral law as currently written will introduce important 
reforms, including the establishment of an independent 
commission to oversee elections (in place of an Interior 
Minister who is likely to be running for election 
himself). 
 
¶12.  (SBU)  Changing the electoral status quo will not 
necessarily benefit the "March 14" parliamentary majority 
in the next election.  PM Siniora will face a challenge in 
shepherding a draft law, once it is finally produced, 
through his cabinet and on to the Parliament.  For now, he 
simply needs a final draft law. 
 
REFORM AT A CROSSROADS 
---------------------- 
 
¶13.  (SBU)  Lebanon is presently at a critical juncture.  A 
series of parliamentary "national dialogue talks" -- with 
Siniora, as well as Aoun and the leadership of Hizballah 
and Amal at the table -- has tentatively agreed to ask 
Syria to demarcate the Syrian-Lebanese border, establish 
normal diplomatic relations between the two countries, and 
restrict armed Palestinians to the camps.  However, the 
talks show no sign of cutting through the immediate impasse 
over the Lahoud presidency, as well as the longer-term 
problem of Hizballah's disarmament. 
 
¶14.  (SBU)  The next meeting of the National Dialogue is 
scheduled for April 28, but no one is quite sure whether 
further progress is possible.  What comes after the 
conclusion of the National Dialogue is also uncertain.  The 
pro-reform government faces numerous challenges and much 
will depend on moving forward with political and economic 
reform and the resulting support of the Lebanese people. 
FELTMAN