06BEIJING12175
JUNE 13 MFA PRESS BRIEFING:  CHINESE ARMS EXPORTS,
Tue Jun 13 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO6873
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHBJ #2175/01 1641038
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 131038Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8767
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID 0693UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 012175 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM CH KN
SUBJECT: JUNE 13 MFA PRESS BRIEFING:  CHINESE ARMS EXPORTS, 
SCO SUMMIT, IRANIAN NUCLEAR ISSUE, SIX-PARTY TALKS, HUMAN 
RIGHTS, AND BEIJING CORRUPTION SCANDAL 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  Key points made at the June 13 MFA press briefing are as 
follows: 
 
--  Amnesty International's recent reports that China's arms 
exports promote violence and human rights violations around 
the world are "groundless."  China complies with its 
international obligations and has export controls in place to 
ensure responsible use. 
 
--  The upcoming Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) 
Summit provides new opportunities for a peaceful resolution 
of the Iranian nuclear issue.  President Hu will hold 
bilateral meetings with all SCO members and observers. 
 
--  Despite reports of a possible North Korean missile test 
and difficulties in the Six-Party Talks process, China hopes 
participants remain flexible and that there will be an early 
resumption of the talks. 
 
-- Recent U.S. House of Representatives criticisms of 
religious persecution in China are "slanderous."  VFM Yang 
Jiechi will head China's delegation to the June 19-30 UN 
Human Rights Council in Geneva. 
 
-- The Spanish courts have "no right" to prosecute Chinese 
leaders for genocide in Tibet.  China and Spain have a 
strategic partnership and China hopes Spain will handle the 
court cases "properly." 
 
--  The dismissal of Beijing Vice Mayor Liu Zhihua, who 
oversees city planning and Olympic-related construction 
projects, will not affect the upcoming 2008 games. 
 
Chinese Arms Exports 
-------------------- 
 
¶2.  During the regular June 13 MFA press briefing,  spokesman 
Jiang Yu called recent Amnesty International criticisms of 
China's arms exports "groundless".  Asked by reporters to 
explain how China tracks and ensures responsible use of its 
military exports, Jiang stated that China adheres to three 
principles in arms trade:  recipient countries must have a 
legitimate need, the arms sold will not destabilize either 
the recipient country or the neighboring region, and that the 
arms sales will not interfere with other countries' internal 
affairs.  China exports far fewer arms than the United 
States, Jiang added, stating that between 2000-2004 the 
United States exported 25.9 billion USD in arms sales to 
China's 1.45 billion USD.  China cooperates and conforms to 
its international obligations and follows a controlled export 
system that ensures end user controls to prevent export to 
third parties, Jiang explained. 
 
The SCO and Iranian Nuclear Issue 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  Asked to confirm whether President Putin will meet with 
Iranian President Ahmadinejad on the sidelines of the 
upcoming SCO summit in Shanghai, Jiang stated only that 
President Hu Jintao will hold bilateral meetings with all SCO 
member and observer countries during the Shanghai SCO Summit. 
  Brushing off questions of U.S. criticism of Iranian 
participation, Jiang stated that Iran was invited to the 
Summit based on the consensus view of all SCO members.  The 
SCO provides new opportunities for a peaceful solution to the 
Iranian nuclear issue, Jiang said, and China appreciates 
Iran's willingness to hold a dialogue. 
 
¶4.  China hopes the Iranian nuclear situation will be 
resolved through talks, Jiang replied, when asked if China is 
ready to join the EU, United States and Russia in direct 
negotiations with Iran.  China is in close contact with all 
the parties on the issue, Jiang said.  China is playing a 
constructive role in finding a solution and will continue to 
make contributions through negotiations, Jiang affirmed, 
explaining that President Hu Jintao and PM Wen Jiabao have 
recently spoken to President Bush and German Chancellor 
Merkel about the matter. 
 
Six-Party Talks 
--------------- 
 
¶5.  The Six-Party Talks process is facing difficulties, Jiang 
said, when asked to comment on reports that North Korea may 
be readying a missile test.  China hopes all parties can show 
flexibility and pragmatism and push for an early resumption 
of the talks. 
 
BEIJING 00012175  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
Human Rights 
------------ 
 
¶6.  The recent U.S. House of Representatives resolution 
criticizing religious persecution in China is full of 
"slanderous accusations," Jiang stated, when asked for 
comments.  The resolution is groundless and constitutes gross 
interference in China's internal affairs.  China protects 
religious freedom and speech in accordance with Chinese law, 
Jiang said.  After recent reforms, China has made great 
progress in legal development, living standards, and human 
rights.  Asked specifically what China expects from initial 
session of the UN Human Rights Council to be held June 19-30 
in Geneva, Jiang confirmed that VFM Yang Jiechi will head the 
Chinese delegation.  China hopes all the parties will respect 
the cultures, histories and religious rights of all nations, 
Jiang said.  China hopes to avoid the double standards of the 
past wherein human rights dialogue was used solely as a 
pretext for political confrontation, Jiang added. 
 
Spanish Court Charges Chinese Leaders with Genocide 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶7.  A recent court case filed in the Spanish National Court 
is utterly libelous, Jiang stated when questioned repeatedly 
by Spanish news reporters on whether the case will affect 
Sino-Spanish relations.  The case, which charges seven 
Chinese leaders (including former President Jiang Zemin) with 
genocide in Tibet, is a politically motivated attempt to 
undermine Sino-Spanish relations, Jiang said.  The Spanish 
courts have "no right" to prosecute such cases and China 
hopes Spain will properly handle the matter.  China and Spain 
have a strategic partnership and China hopes Spain will make 
a joint effort to maintain healthy relations, Jiang said. 
 
¶8.  Questioned if China will ask for the return of two Falun 
Gong members for whom Spain has recently granted political 
asylum, Jiang stated that China is opposed to other countries 
interfering with China's internal affairs. 
 
Beijing Olympics Corruption Scandal 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  The dismissal of Beijing Vice Mayor Liu Zhihua, who 
oversees city planning and Olympic-related construction 
projects, will not affect the Olympics, Jiang stated, when 
asked by the Bloomberg reporter whether corruption scandals 
could affect the 2008 games. 
RANDT