06BRASILIA1061
BRAZIL'S MANAUS FREE TRADE ZONE
Thu Jun 01 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO4395
PP RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #1061/01 1521001
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 011001Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5527
INFO RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 4848
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 2153
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 7048
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES 4040
RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION 5455
RUEHMN/AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO 6270
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO 5532
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA 3009
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 3265
RUEHZP/AMEMBASSY PANAMA 0245
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO 1838
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ 4609
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 3766
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RHEBAAA/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHDC
RUCPDO/USDOC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRASILIA 001061 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS USTR 
TREASURY FOR OASIA 
USDOC FOR 4332/ITA/MAC/WH/OLAC/JANDERSEN/ADRISCOLL/MWAR D 
USDOC FOR 3134/ITA/USCS/OIO/WH/RD/SHUPKA 
DOE FOR SLADISLAW 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD EAIR EINV ECON PGOV BR
SUBJECT: BRAZIL'S MANAUS FREE TRADE ZONE 
 
¶1. (SBU) Charge, Econoff and Commercial Specialist met with a number 
of entities in the Manaus Free Zone May 14-16, including Whirlpool 
Brazil, the Manaus Free Zone Administration (SUFRAMA), the Amazon 
State Industries Federation (FIEAM) and the Center for Business 
Development (CIDE), all of which recited a litany of the challenges 
facing businesses operating in the midst of the Amazon. Their 
largest complaint was how the Lula Administration's policies ignore 
their needs and adversely affect future growth in the region, 
particularly the GOB's emphasis on promoting increased South-South 
trade instead of nurturing strong trade relationships with the U.S. 
and Europe.   Our Manaus interlocutors warned that in the future 
Brazil would be disadvantaged unless the government paid greater 
attention to its principal trading partners.  They also highlighted 
the need for continued new investment, including equipment and 
training aimed to increasing human capital.  All hoped that the 
scheduled June 1 launch of TAM's direct flight from Manaus to Miami, 
as well as the COPA flight from Manaus to Los Angeles (via Panama), 
would increase Manaus' profile with international investors.  The 
enthusiastic welcome USG representatives received suggest there is 
much to gain from greater engagement in Manaus, a thriving city of 
1.8 million in the heart of Brazil's huge Amazon region.  End 
Summary. 
 
--------------------- 
Not Business as Usual 
--------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Charge and Emboffs traveled to Manaus, capital of the State 
of Amazonas and the 8th largest city in the country (population 1.8 
million), to launch Mission Brazil's fifth Virtual Presence Post 
(septel) May 14-16.  While there, they met with government, business 
and civic leaders in the area. Representatives from Whirlpool 
Brazil's Manaus unit told Charge that their biggest challenge is 
competition from China in the face of the appreciated Real, which 
makes their air conditioners and microwaves more expensive in the 
U.S.  Even with the tax incentives that companies enjoy in the 
Manaus Free Zone where Whirlpool and over 450 companies operate, 
low-cost Chinese exports to the U.S. force Manaus (and Brazil)-based 
exporters to the U.S. to become increasingly efficient.  For 
instance, to save on operating costs during low production seasons, 
the company sends everyone in the production chain on annual leave 
at the same time.  Charge noted to Whirlpool representatives that if 
Brazil were to reform its restrictive labor codes, such managerial 
acrobatics would not be necessary. 
 
¶3. (U) Members of the local AmCham told Charge that Manaus offers a 
lot to the savvy business hoping to get a foothold in Latin America, 
through tax incentives and relatively inexpensive labor.  However, 
the workforce's limited technical expertise and the fall of the 
dollar have made Brazil in general less attractive.  Despite recent 
setbacks, most members of the AmCham continue to report increased 
earnings. 
 
--------------- 
SUFRAMA Suffers 
--------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Manaus Free Zone Administration (SUFRAMA) vociferously 
expressed displeasure with the Lula administration, which it blames 
for slower than expected investment growth in the region and for 
preventing it from doing its job.  About 450 companies currently 
operate on 1.7 million hectares in the zone, which SUFRAMA plans to 
expand by another 5.7 million hectares by 2010.  SUFRAMA estimates 
that 22 American companies are located in the free zone. As the de 
facto engine of economic growth in the region and the motivating 
force behind the planned ambitious expansion of the free trade zone, 
and with responsibilities growing as more companies enter the zone, 
the Lula administration has made the job of managing the free zone 
 
BRASILIA 00001061  002 OF 003 
 
 
more challenging, SUFRAMA officials said.  Despite attracting 275 
new projects in 2005 (worth USD 4.68 billion) and 70 new projects 
thus far in 2006 (worth USD 543 million), the zone finds itself 
chiefly ignored by the current administration, losing federal 
government investment dollars to Sao Paulo/Santos and even Rio.  The 
run-down Manaus airport handles over 51 cargo flights per week -- 
the third largest throughput of cargo in Brazil, behind only the two 
Sao Paulo State airports of Guarulhos and Campinas -- but has had to 
fight bitterly for money for upgrades.  SUFRAMA has asked the 
Ministry Development, Industry and Foreign Commerce (MDIC), to which 
it answers directly, for more technicians in order to carry out its 
expanding mandate, but has not yet received much relief, further 
stretching the administrator's human resources. 
 
¶5. (SBU) A strong example of the tense relationship occurred when 
SUFRAMA chief economist Jose Machado interrupted his presentation to 
Emboffs and become embroiled in a heated discussion with his 
supervisor over the phone.  He later revealed that his boss was 
currently in Brasilia arguing with her immediate supervisor, 
Minister of Development, Industry and Commerce Furlan, in opposition 
to the rescission of R$700 million (approximately US$350 million) of 
SUFRAMA funds.  The loss of these funds has prompted protests from 
Free Zone denizens; the prominent Free Zone firm Nokia, according to 
Machado, complained bitterly to the Minister that if SUFRAMA does 
not use Free Zone maintenance fees to maintain the zone's roads and 
other infrastructure, then companies should not be obligated to pay 
the fees. 
 
----------------------- 
Wanted: Trained Workers 
----------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) Center for Business development in the Free Zone (CIDE) 
representatives said their biggest problem is overcoming the 
perception that Manaus does not have the human resources to handle 
increased high tech investment.  Amazonas State Industrial 
Federation (FIEAM) spokesmen and SUFRAMA officials stated that lack 
of human resources is not just a perception but a real problem, 
given the dire need for worker training on equipment that companies 
use in the zone.  While FIEAM administers an extensive training 
program to provide Free Zone companies with trained personnel, it 
acknowledges that there is continuing need for increased training on 
the next generation of industrial production equipment that 
companies hope to acquire. 
 
¶7. (U) In addition to urging increased direct U.S. investment in the 
technology sector in Manaus, FIEAM proposed that U.S. large 
equipment manufacturers and technology companies develop a system 
similar to that of the German company Siemens. A Siemens technician 
from company headquarters is co-located at a FIEAM facility, 
administering certification exams for technicians trained by FIEAM 
on Siemens equipment and helping workers fulfill ongoing training 
requirements. Since, according to FIEAM reps, needs are greatest for 
U.S.-based computer and industrial technology, a greater American 
presence is a logical solution, they said, and one which would 
benefit the users of U.S. capital equipment.  All interlocutors 
noted a need for more software and hardware engineers and 
programmers to keep up with increased automation.  Even with the 
free zone companies wholly sponsoring many of the technology 
programs at the Federal University in Manaus, there is still a 
deficit in trained hardware and software professionals.  Soon, 
companies would like to take a leap into micro-mechanics in the 
interest increased production efficiency, but without trained 
personnel, this will not be possible. 
 
-------------- 
A Coming Boom? 
-------------- 
 
BRASILIA 00001061  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) Despite 2005 industrial growth of almost four times the 
national average (12.1% versus a Brazilian average of 3.1%), and 
with a grand total of 275 new projects in 2005 worth USD 4.68 
billion and 70 new projects in 2006 worth USD 543 million, Manaus 
interlocutors feel the city finds itself chiefly ignored by the 
current administration, losing out (in terms of federal investment 
dollars) to Sao Paulo/Santos and even Rio.  Representatives from 
FIEAM, SUFRAMA, CIDE and the AMCHAM all argued that the Lula 
Administration's strategy of concentrating its commercial promotion 
efforts on South-South trade was flawed as it does not reflect the 
reality that Brazil's strongest trade relationships were with the 
U.S. and Europe. In the Manaus free zone alone, 34.75 percent of 
exports go to the U.S.  The Ministry of External Relations' 
non-pragmatic, ideological foreign policy is working against the 
trade zone, FIEAM representatives said.  They worried that Uruguay 
and Chile will soon leave Brazil behind. 
 
¶9. (SBU) The one thing the current administration is getting right, 
according to SUFRAMA Chief Economist Jose Machado, is its effort to 
attract a semiconductor factory to Brazil.  (Note: The GoB is 
attempting to use its choice of a digital television standard as 
negotiating leverage to obtain Japanese, Korean or European 
investment in a multibillion dollar semiconductor factory.)  The 
states of Amazonas and Minas Gerais have large concentrations of 
niobium, a primary material for the production of semiconductors -- 
which travel to Estonia and Asia before being re-imported into 
Brazil in semi-finished form. According to SUFRAMA, Manaus currently 
consumes 40 percent of the semiconductors used in Brazil and placing 
a plant there would make economic sense (Comment: Based upon our 
contacts in support of the ATSC digital television standard, given 
the spotty investment climate in Brazil the likelihood of this 
happening is low). 
 
¶10. (U) Local authorities believe that the June 1 initiation of a 
daily TAM flight flying directly from Manaus to Miami, along with a 
new Copa Airlines flight, which allows connections through Panama to 
Los Angeles, provide hope for raising Manaus' profile with potential 
U.S. and Asian investors.  The recently approved airport expansion 
will increase cargo flight capacity by another 50 per cent, 
according to authorities. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) The overwhelmingly positive response the Embassy received 
from the business community in Manaus during this 3-day visit 
suggests that there would be high returns for greater USG engagement 
in Brazil's Amazon region, some of which lies almost as close to 
Miami as it does to Sao Paulo.  As the Mission looks to enhance its 
coverage of the huge and under-served regions of North and 
North-Eastern Brazil, we will need to build on the existing 
commercial ties created by U.S. investment in Manaus in particular. 
There is also fertile ground for greater public affairs engagement, 
as perceptions of some of the USG policy priorities, such as trade 
liberalization, can vary substantially from region to region in this 
vast nation. 
 
CHICOLA