06BUCHAREST1589
ROMANIA SEEKS NATO CLEARINGHOUSE FOR MOLDOVA
Mon Oct 16 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Bucharest
VZCZCXYZ0009
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBM #1589/01 2891352
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 161352Z OCT 06
FM AMEMBASSY BUCHAREST
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5362
INFO RUEHXP/ALL NATO POST COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHCH/AMEMBASSY CHISINAU PRIORITY 1188
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYUNCLAS BUCHAREST 001589 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR MO NATO PREL RO
SUBJECT: ROMANIA SEEKS NATO CLEARINGHOUSE FOR MOLDOVA 
INDIVIDUAL PARTNERSHIP ACTION PLAN 
 
 
¶1.  During an October 4 courtesy call by D/PolChief, 
Romania's MFA Deputy Director for NATO Geta Medeleanu 
requested US support for setting up a NATO clearinghouse 
mechanism to help Moldova through implementation of its 
Individual Partnership Action Plan.  Medeleanu said that the 
non-paper (para 3 below), was distributed to NATO capitals, 
but the MFA was hoping for maximum coverage.  Bucharest 
continues to support strengthening Euro-Atlantic linkages 
with Chisinau, and believes that a NATO clearinghouse 
mechanism would be a vital part to more frequent and 
effective engagement.  The recent referendum in Transnistria 
has unsettled the region somewhat, thus looking for ways to 
reaffirm concretely ongoing Trans-Atlantic interests is 
fundamental to everyone's interest. 
 
¶2.  Comment:  While Bucharest seeks to establish its bona 
fides as the NATO regional branch office on the Black Sea, it 
also hopes to use NATO cover to play big brother to Moldova. 
Though Romania would not mind becoming the de facto 
Easternmost gatekeeper for the alliance, it is doubtful that 
Bucharest will successfully convince other Allies that it 
should hold the key for Moldova's aspirations.  End Comment. 
 
¶3.  Begin non-paper: 
 
Setting up a Clearinghouse mechanism for Republic Moldova to 
support the implementation of the Individual Partnership 
Action Plan (IPAP) NATO-R. Moldova 
 
¶1.  The Rationale 
 
On May 19,2006, the NAC approved the Individual Partnership 
Action Plan NATO-R. Moldova, which marks the beginning of a 
new stage of cooperation and a major step forward in the 
relationship between R. Moldova and the Alliance.  Along with 
the EU-R. Moldova Plan, the IPAP can catalyze the domestic 
reforms, including the defense and security sectors-related 
reforms, thus contributing to putting the country on a firm 
course towards the Euro-Atlantic community. 
 
Taking into consideration the difficulties encountered by 
other PfP countries in meeting the objectives included in 
IPAP and the lack of experience of the Moldovan experts in 
dealing with this instrument, it is fairly predictable that 
¶R. Moldova will need as much assistance and guidance as 
possible to overcome the challenges in the process of 
carrying out the activities included in the IPAP matrix. 
 
Against this background, taking into consideration the 
significant support pledged by the allies during the IPAP 
presentation at NATO Headquarters, Romania believes that a 
&clearing house mechanism8 dedicated to R. Moldova would be 
an instrumental mechanism in support of the implementation of 
the Individual Partnership Action Plan (IPAP). 
 
¶2.  The Concept 
 
The clearinghouse for R. Moldova would be an informal 
framework of cooperation opened to voluntary contribution and 
participation from interested allies and PfP countries which 
can offer concrete support and assistance to R. Moldova. 
 
The mechanism would include two conferences per year, with 
participation of experts from ministries of defense and other 
institutions involved in other areas of security sector 
reform, of interest for the Moldovan side.  Including, for 
example, experts from ministries of interior could prove 
beneficial for harmonizing R. Moldova,s defense and security 
sector reform. 
 
Beyond provision of assistance, the clearinghouse mechanism 
could facilitate exchange of experience between R. Moldova 
and the participant countries in the above-mentioned areas of 
reform 
 
The clearinghouse mechanism would be chaired by two or more 
participant states, which will coordinate closely with R. 
Moldova on an ongoing basis in organizing the 
mechanism)related events. 
 
Experts from the International Secretariat have voiced 
initial support for the set up of a clearinghouse mechanism 
for R. Moldova, separate from the current ones existing for 
South East Europe or South Caucasus.  A separate mechanism 
would help donors focus on R. Moldova,s special assistance 
needs and objectives in relation with NATO, which are 
different from the needs and aims of the countries in South 
Caucasus (i.e. Georgia) or South East Europe. 
 
In discussions with Romanian representatives, officials in 
Chisinau endorsed the setting up of a separate clearing house 
mechanism for R. Moldova, to be coordinated by Romanian, as 
Contact Point Embassy, together with one or two other allies 
interested to offer and generate financial assistance for the 
process of IPAP,s implementation. 
 
¶3.  Benefits 
 
This would be a win-win solution, with significant results in 
terms of progress in IPAP,s implementation and optimal 
harmonization between assistance offers and concrete needs of 
R.Moldova. 
 
The clearinghouse mechanism will benefit both allies and R. 
Moldova as it will: 
 
-     contribute in a decisive manner to the IPAP 
implementation by supporting the defense and security sector 
reforms in R. Moldova; 
-     help R. Moldova to identify and prioritize its most 
urgent assistance needs; 
-     avoid duplication of offers; 
-     contribute to the harmonization of assistance 
contributions offered on a bilateral basis by the potential 
allied and Western PfP donors with R. Moldova,s needs; 
-     rationalize the financial efforts and contributions of 
the donors and ensure the coherence, transparency, and the 
consistence of the assistance process; 
-     signal support from NATO community for Moldova,s 
interest to intensify political dialogue with practical 
cooperation with the Alliance and acknowledgement of the4 new 
level of cooperation with NATO 
-     encourage authorities in Chisinau to carry out 
difficult internal reforms and boost public opinion support 
and visibility for NATO in R. Moldova. 
 
¶4.  Way Ahead 
 
As the clearinghouse is a process based on voluntary 
contributions, the set up of the mechanism depends upon the 
level of interest of the potential donor countries. 
 
Consequently, Romania has launched a process  of broad 
consultation with the International Staff, Allied Countries 
) including allies which currently coordinate clearing house 
mechanisms ) and selected PfP countries ) Switzerland, 
Finland, Austria, Sweden ) to determine the level of 
interest in taking part in a clearing house mechanism for R. 
Moldova. 
 
Between October 15-17, a NATO experts team will visit 
Chisinau to assess the progress achieved by R. Moldova in 
implementing IPAP.  Provided that a critical mass of 
interested contributors can be gathered by that time, a first 
exploratory  meeting with representatives from allied 
embassies interested to get involved in the clearing house 
mechanism could be organized during the visit of the NATO 
experts team in Chisinau.  Through its NATO CPE, Romania will 
inform the allied and PfP countries, which are not currently 
represented in Chisinau, but are interested to take part in 
the Clearing house Mechanism, about the results of the 
discussion. 
 
Romania stands ready to provide further details, if 
necessary, and would very much appreciate a timely feedback. 
  End non-paper. 
Taubman