06BUENOSAIRES579
MEDIA REACTION US PRESIDENT BUSH'S POPULARITY
Mon Mar 13 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Buenos Aires
VZCZCXYZ0021
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBU #0579/01 0721912
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 131912Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3789
INFO RHMFIUU/CDR USSOCOM MACDILL AFB FL//SCJ2//
RULGPUA/USCOMSOLANTUNCLAS BUENOS AIRES 000579 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, I/GWHA, WHA, WHA/PDA, WHA/BSC, 
WHA/EPSC 
CDR USSOCOM FOR J-2 IAD/LAMA 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OPRC KMDR PREL MEDIA REACTION
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION US PRESIDENT BUSH'S POPULARITY 
RATING CHILEAN PRESIDENT MICHELE BACHELET'S 
INAUGURATION CEREMONY RICE AND MORALES MEETING THE US- 
LATIN AMERICAN RELATIONSHIP US-CHILEAN TIES US- 
URUGUAYAN FTA USG AND ARGENTINA ON THE TRI-BORDER AREA 
03/13/06 
 
¶1. SUMMARY STATEMENT 
 
Major international stories from the weekend cover 
socialist pediatrician Michelle Bachelet's  swearing 
in as the nation's first female president; the US 
President's popularity rating; the presidents of 
Argentina and Uruguay reaching an agreement to suspend 
construction of two pulp mills; Iran ruling out a 
proposal to move its uranium enrichment program to 
Russia; and the US-Latin American relationship. 
Leading ""Clarin"" reports the Argentine Government's 
reaction to statements made by US Assistant Secretary 
for the Treasury on Terrorist Financing Patrick 
O'Brien during his visit to Buenos Aires. Conservative 
""La Prensa"" reports that US Ambassador Lino Gutierrez 
and Argentine FM Jorge Taiana signed a deal to broaden 
the scope of seismic monitoring activity in Paso 
Flores, province of Ro Negro, in support of national 
requirements and the International Monitoring System 
(IMS) under development by signatories to the 
Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban treaty (CTBT). 
 
¶2. OPINION PIECES AND KEY STORIES 
 
- ""Record lack of support and Republican criticism of 
Bush"" 
 
Hugo Alconada Mon, Washington-based correspondent for 
daily-of-record ""La Nacion,"" comments (03/11) ""Worn 
out by the current situation in Iraq, some domestic 
problems and a G.O.P. that is starting to rebel in 
order to have a chance to compete in this year's 
legislative elections, President George W. Bush 
reached the lowest level of support of his five years 
in the White House. 
 
""According to CBS News and AP-Ipsos' latest opinion 
surveys, only 34-37% of Americans approve of his 
performance..., while his immediate predecessors had 
60% approval during their fifth year in office. 
 
""Bush acknowledged yesterday that his public support 
ratings are low, but attributed this to a responsible 
administration. 
 
""Furthermore, almost 70% of Republicans (and four out 
of every five Americans) believe that the US has 
chosen the wrong path, that the status of the economy 
is a topic of concern, and that a civil war looms on 
Iraq's horizon (the most sensitive point of Bush's 
foreign policy)."" 
 
- ""Morales and Rice spoke about the fight against drug 
trafficking"" 
 
Leandro Uria, on special assignment in Valparaiso for 
daily-of-record ""La Nacion,"" writes (03/12) ""One day 
after having captured media attention in Santiago..., 
Bolivian President Evo Morales showed his pragmatism 
and met yesterday with US Secretary of State 
Condoleezza Rise. 
 
""However, Morales gave a signal that he will not cede 
in his demands when he presented Rice with a charango 
(small guitar) with laminated coca leaves... 
 
""For her part, Rice made an effort to underscore that 
Washington wants to be a good friend of Bolivia and 
said that there has been bilateral cooperation so far 
in the fight on terrorism and drugs. Rice told the 
traveling media 'We have a good relationship with 
Bolivia and want to maintain it as it is.'"" 
 
- ""Morales announces first deals have been reached 
with the US"" 
 
Business-financial ""Ambito Financiero"" reports (03/13) 
""Bolivian President Evo Morales managed to reach 
preliminary deals with the US during an interview with 
US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice. 
 
""Rice and Morales, who held a 30-minute meeting in 
Valparaiso..., reached an agreement on economic and 
 
 
 
 
 
social issues. 
 
""When he returned to Bolivia, Morales himself said 
that during his meeting with Rice they talked about 
broadening tariff preferences in the US. 
 
""... Regarding the fight on drugs and the removal of 
coca plantations, Morales informed that 'they talked 
about reaching an agreement to establish an alliance 
in the fight against drug trafficking while respecting 
coca leaf cultivation."" 
 
- ""The US should look to its backyard more frequently"" 
 
Business-financial ""El Cronista"" carries an opinion 
piece by Juan Tokatlian, director, Political Science 
and International Relations, Universidad de San 
Andres, who writes (03/13) ""In a traditional scenario 
in the US-Latin American relationship, Washington 
seems irritated by certain Southern trends... This has 
given rise to some particular disorder - the 
'frustrated superpower syndrome.' 
 
""In the case of Latin America, Washington does not 
perceive the region in an absolutely negative way but 
as a dependent counterpart. 
 
""... In brief, the US attitude continues to stagnate 
in unilateral myopia and coactive diplomacy. 
 
""The US and region should focus on what can be called 
the four D-agenda - democracy, debt, development and 
drugs... It is urgent to revitalize the OAS as the key 
forum to deal with these issues. 
 
""While it is true that a stable and prosperous Latin 
America is vital for US interests, it is crucial that 
Washington abandon the underlying biases and policies 
that have deepened the frustrated superpower 
syndrome."" 
 
- ""Chile - an invitation to improve democracies"" 
 
Oscar Raul Cardoso, international analyst of leading 
""Clarin,"" opines (03/11) ""... Among the heads of 
foreign delegations that will participate in 
Bachelet's presidential inauguration there will be US 
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, who has long said 
 
SIPDIS 
that she is not negatively disposed toward leftist 
Latin American leaders. 
 
""... However, there are thorny issues between the US 
and Chile. 
 
""The Chilean Congress is about to ratify its accession 
to the Treaty of Rome, which is intended to judge 
those who committed crimes against humanity. 
Washington is against this instrument, and Chile does 
not seem willing to grant the special privilege the 
USG demands for its troops. 
 
""On the other hand, Bachelet could well review the 
participation of the Chilean military in the 
multinational force that is occupying Haiti..."" 
 
- ""Uruguay will broaden its commercial ties with the 
US"" 
 
Hugo Alconada Mon, Washington-based correspondent for 
daily-of-record ""La Nacion,"" writes (03/11) ""US and 
Uruguayan high-ranking government officials will meet 
next month in this capital city in order to broaden 
the commercial ties between the two countries, paving 
the way for an eventual bilatera FTA. 
 
""... During a meeting held by the Council of the 
Americas, in Miami, Uruguayan Industry and Energy 
Minister Jorge Lepra explained that Tabare Vazquez 
wants to deepen the country's commercial ties with the 
US, although Uruguayan government officials will only 
focus 'for the moment' on obtaining better access to 
US markets for the country's products (such as meat 
and software) rather than on a future FTA."" 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- ""The Argentine Government responds to the US on the 
Tri-border"" 
 
Ernesto Azarkevich, on special assignment in Posadas 
for leading ""Clarin,"" comments (03/11) ""Argentine 
Interior Minister Anibal Fernandez challenged the US 
to 'prove' that international terrorism receives 
funding in the Tri-border, as said Patrick O'Brien, 
high-ranking Treasury official during an anti-money 
laundering seminar. 
 
""Fernandez arrived in Posadas on Thursday night to 
attend a meeting of the Interior Security Council. 
Fernandez... sustained that 'speaking of the Tri- 
border as such is too abstract,' and he emphasized 
that the three federal forces (Coast Guard, Sea Guard 
and the Federal Police) are permanently monitoring the 
area.' 
 
""Regarding alleged terrorist financing at the Tri- 
border, Fernandez asserted 'One should not say those 
things, one should prove them and point out those 
responsible for them.' Fernandez also rejected 
O'Brien's statements about the need for updating 
Argentine legislation. Fernandez said 'with the tools 
we have at hand, it is enough for us,' although he 
acknowledged that 'one can always find room for 
improvement.'"" 
 
¶3. EDITORIALS 
 
- ""Chile, an example for the region"" 
 
Leading ""Clarin"" editorializes (03/13) ""Chilean 
President Michelle Bachelet's presidential 
inauguration ceremony has been a major event for the 
democracies of the region at a time that leaders need 
help to make agreement prevail over disagreement. 
 
""... The new (Chilean) government inherits political 
stability and economic growth, although it should 
attend to needs for innovation and face unequal income 
distribution... 
 
""The first gestures of the brand-new president toward 
the region emphasize the strategic priority she will 
assign to the region in her foreign policy and her 
closeness with several political leaders. In sum, this 
is a good start to face the coming problems and the 
challenges ahead."" 
 
- ""Unfulfilled commitments"" 
 
An editorial in conservative ""La Prensa"" reads (03/12) 
""The US is confident of its excellent diplomatic ties 
with Argentina, but in some aspects it is not entirely 
satisfied when commitments do not turn into concrete 
actions. US assistant Secretary of the Treasury for 
Terrorist Financing Patrick O'Brien did not hesitate 
in bringing a list of pending issues we have to 
accomplish with Washington. 
 
""... O'Brien emphasized that Argentina ratified 
international treaties against terrorism (which 
reveals a real commitment), but that a lot of work is 
still ahead in order to honor those treaties. 
 
""During a press conference at the US Embassy, he 
highlighted that some other sensitive and important 
measures are still pending, such as criminalizing 
terrorist financing and also updating anti-money 
laundering legislation."" 
 
To see more Buenos Aires reporting, visit our 
classified website at: 
http://www.state.sqov.gov/p/wha/buenosaires 
 
The Media Reaction Report reflects articles and 
opinions by the cited news media and do not 
necessarily reflect U.S. Embassy policy or views.  The 
Public Affairs Section does not independently verify 
information. The report is intended for internal U.S. 
 
 
 
 
 
Government use only. 
 
GUTIERREZ 
.