06CAIRO4560
TFLE01: FREQUENT DEMONSTRATIONS IN CAIRO AGAINST
Tue Jul 25 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0003
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #4560/01 2061610
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 251610Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0128
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS CAIRO 004560 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR MIKE SINGH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EG
SUBJECT: TFLE01: FREQUENT DEMONSTRATIONS IN CAIRO AGAINST 
ISRAELI "AGGRESSION" 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED. NOT FOR INTERNET DISTRIBUTION. 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Demonstrations in support of Lebanon and 
against Israel have become near daily occurrences in Cairo 
since the July 13 Israeli bombing of Beirut,s international 
airport.  Protests are expected to continue this week, with 
the largest anticipated to be a July 26 demonstration in 
Cairo,s central Liberation Square, coordinated by Islamists, 
leftist groups and NGO activists, to show "solidarity with 
the Palestinian and Lebanese resistance."  On July 21, 
approximately 10,000 Egyptians joined in a peaceful 
demonstration at Cairo,s Al Azhar mosque following Friday 
prayers, declaring their support for Lebanon and denouncing 
recent Israeli military operations in the Levant.  Speeches 
by Islamist and leftist leaders criticized Egypt,s President 
Hosni Mubarak, Jordan,s King Abdullah II and Saudi Arabia,s 
King Abdullah, in addition to the U.S. and Israel.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Demonstrations in support of Lebanon and against 
Israel have become near daily occurrences in Cairo since the 
July 13 Israeli bombing of Beirut,s international airport. 
Protests are expected to continue this week, with the largest 
anticipated to be a July 26 demonstration in Cairo,s central 
Liberation Square, organized by the "National Forces for 
Palestine and Lebanon", a grouping of Islamists, leftists and 
NGO activists, to show "solidarity with the Palestinian and 
Lebanese resistance." (Note: July 26 is also the 50th 
anniversary of Egypt's nationalization of the Suez Canal. End 
Note.)  The demonstration's slogan, already being distributed 
via websites, addresses Arab leaders, stating, "Your 
Majesties, Your Excellencies ... Spit on You!" 
 
¶3. (SBU) According to press reports, thousands of Egyptians 
rallied at Cairo,s Al Azhar mosque following Friday prayers 
on July 21 (press estimates of attendance at the 
demonstration range from eight to fifteen thousand.) 
Speakers included Mahdy Akef (Supreme Guide of the Muslim 
Brotherhood), Abdul Ezz Al Hariry (Tagamau), Abdel Azim 
Maghraby (Nasserite Party), Abdel Azziz Mafakhoum (Kefaya 
Movement), Salah Abdel Metael (Islamic Labor Party), Sayed 
Askar (Al Azhar), Sameh Ashour (Bar Syndicate), and a 
representative from the Al Wafd Party.  MB Supreme Guide Akef 
reportedly described the United States as "the real enemy" 
and in subsequent comments to the press said, "today we are 
supporting the Palestinian, Lebanese and Iraqi resistance and 
every resistance against Zionist, American and European 
arrogance."  Other speakers condemned the U.S. for allegedly 
condoning Israeli violence in both Lebanon and Gaza.  Others 
criticized President Mubarak for his censuring of Hezbollah 
and denounced him as a U.S. agent.  King Abdullah II of 
Jordan and Saudi Arabia's King Abdullah were also criticized 
for "not supporting their Muslim brothers." 
 
¶4. (SBU) Some press reports noted that fights between 
protestors and police followed the rally, breaking out at one 
of the gates of Al Azhar.  Protestors reportedly tried to 
break through a police cordon onto the street, but 
plainclothes police blocked their way, and fistfights broke 
out.  According to Embassy contacts, the disturbances were 
minor and erupted when MB Supreme Guide Akef was leaving Al 
Azhar with his guards, who tried to push through the police 
security line, thereby prompting a fight.  In either case, 
five of the demonstrators were injured, as was one policeman, 
but no arrests were made. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Smaller demonstrations were held on July 21 at the 
El Nour mosque in Cairo,s Abassya district and at the Ahmer 
Ibn Al Az mosque in the Old Cairo district.  Groups of 
demonstrators elsewhere in the city were reportedly not 
exclusively Muslim, but also included significant numbers of 
Copts.  Some Christians told reporters that they were 
demonstrating on behalf of the "Lebanese victims" and that it 
was their duty to support their fellow Arabs, but emphasized 
that they did not support Hezbollah,s attacks against 
Israel.  Also on July 21, another 3,000 demonstrated in 
Alexandria "in solidarity with the Lebanese and Palestinians" 
in a number of mosques following Friday prayers.  The Kefaya 
movement also organized a small demonstration in the Al Raml 
district of Alexandria. 
 
¶6. (SBU) There have been a number of other similar rallies 
held since Israeli military operations in Lebanon began.  On 
July 19, a small group of demonstrators in central Cairo 
waved Hezbollah flags and held up pictures of Hezbollah 
leader Hassan Nasrallah and former Egyptian President (and 
icon of pan-Arab nationalism) Gamal Abdel Nasser.  On July 
16, a peaceful "Support Lebanon and Palestine" demonstration 
in front of Cairo,s Arab Physicians' Syndicate turned into 
 
an angry anti-Israel rally.  The demonstration, which was 
called for via e-mails, SMS and newspapers, was organized by 
the Egyptian Physicians' Syndicate with the participation of 
Kefaya, Youth for Change, the Egyptian Committee for 
Combatting Imperialism and Zionism, the Muslim Brotherhood, 
Al Karama (Dignity Party), and the Pan Arabist Nasserite 
movement.  Press reports indicate approximately 100 Egyptians 
participated.  Also on July 16, the Egyptian Bar Association 
organized a demonstration calling on Egyptians to undertake 
jihad in Lebanon and Palestine.  Demonstrators held up images 
of Nasrallah and Nasser.  Following Friday prayers on July 
14, five thousand Egyptians gathered at Al Azhar mosque, 
shouting slogans in support of the Lebanese and Palestinian 
resistance, according to press sources.  On the same day, the 
Kefaya movement organized a demonstration in front of 
Cairo,s Al Tawfiqiya mosque, but police broke up the 
protest.  Also on July 14, the Muslim Brotherhood organized 
demonstrations across Egypt.  According to press reports, 
thousands demonstrated in the Delta governorates of Daqahliya 
and Damietta, calling for fund-raising on behalf of 
Palestinian and Lebanese civilians. 
 
RICCIARDONE