06CAIRO4608
Egypt Media trends for July 27, 2006
Thu Jul 27 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Cairo
null
Brooke F Adams  08/06/2006 02:06:18 PM  From  DB/Inbox:  Brooke F Adams

Cable 
Text:                                                                      
                                                                           
      
UNCLAS        CAIRO 04608

SIPDIS
CXCAIRO:
    ACTION: PA
    INFO:   AMB OMC AID DAO POL ECON DCM MGT IPS

DISSEMINATION: PA
CHARGE: PROG

APPROVED: PA: RLERNER
DRAFTED: PA: HMAHONEY, ECPO:
CLEARED: NONE

VZCZCCRI356
PP RUEHC RUEHXK
DE RUEHEG #4608/01 2081353
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 271353Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0174
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 004608 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA/PPD FOR ROBIN SMITH AND DAVID BENZE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PTER KPAO KMDR OPRC UK AL AG IS SA IR EG
SUBJECT:  Egypt Media trends for July 27, 2006 
 
 
Sensitive but unclassified.  Not for internet distribution. 
 
¶1. Summary.  The past week  internal disagreement over 
Hezbollah as right or wrong has been replaced by unified calls for 
an 
immediate ceasefire.  The US has been characterized as frustrating 
any 
opportunity to end the days of bloodshed splashed on front pages and 
captured 
on Egyptian and regional television.  Today  headlines spoke of ""US 
isolation"", Israel  ""weakness"" against Hezbollah, and continued 
death and 
destruction at the hands of Israel  ""cluster bombs"".  Calls made to 
talk 
shows and columns written in the papers evidenced fear of the US 
pursuit of 
""a greater Middle East"" and anger toward the ""Arab nation"" and 
leaders for 
failing to stop it.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  In the headlines. The day  headlines and photos were less 
shocking and 
emotional than in previous days, with fewer photos of dead and 
injured women 
and children.  Focus was largely on the Rome talks, and the 
depiction of the 
US as solely responsible for the failure to bring a ceasefire. 
Pro-government dailies, such as Al-Ahram, Al-Akhbar, Al- 
Gomhouriya and Rose Al-Youssef declared, ""American insistence is 
behind the 
failure of Rome Conference""; ""Rice Challenged the World... So Talks 
Collapsed.""  Both Al-Akhbar and independent daily, Al-Masry Al-Yom, 
used 
photos from the Rome Conference to reinforce their headlines. 
Al-Masry Al- 
Yom showed Secretary Rice looking fatigued as she stood next to 
Prime 
Minister Siniora and Al-Akhbar showed her looking intently at Kofi 
Annan. 
Opposition daily, Al-Wafd, continued to use inflammatory headlines 
and 
photos, such as its quote of the very popular Sheikh Qardawi, ""Jihad 
is a 
Religious Obligation on all and Assisting 
Hezbollah is a Must."" 
 
¶3.  In the commentaries.  Writers expressed another day of anger and 
frustration toward their perception of the US  ""new pursuit of 
greater 
Middle East"" and the idea that Arab leaders are impotent against 
that which 
was planned ""before the soldiers were kidnapped.""  A columnist in 
independent 
daily, Nahdet Misr, feared this model would turn the Middle East 
into a 
region ""which has no pride and which will only be allowed to see or 
hear what 
the US and Israel want.""  A columnist in pro-government daily, Rose 
Al- 
Youssef, advised the US that it must understand that ""eliminating 
the 
occupation of Arab lands"" is the only solution and if the ""US 
continues to 
lack this understanding, the resistance will continue and hatred 
toward the 
US will strengthen."" A columnist in pro-government daily, Al-Ahram, 
worried 
that the new Middle East will mean ""allowing Israel to use its power 
to 
redraw the region"" and advised that ""trying to remove Arab 
nationalism will 
create another Iran.""  Another columnist in Al-Ahram emphasized that 
Hezbollah ""is awakening the resistance of the whole nation against 
submission 
and injustice."" 
 
¶4.  Public Opinion.  Many of our close contacts and key influencers 
have 
expressed anger and hurt feelings over their perception of the US 
role in the 
conflict.  During a meeting with Mohamed Hassan el Alfi, the 
editor-in-chief 
of the ruling party  new newspaper, Al-Watani Al-Yom, opening 
pleasantries 
were quickly transformed into a barrage of questions about why the 
US ""treats 
us like dogs and pigs.""  He accused the US of ""selectively enforcing 
UN 
resolutions"" and allowing the occupation to continue.  He also said, 
""I don 
blame Israel for the conflict, I blame our friend in Washington.  I 
am happy 
that you love and protect Israel, we will love Israel, but love us 
too."" 
Another Embassy contact, Egypt's leading actor Adel Emam, was quoted 
on the 
front page of opposition daily Al-Wafd, asking Secretary Rice why 
she ""treats 
us as sheep."" 
 
¶5.  More Public Opinion.  Calls made to the Egyptian Television and 
Arab 
network talk-shows echoed many of the week  newspaper commentaries 
in 
praising the ""power"" of Hezbollah in contrast to the ""impotence"" of 
the Arab 
leaders.  ""Even if Hezbollah fails, it is enough that it showed the 
whole 
world that there is somebody defending us, the Arabs."" Parties who 
might 
normally criticize Hezbollah  tactics, have shown an admiration of 
Hezbollah  ability to ""stand up"" to Israel, while ""the Arab nation 
continues 
to be a coward.""  The US, in contrast, is seen as increasingly 
""complicit"" 
with Israel, using the current situation ""to push its agenda"" and 
""unable to 
understand the outside world.""  As stated by Wahid Abdel Megiud, a 
respected 
researcher at Al-Ahram Center for Strategic Studies during an 
evening talk 
show: ""The US  Greater Middle East initiative failed following its 
defeat in 
Iraq. This war has allowed the US another chance to retain the 
power of this 
project; however  it relies on waging a devastating war which will 
lead the 
U.S. to a deadlock once again, proving that U.S. foreign policy is 
extremely 
shallow."" 
 
Ricciardone