06CAIRO4875
SINIORA CRIES." EGYPT MEDIA TRENDS:
Tue Aug 08 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0007
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #4875 2201325
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 081325Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0404
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVEUNCLAS CAIRO 004875 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/PPD FOR ALBERTO FERNANDEZ, ROBIN SMITH AND 
DAVID BENZE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PREL PREL IS LE EG
SUBJECT:  "SINIORA CRIES." EGYPT MEDIA TRENDS: 
AUGUST 8, 2006 
 
 
¶1.  Summary.  Lebanese Prime Minister Siniora's 
emotional speech in Beirut yesterday, and the 
debate over whether Hezbollah or Israel is the 
victor of the war continued in television and 
print commentaries.  All papers led with similar 
stories and headlines, including, "Siniora's 
Tears"; the "public and official delegation" sent 
to Beirut to show solidarity with the Lebanese 
people; and President Mubarak's most recent 
statements about the crisis in Lebanon. Of 
interest, opposition press reported on an 
upcoming new play entitled, "Either Us or Them." 
End Summary. 
 
¶2.  In the headlines and front pages.  In unusual 
harmony, government-owned, opposition and 
independent papers led with some identical 
headlines and stories. "Siniora Cries," appeared 
on many front pages, with accompanying photos, as 
did lead stories about the dispatching of a 
"Seventy-member delegation, representing 
official, political, and popular figures in 
Egypt," to Beirut today "to show solidarity for 
the Lebanese government and people."  Government- 
owned papers all quoted President Mubarak's 
latest statement on the crisis, in particular, 
his characterization of Israel's actions in Qana 
as a "massacre by all standards" and the UN's 
"sluggishness" as "the reason for the 
deterioration in Lebanon."  In keeping with the 
active public discourse on the "new Middle East", 
the papers quoted President Mubarak as "rejecting 
any attempt to impose 'new maps' on the region." 
 
¶3.  In the commentaries.  The debate over who 
reigns victorious in the conflict continued on 
evening television programs and in opposition and 
independent press.  One guest on satellite- 
broadcast, government-owned, Nile TV's evening 
program claimed the UN resolution "granted a 
political victory to Israel... as the Arab 
countries have no cards to play" while another 
guest praised Hezbollah for its so-called victory 
in persuading Arab people that "they can die with 
honor."  A regular columnist in opposition daily, 
Al-Wafd, asserted that "Jews run the world," 
indicating a victory over President Bush "who 
cannot stand against them."  A columnist in 
independent daily, Al-Masry Al-Yom, claimed 
Israel the "clear loser" as "victory is not 
measured by the size of destruction... but the 
political gains."  Similarly, a columnist in 
Nahdet Misr called Israel the "loser" due to its 
"inability to achieve any military targets." Of 
note, a regular columnist in leading government- 
owned daily, Al-Ahram, alluded to a losing 
position for the Arab countries given "the grave 
need for reform in the Arab World... (due to) the 
connection between freedom and democracy and the 
ability to stop the aggression on the Arab nation 
only after gaining international respect." 
 
¶4.  Public sentiment.  Prime Minister Siniora's 
tearful speech was replayed many times yesterday 
and today, with evening talk-shows reflecting the 
public emotion this image evoked. In just one 
example, the hosts of popular (and competing) 
satellite and terrestrial evening television 
programs, Dream TV's "10 pm" and Egyptian 
Television's, "Your Home" both aired the footage, 
and called for "positive and decisive Arab 
reactions to help Lebanon in this time of 
crisis."  In another reflection of the public 
mood, political events find their way to the art 
world.  According to opposition daily, Al-Wafd, 
today marked the beginning of rehearsals 
for,"Either Us or Them," a new musical play 
tackling "the Arab-Israeli conflict and 
the American imperialistic vision of the Middle 
East."  The famous Egyptian belly-dancer, Lucy, 
and well-known actor, Ahmed Rateb, reportedly 
will star in the play. 
RICCIARDONE