06CARACAS1789
CHAVEZ AND THE RHETORIC OF HATE
Mon Jun 19 00:00:00 +0200 2006
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Caracas
VZCZCXRO3745
PP RUEHAG
DE RUEHCV #1789/01 1701724
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
P 191724Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY CARACAS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5097
INFO RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA PRIORITY 6666
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA PRIORITY 5572
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ PRIORITY 2118
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA PRIORITY 0363
RUEHMU/AMEMBASSY MANAGUA PRIORITY 1299
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO PRIORITY 3847
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA PRIORITY 0764
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO PRIORITY 2200
RUEHTC/AMEMBASSY THE HAGUE PRIORITY 1011
RUEHROV/AMEMBASSY VATICAN PRIORITY
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 0304
RUEHMI/USOFFICE FRC FT LAUDERDALE PRIORITY 3230
RUMIAAA/HQ USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHUB/USINT HAVANA PRIORITY 0804
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVES E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 05 CARACAS 001789 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/20/2021 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM ELAB KDEM SCUL VE
SUBJECT: CHAVEZ AND THE RHETORIC OF HATE 
 
CARACAS 00001789  001.2 OF 005 
 
 
Classified By: Robert Downes, Political Counselor, 
for Reason 1.4(b). 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) President Hugo Chavez has successfully filled the 
Venezuelan political lexicon with hate-inspiring concepts to 
create and enlarge fissures within Venezuelan society and 
cement his domestic support.  Unfortunately, it is already 
changing the way average Venezuelans think and act.  Since 
taking office in 1999, Chavez has perfected his propaganda of 
hate message, hitting on the broad themes of rich vs. poor, 
U.S. imperialism vs. Bolivarianism, and capitalism vs. 
socialism.  Chavez' audiences are the upper, middle, and 
lower classes, though the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela 
(BRV) has over time extended these to international actors 
and the public at large as Chavez tries to make the leap to 
world figure.  Typical messages are "the U.S. is an evil 
empire," "being rich is bad," "the opposition will never 
return."  The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (BRV) 
transmits its messages via its monopoly on all state media, 
rank and file proselytism physical and psychological 
intimidation, and the unmatched oratory skills of Chavez 
himself.  Chavez' hate-sowing rhetoric forces everything into 
an us-or-them binary decision, leaving a frenzied and 
fearful, or at best intimidated, population incapable of 
resolving basic conflicts.  End Summary. 
 
------------------ 
Watch What He Says 
------------------ 
 
¶2. (C) President Chavez is all talk.  Like many autocrats 
intent on maintaining power, he uses rhetoric as a blunt 
political weapon that seeks to vivisect society along class, 
political, social, and race lines.  To outsiders, Chavez' 
long and rambling speeches are semi-coherent and at times 
laughable.  To the average Venezuelan, however, Chavez' words 
have meaning, offering hope or fear, depending on the 
message.  Chavez speaks as if his words will create the 
reality they are describing.  For example, he recounted his 
distorted version of the events of April 2002 for years until 
prosecutors finally started filing charges against those 
Chavez labeled traitors.  For Chavez, merely appearing at a 
construction site for future public housing and railing 
against the "oligarchy" for historically denying homes to the 
poor, as he did recently, is more politically valuable (or 
seemingly important) to Chavez than actually building the 
aforementioned houses.  While it is tempting to chalk this up 
to Chavez' mastery of bovine scatology, we must concede that 
it has remarkable impact on Venezuelans.  Moreover, Chavez is 
going full throttle to extend his hypnotic message around the 
world. 
 
------------------- 
Haves and Have Nots 
------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) When Abraham Lincoln sought to unify the country to 
avoid the Civil War, he appealed to the "better angels of our 
natures."  Chavez, however, consistently calls forth 
Venezuelans' "worse demons" with a simple divide-and-conquer 
strategy.  There are many such divisions, but we chose three 
for this analysis.  His first cut is between rich and poor. 
Admittedly, there were social rifts before Chavez, but the 
political system had as a characteristic two "poli-classist" 
parties that were socially inclusive.  Chavez fanned the 
underlying resentment into flame, however, to propel his 
political movement.  He continues to pick the scabs today. 
In Chavez' Us-vs.-Them thinking, Venezuelans are either poor 
or rich -- he all but ignores the middle class.  The poor he 
calls "el pueblo," a word whose meaning ought to encompass 
all Venezuelans.  Bolivarians like to interchange "el pueblo" 
with "el soberano," literally, "the Sovereign," to imply that 
only the poor have the right to speak in matters of public 
interest.  The remaining Venezuelans (at least 40 percent of 
the population), meanwhile, are relegated to the well-known 
term, "escualido," a term meant to connote scarcity or 
thinness.  Chavistas are now using the term as a verb; 
"escualidizarse" means to detour from the revolutionary path 
and seek a personal fortune (an emerging trend in the 
revolutionary vanguard). 
 
¶4. (C) The second cut of hate rhetoric is between U.S. 
imperialism and Bolivarianism.  "Imperialism" is a Chavez 
label meaning that all USG actions are motivated by the 
desire to dominate other countries.  This harangue emerged 
after April 2002 when Chavez accused the United States of 
plotting a coup to oust him.  Chavez regularly calls the 
United States an "evil empire," though he often adds that 
this is a recrimination of the USG and not of the American 
people per se.  Of course, all Venezuelan "escualidos" are 
automatically tagged as lackeys of the empire.  "Imperialist" 
is a Bolivarian term of disdain that is frequently punctuated 
with "fascist," "terrorist," and "coup-plotter."  Chavez' 
tantrums against President Bush ("assassin," genocidal 
maniac," etc.) are now commonplace.  This theme was put in 
stark relief when senior Chavista Eliecer Otaiza said in 
April 2005 that Venezuelans had to learn to hate Americans in 
anticipation of an eventual armed conflict.  Hyperbole aside, 
INR studies in mid-2005 show a clearly declining trend in 
Venezuelans' perception of the United States.  According to 
the studies, anti-U.S. sentiment increased markedly since 
early 2002 (up 27 points to 48 percent) and Venezuelans with 
positive views of the United States are down 29 points to 52 
percent.  While not all these changes can be attributed to 
Chavez and his rhetorical salvo -- the Iraq War is a 
significant intervening variable -- it is a safe bet that his 
fulminations against us are having an effect.  Meanwhile, 
Chavez uses "Bolivarian" as a loose synonym for 
anti-imperialism.  He paints his Bolivarian Alternative for 
the Americas (ALBA), for example, as the morally pure version 
of the FTAA, which in Chavez' words is an attempt to colonize 
Venezuela. 
 
¶5. (C) A third cut of divisive hate rhetoric is between 
capitalism and socialism.  Underpinned by a neo-Marxist 
interpretation of history, Chavez frequently attacks 
capitalism and neo-liberalism as a "savage" system that if 
left unchecked will end human life on Earth.  Chavez puts his 
economic theory in religious terms, often referring to 
socialism as the way of Christ while capitalism is a "Judas 
system."  He impugns capitalism for its emphasis on the 
individual and lack of "solidarity" and frequently speaks of 
the need for the emergence of a "new man" not motivated by 
consumption.  For example, when three school children were 
brutally murdered in March, Chavez said the murderers were 
guilty of "extreme individualism" and had deviated from the 
tenets of socialism.  Chavez offers socialism as an 
alternative, though Chavez seldom defines this beyond his 
populist spending programs (ironically fueled largely by the 
sale of petroleum to the United States).  Chavez frequently 
blasts a capitalist "oligarchy" in Venezuela that seeks to 
undo the works of the Revolution (and cut off benefits to the 
poor). 
 
---------------- 
Target Audiences 
---------------- 
 
¶6. (C) Chavez' strategic audiences are the majority 
pro-Chavez poor, the opposition (mainly the rich and middle 
class), and the international community.  Despite a recent 
spate of international forays, Chavez still works his 
domestic base, the poor, regularly appearing on television 
distributing benefits to the red-clad masses.  Polls suggest 
that about 20 percent of Venezuelans will support Chavez no 
matter what, but another 30-35 percent are only fair weather 
supporters.  Of course, it is easier given Chavez' skill set 
to tear down and discredit the opposition rather than working 
to earn and maintain the support of the poor.  Chavez instead 
uses his propaganda to stir up resentment against the 
political opposition, blaming them for the troubles of the 
country.  The strategy appears to be working:  a Consultores 
21 study from April 2006 showed that 60 percent of 
Venezuelans do not hold Chavez responsible for the country's 
problems.  At the same time, Chavez does not forget that the 
opposition is a critical audience.  He frequently taunts them 
with outlandish remarks that usually draw asinine responses. 
For example, in February Chavez pushed through legislation to 
add an eighth star to Venezuela's flag (reportedly, because 
Bolivar had wanted it).  Not 24 hours went by before a small 
opposition group held a rally to cut the star out of the 
national flag, opening them up to attacks by Chavistas. 
Finally, since winning the August 2004 referendum, which 
de-capitated the opposition, Chavez has been crafting his 
rhetoric of hate for international audiences.  He never fails 
to hawk his anti-imperialist diatribe in international fora. 
 
------------ 
The Messages 
------------ 
 
¶7. (C) Chavistas play on the fears and anxieties of both rich 
and poor.  For the poor audience, Chavez casts his movement 
as a new evolutionary stage in world political thought that 
is opposed by the United States and the opposition.  Chavez 
often swears on his life that the opposition "will never 
return" to power.  Chavez and his supporters warn that their 
adversaries want to strip the poor of benefits such as the 
Cuban-run Barrio Adentro medical program and Mercal 
subsidized food markets.  Chavez tells his followers that 
they must practice "solidarity" and "community living" before 
seeking personal wealth.  He frequently tells his followers 
that "to be rich is bad."  A priest from Barinas told poloff 
that school reading lessons in his state two years ago were 
teaching children phrases like, "I am poor because someone is 
rich."  Chavez tells the poor audience that an oil-starved 
United States is preparing an invasion, that he will resist 
by blowing up the oil fields and converting the barrios into 
an Iraq-like insurgency war.  To reinforce this, the 
Venezuelan military regularly publicizes its training 
exercises to repel invasions, including training the 
citizen-reservists in urban resistance.  One press report had 
an officer throwing a rifle to a reservists and screaming, 
"The gringos are coming for your women.  What are you going 
to do?" 
 
¶8. (C) For the rich, Chavez heaps coals on their 
uncertainties.  Rural and urban expropriations may be 
publicly touted as correcting an injustice to the poor, but 
it is actually a threat to Venezuela's property owners that 
nothing is safe for those who oppose Chavez.  Caracas Mayor 
Juan Barreto put the elite in a tailspin late 2005 when he 
publicly toyed with the idea of expropriating the posh 
Caracas Country Club for low-rent government housing.  Chavez 
warns the opposition constantly of a lower class uprising 
should something happen to his government, of the poor 
streaming down from the ramshackle neighborhoods that dot 
Caracas' hilly landscape to perpetrate violence on the rich. 
In electoral politics, Chavez describes everything in terms 
of a battle, so that his re-election bid in December will 
deliver a "knockout blow" to the opposition.  If they refuse 
to fight by selecting a single candidate, he taunts them with 
the idea that he will convert the election to a referendum on 
his indefinite re-election.  These messages are intended to 
keep opponents and would-be opponents subdued and unwilling 
to risk open conflict. 
 
¶9. (C) Chavez continues to develop and target his 
international audience, though it is a trial-by-error 
process.  In his early days in office, there was probably 
much more mainstream acceptance of his asystemic, 
anti-globalization message among the international community. 
 After rounds of political successes in Venezuela, however, 
we suspect international actors are waking up to the dangers 
Chavez' power accumulation entails.  His strongest audience, 
perhaps, is among radical leftists in the United States, 
Europe, and Latin America.  While not in the mainstream, 
these dedicated groups present a ready crowd for Chavez' 
overseas events and can influence perceptions in their 
countries. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
With Enough Mice You Can Hide An Elephant 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (C) As pollster Alfredo Keller pointed out earlier this 
year, Chavez controls Venezuela's public political dialogue 
on a ratio of 20,000 to 1.  Of course, much of the private 
media is bitterly critical of Chavez and is able to 
counteract some of the BRV's propaganda despite a severe 
media content law.  Chavez' most powerful weapon in the 
public arena, of course, is himself.  He appears on 
television and radio for hours a week, sometimes in 
compulsory broadcasts on all stations ("cadenas"), delivering 
his message in a variety of ways.  One survey put Chavez' 
obligatory broadcasts during his seven-plus years in power at 
836 hours, with 57 hours of that in the first quarter of 
¶2006.  The Sunday "Alo, Presidente" is his flagship 
propaganda product, and it reportedly has his hard core 
followers glued to the set each week for five to seven hours 
to receive guidance and inspiration.  Practically everyone 
talks for the rest of the week about the latest Chavez rant, 
stealing momentum from all other issues in the public arena. 
Thus, an opposition group that wants to talk about 
fundamental issues like unemployment or crime will find 
itself consistently drowned out by Chavez noise, like 
courting Bolivia's Evo Morales or buying Russian fighters or 
having Iranians building low-cost housing in Venezuela. 
Chavez only has to promise something for people to think he 
has delivered it. 
 
¶11. (C) The official media can deliver Chavez' divisive 
message with a programmatic array of subtlety.  There are 
currently four principal 24-hour government television 
stations: VTV (the principal news and opinion outlet); Vive 
(targeting poor communities); ANTV (the National Assembly's 
station); and Telesur (Chavez' version of CNN to an 
international audience).  VTV has shock talk shows like La 
Hojilla, whose moderator lampoons the opposition and USG on a 
nightly basis.  VTV also airs the cynically titled "Contact 
with Reality" spots that portray opposition figures in the 
worst possible light.  At times of heightened political 
unrest the station runs cartoon spots depicting hideous 
caricatures of key USG figures throwing bombs, supporting 
terrorists, and handing cash to opposition members.  ANTV has 
a morning show in which an analyst tears apart the United 
States over every news item from the war on terror.  Telesur, 
autonomous in name only from the BRV, runs more sophisticated 
news stories that hammer on Chavez' international agenda 
points, such as post-electoral stories from Peru in which 
analysts predict failure for winner Alan Garcia, who clashed 
with Chavez repeatedly during the campaign. 
 
¶12. (S/NF) Of course, subtlety has its limits.  The BRV 
brazenly preaches its messages to its rank and file via the 
missions and other public programs.  Participants in the 
job-creation mission, Vuelvan Caras, for example, receive a 
comic book that describes the concept of "endogenous 
development," re-educating them about how capitalism had 
nearly depleted Venezuela of its resources and human capital 
until the arrival of Chavez.  The newspaper "VEA," fast 
becoming the "Granma" of the Bolivarian Revolution, contains 
a daily opinion column which ends, "Only socialism can save 
the world!  Chavez is socialism!"  The education missions -- 
Robinson, Ribas, and Sucre -- and to a lesser extent public 
school texts all contain distorted versions of history, 
including a reference to how the United States became an 
empire after forgetting that it was once subjugated by Great 
Britain.  When that fails to convince, the BRV also has shock 
troops such as the Tupamaros and various "motorizado" 
motorcycle gangs to deliver the message.  Sending armed thugs 
to threaten and sometimes commit violence against opposition 
figures was a prevailing practice during the era of mass 
opposition protests in 2003-2004.  It is still present in 
today's Chavista toolkit, as seen in April when the 
Ambassador's motorcade was menaced by egg-throwing 
motorcyclists.  Chavistas also dabble increasingly in 
psychological operations, such as staging an apparent 
terrorist act of blowing up a pipeline during the 
parliamentary elections to suggest an international 
conspiracy against the BRV. 
 
--------------- 
The Fear Factor 
--------------- 
 
¶13. (C) The effect of Chavez' rhetorical onslaught is a 
frenzied populace afraid to express anything other than 
support, genuine or not, for the BRV.  A recent focus group 
study by the think tank Cedice Libertad reported that 
residents of the barrio are fearful for their lives, mostly 
because of the out of control crime rate.  However, some 
government supporters added fears for their children in the 
event of a U.S. invasion "as the president constantly 
announces."  Many expressed fears of a subsequent civil war 
in the event that Chavez were to be removed from office. 
Others said they are awaiting an opposition figure who will 
guarantee that were Chavez to leave office the opposition 
would not exact revenge on them.  Chavez opponents in the 
barrio fear losing their employment or other benefits if 
their political affiliation is discovered.  Many said they 
had ceased to vote or sign petitions because it would have 
consequences for them and their families. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶14. (C) The Chavez regime is predicated on making Chavez 
supporters hate the opposition and vice versa.  It is a 
problem that worsens with time, as a new generation grows up 
in this warped environment.  Chavez is in this sense a 
follower of Che Guevara, who said in stark terms, "Hatred is 
a factor in the struggle:  intransigent hatred of the enemy 
pushes humans beyond their limits, and converts them into an 
effective, violent, selective, and cold killing machine."  In 
Venzuela, therefore, to call for dialogue or consensus in 
even basic public policy questions ignores the thousands of 
hours Chavistas put in weekly to keep both sides agitated. 
It also means that Chavistas will not likely let up in their 
assault on the United States any time soon.  We have to 
maintain our careful restraint to the rhetorical provocations 
as well as a steady public diplomacy effort to offset Chavez' 
insidious effort to teach Venezuelans to hate us. 
 
WHITAKER