06CAIRO692
EGYPTIAN MEDIA THEMES, JANUARY 17-23.
Mon Feb 06 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CAIRO 000692 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KPAO KMDR OPRC EG XF ZP ZR IS
SUBJECT:  EGYPTIAN MEDIA THEMES, JANUARY 17-23. 
 
¶1. Summary:  Coverage of the Palestinian elections hit a 
crescendo at the end of the week, with many commentators 
reacting negatively to President Bushs Jan. 27 statement. 
While only three percent of commentaries were critical of 
U.S. policy before the election results were announced, 
forty percent of commentaries on Jan. 28 were negative.  On 
the domestic front, all papers carried independent daily, 
Rose Al Youssef's four-part in-depth interview with Gamal 
Mubarak, which included comments on the NDP, reform and his 
plans within the party.   Internal strife within opposition 
party, Al Wafd, which, among other things, resulted in the 
partys leader suspending the publication of Al-Wafd 
d 
newspaper, generated much commentary on the state of 
opposition politics, and the role of the governing NDP in 
the face of a weakening opposition.   End summary. 
 
¶2.  Palestinian Elections:  Egyptian news television and 
papers provided extensive coverage on the Palestinian 
elections.  Commentators, for example, welcomed the 
election results, called the vote a statement against 
Israel and corruption in Fatah, and stressed the need for 
Hamas and the Palestinian people to ensure the peace 
process continues.  Some highlights included extensive news 
coverage of President Mubarak's statement to the 
Palestinians "to come together and ensure the peace 
process moves forward to achieve the aspirations of a 
Palestinian state" (Jan. 27) and the Arab League's "praise" 
of the "democratic elections" for which it "welcomed the 
results" (pro-government daily, Al-Ahram, circ. 750,000, 
Jan. 27). Independent daily, Al-Masry Al-Yom (circ. 5,000), 
quoted the Supreme Guide of the Islamic movement, the 
Muslim Brotherhood, congratulating Hamas for "its victory 
as a public vote in favor of the Islamic method of solving 
the Palestinian issue."  This sentiment was similar to 
aggressive, pro-government, daily, Al-Gomhouriyyas (circ. 
500,000) conservative column claiming that the Hamas 
victory illustrated "the strong influence of Islamic 
movements on the people." (Jan. 27) Al-Gomhouriyya's second 
column on Jan. 27 quoted a former Egyptian ambassador 
calling on Hamas "to lay down weapons and turn into a 
political movement" to prevent donor countries from cutting 
off assistance and jeopardizing "peace negotiations with 
Israel," a theme similar to Al-Ahram's Islamic columnists 
who questioned "how Hamas will improve the lives of the 
Palestinians when donors are threatening to cut off their 
assistance." (Jan. 28)  Some columnists predicted how Hamas 
would face the challenge of leading, such as Al-Ahram's two 
liberal columnists who concluded that "Hamas will find 
itself compelled to change its method from armed struggle 
to politics" and "will ask Fatah and Abu Mazen to be the 
middle-man in negotiations with Israel."  (Jan. 28) 
 
¶3. Reactions to President Bushs Statement on Elections. 
The U.S. congratulations to the Palestinian people for an 
election free of violence and Secretary Rices 
characterization of the vote as free and fair was noted in 
the press.  However, U.S. statements that it had not 
changed its position on Hamas being a terrorist movement 
spurred negative reactions and created a spike in anti-U.S. 
commentaries which rose from three percent to 33 percent in 
one day. Columnists in pro-government dailies, Al-Ahram, 
Al-Akhbar (circ. 800,000) and Al-Gomhouriyya, characterized 
the U.S. position on Hamas as "hypocritical", "false 
advocacy of democracy" and a reflection of "unjust policies 
for which it must now pay the price."   Television programs 
on January 28 criticized U.S. Mideast policy.  A strategic 
c 
expert on Egyptian TVs Nile News said he doubts the U.S. 
really wants democracy in the region and a commentator 
featured on Al Mehwar satellite TVs evening program, 
VIP, called the election results the U.S.s fault for 
achieving no progress in 13 years since Oslo. 
 
¶4.  Gamal Mubarak on the NDP:  All papers carried the four 
part interview conducted by independent daily and weekly, 
Rose al Youssef (daily circ. unconfirmed; weekly circ. 
50,000).  In the lengthy interview, Mubarak was asked about 
many NDP-related issues, including his interpretation of 
Article 76, the new constitutional article that allowed for 
multi-party elections.  In this context, he was asked if 
Article 76 was passed to serve him personally to run for 
president.  He responded, The main purpose of the 
amendment is to continue reform. The world is changing 
around us and we want to move from the stage of 
personalizing things.  On multi-party elections, he said, 
I do not think that anybody agrees to let one party have 
party have 
the right to run in the elections of 2011.  On the 
contrary, the amendment gave exception to the parties in 
2005 and reflects hopes that many will participate in the 
next elections.  Many papers picked up on his response to 
the question whether he will run for president in 2011, I 
neither have the intention nor the desire to be a 
candidate; my words are very clear."  There were few 
reactions to the interview, however, senior columnist for 
Al-Ahram, Ibrahim Nafei, commented on the interview as 
"paving the way for wide-spread changes and reform in the 
NDP, especially to overcome the problems in the 2005 
parliamentary elections." (Jan. 28) 
 
¶5.  Demise of the Traditional Opposition? 
A judicial decision to allow Al-Wafd's former chairman, 
No'man Gomaa, to re-enter the party's headquarters and 
resume his position prompted questions about the 
opposition's ability to eventually achieve power, as well 
as the State's perceived role in the case.  On Jan. 27, Al 
l 
Ahram published a column blaming Gomaa of "leading Egypt's 
most prominent opposition party into chaos," while Al Masry 
Al Yom accused the government of exposing the Political 
Parties Affairs Committees lack of impartiality and 
intention to destroy true partisan activities."  Pro- 
government daily, Al-Akhbar's conservative chief editor 
wrote that the Wafd party dispute "is not surprising" 
because "opposition parties in Egypt have been affected by 
the atmosphere of reform and transparency sweeping society 
and can no longer tolerate dictatorial leadership." He 
concluded by advising "all other parties to learn the 
lesson." (Jan. 27) 
 
Ricciardone