06CASABLANCA165
FY2006 ANTI-TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS (TIP) PROJECTS FOR
Tue Feb 07 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Casablanca
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHCL #0165/01 0381743
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 071743Z FEB 06
FM AMCONSUL CASABLANCA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6222
INFO RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT 7425
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 4649
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS 1879
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 0571UNCLAS CASABLANCA 000165 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USAID 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP (AMY O'NEILL, SALLY NEUMANN), INL, NEA/RA, 
NEA/MAG, DRL/BA, DRL/IL, AND PRM (SONIA DENTZEL) 
 
GENEVA FOR LABATT 
 
LABOR FOR ILAB HALEY, MUIRRAGUI, STEIN, AND FAULKNER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM EAID ELAB KCRM KWMN SMIG ASEC MO
SUBJECT: FY2006 ANTI-TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS (TIP) PROJECTS FOR 
MOROCCO 
 
REFS:  (A) 05 STATE 0221179 
 
¶1.  Mission Morocco welcomes the Department's continued interest 
in supporting Moroccan efforts to stem trafficking in persons, 
treat its victims, and punish its perpetrators.  The mission is 
very appreciative of Department's recent decision to earmark USD 
183,344 in support of two anti-trafficking projects aimed at 
combating the trafficking of children into domestic servitude in 
Morocco. 
 
¶2.  Post would like to take advantage of the opportunity, as 
presented in ref A, to submit a new project proposal, which is 
designed to aid Moroccan minors at-risk of being trafficked 
abroad.  This proposal entails underwriting efforts offered by 
International Organization for Migration (IOM), the Moroccan 
Ministry of Social Development, Family, and Solidarity (MSFSF) - 
Entraide Nationale, as well as local authorities and associations 
and NGOs active in the field of child protection in Morocco.  In 
recent months the incidences of minors being smuggled and/or 
trafficked out of Morocco to EU countries has increased 
dramatically.  Post strongly supports this project as a first step 
in addressing this growing problem. 
 
¶A.  Title: SALEM: Solidarite Avec Les Enfants du Moroc - 
Solidarity With the Children of Morocco 
 
¶B.  Organization: The proposal is being submitted by the IOM who 
will implement the project.  The IOM currently has a number of 
projects underway in Morocco and has recently been granted the 
right to have official representation in the country.  Other 
partners include the MDSFS - Entraide Nationale (Public 
Establishment for the Fight Against Poverty), an organization 
established in 1957 as a private enterprise which later switched 
to a financially independent public establishment, and various 
NGOs and associations active in the protection of children. 
 
¶C.  Duration: Eight months - new project. 
 
¶D.  Description: General Information and Summary: The SALEM 
project aims to strengthen the local child protection system and 
services in Morocco in order to reduce the exposure of at-risk 
minors to trafficking, irregular migration,and exploitation, as 
well as examine the health-related aspects. According to recently 
acquired data on the phenomenon, thousands of Moroccan minors are 
trafficked to Western European countries, particularly Spain, 
France and Italy.  According to data provided by the National 
Committee for Foreign Minors, 20% of Italy's unaccompanied minors 
are from Morocco. In addition, due to its geographical position, 
Morocco is of increasing interest to criminal networks involved in 
trafficking of persons from the Sub-Saharan region. In this 
context, in order to set up preventative mechanisms, it is 
necessary to acquire a deep understanding of the phenomenon 
through research activities. This preliminary and essential 
research phase, for which IOM will request the financial support 
of the GTIP/Department of State fund, will be part of a larger 
joint program with the Italian Government containing a series of 
activities aimed at preventing the traffickingof minors in the 
Moroccan Region of Beni Mellal. By supporting educational, 
professional training, sheltering, listening and orientation 
services for minors, the project intends to create realistic 
alternatives for those marginalized families who perceive 
migration for their children as the only possible way for a better 
future . The project will require close cooperation with central 
and local governmental and non-governmental interlocutors involved 
in child protection and assistance in Morocco. The SALEM 
initiative, with the support of both the US and the Italian 
Governments, will be an essential component of the IOM strategy in 
the country. Morocco has been a member of IOM since 23 November 
¶1998. The Organization has already carried out various activities 
in close cooperation with the Moroccan government which led to the 
creation of an Observatory of the Moroccan Community Abroad and of 
the Centre for Migrants' Rights. Currently, IOM is creating a 
multifunctional center in Ttouan as a Pilot Project for the socio- 
economic development of a region with high migratory potential in 
Morocco. 
 
Project Objectives: This project intends to contribute to the 
creation of integrated responses to prevent irregular migration, 
trafficking, and exploitation of unaccompanied minors.  In 
 
particular, the project will aim to: 
 
 
-Improve information concerning irregular migration and 
trafficking of minors from/through/to Morocco. 
 
-Identify key areas of further intervention to reduce the exposure 
of Moroccan minors to the risks of trafficking. 
 
-Reinforce the networking and operational capacities of local 
agencies, institutions, governments, associations/NGOs active in 
the field of child protection. 
 
Target Beneficiaries:  Minors at risk of becoming involved in 
trafficking and their families, as well as previously-trafficked 
minors in ad hoc structures currently in other countries; national 
and local government institutions and NGOs active in child and 
adolescent protection in Morocco.  The project is expected to 
positively affect approximately 15,000 to 20,000 minors. 
 
Project Activities: SALEM will be comprised of different project 
components, including rehabilitation of structures for minors' 
care, shelter, education and vocational/professional training 
support, as well as strengthening local services through training 
of social and health care-givers.  The intervention will be 
prepared through research activities to acquire a deeper knowledge 
of the phenomenon in order to better target activities, priority 
geographical areas and needs, local counterparts, specific 
vulnerability factors, and will be consolidated through a 
specifically- tailored information campaign. 
 
Department of State assistance is requested to support the 
research actions and to contribute, together with the Italian 
Cooperation, to the training of social and health caregivers 
involved in the preventative measures and outreach/assistance 
activities to the target group. 
 
¶1. Research on the phenomenon of irregular migration and 
trafficking in minors from/through/to Morocco. 
 
- Elaboration of questionnaires; 
 
- Conducting interviews with different target groups and in 
particular: Moroccan at-risk minors; Moroccan unaccompanied minors 
abroad, particularly in Italy, France and Spain which are the main 
destination countries of Moroccan minors' trafficking routes; non- 
Moroccan minors trafficked to Morocco; local and central 
authorities in Morocco as well as NGOs/associations active in the 
field of child protection and migration. The combination of 
different perspectives should support a better qualitative and 
quantitative knowledge of the phenomenon; 
 
- Production of a research study; 
 
- Translation of the research study in English, French and Arabic; 
 
- Presentation of the research study at a Workshop in Rabat, 
involving national local and central governmental and non- 
governmental actors; 
 
- Distribution of the research study among local, national and 
international counterparts; 
 
- Organization of meetings in identified local areas for the 
presentation of research outcomes. 
 
¶2. Local capacity-building activities with an immediate impact on 
the target group: 
 
- Three psycho-social and health care four-day training for 
personnel with an immediate impact on the target group (shelter 
staff, social workers, NGO staff, health care workers, educators 
and school teachers).  Special attention will be paid toward the 
training of trainers, in order to build capacity and potential for 
sustainability at all levels. Each training course will target no 
less than 20 participants; 
 
- Support to governmental decentralization and local good 
governance, social services management and child and juvenile 
 
protection with the aim of providing local authorities with 
operational tools to contain the root causes at the base of the 
phenomena of illegal migration and trafficking in minors. 
 
Expected Results: A deeper understanding of the phenomena of 
minors trafficking from/to/through Morocco; 
 
- A research book printed and translated into English, French and 
Arabic, for a total of 900 copies as a whole (300 in each 
language); 
 
- The increased level of information and awareness on the dynamics 
and risks inherent to trafficking and irregular migration; 
 
- Prevention strategies with respect to the phenomena of irregular 
migration/trafficking of minors identified and elaborated; 
 
- Coordination at local levels to improve child protective 
services; 
 
- Identify relevant areas of further intervention (structural, 
capacity-building, technical cooperation, information/awareness, 
etc.); 
 
- Strengthened capacities of caregivers of local minors' care- 
givers; 
 
- Protection and assistance measures improved through the 
provision of assisted return, psycho-social rehabilitation and 
familial, scholastic, educational and labor reinsertion services; 
 
- Improved living conditions of at-risk minors 
- Detailed findings in mid-term and final reports. 
 
¶E.  Justification: The SALEM project strategy aims to reduce the 
exposure of minors to a situation of vulnerability with respect to 
the phenomena of smuggling, trafficking and the worst forms of 
exploitation (sexual, for labor, for begging, for illicit 
activities, etc.) that are linked to them along with the 
protection principles set in the most important international 
instruments for child protection (NY Convention, ILO Convention n. 
182, UNICEF Guidelines, UN Protocols on trafficking and 
smuggling).  The project seeks to address the worrisome conditions 
at the origin of these phenomena: abandonment, abuse, and 
marginalization of vulnerable segments of the Moroccan youth 
population.  The combination of different factors, economic, 
social, cultural, together with the restrictive emigration 
policies for the adult population towards countries of 
destination, often pushes marginalized and poor families to 
entrust their children to criminal networks in order to have 
access to the Western European countries with the hope to give 
them a better chance for the future. The link between migratory 
flows and socio-economic factors is also confirmed by the 
prevalence, among trafficked minors, of adolescents between 15 and 
17 years of age, in search of a working opportunity and durable 
insertion chances.  Additionally, Morocco has been increasingly 
targeted by criminal networks engaged in smuggling/trafficking in 
persons from the Sub-Saharan region. In this respect, according to 
IOM data, minors are trafficked to Morocco particularly from the 
Francophone Western African countries. 
 
The SALEM initiative will focus on prevention measures, 
particularly in the creation and enhancement of economic, social, 
pedagogical, psychological and educational opportunities to 
support substantial alternatives to the migratory project.  At the 
same time, the reinforcement of locally available resources, both 
structural and human, to create dedicated areas for 
shelter/orientation/vocational-professional training and psycho- 
social support, as well as networks of social programs to benefit 
the entire minor population, including non-Moroccan minors 
trafficked from Sub-Saharan regions and Moroccan unaccompanied 
minors returning from Western European countries. The improved 
capabilities and opportunities serve to prevent exploitation, as 
well as assist in targeting at-risk minors and de facto victims of 
trafficking/smuggling. 
 
All intervention will be designed using knowledge of minors' 
trafficking from research.  Such research activities will require 
a close collaboration with local authorities as well as NGOs and 
 
other associations.  This initiative will be included in the 
national strategy of the Moroccan Government in the fields of 
child protection, socio-economic development and reduction of 
social exclusion, in the framework of the recently launched INDH 
(Initiative Nationale pour le Dveloppement Humain - National 
Initiative for Human Development), as well as in the field of 
combating illegal migration.  The project will also be strongly 
supported by the Italian Government, particularly in the areas 
related to structural rehabilitation and training socio-sanitary 
caregivers.  This measure is an important part of the IOM strategy 
in the Maghreb.  This strategy promoted actions in migratory 
issues that led to the founding in 2000 of the Observers of the 
Moroccan Community Abroad with the Hassan II Foundation, and in 
2002 of the Centre for Migrants' Rights. Currently, IOM is 
supporting the creation of a poly-functional centre in Ttouan in 
the framework of a pilot project for the socio-economic 
development of a region with high migratory potential in Morocco. 
 
¶F.  Performance Indicators: The research will focus on 
quantitative and qualitative aspects of trafficking and irregular 
migration of unaccompanied minors from/to/through Morocco.  It 
will be further studied through interviews with different target 
groups (local stakeholders), as well as the minors themselves. 
The following indicators will help measure the impact of the 
research phase for quantitative purposes. 
 
- A rapid-assessment survey will determine the actual level of 
awareness of trafficking among local stakeholders (national and 
local authorities, NGOs, social services, families, etc.). A post- 
project survey (after 12 months) will show the level of 
improvement in knowledge of trafficking among these key groups. 
It is estimated that their knowledge will improve by at least 40%. 
 
- Current data indicates that Beni Mellal and Tangier are first 
among priority geographic areas. The research outcomes will 
confirm and/or modify the identification of priority geographic 
areas in need of further intervention. Such identification, 
together with the other quantitative and qualitative data (numbers 
of minors, specific target group risk factors, local institutions 
of reference and operational partners, etc.) will allow the 
development of an articulated Plan of Action for implementation of 
other project components, in coordination with the Italian 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs experts and the IOM Missions involved 
in the project; 
 
- No less than 60 local care-givers will be trained to improve 
their ability to respond to the needs of target groups (minors' 
potential or de facto victims of trafficking).  Improvement of 
capability will be measured with post-training questionnaires, 
with an expected improvement rate of 60%. 
 
¶G.  Evaluation Plan: The IOM Mission in Rome, in its role as 
coordinator of the project and Regional Office for the 
Mediterranean, guarantees regularly monitoring development of the 
project, will signal any possible problematic areas and consult 
with the donor on appropriate measures. Evaluation and monitoring 
of the project's progress will be carried out according to the 
Organization's internal parameters. The donor may choose to 
evaluate the implementation and management of the project at any 
time, as desired. More in-depth evaluation processes may be 
conducted by external, well-known agencies of long-term and 
specific competence. 
 
¶H.  Budget: 
 
- Consultant-researcher for 8 months: 43,000 
 
- Translation and printing of the research book in 900 copies: 
40,000 
 
- Workshop in Rabat: 30,000 
 
- Dissemination of research outcomes and research book 
distribution: 15,000 
 
- Three four-day training courses in target areas: 15,000 
 
- Mobility, logistics, transportation (pre-assessment, monitoring 
and evaluation missions, internal-external research trips): 30,000 
 
 
- Project management and coordination: 45,500 
 
- Overhead 5 percent: 11,500 
 
Total in USD: 230,000 
 
¶I.  Host Government Contribution: With the ongoing, fruitful 
collaboration with IOM, the Moroccan Ministry of Social 
Development, Family and Solidarity (Ministre du Dveloppement 
Social, de la Famille et de la Solidarit MDSFS - Entraide 
Nationale) will provide all the necessary administrative support 
and institutional collaboration require to conduct research and 
operational activities for this project.  Local researchers will 
be identified in close cooperation with local partners and 
nd 
counterparts, and will participate in the activities detailed 
here. Local authorities will also contribute to the dissemination 
of the research outcomes through the organization of public 
meetings.  Local Moroccan authorities will support all possible 
opportunities to raise awareness of irregular migration and 
trafficking of minors from/through/to Morocco. 
 
¶J.  Funding: ESF Funding through IOM 
 
¶K.  Mission Morocco POC: Labor/Political Officer Amy Wilson, U.S. 
Consulate General Casablanca, tel. 212-22-22-14-60 ext.235: fax. 
212-22-29-91-36 
 
¶L.  Other Donors: The "SALEM" project has been presented to the 
Italian Cooperation, Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The components 
to be financed by the Italian Government will entail the 
rehabilitation of existing local structures in identified areas of 
Morocco with a strong migratory prevalence towards Italy to devote 
assistance, protection, educational, psychosocial support and 
vocational training support to the target group.  Such measures 
will require training for social workers and health-care providers 
working to assist and protect abandoned minors and victims of 
trafficking and smuggling, with particular attention toward the 
training of trainers, in order to build capacity and potential for 
sustainability at all levels. The program will be consolidated 
through a specifically tailored information campaign. 
 
Greene