06CAIRO4796
EGYPT MEDIA TRENDS:  AUGUST 3, 2006
Thu Aug 03 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0049
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #4796 2151443
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 031443Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0348
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVEUNCLAS CAIRO 004796 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/PPD FOR ROBIN SMITH AND DAVID BENZE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PREL PREL IS LE EG
SUBJECT:  EGYPT MEDIA TRENDS:  AUGUST 3, 2006 
 
 
¶1.  Summary. Headlines in opposition, pro-government and independent 
papers today focused on the escalation of the conflict, and Egypt's 
role in supporting Lebanon.  Front-page photos in many papers 
included injured Lebanese women, parents carrying injured or 
deceased children, and world leaders, although two papers showed 
exceptionally biased photos of Bush and Blair and Israelis. One of 
the day's commentaries provided a new, balanced perspective of the 
cause of the conflict.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  In the headlines. Papers focused on the escalation of the 
conflict and Egypt's role in supporting Lebanon.  Pro-government 
daily, Al-Gomhouriya, used photos to create the image of Israelis 
celebrating in Lebanese deaths.  The captions on its front page 
photos of two Jewish men playing instruments and a Lebanese family 
huddled over a corpse read, ""Extremist Jews play music for the 
Israeli soldiers so they can enjoy the killing,"" and ""A Lebanese 
family sitting on the ground, reciting the Koran over the corpse of 
a martyred family member.""  Opposition Al-Wafd's photos included one 
of Bush and Blair from the back, overlaid with the words ""arrogance"" 
on Bush's back and ""follower"" on Blair's. 
 
Banner headlines, in red, decried, ""The World is Turning its Back as 
Blair Announces War on Us, and We Weep and Recite the Koran over the 
Martyrs"" (Al-Wafd); ""Baalbak is in the line of fire. Special Israeli 
Forces Fire Randomly at Civilians"" (Independent daily, Al Masry Al 
Yom); and ""War Enters the Decisive Stage"" (opposition daily, 
Al-Ahrar). The pro-government papers included headlines promoting 
Egypt's support to the people of Lebanon, such as, ""Suzanne Mubarak 
Calls for an International Consciousness: Save Lebanon and its 
People"" (pro-government, Rose al Youssef); ""Egypt Works Toward a 
Close Ceasefire"" (pro-government daily, Al-Akhbar); ""Lahoud 
Expresses Gratitude to Egypt"" and ""Mubarak Dispatches Abul-Gheit on 
an Urgent Mission to Beirut to Confirm Egypt's Support to Lebanon in 
its Crisis"" (pro-government daily, Al-Ahram). 
 
¶3.  In the commentaries.  The majority of the commentaries expressed 
the same anger toward the US and Arab leaders that we have seen 
since the conflict began. However, one commentary expressed 
different, balanced sentiment. A senior writer in independent daily, 
Nahdet Misr, criticized as false those who think ""that Arabs were 
deceived and tricked and that the peace process is dead."" He argued 
that ""it is difficult to consider the entire international community 
a bunch of evil deceivers"" and wrote that the war on Lebanon, ""while 
savage, will force the region to realize further the inevitability 
of peace.""  He blamed the war ""not on the kidnapping of soldiers or 
Israel being an aggressor, but because peace was lacking between 
Lebanon and Israel and Lebanon failed to fight a diplomatic battle 
with Israel to regain its occupied land."" 
 
¶4.  Public sentiment. During the past week, embassy personnel have 
experienced tough criticism from some close contacts based on the 
contacts' perceptions of the US position in the conflict.  For 
example, one journalist, who is very friendly during normal times, 
called and pleaded that we tell Secretary Rice ""not to come to 
Cairo,"" and asked, ""Don't those people have TVs in their homes to 
watch chldren being killed?"" Another columnist and TV presnter, 
said, ""Can't you tell your Americans to be marter?  Why do they 
insist on killing children ith their own weapons and then proudly 
announcin it?""  Many close contacts, also, do not wish to met in 
public and others have cancelled meetings. 
RICCIARDONE