06CAIRO972
AYMAN NOUR SEEMS HEALTHY, RELAXED IN PRISON
Wed Feb 15 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS CAIRO 000972 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM KDEM EG
SUBJECT: AYMAN NOUR SEEMS HEALTHY, RELAXED IN PRISON 
 
 
Sensitive but unclassified. Please protect accordingly. 
 
¶1. (SBU) During a regularly scheduled consular visit to 
several American Citizens incarcerated at the Torah Prison 
complex, just south of Cairo, conoff had a "chance" encounter 
with detained political opposition leader Ayman Nour. 
Shortly after conoff was admitted to the prison warden's 
office and began meeting an AMCIT detainee, the warden picked 
up the phone and was heard to summon Ayman Nour.  After 
several minutes, Nour was brought in by guards, sat down 
across from the warden at his desk, accepted a cigarette, and 
engaged in light conversation.  Conoff remained seated on a 
couch across the room with the AMCIT prisoner and did not 
have the opportunity to speak with Nour. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Nour appeared reasonably relaxed and healthy (his 
lawyers have separately told us he is currently in good 
health and spirits).  Nour was apparently wearing his own 
clothes, which conformed to the prison regulation navy blue. 
The AMCIT advised us that prisoners on this bloc have their 
own cells with private toilets.  Like all prisoners at the 
"Torah Farms" unit, he is allowed to roam throughout the 
prison grounds between the hours of 7 A.M. and 5 P.M, though 
he added that "political prisoners" (presumably including 
Nour) are not allowed to interact with non-political 
prisoners. 
 
¶3. (SBU) In all likelihood, Nour's visit to the warden's 
office, during Conoff's presence, was not a coincidence.  The 
warden may have acted on his own initiative, or perhaps on 
instructions, but the intent was most likely to let the U.S. 
Embassy see that Nour was in good condition and was not being 
mistreated.  Separately from this encounter, we are seeking 
an official Embassy visit to Nour as soon as the GOE will 
grant it. 
RICCIARDONE