06CAIRO1309
Egyptian Media Coverage of Secretary Rices
Thu Mar 02 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 CAIRO 001309 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KPAO KMDR OPRC EG DA XZ IS XFNEA PPD
SUBJECT:  Egyptian Media Coverage of Secretary Rices 
Regional Visit, February 21-24, 2006 
 
¶1.  Summary.  Secretary Rices visit to Egypt and the 
region garnered widespread media attention, from 
straightforward news reporting to significant television 
and print commentary.  Between February 22 and 25, of the 
pro-government, opposition and independent papers monitored 
by Embassy Cairo, commentaries regarding the Secretarys 
visit or U.S. policies rose to 30 percent, a significant 
percentage given a national Avian Influenza scare which 
erupted the day of her arrival.  During February 22 and 23, 
satellite and terrestrial television news and talk-shows 
concentrated on her visit and U.S. policies, to include 
frequent airing of her exclusive interview with Egyptian 
an 
Television, and all major newspapers covered her visit to 
the region through February 25.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  Straight News Coverage.  Secretary Rices trip received 
significant straight news coverage from February 21-25.  On 
February 21, most papers headlined her scheduled talks with 
Prime Minister Nazif, Foreign Minister Abul Gheit and 
President Mubarak, with regional news agency, Al-Sharq Al- 
Awsat (Middle East Newspaper) speculating that Secretary 
Rice would ask Mubarak to increase the number of Egyptian 
peacekeeping forces in Darfur.  On February 22, Egyptian 
television news programs led with Secretary Rices official 
meetings and the press conference the previous night, 
focusing on the announced resumption of strategic talks 
between the two countries.  Pan Arab networks (Al-Jazeera 
and Al-Arabia) also highlighted her meetings, and reported 
that while Secretary Rice called on any future Palestinian 
cabinet to respect previous agreements, FM Abul Gheit said 
d 
Hamas deserves the chance to lead.  On February 23, most 
papers ran Secretary Rices arrival two days earlier, and 
her official talks as the second main headline, after a 
major national scare regarding Nile contamination.  That 
same day, TV news programs continued to lead with the 
Secretarys meeting with Mubaraks the day before.  The 
 
SIPDIS 
meeting also continued to be run as major news stories 
inside all papers, with articles quoting Mubarak, via his 
Presidential Spokesman, asking for continuing support for 
the Palestinian people and more time for Hamas to determine 
its positions and form a cabinet.  Opposition daily, Al- 
Wafd, in particular, highlighted her meeting with members 
of civil society, quoting Secretary Rice expressing 
disappointment over Egypts political setbacks and 
emphasizing adherence to reform. 
¶3.  Post-Egypt News Coverage.  On February 24, newspapers 
continued following the Secretarys regional tour, with 
headlines announcing Secretary Rice faces firm Arab 
es firm Arab 
rejection of Hamas and Palestinian Authority isolation. 
Papers reported that Saudi Foreign Minister, Prince Saud 
Al-Faisal, said his country would continue to give 
financial aid to the Palestinian Authority, even with a 
Hamas-controlled government.   Pro-government daily, Al- 
Ahram characterized the Secretary as calling for continued 
reforms in Saudi Arabia, and receiving rejection of her 
position to cut aid to Palestinians.  On her visit to 
Lebanon, pro-government dailies, Al-Akhbar and Al- 
Gomhouriyya, for example, called her unscheduled visit to 
Lebanon a vehicle to demand that Lahoud resign.  Lead 
independent daily, Al Masry Al Yom, reported that Secretary 
Rice admitted that the region differs with Washington on 
Hamas. The same paper on the same day also printed a story 
with the headline, American newspaper says Rice Refused to 
Meet Moslem Brothers which quotes the Christian Science 
Monitor reporting that Secretary Rice spoke openly about 
openly about 
Hamas during her tour of the Middle East and that 
Secretary Rice confirmed to a group of dissidents that 
 
SIPDIS 
the U.S. will continue to apply pressure toward reform and 
quoted activists who told the Secretary that President 
Mubarak has provided a false choice between his rule and 
the Moslem Brothers.  Al-Wafds front page story on 
February 24 led with the headline, Rice Failed to convince 
Egypt and Saudi to Isolate Hamas Financially and 
Politically and reported that Secretary Rice failed to 
convince Arab leaders to cut assistance to the new Hamas- 
led Palestinian government and to isolate it politically. 
¶4.  Television Talk Show Coverage.   On February 22, 
satellite television, Dream TVs evening program, 10 PM", 
gave special coverage to the Secretarys visit, including 
her civil society meeting.  The program provided the names 
of the participants in the meeting, which they 
characterized as secret.  On the same evening, Nile TV 
hosted Ambassador Ahmed Abul Khair, former Assistant 
 former Assistant 
Foreign Minister, who criticized Secretary Rices call on 
Hamas to choose either politics or terrorism.  He added 
that, if the U.S. continues to refuse to sign the FTA with 
the GOE due its support of Hamas, the GOE should tell the 
U.S., "We don't want your money.  On February 23, the 
trailer for Secretary Rices exclusive interview with 
Egyptian Television was aired on every news service on 
Egyptian TV, and the full interview was aired with 
subtitles on prime time, following the main news at 2100, 
and on Good morning Egypt.  On February 23, both Al- 
Jazeera and Al-Arabia hosted Hala Mustafa, one of the 
participants in the civil society meeting with the 
Secretary, via phone.  Ms. Mustafa said the group did not 
 
SIPDIS 
include opposition figures, rather an independent group of 
intellectuals from different organizations.  She asserted 
that neither Secretary Rice nor the participants had any 
special agenda, and that the Secretary was keen to listen 
listen 
to views on political reform in Egypt.  She added that the 
issues of Iraq, Hamas and Iran were discussed. 
¶5.  Commentaries in Independent and Opposition Papers.  On 
February 22, a contributor to lead independent daily, Al 
Masry Al Yom, argued that if the U.S.s claims against 
Iran are true, then her reason for visiting the region is 
to prepare for a military attack on Iran.  He noted a 
change in U.S. policy toward Egypt which is critical of 
the ruling against Ayman Nour while remaining silent on the 
postponement of the municipal elections and continuing full 
assistance to Egypt.  On February 22 and 23, columns in 
independent daily, Nahdet Misr, urged the Secretary to 
carry a clear message back to the U.S. that Egypt totally 
rejects flagrant interference in its affairs, that 
Egyptians will never accept that from this Secretary whose 
country hates Egypt, who has failed in the region, and is 
adopting double standards.  The columnist stressed that 
ssed that 
Secretary Rice refuses to understand Egypts reiterations 
 
SIPDIS 
that it does not accept U.S. or other pressures, that it 
rejects the repetition of the Iraqi scenario in Syria and 
its threats of cutting aid. The piece concluded that 
Egyptians no longer believe the U.S.s ridiculous slogans 
about democracy.  Another contributor to Nahdet Misr on 
February 23 speculated that the U.S.s ulterior motives 
are to convince the GOE to pressure Hamas, to support the 
U.S.s position on Iran, and to be dragged into the Iraqi 
arena, and that any talk about Egypts democracy is nothing 
but blackmail.  A letter to the editor which was published 
on February 24 in Al-Masry Al-Yom expressed the fear that 
Egypt is responding to U.S. pressures, as we did when we 
increased our representation in Iraq, and I do not think 
Rices demands are different this time. Opposition daily, 
Al Wafds February 25 column asserted that, Secretary 
Rices visit was aimed at blocking Palestinians, isolating 
nians, isolating 
Iran despite its right to possess nuclear power, and 
improving the U.S.s impasse in Iraq before Congressional 
elections.  The columnist concluded by urging Arabs to 
extend assistance to Palestinians. 
¶7.  Commentaries from Leading, Pro-Government daily, Al- 
Ahram.  The paper ran a column on February 22 and an 
editorial on February 23.  The columnist speculated over 
Secretary Rices concern over the postponement of Egyptian 
 
SIPDIS 
elections while lacking the same concerns for torturing 
Iraqis and punishing Palestinians for their democratic 
elections.  The columnist asserted that the U.S. seems to 
use democracy to punish Arabs, pointing out that 
Palestinians are being punished for democracy the same way 
Iraqis were sanctioned for dictatorship.  On February 23, 
an unsigned editorial pointed to Secretary Rices 
statements during her visit as proof that the U.S. - 
Egyptian relations are strategic, widespread and balanced 
and this is the reason that differences can appear.  Her 
n appear. Her 
comments on democracy were characterized as friendly and 
not judgmental, as confirmation of Egypts role in the 
heart of the region and the editorial explained that the 
American democratic model is not to be imposed which 
revealed that the bilateral relations are governed by 
mutual respect and realization of mutual importance. 
¶8.  Commentaries from Pro-Government daily, Al-Akhbar.  An 
unsigned editorial on February 23 highlighted that 
Secretary Rices visit to the Middle East came at a 
 
SIPDIS 
critical time after Hamas victory and during Israels 
preparations for new elections.  The editorial highlighted 
the importance of maintaining assistance to the Palestinian 
people and conveyed hope that Secretary Rice will bring 
this message to the Israelis.  A column on the same day 
looked at Secretary Rices friendly words at the press 
conference with FM Abul Gheit, but noted that these 
friendly statements contradict earlier statements of other 
American officials and do not explain why the FTA 
xplain why the FTA 
negotiations were suspended.  An unsigned editorial on 
February 24 advised the U.S. to follow Mubaraks advice 
that Hamas should be given time to cope with its new 
political situation, and that Egyptian leadership and 
counsel is the best way to prevent the collapse of peace 
between Palestinians and Israel.  The editorial noted also 
that Egypt is sincerely committed to the peace process and 
is the only country in the Middle East that can work with 
all parties concerned. 
¶9.  Commentaries from Pro-government weekly, Akhbar Al Yom. 
A February 25 column portended that Secretary Rices 
declarations regarding expansion of transformational 
diplomacy and the role of the American diplomat shows the 
decrease of the U.S. influence that was gained after the 
fall of the Soviet Union.  Another column on the same day 
looked at the Secretarys visit to Egypt as a method to 
ease Egypts positions on Hamas and Iran.  The columnist 
observed that while the U.S. and Egypt agree on general 
agree on general 
strategies, they differ in methods of implementation, which 
is why they agreed to resume the strategic dialogue.  She 
also highlighted that Rices visit did not garner the 
usual media attention, due to the national concern with 
internal issues, like the ferry accident and Avian 
Influenza.  She stressed that it is normal that the two 
sides have differences, but regular dialogue is important. 
¶10.  Commentaries from Pro-Government, Al-Gomhouriyya. The 
numerous commentaries in this sometimes anti-American daily 
began with a February 22 column which asserted that 
Secretary Rice does not care about Nour or elections, but 
 
SIPDIS 
is more interested in Irans nuclear capabilities.  The 
columnist urged the Secretary to look at Americas human 
rights violations before asking about Egypts democracy. 
On the same day, another columnist warned the Secretary 
against repeating the same announcements and warnings 
concerning democracy before every visit to the region 
 the region 
because such announcements amount to interference in 
internal affairs from a country who is responsible for 
the mistakes and sins of Iraq, Abou Ghreib, Guantanamo, and 
domestic surveillance.  He advised the American 
administration to respect the will of the Egyptian people 
and expressed disgust at any attempt to impose 
guardianship.  A February 24 column quoted Secretary Rice 
and Assistant Secretary Welch stating they are not against 
the rise of the Muslim Brotherhood.  The columnist advised 
that and if the Muslim Brotherhood wants to be recognized 
internationally they should cooperate with the U.S. 
Another column on the same day, by a well-known writer but 
occasional contributor to the paper described Secretary 
Rice as the High Commissioner and argued that U.S. 
policies around the world have been catastrophic.  He 
concluded that Secretary Rice is practicing political 
thuggery which will eventually harm the U.S 
 
Ricciardone 
 
 
Ricciardone