06CARACAS1897
MERCAL: THE BRV'S MOST POPULAR MISSION
Fri Jun 23 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Caracas
VZCZCXRO9164
RR RUEHAO
DE RUEHCV #1897/01 1741742
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 231742Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY CARACAS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5229
INFO RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 6695
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES 1307
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ 2137
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA 0382
RUEHMU/AMEMBASSY MANAGUA 1315
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO 2219
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO 3610
RUEHAO/AMCONSUL CURACAO 0878
RUEHGL/AMCONSUL GUAYAQUIL 0527
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE USD FAS
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEHUB/USINT HAVANA 0820
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0323UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 CARACAS 001897 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR NGRANT 
COMMERCE FOR 4331/MAC/WH/MCAMERON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EAGR PGOV VE
SUBJECT: MERCAL: THE BRV'S MOST POPULAR MISSION 
 
REF: A. 2005 CARACAS 578 
 
     ¶B. CARACAS 444 
 
This message is sensitive but unclassified, please treat 
accordingly. 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (U) Since its inception in 2003, the government-owned and 
subsidized food chain, Mercal, has grown exponentially.  It 
now holds nearly half of the market share for domestic food. 
At a 92 percent public approval rate, it ranks as the most 
popular BRV mission, even penetrating into the upper-middle 
classes.  CASA, Mercal's purchasing arm, enjoys significant 
competitive advantages over commercial counterparts, such as 
tax and customs duties exemptions.  To account for rise in 
demand, the Ministry of Food (MINAL), which administers 
Mercal, has plans to expand the network and support 
agricultural investments to supply the stores.  Mercal 
continues to suffer from some shortages and corruption, but 
overall the program appears sustainable, given the social 
importance and popularity of the stores, a continued 
favorable price outlook for oil, and the BRV's focus on food 
security.  President Chavez has openly embraced Cuban 
consultation on the project, and has touted Mercal as one of 
his main successes in delivering the "revolution" to the 
people.  End summary. 
 
----------------------------------- 
47 PERCENT MARKET SHARE AND GROWING 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U)  Mercal was born after the 2003 general strike, when 
the government sought to replace interrupted food supply 
chains.  What started with a few convenience store outlets 
has now turned into a food distribution network with 47 
percent of market share (by volume, 15-20 percent by sales) 
for food products (according to Datos Information Resource, a 
polling firm), reaching 15.2 million people (over 60% of the 
population), with 7,600 direct employees, over 15,000 stores, 
and nationwide sales of 6,000 metric tons per day.  CASA 
(Corporacion de Abastecimiento y Servicios Agricolas), 
Mercal's purchasing arm, is responsible for coordinating both 
imports and domestic procurements.  According to Cavidea (the 
Venezuelan Industrial Food Chamber), in December 2005, 
CASA-brand products had 45 percent market share for rice, 28 
percent for pasta, and 22 percent for flour. 
 
¶3. (U) Mercal has a variety of stores: from large and medium 
"Supermercal" and "Mercal Type II," which carry CASA-brand 
items as well as other commercial brand-name products, to 
"Mercal Type I" carrying exclusively CASA items, to 
"Mercalitos," corner stores operating under a Mercal 
"franchise" and selling both CASA and non-CASA products. 
Mercalitos, which are generally corner stores with a Mercal 
sign in front, make up 90 percent of the network's points of 
sale in Venezuela. 
 
¶4. (SBU)  Mercal operates as a not-for-profit organization 
(profits are about eight percent, according to Arthur D. 
Little, a consulting firm that has studied Mercal since its 
inception and advises clients on doing business with 
Mercal-CASA).  Since 2005, the Mercal-CASA program has been 
administered and financed by the Ministry of Food (MINAL), 
which allocated USD 166 million to the network in 2005.  The 
program received USD 114 million in 2004, when it was under 
the Ministry of Agriculture.  In 2005, the Mercal-CASA 
operation represented 55 percent of MINAL's annual budget, 
not withstanding any additional credits.  Mercal-CASA's 
operating budget figures are not publicly available. 
 
¶5. (U)  According to Datanalysis, a local polling firm, 92 
 
CARACAS 00001897  002 OF 003 
 
 
percent of Mercal users are satisfied with the program. 
Demand for food products has increased eight percent in the 
first 2006 trimester alone, largely in the low-income D and E 
classes (which make up approximately 79 percent of Venezuelan 
households).  Mercal has even tapped into the A, B and C 
classes, with 37 percent of respondents in those classes 
admitting to shopping there.  Reportedly, Mercal employees 
have on occasion denied admittance to "escualidos" (the 
pejorative nickname for upper-class Venezuelans).  However, 
when EconOff and other embassy employees visited three Mercal 
stores in Caracas (presumably looking like upper-middle class 
Venezuelans), there was no problem entering the premises or 
purchasing products.  Though the stores were not equipped 
with credit card readers, the cashiers didn't ask for 
personal information (such as name and identification number) 
for the cash transaction, which is customary in 
privately-owned grocery stores.  Due to increased demand, 
Mercal has announced expansion into cold storage (already 
present in some stores), acquisition of vehicles for their 
transportation fleet, expansion of existing stores and 
improvements of service centers. 
 
------------------------- 
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF MERCAL 
------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU)  Mercal, on average, offers a 32 percent discount on 
goods that are price-regulated (an extensive list of basic 
staples for which the BRV has imposed a sale price ceiling). 
Mercal's prices for non-regulated or non-CASA goods are on 
par with market value.  CASA doesn't pay customs duties on 
imported products, which in 2005 made up 37 percent of their 
200-product basket (down from 70 percent in 2004).  According 
to Arthur D. Little, Mercal has made a concerted effort to 
favor domestic producers.  CASA provides packaging materials 
to suppliers (see Para 8), which allows them to cut costs on 
packaging and marketing and therefore offer a discounted 
wholesale price.  CASA is exempt from paying taxes. 
 
¶7. (SBU)  At first glance, it seems like Mercal would be 
eating into the market share of large grocery store chains. 
However, according to Arthur D. Little, from 2005 to 2006, 
large chains have increased their market share from 35 to 37 
percent.  Other providers, such as warehouse-style stores 
(i.e. Sam's Club equivalent), and corner shops have been hurt 
the most, shrinking from 25 to 17 percent market share.  In 
general, Mercal has driven down price margins -- 
traditionally very high in Venezuela at 30-35 percent -- for 
supermarket chains, and many are attempting to become more 
competitive by varying product choices and improving 
facilities. 
 
¶8. (U)  MINAL has also announced continuation and expansion 
of a series of agricultural investment projects destined to 
supply the Mercal network.  Among these is the now infamous 
Ezequiel Zamora sugar complex (CAEZ), which became embroiled 
in a corruption scandal in March 2006 after an inquiry 
revealed that the USD 2.4 million destined for the project 
had gone into the pockets of a few military officers and 
reportedly of Antonio Albarran, the ex-minister of 
Agriculture.  Among this year's new projects are the proposed 
re-activation of coffee plants, construction of pasta, corn, 
meat and rice processing plants, chicken farms, 
slaughterhouses, cooking oil production facilities, packaging 
factories, and another sugar mill. 
 
----------------------------------- 
POLITICS: PROPAGANDA AND THE CUBANS 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (U) In Mercal, CASA-brand food comes conveniently packaged 
with political propaganda.  Most basic staples have a comic 
book-style cartoon depicting, for example, a devil dressed in 
a suit with a dollar-sign tie (representing the profiteering 
 
CARACAS 00001897  003 OF 003 
 
 
private sector), accompanied by an excerpt from the 
constitution or a political statement.  (Note: for photos of 
products, please contact EconOff at Rioja-ScottIE@state.gov. 
End Note).  Only CASA products carry this propaganda. 
 
¶10. (U) The involvement of Cubans in the administration of 
Mercal is no secret.  In an April Alo Presidente speech to 
celebrate Mercal's three-year anniversary, Chavez publicly 
introduced Barbarita Castrillo, a Cuban "minister" who serves 
as a BRV consultant.  Chavez said: "You have no idea how much 
these people helped us, and continue to help us."  (Note: 
Ostensibly through ALIMPORT, the Cuban Food Import Agency. 
End Note).  That same week, Chavez proposed that Mercal 
expand to Nicaragua, and various National Assembly deputies 
have picked up on the suggestion and have publicly supported 
the idea of taking BRV missions overseas. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
LINGERING ISSUES: SHORTAGES, CORRUPTION 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (U)  Product scarcity is a common occurrence in 
Venezuela, and Mercal is not immune.  The causes for 
shortages are varied, but mostly they occur due to price 
controls, which discourage production by leaving low (often 
negative) price margins.  Erika Farias, the current Food 
Minister, stated that shortages are just a symptom of 
Mercal's popularity.  (Comment: They are more likely a 
symptom of retrograde BRV pricing policies (Ref B).  End 
Comment).  During EconOff's visit to three Mercal stores, 
none had sugar or sardines. 
 
¶12. (SBU)  According to Arthur D. Little, there are over 101 
open corruption cases regarding Mercal in the Venezuelan 
legal system.  In the state of Tachira, Mercal employees were 
reportedly stealing merchandise to sell at a profit over the 
Colombian border.  Reports abound of Mercal employees 
hoarding products affected by shortages to later sell them to 
preferred customers or on the black market.  The food network 
has a very high employee turnover rate, which may be a 
contributing factor.  These incidents prompted MINAL to 
schedule a census of Mercal stores, to be carried out by 
Community Councils. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶13. (U) Mercal is a high visibility project for the BRV, and 
has provided Chavez' voter base with a tangible benefit from 
the "revolution."  Whether the expansion into the middle 
class translates into political support is difficult to 
gauge.  Though the network is largely successful due to 
unfair competition (no taxes or customs duties), it has also 
provided a market outlet for many national producers.  Mercal 
will be sustainable as long as oil revenue and poverty remain 
- the former to finance the subsidies, the latter to uphold 
demand.  To Venezuelans, it will continue to be a place to 
buy basic staples at considerably cheaper prices, and the 
popularity of savings often supersedes a consumer's political 
leanings.  End comment. 
 
BROWNFIELD