06DAMASCUS3049
Damascus Media Reaction: Asad/Mubarak Summit,
Sun Jun 25 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #3049/01 1761217
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 251217Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9898
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6052
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 3911
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2438
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7109
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1098
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4484
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0707
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6846UNCLAS DAMASCUS 003049 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Asad/Mubarak Summit, 
Syria/PLO, Syria/Jordan, Lebanon, Iraq (6/23-25) 
 
¶1.  Summary: Syrian papers highlighted the Syrian-Egyptian summit 
held Thursday between Presidents Asad and Mubarak that focused on 
the situation in the Arab region and bilateral relations. The 
opening session was attended by VP Faruk al-Shara and FM Walid al- 
Mouallem, as well as Minister of Information Mohsen Bilal. The 
meeting was attended from the Egyptian side by Prime Minister 
Ahmed Nazeif and Foreign Minister Ahmad Abul Ghait, as well as 
Minister of Information Anas al-Faqi. The two presidents reviewed 
the brotherly ties between the countries in all fields and means 
of boosting them. Both Presidents reiterated the importance of 
enhancing Palestinian unity and backing the inter-Palestinian 
dialogue, and renewed support for Iraq's stability and 
territorial integrity. 
Papers also reported telephone conversations between VP Shara 
and Mahmud Abbas, Chairman of Palestinian Authority, and Faruq 
Qaddumi, Chief of the PLO Political Department and Secretary of 
Fatah Central Committee. Both phone calls discussed Palestinian 
developments, progress of the inter-Palestinian dialogue and the 
need to make it a success. 
 
On Syrian-Jordanian relations, papers reported a statement by 
Hashem Shabboul, Jordanian Ambassador to Syria, confirming that 
the Syrian-Jordanian Higher Committee was scheduled to convene in 
Damascus on June 28 and 29 under the chairmanship of PM Otri and 
Jordanian PM Maarof Bakhit. He added that the committee would 
discuss ways of boosting trade, investment and economic relations 
between the two countries. He said that the standing cooperation 
between the two countries covers all political, economic and 
educational spheres, pointing to the ever growing relations 
between the two countries. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"VP Shara discusses progress of the inter-Palestinian dialogue 
with Palestinian Chairman Abbas and briefs him on the outcome of 
President Asad's visit to Egypt" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 
6/25) 
 
"Presidents Asad and Mubarak confirm continuing consultation, 
supporting inter-Palestinian dialogue and backing Iraq's 
territorial integrity. Foreign Minister Mouallem: We distinguish 
between resistance and terrorism; Opening a Syrian Embassy in 
Lebanon requires a positive atmosphere. Egyptian FM Aboul-Gheit: 
There is joint Syrian-Egyptian vision on HAMAS and the Arab 
initiative" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 6/23) 
 
"951 Palestinian infants are martyred by Israeli crimes. Italy 
calls on Israel to stop its massacres. Israeli occupation troops 
attack Jennin and Southern Gaza" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
6/25) 
 
"HAMAS refuses to prejudge the outcome of inter-Palestinian 
dialogue. Olmert at the Noble Prize Conference: Israel's borders 
are from the river to the sea" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 6/23) 
 
"Lebanese criticism of the annual report by UN Assistant 
Secretary General Ibrahim al-Ghambari for ignoring the Mossad 
 
SIPDIS 
network" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 6/25) 
 
"Lahoud calls for finalization of the investigation of the 
Israeli network, so as to block the path of attempts to hide its 
truth" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 6/23) 
 
"Minister of Information meets a delegation of Lebanese 
journalists: Syria encourages and blesses the national dialogue" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 6/23) 
 
"PM Ottri reviews tendencies of development and reform plans with 
the Serbian Radical Party" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 6/23) 
 
"Jordan's Ambassador to Syria confirms strong relations between 
Syria and Jordan" (Government-owned Syria Times, 6/25) 
 
"Jordanian PM will visit Syria next Wednesday" (Government-owned 
 
Al-Thawra, 6/23) 
 
"Warnings against failure of the Iraqi National Reconciliation 
Plan" (Government-owned Tishreen, 6/25) 
 
"Five US soldiers killed in Iraq. Scores of Iraqis killed in 
clashes and attacks in Baghdad, Kirkuk and Basra" (Government- 
owned Tishreen, 6/24) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
------------------------ 
 
"So We Do Not All Drown" 
 
------------------------ 
 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(6/24): "The Syrian-Egyptian summit that was held in Cairo on 22 
June was very important, at a time when the suffering of the 
Iraqi and Palestinian Arab peoples continues as a result of the 
aggression and flagrant terrorism practiced by the two strategic 
allies and partners in the aggression and its objectives, the 
United States and Israel.... 
 
"Talks during the summit dealt with the Palestinian and Iraqi 
files based on the Syrian-Egyptian and general pan-Arab concern 
for the interests of the Arab peoples in Iraq and Palestine and 
throughout the Arab world. 
 
"The two leaders stressed their support for the unity and 
stability of Iraq and for the Palestinian national dialogue.... 
Arabs might differ over details, and their positions might not 
be fully identical -- although it is necessary and inevitable to 
have identical positions -- but they must never differ over the 
essence so long as this essence affects every Arab. Differences 
over the essence are fatal and destructive to all Arab 
countries, not only to this individual country or that. The 
danger does not threaten Syria alone. The experience of bleeding 
Iraq should prove to Arab brothers that they are all targeted in 
their existence, identity, and future. 
 
"The Arab situation is unhealthy and perhaps in its worst shape 
since the fall of Granada.... There is a pressing need for Arab 
solidarity and a unified Arab strategy for the sake of coming 
generations.... This is an historic responsibility that all Arab 
leaders, and all Arabs without exception, must shoulder. History 
will not have mercy on those who turn their backs on their 
brothers, no matter what the reasons...." 
 
-------------------- 
 
"Bombing the Future" 
 
-------------------- 
 
Samir al-Shibani, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (6/24): "The Zionist terrorism is deep rooted in 
history, and...the recent attacks in which Palestinian civilians 
were killed and wounded in Gaza came as no surprise. 
 
"The astonishing surprise, however, lies in this horrible world 
silence about organized state terrorism that targets 
children.... Israel does not care about Kofi Annan's regret or 
about international laws, because it knows for sure that no one 
in this world can pressure or disturb it as long as it dominates 
the White House and as long as the aggressive US administration 
offers all protection, sponsorship, and support for this 
terrorism.... 
 
"This is a lesson for Arabs to learn before it is too late." 
 
------------------------ 
 
"A US Witness Verifies" 
 
------------------------ 
 
Ahmad Hamadah, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
commented (6/23): "US Ambassador in Baghdad Zalmay Khalilzad has 
sent a letter to the US State Department in which he painted a 
gloomy picture about the situation in Iraq.... 
 
"Although the entire world -- governments, humanitarian 
organizations, and research centers -- warned Washington and 
London of the dire and disastrous consequences of the occupation 
of Iraq and its destructive impact on the future of the Iraqi 
people and Iraq's establishments and infrastructure, Bush and 
Blair remained stubborn and invaded Iraq without thinking of 
these repercussions.... 
 
"Khalilzad's letter exposes to Iraqis, British, Americans, and 
the whole world statements previously made by Bush and Blair 
.... 
 
"After all these testimonies, the pressing question is: For how 
long will Bush and Blair continue to try to beautify the painful 
reality in Iraq with slogans of democracy, human rights, and 
concern for the freedom and security of the Iraqis?" 
 
Seche