06DAMASCUS2490
Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/China, NAM Summit,
Thu Jun 01 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #2490/01 1520622
ZNR UUUUU ZZH (TAO)
O 010622Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9260
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 5991
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 3853
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2370
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7059
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1033
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4432
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0655
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6796UNCLAS DAMASCUS 002490 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O.12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/China, NAM Summit, 
Palestinian Territories, Iraq, Lebanon, Kabul Riots (5/31) 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Syrian papers reported the speech by Dr. Faisal 
Miqdad, Syrian Deputy Foreign Minister, at the ministerial 
conference of the Non-Aliened Movement in Malaysia. Miqdad said 
that the continued Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan is a 
result of defying international resolutions and of the unlimited 
support given by some countries to Israel's colonial policies. 
Papers also reported meetings by Miqdad on the sidelines of the 
ministerial conference with Algerian Foreign Minister Mohammad 
Bedjaoi, Moroccan Foreign Minister Mohammad Bin Issa, Ghanaian 
Foreign Minister Nana Akufo-Addo, Indonesian Foreign Minister 
Hasan Wirajuda and Malaysian Foreign Minister Sayyed Hamid al- 
Bar. All papers featured the final communique of the conference, 
supporting Syria's right to restoration of the occupied Golan on 
the basis of the Madrid Conference, UN resolutions 242 and 338 
and the land-for-peace principle. "The decision to annex the 
occupied Golan is null and void and has no legal effect," the 
final statement said, calling on Israel to implement UN Security 
Council resolution 497 of 1981 in order to achieve just and 
comprehensive peace in the region. The statement also rejected 
unilateral US sanctions on Syria, considering the so-called Syria 
Accountability Act a violation of international law and 
conventions. It renewed support of the Palestinian people's right 
to establish an independent state with Jerusalem as its capital. 
 
On Syrian-Chinese relations, papers reported Foreign Minister 
Walid al-Mouallem's visit to China and his meeting with Wen 
Jiabao, Chairman of the Chinese State Council. Talks addressed 
bilateral relations and means of developing them in all fields. 
"We agreed, during President Asad's visit to Beijing in 2004, on 
establishing comprehensive cooperation and friendship ties 
between Syria and China," Jiabao said. "These relations are 
characterized by confidence, mutual respect and economic 
cooperation." The Chinese Premier stressed the importance of 
enhancing coordination between the two countries and underscored 
the necessity of enhancing economic cooperation.  As for trade, 
Jiabao expressed his country's wish to increase the volume of 
trade with Syria. For his part, FM al-Mouallem conveyed to the 
Chinese Premier Syria's appreciation for China's continuous 
support of just Arab causes. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Chinese Head of State stresses Beijing's interest in overall 
friendship with Syria, confirming that issues of the region must 
be settled by peoples in the region" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
5/31) 
 
"The Non-Aligned Movement stresses solidarity with Syria and 
rejects American sanctions against her. Deputy Foreign Minister 
Miqdad: Israel challenges legitimate international resolutions 
and receives unlimited support of its colonial policy. We are 
called upon to uphold the UN Charter to increase participation in 
international decision-making" (Government-owned Tishreen, 5/31) 
 
"Deputy Foreign Minister Miqdad delivers Syria's speech at the 
NAM Summit. The final communique supports Syria's right to 
reclaim the Golan, and rejects sanctions on Syria" (Government- 
owned Al-Thawra, 5/31) 
 
"Due to Palestinian students' sufferings, British scholars 
boycott their Israeli counterparts who support racism" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 5/31) 
 
"The Palestinian dialogue witnesses some progress. Partial 
payments of salaries will come soon. Seven Palestinians killed, 
41 injured in an Israeli attack against Gaza. A French call for 
mutual cool-down" (Government-owned Tishreen, 5/31) 
 
"The Lebanese Government calls for adopting a clear stance 
regarding Israeli aggression. President Lahoud: 'We maintain our 
rights by maintaining national resistance.' Former Prime Minister 
Karami: 'Discourse of the February 14 group is a US requirement" 
 
"US military reinforcements in Al-Anbar. British worry in Basra. 
One US soldier, scores of Iraqis killed in an attack on the 
headquarters of the Iraqi Interior Ministry" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 5/31) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
------------------ 
 
"Restoring Memory" 
 
------------------ 
 
Ali Qasem, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, said 
(5/31): "The recent assassination of the Islamic Jihad official 
in Sidon and the Israeli aggression against southern Lebanon 
have brought back to the Lebanese mind Israeli threats to the 
country.... 
 
"Israel did not hesitate to blow the Lebanese situation apart 
once again through a series of escalatory steps, assassinations, 
and aggressions after the Lebanese arena became exposed and 
fertile soil for Israeli security agencies and US and French 
intelligence.... 
 
"Although many people warned against Israeli threats to Lebanon, 
some Lebanese forces considered that an exaggeration.... The 
Israeli aggressions against south Lebanon on 28 May have ushered 
in a new stage in the Israeli approach to the Lebanese 
situation, which was brought about by reckless practices and 
positions that imagined that US sponsorship could offer 
protection from Israeli bites.... 
 
"Everyone knows that what has been happening for years revolves 
around one essential point, namely, disarming the resistance 
through a process of revenge that Israel has planned, the US 
Administration is implementing, and many Lebanese parties became 
involved in when they went too far. The aim of this process of 
revenge is to ease the defeat that was inflicted on Israel and 
open a gap in the opposition to allow Israel to resume tampering 
in the Lebanese arena...." 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
"The Advantage of Heading towards the East" 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
Sa'id Musallam, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
wrote (5/31):  "The Syrian foreign minister held important talks 
with Chinese officials in Beijing.... There is an urgent need to 
develop relations with the Asian countries, especially as 
American and European pressure and blackmail against Damascus 
increase. 
 
"Syria and the Asian countries have much in common, such as 
political and social systems, appropriate climates for economic 
integration, the need to open big markets, and independent 
political decision-making and rejection of colonialism and 
subservience." 
 
"In general, the people of the East know us very well and we 
know them very well. You do not find a Chinese, a Russian, or an 
Asian saying that Arabs must be annihilated, denying Arab 
civilization, or ignorant of how Israel occupied Arab 
territories or of what the United States and the West want from 
our region." 
 
---------------- 
"Kabul Uprising" 
 
---------------- 
 
Bassam Radwan, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(5/31): "Although the immediate cause of the popular uprising in 
Kabul on May 29 was a road accident, the political, social, and 
security situations in that country were the indirect reasons 
for the confrontations between Afghans and US soldiers. The 
security situation in the country is worsening, the political 
situation is tense, and the Afghan people are experiencing 
abject poverty and miserable living conditions under 
occupation.... 
 
"But what is more important is that the Afghan people are known 
for their hatred of occupation...." 
 
Seche