06DAMASCUS209
Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Iran, Lebanon, Iraq,
Thu Jan 19 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0022
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0209/01 0191607
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 191607Z JAN 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6625
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 5728
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 3627
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4216
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0448
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6599UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000209 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Iran, Lebanon, Iraq, 
Palestinian Territories (1/19) 
¶1. Summary: Syrian papers reported that Iranian President 
Ahmedinejad will arrive in Damascus today for a two-day state 
visit to Syria and will meet President Asad and senior Syrian 
 
officials. All papers featured a statement by President 
Ahmadinejad on Wednesday describing relations between Iran and 
Syria as brotherly and strong, and saying that both countries 
have clear positions regarding regional issues and against 
foreign intervention in Middle East affairs. 
Syrian papers also cited a speech by Dr. Mohammed al-Ghofari, 
Syrian Minister of Justice, at the opening of the General 
Conference of the Arab Bar Federation in Damascus, in which he 
said that Syria is still cooperating with the IIC investigation 
into the killing of former Lebanese PM Rafik Hariri and is keen 
to reach the full truth about the crime. Headlines also featured 
a statement by Ibrahim Simlali, Secretary General of the Arab Bar 
Federation, expressing solidarity with Syria against pressure and 
threats that "contradict the international charter." 
All papers reported a statement by Sheikh Hassan Nasrallah, 
Secretary General of Hizbollah, stressing that Lebanese national 
 
SIPDIS 
interests necessitate ending any possible hostility between the 
Syrian and Lebanese governments and peoples. Nasrallah pointed 
out that the latest severe wave of political, media and 
psychological instigation against the Syrian government and 
people have a racial nature. He dismissed the possibility of a 
new civil war in Lebanon. 
End summary. 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"President Ahmadinejad commences today a state visit to Syria: 
Tehran and Damascus reject foreign intervention in regional 
affairs" (Government-owned Tishreen, 1/19) 
 
"Nasrallah: Jumblatt's project is to fragment the region.... We 
refuse to demarcate the Syrian-Lebanese border under occupation. 
Qansuh [Regional Secretary of the Syrian Social National Party]: 
Masks have fallen.... The truth is approaching" (Government-owned 
Al-Ba'th, 1/19) 
 
"Russia reiterates the importance of a professional IIC 
investigation. Lebanese Daily Al-Diyar: The new witness scandal 
causes the collapse of Mehlis' credibility" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 1/19) 
 
"Two Israeli soldiers injured during an arrest campaign in Jenin. 
Abbas calls for resumption of negotiations. Fateh and Hamas will 
be committed to protecting elections" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 
1/19) 
 
"A new military operation in Al-Anbar. US marine killed in 
Baghdad. Fallujah is sealed off for three days. A State 
Department memorandum refutes Bush's allegation that the Iraqi 
regime obtained uranium from Niger" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
1/19) 
 
"Washington rejects negotiations with Iran. The Troika prepares 
to refer Iran's nuclear file to the UN Security Council. Iran: We 
are ready for partnership; threats are useless" (Government-owned 
Al-Ba'th, 1/19) 
 
"Human Rights Watch denounces hypocritical rhetoric and the 
arrest of thousands of suspects without trial: US violations of 
human rights are flagrant" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 1/19) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
----------------------- 
"Most Eloquent Answer" 
----------------------- 
Omar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (1/19): "Thousands of Lebanese students demonstrated 
outside the US Embassy in Beirut on 17 January to protest 
American interference in Lebanese affairs.... This interference 
has taken the form of egregious positions and statements, as 
recently expressed by Ambassador Feltman and US Assistant State 
Secretary David Welch.... 
 
SIPDIS 
"The demonstration will perhaps bring Americans back to their 
senses.... The Lebanese reject American and foreign 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Syrian papers also cited a speech by Dr. Mohammed al-Ghofari, 
Syrian Minister of Justice, at the opening of the General 
Conference of the Arab Bar Federation in Damascus, in which he 
said that Syria is still cooperating with the IIC investigation 
into the killing of former Lebanese PM Rafik Hariri and is keen 
to reach the full truth about the crime. Headlines also featured 
a statement by Ibrahim Simlali, Secretary General of the Arab Bar 
Federation, expressing solidarity with Syria against pressure and 
threats that "contradict the international charter." 
All papers reported a statement by Sheikh Hassan Nasrallah, 
Secretary General of Hizbollah, stressing that Lebanese national 
 
SIPDIS 
interests necessitate ending any possible hostility between the 
Syrian and Lebanese governments and peoples. Nasrallah pointed 
out that the latest severe wave of political, media and 
psychological instigation against the Syrian government and 
people have a racial nature. He dismissed the possibility of a 
new civil war in Lebanon. 
End summary. 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
custodianship.... The demonstration represents an eloquent 
response to those who accused the national resistance of 
treason.... 
"The demonstrations by youth in Beirut and Tripoli were the most 
prominent national topic, showing the truth of the patriotic and 
pan-Arab sentiments against the attempts to separate Lebanon from 
its Arab environment and turn it into a base for conspiracies 
against Syria and the region, and a station for the suspicious 
American-Zionist plans that seek to impose hegemony and serve 
Israel's interests...." 
--------------------------------------- 
"The Okar Voice and the Mokhtara Echo" 
--------------------------------------- 
Khalid al-Ashhab, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawrah, 
commented (1/19): "Jeffrey Feltman, US ambassador in Beirut, 
stated that 'it is time now for the Lebanese government to get 
rid of Hizbollah if it seeks Washington's full support....' 
"This American position is being translated into action by Walid 
Jumblatt and others, who started the campaign against Hizbollah 
by describing Hizbollah's weapons as treacherous and accusing the 
party of loyalty to foreign countries.... 
"The Lebanese must be alert and must understand well what is 
being hatched against them and what maintains their power and 
strength, primarily their national unity and their 
resistance...." 
--------------------------------------------- 
"Lebanese Consciousness Will Reveal Traitors" 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, said 
(1/18): "The rancorous orchestra in Lebanon has stooped to 
unprecedented levels in its abusive language against Syria and 
attacks on the Lebanese resistance.... But this campaign fully 
exposed this group before the Lebanese people and the Arab 
nation.... 
"This group, upon instructions from foreigners, has renounced 
every honorable thing in Lebanon and everything related to 
Arabism, so much so that it is rejecting Arab initiatives to 
bring accord back to Lebanon and preserve the country's national 
unity.... 
"The Lebanese people, who foiled the May 1982 agreement, will not 
allow revival of the agreements of humiliation and surrender and 
will drive off the specter of sedition and civil war, which the 
enemies of Lebanon and Arabism are preparing...." 
Seche