06DAMASCUS4071
Damascus Media Reaction: Lebanon/Israel, Syria/Norway,
Sun Aug 20 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #4071/01 2321259
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 201259Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1058
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6197
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4038
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2594
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7232
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1227
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4609
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0826
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6965UNCLAS DAMASCUS 004071 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Lebanon/Israel, Syria/Norway, 
Syria/Venezuela, Syria/Canada, Syria/Lebanon, Iraq, Palestinian 
Territories, Iran (8/18-20) 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Syrian papers reported Israel's violation of the 
cease-fire in Lebanon through its landing attempt in Boudai 
village in the Bekaa Valley, and the ongoing dispute concerning 
France's participation in the international force. 
Papers also reported a meeting on Saturday between Foreign 
Minister Walid Mouallem and Elsides Rodon, Venezuelan Deputy 
Foreign Minister, that focused on means of boosting bilateral 
relations.  Both sides reviewed the situation in the region. 
Earlier, a session of talks was held between Syrian Deputy 
Foreign Minister Faisal Miqdad and his Venezuelan counterpart, 
touching on developments in the Middle East and in Latin America 
and on bilateral issues. Miqdad expressed high appreciation for 
Venezuelan President Chavez' condemnation of the Israeli 
aggression against Lebanon and defense of Arab rights.  For his 
part, Rodon stressed his country's determination to boost 
relations with Arab countries, particularly Syria.  He also 
expressed gratitude for the help Syria offered in evacuating 
Venezuelan citizens from Lebanon during the Israeli aggression. 
Foreign minister Walid al-Mouallem also held talks with Norway's 
envoy to the Middle East.  Talks dealt with the situation in 
Lebanon and the means of  establishing a just and comprehensive 
peace the Middle East. 
 
Papers reported that Deputy Foreign Minister Dr. Faisal Miqdad 
held talks with delegations from the Canadian and Indian 
parliaments.  Talk centered upon the situation in the region and 
repercussions of the Israeli military aggression on Lebanon. 
Both delegations emphasized the need "to deal with the deeply- 
rooted causes of the struggle in the Middle East," and called for 
ending the Israeli occupation of occupied Arab territories and 
implementation of relevant UN resolutions.  Discussions touched 
upon the status of the occupied Palestinian territories and 
Israel's continuing illegal practices and violations of 
international law and UN resolutions.  The Canadian delegation 
"expressed interest in what is taking place in the region" and 
announced its stand against "the unjustified war" waged by Israel 
against Lebanon, and its condemnation of "Israel's intentional 
targeting and destruction of Lebanese infrastructure." 
 
Papers also reported that Minister of Information Mohsen Bilal 
called on the European Union and western countries to play a 
neutral role in securing peace in the Middle East.  During a 
meeting with the Canadian Parliament delegation, the Minister 
warned against "the aggressive polices that the US and Israel are 
following in the region that are turning the Middle East into a 
focal point of crisis and tensions."  The delegation pointed out 
that "there is a Canadian parliamentary movement, with which this 
delegation is associated, whose task is to enhance Canada's role 
in the international arena."  The delegation added that their 
visit to Syria "comes within this framework due to Syria's 
important role in the region."  Talks during the meeting also 
dealt with the situation in the Middle East and the role that 
Canada can play to solve the struggle in the region in a way that 
boosts international and regional security and stability. 
 
Syrian editorialists and columnists responded to attacks against 
the Syrian position by Lebanon's Saad al-Hariri and Walid 
Junblatt. They defended the Syrian position as representative of 
the Arab peoples and accused critics of "defeatism" or 
involvement in Israeli-American plans against the Arab nation. 
 
End of summary. 
 
Selected Headlines: 
 
"Lebanon calls on the United Nations to condemn the Israeli 
violation of cease-fire.  The Lebanese Resistance foils an 
Israeli landing in Balabak, killing one officer and wounding two 
others.  France's hesitation complicates European participation 
in international force" (Government-owned Tishreen, 8/20) 
"Syria expresses appreciation for Venezuelan President Hugo 
Chavez' stances.  Foreign Minister Walid al-Mouallem discusses 
with Venezuelan Deputy Foreign Minister Elsides Rondon boosting 
of bilateral relations" (Government-owned Tishreen, 8/20) 
"The UN is shocked by France's modest participation in the UNIFIL 
forces.  Lebanese army units continue deployment in South 
Lebanon.  Displaced Lebanese, whose houses were demolished during 
the war, receive compensations from Hizbollah.  Olmert, Peretz 
and Halutz request the assistance of a team of lawyers to 
eliminate the repercussions of the defeat" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 8/19) 
"Foreign Minister al-Mouallem and Norway's envoy to the Middle 
East review the situation in Lebanon and means to establish a 
just and comprehensive peace in the region" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 8/19 
"Vice President Shara holds talks with OIC delegation on 
consequences of the Israeli aggression against Lebanon" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 8/18) 
 
"Speaker of the People's Assembly confers with Canadian and 
Indian parliamentarian delegations.  World parliaments express 
solidarity in facing sole superpower hegemony" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 8/18) 
 
"Foreign minister reviews the situation in Lebanon during a phone 
call with Dutch Foreign Minister, reiterating the importance of 
an Israeli withdrawal behind the blue line" (Government-owned Al- 
Thawra, 8/18) 
 
"Minister of Information:  Supporting the Resistance does not 
contradict the principle of peace" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
8/18) 
 
"The Lebanese army deploys south of the Litani River.  President 
Lahoud:  We appreciate Syria's support;  The Resistance weapon is 
an internal issue" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 8/18) 
 
"Arab political analyst Haykal:  The Israeli aggression was 
premeditated" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 8/18) 
"Change in mood of the Russian street;  a bias towards Lebanon 
and a decrease in the number of Russians sympathizing with 
Israel" (Government-owned Tishreen, 8/19) 
"Three Palestinians martyred.  Hanieh sets conditions to join a 
national unity government.  Olmert reconsiders his unilateral 
withdrawal plan from the West Bank after his failure in Lebanon" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 8/19) 
 
"One Palestinian martyred in Gaza.  Chairman of the Palestinian 
Legislative Council rejects legality of the Israeli court" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 8/18) 
"Two US soldiers killed in Iraq.  Intensive security measures in 
Baghdad" (Government-owned Tishreen, 8/19) 
"Iran commences comprehensive military maneuvers all over the 
country to face any potential attack" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 
8/20) 
 
¶2.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
-------------------- 
 
"The Band of Shame" 
 
-------------------- 
 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (8/19):  "It was not surprising for the leaders of the 
band of shame [Lebanese March 14 group] to come out of their 
holes to stab the Lebanese national resistance and Syria.  This 
is the role it is assigned to play, and no one blames it for 
playing this role as long as its survival depends on it.... 
 
"We wonder where the leaders of this group were when the heroes 
of the Resistance were confronting, with legendary courage, the 
world's fourth-ranking army and inflicting heavy losses and a 
miserable defeat on it.... 
 
"During the war, the 'armed militias' of Walid Junblatt were 
erecting roadblocks to prevent the entry of Syrian and other 
foreign humanitarian assistance to South Lebanon. 
 
"Lebanon will not be taken hostage by this deviant group, which 
is conspiring against Lebanon and its Arabism...." 
 
--------------- 
"Age of Heroes" 
--------------- 
 
Samir al-Shibani, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, 
wrote (8/19): "A new Arab age of honor and resistance has begun 
with the great achievement that the Lebanese Resistance scored 
in the battle against Israel.... Hizbollah's fighters presented 
the most wonderful epics of heroism and pride.... Lords of the 
civil war and the henchmen of the American-Israeli plan in 
Lebanon wagered on a defeat for the Resistance.  But when the 
Resistance triumphed, they could not bear the glow of the Arab 
victory in Lebanon, which helped the nation regain its vitality, 
dignity, and pride.... 
 
"Those Lebanese came out of their holes and began to encroach 
upon leaders for whom the whole nation chanted and under whose 
banners they pledged to fight.... The positions of Junblatt and 
Al-Hariri were not surprising because the two mortgaged 
themselves to the American devil at the beginning of the US plan 
to control the region, using every possible means to create 
civil strife in Lebanon and urge a new 17 May agreement...." 
 
----------------------------- 
 
"The May 17 Group in Action" 
 
----------------------------- 
 
Abd-al-Fattah al-Awad, chief editor of government-owned Al- 
Thawra, wrote (8/18):  "In his last visit to Beirut, Sa'd al- 
Hariri, leader of the Lebanese Future Block, presented himself 
as a stuttering spokesman for the enemies of Syria. 
 
"Instead of focusing on support for the Resistance and laying 
the blame on Israel and the United States for their barbaric 
aggression against Lebanon, Al-Hariri, the deviant son, helps 
provide cover for the Israeli defeat and declares a hostile 
position toward Syria. 
 
"The attack against Syria, the country that supports the 
Resistance, was an attack on the Resistance itself.... But the 
role that Al-Hariri is playing will not bear fruit.... 
 
"As for Junblatt, he was so stupid that he revealed the main 
objective behind his attack against Hizbollah.  He began giving 
lessons to the people of the south, and he appeared as a clown 
playing the role of a lecturer.... 
 
"The military defeat that Israel suffered has driven these 
people to punish those who caused this huge loss for Israel. 
The leaders of the May 17 group rushed to attack the victors and 
help Israel achieve, through press conferences, what its 
military machine failed to achieve.... 
 
"The forces of 17 May will continue to bark in the next phase. 
Their demands are Israeli demands.  They demand that Hizbollah 
be disarmed, just as Israel is demanding.  They demand the 
deployment of international forces to disarm Hizbollah, just as 
Israel is demanding. They are calling for an end to the 
Resistance, just as Israel is doing.  They also want a big rift 
in Syrian-Lebanese relations, just what Israel seeks to create. 
 
"The more these people attack Syria and its positions the more 
Syria knows it is correct and moving in the right direction." 
 
------------------------ 
 
"They Exposed Themselves" 
 
------------------------ 
 
Ahmad Dawwa, a columnist in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(8/18):  "After President Asad's speech, the March 14 group 
began to act in a way that shows its involvement in the Zionist- 
American scheme. 
 
 
 
"The hysteria that the March 14 group showed after Al-Asad's 
speech proves that this group is involved in the aggression and 
in covering it up.... Al-Asad offered conclusive proof of this 
involvement. 
 
"It is true that the war against Lebanon exposed and identified 
suspicious and collaborative roles, but President Al-Asad's 
speech was the blow that knocked out all those who tried to 
disguise, hide, or wriggle out of their roles and join the new 
reality and reap part of the fruits of the major victory that 
the Resistance achieved.  The crocodile tears and theatrical 
acts by some did not work.... 
 
"The next few days will show more of these facts and the failure 
that awaits this group as it tries to implement its new 
orders.... The time has changed, and the climate is not 
appropriate for a new May 17 agreement...." 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
"No Place for Little Ones at Time of Victory" 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
Dr. Adnan Mahmud, a columnist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
commented (8/18):  "The new May 17 trend will not be cleared of 
what happened in Lebanon, no matter how hard it tries to 
disguise and hide its nature, which has become clear to 
everyone, because its positions and trembling words that fear 
the victory of the Resistance bear the hallmarks of its allies 
in the United States and Israel... 
 
"The Arab masses will not forgive those who wagered on Israel's 
victory and will not court those who fear the victory of the 
heroic Resistance, because they revealed their true faces when 
they renounced the action of the Resistance from the first 
moment of the aggression. 
 
"Syria, against which they are plotting, today expresses the 
conscience of the Arab peoples, whose millions went out to chant 
for the Resistance and to announce their support for it and 
their readiness to stand with it and offer every dear thing to 
regain the dignity of the nation.... 
 
"We were not surprised by statements of those petty fools, who 
are plotters by instinct.  Their attack against Syria will only 
serve as an incentive for it to continue its honorable pan-Arab 
positions.... 
 
"History will never forgive those who are today trying to 
slaughter the Resistance and offer it as a present to Olmert and 
Bush after they failed to get it through the repressive machine 
they unleashed in Lebanon.... 
 
"The masks have fallen, and it is no longer useful for people to 
assume different colors.  Those who were yesterday inciting the 
enemy against the Resistance will not be able to talk today, at 
the time of victory, pride, and dignity." 
 
Corbin