06DAMASCUS4534
Damascus Media Reaction:  Syria/PLO, Pope Anti-Islam
Mon Sep 18 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ9026
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #4534/01 2611425
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 181425Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1588
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2664
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7286
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1292
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4668
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0883
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7020UNCLAS DAMASCUS 004534 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction:  Syria/PLO, Pope Anti-Islam 
Statement, NAM Summit, Syria/Europe, Attack on the US Embassy in 
Damascus, Lebanon, Iraq (9/15-18) 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Syrian papers reported the visit to Damascus by 
former Palestinian PM Ahmad Qurei, who met with President Asad 
and conveyed a message from President Abbas.  He also met with 
VP Shara and held a press conference in which he expressed hope 
that a Palestinian national unity government would be formed 
soon, noting that the government should be based on the National 
Accord document from which an agreement between Hamas and Fatah 
has emerged. 
 
Papers also covered the Non-Aligned Movement summit in Havana 
with the participation of FM Minister Mouallem.  On the sidelines 
of the NAM summit, Mouallem met with Jose Ramon Fernandez, Cuban 
Deputy Prime Minister, Marta Lumas, Cuban Minister of Foreign 
Investments and International Cooperation, President Leonel 
Fernandez of the Dominican Republic, and Iraqi Deputy President 
Tareq al-Hashemi.  Mr. Mouallem confirmed to Al-Hashemi Syria's 
keenness to enhance relations with Iraq and to make the political 
process in Iraq a success, in order to achieve security, 
stability and territorial integrity in Iraq. 
 
On the controversy over the Pope's anti-Islam statement, papers 
featured a statement by Syrian Grand Mufti Ahmad Badr Hassoun 
calling for a Christian-Muslim religious summit to prevent 
eruption of a religious war between Christians and Muslims. 
Papers also featured Hassoun's statement accusing some Western 
and Zionist public figures of preparing the ground for a war 
between Christianity and Islam.  He called on the Ulama and 
religious authorities to "act cautiously and realize that a 
third party is trying to ignite a war in order to turn 
international attention away from the Palestinian and Iraqi 
issues." 
 
On Euro-Syrian relations, papers reported the visit to Damascus 
by European MPs, who met Mahmoud Al-Abrash, Speaker of the 
People's Assembly, and Abduallah al-Dardari, Deputy Prime 
Minister for Economic Affairs.  The European MPs reiterated the 
importance of consummating the Syrian-European association 
agreement due to its important role in achieving human and 
economic development that will contribute to the peace process 
and security and stability in the region.  The delegation said 
that Europe has become more convinced of the need to further the 
peace process and that Syria is an important element of the 
process.  The EU MPs asserted the need for Israeli withdrawal to 
the June 4, 1967, borders and for restoration of Palestinian 
rights. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Qurei conveys a message to President Asad from Abbas.  Syria 
calls on Palestinians to adhere to national unity in these 
circumstances.  Qurei:  We aspire to a national unity government" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 9/18) 
 
"The NAM summit unanimously rejects US hegemony.  Mouallem: 
Israel has aborted the peace process;  the co-sponsor has turned 
into a defender of Israeli aggression" (Government-owned Al- 
Thawra, 9/17) 
 
"The NAM summit in Havana salutes the Lebanese National 
Resistance.  Mouallem:  Sponsor of the peace process protects 
Israeli assaults" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 9/17) 
"The NAM summit elects Syria as vice president and decides to 
hold its next conference in Cairo.  The NAM summit calls for 
finding a solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict and for a full 
Israeli withdrawal from occupied Golan" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 9/18) 
 
"Syrian Mufti calls on Vatican to make clarifications on the anti- 
Islam statement" (Government-owned Tishreen, 9/16) 
 
"Pope Benedict repeats apology to Muslims in Sunday ceremony. 
The Christian-Islamic Action Committee in Syria calls to correct 
 
 
what happened. 
"Speaker of the People's Assembly reviews with European MPs the 
horizon of bilateral cooperation between Syria and Europe.  The 
EU reiterates the importance of consummating the association 
agreement with Syria" (Government-owned Tishreen, 9/17) 
 
"Nasrallah calls for a rally on Friday evening to mark the 
Resistance victory.  Changes to the Blue Line by UNIFIL raises 
suspicions among Lebanese about the UNIFIL role.  Lebanese MPs 
and figures call for changing the government, holding the 
imaginary majority responsible for the deteriorating situation" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 9/18) 
 
"Lebanese circles say that Resolution 1701 has failed to prevent 
Israeli violations" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 9/17) 
 
"Lebanese fear from trespassing by the UNIFIL forces and the 
possibility of using them to protect Israel" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 9/16) 
 
"The new government formed by Hanieh will not recognize 
agreements with Israel" (Government-owned Tishreen, 9/17) 
"Former Palestinian PM Qurei is in Damascus today.  Abdul-Hadi, 
PLO spokesman:  Syria is keen for national Palestinian unity" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 9/16) 
 
"Chief of Marine Intelligence admits incapability of controlling 
the Iraqi area of Anbar.  A number of casualties and injuries 
during attacks in Mosel and Baghdad" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
9/17) 
 
"Former CIA official accuses the CIA of assassinating Hariri, 
Houbeiqa and Garange" (Government-owned Tishreen, 9/16) 
 
"Washington says change in the EU position on the Palestinian 
government is not a justification to lift embargo.  The EU 
announces support for a national Palestinian government. 
 
"Additional Australian forces to Iraq.  The US army acknowledges 
killing of four soldiers and loss of fifth.  2680 US soldiers 
killed in Iraq" (Government-owned Tishreen, 9/16) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
---------------------------------------- 
 
"Combating Terrorism is a Syrian Course" 
 
---------------------------------------- 
 
Muhyi-al-Din al-Muhammad, a columnist in government-owned 
Tishreen, said (9/15):  "The attack against the US Embassy in 
Damascus was a terrorist act that targeted not only that 
specific place but also security, stability, and national 
cohesion in Syria, especially since some sleeping or transitory 
terrorist cells found in the chaos that resulted from the 
American invasion of Iraq, in the arrogant policy that the 
United States pursues toward the peoples of the world, in the 
flagrant American support for the Israeli aggression on the 
Palestinian and Lebanese peoples and in the state of anger and 
resentment that dominates the Arab street, an appropriate 
climate to recruit followers and incite them to carry out 
terrorist actions against US interests even if these actions 
result in dozens of innocent victims who mostly oppose the US 
Administration's reckless policy.... 
 
"It is obvious that the terrorists who attacked the US Embassy 
in Damascus on September 12 have adopted the takfiri ideology 
that has explicitly announced, in many countries, that it is 
engaged in open war with the United States and its interests.... 
 
"The foiling of the attack on the US Embassy is not a Syrian 
message to the US Administration seeking approval and praise. 
 
 
Rather, it reflects a clear Syrian approach in combating terror 
wherever it exists.... 
 
"Americans know quite well that the intelligence information 
that Syria gave them helped foil many terrorist operations in 
the United States, Canada, and elsewhere after 9/11.  I believe 
the estrangement between Syria and the United States is due to 
Syria's opposition to the American occupation of Iraq and to the 
American support for Israel in its ongoing aggression against 
the Arab peoples in Palestine and Lebanon and in its continuing 
occupation of Arab territories.  It is also due to the US 
Administration's reckless policy, which leads only to further 
instability and to the growth of extremist and violent movements 
and the revival of the terrorist and takfiri organizations that 
will spare no place in the world from their operations. 
 
"That Syria  has managed to thwart the attack on the US Embassy 
and to foil other operations in the past two years, and to be 
constantly vigilant to confront anyone targeting its security 
and the security of its citizens does not mean that radical 
treatment of terrorism does not require that the United States 
reconsider its policies, incursions, preemptive wars, and 
absolute bias toward the Israeli aggression, which leads to the 
expansion and growth of terrorism despite the money that has 
been spent and the weapons that have been used to eliminate it." 
 
-------------- 
 
"US Gratitude" 
 
-------------- 
 
Michel Khayyat, a columnist in government-owned Al-Ba'th, wrote 
(9/15):  "Through the gratitude that it expressed to Syria over 
its handling of the attack on the US Embassy in Damascus, the 
United States appeared to be dotting the i's and admitting the 
truth for the first time since the events of September 11.... 
 
"We as Syrians were not surprised by the success of Syrian anti- 
terror forces in their heroic performance against the 
terrorists.  Perhaps the secret behind this lies in the fact 
that the United States, in particular, must not forget from now 
on that every Syrian citizen, whether a soldier or a civilian, 
is against mad, criminal, blood-thirsty terrorism.... 
 
"Syria deserves a reward from the world because it works in the 
interest of the world and its security and peace.... 
 
"Perhaps this fact will convince the United States that it is 
mistaken when it directs unjust accusations against Syria.  As 
it expressed itself through spontaneous performance, Syria is a 
hospitable country that respects international laws and norms 
and cares about the lives of its citizens and guests." 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
"Does This Atmosphere Encourage Terrorism?" 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
Izz-al-Din al-Darwish, an editorialist in government-owned 
Tishreen, said (9/16):  "The United States has devoted many 
aspects of its war on terrorism to an open war against Arab and 
international efforts to bring about a just and comprehensive 
peace in the Arab region.... 
 
"Establishing peace in the region on the basis of a just 
solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict appeared in the eyes of 
the Bush Administration as a kind of terrorism.  This 
Administration, therefore, unleashed Israeli aggression, 
obstructed peace efforts, and asked Israel to adopt more hard- 
line positions.... 
 
"The final result of this American war on terrorism was as 
follows:  The United States occupies, directly and through 
 
 
 
military force, an Arab country and an Islamic country and 
dominates other countries in the region.  Moreover, it strikes 
in more than one place in the region.  Israel also occupies and 
attacks.  Terrorists deals stronger blows.  And there are no 
signs of hope that this situation will end.  Indeed, there is 
strong frustration in the Arab and Islamic street, resulting in 
further estrangement from the US Administration and lack of 
trust in its policies and positions.  It is no exaggeration to 
say that the Arab street is boiling in its rejection of the 
policy of the Bush administration and its unlimited support for 
Israel's aggression.  The question is:  Does this climate help 
the fight against terrorism?" 
 
-------------- 
 
"UNFIL Tasks" 
 
-------------- 
 
Ahmad Dawwa, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
commented (9/17):  "Neither the United Nations Interim Force in 
Lebanon UNIFIL nor the Security Council is doing anything 
against Israel's repeated violations of Resolution 1701.... 
 
"It is natural for this to cause much apprehension and suspicion 
among the Lebanese people.... The inaction of the Security 
Council and UNIFIL shows either inability to deter Israel as a 
result of the American position, or a desire to return the 
situation in south Lebanon to tension and war.... 
 
"In either case, the Lebanese government must act.  This 
government closes its ears and eyes to the Israeli violations 
without giving a justification for this position.  This raises 
many questions about the content of the agreements and 
understandings that this government concluded publicly and 
secretly with the parties that worked on Resolution 1701 
 
SIPDIS 
regarding the mission of the international forces. 
 
"The German Chancellor's statement that the mission of the 
German forces operating within UNIFIL is to protect Israel does 
not appear to be a slip of the tongue, as a Lebanese official 
termed it.... What is happening on the ground now proves that 
these forces came to protect Israel, not to prevent violations 
of Resolution 1701. 
 
"The Security Council must put an end to this major defect by 
announcing clearly and explicitly UNIFIL's mission, in order to 
avoid the consequences of the Israeli interpretations." 
 
Corbin