06DAMASCUS362
Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Russia, Palestinian
Wed Feb 01 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0362/01 0321421
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 011421Z FEB 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6808
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 5759
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 3654
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2114
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 6883
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 0752
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4246
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0474
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6625UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000362 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Russia, Palestinian 
Elections, Kyoto Protocol, Lebanon, Iraq (1/31-2/1) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary: Syrian papers reported President Asad's meeting 
with Yuri N. Baluyevsky, Russian Chief of Staff, which dealt 
with enhancing bilateral relations and with the latest regional 
and international developments. Papers also reported the joint 
press conference held by the Russian Chief-of-Staff and his 
Syrian counterpart, Lieutenant General Ali Habib. The latter 
said that "Syria adheres to its rights and will defend them, 
relying on international legitimacy, relevant resolutions and 
the support of its friends, foremost among them the Russian 
Federation." Ali depicted ties between the two armies as long- 
standing and solid. For his part, the Russian Chief-of-Staff 
underlined the importance of respecting the sovereignty of other 
states and the right of peoples to choose the life they want, 
hailing the distinguished national bond in Syria and the 
rallying of its people around the leadership of President Asad. 
"This is an element of strength for Syria that helps it face 
pressure and threats," the Russian Chief of Staff said. 
 
Papers reported a SANA press release saying that Syria would 
propose that Arab nations compensate Palestinians for any aid 
Western powers might cut after the HAMAS victory in the 
Palestinian elections. SANA quoted FM Shara as saying that Syria 
would submit the proposal at the Arab summit scheduled for March 
in Khartoum. "The move comes within the framework of continuous 
Arab support for the Palestinian people, and the respect of its 
will and choices," SANA said. 
 
Papers also reported that Faisal Miqdad, Syria's Permanent Envoy 
to the United Nations, presented to the UN SecGen Syria's Act of 
Accession to the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Changes, 1997. The act stated that Syria's 
accession to the protocol does not signify, in any case, 
recognition of Israel and will not lead to any dealings with it 
whatsoever. 
 
End summary. 
 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"President Asad discusses bilateral relations and enhancement of 
regional and international developments with the Russian Chief 
of Staff" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 2/1) 
 
"A Syrian draft resolution to the Arab summit to continue Arab 
aid to the Palestinian people" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 2/1) 
 
"Clashes continue in the Palestinian territories. Two 
Palestinians martyred in Jenin. HAMAS rejects Western blackmail: 
A long ceasefire and no recognition of Israel" (Government-owned 
Al-Ba'th, 12/1) 
 
"Syria's Permanent Envoy to the United Nations Faisal Miqdad 
presents the UN Secretary General Kofi Annan Syria's Act of 
Accession to the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 2/1) 
 
"HAMAS calls for a neutral and open dialogue with the Quartet. 
Abbas reiterates the importance of continuing international aid 
to Palestinians" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 1/31) 
 
"Putin calls for not stopping aid to Palestinians, confirming 
that his country's position on HAMAS' victory is different from 
the West's" (Government-owned Tisheen, 2/1) 
 
"Ministers of the Amal Movement and Hizbollah: US pressures are 
behind the cabinet crisis" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 2/1) 
 
"One British soldier killed, three injured in Basra. Al-Dulaymi 
calls on the government to release detained Iraqi women" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 2/1) 
 
"Iran warns against internationalizing its nuclear file. Paris: 
The door of diplomacy is still open" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 
2/1) 
 
¶3. Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
---------------------- 
 
"Political Cross-eye?" 
---------------------- 
 
Muhammad Khair al-Jammali, an editorialist in government-owned 
Al-Thawra, said (1/31): "American and European reactions to 
HAMAS' election victory entail distortion of reality and 
distortion of facts, as they portray Israel as a peace dove and 
blame the obstruction of peace and the loss of opportunities for 
peace on the Palestinian people and their resistance groups, who 
stick to their weapons to protect their people and defend their 
security and survival.... 
 
"Those who reject the results of the Palestinian elections are 
political hypocrites, as they forget that Israel has adopted 
terrorism as official policy and that it has never recognized 
the legitimate Palestinian right of return, the establishment of 
an independent state, and the restoration of Jerusalem.... 
 
"Israel's policy of aggression, destruction, settlement, and 
denial of Palestinian rights is the reason for the deadlock in 
the peace process on the Palestinian track...." 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------------- 
 
"HAMAS and the Challenge of Administering Palestinian Affairs" 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------------- 
 
Muhammad al-Khadr, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Ba'th, 
wrote (1/31): "HAMAS' Political Bureau chief Khalid Mashaal 
called on all Palestinian factions to participate in the next 
government.... 
 
"The new Legislative Council has major missions to accomplish, 
as expected by Palestinian citizens, who were exhausted by 
Israeli sieges and aggression and the entrenchment of corruption 
and poverty. The effort must start by putting the domestic front 
and decision-making establishments in order. It should address 
daily living concerns and secure the salaries of about 120,000 
employees, whose management has moved from one political force 
to another. There are other complicated issues, such as border 
crossing points, economic development, security and order, 
negotiations, and the fate of previously signed agreements. 
 
"This is a mission too difficult for any one faction or 
political force to shoulder. It dictates collective 
participation, as called for by Mashaal...." 
 
---------------------------------------- 
 
"Another Weapon in the Hands of the People" 
 
---------------------------------------- 
 
Dr. Khalaf al-Jarrad, chief editor of government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (1/31): "The HAMAS victory in the Palestinian 
elections was a political disaster for Israel.... 
 
"Washington only supports democracy that does not allow 
political forces hostile to the United States and its allies to 
rise to power.... 
 
"As for the Arab region, the American policy toward the issue of 
democracy is organically linked to the consolidation of trends 
that support separation and fragmentation, seek help from 
foreigners, and adopt the concepts of peace and normalization 
with the Zionist entity, regardless of this entity's aggression, 
expansionist ideology, displacement of millions of Palestinians, 
public refusal to comply with international resolutions, and 
occupation of Palestine, the Syrian Golan, Shebaa Farms, and 
other Lebanese villages.... 
 
 
"What has happened in Venezuela, Brazil, Iran, Chile, and 
Palestine points to strong popular inclinations and proves that 
democracy is not a ready-made commodity that can be imported.... 
 
"We must be optimistic that the time of hegemony, dictates, and 
coercion has begun to stagger, fall, and disappear." 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
"Deeds More Important than Words" 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Omar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, said 
(1/31): "The most important result of the Palestinian elections 
is that it revealed the truth about those who claim to support 
democracy in the West and their true position toward democracy 
when it does not match their deviant ideas and double 
standards.... 
 
"These people cannot claim that HAMAS' victory in elections 
obstructed the peace process because this process was nominal 
only, and ineffective, as Sharon's government aborted all its 
requirements...." 
 
Seche