06DAMASCUS624
Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Iraq, Lebanon, Danish
Tue Feb 14 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0005
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0624/01 0451443
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 141443Z FEB 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7125
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 5794
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 3688
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2154
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 6914
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 0791
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4272
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0504
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6651UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000624 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Iraq, Lebanon, Danish 
Cartoons, Pressure on Syria, HAMAS, Iraq, Iran (2/14) 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Syrian papers reported that Vice President 
Shara has informed Moqtada al-Sadr, Leader of the al-Sadr 
movement in Iraq, about Syria's decision to restore diplomatic 
relations with Iraq and exchange diplomatic representation at 
level of ambassadors after the formation of the new Iraqi 
government. During his meeting with al-Sadr, Shara expressed 
Syria's hope that this step would be a starting point for 
advancing the march of development and enhancing bilateral 
relations in all fields. Talks also dealt with developments in 
Iraq that accompanied the political process in different areas 
and their impact on the security situation. "Syrian-Iraqi 
relations will be improved in the forthcoming period to serve 
the interests of both sisterly countries," Al-Sadr told 
reporters following his meeting with Shara. Al-Sadr also 
reiterated the importance of ending the occupation of Iraq. 
 
Syrian papers featured statements by Lebanese figures and parties 
on the first anniversary of the Al-Hariri assassination. Papers 
reported a statement by President Lahoud confirming Lebanese 
insistence on exposing the truth and calling on all Lebanese to 
rise above political trivialities. Headlines also featured a 
statement by the "Amal Movement" calling upon all Lebanese to 
prevent politicization of the crime, and emphasizing that Rafik 
al-Hariri's "Arabness" constituted the main motive for supporting 
the Lebanese national resistance. "The resistance is a Lebanese 
necessity to face the Israeli occupation and deepen Lebanon's 
role in Arab issues particularly the Palestinian cause," the 
statement said. 
 
End summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Vice-President Shara discusses with Iraqi clergyman Moqtada al- 
Sadr latest developments in the Iraqi arena. Shara: Syria will 
restore all its diplomacy relations with Iraq after its 
government is formed." (Government-owned Tishreen, 2/14) 
 
"Dr. Faisal Mekdad, Syria's Permanent Representative to the UN, 
sends a letter to UN Secretary General Kofi Annan clarifying 
Syria's measures to protect diplomatic missions and calls on the 
international community to confront the campaign against symbols 
of the divine religions. Mekdad: Syria is committed to 
international agreements and regrets statements by some 
officials from other countries" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
2/14) 
 
"Danish Prime Minister Rasmussen dismisses some Moslem community 
representatives from talks on the cartoons crisis. Oglo [Chairman 
of the Organization of Islamic Conference] calls on the EU to 
enact legislation." (Government-owned Tishreen, 2/14) 
"Extensive Lebanese anger over suspicions about the arms of the 
national resistance and the Lebanese identity of the Shebaa 
Farms. Israel joins the provocation. Lahoud calls for rising 
above political trivialities" (Government-owned Tishreen, 2/14). 
 
"HAMAS rejects the latest decisions on expanding authorities of 
the Head of the Palestinian Authority. A Palestinian woman was 
killed in southern Gaza. Israeli occupation isolates the West 
Bank from the al-Aghwar area. Olmert recommends demarcation of 
borders as a first mission for the new Knesset. HAMAS links 
ending resistance with full Israeli withdrawal" (Government- 
owned Tishreen, 2/14) 
 
"11 US soldiers were killed or injured in Iraq and Afghanistan" 
(Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 2/14) 
 
"Iran resumes nuclear enrichment research. Russian talks between 
cancellation and postponement" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 2/14) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
------------------------------- 
 
"That Is Why Syria Is Targeted" 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"Syria knows what it wants. It realizes why it is being targeted 
in this hysterical way. It has its national and pan-Arab 
principles, while they have their own opposing plans. The 
difference between the two positions is clear. Syria adheres to 
its national rights, primarily the restoration of all its 
occupied territories. It also adheres to its pan-Arab principles 
with regard to Lebanon, Palestine, Iraq, and the entire Arab 
world. In these national and pan-Arab issues, Syria never 
bargains no matter what the circumstances.... 
 
"On the other side, there are American and Israel plans for 
occupation, hegemony, and the establishment of the so-called 
'Greater Middle East', which would fragment the Arab countries, 
undermine Arabism, and fight Islam and Muslims. Syria cannot 
accept this. It totally rejects it. And it is working to foil it 
in cooperation with its brothers and friends. This is why they 
target Syria...." 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
"Why All Fuss About the Russian Initiative?" 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
Muhammad Khayr al-Jammali, an editorialist in government-owned 
Al-Thawra, wrote (2/14): "President Putin said nothing but the 
truth when he said that Russia never considered HAMAS a 
terrorist organization and called on others to respect the will 
of the Palestinian people, who elected HAMAS in free 
election.... 
 
"The United States does not want anyone in the world to disagree 
with its policy and judgments, even if this policy and these 
judgments are absolutely wrong and based on lies and deception." 
 
"Syria took a courageous position when President Asad received 
HAMAS Political Bureau Chief Khalid Mishaal and congratulated 
him on HAMAS's election victory. 
 
"Will Arabs grasp the significance of the Syrian and Russian 
positions and offer support for and open up to HAMAS -- and it 
is more natural for them than others to adopt this position 
given the pan-Arab dimension of the conflict and the Palestinian 
question -- to make the United States, Israel, and the countries 
moving in their orbit understand that the time of political and 
intellectual stereotyping of the world has gone....?" 
 
------------------------------------ 
 
"The Policy of Extinguishing Fires?" 
 
------------------------------------ 
 
Dr. Buthaina Shaban, Expatriate Affairs Minister, commented 
(2/14): "The incidents that followed the publication of the 
Danish cartoons revealed the fact that the world today lacks a 
conscious political and moral leadership, which can steer the 
ship in a wise and conscious manner. They have also revealed that 
one of the causes of this shortcoming in today's world is the 
fact that the superpowers focus on money and the economy and show 
disregard for the cultural, religious, and spiritual identities 
of people. This is how some western leaders, including the Danish 
prime minister and EU leaders, and the United States, reacted to 
the sweeping Muslim anger in all parts of the world at the harsh 
insult to a noble prophet.  They dealt with the matter in a 
superficial way, which did not address the core of the problem. 
They went back to the old method of leveling accusations at 
forces or countries that are unwelcome in the new age of 
globalization.... 
 
 
"It was strange that other western newspapers republished the 
abusive cartoons in an act of solidarity with Denmark for 
insulting Muslims and their prophet. It was also strange that 
Danish Prime Minister Fogh Rasmussen bragged about having 
received a call from Bush, who expressed solidarity with 
Denmark. We do not know if this was a show of solidarity with 
Denmark for insulting the last of the prophets or for the 
adoption in the west of a new policy of religious and cultural 
racism against Islam and Muslims, in a new manifestation of the 
western traditional hatred for others.... US Secretary of State 
Condoleezza Rice reached the strangest conclusion, namely, that 
'there is no justification for the violence that took place in 
the world in protest against the satirical cartoons'....! 
 
"It is clear that the US Secretary of State's deep contempt for 
the sentiments of Muslims all over the world is what prompted 
her to publicly make light of their feelings toward their 
prophet in this manner. She and other western leaders have not 
seen the magnitude of the insult every Muslim felt as a result 
of the sense of racial superiority, which continues to govern 
Western culture... 
 
"We therefore believe that the Western leaders who focus on 
 
 MSI7696  SECURITY ERROR 
controlling others' oil, manufacturing weapons, and kindling 
wars do nothing more than make hollow statements to put fires 
out here and there.   But the flames of the fires will not 
subside unless the policies of racial superiority are reformed 
on sound moral bases, including respect for people's sentiments, 
identities, cultures, and religions, and for their security and 
peace." 
 
------------------------------- 
 
"Motives Behind Hugh's Mission" 
 
------------------------------- 
 
Charles Kamilah, an op-ed writer in government-owned Tishreen, 
wrote (2/14): "Karen Hughes, the White House's public diplomacy 
officer, will soon begin the second stage of her tour in the 
Middle East in an attempt to wash off American sins and mistakes 
and improve the image of the US policy.... 
 
"Hughes failed in the full sense of the word in the first stage 
of her mission.... Washington does not need someone to improve 
its image. What it needs is to change its political discourse 
and stop being an unfair state.... Washington needs to adopt a 
balanced policy, renounce war plans, and admit a crushing defeat 
in an illegitimate war...." 
 
--Seche