06DAMASCUS5395
Damascus Media Reaction:  Syria/Netherlands, Syria/South
Wed Dec 13 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #5395/01 3471236
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 131236Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2615
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6441
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4231
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2828
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7407
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1445
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4789
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1010
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7140UNCLAS DAMASCUS 005395 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND AFERNANDEZ, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT:  Damascus Media Reaction:  Syria/Netherlands, Syria/South 
Africa, Syria/Russia, Syria/Germany, Brammertz Report, Lebanon, 
Iraq, Baker-Hamilton Report (12/13) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers on Dec. 13 reported the visit to 
Damascus of Bernard Bot, Dutch Foreign Minister, and his meetings 
with President Asad, PM Shara and FM Mouallem, focusing on 
developments in Iraq, Lebanon, and the Palestinian territories. 
Both sides agreed to enhance bilateral relations and agreed to 
continue consultations about issues of common interest.  An Al-Ba'th 
headline featured a statement by FM Walid Mouallem reiterating the 
need for a larger European role in establishing peace and stability 
in the Middle East.  For his part, the Dutch official stressed "the 
significance of the Syrian role to help in accomplishing security 
and stability in the region." 
 
Papers also reported FM Mouallem's meeting with Essop Pahad, South 
African Minister of Presidential Affairs, in anticipation of South 
Africa's non-permanent seat on the UN Security Council starting 
early next year. The meeting touched upon regional developments and 
bilateral relations. 
 
All papers featured a statement to SANA by Evgney Bazhanov, Deputy 
Chairman of the Diplomatic Academy of the Russian Foreign Ministry, 
reiterating the importance of Syria's role in the Middle East. 
Professor Bazhanov said that Russia is coordinating efforts with 
Syria to reach a just and comprehensive solution in the region based 
on the relevant international resolutions, to secure an end to the 
Israeli occupation of Arab territories, including the occupied 
Syrian Golan. 
 
Papers also reported a statement by German Chancellor Angela Merkel 
defending German FM Steinmeier's trip to Syria, which Olmert labeled 
as a "mistake."  Merkel also supported the Baker- Hamilton's 
Commission's recommendations. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
President Asad reviews current developments with Dutch Foreign 
Minister Bernard Bot, confirming Syria's peaceful inclination and 
concern about a just and comprehensive peace" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 12/13) 
 
"Bot:  Talks were very positive and constructive.  Mouallem:  We 
hold dialogue, but we do not accept orders" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 12/13) 
 
"German Chancellor Merkel emphasizes that Syria is a partner in the 
region" (Government-owned Tishreen, 12/13) 
 
"Qatar calls for finding an honorable solution to the Arab-Israeli 
conflict.  UN Chief Annan calls on Israel to withdraw from occupied 
Golan:  The UN Security Council is criticized for it 
double-standards policy in carrying out its resolutions" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 12/13) 
 
"The Lebanese open sit-in enters its 12th day.  President Lahoud 
calls on France to return al-Sadiq, the false witness in the 
assassination of former Lebanese PM Hariri.  Senior Lebanese 
officials call for early elections and accuse Washington and Paris 
of violating Lebanese sovereignty" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
12/13) 
 
"The 3rd report of Serge Brammertz, Head of UN International 
Independent Investigation Commission into the assassination of 
former Lebanese PM Hariri:  Syria has cooperated efficiently, while 
other countries refused to cooperate" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
12/13) 
 
"Evgney Bazhanov, Deputy Chairman of the Diplomatic Academy 
affiliated with the Russian Foreign Ministry, confirms deep-rooted 
relations between Syria and Russia:  We are unifying efforts to 
reach a just and comprehensive solution in the region" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 12/13) 
 
"Five US soldiers killed in al-Anbar and Diwaniya.  300 Iraqis 
killed or injured in an explosion in Baghdad.  Speaker of the Iraqi 
 
 
 
Parliament Al-Mashhadni invites the Iraqi resistance to the 
negotiating table" (Government-owned Tishreen, 12/13) 
 
"An opinion poll shows that Americans support dialogue with Syria 
and Iran and the Baker-Hamilton's recommendations" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 12/13) 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
------------------------------------ 
 
"Even Though Hated by its Beneficiaries" 
 
------------------------------------ 
 
Ali Qasim, a columnist in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote (12/13): 
  "The Baker-Hamilton report was categorically rejected by some 
parties.... Those rejecting the report meet in one point, namely, 
clinging to the US occupation and its continuation despite the 
tragic reality in Iraq, because their interests will be in danger 
once the occupation ends.... 
 
"The US Administration is sending a set of contradictory signals 
which give those opposed to the Baker-Hamilton report a chance to 
explicitly reject ending the occupation, in a last attempt to 
dissuade the Bush administration from accepting the report...." 
 
------------------------------------------ 
 
"Bush, Staying the Course or Moving Ahead?" 
 
------------------------------------------ 
 
Fayiz Izz-al-Din, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(12/12):  "Perhaps it is not the first time the United States is 
suffering a strategic failure in an issue of war or peace since the 
end of World War II.... 
 
"This is a compound failure in the strategy of the US 
Administration, lead by President Bush, and the administration of 
the conservative right wing.... 
 
"What is noteworthy in the Baker-Hamilton Report is the confession 
of the US intelligence community's failure to understand the gunmen 
who are launching continuous attacks in Iraq.  This has impeded 
policymakers in the United States from taking the necessary 
decisions.... 
 
"Further confusion in the Bush administration added to this compound 
failure when Rumsfeld, who was a scapegoat for failure in the US 
elections, stated that the Iraqi course is no longer feasible and 
that US policy in Iraq must change....  This announcement of failure 
isolates the Bush administration more than ever...." 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
"Bush's Democracy and the Mythology of Victory" 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
 
Salim Abbud, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(12/13):  "Despite all his political and military defeats in Iraq, 
Afghanistan, Lebanon, and Latin America, in addition to his defeat 
in the latest US elections and the Baker-Hamilton report that 
acknowledged the failure of his policy in Iraq, Bush is still using 
the language of victory.... 
 
"According to Bush and his administration, democracy means full 
submission to Zionist-American desires.... The democracy that Bush 
presents is an invitation to accept Zionist-American colonization, 
in which democracy becomes a US game to support its projects and the 
regimes that devoted the capabilities of their people and countries 
to support US wars on Arabs.... 
 
 
"The Bush administration's policies feed hatred against America.... 
Bush must give up his mythologies and Zionist thoughts, because the 
future of America and its relations with the world are in 
danger...." 
 
---------------------- 
"Why Early Elections?" 
 
---------------------- 
 
 
Ghazi al-Dada, a columnist in government-owned Tishreen, commented 
(12/13):  "Ever since HAMAS won the elections, the Palestinian 
people have been under a Western economic embargo in general and a 
US embargo in particular, not to mention the Israeli military siege 
that employs the toughest forms of terrorist practices.... 
 
"We wonder what will happen if HAMAS wins the elections again.... 
Will the unfair siege against the Palestinian people end?  Is the 
United States in particular going to continue to fight and punish 
Palestinian democracy....?" 
 
Roebuck