06DILI84
INDONESIAN TRUTH AND FRIENDSHIP COMMISSIONERS ARRIVE IN
Tue Feb 21 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dili
VZCZCXRO3678
PP RUEHCHI RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHDT #0084/01 0521421
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 211421Z FEB 06
FM AMEMBASSY DILI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2253
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA PRIORITY 0356
RUEHWL/AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON PRIORITY 0239
RUEHLI/AMEMBASSY LISBON PRIORITY 0280
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 0158
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO PRIORITY 0192
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 0296
RUEHDT/AMEMBASSY DILI 1571UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DILI 000084 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/MTS, S/WCI 
LISBON FOR DANA BROWN 
JAKARTA FOR HANK RECTOR AND LISSA MCATEE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL JKUS KCRM KAWC ID TT
SUBJECT: INDONESIAN TRUTH AND FRIENDSHIP COMMISSIONERS ARRIVE IN 
DILI 
 
REF: A) 2005 DILI 574 B) JAKARTA 1078 
 
DILI 00000084  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  The five Indonesian members of the bilateral 
Truth and Friendship Commission (TFC) arrived in Dili on Sunday 
to commence a weeklong program.  The program is to include 
meetings with high-level Government officials, site visits, 
meetings with victims of violence in 1999, and a formal plenary 
meeting of the TFC.  Embassy is not aware of any plans for the 
commissioners to examine documents related to the Serious Crimes 
process or to the CAVR during their visit.  East Timor's 
commissioners expressed disappointment with their Indonesian 
colleagues for canceling their original trip plans in the midst 
of the controversy following President Xanana Gusmao's 
presentation of the Commission on Truth and Reception (CAVR) 
report to the UN Secretary General last month. However, they 
expect the CAVR report's handover to contribute positively to 
the TFC process in the long run.  The East Timorese 
commissioners continue to express their desire for international 
advisors both for the full commission and for their office in 
Dili.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (U) All ten members of the bilateral Truth and Friendship 
Commission traveled from Bali to Dili on Sunday, February 19. 
They are scheduled to depart on Sunday, February 26.  The 
arrival of the Indonesian TFC members has been long anticipated 
and follows months during which their plans to visit East Timor 
were repeatedly delayed.  Most recently, having finally reached 
agreement on specific dates and an agenda for a TFC program in 
East Timor, the Indonesian members cancelled their trip at the 
last minute following President Gusmao's presentation of the 
CAVR report to the UNSYG (see reftel B). 
 
¶3. (U) According to the East Timorese commissioners, this week's 
program includes 1) meetings with high-level Government of East 
Timor (GOET) officials, including Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri 
and President of Parliament Francisco Lu'olo Guterres, as well 
as meetings with justice sector officials including Prosecutor 
General Longuinhos Monteiro and President of the Court of 
Appeals Claudio Ximenes;  2) meetings with victims of the 
violence that surrounded the 1999 referendum, including a visit 
to a church in Liquica, the site of a massacre of dozens of 
civilians in 1999 by an Indonesian-backed militia, with the 
reported assistance of Indonesian military and police officers; 
and 3) a two-day official meeting between all commissioners and 
alternates. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Embassy is not aware of any plans for the 
commissioners to have access to any confidential files or 
documents related to crimes against humanity committed in 1999 
during this trip.  According to the UN advisor with the Serious 
Crimes Unit (SCU) archives, no request has been relayed by the 
TFC for access to the SCU files, although the Prosecutor General 
is expected to discuss the Serious Crimes process with the 
commissioners.  The advisor noted that any file access would 
require advance notification as well as stringent arrangements 
to ensure confidentiality.  Moreover, until a memorandum of 
understanding (MOU) is signed finalizing the transfer of the SCU 
files from the UN to the GOET, the UN advisor remains the only 
person with keys to the facility where the files are housed. 
Security for the files continues to be provided by the UN Office 
for Timor-Leste (UNOTIL).  (Note: There were early concerns that 
the TFC's Terms of Reference would allow the commissioners 
access to confidential files held by the Serious Crimes Unit 
(SCU).  To date, however, the TFC has made no plans to use the 
SCU files or any other confidential sources such as the files 
containing CAVR testimonies.  As reported in reftel A, East 
Timor's commissioners have informed Emboffs that the documentary 
review will be focused on reports such as the Indonesian 
Commission of Inquiry into Human Rights Abuses in East Timor 
(KPP HAM) and the CAVR report, along with selected court files 
from the Serious Crimes process, which are already public 
documents.  End note.) 
 
¶5. (SBU) During recent conversations with Emboff, several of 
East Timor's commissioners expressed their disappointment that 
their Indonesian colleagues chose to cancel their original plans 
for a visit to Timor, apparently as a result of political 
pressure following President Gusmao's presentation of the CAVR 
report to the UNSYG last month (see reftel B).  On the one hand, 
the commissioners said they were not surprised by some of the 
reactions in Indonesia to the report, remarking that it was a 
natural reaction that would be moderated over time.  On the 
 
DILI 00000084  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
other hand, one commissioner noted that by giving in to the 
pressure to cancel their earlier trip, the Indonesian 
commissioners had demonstrated the extent to which they do not 
enjoy genuine independence in carrying out the TFC mandate. 
Interestingly, the East Timorese commissioners reported that 
they had given their Indonesian counterparts copies of the CAVR 
Executive Summary a month earlier and that they were also fully 
aware of Gusmao's plans to present the report at the UN when 
they agreed to their original trip schedule.  Despite their 
disappointment, the East Timorese commissioners expressed 
understanding of the pressures on the Indonesian commissioners 
immediately following the CAVR release and were optimistic 
regarding the prospects for the current visit. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Despite the controversy and increase in bilateral 
tensions that followed President Gusmao's presentation of the 
CAVR report at the UN, the East Timorese commissioners expect 
the report's handover to contribute positively to the TFC 
process in the long run.  On a working level, it is hoped that 
the report's contents will contribute directly to the work of 
the TFC.  On a political level, it is hoped that it will create 
greater pressure for a credible TFC outcome.  They describe the 
UN handover as giving the report a higher profile than would 
have resulted from an initial domestic release, and thus placing 
pressure on the Indonesians to respond to its contents.  The 
Timorese commissioners characterize Gusmao's decision to go to 
the UN with the report as an effort to put indirect pressure on 
the Indonesians to take the TFC process seriously and pursue the 
genuine truth, while at the same time attempting to defuse the 
remaining pressure for an international tribunal. 
 
¶7. (SBU) The East Timorese commissioners continue to express 
their desire for assistance to the commission in the form of 
advisors either from the UN or bilateral sources.  However, they 
expressed some frustration and confusion with the manner in 
which the Indonesian commissioners have handled this issue. 
They note that the Indonesians have been markedly unenthusiastic 
about international advisors since the beginning, but then 
recently began to discuss the prospect, couching it as their own 
initiative.  They report that they were recently informed by the 
Indonesians that the US Ambassador in Jakarta had "given a green 
light" for US bilateral provision of advisors.  However, to date 
the two sides have been unable to reach a consensus regarding 
what they would request, regardless of the source.  Meanwhile, 
the East Timorese commissioners emphasized that they still need 
an advisor with expertise in international human rights law, 
especially in the Rome Statute of the International Criminal 
Court, to work exclusively with their Dili office. 
REES