06GUATEMALA195
GUATEMALA: REACTION TO DEATH OF PEACEKEEPERS IN
Wed Feb 01 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Guatemala
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS GUATEMALA 000195 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MOPS PREL KPKO PHUM MASS GT CG UG SU UN
SUBJECT: GUATEMALA: REACTION TO DEATH OF PEACEKEEPERS IN 
THE CONGO 
 
REF: A. KINSHASA 108 AND PREVIOUS (NOTAL) 
     ¶B. 2005 GUATEMALA 828 (NOTAL) 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: The deaths of eight Guatemalan 
peacekeepers in the Congo has provoked some criticism of 
Guatemalan participation in international peacekeeping.  The 
Guatemalan President praised the dead peacekeepers as heroes 
and reiterated his government's continued commitment to UN 
peacekeeping missions.  A French media report claiming that 
the Guatemalans were involved in a clandestine war criminal 
hunt has added to the controversy, and the Guatemalan Foreign 
Ministry has asked the UN for an accounting.  The death of 
the peacekeepers was a rude surprise for most Guatemalans who 
know little about the UN Mission in the Congo.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) The deaths of eight Guatemalan Army Special Forces 
(Kaibil) soldiers in the January 23 clash with Lords 
Resistance Army (LRA) guerrillas in the northern Congo 
provoked expressions of concern among human rights groups, 
the media, politicians and the general public.  With some 
dissenting voices, the general attitude captured by the 
commentary was one of wondering why the Guatemalan military 
was participating in a peacekeeping mission in Africa while 
Guatemala remained beset with many problems, especially a 
critical level of crime and violence.  A Le Monde report 
claiming that the Guatemalans were engaged in a clandestine 
British Intelligence-directed hunt for LRA leader Vincent 
Otti only intensified the criticisms.  Guatemalan Government 
Human Rights Ombudsman Sergio Morales demanded an 
investigation of the circumstances of the attack, stating 
that "we want to know why the soldiers were alone, what their 
orders were, what intelligence gathering mission they had, 
and who their commander was."  The media mangled the issue of 
funding for Guatemalan participation, leading Catholic 
prelate Cardinal Quezada to criticize (wrongly) the GOG for 
spending on this deployment $5.3 million that could have been 
spent on schools for Guatemalan children. 
 
¶3.  (U) While the Guatemalan Foreign Ministry has asked the 
UN for a full accounting of the Congo incident that addresses 
the Le Monde claims, the GOG has vowed its continued support 
for the peacekeeping mission.  After the news broke about the 
deaths, Guatemalan President Berger praised the peacekeepers 
as heroes, a comment that he repeated at a solemn and 
well-attended January 28 airport ceremony to receive the 
caskets of the peacekeepers.  He also told the press that 
Guatemalans do not "bail out."  The senior leadership of the 
Guatemalan military continues to strongly support 
participation in peacekeeping operations as a vehicle for 
enhancing the professionalization of the Guatemalan military 
(principally through exposure to other military forces and 
through experience gained in out-of-area joint operations). 
The Guatemalan Foreign Ministry remains equally supportive of 
efforts that it views as enhancing Guatemala's international 
reputation. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Comment:  The deaths of the Guatemalan peacekeepers 
were a great shock to all except the Guatemalan military, who 
were well aware of the risks of the MONUC deployment, and 
their missions (reconnaissance and hostage rescue) in it. 
Nor did it seem that anyone outside of the military was aware 
that MONUC is a Chapter Seven operation.  Critics of the 
deployment who are making distinctions between offensive and 
defensive operations are equally uninformed about the 
Guatemalan contingent's missions, and about MONUC operations 
in support of upcoming April elections. 
DERHAM