06GUANGZHOU5378
Progressive Magazine's 2005 Award Winners for
Mon Feb 27 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Guangzhou
VZCZCXRO9446
RR RUEHCN
DE RUEHGZ #5378/01 0580842
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 270842Z FEB 06
FM AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8945
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUEAWJA/DOJ WASH DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 GUANGZHOU 005378 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR DRL, EAP/CM, AND EAP/PD 
USDOC FOR 4420/ITA/MAC/MCQUEEN 
STATE ALSO PASS USTR 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM KPAO OPRC OIIP PGOV PINR CH
SUBJECT:  Progressive Magazine's 2005 Award Winners for 
Acting "For the Public Good" 
 
Ref:  Guangzhou 4104 (notal) 
 
(U) THIS DOCUMENT IS SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  PLEASE 
PROTECT ACCORDINGLY.  NOT FOR RELEASE OUTSIDE U.S. 
GOVERNMENT CHANNELS.  NOT FOR INTERNET PUBLICATION. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary and comment:  Li Datong, the originator of 
the China Youth Daily's "Freezing Point" section, is the 
most prominent person named in the Nanfengchuang ("South 
Wind Window") list of 2005 annual award winners for acting 
"for the public good" -- the magazine's raison d'etre. 
Then again, Nanfengchuang would have lost credibility as 
south China's most progressive journal if it had not 
included Li.  The other 35 Nanfengchuang individual and 
organization award winners are arguably less controversial, 
from a Chinese government perspective.  One foreign 
recipient was a Japanese woman who worked to maintain the 
truth about the Nanjing Massacre -- demonstrating the 
periodical's patriotic credentials.  Other foreign or 
foreign-linked award recipients included the International 
Finance Corporation, Greenpeace, the religiously based 
Amity Foundation, and the committee of East Asian scholars 
from a variety of countries who jointly compiled an 
"objective" history of the region.  Domestic award-winners 
included a respectable list of government officials or 
agencies who took extraordinary efforts -- sometimes at the 
cost of careers -- on behalf of local citizens and 
constituents, individuals who were extraordinarily generous 
despite sometimes personal straitened circumstances, and 
campaigners for freedom of expression, labor justice, 
environmental protection, public health, the rule of law, 
and other worthy causes.  This message uses synopses of 
Nanfengchuang's award citation remarks for each recipient 
and does not constitute the Consulate's commentary.  We 
have provided synopses on all the award winners so that 
some of our readership might have handy a representative 
list of individuals and organizations who, at least from 
the Nanfengchuang's perspective, make up part of the fabric 
of China's very limited civil society sector.  Notable is 
the nearly total absence from the list of any prominent 
private business philanthropists -- the subject of a future 
message by Consulate Guangzhou.  End Summary and Comment. 
 
2005 INDIVIDUAL AWARDS 
CATEGORY: GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS 
------------------------------ 
Zhang Hongjun: resigning with ease 
---------------------------------- 
¶2.  (U) When he was a senior official as the Director of 
the Pricing Bureau of Fuyang City, Zhang, 46, had the 
unusual courage not to follow the hidden rules of the 
leadership.  He overruled the inappropriate collecting of 
fees by the local education bureau and schools, a decision 
that led to revenge by local municipal leaders.  Later he 
was transferred to another position from which he resigned 
and became an ordinary citizen. 
 
CATEGORY: PEOPLE'S REPRESENTATIVES IN CONGRESS 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Hong Kezhu: calling for education equity 
---------------------------------------- 
¶3.  (U) Hong, 62, is a delegate to the National Congress. 
He made a well-known proposal requesting "the unifying of 
the entrance exams and admission scores by the 30 key 
national universities."  Hong pointed out that big cities 
like Beijing and Shanghai occupied excessively large and 
unfair proportion of quality education resources compared 
with other provinces.  He not only pointed out the problem 
on behalf of the people's interest, but also was 
constructive in providing a solution in his proposal.  He 
is also complimented for his modern public affairs 
awareness in seeking political and mass media assistance in 
realizing his goal. 
 
Zhang Fengxian: the Queen of Proposals 
-------------------------------------- 
¶4.  (U) Zhang, 62, submitted a total of 187 proposals 
during her 15 years as a National Congress Delegate and 3 
years as a Zhejiang Provincial Congress Delegate.  Starting 
 
GUANGZHOU 00005378  002 OF 008 
 
 
as a worker and driven by her tireless pursuit of equity 
and justice, Zhang focused her proposals on the interest of 
workers and tried her best to find a systematic and 
regulated solution.  Many of her proposals have been 
included into the provincial congress's legislative agenda. 
 
CATEGORY: RULE OF LAW 
Pu Zhiqiang: a lawyer defending the right of media 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
¶5.  (U) Pu, 40, has been trying to expand the space for the 
Chinese media and the public to express their will by 
introducing famous verdicts and news report from foreign 
cases involving the freedom of media report and the freedom 
of expression.   He understands that the implementation of 
all basic citizens' rights stipulated in the Constitution 
starts with safeguarding freedom of expression.  He has 
participated in a number of cases in which individuals sued 
official media organizations even when the plaintiffs had 
little confidence in winning just to try to give justice 
its due. 
 
Guo Jianmei: defending women's rights 
------------------------------------- 
¶6.  (U) Guo, 44, founded the first public-interest 
organization specializing in providing legal aid and 
research to women-Women Law Research and Service Center 
under the Law School of Peking University about ten years 
ago.  Recently, Guo and her team selected cases typical of 
infringement of women's rights and tried to use these 
lawsuits to push forward related legislation, with better 
protections effects, or to promote public awareness of 
related rules.  Typical cases included sexual harassment, 
labor disputes, equal employment opportunity, and land 
rights for married women. 
 
CATEGORY: SCHOLARS 
He Weifang: showing real independence 
------------------------------------- 
¶7.  (U) He is one of the rare scholars who can maintain 
their independence from power and interest groups and dares 
to say what the people want to say.  He never stops 
promoting rule of law in local universities and law 
enforcement agencies since he found that the one key 
difficulty in the justice reform was people's confused 
understanding about the power of natural justice and the 
ways through which the power should be implemented.  He is 
also outspoken in commenting on big legal cases based on 
his courage and loyalty to knowledge. 
 
Zhou Qiren: the significance of self-constraint for Chinese 
economists 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
¶8.  (U) For years Zhou kept a low profile and focused on 
studying economic problems associated with China's reform 
process.  His theories are based on logic and seriousness, 
not on the interest of any groups.  He provides people with 
an independent perspective to understand the necessity of 
reform.   He has close relations with business circles, but 
never sacrifices his independence to suit these circles. 
 
Chen Yan: the boatman between Chinese and French cultures 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
¶9.  (U) Chen, 50, as an overseas Chinese scholar living in 
France, has been trying to promote cultural exchanges 
between China and France for the past 20 years.  He 
initiated the 2005 China-Europe Cultural Forum, and 
compiled a series of books introducing China.  He called 
for the two peoples to listen to and understand each other 
with reason. 
 
CATEGORY: PERSISTENT RIGHTS DEFENDERS 
Hua Ruqi: resigning for the interest of voters 
--------------------------------------------- - 
¶10.  (U) Hua, 54, was his village's Director of 
Administration Commission in Hunan Province.  In May 2005, 
Hua organized a collective resignation by officials from 
over 40 villages in two provinces and Chongqing along the 
Qingshui River, which had been polluted by several chemical 
refineries in its upstream areas for years.  Their action 
 
GUANGZHOU 00005378  003 OF 008 
 
 
attracted attention from Beijing, and the pollution issue 
has finally been put on the agenda of the local governments 
concerned. 
 
Yang Yunbiao: let the voice of the silent majority be heard 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
¶11.  (U) Yang, 33, actively participated in democracy 
construction of his village.  He headed a self-organized 
right-defending organization that started from about 30 
families to over 166 families in several villages.  In this 
year's village election, Yang's organization played a very 
active role in educating the villagers about the importance 
of democracy and rule of law.   He believed it would be 
easier for farmers to get their voices heard after they got 
organized, and this would contribute to social stability. 
 
Lu Fushan: Awakening Luotuo Xiangzi 
----------------------------------- 
¶13.  (U) (Translator's note: Luotuo Xiangzi , or Camel 
Xiangzi, a well-known novel by playwright Lao She, 
recounted the tragic life of a  young man in old Beijing 
who made a living by pulling a rickshaw -- often translated 
into English as "Rickshaw Boy.")  Lu, 32, hailed from 
Junyang County, Shaanxi Province. A primary school drop-out 
because of his outrage over the school's arbitrary charges, 
he made a living by riding a pedicab in Xian City. On the 
afternoon of February 15, 2000, he was stopped by the 
traffic police for " breaking regulations on coming to the 
urban district to do business".  Lu's pedicab was 
unlicensed and was later confiscated by the Xian traffic 
police pursuant to Xian PSB's "2000 No. 1 Notice."  Lu 
spent five years suing the traffic police for their illegal 
administrative behavior.  His ground was that the traffic 
police did not hand down the Administrative Punishment 
Decision according to legal procedure and that Xian PSB was 
not a legitimate body to enact economic punishment 
according to the "Administrative Punishment Law."  Lu lost 
his case in the courts of first and second instances but 
won support from the Shaanxi Higher People's Court, which 
ordered the Xian Intermediate Court to retry the case.  Lu 
finally won the case and got his pedicab back with 
compensation from the traffic police.  He got the award for 
his efforts in making Xian's administrative department act 
according to law, thereby reducing arbitrary law 
enforcement. 
 
Zhu Wenguang; A Zorro who studies Law 
------------------------------------- 
¶14.  (U) Zhu, 48, hails from Zhongjiang County, Sichuan 
Province.  He started rescue work as a volunteer in 1994 
and has successfully rescued over 170 abducted women and 
forced laborers in Shanxi and Henan provinces.  He also 
helped 8 workers or their families who died or were 
disabled because of work injuries in Guangdong and Shanxi 
provinces to gain compensation.  His voluntary rescue work 
brought him fame as well as troubles from a 27-day jail to 
a forced closure of his "Zorro Rescue Center."  He 
gradually enhanced his legal knowledge doing rescue work 
and realized the need to transform himself from a "Zorro" 
to a "legal worker."  He got the award since his 
accumulation of legal knowledge and awareness was a typical 
case of the sustainable development of Chinese society. 
 
Qiao Songju: Tipping off Avian Flu 
---------------------------------- 
¶15.  (U) Qiao, 31, is from Jiangsu Province.  On October 
13, 2005, he got a call from his father, saying that a 
friend who raised geese in Anhui province was going to sell 
the sick geese to Jiangsu province.  Qiao suspected that 
the geese were infected with avian influenza and called the 
Secretary to Director-General of Veterinarian Bureau in the 
 
SIPDIS 
State Agriculture Ministry.  The Agriculture Ministry 
immediately sent a team to investigate, culling over 
100,000 poultry and vaccinating another 100,000, an act 
praised by WHO as a timely control of the epidemic outbreak 
in Anhui.  However, two days after the epidemic was 
announced, Qiao was taken to the local public security 
bureau, who suspected that his tip-off was in exchange for 
money from the State Agriculture Ministry.  The local PSB 
 
GUANGZHOU 00005378  004 OF 008 
 
 
later handed down an "Arrest Notification," saying that 
Qiao should be put under criminal detention for alleged 
blackmailing in a fake vaccine case.  Qiao's family said he 
tipped off the government about fake vaccines in that case 
and angered local organizations.  Qiao was given the award 
because he demonstrated the courage and public spirit of an 
ordinary citizen during a crisis despite pressure from 
social relations and local governments focused mainly on 
pursuing an economic development strategy. 
 
CATEGORY: DISSEMINATOR'S RESPONSIBILITY 
Li Datong: People's Trust is condition on which newspapers 
rely for existence 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
¶16.  (U) Li, 53, hails from Beijing.  On August 15, 2005, 
Li, veteran editor at China Youth Daily and chief of the 
paper's well-known section called "Bingdian"("Freezing 
Point"), wrote an open letter in a high-profile move 
criticizing the paper's new draft appraisal system to link 
pay with praise for violating the standard measuring news 
values and deprived the journalists' rights to reveal 
social and official corruption.  His letter finally made 
the Party Committee of China Youth Daily scrap the draft 
and design a new one.  Li got the award for his persistent 
professionalism in presenting quality news to the readers 
and stepping forward to safeguard the honor of his 
profession. 
 
Li Yang: Movie as a kind of care 
-------------------------------- 
¶17.  (U) Li, 47, hails from Xian City.  The movie "Blind 
Shaft," Li's debut feature, was also a multiple award 
winning film.  By investing all of his money and even money 
borrowed from his relatives, Li produced a film that 
depicted the terrible situation of coal miners in China. 
"The Award for Public Interest" given to such a low key 
film director in the mainland was not to recognize his 
professionalism as a film maker, but to show respect for 
his unremitting pursuit of revealing human nature and 
expressing humanitarian concern. 
 
Matsuoka Tamaki: Revealing the concealed truth 
--------------------------------------------- - 
¶18.  (U) Matsuoka Tamaki, 58, is a native of Osaka, Japan. 
As the only Japanese, together with other three Chinese, 
she received the "Special Contribution Prize" presented by 
Nanjing Memorial Hall of Compatriots Murdered in the 
Nanjing Massacre.  A 58-year-old primary school teacher, 
Matsuoka collected the personal stories of 120 victims and 
published her second book about the Nanjing Massacre -- 
"Nanjing Massacre - The Split Soul of the Victims." 
Matsuoka said it was not easy to collect information from 
the victims.  Most were reluctant to recall the misery and 
pain they endured, especially those women who had been 
raped.  "I was a primary school teacher and I hope my 
pupils will know the truth," said Matsuoka. 
 
CATEGORY: GREEN ACTIVISTS 
Xiao Liangzhong (deceased): A wave joins the river of 
freedom 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
¶19.  (U) Xiao, 32, hailed from Diqing, Yunnan Province.  On 
January 5, 2005, Xiao suddenly passed away at the age of 
¶32.  Before his death, this young anthropologist's health 
was irreparably undermined by his commitment to leading the 
fight to block the construction of a dam system in the 
region of his native village in Yunnan province.  The 
construction was part of an eight-dam power scheme for the 
Tiger Leaping Gorge and Jinsha River.  After comprehensive 
data collection and site inspections, Xiao worked day and 
night to contact environmentalists, research institutes, 
and journalists to support his Letter of Appeal to stop the 
project.  His efforts brought about a meeting attended by 
nine environmental protection organizations and many 
experts in this field in Beijing calling for a stop of the 
eight-dam power construction.  It was Xiao's actions that 
made the world care about the original residents who lived 
in harmony with the river.  In contemporary Chinese society 
where actions and care are missing, his independence and 
 
GUANGZHOU 00005378  005 OF 008 
 
 
unremitting inquiries served as a model for intellectuals. 
 
Yun Jianli: Hanjiang River's voice heard through the South 
and the North 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
¶20.  (U) Yun, 61, is a native of Hubei Province. 
Environmental NGO organizers are usually in periphery 
positions, but Yun and her "Green Han Jiang" organization 
were exceptionally active. The organization trained over 
500 "seed teachers" for environmental protection education, 
attracted over 70,000 citizens to their public education 
activities, and hosted its own website and internal 
communication system.  Before Yun initiated "Green Han 
Jiang" in 2002, she served four terms in the municipal and 
provincial CPPCC.  Transforming herself from a member of 
the elite in the political system to a campaigner in a NGO, 
she went in person to the suburbs and factories to carry 
out investigations of pollution and went to Beijing to 
enunciate her concern and devotion to the Han River.  Now 
the river has greatly improved in water quality, and she 
has made great contributions to the quality of water being 
transferred from the south to the north. 
 
CATEGORY: THE CANDLE LIGHT OF LOVE 
Bai Fangli (deceased): A pedicab rider in paradise 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
¶21.  (U) Bai, 93, hailed from Tianjin City.  On September 
23, 2005, Bai Fangli passed away at the age of 93.  Over 
the last 18 years before his death, he donated RMB 350,000 
earned driving a pedicab in Tianjin to fund 300 poor 
university students.  He passed away with zero money in his 
bank account.  Some newspaper estimated that if the charge 
for a pedicab ride was 0.5 yuan per kilometer, Bai had to 
have ridden the equivalent of 18 trips around the earth at 
the equator to earn the RMB 350,000.  The old man's reason 
to fund education was simple:  he could not bear children 
dropping out of school due to poverty.  The whole society 
was touched and perspired from embarrassment because of his 
actions. 
 
Zhao Huaqiong: Love never failed 
-------------------------------- 
¶22.  (U) Zhao, 58, is from Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province. In 
Zhao's self-operated hospital, migrant workers only spend 
RMB 0.5 to see a doctor and around RMB 10 in drug 
prescriptions, almost half the price one would spend in 
other hospitals.  After retiring from her position as a 
factory doctor in a state-owned enterprise, Zhao used her 
own savings to open a private clinic.  At the end of 2004, 
in order to meet the increasingly urgent demand from 
migrant workers, she sold the house intended for her son's 
marriage and borrowed money to build a clinic in a hospital 
for migrant workers.  The clinic incurred a loss of RMB 
300,000 in its first year of operation as discounts were 
frequently given to patients and free treatment provided to 
those without a single penny.  At the first anniversary of 
the hospital, Zhao managed to raise some money to relieve 
the clinic's current financial difficulties.  Though the 
clinic might end up in failure, Zhao's love never failed. 
She is like a mirror reflecting some people's indifference 
to vulnerable societal sectors. 
 
Zhai Meiqing: Set up the first state-level private 
foundation 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
¶23.  (U) Zhai, 41, hails from Guangdong Province.  Since 
making a donation in 1992 to build the first Project Hope 
primary school, Zhai's Xiangjiang Group has helped more 
than 20,000 drop-outs to return to school and donated an 
accumulated fund of RMB 300 million to build over 300 
schools.  In June 2005, Zhai contributed RMB 50 million to 
set up the "Xiangjiang Social Aid Foundation," which became 
China's first state-level private foundation after 
obtaining approval from the Ministry of Civil Affairs. 
Zhai hopes to see the foundation raise a fund of RMB 1 
billion in the coming several years.  Although some people 
question the motivation behind her philanthropy as using 
the foundation to provide financing help for her capital- 
intensive business, Miss Zhai deserves respect from the 
 
GUANGZHOU 00005378  006 OF 008 
 
 
public for her "making charity a life mission." 
 
ANNUAL ORGANIZATION AWARDS 
Farmers Association of Puzhou Town, Yongji City: Let 
farmers organize themselves 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
¶24.  (U) As a grassroots organization, the Farmers 
Association of Puzhou Town, Yongji City, Shanxi  has helped 
farmers reduce market risks, realize self-learning and 
self-education, and form beneficial interactions between 
farmers and government by grassroots.  It has offered 
significant inspiration in exploring how to construct 
communities in Chinese villages.  The farmers Association 
registered itself with the Municipal Civil Affairs Bureau 
on June 7, 2004, with the direct support of municipal 
government leaders.  It has more than 3,800 members so far. 
Since its founding, it has been headed by Zheng Bing and 
has devoted itself to community construction in villages 
and the development of rural economy.  On October 20, Zheng 
and 20 other women farmers around the world won an award 
from the Women's World Summit Foundation. 
 
Legal Commission of the Fujian People's Congress: Bring 
medical service into Law on Consumer Rights 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
¶25.  (U) In October 2005, the Fujian People's Congress 
passed the "Methods of Fujian's Implementation of the Law 
on Consumer Rights of the People's Republic of China," 
incorporating medical service into the Law on Consumer 
Rights.  It has completely shattered the unfair status quo 
in the current medical service system, in which the 
public's complaints against the medical administration 
authorities are dealt with by the authorities themselves. 
Many legislators at local levels are considering the 
implementing their own version of the "Law on Consumer 
Rights" to regulate medical service and to form the legal 
basis for resolving hospital-patient disputes.  The 
national Administration of Industry and Commerce (AIC) has 
also proposed amendments to the Law on Consumer Rights. 
The Legal Commission of the Fujian People's Congress, 
through their own efforts, has benefited the public ahead 
of national legislators. 
 
Publicity Department of Wenling Committee of the Chinese 
Communist Party: New explorations of an old department 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
¶26.  (U) The Publicity Department of Wenling has taken the 
initiative to shoulder the responsibility of reform and 
innovation, and has made precious accomplishments in the 
exploration of how to strengthen the Party's governance and 
how to promote grassroots democracy.  It has exemplary 
significance in the construction of political civilization 
in all of China during the current transitional period. 
 
Fuzhou Pricing Bureau: First list that itemizes the cost of 
real estates 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
¶27.  (U) In July 2004, the Fuzhou Pricing Bureau released 
the country's first list itemizing the average cost of real 
estate in the city.  The list, which is called the "first 
document that uses accurate statistics to expose the inside 
of the real estate industry," sparked immediate 
repercussion in the country's real estate industry and 
raised heated debates on the subject.  The National 
Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) said that 
"Fuzhou's practice complies with the interest of the mass 
of the people."  According to the list, the profit margin 
of real estate developers in Fuzhou averaged 50%, with the 
lowest at 20% and the highest at over 90%. 
 
World and China Research Institute: Democracy begins with 
election 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
¶28.  (U) As a non-governmental think tank, the World and 
China Research Institute has a consistent and clear 
mission: to promote the improvement of China's political 
system and to promote progress of China's democracy.  In 
the year 2005, which has been a year full of twists and 
turns in China's grassroots democratic election, they once 
 
GUANGZHOU 00005378  007 OF 008 
 
 
again made independent and sensible judgments.  The World 
and China Research Center was established in 1993 and has 
had a focus on research in politics.  The organization's 
founder, Li Fan, got his master's degree in Political 
Science from Ohio State University.  The Research Institute 
has spent a great deal of energy in promoting grassroots 
election. 
 
Public Alliance Research Office: Take actions under the 
idealist sky 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
¶29.  (U) The Beijing Public Alliance Research Office was 
founded in October 2003 and was originally named "Beijing 
Sunshine Political Research Center."  In 2005, it changed 
to its current name.  In recent years, the presence of the 
Public Alliance Research Office is always seen on the 
forefront of conflicts during China's transitional period. 
Supported by idealism, the Public Alliance Research Office 
rationally, constructively, and gradually promotes the 
progress of the society.  The office has offered legal 
advice in a number of high-profile litigation cases.  In 
2005, one of the office's key projects was the "Report on 
China's Petition System."  In the report, the office 
exposed problems in the current petition system, calling 
for reform of the grassroots political system and putting 
forward some specific suggestions. 
 
Amity Foundation: Moral is proven by love 
----------------------------------------- 
¶30.  (U) Amity Foundation is a non-governmental charity 
established by Chinese Christians.  For many years, under 
the banner of love, it has rallied various social groups to 
introduce international resources into China for the 
development of rural and poor regions and the betterment of 
weaker groups.  The practice of the Amity Foundation not 
only brings about tangible help and encouragement to those 
who are in need but also spreads to the society the values 
of sympathy, understanding, and concern.  It was founded in 
1985 by Christians in mainland China, but it has done a lot 
of things that do not have anything to do with religion, 
such as education, poverty relief, medical treatment, rural 
development disaster relief, etc.  For instance, in the 
organization's "Brightness Campaign," Amity Foundation 
actions helped recover the vision of 180,000 cataract 
patients. 
 
Greenpeace 
----------- 
¶31.  (U) Greenpeace is a global NGO founded in 1971 and 
headquartered in Amsterdam, Holland.  China's Greenpeace 
was founded in 1997 and headquartered in Hong Kong.  In the 
year 2005, Greenpeace worked on 4 areas in China:  climate 
change and recyclable energy, food safety and sustainable 
agriculture, prevention and control of toxics, protection 
of primitive forests.  In 2005 Greenpeace exacted a HP 
promise not to use toxic substances in their products; 
investigated APP's illegal destruction of forests in 
Hainan; exposed the illegal growing of genetically modified 
rice in Hubei; suggested to the Guangdong Government the 
construction of wind power plants, and so forth. 
 
SACOM: Recover the conscience of Mickey Mouse 
--------------------------------------------- - 
¶32.  (U) SACOM (Students and Scholars Against Corporate 
Misbehavior)conducted a special investigation of Disney 
that unveiled the low-cost secrets of authorized product 
manufacturing, requested the multinational company to 
increase the unit price of in its orders, and established a 
monitoring system based on workers democracy so as to 
enhance the level of corporate social responsibility.  On 
August 18, 2005, less than one month before the grand 
opening of the Hong Kong Disneyland, SACOM released a 
20,000-word report entitled "Recover the Conscience of 
Mickey Mouse," which was based on their half-year 
investigation of several Disney suppliers located in 
Dongguan and Shenzhen.  The report accused Disney suppliers 
of underpaying workers. 
 
Phoenix Satellite TV's "Oral History" program: Save memory 
 
GUANGZHOU 00005378  008 OF 008 
 
 
and reflect on history 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
¶33.  (U) When we are requesting our neighboring country to 
reflect on history, this program is fighting against the 
collective oblivion of the history of the Chinese nation 
itself.  The program allows some witnesses of history to 
come to the screen, and to tell the audience stories that 
have been hidden in their hearts for many years, bringing 
rich details to the Chinese people's memory of modern and 
contemporary history.  The program not only broadens the 
verbal space of the Chinese language media, but also serves 
as "first aid" to people's memory.  In this sense, "Oral 
History" has huge significance.  Since the launch of the 
program, it has followed strictly the Party's rules 
concerning publicity, and that only historical events 
officially approved for public commentary can be included 
in the program.  Yet, despite these limitations, the 
program still raises emotions of the audience. 
 
The Compiling Committee of the Asian History Book: 
cooperation on compiling history book reflects attitude at 
the non-governmental level 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
¶34.  (U) The publication of the "Modern and Contemporary 
History of Three Countries in East Asia" has a more 
important significance than the book itself.  It reflects 
the non-governmental level attitude in the future 
cooperation and exchanges in the East Asian region, and 
creates a model in solving historical conflicts among 
different nations -- that is, to gain common grounds 
through discussion. 
 
International Finance Corporation: Profits can be green 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
¶35.  (U) The International Finance Corporation (IFC) was 
founded in 1956 and is headquartered in Washington D.C.  A 
member of the World Bank Group, as a profit-making finance 
institute, IFC considers the elimination of negative 
impacts of investments on the environment and society as 
the necessary condition for investments, and sets this 
principle as a benchmark in the industry.  It sets up 
corporate social standards, environment standards and other 
standards, which have become its bottom line in selecting 
investment companies.  Enterprises that have only good 
financial indicators but do not pass third-party social 
audits and environment audits are rejected by IFC.  The 
performance of IFC and its partners such as the German- 
based DEG has added the color of green to an financial 
investment industry which normally adheres exclusively to 
the principle of "profit is everything." 
 
Beijing Medical Team: Prioritize medical service and public 
health in rural villages 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
¶36.  (U) Over the last 40 years, the Beijing Medical Team 
has single-mindedly conducted medical service in rural 
villages in Linzhou, Henan Province.  Many well-known 
doctors have worked in those rural villages.  They offer 
free diagnosis and free medical treatments to the local 
people, and made it a national-class base for esophagus 
cancer prevention and control. 
 
DONG