06GUANGZHOU11043
Short March:  Shantou -- Still in the Dark On IPR,
Mon Apr 10 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Guangzhou
VZCZCXRO7378
RR RUEHAG RUEHCN RUEHDF RUEHGH RUEHIK RUEHLZ
DE RUEHGZ #1043/01 1000521
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 100521Z APR 06
FM AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4426
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUANGZHOU 011043 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EB, R, EAP/CM, EAP/PD, DRL 
STATE PASS USTR 
USDOC FOR 4420/ITA/MAC/MCQUEEN, CELICO, DAS LEVINE 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KIPR ECON SCUL EINV PHUM KPAO PINR CH
SUBJECT: Short March:  Shantou -- Still in the Dark On IPR, 
But Students OK on Innovation 
 
REF: Guangzhou 10542 and previous 
 
(U) This document is sensitive but unclassified.  Please 
protect accordingly.  Not for release outside U.S. 
Government Channels.  Not for internet publication. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  Shantou officials state that despite 
its notoriety in the past as a haven for the production of 
counterfeit goods, the city has reformed dramatically in 
intellectual property rights (IPR).  Through education, new 
laws, and law enforcement, Shantou is cracking down on 
producers, sellers, and purchasers of counterfeit goods in 
the city and changing their views to more forthrightly 
support IPR protection.  Despite grand sounding plans, 
Shantou officials did not provide many details of their 
plans or of their implementation and blamed most IPR 
infringements on "uneducated peasants" rather than on 
sophisticated manufacturers.  Congenoffs also had a lively 
discussion on innovation and IPR with students at Shantou 
University.  End Summary. 
 
"Shantou Back on the IPR Wagon" 
-------------------------------- 
¶2.  (SBU) Shantou is a regional level city in Eastern 
Guangdong. In addition to being an important historic and 
regional port, it has a nefarious reputation for IPR 
violations.  Many counterfeit goods are produced and sold 
in the city.  The director of the Shantou Intellectual 
Property Rights Bureau (IPB), Zheng Xingguo, and the 
director of the Market Order Rectification and 
Standardization Office (MORO), Zheng Guimu, stated that 
protecting IPR is a top priority of City officials.  The 
IPB has focused on educating locals about IPR issues in an 
attempt to curb IPR violations. The IPB promotes IPR 
awareness by visiting schools, running TV and radio ads, 
and requiring public servants to take tests on IPR issues. 
The IPB has established an IPR foundation for teenagers in 
the city and strongly promotes World IPR Day.  The city 
government has also encouraged various business groups to 
establish their own IPR associations.  Shantou is one of 
the few cities in China, which has its own IPR court 
capable of trying cases locally.  The IPB says that despite 
a modest budget, the bureau has made great strides in 
combating IPR infringement in the municipality. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The IPB also claims to offer mediation between 
companies with disputes over IPR issues.  The IPB 
representative told a story of how an U.S. company was 
upset when it discovered that a local company was 
counterfeiting its product.  The IPB then intervened and 
convinced the local counterfeiter to break the mold used 
for production and everyone was then happy.  However, when 
Congenoffs requested more details, specifically the name of 
the U.S. company involved, the IPB representative said he 
would have to provide these details at a later date.  City 
officials mostly blamed IPR infringements on "uneducated 
peasants" rather than on sophisticated manufacturers. 
Officials say that its urban dwellers are much too 
sophisticated to violate IPR laws. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The IPB is also encouraging Shantou companies to 
file for patents as a way to encourage innovation among 
local firms. The bureau has set up a website, which 
contains patent information from the U.S., the E.U., and 
Japan.  Local companies can search this website in order to 
see if an idea has already been patented. Shantou won the 
designation of "China's City of Brands" in 2005 from the 
central government.  Shantou has four "famous" brand names 
and the local government is working hard to develop more. 
 
More -- Or Less -- On MORO 
-------------------------- 
¶5.  (SBU) MORO Director Zheng said that his office in 
reforming the market, and "supervising" IPR enforcement. 
In Beijing, MORO falls under the authority of the Ministry 
of Commerce, but in Shantou it is under the authority of 
the local executive office.  The MORO representative says 
this gives them more authority and flexibility when dealing 
with IPR issues.  The Shantou Executive Vice-Mayor heads 
 
GUANGZHOU 00011043  002 OF 002 
 
 
MORO locally and another Vice Mayor and the Secretary 
General are both deputy directors of the organization. 
MORO also coordinates efforts between other agencies and 
the IPB.  The goal of MORO is to ensure the implementation 
of IPR tasks set forth by the central government. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) MORO has four main duties in Shantou: 
researching and drafting IPR action plans; organizing 
enforcement activities at the local level; monitoring 
complaints from companies; and conducting temporary IPR 
enforcement campaigns.  Zheng could not give any examples, 
however, of any intervention by MORO in specific cases that 
had any impact on their resolution. 
 
Shantou U. Students Get It and Don't Get It 
------------------------------------------- 
¶7. (SBU) Moving to Shantou University, Congenoffs addressed 
approximately 125 university mostly law students on the 
importance of protecting IPR and the U.S. experience in 
developing an innovation culture.  In the good-humored 
question and answer session, the students clearly 
demonstrated their confidence that China would become a 
highly innovative society through taking risks and 
developing IPR themselves.   Nevertheless, not a few 
students argued, for example, that China should be given a 
grace period so that it can develop its version of Windows 
and Oracle (we responded that the world will not stand 
still and that China would fall behind if it wanted to 
reinvent some software) or that pharmaceuticals should not 
be as expensive as they are (we noted the high research 
costs in developing drugs and the high failure rate).  At 
the end of the event, many students expressed their keen 
interest in the American IPR development and protection 
system that buttresses perhaps the most innovative society 
in the world, with indications of their interest in 
studying these and other topics in the U.S. 
 
Comment: "Those Pesky Peasants Again" 
-------------------------------------- 
¶8.  (SBU) On the surface, government officials in the 
Shantou area appear to be making progress in the area of 
protecting IPR.  It was not clear, however, how well the 
government is implementing these plans, and officials seem 
to be short on details.  Shantou officials did say that 
they arrested two IPR violators in 2005 in addition to 
their aforementioned example of helping a U.S. company work 
out their IPR problems, but the Shantou officials were not 
forthcoming with any details about these events or the 
parties involved.  The officials also kept stressing that 
urban inhabitants of Shantou are very respectful of IPR and 
that all IPR infringers are peasants from the countryside 
who are not educated well enough to know better.  They 
repeated this point again and again, and used it as an 
excuse for any shortcomings. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The next leg of the "short march" took the 
Consular party to Jieyang, one of the most densely 
populated prefectural cities in Guangdong and seemingly 
devoid of the erratic swagger to be found in Shantou. 
 
Dong