06HELSINKI1037
DAS PEKALA,S OCTOBER 4 MEETINGS WITH FINNISH MFA
Thu Oct 12 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Helsinki
VZCZCXRO6775
RR RUEHDBU RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHHE #1037/01 2850845
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 120845Z OCT 06
FM AMEMBASSY HELSINKI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2589
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVEC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 HELSINKI 001037 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/10/2016 
TAGS: PREL SENV ENRG ECON FI AF GT VE RS GG
SUBJECT: DAS PEKALA,S OCTOBER 4 MEETINGS WITH FINNISH MFA 
OFFICIALS 
 
 
Classified By: Econ Chief Jane Messenger for Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D) 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
¶1. (SBU) EUR DAS Mark Pekala visited Helsinki October 4-6 to 
participate in the Nordic-Baltic Chiefs of Mission Conference 
and to consult with Finnish officials on bilateral and 
transatlantic issues.  In separate meetings with Finnish 
Political Director Pilvi-Sisko Vierros-Villeneuve and 
Director General for the Americas and Asia Elina Kalkku, 
Pekala discussed Finland,s EU Presidency, the Middle East, 
Kosovo, North Korea, NATO, Georgia, and the October 24-25 
U.S.-EU High Level Dialogue on Climate Change, Clean Energy 
and Sustainable Development  (HLD), which will be hosted by 
Finland in Helsinki.  Vierros-Villeneuve gave an emphatic 
explanation of why Finland was unable to provide AK-47s to 
Afghanistan.  Pekala raised U.S. support for Guatemala,s bid 
for a UNSC seat and the status of the visa waiver program. 
End Summary. 
 
----------------------- 
Finland,s EU Presidency 
----------------------- 
¶2. (SBU) Vierros-Villeneuve said that Finland,s EU 
Presidency had been "off-track" since the Lebanon crisis 
broke in July.  Finnish priorities had been subsumed to some 
extent by the situation in the Middle East.  Now that the 
crisis was entering a new phase, the GoF hoped to refocus the 
Presidency on upcoming events such at the EU-India Summit 
(October) and the EU-Russia Summit  (November). 
 
----------- 
Middle East 
----------- 
¶3. (SBU) Pekala noted that Secretary Rice was in the Middle 
East to take stock of the situation, not to broker any 
particular agreement.  Vierros-Villeneuve agreed that her 
visit was important, and opined that support for Abbas was 
imperative at the present moment.  She said that she was 
particularly pleased that the Secretary had taken up the 
access/movement issue since the GoF was concerned Gaza would 
collapse unless progress was made in this area soon. 
Vierros-Villeneuve reported that when Abbas had requested 
additional EU assistance, Commissioner for External Relations 
Ferrero-Waldner had balked. This was unhelpful, and member 
states needed to come forward with assistance at this 
critical time.  DAS Pekala agreed that it was important not 
to punish the Palestinian people, but instead to engage in 
creative thinking about how to help them without supporting 
the current regime. 
 
------------------------- 
No AK-47s for Afghanistan 
------------------------- 
¶4. (C) Vierros-Villeneuve said categorically that Finland 
would not provide surplus AK-47s to Afghanistan.  She 
emphasized that myriad problems made it impossible ranging 
from political considerations, to re-export license 
difficulties with Germany, to domestic legislation.  Finnish 
public opinion, as well as Finland,s parliament, would 
overwhelmingly oppose any transfer.  Vierros-Villeneuve 
worried that Finland,s leadership of the UN Small Arms 
Treaty process would also be compromised, particularly with 
its NGO partners.  There were licensing problems, since the 
arms originally came from (East) Germany.  Finland would have 
to secure a German re-export license and it was unlikely the 
EU,s Code of Conduct would allow this.  Finally, Moscow was 
already complaining about other AK-47 re-export issues, and 
transfer of the weapons in question would create further 
difficulties for Finland with Russia.  Vierros-Villeneuve 
noted, however, that Finland was interested in exploring 
other opportunities for assisting Afghan forces.  Pekala said 
he understood these serious obstacles; he asked for more 
specific information on the export-license issue, on domestic 
legislation, and on the number of AK-47s held by the Finns. 
He said he hoped to continue this conversation with Finland. 
 
------------- 
Serbia/Kosovo 
------------- 
¶5. (C) Vierros-Villeneuve asked about UN Special Envoy for 
Kosovo Ahtisaari,s report at a meeting of EU Defense 
Ministers that the U.S. now believed the timeline for an 
agreement on Kosovo should be extended given the current 
difficulties.  Pekala replied that the U.S. continued to seek 
a solution before the end of the year.  During a recent trip 
to Belgrade, A/S Fried delivered a clear and unequivocal 
message to the Serbs that there was no going back.  The past 
(and the status quo) are unacceptable.  The only option is to 
move forward.  Vierros-Villeneuve agreed that there had to be 
a "European future" for the Serbs, including in the EU and in 
 
HELSINKI 00001037  002 OF 003 
 
 
other transatlantic institutions.  For its part, Finland was 
pushing forward visa facilitation for young Serbs so that 
they feel part of Europe and stakeholders in its future.  She 
added that Kosovo would be a top agenda item at the upcoming 
GAERC in Brussels. 
 
----------- 
North Korea 
----------- 
¶6. (SBU) Vierros-Villeneuve said that the ASEM meeting had 
highlighted for the EU the importance of the North Korea 
nuclear issue for its Asian partners.  The international 
community needs to send Pyongyang a clear message that 
threats to carry out a nuclear test - especially with a 
showdown with Iran looming - are unacceptable.  If North 
Korea actually carried out a test, it should be severely 
condemned, and real consequences should result.  (Note: The 
EU subsequently released a statement condemning North 
Korea,s nuclear test.) 
 
------- 
Georgia 
------- 
¶7. (SBU) Vierros-Villeneuve agreed with Pekala about the 
seriousness of the situation in Georgia and the need to show 
support for Georgian sovereignty.  She said that upon his 
recent return from Tbilisi, Finnish FM Tuomioja told Russian 
FM Lavrov that Moscow,s response was disproportionate. 
Vierros-Villeneuve believed that a strong message also needed 
to be sent to the Georgians that the time was not right to 
challenge Russia.  Vierros-Villeneuve observed that the 
Russian were feeling strong right now, and that Georgia had 
developed an unhelpful tendency to present the EU with 
successive "faits accomplis" when bucking Moscow.  DAS Pekala 
agreed about counseling restraint on Georgia,s part, but 
said Tbilisi needed to know that the door was open to EU and 
NATO membership and a European future. 
 
---- 
NATO 
---- 
¶8. (C) Vierros-Villeneuve said that Finland had agreed to 
postpone release of the Finnish-Swedish enhanced partnership 
proposal until the new Swedish government was formed; the 
proposal would carry more weight with the new government,s 
backing.  DAS Pekala agreed this could be helpful, but 
cautioned against waiting too long. 
 
------------------- 
High Level Dialogue 
------------------- 
¶9. (U) MFA Director General for Asia and the Americas Elina 
Kalkku summarized preparations for the October 24-25 High 
Level Dialogue on Climate Change, Clean Energy and 
Sustainable Development, noting that it would be hosted 
jointly by Finnish Minister for Environment Enestam and 
Minister of Trade and Industry Pekkarinen with Commission 
participation by DGTREN, DGENV and DGRELEX.  The Finns will 
also invite the German Ministers of Environment and Energy. 
Hinting at bureaucratic difficulties, Kalkku observed that it 
had been "quite an innovation" to gather environment and 
energy officials together, but agreed that it made perfect 
sense given the natural synergies between energy and climate 
change.  Pekala thanked Finland for its efforts and 
particularly welcomed the co-chair role for the Ministers of 
Environment and Trade and Industry. 
 
----------------------- 
UNSC Seat for Guatemala 
----------------------- 
¶10. (C) Kalkku stated that Finland would of course vote for 
Guatemala and although there had been no formal consultation 
among EU member states, she felt quite confident that the 
entire EU would vote for Guatemala.  She did note with 
interest, however, that a recent visitor from Uruguay had 
said that Latin America may not favor either Venezuela or 
Guatemala and may look for a third Latin American candidate. 
She also acknowledged that there was EU concern that Africa 
would support Venezuela because of strong oil ties. 
 
----------- 
Visa Waiver 
----------- 
¶11. (U) In response to Pekala,s request for an update on 
visa waiver discussions within the EU, Kalkku said that she 
just received the Commission report that will form the basis 
of Council discussion.  She acknowledged that the move to 
require diplomatic visas as a proposed countermeasure was a 
possibility.  Pekala briefed on the visa waiver roadmap 
process and underscored that it was a serious and meaningful 
effort designed to move countries in the right direction. 
Kalkku advocated for any small step, such as Canada had 
 
HELSINKI 00001037  003 OF 003 
 
 
recently taken with Estonia. 
HYATT