06HELSINKI8
FINLAND:  PRESIDENT'S NEW YEAR ADDRESS
Wed Jan 04 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Helsinki
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS HELSINKI 000008 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PLEASE PASS TO EUR/NB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV FI
SUBJECT: FINLAND:  PRESIDENT'S NEW YEAR ADDRESS 
 
 
¶1.  (U)  President Tarja Halonen's New Year's Day speech-- 
which also serves as Finland's de facto state of the union 
address-- focused on what she termed the "increasing 
disparity in income levels in Finland."  Halonen said that 
Finland has been a winner in the emerging global economy, and 
that the country's wealth has increased correspondingly; 
however, this newfound affluence is not being distributed 
evenly among all sectors of society.  Citing continued 
unemployment and a wider gap between haves and have-nots, 
Halonen cautioned Finns that "We must take better care of 
social justice."  She also expressed hope that Finnish 
companies transferring jobs and operations abroad would 
"remember that they are Finnish and ...maintain close ties 
with Finland."  Despite such globalization-related concerns, 
Halonen asserted that the fundamental structure of Finland's 
social welfare state was sound. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Halonen restated her strong support for the United 
Nations, emphasizing the UN's role as one of the cornerstones 
of Finnish foreign policy.  She also said that relations with 
Russia, the EU and U.S. were strong, further commenting that 
Finnish-U.S. relations were "running smoothly."  Looking 
ahead to Finland's second-term 2006 EU Presidency, she said 
that Finland hoped to promote international security, 
economic growth, employment, social justice, and the 
environment. 
 
¶3.  (U)  Comment:  Halonen's address, doubling as campaign 
speech with a presidential election only two weeks away, hit 
on familiar themes:  concern over social inequality, the 
necessity of ameliorating globalization's negative 
ramifications, and the health of Finland's external 
relations.  The income disparity issue, which was also raised 
during recent televised presidential debates, highlights the 
unique perspective of the Nordic welfare states.  By most 
international measures, income distribution in Finland is one 
of the most egalitarian in the developed world, and the 
oft-mentioned "disparities" involve increases in real income 
across the board, but with larger increases in the top income 
brackets.  However, social equality issues have real 
resonance in Finland where social support is beginning to 
falter, the taxpayer is at maximum stress and there is no 
real revenue source for additional spending. Also, in social 
democratic Finland, individual displays of wealth are likely 
to provoke disapproving frowns unlike the envious or 
appreciative smiles it might elicit elsewhere.  Halonen's 
remarks about strong relations with the U.S. were clearly 
calibrated to answer foreign policy critics who frequently 
cite less than optimal Finnish-U.S. ties (in their view) as 
one of her chief shortcomings. 
HYATT