06ISTANBUL598
ISTANBUL CONFERENCE SHOWCASES INCREASED POLICE
Thu Apr 20 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Istanbul
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ISTANBUL 000598 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TU BO MD KCRM PGOV KJUS
SUBJECT: ISTANBUL CONFERENCE SHOWCASES INCREASED POLICE 
SERIOUSNESS ON TRAFFICKING 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  Police chiefs and high-level officers from 
throughout Turkey participated in a three-day workshop in 
Istanbul from April 12-14 on combating trafficking in 
persons.  In Turkey,s case, most victims are women lured 
from eastern European countries by the promise of work, and 
then forced into sexual slavery.  Presentations by Europol, 
Scotland Yard, and other law enforcement shared best 
practices with the officers.  The workshop, organized by the 
International Organization for Migration (IOM) with 
sponsorship from the Swedish Consulate in Istanbul, showcased 
Turkey,s seriousness in tackling this growing crime-- 550 
victims were identified in the last two years.  Though 
Turkish police officers still need additional training and 
resources to deal with trafficking, the Europol 
representative told us that Turkey has made a  quantum 
leap, in the last two years.  End Summary. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Turkish National Legislation and Prosecution 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Faruk Kurtoglu, Istanbul prosecutor and Ministry of 
Justice representative, began the program by outlining 
changes in Turkish law that have been made to combat 
trafficking.  For example, a crime was previously defined as 
a violation of the law; after reforms in 2005,  unfair, 
acts are also criminalized: Article 80 of the Turkish penal 
code now categorizes exploitation, threats, coercion or 
forced labor as punishable.  This is a direct response to the 
growing human trafficking problem.  He also cited the 2003 
legal reform, whereby a foreigner must be married to a Turk 
for three years before qualifying for a Turkish passport as 
another measure that will help combat trafficking by making 
it more difficult to smuggle people into the country. 
 
--------------------- 
Prosecution Rates Low 
--------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Prosecution of this crime, however, remains low, as 
prosecutors and judges are not yet aware of the 2005 
legislative reforms.  Participants predicted that planned 
training in the coming months should increase this awareness 
and thereby also increase prosecution rates.  Traffickers are 
suspected to be Turks acting with Eastern European 
accomplices.  A recent trend of concern is that traffickers 
are increasingly women who had themselves been trafficked. 
Two policemen are currently on trial for trafficking in 
persons, but it is not clear to what degree corrupt officials 
are part of the problem. 
 
---------------------------- 
International Best Practices 
---------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) Steve Harvey, head of Europol,s trafficking persons 
department, provided technical training throughout the 
workshop.  He explained the EU,s approach to treating 
victims of trafficking and prosecuting traffickers.  The 
Europol framework places women,s welfare above prosecuting 
criminals at any cost, arguing that the state should not take 
action unless victims desire it.  Above all, he expressed the 
need to treat victims humanely given that this crime by its 
very nature violates human rights.  In discussing how to 
treat a victim, Harvey told the group to "speak to her as you 
would want someone to speak to your wife or daughter." 
 
¶5. (U) The leader of a six-member Swedish Parliamentarian 
delegation echoed this humanist approach.  In Sweden, 
trafficking in persons and prostitution are on the decline 
following a concerted effort to heighten penalties. 
Traffickers therefore no longer find Sweden an easy 
environment, and have chosen to move elsewhere.  The Member 
of Parliament contrasted this approach with that of Germany 
and the Netherlands, where legalized prostitution has 
produced concomitant increase in prostitution's incidence. 
She called for greater sanctions against traffickers, which 
produced a discussion by the audience of the merits of the 
Swedish approach. 
 
---------------------- 
Audience Participation 
---------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) The vast majority of 35 police participants were 
attentive and focused throughout the workshop, asking 
practical questions about how they could better handle the 
situations they face on a day-to-day basis.  In one instance, 
a participant suggested that outlawing prostitution simply 
pushed it underground, making it more dangerous for health 
and safety, and harder to combat.  Another suggested that 
Turkey is more of a transit country and not as much of a 
destination country for trafficking in persons as other 
countries in the region-- according to this view, Turkey is 
therefore already devoting sufficient resources to combating 
this type of crime, and other issues should have a higher 
priority. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Participants also questioned a Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs presenter about whether the MFA was in fact taking 
steps to help the police force face this challenge.  They 
felt that the MFA expected them to fight this crime but did 
not help cover the costs of shelters, medical exams, etc. to 
properly assist rescued women.  The MFA representative 
responded that the GOT had sent a letter to public hospitals 
stating hospitals must provide medical examinations for free, 
and assured the audience she would report back to her 
superiors that there was a glitch in the implementation. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) The high-level attendance-- both in terms of number 
of participants and expertise of speakers-- showcases the 
Government of Turkey,s recognition of the seriousness of the 
problem and the need to address it effectively.  Police 
chiefs and officers in the room were attentive and serious, 
conveying a professionalism and commitment.  While welcoming 
input on how Europe addresses the problem, they were also 
willing to voice their own concerns, experience, and 
challenges.  Such a free exchange of points of view can only 
strengthen Turkish officials, ability to combat trafficking 
and assist its victims.  Of course, the proof of the pudding 
will be GOT seriousness when it comes to prosecuting actual 
cases.  End Comment. 
JONES