06JAKARTA13229
INTERFAITH YOUTH DELIVER POTUS LETTER TO AMBASSADOR
Fri Nov 17 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXRO1865
RR RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM
DE RUEHJA #3229/01 3210659
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 170659Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2097
INFO RUEHZS/ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS
RUEHJA/ISLAMIC CONFERENCE COLLECTIVE
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 0092
RUEHWL/AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON 1137
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JAKARTA 013229 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM SOCI KISL ID
SUBJECT: INTERFAITH YOUTH DELIVER POTUS LETTER TO AMBASSADOR 
 
¶1.   In advance of President Bush's upcoming visit to 
Indonesia, a group of Indonesian interfaith youth leaders met 
with the Ambassador to present a letter to the President 
(full text in para 6).  The delegates represented all of 
Indonesia's major religions:  Islam (the youth wings of 
mass-based Muslim organizations Muhammadiyah and Nahdlatul 
Ulama); Christianity (Catholic Youth and the Protestant 
Indonesian Young Christians' Movement); Buddhism (the Young 
Generation of Indonesian Buddhists); Confucianism (Confucian 
Youth); and Hinduism (the Indonesian Hindu Youth Association). 
 
¶2.  After thanking the Ambassador for receiving them, a 
delegate read the organizations' letter to President Bush. 
While condemning the September 11th terrorist attacks and 
expressing support for eradicating terrorism, the missive 
characterized the war on terror as "irrational and 
unacceptable," adding that "war is not the answer."  The 
group further contended that the U.S. "occupation" of 
Afghanistan and Iraq might result in a "new generation of 
terrorist(s)."  They urged the USG to put an end to 
"hegemonic and double standard policies;" cease using 
military action against independent states; promote a 
"culture of peace" for dialogue and mediation-based conflict 
resolution; and work with other nations on UN reform so that 
it may "play a more effective role in maintaining 
international peace and security and development."  The 
letter concluded in saying that the signatories do not hate 
Americans, but simply disagree with U.S. foreign policy. 
 
¶3.  The Ambassador welcomed the group and promised to forward 
their letter.  He did take exception, however, with the 
delegation's contention that U.S. foreign policy has been 
destabilizing.  He argued that since World War II, U.S. 
foreign policy has focused on improving global stability 
through democratization and economic development, founding 
the United Nations precisely as a vehicle for implementing 
this.  He noted the particular success of U.S. foreign policy 
in encouraging European reunification and fostering economic 
development and democracy in East Asia.  With regard to 
Afghanistan, the Ambassador said he had no qualms about 
deposing a regime that harbored a terrorist group responsible 
for killing more than 3000 people on September 11, adding 
that the Afghan people welcomed the Taliban's demise.  On 
Iraq, the Ambassador refuted the groups' claim that the U.S. 
is an occupying force, emphasizing that U.S. troops will 
leave as soon as the country is stabilized. 
 
¶4.  The Muslim Ansor Youth representative commented that in 
his view, terrorism must be fought throughout the world. 
However, he suggested, many groups believe that the U.S. uses 
the war on terror to exert political pressure 
inappropriately.  He asked that the U.S. see Indonesia as a 
friend, and that the bilateral relationship be a symbiotic 
one.  The Protestant leader acknowledged the common interests 
between the predominately Christian U.S. and the Indonesian 
Christian community.  He cautioned, though, that U.S. actions 
sometimes had negative repercussions for Christians in 
Indonesia, and said that although they may be America's 
correligionists, Indonesian Christians were Indonesians 
first.  He hoped that the U.S. and Indonesia could work 
together on what he called the most important issues: 
poverty and education. 
 
¶5.  The Ambassador responded that the U.S.'s relationship 
with Indonesian is not based on counterterrorism, although it 
is an important aspect of U.S. policy.  Rather, the U.S. has 
a strong relationship with Indonesia because it is the 
world's fourth largest country, and the third and fourth 
biggest countries must work together.  He stressed USG 
support for Government of Indonesia policies, and said that 
the U.S.'s number one priority is ensuring that Indonesia 
succeeds as a prosperous democracy that is a friend on 
international issues.  To this end, U.S. assistance to 
Indonesia is focused on health, education and other 
Indonesian priorities.  He added that the U.S. does not 
expect that Indonesia will agree with us on everything, but 
said that is acceptable in a democracy. 
 
¶6.  Text of letter. 
 
Jakarta, November 17th, 2006 
 
His Excellency 
George W. Bush 
President of the United States of America 
 
Dear Mr. President, 
 
First of all, we would like to express our gratitude to Your 
 
JAKARTA 00013229  002 OF 002 
 
 
Excellency for taking the time to read this letter.  On 
behalf of Indonesian Interfaith Youth Organisations we 
strongly disagree with your hegemonic foreign policies which 
worsening global world order.  There is a hope by the end of 
the Cold War, marked by the fall of Berlin Wall, US would 
take an initiative to create new world order that ensure the 
establishment of a more civilised, just and peaceful world. 
But soon the hope had proven untrue. 
 
For your information, we condemned in the strongest possible 
manner the September 11, 2001 tragedy, a terrorist attack 
causing death and injuries of thousands of innocent Americans 
and other nationalities.  We are in line with you that 
terrorism is the enemy of humankind that should be conquered 
together.  However, your campaign on "War on Terror" that 
justifies the war in Afghanistan and Iraq are irrational and 
unacceptable.  Your Excellency must realise that war is not 
the answer.  One can not democratize a country with 
undemocratic ways.  Your wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, in 
fact, have been creating culture of violence and hatred which 
in long run will bring disadvantages to America. 
Furthermore, Iraq and Afghanistan as your occupation 
territories could turn into fertile soils to cultivate new 
generation of terrorist. 
 
In this regard we strongly urge American government to: 
 
¶1. End your hegemonic and double standard foreign policies 
that suffer, especially, developing countries. 
 
¶2. Stop invasion and aggression as well as using military 
actions to any independence states. 
 
¶3. Promote a culture of peace to resolve disputes among 
states and nations through dialogue and mediation. 
 
¶4. Take serious initiatives together with other countries to 
continually reform the United Nations so that it could play a 
more effective role in maintaining international peace and 
security and development. 
 
Finally, we welcome you to Indonesia and we do hope that our 
voices be heard.  We never hate our American friends; we just 
disagree with your unjust foreign policies. 
 
Best Regard, 
Indonesian Youth Religious Organisations 
 
¶M. Izzul Muslimin, Chairman, Muhammadiyah Youth 
 
¶A. Malik Haramain, Secretary General, Ansor Youth (Nahdlatul 
Ulama) 
 
¶I. Nyoman Gde Agus Asrama, Chairman, Indonesian Hindu Youth 
Association 
 
Ponijan Liaw, Chairman, Young Generation of Indonesian 
Buddhists 
 
Sahat Sinaga, Chairman, Indonesian Young Christians' Movement 
 
M.T. Natalis Situmorang, Chaiman, Catholic Youth 
 
Kristan, Chairman, Confucian Youth 
 
End text. 
 
 
PASCOE