06KABUL5939
SAYYAF UNDER SIEGE: LAND DEALS AND HUMAN RIGHTS IN
Sun Dec 24 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO3262
PP RUEHDBU RUEHIK RUEHYG
DE RUEHBUL #5939/01 3580542
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 240542Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5048
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVE
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3462
RHMFIUU/COMSOCCENT MACDILL AFB FL
RHMFIUU/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KABUL 005939 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR SCA/FO DAS GASTRIGHT, SCA/A, S/CRS, SA/PB, S/CT 
STATE PASS TO USAID FOR AID/ANE, AID/DCHA/DG 
NSC FOR AHARRIMAN 
OSD FOR KIMMITT 
CENTCOM FOR CFC-A, CG CJTF-76, POLAD, JICCENT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PINR PINS PREL SOCI AF
SUBJECT: SAYYAF UNDER SIEGE: LAND DEALS AND HUMAN RIGHTS IN 
AFGHANISTAN 
 
¶1. (SBU) Begin summary: Member of Parliament and former 
warlord Abdulrab al-Rasul Sayyaf has come under serious 
attack in the media because of allegations of land-grabbing 
as well as for his role in the civil war that almost 
destroyed Kabul. Truth and facts in Afghanistan are always 
difficult to determine, but Sayyaf's position as a major 
jihad figure and his prominence in the Parliament make the 
case against him especially complicated. The old warrior is 
on the defensive, and whatever happens as a result of the 
media attacks will resonate through Afghanistan's very 
powerful mujaheddin circles. End summary. 
 
ACCUSATIONS OF HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES 
 
¶2. (SBU) On 20 December, one day following renewed publicity 
over the release of the Human Rights Watch report (SEPTEL) 
listing Abdulrab al-Rasul Sayyaf as prominent in the pantheon 
of present-day Afghan political leaders who had allegedly 
committed serious abuses in the past and should be put on 
trial, Poloff was called to meet with Sayyaf personally.  The 
private meeting lasted more than an hour, and Sayyaf opened 
with a long monologue aimed against AIHRC (Afghan Independent 
Human Rights Commission) Director Sima Simar, whom Sayyaf 
assumes was somehow behind the Human Rights Watch report.  He 
believed that Simar was a Maoist and had instigated a 
personal campaign to discredit him and all the former 
mujaheddin. "She has called all the mujaheddin dogs, and has 
insulted the Afghan nation", he claimed. Sayyaf insisted that 
Sima Simar was a member of what he said was a 
Maoist-influenced RAWA (Revolutionary Afghan Women's 
Association), and that she was using her present position as 
Director of AIHRC to both attack former mujaheddin and to try 
to destabilize the present Afghan government. As his "proof" 
that the Human Rights Watch Report was Communist-inspired, 
Sayyaf noted that all the names of alleged human rights 
abusers were mujaheddin, and that none of the Communist 
leaders "who killed thousands and thousands of Afghans" were 
listed. He said that this was a conflict between "those who 
believed in God, and those who did not". Sayyaf described the 
personal sacrifices he had made during the jihad, including 
years of enforced separation from his family, and the death 
of his mother in Kabul after he had not been able to see her 
for many years. It was clear that he felt deeply aggrieved 
over what he viewed as a personal attack in the media and in 
the Human Rights Watch Report. 
 
ACCUSATIONS OF LAND GRABBING: WHAT IS TRUTH? 
 
¶3. (SBU) Over the past few months, Sayyaf has come under 
strong criticism in the Afghan media for his alleged role in 
a major land controversy in Paghman district of Kabul 
Province, and the accusations have surfaced inside the 
Parliament. At the request of MP Seyyed Ishaq Gailani, Poloff 
met with a large group representing the allegedly 
disenfranchised Paghman landowners. Their version of the land 
squabble, which involves 7500 jerib (equivalent to 
approximately 3705 acres) is that the land in question was 
originally given to the local people (all Tajiks) by the then 
Shah, Amanullah Khan, and that the local owners had decided 
recently that the common area should be subdivided among the 
six districts claiming ownership. They entrusted the original 
deeds to Sayyaf - as a highly respected Pashtun 
non-interested party - in order for him to divide it among 
the large number of claimants. According to the delegation, 
Sayyaf had repeatedly delayed responding to their request for 
an equitable division among the six affected Tajik districts. 
Land values in the area continued to rise (the area is within 
easy reach of Kabul), and the original claimants realized 
that parcels of the affected land were being sold off and 
otherwise developed by Sayyaf's nephew, Momtaz, and by 
Sayyaf's close colleague, Sher Alam, the former governor of 
Ghazni and deputy to Sayyaf in the jihad-era Ittihad Party. 
The delegation said that the present Minister of Interior 
(Zarar Moqbel) and the Kabul Chief of Police (Guzar) also had 
 
KABUL 00005939  002 OF 003 
 
 
financial interests in the land development and were 
supporting Sher Alam. When Sayyaf continued to obfuscate, 
demonstrations and armed clashes resulted, and several local 
residents were arrested by the police. These demonstrations, 
which resulted in deaths, injuries and the public destruction 
of posters of Sayyaf, were covered by TOLO television, as was 
a demonstration in front of the Parliament building. UNAMA 
got involved, and Kabul Governor Din Mohammad allegedly 
investigated and came out in support of the local residents. 
The local residents claim that the police with whom the 
locals fought were brought in from Ghazni by Sher Alam.  The 
Paghman delegation added that the Supreme Court, various 
members of Parliament and even Karzai's office have all been 
involved in the ongoing (and increasingly complicated) 
investigations, taking various sides on the issue. The end 
result was that despite official findings in the local 
residents' favor, the land ownership was still in question, 
parcels continue to be sold off by Sher Alem, there have been 
a number of local residents killed and twelve prominent local 
residents are in police and/or in National Directorate of 
Security (NDS) custody. 
 
¶4. (SBU) A second version of events was given Poloff by 
Sayyaf's political advisor, Kutwal, in a private meeting. He 
claimed that the land had been sold to Sayyaf's nephew and to 
Sher Alam several years ago by the ostensible owners when the 
prices were very low. The two new owners had started to 
develop the area and sell off parcels, but more recently as 
land values in the area rose steeply the people who had sold 
the land decided they wanted to benefit from the new prices. 
He claimed that the question of who actually owned the land 
and whether the sale to Sher Alam and Sayyaf's nephew was 
valid had gone to various courts as well as to the Attorney 
General's office, but the people who opposed the original 
sale had not been satisfied and had started to demonstrate in 
order to get the land returned or to get more money on top of 
their original sales price. 
 
¶5. (SBU) On December 20, Sayyaf gave yet a third version of 
the chain of events regarding the land.  He explained that 
the problem originated when six Tajik districts started to 
squabble over the disposition of the 7,500 jerib of common 
land, and noted that as relatively recent residents in the 
area, neither he nor his family had any claim to this land. 
The six districts sent representatives to him to ask that he 
hold the various deeds until the various clans could reach a 
consensus over who owned what.  He accepted the trust despite 
initial misgivings, because the local district governor 
pleaded with him that it was the only way to stop the feuding 
among the six Tajik groups. Time passed and the six continued 
to squabble, until one family approached the AIHRC and TOLO 
TV to complain that "Sayyaf was stealing their land". Sayyaf 
says he tried to give all the deeds entrusted to him back, 
but a series of delegations kept insisting he keep them 
pending a full resolution of the problem. Events snowballed, 
and the dissident family worked with AIHRC and TOLO TV to 
arrange demonstrations in Paghman, causing Sayyaf to insist 
that the six original delegations retrieve their deeds, thus 
leading to accusations that he had given the deeds to his 
fellow Ittihad party members, and on and on.  Sayyaf claimed 
that TOLO TV had announced the demonstrations in advance in 
order to attract crowds, and that AIHRC employees had 
actually taken part in the protests rather than simply 
witnessing them as neutral observers. Sayyaf appeared 
heartily tired of the whole chain of events, and ended by 
saying "I swear to God that I do not even have one dollar of 
my own money. Everything, even the clothes I am wearing, 
belongs to the Party". 
 
COMMENT 
 
¶6. (SBU) Sayyaf, despite his controversial past, is a widely 
respected figure in Afghan mujaheddin circles, and has played 
a strong pro-government role in the Parliament.  When he 
 
KABUL 00005939  003 OF 003 
 
 
speaks out on issues in the plenary sessions, the room falls 
silent and he is given careful attention. His comments tend 
to be succinct and erudite. As Chairman of the Wolesi Jirga 
Foreign Affairs Committee, he has done much to maintain 
contact and good relations with foreign embassies in Kabul 
and with USG officials. That being said, he has many enemies 
in the Parliament and on the general Afghan political stage. 
He is also highly controversial because of his role in the 
jihad and especially because of his prominence in the violent 
civil war that erupted after the fall of the Najibullah 
government. Sayyaf is feeling beleaguered and very much on 
the defensive, but whatever the facts are, attacks on him 
will be seen as an attack on the mujaheddin as a whole. 
Truth in Afghanistan is a many-splendored, but much-soiled 
thing. All the versions of the Paghman land dispute ring 
partially true and partially untrue as well. The full truth 
is probably impossible to ascertain and depends on the 
political leanings and profit motives of the parties 
involved. End comment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NORLAND