06KHARTOUM2925
AEC Plenary Minutes - Dec. 12 Meeting
Sun Dec 31 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO7206
RR RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #2925/01 3650614
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 310614Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5683
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 002925 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV EAID PREL SOCI SU
SUBJECT:  AEC Plenary Minutes - Dec. 12 Meeting 
 
Ref:  Khartoum 02765 
 
¶1.  Summary:  The Assessment and Evaluation Commission (AEC) held 
its 15th plenary session in Khartoum on December 12.  The plenary 
session involved somewhat heated discussion about the AEC Chairman's 
recent remarks to the press about the oil fields and other armed 
groups (OAGs) operating in the South (covered in septel).  Other 
topics include the Malakal incident (reftel), and updates on the new 
currency and the population census.  (Note:  Although in draft form, 
the minutes nonetheless are indicative of issues under discussion 
and the nature of interactions among participants.  End note.) 
 
¶2.  The draft minutes from the December 12 AEC plenary meeting are 
as follows: 
 
(Begin text) 
Draft Minutes from the 15th AEC Plenary Meeting held on 12 December 
2006 
The meeting was attended by representatives from Italy, Kenya, NCP, 
the Netherlands, Norway, SPLM, U.K., U.S. and observers from 
EU-Germany and EC, and L.O.A.S.  The U.N. participated. 
The minutes from the 14th AEC Plenary held on November 14th, 2006 
were adopted. 
The Chairman reported that his Press Conference held on December 
10th entitled, "The CPA - 2 years after signing" was well attended. 
It represented his personal views and was accurately reported in the 
media.  The "Opening Statement" would be circulated with his report 
for the period November 14th to December 12th, 2006. 
NCP commented that the media would mistake the Chairman's personal 
observations as the AEC's collective report.  NCP Commission member 
Idris Abdelgadir had been approached both by the Office of the 
President and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs regarding the 
Chairman's observations on violations of the CPA in connection with 
the oil fields and the OAGs.  NCP did not argue the fact that the 
Chairman could hold a Press Conference.  However, his methodology 
was in question.  It was important to collectively "guard against 
any peace spoilers."  The AEC has the role to support unity and 
insure that the CPA is implemented. 
The Chairman responded that his personal observations were based on 
facts and were in accordance with the provisions of the CPA. 
SPLM noted that the Press Conference was excellent.  Its contents 
had been tabled on numerous occasions to the Commission and its 
Working Groups.  The Commission should report honestly, truthfully, 
and factually.  More attention is required to two issues: 1) the 
"National Reconciliation and Healing Process;" and, 2) "Ssecurity" 
as the basic right of every citizen.  SPLM questioned whether there 
was a plan in place to deal with OAGs. 
SPLM further noted that the Chairman is mandated by "this body" (the 
Commission).  The report had been balanced. 
NCP reported that the recent events in Malakal were the result of 
conflict within the JIU.  However, SPLM challenged that 
interpretation and explained that the conflict had been between 
SPLM-JIU and the militia component of the JIUs.  Proper SAF was not 
the issue. SPLM added that at war time, the government used the 
militias to conduct counter-insurgency.  SPLA never adopted that 
approach.  One should report the situation as it is and be able to 
resolve it. 
Reports from the Working Groups were presented. 
The Coordinator for the Security Arrangement Working Group reported 
that at the time of the last meeting (December 6th) the security 
incidence in Malakal was under investigation. 
NCP argued that monitoring the cease-fire was impossible in the 
absence of precise SPLM locations and lists.  SPLM responded that 
the assembly areas of the SPLM were well known.  The problem was 
with the recurring defections and shuttling of troops between one 
side and the other.  The JDB, OAGCC, and UN should address these 
problems and coordinate efforts. 
The Commission agreed it would hold a Special Session with the 
JDB-OAGCC soon.  The agenda would be the redeployment process, OAGs 
and the DDR progress. 
The Coordinator for the Working Group on the Three Areas informed 
the Commission that the report would be submitted once the parties 
had finalized their comments on the discussion during the meeting on 
December 7th.  It had dealt with Abyei and the scope of its interim 
administration.  The parties had come closer on the issues. 
The Coordinator of the Power Sharing Working Group reported on the 
Special Session with the Border Committee.  Although its budget was 
not released, the committee could access funds and start activities. 
 The timetable was to conduct the technical work by the end of this 
dry season.  A report would then be submitted to the Presidency.  If 
it is approved, implementation would proceed in the following dry 
season. 
The Coordinator for the Wealth Sharing Working Group had to postpone 
the meeting.  Norway reported that the introduction of the new 
currency was scheduled for January 9th, 2007.  However, although the 
norm is to print 50% of a new currency prior to a launch, Sudan had 
only 10% printed.  Distribution would commence in the South. 
Support and confidence in the new currency is vital.  Funds from the 
international community would be required to support the process. 
NCP informed that the technical report on the Wealth Sharing 2007 
budget encompassing CPA and DPA would be submitted to the Presidency 
and then to the National Assembly.  FFAMC had submitted its report 
including projections for oil revenues.  Projects connecting the 
 
KHARTOUM 00002925  002 OF 002 
 
 
North and the South would receive national funding in 2007.  In 
infrastructure the railway, river transport and some roads in the 
South would be funded.  In agriculture cattle vaccination and seeds 
are budgeted for. National revenue institutions such as customs, 
national taxes, and standards for imports are also included. 
The National Land Commission was in the process to submit to NCRC a 
draft document. 
Under AOB on the agenda:  the Chairman informed the Commission that 
a new coordination unit had been introduced by the Presidency to 
support all the CPA Commissions.  NCP underlined that the unit is 
set up to support and organize.  It will "not encroach on" the work 
of Commissions.  SPLM noted that documents from the Presidency 
should be released both in Arabic and English. 
The chairman also informed that the "Pilot Census" was scheduled for 
late January 2007.  The Commission would hold a Special Session with 
the Census Commissions in the North and South and invite UNFPA to 
give an update on preparations for the census. 
Again, the Chairman reminded the commission members to complete the 
forms designating commissioners and alternates. 
The 16th AEC Plenary meeting is scheduled for January 16th, 2007. 
Reminders will be sent. 
(End text) 
 
HUME