06KHARTOUM1964
HARDLINE MESSAGE STILL PUSHED BY BASHIR
Thu Aug 17 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO3361
PP RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1964 2291505
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 171505Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4203
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS KHARTOUM 001964 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM ER SU
SUBJECT:  HARDLINE MESSAGE STILL PUSHED BY BASHIR 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  During the past week the Government of Sudan 
appeared to continue to move to the right.  President Bashir spoke 
in strident tones about the UN, and compared fighting an 
international peacekeeping force to Hezbollah's conflict with 
Israel, senior regime officials traveled to the North in an apparent 
effort to firm up the NCP's base of support, and rumors circulated 
of a reshuffle of certain senior government figures to empower the 
regime hardliners.  End summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Officials' Comments and Editorials More Strident 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Statements in the past week by President Omer Hassan 
al-Bashir and other National Congress Party leaders have lauded the 
outcome of fighting in Israel and Palestine.  Bashir has gone 
further in recent days by pledging to fight the UN like Hezbollah 
fought the Israelis.  His comparison is a continuation of his 
rhetoric against UN involvement in Darfur, and appears calculated to 
build ideological and emotional support in advance of an anticipated 
offensive in Darfur and to counter international pressure which may 
result. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The inflammatory remarks have been reported extensively in 
the Arabic and English-language press, and have been repeated in 
editorials (covered septel).  Bashir commended "the steadfastness of 
Hezbollah under the leadership of Nasrallah" and hailed the struggle 
of the Palestinian peoples, affirming Sudan's solidarity with 
Lebanon and Palestine.  A senior NCP member praised the "stance of 
Hezbollah in the face of the Zionist enemy and the victory achieved 
in Lebanon after the Israeli aggression against it." 
 
¶4. (SBU) Simultaneous statements by regime officials, including Vice 
President Ali Osman Taha, and reports published in SUNA, the 
national press organ, continued to refer to the proposed UN role in 
Darfur in conspiratorial terms.  SUNA claimed comments by Jan Pronk 
on the increase of violence in Darfur in the past year were timed 
specifically to weaken the Sudanese Government stance against a UN 
force in Darfur, and to enable the UN to "send a huge military force 
in Darfur prior to occupying Sudan." 
 
------------------------------ 
High Level Visits to the North 
------------------------------ 
 
¶5. (SBU) The analogy with Hezbollah was a recurring theme as leaders 
headed north.  Vice President Taha visited Northern State August 
14-15.  President Bashir will visit River Nile State on August 17. 
These visits can be seen as an effort to shore up support for the 
NCP in the party's base in the North.  The visits reassure the 
northerners that they are the center of attention and play on the 
theme that "outsiders are against us," but that Sudan would prevail. 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) In addition, the Minister of Energy and Mining Dr. Awad 
Ahmad al-Jaz visited the North on August 16 and met with leaders 
there, reaffirming that peace in the East had been nearly finalized. 
 Interestingly, while in the North, he "announced the discovery of 
oil reserves in bloc 14 in Wadi Halfa (northern Sudan) and affirmed 
that the area is rich in gold and other mineral resources."  His 
statements have no basis in reality, but can be seen as a comment 
that the North has its own resources and does not need outsiders. 
(Comment:  In fact, Wadi Halfa is not in block 14, there has been no 
oil exploration at Wadi Halfa and geologically it is unlikely oil 
will be found in the area.  End comment.) 
 
--------------------- 
Government Reshuffle? 
--------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Alwan ran a short story recently asserting that there will 
be a reshuffling of government positions to accommodate SLM leader 
and now Senior Assistant to the President Minni Arkoi Minawi. 
Concurrently, there are rumors circulating on what changes will be 
made. Notably, it is rumored that National Intelligence and Security 
Services Director Salah Gosh will be replaced; either by current 
Minister of Interior Zubeir Bashir Taha, or State Minister of 
Foreign Affairs Ali Ahmed Karti.  Both Taha and Karti are NCP 
hardliners, who helped to create the Popular Defense Forces (PDF). 
 
HUME