06KHARTOUM2702
AEC: SPLM Accuses NCP of Insincerity and Attacks
Sun Nov 19 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO3244
RR RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #2702/01 3231646
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 191646Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5285
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 002702 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL ECON EPET SU
SUBJECT: AEC: SPLM Accuses NCP of Insincerity and Attacks 
 
REF: Kharotum 2667 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY: During the 14th Assessment and Evaluation Commission 
(AEC) Plenary held on November 14, The SPLM accused the NCP of 
insincerity in implementing the CPA and asserted that Sudan armed 
Forces (SAF) were complicit in the current instability around Juba. 
The Commission also reviewed November 11 AEC presentation by 
Government of Southern Sudan (GoSS) Minister for Legal Affairs 
Michael Makuai.  Makuai had said that the establishment of GoSS 
institutions was progressing well, but hindered by the national 
Ministry of Justice's (MoJ) refusal to certify the ten state 
constitutions.  Makuai said he plans to use a procedural loophole to 
certify the constitutions himself.  Makuai also expressed concern 
abut the SAF's role in attacks around Juba (reftel), environmental 
degradation in the oil fields, lack of action in Abyei, and the fact 
that North-south boundary commission is hampered by a lack of funds. 
 End Summary. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Chairman's Report and Norway Speaks 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Norwegian Minister of International Development Erik Solheim 
opened the meeting by emphasizing that his country is a partner with 
both the NCP and SPLM, that Darfur issues cannot be separated from 
peace in the south, and that he feels the AEC is critical in 
achieving CPA implementation.  Solheim also complained about the 
slowness of the World Bank and said his country may pull out of the 
Multi-Donor Trust Fund if changes do not come quickly. 
 
¶3.  In his report, Tom Vraalsen, AEC Chairman, described a meeting 
with Vice President Ali Osman Taha in which the VP complained that 
the AEC trip to Juba exceeded its scope by listening to complaints 
over national CPA implementation and not focusing on southern 
issues.  In a separate meeting, Vraalsen said that he discussed with 
First Vice-President Salva Kiir possibilities for IGAD to take a 
more active role on breaking deadlocks in CPA implementation. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Security: SAF Accused of Wrongdoing in Juba 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  During the meeting, State Minister for Agriculture (SPLM) Anne 
Ito said that while investigations are proceeding slowly and 
deliberately, there is evidence the SAF has been behind the recent 
attacks in and around Juba (reftel).  Saeed Al Khatib, the NCP 
representative, warned that the AEC should wait until all the facts 
are in and suggested the matter be taken up at the next security 
working group (SWG) meeting.  He said that because this issue was 
not discussed at the last SWG meeting, it is outside the scope of 
the plenary; the working groups should set the agenda for the 
plenary and not the other way around he explained.  The UK 
Ambassador, who chairs the SWG, disagreed.  He believes the plenary 
must give direction to the working groups. 
 
------------------------------ 
Makuai: A Litany of Complaints 
------------------------------ 
 
¶5.  The Italian Ambassador, chair of the Power Sharing Working Group 
(PSWG) gave a report on the presentation by Michael Makuai.  Makuai 
had been invited to the PSWG to discuss implementation of the CPA in 
the South.  The minister had said that the establishment of 
institutions was going well: the Southern Sudan Legislative Assembly 
(SSLA), all state legislatures, and the judiciary were all fully 
appointed and functioning.  These institutions, however, all 
suffered from capacity problems due to a lack of qualified 
professional staff. 
 
¶6.  The writing of the state constitutions had also been going well, 
Makuai said, until they were submitted to the MoJ for certification 
of compliance with the Interim National Constitution (INC).  The MoJ 
asked to strike the language on state boundaries, state names, state 
capitals, and references to the 2011 referendum for southern 
independence, saying these were national competencies.  Makuai 
disagreed, saying that the states had a right to include all of the 
above so long as it did not contradict the INC.  He also said that 
because the MoJ did not respond within the two weeks allotted in the 
INC, with an average response of over there weeks, the state 
constitutions should automatically take affect, and he would certify 
them himself.  The NCP strongly disagreed, citing article 58(b) of 
the CPA which specifically assigns certifying state constitutions to 
the national government. 
 
¶7.  Makuai had also expressed complaints and fears covering a broad 
range of CPA issues, including Abyei, civil service reform, a 
North/South Boundary Commission starved for cash, and reports of 
environmental destruction around the Bentiu oil fields.  Makuai said 
the NCP was obviously not a serious partner in the CPA.  The NCP 
representative at the PSWG meeting, al Kahtib, asserted the NCP was 
serious and said that the slowdown of the boundary commission was 
the result of SPLM slowness and not money, in fact the commission 
had been given over USD 1.2 million, plus equipment in kind. (NOTE: 
 
KHARTOUM 00002702  002 OF 002 
 
 
in a subsequent private meeting, al Khatib confided to Embassy 
officials that the real obstacle was the incompetence of the NCP 
technocrat chairing the commission.  End Note) 
 
¶8.  Following the PSWG report, the NCP representatives expressed 
regret that once again the opportunity to learn about southern CPA 
implementation was lost.  They asserted that Makuai should have 
stuck to the scope of his original invitation and not discussed 
national matters, which were the purview of his northern SPLM 
counterparts. 
 
HUME