06KHARTOUM1368
SOUTH SUDAN:  VISIT OF UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
Fri Jun 09 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO3586
RR RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1368/01 1601233
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 091233Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3149
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 001368 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSTIVE 
 
E.O. 12958 :N/A 
TAGS: PPREL PGOV PHUM EPET SU UN
SUBJECT: SOUTH SUDAN:  VISIT OF UNITED NATIONS SECURITY 
COUNCIL TO JUBA 
 
¶1.  Summary.  The UN Security Council paid a whirlwind 
visit to Juba on June 8.  Led by UK Permanent 
Representative Emyr Jones Parry, the delegation spent 
much of its time in meeting with United Nations staff. 
The only other meetings were with GoSS President Kiir and 
Vice President Machar and select ministers and a one-hour 
presentation by the Southern Sudan Legislative Assembly 
(SSLA).  Kiir disclosed during a press event that a 
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) delegation was in Juba, but 
the visit otherwise broke little new ground.  End 
summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
UNMIS Brief and the Combined Joint Military Commission 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶2.  The visit began with a short briefing in the airport 
VIP lounge by UNMIS Regional Coordinator James Ellery, 
who discussed the security situation throughout South 
Sudan, including the LRA, other armed groups still at 
large, tribal conflicts, and indiscipline within the LRA. 
He briefly described UNMIS military deployment and scope 
of mission. 
 
¶3.  The delegation moved to the UNMIS Sector I 
headquarters to attend a session of the Combined Joint 
Military Commission, which provided the participants the 
flavor of the relationship between the Sudan People's 
Liberation Army (SPLA) and the Sudanese Armed Forces 
(SAF).  There was a sharp exchange between the two sides 
following a question raised by U.S. Ambassador Jackie 
Wolcott Sanders about the status of Abyei.  The SAF also 
threw out for the first time a new demand - that now that 
the SAF was pulling out of southern towns, and especially 
Juba, the SPLA was also obliged to withdraw. 
 
----------------------- 
Salva Kiir Offers Views 
----------------------- 
 
¶4.  The delegation moved to the main hall of the SSLA for 
its next meeting with Salva Kiir, Riek Machar and a 
handful of GoSS ministers.  Kiir presented a set piece 
presentation on difficulties with the implementation of 
vital parts of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, 
including the Abyei Boundary Commission decision, the 
Joint Defense Board and formation of Joint Integrated 
Units, and the failure of the National Petroleum 
Commission to resolve contentions over production and 
wealth sharing.  In particular, he stressed that a 
failure to deal with Abyei could spark a return to war. 
Kiir said that one major cause of delay had been the 
death of John Garang; the second the National Congress 
Party's unwillingness to implement key CPA provisions. 
He concluded by noting that without implementation, there 
was no agreement, and without an agreement, there would 
be conflict. 
 
¶5.  Turning to the GoSS, Kiir said that the South was 
struggling to establish basic institutions.  There was no 
infrastructure, and the rule of law had not been 
established.   Kiir answered a number of questions, 
saying that the GoSS had committed to universal primary 
education in English.  On Darfur, he said the Darfur 
Peace Agreement (DPA) was unpopular with many Darfurians 
who felt that peace had been imposed.  He said that it 
was necessary to bring in Abdul Wahid to help strengthen 
the DPA.  On the role that others should play in helping 
Sudan to break out of its cycle of conflict, he said that 
the international community should press the Government 
of National Unity to respect the CPA.  Wealthy countries 
that have not yet contributed to rebuilding the South of 
Sudan should help the GoSS through training of police and 
civil servants. 
 
¶6.  In a press event following the meeting, Jones Parry 
emphasized the determination of the UNSC to make the CPA 
succeed. Asked about GoSS mediation between the 
Government of Uganda and the LRA, Kiir repeated the three 
options he had offered the LRA - mediation, return home, 
or military force.  He acknowledged that an LRA 
delegation was in place. 
 
-------------------------- 
The Assembly Gets its Turn 
-------------------------- 
 
¶7.  After lunch, the UNSC met with SSLA Speaker James 
Wani Igga and select MPs.  After a long retrospective on 
 
KHARTOUM 00001368  002 OF 002 
 
 
the history of the SPLM, Wani Igga spoke about the CPA, 
essentially repeating the litany of grievances earlier 
presented by Kiir.  He made several inaccurate 
statements, including a claim that only ten percent of 
SAF troops had been withdrawn from the South.  Wani Igga 
opened the floor to other speakers, who addressed a 
variety of topics: gender inequality, the need to fight 
corruption, and the vital role the international 
community must play to help South Sudan succeed.  The 
most impressive speaker was an MP who predicted that UNSC 
failure to put peacekeeping troops into Darfur would 
graduate Sudan from rogue to failed state.  He noted that 
he was born and grew up in war; he consequently was 
convinced that failure to solve Darfur would lead to 
failure of the CPA. 
 
------------------------ 
NGOs and UN Country Team 
------------------------ 
 
¶8.  The final session was a truncated meeting with NGOs 
and the country team that ended early to allow the 
delegation to depart before the 6:00 p.m. closure of 
Juba's airport.  The format was question and answer, with 
the range of NGO/UN participants contributing in their 
areas of expertise. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Sandstorm prevents timely return to Khartoum 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  A military briefing over dinner at the UK Amb's 
residence in Khartoum had to be canceled when the UNSC's 
plane was diverted to Port Sudan due to a bad sandstorm 
in Khartoum.  They finally arrived back in Khartoum near 
midnight. 
 
STEINFELD