06KHARTOUM634
Southern Sudan:  Telecom Challenges
Fri Mar 10 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO5518
RR RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #0634 0691914
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 101914Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1852
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVEUNCLAS KHARTOUM 000634 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS PGOV PINR SOCI SU
SUBJECT: Southern Sudan:  Telecom Challenges 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  The lack of reliable cell phone 
connectivity in Juba has made communications, and all 
operations, more difficult for the Government of Southern 
Sudan (GoSS), local businesses, and the international 
community.  Most organizations rely on Thuraya satellite 
phones, which are expensive and generally only work 
outdoors.  On March 7, CG Juba Officials met with Elijah 
Biar Kuol, GoSS Under Secretary for Telecommunications 
and Postal Services, who said that Khartoum is not 
helping to alleviate the problems, and is preventing the 
GoSS from taking steps to resolve them itself.  End 
Summary. 
 
------------------------------- 
Is it One Country, Two Systems? 
------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Kuol explained that the GoSS is currently in a 
dispute with the National Telecommunications Commission 
(NTC), which regulates telecom operators in Sudan.  He 
said that the GoSS has requested part of the spectrum to 
grant telecom license independently, as well as their own 
exchange with direct access to Sudan's international 
gateway.  Kuol believes this is justified under the "one 
country, two systems" arrangement in the CPA.  The NTC 
has refused both requests. 
 
¶3.  As an alternative, Kuol said, the GoSS has asked for 
its share of government revenues from Mobitel, which 
operates in former garrison towns, but rarely functions. 
The NTC has also refused this request, asserting that it 
retains full control over the telecom sector.  Kuol 
explained that the GoSS is in talks with telecom 
companies directly, but sanctions and the questions over 
their legal ability to grant licenses has discouraged 
legitimate companies. 
 
--------------------------- 
Bypassing NTC, If Necessary 
--------------------------- 
 
¶4.  Kuol said that if this is not resolved, the south 
would be forced to seek its own country code and 
independent international gateway.  He believes the 
communication difficulties are acute, threatening the 
operation of the entire government, but Khartoum is doing 
nothing.  Expressing the level of distrust common among 
southern officials, Kuol also said that he has seen 
"Arabs" using their Mobitel cell phones in Juba, so the 
service difficulties must be intentional. 
 
¶5.  Bio note:  Kuol is a Dinka from the Upper Nile 
Region.  He was formerly the Deputy Director of the 
SPLM's communications agency.  During the war, Kuol 
fought in the Upper Nile until the 1991 split.  He 
remained with Garang and relocated to the areas outside 
of Torit and Juba. 
 
WHITAKER