06KHARTOUM292
SOUTHERN SUDAN:  Fighting in Jonglei State
Tue Feb 07 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO8829
RR RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #0292/01 0381743
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 071743Z FEB 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1331
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 000292 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS, SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV MOPS PINR SU
SUBJECT: SOUTHERN SUDAN:  Fighting in Jonglei State 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY:  In a meeting with CG Juba, Government of 
Southern Sudan (GoSS) Minister of Culture, Youth, and 
Sports John Luc Jok spoke about the recent fighting in 
the Jonglei area.  The minister is from Jonglei state, 
and has been in contact with all the parties involved. 
According to Jok, on February 3, fighting broke out 
during an SPLA mission to disarm locals in Yuai, Jonglei 
state.  The disarmament had been pre-arranged and 
approved by a local militia leader and village chief. 
However, many youths, who believed they needed their guns 
to protect their cattle during the upcoming migration, 
refused to be disarmed.  Local militia ambushed an SPLA 
force, and a firefight left 60 dead, mostly in the SPLA 
(Note: some papers have been reporting over 200 dead, 
while South Sudan Defense Force Chief of Staff Paulino 
Matip claims only 12 dead.  End note.)  There have been 
no reports of retaliation, and the situation is now calm 
but tense, according to Jok.  All sides will meet in a 
conference to try to resolve outstanding issues.  End 
Summary. 
 
--------------------------- 
Disagreement over Disarming 
--------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) During a conference with the SPLA/SSDF in January, 
local Dinka and Nuer chiefs agreed to disarmament of non- 
military personnel, with regional security provided by a 
united SPLA/SSDF force.  The SPLA decided began with Nuer 
cattle herders around Yuai, the are from which the "White 
Army" originates (Note: the original White Army was 
responsible for the Bor massacre in 1991, although it is 
unclear what relationship this group in Yuai shares with 
that White Army, if any.  End note.)  This force of 1,200 
went in after receiving permission from the White Army 
commander on the ground, Lt. Col. Yousef Biliu, and the 
local chief. 
 
¶3. (U) Although Nuer leaders had approved, young Nuer men 
from the area decided not to disarm.  With Yuai 
completely dry, these herders were planning a seasonal 
migration to Ayod and Bor, and they believed they would 
need their weapons to protect their cattle from theft by 
the Merle in Ayod and the Dinka in Bor, neither of whom 
had been disarmed.  After an initial argument between 
local armed herders with SPLA advance officers in a local 
market, a larger SPLA contingent arrived, expecting no 
trouble.  Upon arrival, the locals, joined by members of 
the White Army and affiliated elements of the South Sudan 
Defense Force (SSDF), attacked the arriving SPLA group. 
According to Jok, the ensuing firefight left at least 60 
dead, mostly from the SPLA.  Not all casualties were from 
direct combat, as some SPLA troops fled into the bush, 
became lost, and subsequently died of thirst.  Several 
SPLA troops were captured, but have since been released. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Gatwick Called to Restore Order; Nuer Prophet Killed 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) UNMIS coordinator for the south, James Ellery, 
agreed to fly Major General Simon Gatwick, a former White 
Army commander who has now joined the SPLA but had 
periodically been allied with the SSDF, to mediate in 
Yuai.  Gatwick, who has great influence in the region, 
defused the situation and managed to bring the detained 
SPLA officers back to Juba. 
 
¶5. (U) The Nuer prophet Wut Nyang Garakek was killed 
while taking part in the mediation effort.  Reputedly a 
member of the White Army who led the troops on the ground 
during the Bor Massacre, Nyang believed he still had 
influence in the area.  However, last year, a different 
self-proclaimed prophet had led a group of Nuer from 
Jonglei to the "Promised Land" near Akobo, and 
established a cult that engaged in strange rituals, such 
as women walking around naked.  After this experience, 
Minister Yok reported that Nyang was killed because the 
already overwrought locals were no longer tolerant of 
such prophets. 
 
--------------- 
The Way Forward 
--------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) General Gatwich is in Juba assembling a 
delegation of pastors, SPLA, SSDF, and the governor of 
Jonglei, with plans to return to Yuai to help defuse the 
situation and find a durable solution to permit the Nuer 
migration.  The Merle and Dinka have heard about the SPLA 
ambush, and reportedly have said that they would attack 
armed Yuai cattle herders who come to Ayod or Bor. 
Migration is essential for the survival of thirsty Yuai 
 
KHARTOUM 00000292  002 OF 002 
 
 
cattle.  Current plans are for a robust SSDF/SPLA force 
to secure the area, disarm, and provide protection for 
the Nuer.  Gatwich also plans to meet with the local 
armed elements to explain the Juba Declaration and 
regarding their commanders' decision to join the SPLA, 
which seems to be poorly understood.  SPLA soldiers 
involved in the original incident have reportedly been 
called back to Juba for an investigation of what happened 
and who started it. 
 
---------------- 
Stirring the Pot 
---------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) COMMENT:  Minister Jok's detailed account of the 
events in Jonglei matches other credible accounts.  On 
February 7, SSDF Chief of Staff Paulino Matip held a 
press conference in Khartoum and gave a similar story 
(only the casualty count varied).  A spokesperson for 
Gordon Kong has claimed that it was a larger massacre of 
over 200 civilians, including women and children, as part 
of an effort to neutralize the "new" SSDF.  His account 
claimed that SPLA forces are roaming the area, robbing 
and killing with impunity.  However, he is an unreliable 
source.  The locals that the SPLA were attempting to 
disarm had not joined Kong's forces, and in fact had 
joined, theoretically, the SPLA.  The National Congress 
Party (NCP) has cited Kong's account of events and called 
for a full investigation of this "CPA violation."  Jok 
claims this is another case of the North blowing an 
incident out of proportion to "stir the pot."  Southern 
Sudan remains a highly charged stew of tribes, militias, 
cattle raiders, prophets, and profiteers, so future 
incidents, exaggerated press reports, and ongoing 
accusations are likely to continue. 
 
HUME