06KHARTOUM2804
Malakal Update:  Fragile Calm Returning
Wed Dec 06 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO7666
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #2804/01 3401119
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 061119Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5505
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 002804 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINR MARR EAID SU
SUBJECT:  Malakal Update:  Fragile Calm Returning 
 
Ref: a) Khartoum 02772, b) Khartoum 02765 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  Malakal is returning to a fragile calm, with the 
possibility of violence still looming.  The ceasefire is holding as 
of December 5, civilians are returning to the town, and humanitarian 
organizations are being encouraged to resume operations.  The Sudan 
People's Liberation Army (SPLA) and Sudan Armed Forces (SAF) have 
deployed to pre-clash locations, and the GoSS and the GNU are 
engaged in post-incident discussions, with President Kiir visiting 
Malakal on December 4.  However, the underlying causes of the 
conflict have not been addressed as unaligned, SAF-supported 
Southern Sudan Defense Force (SSDF) militias remain in Malakal. 
Both the SPLA and the SSDF are reportedly massing troops in the area 
and more violence in greater Upper Nile region is likely. 
Hardliners in the SPLM believe that attacks by the SSDF constitute 
violations of the CPA because the SSDF is still receiving SAF 
support.  These hardliners also believe the attacks are an organized 
NCP attempt to destabilize their region and are demanding that Kiir 
do more to respond.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Ceasefire Holds; Root Causes Still in Place 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) The ceasefire in Malakal is holding following the November 
27 outbreak of violence between militias aligned with the SAF and 
SPLA (reftels), although there are continuing reports of sporadic 
gunfire.  Shops are reopening, barge traffic is resuming, and people 
are moving freely around town.  There are no reports of any targeted 
attacks against Northerners.  The local government has called for 
calm on the radio and urged people to return, which many are doing. 
The joint patrols comprised of SPLA, SAF, national police, UN 
police, and UNMIL Observers are helping restore order.  A buffer 
zone exists between the SAF and SPLA, with UNMIS presence in this 
zone and at the airport. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The situation remains tense, however, as the underlying 
causes of the violence have not been addressed.  The presence of the 
SAF-supported, but nominally unaligned SSDF and the absence of a 
political solution to the dispute over the Commissioner of Fanjak 
position continue to threaten the town.  Local SSDF commander 
Gabriel Tang (aka Gabriel Gatwech Chan or Tanganya), who holds the 
rank of Major General in the SAF and has demanded to be appointed 
Commissioner of Fangak, was flown to Khartoum by the UN at the 
beginning of the crisis to help defuse the situation.  However, the 
ongoing presence in the area of both Tang's deputy, Thomas Mabor, 
and the SPLM's designated Commissioner of Fangak, John Maluit, 
fueled the subsequent violence and continue to create tension. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The representative of UN OCHA in Malakal is appealing to 
international organizations to return to the town to help restore 
normality and to address the urgent humanitarian crises, including 
disposal of decaying corpses that are contaminating the Nile River, 
and access to safe drinking water.  The estimated number of dead has 
exceeded 150 and the number injured close to 400.  The ICRC has 
delivered a total of 27 bodies from SAF controlled areas to SPLA 
areas.  Following the extensive looting, the OCHA is also concerned 
about growing numbers of vulnerable people in the town. 
 
---------------------------------- 
All Sides Investigating the Matter 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) The GOSS and Government of National Unity (GNU) are both 
investigating the causes of the fighting.  Khartoum reportedly sent 
the Minister in the Office of the President, Idris Mohammed Abdel 
Kader, to Juba to discuss the situation over the weekend of December 
¶2.  Although the press said that GoSS Vice President Riek Machar was 
sent to Malakal, Machar explained he did not go because the GoSS 
wanted to first send military commanders to address the situation on 
the ground.  ConGen contacts have asserted that some SPLM/A members 
opposed dispatching Machar, a powerful Nuer leader who founded the 
militias that became the SSDF.  They say that Machar and former SSDF 
leader Lt. Gen. Paulino Matip, now SPLA Deputy Commander-in-Chief, 
may have been involved in the original attack and should be 
distanced from any resolution of the situation. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
SPLM Growing Impatient As Calls for Action Grow 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶6. (SBU) The Joint Integrated Unit (JIU) presence in Malakal has 
been descried as useless by a senior GoSS official, and it appears 
to be playing no active role in restoring security or public 
confidence.  The SPLA has dispatched Deputy Director of Operations 
Piang, who was joined by the Deputy Commander of the JIUs in 
Southern Sudan, Major General Thomas Cirillo, to Malakal.  (Note: 
Chief of Staff Oyai Deng Ajak is visiting South Africa.  End note.) 
Hardliners in the SPLA, including Deng and others, reportedly were 
not dispatched to Malakal by Kiir, who is concerned about escalating 
the military response.  ConGen contacts report concerns among SPLA/M 
 
KHARTOUM 00002804  002 OF 002 
 
 
members that Kiir is not taking a hard enough position to rid the 
South of the militia problem. 
 
¶7. (SBU) There is widespread belief among Southerners that the 
National Congress Party (NCP) is behind the Malakal violence.  GoSS 
President Salva Kiir, SPLM Secretary General Pagan Amum and GoSS 
Vice President Machar have all publicly asserted that the NCP must 
take responsibility for any tribal militias that it trained, armed, 
and financed.  They believe these groups continue to follow an NCP 
agenda to destabilize the South.  The SAF has only admitted to 
providing non-lethal aid, such as food and clothing, to the groups 
it supported during the war, a move it says it necessary to maintain 
calm until a proper disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration 
(DDR) process can take place. 
 
HUME