06KHARTOUM324
Southern Sudan: Meeting with the Attorney
Sat Feb 11 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXYZ0032
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKH #0324 0421436
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 111436Z FEB 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1378
INFO RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI 0446
RUEHKM/AMEMBASSY KAMPALA 0047
RUEHDS/AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA 0080UNCLAS KHARTOUM 000324 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM SU
SUBJECT: Southern Sudan: Meeting with the Attorney 
General 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) On February 9, CG Juba met with Government of 
Southern Sudan (GoSS) Attorney General (AG) Majok Mading 
Majok for the three Equatoria states (Note:  Bahr el 
Jebel is often called Central Equatoria and reportedly 
will be officially renamed in the near future.  End 
note.).  A holdover from the old civil service managed by 
Khartoum, Majok said that his functions would soon be 
moved under the GoSS Ministry of Justice, although for 
the moment he continues to receive his salary from the 
North.  In practice, he still works directly with the GNU 
police in investigating and prosecuting both civil and 
criminal cases. 
 
New Court System: English Common Law Variant Vice Sharia 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Majok said that he expects the new court 
system to resemble the old in structure, but not in 
practice.  There will be a southern Supreme Court with 
state Courts of Appeals that can review rulings of 
provincial courts and first, second, or third class 
magistrates.  There will be juries, but at the provincial 
level rulings will be made by a single judge who must be 
a first class magistrate.  There will also be High Courts 
at the state level, similar to Kenya or Uganda.  The 
other main structural difference will be that the Supreme 
Court in Khartoum will no longer hold sway over southern 
courts.  In practice, the South will replace sharia law 
with a variant of English Common Law. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Majok said that customary law has been more 
influential in SPLA areas than in government garrison 
towns such as Juba.  He identified a lack of codification 
as the main problem with customary law - the GoSS needed 
to codify and reconcile the various customary codes to 
avoid arbitrary rules by tribal and local authorities. 
 
Challenges: Staffing, Training, English Use, Computers 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) He identified staffing and training as the 
greatest challenges.  The AG's office had inherited 32 
senior staff from GOS garrison towns, with additional 
personnel expected to return from the North or from 
abroad.  However, most returnees with legal backgrounds 
were opting for the judiciary rather than the office of 
the AG.  He observed that this was an impossible small 
number for the entirety of Southern Sudan.  Majok said 
that his staff required training at all levels, and 
especially English language training, since plans were 
afoot to switch court proceedings and investigative 
reports from Arabic to English.  There were no computers 
in the AG office, and no personnel trained to use them. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Majok said that he did no know how many 
private attorneys practiced in Sudan, but he estimated 
that these numbered less than twenty.  He said that he 
expected to continue in his present function and hoped 
that the GoSS would commit sufficient resources to 
establish communication between the AG office and states. 
He said that he was reluctant to travel from Juba by road 
for fear that he might be attacked by persons he had 
prosecuted successfully prosecuted in the past. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Comment.  Majok spoke with confidence about 
legal reform, but we are not convinced that he is fully 
in the know.  It will be interesting to see how he and 
his thirty-two senior staff fare as the GoSS reviews the 
combined list of old and new civil servants to determine 
which persons are best qualified to fill existing slots. 
End comment. 
 
Biodata 
------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Majok is a Dinka from Bor who was educated 
in Juba and Khartoum and worked in Khartoum, Port Sudan, 
and Gezira State in various capacities in the federal 
AG's office and with parastatal corporations.  He is a 
practicing Episcopalian.  Majok is kin to Charles 
Manyang, a lawyer who was formerly Sudan's Ambassador to 
Oslo and more recentlycurrently Director of the MFA 
Treaties and International Law Legal Departmentivision. 
 
HUME