06KHARTOUM1894
Sant'Egidio Returns From the Bush with Hope
Wed Aug 09 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO5246
RR RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1894/01 2211307
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 091307Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4083
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUEHROV/AMEMBASSY VATICAN 0023UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 001894 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: TBD 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MOPS UG SU
SUBJECT:  Sant'Egidio Returns From the Bush with Hope 
 
REF: Khartoum 01881 
 
KHARTOUM 00001894  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  While the negotiating team focuses on social 
issues and power sharing, the leader of the Lord's Resistance Army 
(LRA) cares only about his own fate and that of his commanders, 
according to mediators from the Communita' Di Sant'Egidio (CSE). 
Returning from a trip to the LRA camp, the CSE reps said that Riek 
Machar, lead mediator and Vice President of Southern Sudan, was 
upset at the degree of disconnect between LRA leader Joseph Kony and 
the politically-oriented LRA negotiating team.  Despite this 
problem, the CSE team noted that Kony seemed eager for peace.  They 
thought an agreement could even be possible within the month if 
certain obstacles, like the ICC indictments, could be addressed. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Kony Wants Reconciliation and Personal Safety 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) During the week of July 30, Riek Machar led a group to meet 
with Kony and his commanders at the isolated LRA camp a short walk 
across the border into DR Congo from Nabanga.  The group included 
Ugandan government officials, the LRA negotiating team from Juba, 
Acholi and northern Ugandan society leaders, GoSS representatives, 
journalists, UNICEF, and CSE.  The LRA took the group to a small 
clearing that the LRA called its parliament; they subsequently 
discussed peace with Joseph Kony and his principal deputy, Vincent 
Otti. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Kony began by addressing the Acholi leaders, including the 
tribe's chief, with considerable deference.  Kony explained that the 
Acholi leadership had asked him to begin this rebellion 20 years 
ago, but that now he felt abandoned.  Kony said his only condition 
for peace was reconciliation and guaranteed safety and freedom for 
him and his men.  While he did not mention the atrocities in Uganda, 
he did apologize to the Southern Sudanese for what he had done. 
Kony did not discuss any of the political issues that had taken 
center stage at the talks in Juba. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Kony and his commanders also acknowledged the relationship 
developed with Machar, who served as one of their principal liaisons 
when he was fighting with the North.  The CSE representatives said 
this clearly made Machar uncomfortable.  Kony then briefly 
referenced the Ten Commandments and visions of the Holy Ghost, but 
did not focus on them.  Kony had previously claimed that the Holy 
Ghost had ordered him to overthrow the Ugandan government and 
replace it with one based on the Ten Commandments. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Negotiatiors Have Their Own Agenda 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) While Kony said he had appointed the mainly diaspora LRA 
negotiating team, it became clear that the divisions between them 
were even greater than anyone had expected.  According to the CSE 
team, Kony was unaware of the political demands discussed at the 
talks, and seemed unable to understand the issues.  During the 
meeting, some of the Acholi Southern Sudanese said that the LRA 
translators from the Juba team had even altered Kony's message to 
their advantage.  While there were some good people on the team, the 
CSE representatives commented that most of them were advancing their 
own political careers or just after money. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Annoyed by the distance between the LRA's negotiators and 
its leaders, Machar demanded that the LRA announce an immediate 
ceasefire and send Otti to the talks.  Otti suspected this ultimatum 
was a trap and refused to go to Juba while the ICC warrants were 
outstanding.  In the end, everyone agreed to continue moving forward 
with the existing delegation in Juba, starting August 7. 
 
--------------- 
The Way Forward 
--------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) The CSE team said it had convinced Otti to agree to go to 
Juba, with the timeframe left open.  The reps also noted that the 
LRA had announced the unilateral ceasefire that Machar requested. 
Experienced mediators, the CSE reps said they were impressed with 
Machar's ability to broker the talks.  They did not feel additional 
international support was necessary, except perhaps for a helicopter 
to ferry delegations to the LRA camp for frequent consultations. 
They noted this would cut the 13-hour drive from Maridi to Nabanga 
to a few minutes. 
 
¶8. (SBU) While not willing to be optimistic, the CSE team believed 
that the negotiations were real.  Kony showed genuine deference to 
the Acholi leaders, and every LRA member, from Kony on down, had a 
the look of fear.  They think Kony refused a request to release his 
Southern Sudanese child abductees as a sign of goodwill because 
children are his main bargaining chip and the heart of his movement. 
 They noted that a negotiation based on reconciliation and security, 
 
KHARTOUM 00001894  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
while worse for the IDPs, would be much simpler.  A resolution was 
possible in less than a month, they said, well before the Ugandan's 
September 12 deadline. 
 
¶9. (SBU) The CSE reps said that the ICC could take credit for 
helping to bring about the talks, but now should step aside.  They 
explained that Article 53 allowed cases to be dropped in the 
interest of local justice.  Still, security guarantees would be 
difficult, as Otti repeated several times that he does not want to 
share Charles Taylor's fate.  However, the CSE believes the Ugandans 
would favor a quick and quiet resolution that would avoid a careful 
investigation into actions of the Ugandan army. 
 
HUME