06KHARTOUM850
MFA Paper Outlines Foreign Policy Objectives
Thu Apr 06 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO4712
RR RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #0850/01 0961552
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 061552Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2225
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 KHARTOUM 000850 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV US SU
SUBJECT: MFA Paper Outlines Foreign Policy Objectives 
 
Ref:  Khartoum 00823 
 
¶1.  Summary:  During the April 1-5 MFA ambassadorial 
corps conference (reftel), the ministry circulated a 
thought piece on the future of Sudanese foreign policy. 
Its key points are as follows:  Sudan is entering a new 
era following the signing of the Comprehensive Peace 
Agreement, Sudan must thus review its foreign policy. 
Under the Interim National Constitution, Sudan's foreign 
policy is to stress cooperation, integration, human 
rights, dialogue as a means of resolving disputes, non- 
interference in the domestic affairs of other states, and 
fighting organized crime and terrorism.  Sudan's Afro- 
Arab character is key to the development of its ties, 
which will continue to focus on neighboring states. 
While progress has been made with Egypt and Libya, 
relations with Ethiopia are sound, while those with Chad 
and Eritrea are tense. 
 
¶2.  Relations with the U.S. are at a critical period, 
with performance below ambitions.  Hence Sudan will 
strive to achieve a common understanding on issues. 
Sudan will work in particular to develop its relations 
with Canada, Brazil, and Argentina; China, India, 
Malaysia, and Pakistan; and South Korea, Indonesia, and 
Japan.  As well, relations with the EU and within the UN 
are key.  The problem of Darfur needs to be solved, in 
part due to its negative effect on international 
relations.  Finally, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs will 
address the internal issues of compensation, career 
tracks, and training.  End summary. 
 
¶3.  The text of the paper is as follows (unofficial 
Embassy translation): 
 
(Begin text) 
 
REPUBLIC OF THE SUDAN MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS 
 
THE DELIBERATING CONFERENCE BY THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN 
AFFAIRS - KHARTOUM, APRIL 1-5, 2006 
 
A PAPER ON FOREIGN POLICY: 
 
Our country is entering into a new phase at the beginning 
of implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement; 
it is characterized by more openness to all components of 
the Sudanese community and it truthfully expresses its 
cultural and ethnic diversity. 
 
Definitely, these present facts should be reflected in a 
way or another on the State's policies in various 
domains.  This necessitates a review the shape of the 
foreign policy of the country during the transitional 
period. 
 
Whereas the principles ruling foreign policy have never 
been controversial between the various elements of the 
society, this policy will based on the principles that 
were stated in the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the 
Interim National Constitution of the country in addition 
to the events of the past quarter century and the laws 
that rule jurisdictions and goals of the federal 
ministries and other documents pertaining to the nation's 
external challenges. 
 
The Interim National Constitution of the Republic of the 
Sudan determined seven objectives of the foreign policy 
during the transitional period; they can be summarized as 
follows: 
 
-- Promotion of international cooperation, consolidating 
universal peace, and respect for international law and 
fostering a just world economic order. 
 
-- Achievement of African and Arab economic integration 
and promotion of African and Arab unity and Afro-Arab 
cooperation. 
 
-- Enhancement of respect for human rights and 
fundamental freedoms in regional and international 
forums. 
 
-- Promotion of dialogue among civilizations and 
establishment of international order based on justice. 
 
-- Enhancement of economic cooperation among countries of 
the South. 
 
-- Non-interference in the affairs of other States, 
promotion of good neighborliness and mutual cooperation 
with all neighbors, and maintaining amicable and balanced 
 
KHARTOUM 00000850  002 OF 006 
 
 
relations with other countries. 
 
-- Combating international and transnational organized 
crime and terrorism. 
 
For realizing the abovementioned goals, Sudan, like other 
states, interacts viably with its regional and 
international communities. 
 
Normally, the factors of geography and history rule 
Sudan's actions in the domain of foreign policy where its 
Afro-Arab affiliation has been one of the most important 
basics of our foreign policy. 
 
For realizing our lofty objectives in the desired way and 
to allow citizens to reap great benefits, it was 
necessary to utilize our resources in the most ideal way 
and according to clear priorities for effective action in 
various circles of our foreign policy. 
 
Directly neighboring states represent the most important 
circle for us because the developments witnessed in these 
states are directly reflected in the security and 
stability of our country. 
 
Sudan has always been seeking and will be seeking, 
Inshallah, in the future to maintain excellent relations 
with these states, without any exception, based on good 
neighborliness, respect for other peoples' choices, and 
realizing mutual interests. 
 
We view development of our relations with most of these 
states as satisfactory; we have taken broad strides 
toward realizing integration with the sisterly Arab 
Republic of Egypt and the Arab Libyan Jamahiryia. 
 
Our cooperation with Ethiopia has greatly advanced; joint 
committees have been established at the highest levels to 
realize cooperation in all domains. 
 
There is tenseness in our relations with some states, 
such as Eritrea and Chad, due to internal problems that 
trespassed the international borders. 
 
Certainly, we are seeking to normalize these relations 
based on principles of good neighborliness and non- 
interference in internal affairs; all exchanged visits 
with Eritrea are based on this pattern. 
 
The Tripoli Agreement was concluded with Chad, and 
efforts to implement it are ongoing. 
 
The presence of the LRA "Lord's Resistance Army" in 
Southern Sudan has negatively our relations with sisterly 
Uganda. 
 
We are determined to end it, and we hope that the leaders 
of this movement would listen to the voice of reason and 
would seek to resolve their problems with the Ugandan 
government through dialogue and amicable methods. 
 
The sisterly Arab states have all been a support to Sudan 
since its independence in 1956, which we greatly 
appreciate. 
 
We commend the Arab League resolution on establishing a 
special fund for support of peace in Southern Sudan and 
in the war-affected areas.  We also appreciate the Arab 
states support that has been and is still offered at the 
bilateral level. 
 
Sudan will always be close to what is going in the Arab 
world.  Hence, we follow with deep concern, denouncing 
the terror and killing committed against the Palestinian 
people.  Also, we are observing with concern ongoing 
incidents and pray for God to grant stability for this 
important Arab country and to bring about peace and 
tranquility for its sisterly people. 
 
Sudan has mediated between Syria and Lebanon.  The role 
of Sudan has been reinforced in its African and Arab 
domain by convening the two groups' summits in Khartoum 
on January and March of this year. 
 
Our absolute belief in the unity of destiny remains our 
guide in all our actions in the continent of Africa.  We 
will work in the forthcoming era to set our potentials 
under the brothers' disposal in Africa for realizing 
ambitions of the citizens of the continent in terms of 
construction and development.  Sudan, after overcoming 
the problem of war with its south, will also play a 
significant role in regional and semi-regional 
 
KHARTOUM 00000850  003 OF 006 
 
 
institutions - and we have contributed in establishing 
most of them - in realizing development, prosperity, and 
sober rule. 
 
We are pleased that some of these organizations have 
played an effective role in realizing peace in our 
country; they include the IGAD, Arab League, and the 
African Union, the last of which we welcome for the great 
role played by its peace mission in Darfur. 
 
From our side, we will keep on providing all possible 
support to the AU Mission to perform its role. 
 
Sudan has stood against all attempts for belittling the 
AU's role and transferring the peace process in Darfur to 
the UN. 
 
The conference will discuss a number of issues related to 
our relations with African states.  There will be a 
special session on relations with neighboring states, the 
AU role, and the map of diplomatic representation in the 
continent. 
 
The relations with the United States and the European 
states represent one of our utmost concerns to benefit 
from the economic and political weights of this group and 
seeking to realize objectives of our foreign policy. 
 
Our relations with the United States have witnessed a 
critical period during the past few years.  Although the 
progress achieved in this domain is still below our 
ambitions, the upcoming period will witness constant 
efforts from our side to reach common understanding with 
the American Government on the most ideal means for 
handling points of American concerns related to the 
internal developments in Sudan, regional stability, and 
combating terrorism. 
 
We will also endeavor toward developing our relations 
with other important States in the two continents of 
North and South America, such as Canada, Brazil, and 
Argentina. 
 
Sudan's peace process involved an introduction of 
European states to Sudan again after a several-year 
boycott. 
 
Signing the Comprehensive Peace Agreement led to 
remarkable enhancement in Sudanese-European relations in 
spite of the complexities caused by the Darfur crisis. 
 
We will continue our dialogue with the European Union and 
its states toward completion of our efforts for restoring 
the frozen rights of Sudan in the Lome and Cotonou 
Agreements, resumption of development aid, and work for 
writing off debt. 
 
Our relations with the Asian states are flourishing; this 
has been evidently reflected in rise of the size of Asian 
investments from states such as China, India, Malaysia, 
and Pakistan, particularly in the domain of oil 
production. 
 
The volume of trade exchanges has also risen with states 
such as South Korea and Indonesia, while our relations 
with Japan witnesses promising developments; last year 
several Japanese delegations visited the country and 
discussed issues of economic cooperation. 
 
Moreover, we have commenced important contacts with the 
Japanese government for handling Sudan's debt. 
 
Developing relations with the Asian states would be one 
of our concerns in the transitional period, particularly 
that these states presently occupy high position in the 
world economy. 
 
Implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement "CPA" 
is considered the first duty of the Government of 
National Unity during the transitional period.  Hence, 
performing the duties linked to the implementation of the 
peace agreement toward relationships with the external 
word represents a top priority in our move with the 
United Nations and the international community as a 
whole. 
 
The United Nations Mission in Sudan is considered at the 
top of the circles we are dealing with in this regard; we 
particularly work to reactivate the national mechanism 
for dealing with the mission after we signed an agreement 
on the status of forces (SOFA) that rules the 
relationship between the government and the mission. 
 
KHARTOUM 00000850  004 OF 006 
 
 
 
Sudan has good heritage in cooperation with the 
international community in the domain of humanitarian 
affairs.  Our dealing with the voluntary organizations 
and the UN operating in this domain in Darfur will be 
objective.  We will also work with the international 
community under circumstances characterized by the 
obvious shrinkage in size of humanitarian assistance; 
this is to guarantee the provision of the required relief 
commodities, particularly in Southern Sudan due to the 
voluntary repatriation of refugees and displaced persons 
in light of the implementation of the peace agreement and 
the transition from the relief phase into the phase of 
development and rehabilitation. 
 
Last year, the United Nations celebrated its sixtieth 
anniversary.  Recently, some important issues regarding 
the role of the UN in the future and reconsideration of 
its structures to become more democratic and broadly 
representative have come about. 
 
Sudan has worked through the African and Arab groups to 
present projects for reform of the UN to fit the role 
that developing states should play.  These developing 
states have succeeded on the issue of the UN General 
Assembly resolution on establishing the International 
Council for Human Rights; geographical representation 
will be fair in it and its work will be kept away from 
selectivity and political purposes. 
 
Our efforts will continue in coordination with the 
developing states for completion of the reform process in 
the United Nations, particularly in expanding the 
Security Council in a way that guarantees just 
representation of Third World states. 
 
In seeking to develop our relations with the 
international community, we will exert our utmost efforts 
for cooperation with the Security Council to implement 
its resolutions regarding our country, particularly 
Resolutions No. 1590 and 1591 in a way that would not 
harm our sovereignty.  We will double our communications 
with the international financial institutions for 
handling the debt issue and will continue our efforts for 
joining the World Trade Organization. 
 
Our country is entering into a new political phase; 
during this phase we will promote values of human rights, 
transparency, and general freedoms.  Hence, we, in the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs in coordination with the 
concerned authorities, will crystallize a positive 
official position toward Sudan's ratification of the 
international agreements in the domain of human rights. 
This will open the door widely for international 
cooperation and benefits from technical and economic 
assistance. 
 
Pursuant to the Interim National Constitution provisions, 
we hope to move from the position of defense to the 
position of positive work with the international 
community to elevate values of human rights, 
transparency, and democracy. 
 
Thus, our delegations participant in international 
conferences and forums will be directed to work for this 
goal. 
 
Probably one of the top priorities in the duties of the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs at all times is the concern 
of Sudanese communities abroad, welfare of their 
individuals' interests, and working to link them to the 
important developments in their country. 
 
Today, the reasons that led to alienation between people 
of Sudan abroad and their country in the past are over 
now.  During the transitional period, we will give more 
attention to issues involving the category of these 
citizens in light of the promises made by the state to 
facilitate their stay abroad and their return back home. 
 
One of the essential issues that the Ministry will 
undertake in this domain is to contribute to the 
refugees' voluntary repatriation from neighboring states 
after the realization of peace. 
 
Moreover, we have taken some steps to facilitate the 
process of aliens' entry into the country.  This is after 
the approval of a constitutional that is characterized by 
political and economic openness and in light of our 
expectations of foreign investors' inflow in to the 
country. 
 
 
KHARTOUM 00000850  005 OF 006 
 
 
The Darfur issue remains a worry to us in dealing with 
the international community; this crisis has been an 
introduction for attack against Sudan and distortion of 
its image abroad. 
 
Despite the great efforts the government has exerted in 
this regard, not finding a final solution for the problem 
would greatly weaken our position in the international 
arena, particularly since the UN and the international 
community are closely observing what is going in Darfur. 
 
Although any positive signs in the UN Secretary General's 
reports to the Security Council basically depend on 
developments on the ground, a heavy task is borne by the 
Foreign Ministry in changing the distorted image about 
the country. 
 
From our side, we will work to exploit every opportunity 
to penetrate the international community.  But this 
undoubtedly requires precise coordination with the other 
circles in the National Unity Government to guarantee 
absolute harmony between the external movement and the 
internal movement. 
 
Sudanese diplomacy has succeeded in persuading the 
African Union not to transfer its duties in Darfur to the 
United Nations except upon the approval of the Government 
of Sudan and after reaching a peace agreement.  We have 
to bear a heavy burden in the Ministry to confront the 
campaign led by some influential states to place Darfur 
under the international forces' authority. 
 
Enhancement of the image of Sudan abroad, which has been 
affected by the abovementioned disturbed situation in the 
country, whether it is the war in the south or in Darfur, 
needs redoubled media efforts. 
 
Even though the greatest part of the burden in this 
domain should be borne by other circles in the National 
Unity Government, the Foreign Ministry undertakes a great 
role; this is based on the widespread nature of its 
diplomatic missions abroad. 
 
For achieving this significant role, we have to endeavor 
to focus on the weight of media areas abroad; this would 
enable us to transmit our message appropriately. 
 
As we will also work to open channels for dealing with 
the widespread Arab and foreign mass media and with the 
world international news agencies and their resident 
correspondents in Khartoum.  This effort needs a high 
degree of coordination to ensure that the accurate media 
message has reached the objective it targets. 
 
Based on its jurisdictions in the domain of Sudan's 
external relations, the Ministry undertakes the duty of 
coordination and follow-up vertically with the Presidency 
of the Republic, Council of Ministers, and the two 
Legislative Councils - the National Assembly and the 
Council of States; and horizontally with the Ministries, 
institutions, corporations, and concerned organs on 
relevant issues, external dimension within the framework 
of bilateral relations with the world states, 
international and regional cooperation, and world issues 
with the other concerned specialized international and 
regional organizations. 
 
All these are carried on by the communications conducted 
by the leadership of the Ministry, its expert departments 
and our missions abroad. 
 
Due to the upcoming period, which is full of challenges 
from various directions, we, from our side, will work to 
coordinate precisely with the government circles to 
guarantee appropriate implementation of foreign policy. 
 
Our conference will convene a special session for this 
matter, and we hope it would find the solutions for all 
the problems we are facing in this regard. 
 
We would not be able to achieve our ambitious goals in 
the domain of external work during the transitional 
period but through the provision of a supportive and 
satisfactory work environment.  This would encourage the 
workers at the Ministry to perform their duties 
enthusiastically and to exert their utmost efforts. 
 
Of course, improvement of the work environment can come 
about by confronting the administrative problems from 
which the Ministry suffers.  The administrative 
distortions in the job structures within the Ministry's 
bureaus is the most important.  This will be addressed by 
 
KHARTOUM 00000850  006 OF 006 
 
 
reviewing the present structure, preparing new job 
structures, and employing intermediate and higher-level 
diplomatic cadres in accordance with the restrictions and 
conditions in force and in compliance with the 
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. 
 
The salary scale will also be handled with great concern 
to find a radical treatment, as it is extremely weak. 
This would reassure and provide a sense of stability 
among employees. 
 
For addressing the requirements of the application of the 
federal system, the Ministry has taken concrete steps 
toward opening sub-offices in Juba, El Fasher, and Port 
Sudan to regulate the foreign diplomatic presence in 
these areas and to offer advice and consultation to the 
state governments in regard to dealing with the foreign 
presence. 
 
Perhaps one of the most important sides for correcting 
the work environment is through exerting effort to 
provide training to all workers in the Ministry, whether 
diplomats or not. 
 
During the past few years, the Ministry has been able to 
double the amount of opportunities for external training 
of diplomats in collaboration with several states in 
various parts of the world.  The Ministry has also given 
attention to internal training; during the transitional 
period, we will work to double the training opportunities 
to include all workers in the Ministry.  In this regard, 
we will review missions and methods of the National 
Diplomatic Center to conduct internal training. 
 
We will also give more concern to the social aspects of 
employees, such as health insurance and collective 
transportation. 
 
We will inaugurate some social facilities and lay the 
foundation for others, such as a school and a sports 
compound. 
 
In seeking promotion of work auxiliaries, we will 
implement important projects.  This has started with 
expansion in the Ministry's premises, as well as the 
provision of equipment and essential furniture for the 
workers' comfort. 
 
As we are also seeking at the same time to realize the 
objective of establishing an electronic government that 
is supported by the highest authorities in the country. 
 
We will work to modernize the means of communications 
that link the headquarters with missions abroad and to 
establish a comprehensive database for facilities and 
embassies. 
 
We seek to make advancements with respect to the 
information revolution to benefit from the tremendous 
potentials available to upgrade the effectiveness of 
Sudanese diplomacy. 
 
The concepts stated in this paper affirm that Sudan's 
relations with the international community have greatly 
ramified and covered many fields at bilateral, regional, 
and international levels. 
 
Fortunately, we are approaching a new era that comes at 
the end of the war with the South that is full of 
indications of soon reaching resolution of all other 
problems of Sudan.  This would assist in releasing the 
country from the fetters that have been chaining it for 
many years. 
 
We are optimistic that the forthcoming years would 
witness a genuine explosion of energies of which the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs to realize the state's goals 
in citizens' development and prosperity. 
 
(End text) 
 
STEINFELD