06KHARTOUM271
SUDAN:  Reaction to Danish Cartoon Relatively
Mon Feb 06 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO6809
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #0271/01 0371028
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 061028Z FEB 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1282
INFO RUEHCP/AMEMBASSY COPENHAGEN 0002
RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 000271 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PREL SOCI SCUL PGOV KISL DA NO US SU
SUBJECT: SUDAN:  Reaction to Danish Cartoon Relatively 
Mild 
 
Ref:  Khartoum 00264 
 
¶1.  Summary:   Despite some violence in Darfur and a 
Friday demonstration in Khartoum, the situation here has 
remained relatively calm.  The Norwegian Embassy received 
a threat, but is being well protected by Sudanese forces. 
There is some concern that Danish and Norwegian NGO's may 
have to halt operations, at least temporarily.   End 
Summary. 
 
Demonstrations Held in Khartoum on Feb. 3 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Following the February 2 demonstration targeting the 
Danish Refugee Council in Nyala, the Embassy issued a 
warden notice advising American citizens in Sudan to 
exercise caution especially during the period after 
"Jama" prayers on February 3 (reftel).  This warning was 
issued based on indications of the likelihood of 
demonstrations taking place in Khartoum after Friday 
Mosque services. 
 
¶3.  Early Friday morning, Sudanese riot police were pre- 
positioned throughout Khartoum -- at most diplomatic 
missions, including the U.S. Embassy, as well as at the 
United Nations and the offices of other prominent 
international organizations. Throughout the morning and 
mid-day, the streets of Khartoum remained relatively 
quiet. After prayers, large numbers of individuals coming 
from three Khartoum mosques converged on a city square 
located behind the Presidential Palace.  The Danish 
cartoons were a topic of discussion at many local Mosques 
by government-selected religious speakers, who encouraged 
mosque attendees to participate in the scheduled 
demonstration.  The crowd was estimated to number between 
2,500 to 3,000. The crowd marched from the square to the 
nearby offices of the United Nations headquarters and 
European Union, where they held a peaceful rally against 
the cartoons.  The protest included shouts of "Down with 
the U.S." The protestors also presented written 
complaints to representatives from the UN and EU.  The 
Embassy received reports Presidential Advisors Dr. Ahmed 
Ali Al-Imam (religious affairs) and Dr. Ghazi Salahuddin 
(political affairs) addressed the crowd. There were no 
reports of violence. 
 
More Details Emerge on Darfur Incident 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  On February 2, approximately 50 to 70 youth organized 
a demonstration at the Danish Refugee Council (DRC) and 
Norwegian Church Aid (NCA) compounds in Nyala, South 
Darfur.  The crowd, primarily boys from a local private 
school, threw stones at the DRC compound and destroyed 
the guard hut, then moved to the NCA compound, where they 
damaged an NCA vehicle, vandalized two motorbikes, and 
injured one staff member. 
 
¶5.  Demonstrations continued over the ensuing days, 
during which time protestors presented DRC with a letter 
requesting that DRC leave South Darfur, which was not of 
an aggressive or threatening tone.  DRC complied with the 
request; however, it is not yet clear whether DRC's 
departure is a temporary security precaution or a 
permanent withdrawal from South Darfur.  NCA continues to 
work in Nyala, but is keep a low profile and is remaining 
on high alert. 
 
¶6.  On February 4, a USAID partner reported hearing from 
the Sudanese government immigration department that the 
government was canceling the "stay" visas for all Danish 
and Norwegian NGOs staff.  Local press reports that Dutch 
and French NGOs may face the same treatment, and that 
several NGOs might be expelled from Sudan for "poor 
performance." 
 
Norwegian Embassy Protection, Press Release 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  The Norwegian embassy received a threatening letter 
on February 3; police have provided ample protection.  On 
February 6, local English press printed a press release 
from the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
highlighting the importance of respect for religion.  The 
release referred to the publication of derogatory 
material as "unfortunate and deplorable," but also 
observed that freedom of expression is a constitutional 
 
KHARTOUM 00000271  002 OF 002 
 
 
right and a mainstay of Norwegian society.  (Note: 
Denmark does not have a diplomatic mission in Sudan.  End 
note.) 
 
Press Reaction 
-------------- 
 
¶8.  The Sudanese Arabic-language press carried reports of 
the demonstrations in Khartoum, which included burning of 
the Danish and Norwegian flags.  One (Al-Hayat, Feb. 5) 
noted a demand from the Muslim Scholars Association for 
the expulsion of the ambassadors of Denmark, Norway, 
Spain, France, and Germany as well as a boycott of their 
goods.  The new pro-Northern separatist daily Al Intibaha 
also reported the demonstration in Nyala ("Demonstrators 
in Darfur burn Vehicles of Norwegian and Swedish NGOs," 
Feb. 4).  An editorial in the same edition - "We all will 
die for you, Prophet Mohammed!" - saw the insulting 
caricature as "a declaration of war on all Muslims," 
regardless of Danish government apologies. 
 
¶9.  Other editorials have supported a boycott of Danish 
goods, as in the pro-government dailies Sudan Vision 
(Feb. 5 and 6), Alwatan (Feb. 5), and Al-Rai Al-Aam ("The 
Freedom of Insult," Feb. 4).  However, Sudan Vision also 
joined the other two (pro-Southern) English-language 
dailies in publishing, on Feb. 6, the text of a Norwegian 
official statement that, while characterizing the impact 
of the cartoons as "unfortunate and deplorable," 
maintained that freedom of expression also entails 
"tolerance" for different points of view. 
 
Government Reaction 
------------------- 
 
¶10.  According to the government Sudan News Agency, the 
National Congress Party renewed on February 2 a call for 
a boycott of Danish and Norwegian products and expressed 
hopes that government officials in the Muslim world would 
cut off diplomatic ties with any country that "humiliates 
Islam or Muslims."  Also on Febraury 3, Foreign Minister 
Lam Akol, in a BBC interview in London, condemned the 
publication of the cartoons, stating that such behavior 
is not helpful to the dialogue between civilizations and 
cultures. 
HUME