06KHARTOUM2829
DARFUR: SLA/M REACHES OUT TO ALL PARTIES
Mon Dec 11 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXYZ0005
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKH #2829/01 3451317
ZNR UUUUU ZZH  (CCY TEXT - MSI9649 - AD598611 - 555)
P 111317Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5540
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS KHARTOUM 002829 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
C O R R E C T E D   C O P Y - TEXT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREF AU SU
SUBJECT:  DARFUR: SLA/M REACHES OUT TO ALL PARTIES 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  SLM/Minawi representatives hosted a widely attended 
general meeting in El Fasher November 28-29 to discuss the progress 
of DPA implementation, new initiatives to bring signatory and 
non-signatory groups back to the negotiating table, and ways to work 
productively with the African Union Mission in Sudan. The event 
sought to reach out to all parties involved in the Darfur peace 
process and establish concrete recommendations for improving 
coordination and communication.  End summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
SLM General Meeting Reviews DPA, Peace Process 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶2.  SLM/Minawi representatives to the African Union held a General 
Meeting November 29-30 at the DPA Implementation Office.  The event 
drew wide attendance, including representatives from the Ceasefire 
Commission (CFC), AMIS Deputy Head of Mission, AU Civilian Police 
(CIVPOL), Sudanese Government, UNMIS, and armed movements, including 
JEM Peace Wing and SLM/Free Will. SLM Chair Arko Suliman Dahia 
outlined objectives of the meeting:  the progress of Darfur Peace 
Agreement (DPA) implementation, cooperation between signatory and 
non-signatory parties on the peace process and the role of SLM/A 
representatives to the African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS).  In 
the final declaration and recommendations, participants agreed to 
form a SLA/M-chaired commite of signatory and non-signatory 
participants to negotiate with the Sudanese Government on DPA 
implementation. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
SLM Frustrated with Slow Pace of DPA Implementation 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶3.  The SLM is committed to the DPA, said SLM/Minawi official Ali 
Mukhtar, but frustrated with the slow pace of implementation. "We 
signed the DPA for the safety and prosperity of Darfurians, to stop 
the loss of lives and end the tragic suffering," he said, "but you 
all know that the DPA has not progressed an inch, the only thing 
implemented is the appointment of the Senior Assistant to the 
President." He noted that vulnerable groups such as children and the 
elderly rely on the armed movements to provide them with "security, 
support, freedom, and democracy." 
 
¶4.  Major Salah Mahdi Hassan, Sudanese Government representative to 
the CFC, expressed his support for the SLA general meeting as a step 
toward DPA implementation.  He said that such initiatives would 
speed up the restoration of peace and stability to Darfur, and added 
that the resolutions of this conference would be carefully 
considered by the Sudanese Government. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
Greater Coordination by Signatories & Non-Signatories 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶5.  JEM Peace Wing representative Mohammed Bashir Ahmed expressed 
his appreciation for the presence of all the different movements 
despite their differences.  He said JEM refused to sign the DPA 
because it "does not respond to the needs and aspirations of the 
majority of Darfurian people."  Expressing JEM's readiness to 
negotiate future solutions, he added that JEM is not an opponent to 
peace, and believes that "armed conflict will never lead to peace." 
Ahmed reaffirmed the JEM's commitment to the N'Djamena Humanitarian 
Ceasefire Agreement and called on all armed movements to observe a 
cessation of hostilities and show good faith in negotiating for 
peace. 
¶6.  The delay in implementation of the DPA has increased distrust 
between the parties, said SLM/A Free Will representative Jamal Abdel 
Rahman Abdalla, and consequently lowered interest by other rebel 
groups to sign it.  He said that the major complicating factor is a 
lack of coordination between the Sudanese Government and the 
signatories.  He called on the signatories of the DPA to improve 
communication channels. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
AU:  Safe Passage for Humanitarian and Fuel Convoys 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶7.  The AU CIVPOL commissioner, RD Moeyana, argued that the AU is 
under-equipped, lacking basic technical support and a full mandate 
to protect IDPs.  He requested that rebel forces reduce military 
operations near the IDP camps and villages and desist from attacking 
humanitarian convoys.  Moeyana highlighted upcoming AU sponsored 
seminars in Khartoum for the Sudanese Government, SLM/A, and 
international partners to support community policing.  He also urged 
the SLM/A political section to submit lists of nominees to be 
considered for the CIVPOL commission. 
 
¶8.  AU Chief of Joint Logistics, Col. Michael Kamuzu, also detailed 
challenges facing the AU and specifically mentioned difficulties 
with fuel shortages and transport.  He discussed a recent hijacking 
attempt on one of the fuel convoys on the Nyala to El Fasher road, 
and noted the difficulties these attacks present.  Kamuzu asked the 
armed factions to give AU fuel convoys safe passage. 
----------- 
Conclusions 
----------- 
 
¶9.  The general meeting produced a two-page declaration and 26 
recommendations (Note:  post will forward text of both to AF/SPG via 
e-mail.  End note.)  The declaration listed participants' 
frustration with the lack of action on DPA implementation, the 
continuing deterioration of security conditions, remilitarization of 
the Janjaweed militia, the continuation of military operations 
between the Sudanese Government and non-signatories, and associated 
attacks on civilians.  Participants also mentioned problems facing 
SLM/A representatives working with the African Union and security 
challenges to the work of the AU and humanitarian relief agencies. 
Significantly, the declaration expresses concern over the dedication 
of the Sudanese Government in implementing the Darfur Peace 
Agreement. 
 
¶10.  Recommendations range from the very specific to very broad, 
including improving the SLM/A's relationship with the AU and DPA 
non-signatories.  Several recommendations urge strengthening a 
reciprocal relationship between the SLM/A with the AU to support the 
AU's mission, while calling for administrative and logistical 
support for SLM/A CFC representatives.  Most notable are 
recommendations to improve communication and forming a committee of 
DPA signatory and non-signatory parties to negotiate with the 
government.  The SLM/A also recommended creating political offices 
in the three Darfur states and establishing media programs. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶11.  The final declaration clearly enumerates the frustrations of 
all parties, and their recommendations could help to resolve some 
issues.  However, it remains to be seen whether the SLM/A will be 
able to maintain momentum due to the recent flare up of violence in 
El Fasher.  In conversations on the margins of the general meeting, 
mid-level SLA/M contacts noted the importance of commencing DPA 
implementation and not waiting for the Sudanese Government to take 
action.  If the new SLM/A-chaired committee of signatory and 
non-signatory parties is established and develops a platform for 
negotiation, it could prove a useful tool to improve communication 
among all parties.  End comment. 
 
HUME