06KHARTOUM2161
LRA Talks Resume as LRA Assembles
Thu Sep 07 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO3874
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #2161 2501511
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 071511Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4450
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUEHKI/AMEMBASSY KINSHASA 0061UNCLAS KHARTOUM 002161 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MOPS UN UG SU
SUBJECT:  LRA Talks Resume as LRA Assembles 
 
Ref: Khartoum 2038 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY:  Talks between Uganda and the Lord's Resistance Army 
(LRA) resumed in Juba on September 6, amidst increasing reports of 
LRA fighters moving to their assembly points.  Talks are now 
focusing on the social issues in northern Uganda.  Most observers 
are optimistic about the talks, but are now discussing whether the 
negotiations can successfully address the fundamental social issues 
in Uganda.  Meanwhile, Switzerland is searching for a way to 
continue its support without undermining the authority of the 
International Criminal Court (ICC).  END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Machar Returns as the Process Gains Momentum 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) After an initial recess to allow the cessation of hostilities 
(CoH) to take effect, talks have been on hold since Sunday because 
the lead mediator, Government of Southern Sudan (GoSS) Vice 
President Riek Machar had traveled to one of the assembly points, 
Owiny-ki-Bul.  He wanted to ensure the designated area was not 
mined, and to boost support from the local population.  Owiny-ki-Bul 
is 10 km from the Ugandan border, just outside of Parajok and east 
of Nimule.  The second assembly point, Ri-Kwangba, is on the Congo 
border south of Maridi, next to Nbanga and near the LRA's Garamba 
park base. 
 
¶3. (U) Over the past week, there have been increasing reports of LRA 
fighters emerging from the bush and proceeding to the assembly 
points, despite early complaints from LRA leader Joseph Kony about 
designated routes, and accusations of minor CoH violations on both 
sides.  Surprise encounters between Ugandan military (UPDF) and the 
LRA have all ended peacefully, and one of the ICC indictees, Dominic 
Ongwen, has reportedly received food and safe passage from the 
UPDF. 
 
¶4. (SBU) This initial success has led to a wave of exuberance in 
Southern Sudan; any mention of the peace process at the opening of 
Southern Sudan Legislative Assembly (septel) met with cheers and 
loud applause.  The discussions are now shifting from whether these 
talks can succeed to whether there is room in a deal with Kony to 
solve Uganda's underlying social issues.  A team of observers, led 
by Gulu District Chairman Norbert Mao, is trying to help steer the 
process in that direction.  Chairman Mao told the Acting Consul 
General that he wants to ensure Kony is northern Uganda's last 
rebel. 
 
------------------------------------------- 
Switzerland Trying to Support Peace and ICC 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Swiss ambassador for humanitarian affairs, Jean-Daniel 
Bieler, also wants these talks to lead to a lasting and just peace. 
In Juba to consult with the Swiss humanitarian advisor to the talks, 
Ambassador Bieler believes the process may eventually marginalize 
Kony, placating the LRA leader while focusing on the root causes of 
Ugandan's social problems.  While he thinks this development should 
be encouraged, he expressed fears that Kony may end the talks if he 
sees it moving in that direction. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Bieler is also concerned that the negotiators are not 
really working to resolve the ICC issue.  If a deal is reached, he 
does not want it to be scuttled by The Hague Court.  That, Bieler 
said, is the paradox of the Swiss position:  they want to support 
the talks without undermining the authority or legitimacy of the 
nascent ICC.  The Swiss Ambassador does not believe there will be an 
acceptable legal solution to this conundrum, so he would like the 
international community to find a political one.  While difficult, 
Bieler thinks this is essential for the continued viability of the 
ICC.  He requested U.S. support in finding this solution. 
 
HUME