06KHARTOUM1481
WEST DARFUR - INTERAGENCY COOPERATION TO
Sun Jun 25 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO9728
PP RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1481/01 1760902
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 250902Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3386
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KHARTOUM 001481 
 
SIPDIS 
 
AIDAC 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR AF/SPG, PRM, AND ALSO PASS USAID/W 
USAID FOR DCHA SUDAN TEAM, AFR/SP 
NAIROBI FOR USAID/DCHA/OFDA, USAID/REDSO, AND FAS 
USMISSION UN ROME 
GENEVA FOR NKYLOH 
NAIROBI FOR SFO 
NSC FOR JBRAUSE, NSC/AFRICA FOR TSHORTLEY 
USUN FOR TMALY 
BRUSSELS FOR PLERNER 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREF PGOV PHUM SOCI KAWC SU
SUBJECT:  WEST DARFUR - INTERAGENCY COOPERATION TO 
CURTAIL ALCOHOL PRODUCTION IMPROVES IDP PROTECTION 
 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  Strict enforcement of a new policy designed to 
curtail the illegal production, sale, and consumption of 
alcohol in Riyad camp for internally displaced persons 
(IDPs), near El Geneina, West Darfur, resulted in an 80 
percent reduction in alcohol production and a decline in 
the number of protection incidents recorded at the camp. 
An interagency group comprising the Office of the U.N. 
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), African Union 
Mission in Sudan (AMIS), the international non-government 
organization (NGO) camp coordinator, Government of 
National Unity (GNU) police, and community leaders 
jointly assessed the problem and devised an effective 
policy that limited the production and sale of alcohol by 
threatening to evict individuals engaged in these 
activities inside the camp.  Frequent patrons of illegal 
alcohol establishments included armed security personnel 
who, when intoxicated, became belligerent and abusive, 
threatening the safety of camp residents.  Furthermore, 
the illicit alcohol trade contributed to the development 
of criminal behavior that also threatened the public 
safety of the camp's vulnerable IDP residents.  Notably, 
the successful restriction of the camp's alcohol trade 
was achieved without evicting any camp residents.  End 
Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
Illegal Alcohol Trade Destabilizes an IDP Community 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶2.  The production, sale, and consumption of alcohol in 
northern Sudan are prohibited by law.  Individuals who 
fail to comply with this law can be imprisoned for up to 
two years.  Despite the prohibition against alcohol in 
Darfur, strong demand has created a viable black market 
for the production and sale of alcohol.  Locally made 
alcohol is available for sale in towns and cities, as 
well as in several large IDP camps throughout Darfur. 
 
¶3.  In January 2006, UNHCR and several NGOs working in 
West Darfur became concerned about an apparent rise in 
the number of violent incidents at Riyad IDP camp near El 
Geneina, West Darfur.  UNHCR and NGOs jointly analyzed 
protection incident reports from the camp.  The 
investigation revealed that a majority of protection 
incidents -- including nightly weapon discharges, 
physical assaults, shootings, harassment, home invasion, 
and sexual assault of women by intoxicated, uniformed, 
and armed men -- involved alcohol as a root cause.  The 
assessment team also found evidence indicating that 
several sheikhs, or local community leaders, were 
profiting from the illicit alcohol trade and obstructing 
attempts to curb the production, sale, and consumption of 
alcohol. 
 
¶4.  After conducting further research and consulting with 
Riyad camp community leaders, the interagency group 
concluded that a significant increase in local alcohol 
production and consumption towards the end of 2005 
destabilized Riyad camp's vulnerable IDP community.  The 
group's research indicated that more than 40 camp 
residents were producing and supplying alcohol to an 
active market with alcohol available 24 hours a day. 
However, the majority of alcohol producers who had 
established illicit businesses in Riyad camp were women 
from nearby El Geneina rather than Riyad's IDP camp 
residents.  The group expressed particular concern over 
the large number of uniformed, armed personnel found to 
patronize these illegal establishments.  The majority of 
the reported protection incidents occurred at night when 
joint patrols are not conducted by AMIS Civilian Police 
and GNU police.  (Note:  International agencies are 
prevented from working in the camp at night due to the 
government-imposed curfew.  End note.) 
 
¶5.  Riyad camp is located directly adjacent to El 
Geneina, West Darfur's state capital.  The illicit 
alcohol trade which developed as a result of this close 
 
KHARTOUM 00001481  002 OF 003 
 
 
proximity also spawned the development of a "red light" 
district in the camp that was frequented by both IDP and 
town residents.  Solicitation of prostitutes by armed, 
uniformed personnel threatened the safety and wellbeing 
of the camp's IDP population.  The interagency group was 
also concerned by numerous destabilizing behaviors 
associated with the illicit alcohol industry, including 
gambling, smuggling, gun-running, and the formation of 
gangs, possibly through forced recruitment of local 
youth. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
Interagency Cooperation to Solve the Alcohol Problem 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶6.  Selling alcohol is a lucrative proposition.  The 
interagency group initially considered increasing 
livelihood programs to serve as alternatives to alcohol 
production.  However, as the income generation potential 
of the proposed livelihood interventions did not compare 
favorably with that of alcohol production, the programs 
were deemed unattractive substitutes.  Since the research 
indicated that the major alcohol suppliers originated 
from El Geneina, the group concluded that IDP livelihood 
programs alone would ultimately fail to address the root 
cause of the problem.  The group did not fully 
investigate solutions designed to limit demand for 
alcohol in Riyad camp. 
 
¶7.  Though the camp's residents wanted to bring an end to 
the production, sale, and consumption of alcohol in their 
community, they were prevented from taking action due to 
fear of retaliation from powerful sheikhs who profited 
from the illicit trade.  Community leaders wanting to 
halt alcohol production requested assistance from local 
police.  Many NGOs working in the camp were initially 
reluctant to involve GNU police in any alcohol 
interdiction effort.  However, UNHCR viewed the problem 
as an opportunity to engage the GNU police in an effort 
to strengthen community law enforcement and build trust 
between police and the IDP community. 
 
¶8.  The alcohol policy eventually developed by the 
interagency group included both enforcement and 
livelihood substitution measures.  Issued in early March 
through an information campaign involving community 
leaders, women's committees, GNU police, UNHCR, AMIS, and 
the NGO camp coordinator, the alcohol policy declared 
that individuals producing alcohol in the camp had one 
week to cease production activities.  If producers failed 
to comply, authorities threatened to confiscate and 
destroy their equipment and evict them from the camp. 
GNU police concurred with the importance of the alcohol 
policy and agreed that no one would be arrested in 
furtherance of the alcohol interdiction policy. 
 
---------------- 
Positive Results 
---------------- 
 
¶9.  Since the policy came into force in mid-March, the 
interagency group estimates that 75 to 80 percent of 
Riyad's illicit alcohol stills have ceased production. 
Though the group estimates that up to eight stills remain 
operational, local alcohol production occurs on a much 
smaller scale.  Producers quickly adapted to enforcement 
measures by brewing and selling alcohol early in the 
morning, between 0300 to 0600 hours when the camp curfew 
remains in effect. 
 
¶10.  According to the interagency group and Riyad's IDP 
community representatives, the policy resulted in a 
significant decrease in the number of protection 
incidents in the camp over the 10 weeks since the alcohol 
policy has been enforced.  Moreover, protection incidents 
that have been reported in recent weeks are less violent 
in nature.  Gunshots, which had been routinely heard at 
night, no longer occur.  An examination of the March and 
April protection reports clearly reflects this 
improvement. 
 
 
KHARTOUM 00001481  003 OF 003 
 
 
¶11.  Two GNU police monitoring missions have discovered 
and destroyed six stills since the end of the grace 
period for voluntary compliance.  Other materials used in 
the distilling process such as plastic buckets, metal 
pots, terra cotta pots, and glass jars have been either 
confiscated or destroyed.  UNHCR, the NGO camp 
coordinator, and AMIS Civilian Police witnessed these GNU 
police operations and reported that they were conducted 
in a professional and restrained manner.  (Note:  While 
commendable that GNU police are contributing to improving 
public safety in Riyad camp, GNU police actions in other 
IDP camps in Darfur and in the Khartoum vicinity have 
prompted widespread reports of human rights violations. 
End Note.) 
 
¶12.  To date, authorities have not arrested or evicted 
individuals found culpable of alcohol production.  The 
interagency group maintains that if alcohol production 
expands beyond current levels and protection incidents 
once again increase, graduated enforcement involving 
harsher consequences will be applied.  Such measures may 
include individual arrests and destruction of shelters, 
particularly if producers are found to be residents of El 
Geneina profiting from the illicit sale of alcohol in the 
camp. 
 
HUME