06LISBON2406
PORTUGAL: VENEZUELA SPECIAL COORDINATOR DISCUSSES
Wed Oct 25 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Lisbon
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHLI #2406/01 2981608
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 251608Z OCT 06
FM AMEMBASSY LISBON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5294
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 0314
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0059
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 1456
RUEHUB/USINT HAVANA 0029C O N F I D E N T I A L LISBON 002406 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 10/16/2016 
TAGS: PREL PGOV VE BR PO
SUBJECT: PORTUGAL: VENEZUELA SPECIAL COORDINATOR DISCUSSES 
VENEZUELA, BRAZIL, AND CUBA 
 
REF: LISBON 2160 
 
Classified By: CLASSIFIED BY PUBLIC DIPLOMACY OFFICER ROBERT 
HOWES FOR REASONS 1.4(B) AND (D). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary:  In an October 3 meeting with WHA Special 
Coordinator for Venezuela Deborah McCarthy, Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs (MFA) Latin America Director Helena Coutinho 
stressed Portugal's commitment to a fair Venezuelan 
presidential campaign with a viable opposition to prevent 
Chavez from gathering too much power.  The GOP also remains 
fully engaged in urging African counterparts to support 
Guatemala in the election for the UN Security Council (UNSC). 
 Coutinho highlighted Portugal's long-standing relationship 
with Brazil and its ability to work well with the Lula 
administration.  With regards to Cuba, Coutinho concurred 
with the U.S. desire to see the return of democratic rule but 
noted the EU approach was to keep open lines of communication 
with the Cuban government while simultaneously talking to 
independent civil society groups.  End Summary. 
 
Relations with Venezuela 
------------------------ 
¶2. (C) Coutinho stated that the fact that nearly half-million 
Portuguese nationals and additional 800,000 persons of 
Portuguese descent reside in Venezuela influences Portugal's 
relationship with the Chavez government. Since last year, 
Chavez has requested a state visit with the Portuguese 
president but the GOP has not been willing to find a 
convenient time.  Coutinho expressed concern regarding 
Chavez's attempts to further consolidate power, especially 
judicial power, in his own hands.  She cited the imprisonment 
of a Portuguese pilot as an example of this "blurring" of 
powers.  Jailed for several months last year, the pilot's 
trial was postponed sixteen times and the Venezuelan 
government was never in a hurry to resolve the case, although 
he was eventually released.  McCarthy concurred with the 
concern over power consolidation and reiterated the USG 
desire to work with other countries both inside and outside 
the region that may exert an influence on Chavez. 
 
Venezuelan Presidential Elections 
--------------------------------- 
¶3. (C) Portugal remains committed to a fair Venezuelan 
presidential campaign and hopes to send observers as part of 
an EU mission.  McCarthy also underscored the need for 
international election observers but noted that the USG could 
not fund or send any observers to Venezuela.  Coutinho viewed 
the participation of the opposition in the elections as a 
positive sign as they will be the ones to prevent Chavez from 
drawing too much power into his own hands.  Nonetheless, 
Coutinho noted that the recent placement of a campaign 
billboard showing Chavez meeting with Prime Minister Socrates 
could be a boost to his electoral campaign.  While the GOP 
was angered by the posters and strongly expressed its 
dissatisfaction to the Chavez government (reftel), it might 
be too late to change the minds and potential votes of the 
many Portuguese living in Venezuela who only saw the poster 
touting the meeting with Socrates. 
 
UNSC Vote 
--------- 
¶4.  (C) McCarthy finished the conversation on Venezuela by 
commenting that the outcome of the UNSC vote between 
Venezuela and Guatemala would not be decided in the western 
hemisphere but in other parts of the world, notably Africa. 
McCarthy reiterated the USG request that Portugal advocate 
for Guatemala, especially given Portugal's close relationship 
and influence with lusophone countries in Africa.  Coutinho 
responded that Portugal had been previously demarched on the 
issue by the USG and that the GOP had discussed the issue 
with its African counterparts and would continue to do so. 
 
Strong Ties to Brazil 
--------------------- 
¶5. (C) Coutinho noted that Portugal and Brazil share a very 
strong, close, and long-standing relationship.  Portugal 
works well with the Lula Government, has an increasing number 
of investments in Brazil, and is actively trying to attract 
more Brazilian investment to Portugal.  Coutinho opined that 
Lula has done a good job of managing Brazil's economy 
(despite recent corruption scandals) and that Portugal felt 
positively about the direction of Brazil under Lula. 
McCarthy commented on USG's continued engagement with Brazil, 
noting that it could play a greater leadership role in the 
hemisphere. 
 
Cuba 
---- 
¶6. (C) The future of Cuba continues to be a topic of great 
interest to both Portugal and the EU, and Coutinho agreed 
with McCarthy that Cuba must move forward democratically. The 
big question was how this transition could be done without 
the EU and others being seen as interfering in the country's 
internal affairs.  For the time being, the EU plans to 
maintain the dialogue with the Cuban government while 
reaching out to the independent civil society.  According to 
Coutinho, civil society groups in Cuba have acted very 
prudently and thus it was difficult to gauge when and how 
they will act.  For now, the EU can only keep in contact with 
them and heed their request to keep such contacts low-key. 
 
Comment 
------- 
¶7. (C) Coutinho's comments during the meeting indicated that 
the GOP remains in broad agreement with the U.S. on issues of 
immediate concern, such as the need for a valid opposition on 
the upcoming Venezuelan elections and the importance of 
ensuring a transition to democratic rule in Cuba. However, 
her strongest points about the many Portuguese living in 
Venezuela, Portugal's close ties with Brazil, and EU's 
approach on Cuba demonstrate that Portugal is not only 
watching the region closely but is also closely looking after 
what it sees as its own and EU interests, which are not 
always consistent with ours. 
 
¶8. (U) Special Coordinator for Venezuela Deborah McCarthy 
cleared this cable. 
Hoffman