06MANAGUA715
LEON: SANDINISTA BASTION WELCOMES AMBASSADOR, MCC
Thu Mar 30 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0715/01 0892255
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 302255Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5783
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0599
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 000715 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/30/2016 
TAGS: KDEM NU PGOV PINR PREL KMCA EFIN ECON
SUBJECT: LEON: SANDINISTA BASTION WELCOMES AMBASSADOR, MCC 
SUPPORT 
 
REF: MANAGUA 0709 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul A. Trivelli. Reasons 1.4 (B,D). 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary:  During Ambassador's recent trip to Leon 
department, the upcoming November national elections were on 
the tongues of all interlocutors.  The cradle of Liberalism, 
intellectual Leon is now a Sandinista (FSLN) bastion, with 
ten of its eleven mayors in the department FSLN militants. 
Notwithstanding Leon's Sandinista bent, local government and 
university authorities appear willing to participate in 
U.S.-funded programs, if for no other reason than to improve 
regional prosperity.  Ambassador met jointly with Leon's 
Sandinista mayor Transito Tellez and a baseball coach and a 
young pitcher who participated in the World Baseball Classic. 
 He inaugurated a USAID-sponsored National Autonomous 
University of Nicaragua (UNAN) Judicial Oversight Institute 
and was interviewed live by VOA affiliate Radio Dario 
(average of 30,000 listeners).  While views vary regarding 
which political party and candidates will float to the top in 
Leon, most contacts concur that the FSLN will lead the pack, 
in part, according to opponents, because the Sandinistas are 
threatening to fire and withdraw scholarships from Leoneses 
who do not support them.  While Herty Lewites supporters 
claim they will draw votes both from the FSLN and the 
Liberals, Eduardo Montealegre supporters assert that despite 
the Sandinista hegemony in Leon, he will attract a 
substantial segment of young voters.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) Taking advantage of Ambassador's March 23 trip to 
Leon to inaugurate a USAID-sponsored National Autonomous 
University of Nicaragua (UNAN) Judicial Oversight Institute 
and to greet baseball coach Sandy Moreno and Little League 
pitcher Geovanni Toval -- recently returned from a 
Department-sponsored baseball diplomacy program -- Ambassador 
met with local political, economic, and civil society 
leaders.  His message was clear: The U.S. supports clean, 
transparent, and inclusive elections; we oppose caudillismo, 
not/not a particular party; it is unclear whether the FSLN is 
democratic; the PLC under Arnoldo Aleman is not acceptable to 
the international community; we encourage Nicaraguans to vote 
for an alternative; and while a united center-right would be 
ideal, it is not essential to maintaining friendship and 
cooperation between our two countries. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Of Leon's eleven municipalities, ten -- including 
the city of Leon - - are controlled by the FSLN/Convergencia. 
 The cradle of Liberalism, Leon was a center of conflict 
during the 1980s civil war.  A large portion of the 
Sandinista soldiers came from the department, and today Leon 
is a Sandinista (FSLN) bastion.  One of the hubs of 
Sandinista militancy is the UNAN, whose incoming rector, 
Rigoberto Sampson, is one of the FSLN's National Assembly 
deputies.  Notwithstanding Leon's Sandinista dominance, its 
residents -- including its Sandinista mayors -- pride 
themselves over their participation in the U.S.-sponsored 
Millennium Challenge Account compact program (the program 
covers Leon and Chinandega departments). 
 
EDUARDO DRAWS THE YOUTH VOTE? 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4.  (C) Election talk is already abuzz in this university 
town.  While most interlocutors concurred that Daniel Ortega 
will likely win the department, Montealegre and Lewites 
supporters assert that their respective candidates draw more 
support than meets the eye; poll respondents are reluctant to 
express support for anyone other than Ortega because the fear 
the FSLN will retaliate, Lewites and Montealegre supporters 
told us.  They claim that Sandinista tactics include threats 
that non-supporters will lose government jobs and 
"uncooperative" students will lose their scholarships. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Montealegre's Leon campaign manager, Ramon Masias, 
is a lapsed PLC militant who abandoned the PLC after he 
refused to defend PLC caudillo/convicted money launderer 
Arnoldo Aleman.  He shared with Ambassador one of Aleman's 
favorite mantras: 'An ounce of loyalty is worth a quintal 
(one hundred pounds) of wisdom,' adding that Aleman has tried 
six times to convince Masias to return to the PLC fold.  He 
warned Ambassador that Nicaragua is "on the brink of a 
political catastrophe" if Daniel Ortega wins in November. 
Noting that Nicaragua's rural vote will be key to winning the 
November election and that most of Nicaragua's rural voters 
hate the Sandinistas, Masias acknowledged that it will 
nonetheless be difficult to draw this support to 
 
Montealegre's camp because -- thanks to Aleman's politically 
astute program to build schools and health clinics in remote 
areas -- rural voters are diehard PLC loyalists.  Further, 
though much weakened, the PLC still maintains working party 
machinery, certainly more robu 
st and experienced than Montealegre's.  Mentioning that Radio 
Corporacion reaches every corner of the department, Masias 
suggested that well-targeted messages via radio could help 
garner support for Montealegre.  (Radio Corporacion's 
baseball announcer already throws in pitches for Montealegre 
in between calling balls and strikes.) 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Masias acknowledged that a four-way presidential 
race presents its risks, but does not fear it, noting that 
both Montealegre and Lewites enjoy considerable support in 
Leon, particularly among the youth who are attracted to 
Montealegre's youth and honesty.  The FSLN's competitive 
advantage is its funds to buy votes and its promises that a 
Sandinista victory means food and jobs for everyone.  Still, 
if elections were held today, Eduardo would win 40 percent of 
the vote, claimed Masias.  He also dismissed FSLN assertions 
that Herty garners no Sandinista support, noting that many 
people are afraid to voice their opinion for fear of losing 
their jobs or scholarships in the Sandinista-dominated 
department.  To Ambassador's query over the appropriateness, 
or not, of his public messages, Masias was unequivocal: while 
politicos may fuss over them in public, talking straight to 
politicians is the only way to have impact.  Further, 
ventured Masias, the Nicaraguan people need to know that the 
U.S. is helping th 
em, although USG resources would be put to better use if more 
funds went to the people and less to "expensive foreign 
consultants." 
 
CAFTA: BEST THING THAT COULD HAPPEN, EVEN IF WE ARE UNPREPARED 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) A self-made leather producer, Masias claimed that 
Nicaragua is not a poor country but lamented that its 
politicians have made the people poor and the wealthy have 
not learned to share.  He believes that small industry will 
be the key to Leon's economic future.  To Ambassador's query 
over local viewpoints on CAFTA, Masias replied that he is a 
firm CAFTA supporter, that it will be the best thing that 
could happen to Nicaragua, even though Leoneses are not well 
prepared to compete and suffer from exorbitant energy costs 
(over $1,000 per month for his small factory).  In Nicaragua, 
being an industrialist is a heroic exercise, explained 
Masias, who considers commercial work much easier.  He was 
responsive to Ambassador's initiative for the private sector 
to help its employees obtain national ID cards (cedulas) to 
vote and to go to the polls on Election Day. 
 
HERTY 2006 AIMS TO TAKE VOTES FROM FSLN AND PLC 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8.  (C) Herty supporters Julio Argueta (Herty 2006 
coordinator); Humberto Altamirano (Movimiento Pro-Rescate 
Sandinista), Alfonso Silva Roman (Movimiento para el Rescate 
del Sandinismo, or MRS); and Luis Felipe Perez Caldera 
(former Leon mayor and leader of the Movimiento para la Union 
pro Leon) coincided that the FSLN maintains is dominance over 
Leon.  However, they argued that Lewites and Montealegre also 
enjoy considerable support and that, on Election Day, the 
results might tilt in the favor of these two dissident 
candidates.  They explained that Herty Alliance priorities 
for now are to build a cadre of campaign activists and 
monitors; so far the alliance has 1,000 supporters and aims 
to reach 10,000.  Most of these volunteers are young 
Sandinistas and independents, they explained, noting that 
people are drawn to Lewites' opposition to the Aleman-Ortega 
pact, also the reason he garners the support of more 
Sandinista "commandantes" than Ortega's mafia-run FSLN.  The 
FSLN is not internally democratic, and neither FSLN nor 
Liberal elites care about social justice and jobs for the 
poor; the Sandinista intellectuals are with Herty, claimed 
Silva Roman. 
 
¶9.  (C) Silva Roman confirmed that the FSLN is threatening 
Lewites supporters that they will lose their jobs and 
scholarships if they continue supporting Herty.  This fear of 
reprisal prompts many poll respondents to claim they support 
Ortega, but they will vote for Herty, claimed Silva Roman, 
who added that Lewites sincerely seeks a constructive, 
respectful relationship with the United States.  The problem 
 
is not the United States, but Nicaragua's political class; 
most Nicaraguans desire positive relations with the United 
States and most have family or friends there, he explained. 
 
 
SANDINISTA MAYOR - EX-YOUTH COMMANDO TURNED PRAGMATIST? 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶10.  (C) Mayor Transito Genaro Tellez, who is a candidate for 
the MCA-Nicaragua (MCA-N) board, asserted to Ambassador that 
he is a public servant for all residents first, and a 
Sandinista second.  Attempting to distance himself from 
Daniel Ortega, he claimed he challenged the FSLN leaders when 
Ortega preferred another mayoral candidate.  Tellez also 
criticized Sandinista dissidents Alejandro Martinez Cuenca 
and Herty Lewites for failing to support him at that 
juncture.  He had nothing but praise for the MCA-N 
initiative.  To Tellez, the MCA-N deserves credit for 
reviving Leon's mayors' association, which was on the road to 
extinction until the Millennium Challenge Account reunited 
the group and gave them something to work for.  He is 
optimistic that the MCC will bring prosperity to the region 
and improve bilateral relations, concurring with Secretary 
Rice's remark that the U.S.G. has made considerable 
investment abroad but it has had little impact.  To Tellez, 
the new MCC assistance scheme is a better approach.  Proud of 
his Sandinista roots, Tellez explained that he had cut his 
Sandinista teeth as a member of its youth commando in the 
1980s. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) A self-declared political reformist and journalist 
by training, Tellez claimed he prefers to change the FSLN 
from within.  He appeared receptive to Ambassador's message 
that, while the U.S. harbors serious doubts over Ortega's 
democratic credentials, we would look favorably on the FSLN's 
evolution into a modern, left-of-center party.  Nonetheless, 
Tellez dismissed Herty as an agent of change, asserting 'he 
already had his chance' and enjoys little support in Leon. 
Rather, the change must come from below and from the younger 
generations, not from the old Sandinista leadership in 
Managua, averred Tellez, who noted that five of Leon's mayors 
are young and are questioning the old ways.  Tellez remarked 
that election fever has already arrived in Leon,  noting 
eight Sandinista pre-candidates will vie in May primaries for 
National Assembly seats.  He predicted Daniel Ortega will be 
Nicaragua's next president, reasoning that the governments of 
the past 16 years have failed to meet the people's needs and a 
spirations. 
 
¶12. (SBU) As an example of moral decay and national 
government ineffectiveness (over the prolonged public 
hospital doctors' and medical workers' strike), Tellez cited 
a recent grisly discovery by city employees of six human 
fetuses in a hospital dumpster.  Moreover, patients have no 
access to medicines, and while during the 1980s the 
illiteracy rate dropped to 10 percent, it has since climbed 
to 30-40 percent.  Tellez also claimed that Ortega has 
changed his ways and will not return the country to the days 
of the 1980s.  Ambassador pushed back, asserting that Ortega 
continues to use hostile 1980s rhetoric, most recently 
blaming the U.S. for the worldwide drug scourge and even 
accusing U.S. lawmakers of being complicit. 
 
PRIVATE SECTOR 
- - - - - - - 
 
¶13.  (SBU) Receptive to COSEP cedulation and voter outreach, 
BANPRO managers Xavier Lopez Guerrero and Juan Carlos 
Gurdian; BANCENTRO branch manager Carlos Fernandez Sera; BAC 
branch manager Hipatia de Montalvan; and, Jose Saldivar, 
Manager of ARNECOM, which produces electric chassis for Ford 
Explorers, echoed Masias' assessment of CAFTA.  While the 
Leon area lacks preparation to compete in CAFTA, they 
concurred that it will ultimately benefit from it, noting 
that as a university town, Leon has a talented pool of job 
applicants to draw on.  According to the bankers, after 
Managua, Leon is the area where banks are thriving most, with 
record deposits.  Despite the uncertainty of the November 
election outcome, customers continue to renew their 
certificates of deposit, although most will expire by January 
2007 at the latest, they said.  ARNECOM is even expanding its 
production and investments, although it does have a 
contingency plan: in the event that the Sandinistas win and 
Ortega implements draconian policies 
against the private sector, they can relocate to another 
country. 
 
 
CIVIL SOCIETY: WE MUST PROMOTE CITIZEN RIGHTS, NOT JUST 
ELECTIONS 
- - - - - - - - - -  - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - 
 
¶14.  (SBU) Movimiento por Nicaragua (MpN) and Etica y 
Transparencia (ET) representatives who met with Ambassador 
argued that that civil society must not only prepare 
Nicaraguans for elections, but also help them exercise their 
rights and responsibilities as citizens and to lobby for 
better public services.  Leon ET coordinator Hermogenes 
Santiago Media Rodriguez and MpN coordinators Allison Maria 
Loasiga, Jorge Antonio Sarria, and Carmen Maria Salgado, 
explained they are encouraging Leoneses to challenge 
electricity provider Union Fenosa for its exorbitant yet 
mediocre service (see para 17).  On the political landscape, 
Salgado asserted that Tellez had stacked the already bloated 
municipal government with his cronies and was not popular, 
having won with only 12 percent of the eligible voter pool. 
If it had not been for PLC leader Enrique Quinonez, current 
ALN-PC Assembly Deputy Maria Eugenia Sequeira would have been 
mayor, she claimed (Quinonez interrupted a Sequeira rally, 
barging onto the stage and attacki 
ng participants).  MpN activities for the November election 
include helping citizens obtain and verify their cedulas and 
educating them on the process and the candidates through 
spots on a Radio La Carninosa.  ET is auditing the cedula 
process and the voter roster (padron), and will have an ample 
cadre of electoral observers, explained Media Rodriquez. 
 
¶15.  (SBU) While Salgado, who is an economist, concurred with 
Ambassador that Nicaragua has progressed over the past ten 
years, she averred that jobs are what people relate to, not 
economic indicators.  "You can't eat macroeconomics," she 
quipped, citing tourism, agro-industry, and small industries 
as potential growth areas that could benefit from CAFTA. 
However, infrastructure and public services must improve to 
enable Leoneses to compete.  For example, only 21 of Leon's 
196 bakeries have potable water, she said.  The group 
concurred that Nicaraguans desire a political change and were 
receptive to Secretary Rice's assertion that the problem is 
not the Left but how to make the Left democratic.  "Civil 
society's job will not end with the election; the MpN must be 
the fly in the eye of whatever government that comes to 
power," opined Salgado. 
 
MCC COMPACT -     WE NEED IT, WANT IT, AND WON'T LOSE IT 
- - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - -  - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶16.  (SBU) An atmosphere of enthusiasm and anxiety pervaded 
the Ambassador's meeting with the Leon and Chinandega 
development councils (Nicaragua has a network of local 
development councils at the departmental and municipal levels 
and under the framework of the National Development Council 
(CONADES) established by the Citizen Participation Law). 
Without exception, participants Enrique Padilla Chinandega 
UPANIC (Agropecuarios Producers of Nicaragua); Agrecio Osejo, 
FSLN Mayor of Somotillo-Chinandega; Alberto Aviles (GON's 
representative in Chinandega (associated with 
presidential-hopeful/APRE member Jose Antonio Alvarado); 
Jilma Balladares VP of CDD Leon and President of Fundapadele 
NGO (constructs low-budget housing); and Ernesto Medina, 
outgoing UNAN rector had nothing but praise for the MCC 
compact.  However, also without exception, they were clearly 
anxious that the program's fate could hinge on the outcome of 
the November election, specifically that the U.S. will 
withdraw the program if Daniel Ortega wins.  Somotillo's 
Sandinista mayor summed up the group's sentiment on the MCC: 
"We need it, want it and will make sure we do not lose it," 
also asserting that Nicaragua's changes were irreversible and 
even an Ortega victory would not return Nicaragua to the 
1980s.  To this concern, Ambassador replied that the MCC will 
continue so long as the new Nicaraguan government maintains 
the required score in the MCC's assessment scale, which 
measures democracy/human rights, governability/rule of law, 
and economic and investment openness. 
 
ALL GANG UP AGAINST POWER GIANT UNION FENOSA 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶17.  (SBU) All interlocutors voiced pride for their region 
and all shared a common dislike for power giant Union Fenosa. 
 In exchange for exorbitant fees, Fenosa provides inadequate 
access to electricity and mediocre service with frequent 
outages that damage equipment, businessmen and officials of 
 
all political ilk complained.  (Note:  This perception is not 
unique to Leon.  End Note.) 
 
LEON: DEMOGRAPHICS AND VOTING PROFILE 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶18.  (U) Total Population (2005 est.): 
         Total Urban Population: 
         Total Rural Population: 
 
         Votes Received by Party, 2004 Municipal Elections 
         PLC:    41,511 
         FSLN:      66,574 
         APRE:       5,815 
         PRN:          871 
         AC:           811 
         CCN:     1,972 
         PLI:     1,567 
         MSL:       144 
         PLN:     1,233 
 
Votes Received by Party, 2001 National Elections 
         PLC:  73,708 
         FSLN:    83,119 
         PC:    5,794 
 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
¶19.  (C) Notwithstanding Leon's Sandinista proclivity, local 
government and university authorities appear willing to 
participate in U.S.-funded programs, if for no other reason 
than to improve regional prosperity.  However, according to 
some, such as National Assembly Camino Cristiano Party (CCN) 
deputy Delia Arellano, who recently joined Montealegre's 
caucus, the Sandinistas are duplicitous in their engagement 
with the Americans in Leon (Reftel).  Specifically, she 
alleged that the Sandinistas are disguising the benefits of 
the MCA-N program as FSLN-sponsored goodies to attract more 
support.  She claims evidence of this comes from evangelical 
pastors in the area, who have informed her that the 
Sandinistas have approached them on these supposed FSLN 
programs to attract them to the FSLN.  While we have heard 
these allegations before, we have yet to confirm any of them. 
 We will facilitate a meeting with the MCC director and these 
evangelist leaders to clarify their assertions and to explain 
in more depth the compact program. 
TRIVELLI