06MANAGUA720
IT'S MY PARTY - AND I'LL DO WHAT I WANT TO
Fri Mar 31 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0720/01 0901312
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 311312Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5788
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0604
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 000720 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/30/2016 
TAGS: KDEM NU PGOV PINR PREL KCOR
SUBJECT: IT'S MY PARTY - AND I'LL DO WHAT I WANT TO 
 
REF: MANAGUA 0709 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul A. Trivelli. Reasons 1.4 (B,D). 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY:  All is not well on the Liberal 
Constitutional Party (PLC) farm, as rivals vie for caudillo 
leader/convicted money launderer Arnoldo Aleman's blessing to 
run for president on the party ticket.  Five of the six PLC 
pre-candidates recently confronted Aleman about the PLC 
Central Committee proposal to hold 28 regional 
"mini-conventions" to vote for the PLC candidate before the 
April 2 general convention.  PLC deputy/presidential-hopeful 
Enrique Quinonez informed polcouns that he would not 
participate in the PLC's April 2 convention unless Aleman 
cedes and cancels the PLC's March 31 pre-convention, which he 
claims is a ruse to anoint competitor Jose Rizo.  According 
to Quinonez, Aleman and his cronies have already drawn up 
documents with the decisions of departmental representatives 
selecting Jose Rizo as the winner of the March 31 event. 
Under pressure, Aleman conceded that the March 31 
mini-conventions will be held under secret ballot.  Now all 
pre-candidates but Noel Ramirez are back aboard and will 
participate.  Until recently, Quinonez was one of Aleman's 
cronies and a fervent supporter and he may remain so if the 
wind blows again in his favor.  Nonetheless, the fact that 
Quinonez recognizes that Montealegre may be the best option 
to beat Ortega is significant even though an eventual 
political association with Quinonez could more likely hurt 
than help, Montealegre.  END SUMMARY. 
 
CHANGES IN RULES OF THE GAME FORCE CANDIDATES TO CONFRONT 
ALEMAN 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- 
 
¶2.  (U) Five of the six PLC pre-candidates schlepped to El 
Chile on March 27 to confront Aleman about the PLC Central 
Committee proposal to hold 28 regional "mini-conventions" to 
vote for the PLC candidate before the April 2 general 
convention.  Pre-candidate Enrique Quinonez publicly repeated 
his assertion that the candidate should be chosen, as 
originally decided by the CEN, via a secret vote at the 
general convention to guarantee a "transparent process" and 
avoid the dedazo of Aleman.  On March 28, Noel Ramirez 
announced the withdrawal of his candidacy, characterizing the 
CEN's decision as "legal, but not legitimate."  Also on March 
28, pre-candidate Francisco Aguirre Sacasa advised that he 
will withdraw his candidacy unless the PLC cancels its March 
31 event.  Only front-runner Jose Rizo has not complained, 
which has prompted more speculation that he is Aleman's 
"chosen one." 
 
¶3.  (C) PLC deputy, presidential-hopeful Enrique Quinonez 
informed polcouns March 28 that he will not participate in 
the PLC's April 2 convention unless Aleman cedes and 
eliminates the March 31 "mini-convention," which Quinonez 
claimed is a ruse to anoint Jose Rizo.  According to 
Quinonez, who maintains he enjoys considerable support at the 
departmental level, Aleman and his cronies have already drawn 
up documents with the decisions of departmental 
representatives selecting Jose Rizo as the winner of the 
March 31 event.  He also complained that the PLC has added 
some additional 200 conventioneers to the mix, for a total of 
726, probably to stack the votes in the departments.  (Note: 
Aguirre publicly echoed Quinonez' concerns, alleging that 
only on March 27 were the names of these 200 additional 
conventioneers released, too late to reach out to them for 
their support.) 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Quinonez provided polcouns a copy of the letter the 
five candidates sent to PLC party president Jorge Castillo 
Quant.  Signed by pre-candidates Enrique Quinonez, Ramiro 
Sacasa, Haroldo Montealegre, Francisco Aguirre and Noel 
Ramirez, the letter calls on the PLC to rescind the March 31 
departmental pre-conventions and maintain the original 
agreement to hold the convention on April 2 under secret 
ballot.  The signatories warn that they will not participate 
in the candidate selection process unless these conditions 
are met.  The PLC leadership insists it will continue with 
the two-stage process, that the March 31 vote will be open or 
secret depending on the will of the departmental 
 
SIPDIS 
participants, and that if no candidate receives 51 percent of 
the votes in the March 31 process, then the conventioneers 
will vote in secret for a second round on April 1.  (Comment: 
 Some of our PLC contacts allege that Aleman has promised to 
allocate a number of National Assembly seats to department 
chiefs in exchange for 
their loyalty.  Their support for Rizo could be part of the 
bargain.) 
 
TIME TO JUMP SHIP? 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5.  (C) Quinonez shared that he is considering supporting 
Eduardo Montealegre if it will guarantee Daniel Ortega's 
defeat.  He explained that he now realizes how Montealegre 
felt when he was expelled from the PLC and recently told 
Montealegre that he shares his frustration with Aleman's 
insatiable hold on the PLC to the detriment of the party and 
Nicaragua to protect his own skin.  Quinonez recounted that 
in a March 26 powwow of the PLC presidential-hopefuls at El 
Chile, Aleman banged the table and screamed at him after he 
questioned the fairness of changing in mid-stream the rules 
of the PLC internal primary.  "This is my party and I will do 
what I (expletive) well please," Aleman reportedly screamed. 
 
¶6.  (C) Polcouns reiterated U.S. opposition to caudillo 
leadership, be it Ortega or Aleman, and the fact that we do 
not have problems with the PLC as a party, but rather, its 
leadership.  Further, given the Aleman-Ortega pact, Aleman's 
selection of the PLC candidate could be directed by Ortega, 
who would certainly favor a weak opponent he could discredit 
closer to the November election.  Quinonez concurred that 
Ortega may have something to do with Aleman's choice and this 
could explain the last-minute change in primary procedures to 
ensure Rizo will win.  Claiming he has always opposed the 
Aleman-Ortega pact, Quinonez blamed co-party members Rene 
Herrera and Noel Ramirez for serving as intermediaries for 
the nefarious pact. 
 
ALEMAN CEDES ON VOTE SECRECY 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7.  (U)  Responding to the PLC's internal discontent, Aleman 
ceded a bit on March 19, agreeing that the March 31 
mini-conventions will be held under secret rather than open 
vote.  He also warned the recalcitrant pre-candidates that 
"one must wash dirty laundry at home."  Now all 
pre-candidates but Noel Ramirez are back aboard and will 
participate. 
 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
¶8.  (C) Until recently, Quinonez was one of Aleman's cronies 
and a fervent supporter; he may remain so if the wind blows 
again in his favor.  Nonetheless, the fact that Quinonez 
recognizes that Montealegre may be the best option to beat 
Ortega is significant.  On the other hand, an eventual 
political association with Quinonez -- whose reputation as a 
thug willing to resort to any tactic to achieve his goals -- 
could more likely hurt than help, Montealegre. 
TRIVELLI