06MANAGUA1517
BLUE LANTERN LEVEL 3: PRE-LICENSE END-USE CHECK ON
Tue Jul 11 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #1517 1921314
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 111314Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6940
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS MANAGUA 001517 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PM/DTCC REBECCA VALERIN, WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: NU KOMC ETTC
SUBJECT: BLUE LANTERN LEVEL 3: PRE-LICENSE END-USE CHECK ON 
APPLICATIONS 05-997983, 05-997984 
 
REF: SECSTATE 78987 
 
¶1.  Summary: Econoff has performed the requested pre-license 
check on application 05-997983.  El Caza y Pesca in Managua, 
Nicaragua, presents as a legitimate business selling weapons 
for legal, personal and home security use.  The Nicaraguan 
National Police confirmed that the gun shop is a legitimate 
business authorized by the police to import weapons.  Sales 
records show that the El Caza y Pesca sells both to 
individuals and companies, including security companies and 
other weapons purveyors. The Manager demonstrated familiarity 
with applicable Nicaraguan laws and regulations, and 
demonstrated compliance with United States Munitions List 
(USML) regulations, including restrictions on re-exporting. 
In post's assessment, this company is a reliable recipient of 
the USML items listed in REFTEL.  End Summary 
 
¶2.  The business had been open approximately one year and is 
owned by Maria Rivera Centeno and Ana Maria de Chamorro. 
Econoff met with Manager Lizbiana Araica, who shared the 
shop's current license and registration.  The shop is located 
on a busy main street and is open to the public.  An armed 
guard is posted in front of the shop, and most weapons are 
kept behind the sales counter, many of them displayed in 
locked glass cases.  Some weapons are mounted on the back 
wall of the shop behind the counter.  The rest of the 
inventory is located in a closed room behind the counter and 
office space, which can only be entered from within the 
store.  The door has a standard doorknob lock which was 
unlocked during the visit.  When asked, Araica said that only 
she has the keys to the storage room and access is limited to 
herself and two sales associates. 
 
¶3.  The shop has imported ammunition and hand-cuffs from the 
U.S. previously, however, the REFTEL order from Valor marks 
their first effort to import U.S. rifles and revolvers. 
According to Araica, it is less expensive to import the 
weapons directly from the U.S. than to buy them locally, 
allowing the business to become more competitive.  She feels 
that the weapons she has ordered are those most demanded by 
the Nicaraguan market and aims to increase sales by supplying 
them at a better price than her competitors. 
 
¶4.  Sales records show that the El Caza y Pesca sells both to 
individuals and companies, including security companies and 
other weapons purveyors.  The shop keeps good records, 
recording the name, national identification number and 
address of the buyer and the serial number(s) and quantity of 
weapon or ammunition sold.  Sales to or purchases from other 
companies are recorded both in the sales register and with a 
separate receipt of exchange that includes the number, type 
and serial number of each gun bought or sold.  The business 
serves primarily the Managua area and the surrounding 
countryside.  The shop does not sell used weapons.  The 
request to import 80 weapons is consistent with the shops 
sales records, which showed an average monthly sales rate of 
between 10 and 20 weapons. 
 
¶5.  Araica showed a great familiarity with Nicaragua's gun 
control laws, explaining to Econoff the latest legal reforms. 
 She even  provided Econoff with a copy of the new Law 510 
and the Nicaraguan National Police's promotional material 
regarding the law.  Araica also showed familiarity and 
demonstrated compliance with applicable United States 
Munitions List (USML) regulations, including restrictions on 
re-exporting. 
 
¶6.  Comment:  The manager was forthcoming in answering all 
questions and cooperative in providing requested records.  In 
post's assessment, this company is a reliable recipient of 
the USML items listed in REFTEL. 
TRIVELLI