06MANAGUA813
CHONTALES, NICARAGUA: CALL FOR UNITY AND
Tue Apr 11 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0813/01 1012244
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 112244Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5944
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVEC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 000813 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/06/2016 
TAGS: PGOV ECON EINV SOCI NU
SUBJECT: CHONTALES, NICARAGUA: CALL FOR UNITY AND 
MONTEALEGRE OPPORTUNITY IN A LIBERAL COMMUNITY (SECOND OF 
TWO) 
 
REF: MANAGUA 721 
 
Classified By: AMBASSADOR PAUL TRIVELLI FOR REASONS 1.4 (a & b) 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: While baseball is Nicaragua's national 
sport, it is surpassed by politics in the Department of 
Chontales.  Emotions are still raw in this cattle raising 
region where misguided economic policy, Contra attacks and 
Sandinista reprisals devastated the countryside in the 
1980's.  During a March 9 visit, ECONOFF encountered a wide 
variety of opinions about how best to defeat the Sandinista 
Front Party (FSLN) in November, but uniform hostility to 
Sandinista leader Daniel Ortega and skepticism about the 
democratic bonafides of Sandinista dissident Herty Lewites. 
In meetings with politicians, business owners, and cattle 
ranchers - and even chats with waiters and hotel staff - 
Chontelenos distinguished themselves for being politically 
savvy.  The oft repeated themes were fear and loathing of the 
FSLN, a high regard for PLC dissident Eduardo Montealegre, 
and a desire for Liberal unity.  End Summary. 
 
Chontales Politics - No Love For Local Boy Ortega 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2. (U) Until the 1990's, Chontales had traditionally been a 
bastion of Conservative Party (PC) Support.  The domination 
of political and economic life by owners of large estates was 
disrupted by the Sandinista Revolution of 1979.  In the 
1980's, these already "conservative" leaders became strong 
supporters of the anti-Sandinista insurgent (Contra) forces 
as the FSLN's property reform program resulted in the 
confiscation of great tracts of land.  Contras were also 
active in Chontales, constantly attempting to disrupt traffic 
on a highway that brought needed supplies to the 
revolutionary government via the river port of El Rama, which 
enjoys access to the Atlantic Ocean.  The Sandinistas 
governed this center of opposition with a heavy hand, earning 
the eternal enmity of much of the population - including many 
of the rural poor whose interests the FSLN were theoretically 
representing.  Further alienating Chontales from the FSLN is 
the fact that this region had been one of the most prosperous 
in Nicaragua prior to the Revolution and was devastated by 
the war and land reforms that left a great deal of the 
previously productive land idle. 
 
¶3. (U) After Nicaragua's emergence from a decade of 
revolutionary leadership, the bulk of former PC and Liberal 
Party members formed the PLC to counter the FSLN.  As a 
result, the PLC has replaced the PC as the dominant political 
party in Chontales.  Even so, several current PLC members 
told ECONOFF that they really still consider themselves to be 
Conservatives.  Alternatively, the two PC members with whom 
we spoke admitted that they usually wind up voting for the 
PLC candidate as the most viable choice to defeat the FSLN. 
Despite the fact that FSLN leader Daniel Ortega is from La 
Libertad, Chontales, he is a despised figure in this 
department, and his hometown is run by the PLC. 
 
Cattle Ranchers Supportive of Montealegre But Wary of Liberal 
Disunity 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4. (SBU) Since 40% of all cattle in this cattle raising 
country are found in Chontales, the political views of cattle 
ranchers are key to understanding the region.  To that end, 
ECONOFF held meetings with members of the Chontales 
Cattlemen's' Association (AGC) and the Santo Tomas 
Cattlemen's' Cooperative (CGST).  Three of the four leaders 
of AGC identified themselves as being Liberal and the fourth 
Conservative.  The CGST meeting was attended by two PLC 
members, a Vamos Con Eduardo/Nicaraguan Liberal Alliance 
(ALN) member, and a PC member.  To a person, these beef and 
dairy sector leaders were hostile to the FSLN and Daniel 
Ortega.  They also challenged the democratic bonafides of 
Sandinista dissident Herty Lewites, calling his candidacy a 
"hoax."  Furthermore, they opined, Lewites has surrounded 
himself with hard-line leftists so he should not be trusted. 
Although some participants admitted knowing a few people who 
said they plan to vote for Lewites, they saw no evidence of 
any Herty 2006 campaign apparatus in Chontales. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The cattle ranchers spoke favorably of Eduardo 
Montealegre.  They liked the fact that he represents 
government transparency and economic modernism; they 
acknowledged that the corruption of Arnoldo Aleman damages 
the country and enables the FSLN.  On the other hand, the 
examples of the March 5 Atlantic Coast regional elections and 
the municipal elections of 2004, give these hard-line 
anti-Sandinistas pause.  Several said that if they unite the 
 
 
Liberals will win, but that disunity could enable Daniel 
Ortega to slip into the Presidential Palace with 35-40% of 
the vote. The ranchers also spoke favorably of Jose Rizo (who 
had not yet been named as the PLC presidential candidate) and 
APRE presidential pre-candidate Jose Alvarado.  Several 
cattlemen opined said that Montealegre needs to visit their 
department more often and that he suffers from an image of 
being cold and elitist. 
 
¶6. (C) There was disagreement among the cattlemen about 
whether Aleman's corruption was bad enough to justify 
abandoning the PLC.  The consensus view was that if 
Montealegre is sufficiently ahead in the polls prior to 
election day, then they and their fellow Chontelenos would 
likely vote for him.  On the other hand, if it looks close, 
the cattlemen said that many Liberals would hold their noses 
and vote for the PLC candidate to prevent Ortega from 
becoming president. Hilario Vargas, former mayor of Santo 
Tomas and an ALN member, said that the Atlantic Coast 
election results (in which the FSLN was able to win many 
seats despite having fewer votes than the Liberal bloc) 
caused him to think that Liberal unity might be even more 
important than his desire to end the Alemanista culture of 
corruption.  In the end, about a third said they would 
support Montealegre no matter what, a third said they would 
support Montealegre only if Ortega had no chance of winning, 
and a third were unsure or unwilling to say.  None of the 
ranchers defended Aleman on his own terms.  The two ranchers 
who are members of the PC said that they will vote for 
Montealegre, as his party has formed an alliance with the PC. 
 
Vamos Con Eduardo/ALN Taking Over the PLC Infrastructure in 
Chontales 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7. (C) Leaders of Vamos Con Eduardo/ALN in Chontales are 
enthusiastic about their candidate's prospects in the 
Department. All of these Montealegre supporters have long 
histories as PLC activists and leaders.  One reason for their 
enthusiasm is their claim that they are taking over the 
infrastructure of the PLC from the inside.  Elman Urbina, 
former PLC municipal council president of Juigalpa and 
Lombardo Madriz, a Juigalpa city councilman and ex-chief of 
the PLC in Juigalpa illustrate this phenomenon.  These ALN 
members reported that many PLC council members, mayors, party 
functionaries and election officials are members of both 
organizations simultaneously and plan to use PLC resources to 
benefit Montealegre.  They also noted that Montealegre has 
five campaign centers in Chontales.  Comment: To down play 
its poor performance in public opinion polls the PLC argues 
is that it has superior organizational power to mobilize 
voters and defend election results compared to the newly 
cobbled together Montealegre organization.  If the apparent 
take over of the PLC structure by Montealegre's people is 
happening in other parts of Nicaragua as well - - and 
EMBOFF's have witnessed a similar phenomenon elsewhere - - 
the PLC may be in worse shape than it admits.  End Comment. 
 
¶8. (SBU) ALN meeting participants said that they appreciate 
USG calls for free and fair elections, transparency in 
government, and an end to the caudillo politics of Aleman. 
To them the leaders of the PLC do not represent the true 
feelings of the voters.  They see the PLC as having been 
"kidnapped" by a few leaders and asked that the Embassy be 
even more outspoken in our opposition to Aleman's domination 
of the PLC and the PLC-FSLN power sharing pact.  Other 
insights included sharing the view that the Rizo would be the 
strongest PLC candidate in Chontales, and they incorrectly 
predicted that Aleman would not permit Rizo's nomination. 
 
Aleman Loyalist Says PLC Victory Necessary to Defeat FSLN, 
While Defending Pact With FSLN 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶9. (C) Marcio Gutierrez, the Departmental Electoral Council 
(CED) president for Chontales repeated familiar PLC bromides 
and shared a few surprising confessions.  Gutierrez admitted 
that the PLC had learned a lot from the Mexican PRI as to how 
to steal elections, although he did not admit to being 
personally involved in such fraud.  He argued that only the 
PLC has the organizational capacity to defeat the 
Sandinistas, while also defending the PLC pact with the FSLN 
as the "only way to get anything done."  Gutierrez rejected 
ALN claims that they are well organized in Chontales and that 
Montealegre is a popular figure in the department.  He shared 
his belief that Jose Rizo has the best chance of winning in 
Chontales (Note: This comment was made before Rizo was 
nominated by the PLC.  End Note.). Gonzalez did not defend 
Aleman's criminal activity, but it was a sore spot - - he 
 
 
appeared to tear up on two occasions when the subject arose. 
 
¶10. (C) Gutierrez argued that Aleman's leadership is still 
strong and the USG should stop denying it.  In his view, the 
Embassy should not interfere in the internal politics of 
Nicaragua when it comes to opposing the Aleman-dominated PLC, 
although we should do whatever we can to keep the Sandinistas 
from winning.  He did confess that he thinks the PLC would be 
better served if Aleman were replaced by another leader. 
Gutierrez remarked that his wife had been denied a tourist 
visa in November 2005 and that he believed it was because of 
his political loyalties.  (Comment: According to consular 
sources, she was not refused a visa for political reasons. 
However, the fact that Gutierrez thinks his wife was refused 
because of his political allegiances, is evidence that the 
USG policy of revoking visas from corrupt politicians has 
struck a cord.  End Comment.) 
 
Voting Patterns Show Liberal Strength in Numbers and FSLN 
Strength in Organization 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶11. (U) In 1990 the National Opposition Alliance (UNO) won 
with 80% of the votes in Chontales.  In the 2001 presidential 
election the anti-Sandinista vote was 72% with the PLC 
gaining 53,439 votes, the PC 1,872 and the FSLN 21,771. In 
the 2004 municipal elections, a low voter turn out, a divided 
center-right, and alleged electoral malfeasance did allow the 
FSLN to capture mayorships in Juigalpa (the departmental 
capital), Acoypa, and Santo Tomas.  As a whole, the 
anti-Sandinista vote was still 70% in Chontales, but the 
center-right was splintered into eight parties.  The 
comparison between the PLC and FSLN was 21,113 votes to 
16,774, with 17,386 votes going to other center-right 
parties. 
 
¶12. (SBU) COMMENT: These figures show that 16,812 fewer 
center-right voters cast ballots in the 2004 municipal 
elections than in the last presidential election, compared to 
only 658 fewer FSLN voters.  The FSLN is clearly more 
organized and disciplined in Chontales than its competitors, 
as is true throughout Nicaragua.  The Sandinistas' tactical 
advantage in 2006, therefore, would come from a divided 
and/or reduced turnout from their competitors since the FSLN 
has mastered the science of getting its voters to the polls. 
 
 
¶13. (SBU) Chontales offers a treasure trove of voters for 
anti-Sandinista candidates in the 2006 national elections.  A 
united center-right would rack up big numbers,  Similarly, 
the good will that Eduardo Montealegre has built in the 
department should give him an opportunity to take advantage 
of the seemingly genuine desire for good government in 
Chontales.  His biggest challenge is to convince these voters 
that he can win. 
TRIVELLI