06MANAGUA674
MONTEALEGRE: REAL TEST BEGINS AFTER PLC SELECTS
Fri Mar 24 00:00:00 +0100 2006
SECRET
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0038
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0674/01 0832117
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
P 242117Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5713
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0593
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCS E C R E T MANAGUA 000674 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/24/2016 
TAGS: KDEM NU PGOV PINR PREL ECON EFIN
SUBJECT: MONTEALEGRE: REAL TEST BEGINS AFTER PLC SELECTS 
ITS PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul A. Trivelli. Reasons 1.4 (B,D). 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary: Eduardo Montealegre is reassured by the 
latest IRI/Borge poll suggesting that he is the candidate 
most able to beat Sandinista (FSLN) leader Daniel Ortega in 
the November elections.  Montealegre believes the next poll, 
to be conducted following the Liberal Constitutional Party's 
(PLC) April 2 convention, will provide a clearer indication 
of his strength.  Montealegre is close to jettisoning 
stop-and-go negotiations with Jose Antonio Alvarado to join 
his ticket as the vice presidential candidate and may opt 
instead for a female running mate.  To Montealegre, his most 
daunting challenge is garnering private sector support, some 
of which prefers to bet on a "safer" PLC candidate to beat 
Ortega.  He recently shared with Ambassador his willingness 
to compete with likely PLC presidential candidate Jose Rizo 
in multi-party primaries if PLC caudillo Arnoldo Aleman 
abandons the PLC helm -- an unlikely scenario.  We are 
seeking to arrange April meetings for Montealegre with senior 
USG officials and legislators, a speaking engagement with a 
think-tank, and perhaps a press interview to provide him 
higher visibility and possibly draw more support from the 
private sector.  End Summary. 
 
The Next Poll Will Put Montealegre's Popularity to Test 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  (C) In his March 21 meeting with Ambassador, Eduardo 
Montealegre indicated he is reassured by the mid-March 
IRI/Borge poll showing him as the candidate most able to beat 
Sandinista (FSLN) leader Daniel Ortega in the November 5 
national elections.  However, he said the real test will come 
in the next poll following the PLC's April 2 convention to 
select its presidential candidate, which will measure his 
relative strength vis-a-vis his PLC competitor.  His PLC 
detractors regularly retort that party organization, not the 
polls, is the determinative electoral factor, and they have 
recently pointed to the Atlantic Coast elections to bolster 
their point.  (Comment:  The will of the people continues to 
be a negligible consideration by Nicaragua's traditional 
party leaders.  End Comment.) 
 
Dealing with Runaway Alvarado and other VP Deliberations 
 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3.  (C) Montealegre lamented competitor and APRE 
pre-candidate Jose Antonio Alvarado's continuing avoidance to 
committing to an alliance, noting that Jose Rizo has also 
offered Alvarado the VP slot and up to ten National Assembly 
seats (in the IRI/Borge mid-March poll, 29 percent of the 
respondents favored Alvarado as Montealegre's running mate). 
In the increasingly likely event that Alvarado does not join 
his alliance, Montealegre believes a female candidate would 
serve as an effective running mate, although he would need 
Conservative backer Mario Rapacciolli's approval to select a 
candidate (male or female) from outside the Conservative 
Party. (Note: APRE president Miguel Lopez Baldizon announced 
March 21 that APRE will hold primaries to select its 
presidential candidate on April 23. Alvarado and Francisco 
Fiallos are the two contenders.  Neither APRE candidate has 
significant public support or realistically expects to be 
president.  The real issue is which Liberal branch APRE will 
form an alliance with fo 
r November.  While Alvarado's camp favors a deal with the 
PLC, Fiallos is inclined towards Montealegre's ALN-PC.  End 
Note.) 
 
¶4.  (C) Montealegre explained that Rapacciolli is willing to 
cede his VP ambitions if it means bringing aboard Alvarado, 
but he may not agree to relinquish the slot to a female 
candidate (according to the same poll, 67.7 percent of the 
respondents believe Montealegre should pick a female running 
mate).  Montealegre opined that a female Liberal who is 
neither from Managua nor from Nicaragua's elite class would 
be ideal even though he favors former Minister of Tourism 
Lucia Salazar, who, like most of the other obvious choices, 
is from Managua and from an elite family.  (Note: Salazar, 
who was at one time also being considered as a running mate 
for Herty Lewites, previously indicated she was not 
interested due to family considerations.  She may find a 
Montealegre offer a little more appealing, however.)  He 
cited Cristiana Chamorro as another possibility, explaining 
that financier Carlos Pellas' wife Vivian Pellas (she 
garnered over 22 percent in the poll) is Cuban born, and 
therefore ineligible to run (Chamorro received almost 10 
percent support and Lucia Salazar just over 3 percent). 
 
 
PRIMARIES - UNDER THE RIGHT CONDITIONS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5.  (C) Montealegre expressed his willingness to compete with 
likely PLC presidential candidate Jose Rizo in an inter-party 
primary if the terms are right.  Montealegre suggested the 
following process: 
 
--PLC and ALN-PC primary voters would include members of 
party affiliated national, departmental, and municipal boards 
for a total of 34,000 - 40,000 participants. 
 
--In addition for voting for the Liberal Alliance 
presidential candidate, participants would vote for 
departmental deputies. 
 
--Voting would occur in the 17 departments plus Managua, with 
each department having one voting center and Managua offering 
one center per district. 
 
--The vote would be held May 14. 
 
--The Liberal Alliance would form a board of directors, 
independent from Aleman; meetings would no longer be held in 
Aleman's El Chile residence (Montealegre was adamant that 
this condition must be met). 
 
--An extension of the deadline to submit alliances to the 
Supreme Electoral Council (CSE) would be in order (current 
deadline is May 5). 
 
¶6.  (C) Remaining issues to resolve via negotiations would be 
the selection of national and Parlacen deputies and the 
guarantee that Aleman would recede from the political scene. 
Montealegre was confident that if the primaries are clean and 
not controlled by Aleman, he will win over Rizo or any other 
PLC candidates. 
 
¶7.  (C) Comment: Ambassador met with CEPPS partners March 22 
to discuss primary options and shared Montealegre's primary 
concept with them.  Local IRI Director Gilberto Valdez, the 
CEPPS "primaries guru" and other CEPPS directors were 
favorable to supporting the proposal.  Valdez commented, 
however, that IRI could also support primaries involving a 
much larger universe of eligible voters, such as all party 
"affiliates," a plan discussed earlier that would encompass 
about 300,000-400,000 voters.  Valdez noted that using 
affiliates would be more democratic and likely bring more 
voters into the Liberal camp. The likelihood of the PLC 
agreeing to these terms is remote at this point; however, 
pressure from the private sector and leaders of neighboring 
countries could help. 
 
In Search of Financial Backing and Name Recognition 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8.  (C)  Ambassador shared with Montealegre the gist of his 
separate meetings  with Salvadoran President Saca and 
Nicaraguan financier Carlos Pellas.  In essence, both Saca 
and Pellas advocate a united Liberal ticket under the PLC's 
banner and machinery, arguing that this approach is the only 
safe way to beat Daniel Ortega.  They propose that 
Montealegre run as Rizo's VP, be guaranteed a number of 
Assembly seats, and run as the party's presidential choice in 
¶2011.  Ambassador disputed this reasoning at the Saca and 
Pella meetings, noting that support for a PLC candidate at 
this point is tantamount to support for Aleman, and by 
extension, the FSLN. 
 
¶9.  (C) Montealegre replied that he too has received this 
offer from Pellas and Saca intermediary Calderon, and has 
rejected it, explaining that he will not enter into any 
alliance with the PLC so long as Aleman controls it, because 
under these circumstances the PLC would lose the election. 
Further, Montealegre argued that he clearly enjoys more 
popular support than Rizo and offers a better chance to beat 
Ortega.  Montealegre offered that President Bolanos public 
support for him and the president's continuing engagement 
with his regional counterparts and the private sector could 
help provide the momentum to shift Saca and Pellas' position. 
 Similarly U.S. pressure would be helpful, suggested 
Montealegre. 
 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
 
¶10.  (S) After assuring us he would not commit to a candidate 
until there was a shake-out and unification on the democratic 
front, Pellas now appears to have thrown his lot in with Rizo 
and Aleman.  He argues that Nicaragua cannot change overnight 
and he clearly favors a lower risk scenario: the PLC 
candidate, ideally Rizo, running against Ortega and Lewites. 
Pellas believes the Montealegre route is riskier because it 
would likely spell a four-way race, pitting Liberals against 
Liberals and dividing their support, which could lead to an 
Ortega victory.  We suspect that these arguments are only 
part of what drives Pellas, however.  A Montealegre victory 
would shake up the Ortega-Aleman pact and could change the 
way Nicaraguans do business.  The current system is 
dysfunctional, but Nicaragua's private sector has learned to 
navigate it, preferring a "malleable" judicial system to the 
uncertainty that a Montealegre government, seeking to 
establish international standards and the rule of law, could 
represent. 
 
¶11.  (S) Putting pressure on Pellas via his U.S. business 
partner GE Finance International and the persuasion of senior 
USG officials could prompt Pellas to change his position. 
Besides our standard points about why supporting Rizo would 
mean a perpetuation of the pactist caudillo system and most 
likely playing into Ortega's hands, we will emphasize to 
Pellas and his GE business partners our serious concerns over 
Aleman camp connections to criminal activities.  We are 
seeking to arrange, via IRI and the desk, April meetings for 
Montealegre with senior USG officials and legislators, a 
speaking engagement with a think-tank, and perhaps a press 
interview to provide him higher visibility and possibly draw 
more support from the private sector. 
TRIVELLI