06MANAGUA1193
NICARAGUAN ELECTIONS: LIBERAL CHONTALENOS FEAR
Mon Jun 05 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0039
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #1193/01 1561635
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 051635Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6470
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0693
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 001193 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/01/2016 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM SOCI NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUAN ELECTIONS: LIBERAL CHONTALENOS FEAR 
DIVISION IN RANKS 
 
REF: MANAGUA 0813 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul Trivelli for reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: Despite the May 31 deadline to register 
party candidates for the November national elections and the 
fact that both major Liberal groups determined to run 
separately, we found most Liberals in Chontales still hoping 
for a united front to challenge the FSLN in November. 
Supporters of dissident Sandinista Herty Lewites claimed that 
Lewites, alliance is just as "democratic" as the PLC or ALN. 
 All parties are suspicious of the pact-controlled Supreme 
Electoral Council (CSE) and its local affiliates, and the 
departmental Etica y Transparencia (ET) representative warned 
of irregularities with the official voters list (padron) and 
problems with the distribution of voter ID cards (cedulas). 
End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Ambassador and emboffs traveled to the central 
Nicaraguan department of Chontales on May 31 to meet with 
local business and political leaders and discuss the upcoming 
national elections.  We saw representatives of the Nicaraguan 
Liberal Alliance (ALN), the Sandinista Renovation Movement 
(MRS), the Chontales Ranchers' Association, the mayors of 
different municipalities in Chontales (PLC and Conservative), 
and the local ET director.  Ambassador also took the 
opportunity to address the local "Book in a Box" English 
training program participants, interview with a Juigalpa 
radio station, and meet a group of Peace Corps volunteers. 
 
ALN OFFICIAL: ALEMAN IS DRIVING THE PLC TO RUIN 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3. (C) Like many of the ALN,s regional officials, ALN 
Chontales Director Elman Urbina was formerly the departmental 
director for the PLC.  Urbina explained that the PLC's lack 
of internal democracy ) epitomized by Aleman's "dedazo" 
selection of President Bolanos ) set the party on an 
inexorable downward slide.  He claimed that the division of 
the democratic forces brought about by Aleman,s 
mismanagement of the party cost the PLC Juigalpa (the capital 
of Chontales and a largely Liberal city) and other 
municipalities in the department in the 2004 municipal 
elections.  Urbina described Jose Rizo and Jose Antonio 
Alvarado,s PLC caravan, which came though Chontales about 
two weeks ago, as a "failure," noting that most of the cars 
were from Managua, not local. 
 
¶4. (C) Urbina stated that ALN presidential candidate Eduardo 
Montealegre enjoys considerable support in Chontales, though 
the ALN is "weaker in rural areas."  According to Urbina, 
over 4,000 Chontalenos voted in the ALN primaries to select 
departmental deputy candidates.  He claimed to have close, 
productive relations with local ALN alliance partners 
(notably the Conservative Party and Resistencia). 
 
¶5. (C) Urbina complained that the ALN has been unfairly 
excluded from the Departmental and Municipal Electoral 
Councils (CEDs and CEMs), which are still dominated by the 
FSLN and PLC, the traditional majority parties.  The "second 
chairs" of the voting boards, reserved for third parties, 
were allotted to the MRS (Herty Lewites, alliance) despite 
the ALN's relatively greater presence in Chontales.  He noted 
that the ALN is working with the MRS to try to prevent fraud, 
but frankly described a situation that occurred during the 
2004 municipal elections in which APRE won a close vote in 
Cuapa, but the municipality was given to the PLC by the CED 
during negotiations with the FSLN.  (Comment: Urbina is a 
reliable source since he was the PLC's departmental director 
at the time.  End Comment.) 
 
MRS LEADERS: WE ARE DEMOCRATS TOO 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6. (C) Ambassador also met with leaders of Herty Lewites' 
alliance (MRS) Manuel Moran and Ricardo Zambrana.  When asked 
about Lewites' strength in Chontales, Moran claimed that the 
MRS is organized in every municipality, though admitted 
communication problems with rural communities due to bad 
roads and lack of phone services.  He stated that Chontalenos 
are attracted to Lewites' "participatory government" 
proposal, which promises to analyze and resolve the needs and 
problems of the people and fight corruption of all types 
(including the FSLN-PLC pact). 
 
¶7. (C) Moran claimed that Lewites will claim some 20 percent 
 
of the Sandinista vote from the FSLN.  He asserted that many 
FSLN officials in Chontales secretly support Lewites, but are 
afraid to switch sides publicly because of FSLN intimidation. 
 Moran also noted that the FSLN is accusing Lewites' 
supporters of being "pro-gringo CIA instigators."  The 
Supreme Electoral Council is "100 percent controlled by the 
FSLN," Moran remarked, and is "preparing to commit fraud each 
day."  Hence, local and international observation for the 
elections is essential. 
 
¶8. (C) Moran and Zambrana expressed some consternation that 
the USG and other actors have labeled the Liberals and 
Conservatives the "democratic forces" in Nicaragua.  Lewites' 
alliance also supports democracy, they argued, and is 
completely opposed to caudillo-style government and the 
PLC-FSLN pact. 
 
RANCHERS' ASSOCIATION BEMOANS LIBERAL DIVISIONS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶9. (C) The members of the Chontales Ranchers' Association 
expressed their collective fear that the divided Liberal 
forces could permit an FSLN victory.  One rancher observed 
that the Embassy's primary proposal was an "excellent idea" 
to unify the democratic forces, but was torpedoed by PLC 
leader Arnoldo Aleman, who did not want to surrender control 
of the party.  They commented that the FSLN and PLC will use 
their influence over the CSE to commit fraud in the 
elections, so a strong observation effort is necessary. 
Notably, the two (visibly) younger members of the Association 
seemed more enthusiastic about the opportunity to select new 
political leaders and not quite so concerned about Liberal 
divisions. 
 
PLC MAYORS: EDUARDO IS A GOOD PERSON, BUT ONLY PLC CAN WIN 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶10. (C) The Ambassador's lunch with the mayors of Chontales 
was dominated by outspoken PLC representatives.  The FSLN 
vice-mayor of Juigalpa confirmed his attendance, but did not 
appear.  The PLC mayors echoed the positions of their 
counterparts in other departments: Montealegre is a good 
candidate, but only the PLC has the party structure to win 
elections; the polls are not reliable because they are 
manipulated by Montealegre,s allies; and Lewites, candidacy 
is a Trojan Horse ) he will withdraw before the elections. 
The mayors were not strong defenders of Aleman, but did back 
the party and supported the candidacy of Jose Rizo.  Marina 
del Carmen Lorio, the outspoken PLC mayor of La Libertad, 
criticized Montealegre as an "elitist" and claimed that only 
45 people in La Libertad voted in the ALN primaries.  Turning 
to Conservative mayor of San Pedro Jose Ignacio Gonzalez, 
Lorio commented that even though he defeated the PLC 
candidate in the municipal elections, his constituents would 
vote for the PLC in the national elections.  Gonzalez did not 
contradict her. 
 
¶11. (C) The Director of the Liberal Association of Patriotic 
Mayors (ASALPAT), Novis Rosales, also attended the lunch. 
Rosales claimed that FSLN mayors and other officials are 
receiving advice from over 160 &electoral experts8 from 
Venezuela as well as paying bribes to rural voters to &clean 
the image8 of Daniel Ortega before the elections.  Before 
the lunch, Rosales confided to poloff that four PLC mayors 
ignored the ASALPAT prohibition to cooperate with the 
Sandinistas in the Venezuelan program to provide discounted 
oil and urea directly to participating municipalities.  He 
warned that the Venezuelans are planning to set up 
&Community Development Councils8 in the municipalities, 
which would presumably promote Bolivarian values and support 
the FSLN politically.  Rosales shared a copy of an ASALPAT 
statement condemning the FSLN deal with Venezuela as illegal 
and an example of Venezuelan interference in Nicaraguan 
politics.  He identified the renegade Liberals as the mayors 
of Rivas (Rene Martinez), El Crucero (Carlos Antonio 
Hernandez Garcia), San Rafael del Sur (Santiago Jose Ruiz 
Molina), and La Trinidad (Luis Jarquin Laguna). 
 
LOCAL ETICA REP WARNS OF PADRON IRREGULARITIES AND CEDULA 
PROBLEMS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - - 
 
¶12. (C) The Ambassador later met with the local Director of 
Etica y Transparencia (ET), Melba Rosa Suarez, to discuss 
ET's efforts to review the local voters' list (padron) and 
 
distribution of national/voter ID cards (cedulas).  Suarez 
commented that the local padron suffers from the same 
deficiencies at the local level as at the national level ) 
it contains a high percentage of deceased citizens and omits 
significant numbers of eligible voters.  On the issue of 
cedulas, Suarez claimed that the CSE and CED are not serious 
about producing and distributing the cards.  She commented 
that she has encountered several would-be voters who have 
waited years to receive a cedula and then sent on a wild 
goose chase by CSE officials trying to locate their cedula. 
The CED in Juigalpa has 1,800 unclaimed cedulas, she 
remarked.  Suarez did allow, however, that the opening of the 
CEMs in June will presumably make cedulas much more 
accessible to the rural population. 
 
¶13. (C) Regarding the elections in general, Suarez commented 
that the campaign in Chontales has not "heated up" yet.  In 
her opinion, however, the people are tired of the traditional 
parties and ready to consider alternatives. 
 
COMMENT: WHAT NOW? 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶14. (C) The separate registration of party alliances and 
candidates in March (septel) for the ALN and PLC has thwarted 
the hopes of provincial Liberals for unity.  Despite the PLC 
leaders' shrill assertions that only the PLC has the 
"structure" to defeat the FSLN, they also fear that the party 
will fare poorly in competition with the ALN.  If young 
anti-pact Liberals and independents like the two cattlemen in 
the Ranchers' Association turn out to vote in large numbers, 
Nicaragua could witness a true political reformation. 
TRIVELLI