06MANAMA378
MOSTLY POSITIVE REACTIONS TO FTA CONFERENCE
Sat Mar 11 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Manama
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 MANAMA 000378 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA/ARP, EB 
USTR FOR J BUNTIN 
COMMERCE FOR FCS - B ORR 
ALSO FOR ITA/MAC/AMESA - T HOFFMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD ECON BEXP PREL KPAO BA ECTRD BILAT
SUBJECT: MOSTLY POSITIVE REACTIONS TO FTA CONFERENCE 
 
REF: A. MANAMA 326 
     ¶B. MANAMA 314 
     ¶C. MANAMA 305 
 
Sensitive but unclassified; please protect accordingly.  Not 
for Internet distribution. 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) The February 27 conference on "Free Trade in the 
Middle East," attended by Commerce Secretary Gutierrez, 
Bahraini Minister of Industry and Commerce Fakhro, and 
Jordanian Minister of Industry and Trade Zubi, publicized the 
benefits of the U.S.-Bahrain free trade agreement (FTA) and 
brought together some 400 American and regional business 
people to discuss business.  Widespread media coverage of the 
event and Secretary Gutierrez's press roundtable was 
uniformly positive.  Bahraini business people, in discussions 
with EmbOffs, had mostly positive reactions to the 
conference.  Those familiar with doing business in the United 
States and the West were the most optimistic, saying the FTA 
would boost their business relations with American companies. 
 A textiles manager said he would pursue partnerships with 
Jordanian companies, who are already familiar with the 
provisions of their FTA with the U.S.  Others thought the 
agreement would boost Bahrain as an investment destination. 
Those business people unaccustomed to doing business with the 
United States are looking for government assistance and 
guidance in taking advantage of the FTA.  End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Positive Headlines About FTA Conference 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Commerce Secretary Gutierrez, Bahraini Minister of 
Industry and Commerce Hassan Fakhro, and Jordanian Minister 
of Industry and Trade Sharif Zubi headlined the February 27 
conference on "Free Trade in the Middle East."  Some 400 
attendees, including over 100 American company 
representatives, heard senior government officials and 
business leaders discuss ways to benefit from the 
U.S.-Bahrain FTA and participated in the five breakout 
sessions on key industry sectors.  The widespread press 
coverage of the event and Secretary Gutierrez's press 
roundtable was uniformly positive, with the media focusing on 
the unique nature of the conference and speakers' calls for 
business people to take advantage of the FTA. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) In conversations with EmbOffs, Bahraini business 
people's reactions to the conference were mostly positive. 
Those who are already doing business with American and 
Western companies see immediate benefits and are looking to 
expand their trade with the U.S., while those unfamiliar with 
American or European markets continue to look for government 
guidance on next steps.  Yusuf Mashaal, General Manager of 
Mashaal Chemical Industries, told EmbOff that he found the 
conference to be very useful.  He had productive discussions 
with an American company representative about the possibility 
of manufacturing patented chemical products on behalf of the 
American firm for delivery to clients in the region.  He 
commented that Bahrain brings a lot of expertise and 
experience in the chemicals and petrochemicals industries, 
more so than Jordan, for example, which also has an FTA with 
the U.S. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Opportunities in Luxury Goods, Textiles 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Ali Abdul Hussein, Marketing Director for Al Shaikh 
Design Company, a manufacturer of high-end perfumes, said 
that his company is already exporting to the U.S. but the 
price benefits that will come as a result of the FTA tariff 
exemption should boost his sales in the U.S.  Similarly, 
Abdulla Al Hawaj and Jawad Al Hawaj, both executives with the 
Al Hawaj chain selling branded luxury items, believe the FTA 
will allow them to sell more American products.  Even without 
the FTA, American products are less expensive than competing 
French, Spanish, and German goods, and with the removal of 
customs duties, the price gap will increase.  Jawad Al Hawaj 
said his company had recently signed deals with Donna Karan 
New York and Calvin Klein to stock their products. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The operations director of Manama Textiles Company, 
which is already a big clothing exporter to the U.S., said 
the FTA will help his company compete with lower cost 
producers around the world.  He was interested in taking 
advantage of provisions of the agreement dealing with 
clothing and apparel manufactured from American cloth.  He 
also was interested in partnering with Jordanian textile 
companies that were experienced in working under the 
provisions of the U.S.-Jordan FTA.  Bahrain-based attorney 
Qais Zubi (who is the cousin of Jordanian Minister Zubi) said 
that Jordan and Bahrain should organize delegations to learn 
from each other and develop joint ventures to benefit from 
the FTA. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Bahrain As An Investment Destination 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Other conference participants hoped the FTA would 
serve to promote Bahrain as an investment destination.  Ahmed 
Al Jawahery, Director of Middle East Trading and Engineering, 
remarked that the large turnout for the conference reflected 
increased interest among Bahraini and American business 
people in the FTA.  Although Bahrain itself is a small 
market, it can act as a regional hub.  He thought the FTA 
"puts Bahrain on the map" along with other global commercial 
centers as an investment destination.  Malik Al Ghanem, 
Regional Director of Yousif bin Ahmed Kanoo, told EmbOff that 
his company wants to establish a joint venture with an 
American company in the logistics field.  He is negotiating 
with several firms already.  He commented that for American 
companies coming to the region for the first time, Bahrain 
offers many advantages, including easy access to the large 
Saudi market. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Some Need Guidance, Support of Governments 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Ahmed Al Tahoo, owner of Al Tashel Jewelry, and 
Mohan Kumar, General Manager of the Bahrain Import-Export 
Company, were disappointed that no American companies in 
their business sectors - jewelry, consumer products, 
electronics, and home appliances  - attended the conference. 
They are interested in importing American products but are 
unsure how to make contact with appropriate companies. 
(Note:  The Embassy Commercial Section is assisting.) 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Abdul Rahman Al Moayyed, a director at YK Al 
Moayyed and Sons, one of the largest family conglomerates in 
Bahrain, told EmbOff that he had hoped the conference would 
discuss the technical aspects of the FTA.  Instead, the 
conference served as "a marketing campaign" but offered 
nothing tangible.  Greater focus on the practical aspects of 
the FTA would have resulted in more deal making because the 
parties would better understand what they have to gain.  As 
far as enhancing relations between the U.S. and Bahrain, the 
agreement was already successful even though it had not yet 
entered into force.  Saeed Radhi, owner of Al Sharq Aluminum 
Company, complained that the conference did not address 
techniques and strategies for finding markets in the U.S.  He 
thought the Bahraini government should create an advisory 
body to assist manufacturers expand exports to the U.S. 
market. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The FTA conference succeeded on many levels -- 
widespread media coverage of Secretary Gutierrez's visit, 
focus on the benefits of the FTA to business people, 
promotion of American exports and investments, and building 
awareness of the positive role the United States plays in the 
region.  Those Bahraini business people already familiar with 
American or other Western markets are most at ease with the 
concept of the FTA and understand how to benefit from it. 
They see the FTA as a means to expand the business they are 
already doing with the U.S.  Those unfamiliar with Western 
markets are looking for something to grasp onto -- more 
details about the agreement, more explanation of the 
benefits, or a government advisory body to identify business 
opportunities.  The message of the conference was that 
governments had negotiated the agreement, but it was up to 
business people to realize the benefits.  The savvy business 
people are proactively making deals and establishing 
relationships, while others wait to be led to opportunities. 
 
MONROE