06MANAGUA1961
MRS: "WE WANT TO BRING ORTEGA DOWN"
Wed Sep 06 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #1961/01 2492233
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 062233Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7487
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0760
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 001961 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/06/2016 
TAGS: EAID ECON EFIN KDEM NU PGOV PINR PREL
SUBJECT: MRS: "WE WANT TO BRING ORTEGA DOWN" 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul A. Trivelli. Reasons 1.4 (B,D). 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY: Sandinista Renovation Movement (MRS) 
spokesperson Israel Lewites (Herty Lewites' nephew) recently 
asserted to polcouns that the MRS is the only viable option 
for the 2006 election.  Lewites believes that the MRS can 
capture some of the traditional Sandinista (FSLN) vote, 
enough to ensure that Daniel Ortega does not win on the first 
round, also predicting that many of the undecided voters will 
vote for the MRS.  Lewites warned that Eduardo Montealegre 
has been tainted by the 
CENI (Certificados Negociables de Inversion) scandal, and if 
he wins the presidency, will therefore be controlled by the 
FSLN.  Lewites described the MRS' platform and the evolution 
of the campaign after Herty's death.  Despite what he sees as 
recent successes, Lewites noted that limited resources will 
continue to hamper the campaign and election day efforts, 
including the MRS' ability to send party poll watchers 
(fiscales) to voting centers.  END SUMMARY. 
 
"The only viable option" 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  (C) In a meeting with poloffs on August 31, MRS 
spokesperson Israel Lewites addressed the CENI issue and 
Montealegre's possible involvement.  He stated that the MRS 
is the only viable party, as Montealegre's image has been 
tainted.  He explained that even if Montealegre were to win 
the presidency, the FSLN (through a pact with the PLC) would 
likely control the National Assembly and Montealegre would 
enjoy no real power.  In light of the possibility of a 
continuing pact between the FSLN and the PLC in the Assembly, 
Lewites believes that the focus of the election should be on 
the deputy slots. 
 
¶3. (C) Lewites emphasized that the MRS would never return to 
an FSLN controlled by Ortega.  He expressed concern about a 
possible FSLN win, estimating  that the FSLN can easily steal 
four to five percent of the vote on election day.  He also 
pointed out the ideological differences between the ALN and 
the MRS, and denied any possibility that Edmundo Jarquin 
might step down and support Montealegre.  He responded that 
if Jarquin resigns, the MRS votes may migrate to Ortega. 
 
¶4. (U) Polcouns reiterated the USG position that the MRS is a 
viable and constructive option, with whom the United States 
would maintain good relations. 
 
Campaign tactics 
- - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5.  (C) Lewites shared that the MRS is renewing campaign 
efforts and planning intensive outreach in rural areas. 
Jarquin will visit the smaller cities and towns, while vice 
presidential candidate Carlos Mejia Godoy will concentrate on 
the countryside.  Recent campaign efforts have focused on 
creating name recognition for Jarquin, wooing the youth vote, 
as well as capturing some of the traditional FSLN vote. 
 
¶6.  (U) Shortly after Jarquin was named as the new MRS 
presidential candidate, Lewites initiated a campaign -- "Vota 
por el feo que quiere una Nicaragua linda" (Vote for the ugly 
guy who wants a beautiful Nicaragua), playing on Jarquin's 
appearance.  According to Lewites, the campaign rapidly 
increased recognition of Jarquin and everyone now calls him 
"El Feo."  Another recent campaign ad mocks Daniel's 
appearance on July 19 riding a thoroughbred with the 
Nicaraguan flag tied around his neck and contrasts it with 
Jarquin riding a burro during a campaign rally in the 
countryside.  Other efforts to court the youth vote include a 
contest for young people to write a Reggaeton song (a popular 
style which mixes reggae and Latin American hip hop) against 
corruption with a $200 prize for the winner. 
 
MRS Platform 
- - - - - - - 
 
¶7.  (U) MRS campaign efforts have focused on portraying the 
party as the only "anti-pact" option.  Their campaign 
materials mention a "clean pact" with the people and their 
platform focuses on anti-corruption and services for the most 
disadvantaged in Nicaragua.  Their "clean pact" with the 
people includes 14 points: 
 
- End the PLC - FSLN pact. 
- Put an end to "mega" salaries and pensions for government 
worker in order to increase salaries for health care workers 
and teachers. 
- Create 500,000 new jobs, focusing on employment for youth. 
- Eradicate hunger and infant malnutrition. 
- Guarantee better education for children. 
- Increase and improve medical services. 
- Create a development bank for small producers. 
- Find housing solutions for the most needy. 
- Prioritize road construction for the center and north of 
the country; increase communication with the Caribbean Coast. 
- Grant true autonomy to the RAAS and the RAAN. 
- Protect Nicaraguan emigrants and ensure their right to vote. 
- Improve security and safety for all Nicaraguans; stop 
violence against women and children. 
- Promote sustainable use of natural resources. 
- Develop alternative energy sources and encourage tourism 
and development. 
 
¶8.  (C) According to Lewites, the two key issues for the MRS 
are term limits in the National Assembly and the regulation 
of salaries.  He believes that the system must be changed 
whereby National Assembly seats are not treated as a reward 
for the party faithful. 
 
Life after Herty 
- - - - - - - - - 
 
¶9. (C) Jarquin and the MRS continue to use Herty Lewites' 
popularity as a campaign tool, emphasizing his legacy. 
Jarquin does not enjoy Herty's popularity and many say he 
lacks Herty's charisma.  During the meeting, Lewites voiced 
his strong support for Jarquin and satisfaction with his 
commitment to the party.  He commented on Jarquin's 
dedication and honesty, but admitted that his candor recently 
lead to a tactical mistake.  Jarquin expressed his support 
for legalizing elective abortions, a procedure opposed by a 
large majority of Nicaraguans and the Catholic Church.  The 
Catholic Church, as well as the other candidates (including 
the FSLN) publicly denounced Jarquin's position. 
 
¶10. (C) Lewites confirmed that financial backing remains a 
critical issue and that the MRS has not been able to raise 
many funds from Herty's contacts.  Embassy contacts report 
that several sources of funding brought to the MRS by Lewites 
(from Jewish communities in Panama and Europe, for example) 
have run dry.  Jarquin himself admits that the MRS receives 
minimal support from the Nicaraguan private sector, and the 
party has been forced to essentially cut off local candidates 
in lower-priority departments -- basically everywhere but the 
Pacific region, which contains the majority of MRS 
supporters. 
 
¶11. (C) Lewites is particularly concerned about fraud on 
election day and not having enough funds to cover logistical 
expenses for the MRS fiscales.  He told poloffs that the MRS' 
selection and preparation of party poll watchers (fiscales) 
is progressing.  IRI has confirmed that it has trained about 
30% of the MRS fiscales.  According to Lewites, the MRS 
intends to have at least two people per voting table (JRV) on 
election day, but they need funds to feed and transport the 
fiscales and other helpers. 
 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
¶13. (C) Lewites seems optimistic about the possibility of the 
MRS winning a fair number of deputy seats.   Adamantly 
anti-Daniel, Lewites claims he views the election as a 
personal fight.  He made a point of mentioning to poloffs 
that he had studied in the United States (at the University 
of Texas in Arlington) and believes in "the American dream" 
and supports responsible capitalism -- since it so clearly 
benefited him.  Lewites is the force behind the MRS' 
innovative publicity campaign that has a large number of 
Nicaraguans talking about "El Feo."  Though current polls 
show Jarquin in third place, if the MRS can shift votes from 
the FSLN and garner some of the undecided vote, it is still a 
viable option -- and could be the key to preventing an Ortega 
win. 
TRIVELLI