06MANAGUA2624
AMBASSADOR DISCUSSES NEXT STEPS WITH FSLN
Mon Dec 04 00:00:00 +0100 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0026
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #2624/01 3381432
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 041432Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8349
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS PRIORITY 0843
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 002624 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/04/2016 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PINR KDEM NU
SUBJECT:  AMBASSADOR DISCUSSES NEXT STEPS WITH FSLN 
INTERMEDIARY SANTOS 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 2611 
 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 2608 
     ¶C. MANAGUA 0632 
     ¶D. MANAGUA 0579 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul A. Trivelli. Reasons 1.4 (B,D). 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary:  Following up on Assistant Secretary Thomas 
Shannon's recent meeting with President-elect Daniel Ortega 
(Ref. B), Ambassador, DCM and polcouns met with Sandinista 
National Liberation Front (FSLN) Foreign Affairs Secretary 
Samuel Santos to discuss next steps in our bilateral 
relationship with the incoming Sandinista government.  Over 
dinner at the Santos residence, Ambassador reiterated our 
firm commitment to Nicaragua's democracy and its people, and 
our interest in working with the new government on issues of 
mutual concern.  He also explained that most of our aid 
programs are tied to a number of legislative requirements. 
Santos related that Ortega was very pleased with his first 
dialogue with A/S Shannon.  Santos was pleasantly surprised 
by the myriad of development projects the USG promotes in 
Nicaragua and eagerly accepted the Ambassador's offer to 
present an overview of our programs and their parameters to 
Ortega's transition team during the week of December 11.  End 
Summary. 
 
 
A PROMISING BILATERAL "TAKE-OFF" 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  (C) As part of our follow on to A/S Shannon's November 28 
meeting with President-elect Daniel Ortega (Ref. B), 
Ambassador, DCM and polcouns met with FSLN Foreign Affairs 
Secretary Samuel Santos, whom Ortega designated as his 
intermediary to discuss next steps in our bilateral 
relationship with the incoming Sandinista government.  Over 
dinner at his residence -- on a ridge overlooking both 
Managua and Granada and formerly a lodging for coffee pickers 
-- Santos related that Ortega was very pleased with his first 
dialogue with A/S Shannon and the Ambassador.  "The plane 
took off smoothly, and I hope the flight will be a good one," 
offered Santos, who asserted that Ortega's interest in 
maintaining a respectful and constructive relationship with 
the United States is genuine.  He assured the Ambassador that 
Ortega and his followers will avoid the public display of 
negative, offensive rhetoric that could damage the 
relationship. 
 
¶3.  (C) Concurring with Santos' assessment of the 
Shannon-Ortega meeting, the Ambassador noted that while some 
of the presidents of other Central American countries had 
offered to serve as intermediaries between the USG and the 
new FSLN government, he believed that direct relations are 
possible, as evidenced by the Shannon-Ortega meeting and the 
present dinner, and advisable.  Polcouns suggested that 
contentious issues be addressed outside of the media 
limelight, as the media often seeks political scandal rather 
than good-news development stories.  The DCM remarked that 
refraining from "double discourse" in public is the most 
effective way to avoid misunderstanding and to foster 
positive engagement. 
 
EMOTIONAL TIES WITH FIDEL, HUGO, THE FLMN 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4.  (C) After reiterating his intention to be frank with us 
on all issues, Santos asserted that he and other FSLN leaders 
will not abandon their friendships with Fidel Castro, Hugo 
Chavez, the FMLN, or other left-leaning allies.  However, 
(unlike the policies of the 1980s Ortega regime) the FSLN 
will not meddle in the internal affairs of other countries or 
movements, and instead, focus on resolving Nicaragua's 
daunting social problems, claimed Santos.  The Ambassador 
replied that A/S Shannon had alluded to our respect for 
Nicaragua's sovereignty and the FSLN's right to maintain 
relations with its allies.  However, if the FSLN government 
were, for example, to recruit hundreds of Venezuelans to man 
its ministries, we would be concerned.  Santos dispelled this 
possibility, noting that more likely Nicaraguans would be 
sent to Venezuela.  Further, U.S. experts will be most 
welcome in Nicaragua to help with development projects. 
 
A TWO-CHINA POLICY 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5.  (C) Santos, who is among the possible candidates to head 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, asserted that Ortega is 
determined to maintain a "two-China policy."  For Santos, it 
is incumbent upon the two Chinas to resolve their 
differences, not Nicaragua.  He recounted that in his 
meetings with the Taiwanese and Mainland Chinese, both groups 
are eager to resolve their differences and enjoy strong trade 
and investment ties, in addition to their close cultural and 
historical affiliations.  Santos mentioned how impressed he 
was by the efficiency of Taiwan's agricultural sector, noting 
that only 9% of its population works the land.  The 
Ambassador remarked that in the United States, which is the 
world's largest exporter of agricultural products, less than 
1% of the population lives on farms. 
 
FOCUS ON DEVELOPMENT 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6.  (C) The Ambassador reiterated our firm commitment to 
Nicaragua's democracy and its people, specifically, our 
interest in working with the new government on issues of 
mutual concern -- including mitigating poverty, improving 
health and education, building infrastructure, strengthening 
rule of law, and helping Nicaraguans take full advantage of 
CAFTA.  The DCM suggested that focusing on development rather 
than on politics would offer a constructive point of 
departure.  Echoing the DCM's perspective, Annelly Santos 
added that Nicaragua's younger generations are tired of the 
political rhetoric and seek concrete solutions to real 
problems. 
 
¶7.  (C) The Ambassador referenced the Millennium Challenge 
Compact (MCC) as an example of our countries' close bilateral 
development partnership.  He cited the MCC's emphasis on 
building roads and other infrastructure as especially 
valuable as these activities address Nicaragua's dire need 
for highways and secondary roads, which are needed to 
transport agricultural products and other goods to market in 
a timely manner.  Santos mentioned Nicaragua's energy crisis 
as another challenge.  The Ambassador commented that to 
attract and keep foreign investment a steady and reliable 
energy supply is essential, observing that the problem is 
largely political, not technical. 
 
¶8.  (C) The DCM sought clarification on Ortega's reference to 
the possible need for some "amendments to CAFTA" (Ref. B). 
Santos replied that while the FSLN supports CAFTA, it is 
concerned that small farmers and producers are ill equipped 
to compete with U.S. agribusiness.  The Ambassador explained 
that then-U.S. Trade Representative Robert Zoellick had 
conceived CAFTA as a development vehicle to capacitate trade 
partners in this globalized world, reduce poverty, integrate 
the Central American region, and complement the region's 
political progress over the past decade.  He highlighted 
CAFTA's USD 10-million TCB fund and a Michigan State 
University initiative that help Nicaraguans compete and 
increase their exports by improving crop quality and 
diversification. 
 
¶9.  (C) The Ambassador also cited USG support for Nicaragua's 
"Cup of Excellence" (Taza de Excelencia) program, which has 
helped small Nicaraguan coffee producers increase the quality 
and quantity of their coffee production and exports.  Santos 
was bowled over and pleasantly surprised by the myriad of 
development projects the USG supports in Nicaragua.  The 
Ambassador related how his comments on Liberal Constitutional 
Party (PLC) caudillo Arnoldo Aleman make front page news, 
while his inauguration of an assistance project, if covered 
at all, is relegated to the 14th page.  Santos eagerly 
accepted the Ambassador's offer to present an overview of our 
programs to Ortega's transition team during the week of 
December 11. 
 
DEALING WITH ALEMAN AND FIXING THE JUDICIARY 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶10.  (C) Polcouns remarked that independent, non-partisan 
judiciary is also crucial for development, investment, and 
governability.  The Ambassador mentioned Liberal 
Constitutional Party (PLC) caudillo Arnoldo Aleman's appeal 
before the Supreme Court as a case in point.  Santos conceded 
that Nicaragua's judiciary is in dire need of reform and that 
Aleman is problematic.  He assured us that the FSLN is 
already "starting to address these issues," but will take a 
gradual approach.  He added that President Bolanos had erred 
by confronting Aleman on corruption before he had 
consolidated his leadership in government and over the PLC. 
 
 
SLOW GO ON CABINET APPOINTMENTS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶11.  (C) According to Santos, Ortega will take his time in 
selecting his cabinet leadership, noting that thus far only 
the Minister of Education has been appointed (de Castillo). 
However, he is certain that he and Bayardo Arce will occupy 
ministerial positions, Arce most likely the Ministry of Trade 
and Commerce.  Ortega will also respect civil servants and 
intends to appoint only 200 FSLN supporters to government 
positions. 
 
BIODATA 
- - - - 
 
¶12.  (C) Samuel SANTOS Lopez was born December 13, 1938.  His 
grandfather was Somoza's National Guard Chief of Operations 
and Intelligence.  However, his father later opposed the 
Somoza regime and Santos soon followed in his footsteps when 
he was not yet 18, abandoning architectural studies in Mexico 
to join the rebellion.  Santos was incarcerated on several 
occasions for a total of over two years.  During the 
Sandinista era, he served as chief of the FSLN Finance 
Department and was a member of the FSLN Assembly.  He also 
served as Mayor of Managua and Minister of Managua 
Reconstruction.  Santos helped divert GON funds to arm the 
FMLN in El Salvador.  An economist and wealthy businessman, 
Santos was a member of the failed Interbank and lost 
considerable money in the bank scandal.  Santos owns a hotel 
in Managua and is the General Manager of Best Western, 
Nicaragua.  He is a major proponent of building a canal 
through Nicaragua and is a close business partner of Bayardo 
Arce's.  He has relatives in the United States, including a 
sister in Los Angeles and sons in San Francisco. 
 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
¶13.  (C) Santos is a pragmatist who likely believes that his 
role in brokering constructive bilateral relations at this 
stage will increase his chances of becoming Foreign Minister. 
BRENNAN