06NDJAMENA541
CHAD:  RUPTURE WITH SUDAN, THREAT ON REFUGEES, OIL
Sat Apr 15 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ndjamena
VZCZCXRO4293
OO RUEHROV
DE RUEHNJ #0541/01 1051348
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 151348Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY NDJAMENA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3536
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHUJA/AMEMBASSY ABUJA 1039
RUEHDS/AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA 0693
RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0134
RUEHLC/AMEMBASSY LIBREVILLE 0792
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 1281
RUEHNM/AMEMBASSY NIAMEY 2586
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 1669
RUEHYD/AMEMBASSY YAOUNDE 1068
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0679UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NDJAMENA 000541 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF, AF/C, INR, DRL, DS/IP/AF, DS/IP/ITA; 
LONDON AND PARIS FOR AFRICAWATCHERS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREF CD SU
SUBJECT: CHAD:  RUPTURE WITH SUDAN, THREAT ON REFUGEES, OIL 
PRODUCTION STOPPAGE 
 
Following is Embassy translation of communique of April 15, 
delivered by the Prime Minister Pascal Yoadimnadji to 
ambassadors and representatives of international 
organizations in Ndjamena: 
 
Quote: 
 
The Extraordinary Council of Ministers of April 14, 2006, 
took important decisions on numerous challenges that our 
country now faces.  We wanted to meet you, as special 
partners with Chad, to inform you of the decisions taken by 
the Government of the Republic of Chad and solicit the 
support of your respective countries and organizations. 
Living among us in this country, you have witnessed the 
repeated aggressions of the Republic of Sudan against our 
country and the difficulties our country has had with the 
World Bank, following the revision of Law No. 001 on the 
management of oil revenues. 
 
On the first point -- the repeated aggressions of the 
Republic of Sudan against the Republic of Chad -- you have 
just been eye witnesses to the attacks by Sudanese 
mercenaries against our cities and military garrisons.  The 
attack on the city of Ndjamena under your very eyes in the 
early hours of the morning of April 13 constitutes the 
ultimate affront.  Our armed forces and security forces 
defeated the attackers and checked the destabilization plan 
programed for Chad by Sudan.  You are also witnesses of the 
burden of Sudanese refugees which Chad supports and all the 
sacrifices made by Chad to help to resolve the Darfur 
conflict and thus relieve the sufferings of Sudanese refugees. 
 
Despite this, the Government of the Republic of Sudan has 
since 2004 planned the destabilization of Chad.  Chad has 
regularly alerted international opinion to the machiavellian 
plan by the Government of Khartoum.  We regret to state that 
the International Community closes its eyes to the inimical 
behavior of the Government of Khartoum:  it hesitates even 
until today to condemn unequivocally and to impose sanctions 
against Sudan. 
 
Faced with this situation, the Government of the Republic of 
Chad sees itself as obliged to take the decision to break its 
diplomatic and economic relations with Sudan and to recall 
the Chadian facilitators in the inter-Sudanese negotiations 
at Abuja where Chad has offered its co-mediation.  We wish to 
note however that the presence of Chadian elements within the 
forces of the African Union Mission in Darfur is not put in 
question. 
 
Concerning the Sudanese refugees, numbering 300,000, we note 
equally with regret that despite our numerous appeals to the 
International Community to deploy United Nations forces in 
Darfur in order better to bring security to them and to our 
frontiers with Sudan, very little has been done.  Thus, on 
April 9 at 17:00, local time, a camp of Sudanese refugees 
located in the district of Goz Amir, (in the region) of Goz 
Beida, hosting 17,000 persons and guarded by a dozen Chadian 
gendarmes, was attacked.  The assailants also attacked the 
staff and office of HCR where they made off with their means 
of communication before retreating to Darfur, after having 
killed two gendarmes and caused important damage. 
 
The massive presence  of Sudanese refugees has enormous 
consequences for Chad.  This presence causes significant 
human, environmental, and economic damage to our country. 
The Chadian Government notes over time that the refugees are 
better treated than the Chadian host populations who were the 
first to share with the refugees the few means that they 
have.  Chad cannot tolerate for long this policy of double 
standard.  Therefore, we appeal solemnly to the International 
Community to make a great commitment to the conflict of 
Darfur, if not to find a definitive political exit, at least 
to deploy a United Nations force to permit the Sudanese 
refugees to go back to their homeland. 
 
The Chadian Government gives the International Community 
until the end of June 2006 to find a solution, in the absence 
of which we invite the same International Community to find 
 
NDJAMENA 00000541  002 OF 002 
 
 
other countries to welcome them.  It is an issue of survival 
for Chad and the Chadian people.  Chad cannot agree to be 
recompensed with false promises for the sacrifices made by 
its population in welcoming the Sudanese refugees, despite 
its involvement from the first hours of the conflict in 
Darfur in aiding the Sudanese Government and rebels to find a 
political solution. 
 
In the second place, concerning the difficulties that Chad 
has had with the World Bank concerning the revision of Law 
No. 001 on the management of oil revenues, the Chadian 
Government invites the World Bank and the petroleum 
Consortium (Esso, Petronas, and Chevron) to pay over without 
delay the share of oil revenues owed to Chad.  They have 
until Tuesday April 18 at 12:00 to accomplish this, failing 
which the Government will see itself obliged to stop the 
production of oil in Doba. 
 
If you are not aware, we wish to bring to your attention that 
of the 28 (twenty eight) participants in the Chadian 
exportation project, of which 7 (seven) direct and 21 (tewnty 
one) indirect, all the other participants receive their share 
of oil revenues except for Chad, whose revenues will soon 
have been blocked for six (6) months at the City Bank of 
London and by the Consortium. You will agree with us that 
this is a particularly laughable situation.  The oil is 
Chadian.  Its exploitation must first of all profit the 
Chadian people.  In the opposite case, it is better to stop 
its exploitation and commercialization until an acceptable 
compromise is reached for all the participants. 
 
In all sovereignty, the Chadian people, through their 
national representation, proceeded with the revision of Law 
No. 001 on management of oil revenues.  It is their absolute 
right.  So why all the commotion on this subject?  The law on 
management of oil revenues was voted by the Chadian National 
Assembly and promulgated by the President of the Republic of 
Chad, as is the rule in every State of law.  Chadians are not 
guinea pigs for experimenting with certain vague theories 
which have not produced results anywhere in the world.  The 
Chadian people have lived without oil and will live tomorrow 
without oil, which is an essential, exhaustible resource. 
 
To conclude, we wish to inform you that the schedule for the 
presidential election with be maintained.  The voting in the 
presidential election of May 3 will definitely take place on 
that date, however much it might displease the Sudanese 
Government and its mercenaries.  We invite all the candidates 
for the presidential election to continue to carry on their 
campaign.  All arrangements have been made for assuring the 
serenity and tranquility of the voting in the presidential 
election. 
 
Democracy has its requirements.  Constitutional mandates must 
be respected in order to assure the regular functioning of 
the institutions that are solidly founded, despite the 
desperate maneuvers of the enemies of Chad.  We invite those 
of our partners to whom invitations were addressed to observe 
the presidential election to make the necessary arrangements 
so that international observers will join their Chadian 
colleagues to guarantee the transparency of this important 
event.  We thank you in advance. 
 
Such were the great decisions taken by the Extraordinary 
Council of Ministers Friday 14 April 2006 which we wanted to 
bring to your attention. 
WALL