06NICOSIA1208
TFLE01: THE EVACUATION CRISIS IS NOT YET OVER:
Thu Jul 27 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Nicosia
VZCZCXRO2622
OO RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHLZ
DE RUEHNC #1208/01 2080939
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 270939Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY NICOSIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6520
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 4698
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 4181
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV PRIORITY 6351
RUEAHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NICOSIA 001208 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR U/S BURNS, U/S FORE, AND A/S HARTY FROM AMBASSADOR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINS AEMR MARR CASC LE CY
SUBJECT: TFLE01: THE EVACUATION CRISIS IS NOT YET OVER: 
URGENT NEED FOR A WAY FORWARD IN CYPRUS 
 
REF: NICOSIA 1195 AND PREVIOUS 
 
¶1.  THIS IS AN ACTION REQUEST -- SEE PARAGRAPH 10. 
 
¶2. (SBU) SUMMARY.  With civilian outflow from Lebanon 
slowing, Post is facing a looming crisis involving the 
approximately 250 or so people who remain in the Cyprus 
International Fairgrounds because one or more members of 
their families cannot be documented for onward travel to the 
US.  Post has received DHS TDY assistance and has expedited 
the procedures for requesting humanitarian parole from DHS. 
Nonetheless, parole approvals take time and our DHS TDYer has 
identified at least ten families with members who have 
serious ineligibilities that would likely prevent them from 
ever obtaining parole. This number is likely to grow as more 
evacuees trickle in and are processed.  All assisted arrivals 
are currently being housed at the Fairgrounds in Nicosia at 
open-ended USG expense with medical support from CTF-59. 
Those with Cypriot visas (required of Lebanese) are facing 
the imminent expiration of their allowed five-day stay.  The 
Government of Cyprus, already overwhelmed by tens of 
thousands of third country civilians fleeing Lebanon, is 
certain to react angrily when it realizes we have left those 
ineligible to enter the United States, including convicted 
criminals and drug dealers, on their shores; the GOC has 
already clamped down on undocumented arrivals at its seaports 
and airports -- and its ability to retaliate by restricting 
further assisted departure operations and/or operational 
support missions for Embassy Beirut -- cannot be ignored. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Post requests that the Department urgently/urgently 
consult with DHS on a procedure whereby Post would inform 
undocumented family members that they may board a charter 
flight to the United States with the explicit understanding 
that at the Port of Entry they would be put into detention 
until either DHS could resolve their status or until it was 
safe to return them to Lebanon.  Undocumented family members 
would make their own choice as to whether to submit to 
detention or travel elsewhere.  This method would also allow 
families to travel to the United States together, thus 
preventing accusations that the U.S. government is "forcing" 
U.S. citizens back into a war zone, and allow DHS to conduct 
more in-depth security checks on these arrivals. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶4. (SBU) With the largest outflow from Lebanon apparently 
behind us, Embassy Nicosia and our military colleagues have 
been able to clear most of the backlog of those arriving from 
Lebanon.  Assuming outgoing airlift capacity continues to 
match or exceed the inflow of civilians arriving by sea and 
air, Post does not anticipate a repeat of the situation 
earlier in the NEO, when as many as three thousand people 
were sheltered at the Fairgrounds.  We are pleased and proud 
to have helped over 13,000 of our compatriots get out of 
harm's way and back home.  As the tide has receded, however, 
a smaller -- but much more problematic -- group of arrivals 
remains behind.  We do not have the authority to solve all 
their problems by ourselves, and thus need Washington's 
urgent help. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Currently some 250 people are at the Fairgrounds 
because the lack of proper documentation or uncertainties 
about their immigration status prevent them from proceeding 
immediately to the United States -- and more such cases 
continue to arrive each day.  Post has been able to 
adjudicate many of these cases quickly; when it is simply a 
matter of replacing passports, documenting LPRs or reissuing 
those with expired visas, our consuls have been able to move 
such people expeditiously to outbound flights. 
 
¶6. (SBU) However, in cases where a DHS decision on 
humanitarian parole is required, the process has been much 
slower.  DHS has provided TDY help and expedited the 
processing.  But each parole decision must still be approved 
at the Assistant Secretary level. As of July 27, several 
people whom we believe are likely candidates for eventual 
parole have spent as many as six nights in the Fairgrounds 
shelter at USG expense -- with no end in sight.  American 
citizen family members are reluctant to leave their 
undocumented kin.  Patience is beginning to wear thin among 
those at the Fairgrounds; a violent altercation was only 
narrowly averted on July 25, frustration continues to grow, 
and the situation is often tense. 
 
¶7. (SBU) To make matters worse, there are 25 or so 
 
NICOSIA 00001208  002 OF 002 
 
 
individuals with Class One ineligibilities (including 
convicted rapists, drug dealers and deportees), who are 
unlikely candidates for parole.  These individuals, sometimes 
with family members who are U.S. citizens or otherwise 
eligible to go to the U.S. in tow, pose two serious 
difficulties. 
 
¶8. (SBU) First, there is the immediate question of safety and 
order. It is our sense that some of these individuals were 
behind the rumors, grumbling, and discontent that led to the 
near-brawl on July 25.  We are even more gravely concerned, 
however, about the threat posed by those with criminal 
backgrounds who are housed in the same facility as 
unaccompanied minors, single mothers, and other vulnerable 
people.  Post is actively exploring alternative 
accommodations, such as hotels, to segregate out those with 
criminal histories in the short term, as we work to expedite 
the onward travel of those who are qualified.  We are 
ill-equipped to provide personal, 24-hour protection at the 
Fairgrounds facility which, after all, is not -- and should 
not resemble -- a camp, rather than an emergency shelter. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Cases who are unlikely to qualify for parole into 
the U.S. pose a second, longer-term difficulty: what do we do 
with them?  The U.S. government cannot lodge them 
indefinitely in Cyprus, either in hotels or at the 
Fairgrounds.  Nor can we opt for "refoulement" by sending 
them back into the country we just helped them flee.  The 
Government of Cyprus has made it clear that foreign 
governments are responsible for onward transit of any third 
country nationals that they have brought into Cyprus.  The 
GOC understandably would react strongly and negatively if 
they believed we were not fulfilling this responsibility, and 
could easily retaliate by withholding future cooperation in 
assisted departure efforts or other vital missions, like a 
renewed Beirut air or sea bridge.  Cutting ineligible cases 
loose here is not an option. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Post therefore requests that the Department: 
 
a)   Consult with DHS to establish immediately a procedure 
whereby Post would inform undocumented family members that 
they may board a charter flight to the United States with the 
explicit understanding that at the Port of Entry they would 
be put into detention until either DHS could resolve their 
status or until it was safe to return them to Lebanon. 
Undocumented family members would make their own choice as to 
whether to submit to detention or travel elsewhere.  This 
method would also allow families to travel to the United 
States together and allow DHS to conduct more in-depth 
security checks on these arrivals. 
 
b)  While option a) is under discussion, urge DHS to expedite 
the processing of cases using the current parole procedure 
and provide guidance on how we should handle those who will 
not qualify for parole. 
 
¶11.  Our assisted departure efforts from Lebanon so far have 
been a major success for all concerned.  However, unless we 
quickly resolve the issues outlined above, the U.S. 
government runs the risk of our success being undermined and 
replaced with serious diplomatic and public relations 
problems. 
 
¶12.  We request guidance on these issues as soon as possible. 
SCHLICHER