06PARIS1529
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iran Human Rights Report
Fri Mar 10 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 001529 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iran Human Rights Report 
Transatlantic Relations 
PARIS - Friday, March 10, 2006 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Iran 
Human Rights Report 
Transatlantic Relations 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
The announcement that Abu Ghraib "which had become a symbol of 
embarrassment" would close was picked up by French television 
last evening, carrying once again the controversial photos of 
detainee abuse. Alain de Chalvron on France 2 television 
concluded his commentary with the following: "The detainees 
will be transferred to a new prison, where this time, there 
will be no cameras allowed." Liberation this morning carries 
the information as reported by dispatches. 
 
Deputy Secretary Zoellick's visit to Paris in connection with 
the Sudan Consortium is reported in Le Figaro: "Since the 
beginning of the week, the U.S. and the EU have launched a 
diplomatic campaign for the transfer of the peacekeeping 
mission in the region from the African Union to the UN. `The 
crisis persists in Darfur. The cease-fire has been ended. 
There is no time to waste,' said Deputy Secretary of State 
Robert Zoellick. 
 
Catholic La Croix devotes a commentary on Iran, concluding 
that the "beautiful cooperation between the U.S. and the EU-3 
may end soon." (See Part C) UN Reform and the publication of 
the Human Rights Report make up the rest of today's 
international news. (See Part C) 
 
Social and political issues continue to be today's lead and 
editorial stories. Le Figaro interviews Princeton University 
Professor Ezra Suleiman on French society, the CPE and social 
reforms. He calls France "a nation of spontaneous anti- 
liberalism." "In France, precariousness is a concept defined 
in comparison to the job security of civil servants. France 
likes to demonize; it is an instinctive reaction. Hence this 
spontaneous anti-liberalism of France's youth. The word 
liberal has almost become an insult. If France is so reluctant 
to accept reforms, it is because all previous government 
reforms, on the right and the left, have gone against the 
changes required by globalization. The law on the 35-hour 
workweek is a case in point. To the right, the solutions 
colored by social-radicalism a la Chirac are not a serious 
counterweight to the left's anti-liberalism. France is 
freezing itself into an obsolete social model. The situation 
is becoming critical. But France is resilient, and I refuse to 
be pessimistic." 
 
Philippe Gelie in Le Figaro analyzes the consequences of Larry 
Summers' "forced" resignation as Harvard President, because of 
his "politically incorrect" stance on women in science and his 
desire to develop fundamental sciences to the detriment of the 
humanities. "By attacking the bastion of the humanities, 
Summers has found his match." The tempest, according to Gelie, 
has unleashed an inside war among Democrats, "where this 
battle is being fought" illustrating the disarray of the 
opposition in the U.S., which is divided over Iraq, 
immigration and economic policies. "With the mid-term 
elections looming, the Democrats are like Harvard, without a 
leader or a program." 
 
Le Monde carries an op-ed on transatlantic relations, based on 
Ambassador Schnobel's book "Europe-U.S.: A Common Future." 
(See Part C) 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Iran 
 
"Iran, a Break in the Making" 
Christophe Ploquin in Catholic La Croix (03/10): "For any 
nation, being brought before the UNSC is always a moral and 
diplomatic defeat. This is why it can be said that Iran has 
just registered a failure. This defeat for Iran is a victory 
for the U.S. . Now that the issue has been brought before the 
UNSC, the U.S. has every intention of taking over. For the 
past three years, Washington left the EU-3 in charge. Despite 
Russia's moderating intervention, the crisis could not be 
resolved. Now the UNSC will move into a phase of gradual and 
increased pressure on Tehran, using the threat of sanctions. 
But this is also the phase when the Bush administration will 
prove how well it can maneuver. Neither China nor Russia will 
be in favor of sanctions. And so the consensus that has 
prevailed for the past three years at the IAEA thanks to the 
EU-3 diplomatic efforts may not survive. Although Europeans 
and Americans share the same views on the nuclear issue, they 
do not see eye to eye on the long-term strategy to use with 
Iran. While the Americans characterize Iran's regime as 
irresponsible and are seeking to topple it, the Europeans hope 
to be able to continue living and doing business with Iran, 
and worry about a strategy of the worse. This is why on either 
side of the Atlantic, everyone is convinced that the beautiful 
cooperation of late is coming to an end." 
 
Human Rights Report 
 
"The U.S. Points a Finger at Abuse in Arab Nations" 
Corine Lesnes in left-of-center Le Monde (03/10): 
"Washington's Human Rights Report can be summarized as a 
compilation of the contradictions plaguing America's new 
foreign policy in promoting democracy. Three of the countries 
visited recently by Secretary Rice are targeted,. Egypt, Saudi 
Arabia, and Jordan. According to Amnesty International, the 
countries fingered are the same countries where the U.S. 
occasionally sends prisoners in the framework of the 
`renditions.' In the chapter devoted to France, `French 
democracy' does not come out unscathed. The report points to 
French military personnel indicted for its actions in Cote 
d'Ivoire and denounces police brutality, racism and anti- 
Semitism. The report does not spare President Chirac, 
recalling that he is under scrutiny for corruption for the 
period when he was Mayor of Paris." 
 
Transatlantic Relations 
 
"A Reconciliation of Circumstance" 
Thomas Ferenzi in left-of-center Le Monde (03/10): "Having 
read former Ambassador Rockwell Schnabel's book based on his 
EU experience and entitled `Europe-U.S.: A Common Future,' and 
despite the tribute paid to European integration, one comes 
away with the impression that incomprehension remains. 
Ambassador Schnabel is particularly worried about Europe's 
attempts to `balance' the transatlantic relationship. He feels 
that it is unacceptable for Europe to aim to be a 
`counterweight.' One might have thought that after President 
Bush's visit to Brussels, and calls for appeasement, 
Ambassador Schnabel might have tried to understand Europe's 
motivations. But no, he sticks to his guns and condemns the 
proposal for a European headquarter distinct from NATO's. In 
short, while relations between Europe and the U.S. appear to 
have improved, it is clear that deep down differences remain. 
According to Ambassador Schnabel the Americans refute the 
French stance of `multipolarity.' It is therefore difficult to 
imagine how transatlantic relations might warm up. Knee-jerk 
reactions are back. The U.S. insists on NATO's primary role, 
while Europe wants primarily to avoid a crisis with the U.S. 
And so today's calm is more of a truce of circumstance than a 
common vision." STAPLETON