06PARIS2889
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iran Middle East Bolivia -
Wed May 03 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 002889 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; 
AF/PA; EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; 
PM; OSC ISA FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC 
FOR ITA/EUR/FR AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; 
MOSCOW/PA; ROME/PA. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iran Middle East Bolivia - 
Nationalized Oil Companies 
PARIS - Wednesday, May 03, 2006 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Iran 
Middle East 
Bolivia - Nationalized Oil Companies 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
The Clearstream scandal, PM Villepin's "Counter-attack" to 
defend himself against accusations that he asked for an 
investigation into Interior Minister Sarkozy's finances, 
Iran and Bolivia's plan to nationalize foreign oil 
companies are today's lead stories, with a number of 
editorials commenting on the Clearstream scandal and the 
need for "clarification," which, according to Le Figaro, 
"is urgent." Le Figaro notes on its front page that the 
foreign press is "severe" in its judgment of PM Villepin 
and the end of Chirac's term. Liberation headlines: 
"Villepin Answers But Says Nothing" in reference to 
Villepin's attempts to defuse his accusers. Interior 
Minister Sarkozy's 'selected' immigration plan is also 
widely reported. 
 
International news is dominated by Bolivia's 
nationalization of foreign oil companies: for Les Echos, 
"Latin America Is Becoming a New Zone of Tension." The 
editorial asks: "Will we have a shortage of oil soon?" 
Other international stories include the Palestinians' 
plight. Liberation carries an op-ed by former Socialist PM 
Lionel Jospin asking the EU to "revise its policy." Iran 
and Nicholas Burns's presence in Paris is widely noted, in 
Le Figaro, La Croix and Liberation. (See Part C) Under 
Secretary Burns is extensively quoted by the Kuwait News 
 
SIPDIS 
Agency KUNA: "We believe there can be a diplomatic solution 
to the problem of Iran trying to seek a nuclear weapons 
capability. We have not given up on diplomacy and we are 
focused on diplomacy." 
 
An article in La Croix notes that the "Crisis in Darfur has 
become a major issue for American public opinion." "Deputy 
Secretary of State Robert Zoellick arrived yesterday in 
 
SIPDIS 
Nigeria to try to wrangle an agreement in the negotiations 
between the Sudanese government and the rebel movement. The 
U.S. is showing its concern for a conflict that is 
increasingly important to public opinion in the U.S." In 
the article, one Brookings Institute expert is quoted as 
saying that no African issue has mobilized so many American 
since the anti-apartheid movement in the 1980's. 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Iran 
 
"The West Increases Its Pressure on Iran" 
Alain Barluet in right-of-center Le Figaro (05/03): 
"Deciding on the final text for the UN resolution which 
would open the doors to possible sanctions, and as last 
recourse to a military intervention, became yesterday a 
difficult task which taxed the fragile 'unity' of the 
international community. Nicholas Burns did indeed reaffirm 
that the U.S. would favor diplomacy, but he also reminded 
everyone that Washington 'was leaving every option on the 
table.'" 
 
"Progressive Response to Iran" 
Agnes Rotivel and Gilles Biassette in Catholic La Croix 
(05/03): "For the State Department's third ranking 
official, Nicholas Burns, the international community must 
send a 'very firm' message to Iran. 'The UNSC has no other 
choice but to take the path of the UN charter's article 7' 
which in case of a threat to world peace, opens, as a last 
resort, the door to a military action. The world's major 
powers want to increase their pressure on Iran while 
preserving their unity. To reassure the Chinese and the 
Russians, the Europeans are offering a step-by-step 
approach. In Paris, an official insisted that 'chapter 7 
does not necessarily lead to military action.' But a 
resolution that does not invoke chapter 7, would not, 
according to western diplomats, carry as much weight. In 
order for the Russians to accept mentioning chapter 7 in 
the resolution, the West could propose to offset the 
resolution with generous offers in terms of nuclear and 
commercial cooperation." 
 
"The UNSC Tries for Unity" 
Veronique Soule in left-of-center Liberation (05/03): "The 
State Department's third ranking official, Nicholas Burns 
spoke in favor of sending a 'very firm' message to Iran. If 
the next resolution does not trigger a reaction, he has 
offered that another resolution be drafted, which would 
involve economic sanctions. although he excluded the oil 
and gas sectors from such sanctions." 
 
"Dissuading Iran?" 
Jean-Francois Bayart, a director of research at the CNRS, 
in left-of-center Le Monde (05/03): "Iran is legally a 
prisoner of its 1968 commitment [to the NPT]. But countries 
such as India and Pakistan not only have benefited from a 
sort of allowance accorded to non-signatories but are also 
actively courted by the U.S. and France. Despite the 
Iranian president's hard-line attitude vis--vis Iran's 
nuclear program.  the notion that the regime wants this 
technology in order to lessen its dependence on fossil 
fuels should not be cast aside. Iran's decision to resume 
the enrichment of uranium is symptomatic of its frustration 
with regard to Europe and the U.S. and the fruitlessness of 
negotiations over the last two years. An American nuclear 
strike on Iranian installations would only serve to show 
the absurdity of the first use of the nuclear bomb, since 
1945, in the name of defending a non-proliferation treaty." 
 
Middle East 
 
"Wofensohn Throws in the Towel in the Middle East" 
Patrick Saint Paul in right-of-center Le Figaro (05/03): 
"The Quartet's emissary considers that Europe and America's 
policy in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is counter 
productive. Since Hamas's electoral victory and Israel's 
unilateral policy, the Quartet has been paralyzed. 
Wolfensohn, the Quartet's emissary, has thrown in the 
towel. His resignation may well signal a disengagement of 
the Quartet. Wolfensohn feels that his action was destined 
to fail ever since Hamas's victory. According to European 
sources, the Quartet must now decide whether it will name a 
successor for Wolfensohn, and whether the roadmap hasn't 
become obsolete. These same sources wonder if it still 
makes sense for the Quartet to play the role of 
intermediary." 
 
"Wolfensohn Gives Up" 
Agnes Rotivel in Catholic La Croix (05/03): "James 
Wolfensohn is disappointed and discouraged. His resignation 
was expected, especially since the EU's decision to 
partially suspend its aid to the Palestinian Authority, a 
measure he has denounced. For him, it would be an error for 
the West to starve the Palestinians in order to get their 
support for the peace process." 
 
"We Must Help the Palestinians" 
Former Socialist PM Lionel Jospin pens an op-ed in left-of- 
center Liberation (05/03): "The EU must alter the decision 
it has taken since Hamas's victory. If the situation were 
to continue (in the Palestinian territories,) it would lead 
to a human tragedy, disastrous insecurity and maybe 
political chaos." 
 
Bolivia - Nationalized Oil Companies 
"Our Thirst for Oil" 
Jean-Marc Vittori in right-of-center Les Echos (05/03): 
"The problem of an oil shortage does not come, at least not 
yet, from a shortage of resources. It stems from high 
demand in the U.S. and China, combined with the technical 
and political vagaries of oil producing nations. Iran, and 
now Bolivia's decision to nationalize foreign oil 
companies. added to tension in Nigeria and the war in Iraq, 
or Venezuela's latest demands. More than half of the 
world's reserves have limited or forbidden access. Even if 
some wealthy nations are tempted to intervene, the 
political decisions taken by Moscow, Tehran, La Paz and 
others are decisions taken by sovereign nations. Closing 
the door to foreign investors will necessarily trigger 
still higher oil prices." STAPLETON