06PARIS2476
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iran Hamas Chad
Fri Apr 14 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 002476 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iran Hamas Chad 
PARIS - Friday, April 14, 2006 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Iran 
Hamas 
Chad 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
Ambassador Stapleton is interviewed on page two of regional La 
Voix du Nord on Franco-American relations. "There have always 
been diverging opinions between France and the U.S. . but they 
have never kept us from being allies. We cooperate very 
closely on important issues such as Iran, Afghanistan, the 
fight against terrorism and military cooperation." 
 
Two lead stories share top billing in today's headlines, the 
political aftermath of the recent CPE battle and its effect on 
France's leading political figures, and the worsening 
situation in Chad. La Croix headlines "France Caught Up in the 
Crisis in Chad" and explains that more than a thousand French 
soldiers and 1600 ex-pats live in Chad. The extensive report 
explains the inter-connection between Chad's oil reserves and 
Sudan's power play. In an analysis, La Croix explains: 
"although Paris is embarrassed by the situation and by Chad's 
President, `a dictator without scruples,' it is nevertheless 
giving its support to President Idriss." For Le Figaro, "Chad 
is weakened by the conflicts in nearby Darfur' and adds that 
Sudan is "aided in the north by Libya which considers Chad to 
be its `playground.'" For Liberation "France could well be 
caught in a trap" and an analysis by Jean-Dominique Merchet 
suggests "this is a harsh blow for France's Africa policy." 
(See Part C) 
 
Iran's nuclear ambitions and El-Baradei's visit to Teheran are 
reported. Le Figaro comments on a "delicate mission" because 
of Iran's "fait accompli." Le Monde quotes Secretary Rice's 
demand for "strong measures to be taken" by the UNSC and also 
quotes FM Douste Blazy who has "firmly" invited Iran to 
"suspend its dangerous activities." Liberation carries an op- 
ed by a researcher from IRIS, Institute for Strategic 
Relations, Frederic Tellier, who comments on "Iran's serene 
nuclear strategy because of the West's reticence to trigger a 
crisis with Iran." (See Part C) 
 
Le Figaro carries an op-ed on Hamas and its new political 
role, and asks: "is this a catastrophe or an opportunity to be 
seized?" (See Part C) 
 
Le Figaro reports that Moussaoui "has accused his lawyers of 
not having his best interests at heart. and of not having 
found him a Muslim lawyer." Moussaoui's "venom" towards the 
U.S. is noted and the article comments: "His accusations may 
well in the end feed the defense's agenda: proving the mental 
instability of the accused." La Croix reports extensively on 
the "horror of 9/11" as illustrated by testimonies and sound 
recordings played at the trial. 
 
La Tribune reports on the "groan" caused by the delay of 
"passports for the U.S."  "Electronic passports, mandatory for 
going to the U.S. for travelers who do not have a machine 
readable passport, are finally ready. As of yesterday, the 
National Printing Office began to produce them. They will be 
available as of April 19 in Paris and between May 2 and June 
25 for the other departments."  Ticket sales for the U.S., 
however, have declined already by 40%, according to a tour 
operator, Vacances Transat. The Canadian market, in contrast, 
is booming with a 10% increase in French travel. Le Parisien 
shows a picture of the "new electronic passport." 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Iran 
 
"Tehran's Serene Nuclear Strategy" 
Frederic Tellier of the Institute for Strategic Relations in 
left-of-center Liberation (04/14): "Has Tehran already won its 
nuclear bet? Faced with the West's show of determination, 
Tehran is advertising complete serenity. The only true threat 
which Tehran has ever taken seriously, America's military 
threat, is fast eroding. The Iranians are well aware that the 
West's instinctive reticence to trigger a crisis with Iran is 
gaining in the U.S. This unprecedented situation has opened a 
narrow window of opportunity which Tehran has every intention 
of taking advantage of it." 
 
Hamas 
 
"Hamas in Power: A Catastrophe or an Opportunity to Be 
Seized?" 
Pierre Rousselin in right-of-center Le Figaro (04/14): "The 
results of the elections in Palestine could either be a 
catastrophe for peace or an opportunity. At first glance 
nothing good can be expected from a movement, which calls for 
the destruction of Israel and has now found legitimacy through 
the ballots. Optimists will say that at least things are 
finally clear. But the truth is that no one knows what 
conclusions should be drawn from these elections. If the 
outcome is indeed a catastrophe, then we must put an end to 
this situation. The hawks in Israel and in the U.S. are in 
favor of this option. If this is an opportunity, we must 
define the rules of the game, which the Islamists must adhere 
to. The position adopted by the U.S. and Europe is not about 
to make Hamas change. For those who are financing the region, 
the question is not whether to open or close the flow of 
money, but to re-orient their financing. As for security 
issues, we must demand of Hamas that it respect the cease- 
fire. Regarding the mutual recognition of the two states, this 
must be an absolute pre-requisite. But Hamas will not agree to 
anything unless negotiations are part of the agenda. Rather 
than sticking to a `roadmap' which has never been implemented, 
the international community should take into account Israel's 
unilateralism and include it in planned negotiations with the 
Palestinians. The international community's priority task is 
to help Hamas evolve. This is not just for the sake of peace 
in Palestine. Because of Hamas's role in the Muslim world, it 
is for the sake of Islam in the world. If the problem which 
has come about because of an election is not dealt with 
seriously, a policy of the worse could plunge the region into 
chaos." 
 
Chad 
 
"Ambivalence in Africa" 
Patrick Sabatier in left-of-center Liberation (04/14): "As 
long as France continues with it traditional Africa policy, it 
will continue to be confronted with the same dilemma: to 
intervene directly. and be accused of neo-colonialism, or to 
disengage completely . and abandon whole populations to be 
slaughtered. But in not choosing, France puts its soldiers in 
a dire and uncomfortable position of arbiter and therefore of 
being used as a punching ball. The crisis in Chad is also the 
extension of the cancer that is ravaging the Darfur region in 
neighboring Sudan. We can ignore the crisis in Chad, at the 
risk of letting it become another huge Darfur, or another 
Somalia. Our Legislators should at least discuss the problem." 
STAPLETON