06PARIS1620
AVIAN FLU:  U/S DOBRIANSKY REVIEWS EFFORTS TO
Tue Mar 14 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 001620 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM USMISSION UNESCO 
 
STATE FOR IO/EDA SHARON KOTOK, IO/T AMY BRIDGMAN 
IO/UNESCO KEVIN PILZ, OES HAROLD FOSTER, BARRIE RIPIN, 
OES/STAS ANDREW W. REYNOLDS, OES/IHA JOHN S. BLODGETT, 
OES SUSAN POVENMIRE, G JOAQUIN FERRAO, JEFFREY MIOTKE 
STATE FOR NSC GENE WHITNEY 
STATE FOR NSF INTERNATIONAL OFFICE 
STATE FOR USDA PETER FERNANDEZ, RON DEHAVEN, AND 
MICHAEL J. DAVID 
STATE FOR USAID DENNIS CARROLL 
 
 
E.O. 12958:     N/A 
TAGS: TBIO KSCA KFLU UNESCO
SUBJECT:  AVIAN FLU:  U/S DOBRIANSKY REVIEWS EFFORTS TO 
COUNTER THREAT WITH WORLD ANIMAL HEALTH ORGANIZATION 
(OIE) DIRECTOR GENERAL 
 
REF:  A.  PARIS 217   B. PARIS 1209 
 
¶1.  Summary and Introduction:  International Efforts to 
Counter Avian Flu were the focus of U/S for Global 
Affairs Paula Dobrianksy's February 28 meeting with 
World Organization for Animal Health (OIE) Director 
General Bernard Vallat.  Stressing White House 
leadership on this issue, U/S Dobriansky briefed Vallat 
on the International Partnership on Avian and Pandemic 
Influenza.  Vallat discussed his organization's efforts 
to encourage countries to develop good governance 
measures that will make possible early detection of new 
cases of avian flu, and rapid reaction (REF A).  He 
also briefed on the OIE's work with the FAO, saying the 
two organizations have agreed that the OIE will take 
the lead at the global and regional levels, while the 
FAO will focus on the national level.  USUNESCO Deputy 
Chief of Mission, G Senior Advisor Ferrao, and USUNESCO 
Science Officer (note taker) also attended the meeting. 
Vallat was accompanied by Advisor Alejandro Thiermann. 
Carefully targeted USG support to the OIE, based on 
interagency consensus, will advance US interests in 
combating avian flu in a proactive way, and in laying 
the groundwork to counter future threats.  End Summary 
and Introduction. 
 
¶2.  U/S Dobriansky opened by stressing White House 
interest in avian flu. Vallat stressed the 
unprecedented challenge posed by globalization: 
pathogens now have greater opportunity to travel and 
cross with other pathogens.  He agreed with U/S 
Dobriansky that birds have always been prey to viruses; 
what's new is the rapidity with which the virus evolves 
in wild birds.  At present, Vallat stressed, the 
ability of the virus to infect humans is low; it poses 
a risk to animals, not humans.  We must take steps to 
prevent a pandemic, Vallat declared, highlighting the 
correlation between the number of viruses circulating 
in animals and the probability of a virus mutating and 
being transmitted to humans.  What we need are new 
policies worldwide. 
 
OIE Priorities: Good Governance via Systematic 
Assessment 
 
¶3.  Queried on OIE priorities, Vallat stressed that the 
OIE mission is to ensure that all member states have 
appropriate governance mechanisms, including 
legislation, organization and resources to detect avian 
flu quickly and to move rapidly to the confinement and 
killing of infected animals, and then systematic 
disinfection of the environment within 3 kilometers. 
If all countries are able to do this, we can eliminate 
avian flu.  However, of 167 OIE member states, 40 do 
not manage the problem according to OIE 
recommendations.  If even one country is not able to 
control the spread of the disease, this will constitute 
a potential reservoir of contagion for the entire 
planet. 
 
¶4.  At the January pledging conference in Beijing, 
Vallat reported, the OIE succeeded in convincing 
participants that appropriate governance measures 
constitute an international public good. Wealthy 
countries -- for their own self-protection -- and 
financial institutions must devote resources to 
developing infrastructure in poor countries because 
poorer countries simply can't. This must be a priority 
if a pandemic is to be forestalled; it makes more sense 
to invest in appropriate infrastructure than in masks. 
 
¶5.  The OIE, in conjunction with the IICA (Inter- 
American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture), has 
developed a tool to identify gaps in veterinary 
services.  At the request of the World Bank - which has 
made this assessment a prerequisite for World Bank 
investment in veterinary services -- the OIE is 
compiling a list of experts who can help countries 
apply the tool to assess their needs and identify gaps, 
Vallat reported.  The OIE regional office in Bulgaria 
is ready to prepare national plans, he noted. 
Acceptance of the tool constitutes a victory for public 
health worldwide, but it will be impossible to apply 
without a presence at the country level worldwide.  It 
will be necessary to assess, for example, whether more 
labs are needed, or appropriate laws and regulations. 
Another key element is workforce succession plans. 
Vallat noted that some advocate "blue helmets" to help 
countries manage the disease once it spreads to humans. 
But more important is a national commitment to 
implementing relevant existing standards. 
 
¶6.  Vallat stressed the importance of private-public 
partnerships, of involving farmers and supermarkets on 
issues relating to food safety guarantees, as well as 
multinational companies.  He noted that McDonalds has 
been particularly enthusiastic. 
 
FAO Works at Country Level, OIE regionally and globally 
 
¶7.  Queried on the division of responsibilities between 
the World Organization for Animal Health and the FAO, 
Vallat explained that the role of the latter is to 
"fight hunger and feed humanity"; its action is focused 
on developing countries.  The OIE's focus is not 
limited to developing countries; its mission is to set 
"standards for everyone." 
 
¶8.  The FAO is a useful partner for the OIE at the 
national level, with human resources to help poor 
countries implement new programs.  The FAO will play an 
important role in applying the tool to assess existing 
infrastructure at the country level: the FAO can help 
identify key private and public players; the assessment 
will be performed in the presence of FAO officials; and 
the FAO will work on in-country implementation. 
 
¶9.  The OIE's mandate is to publish norms and manage 
capacity building, as well as to explain standards and 
how they should be implemented at the national level. 
Implementing standards will enhance international 
market access for developing countries.  The OIE also 
takes the lead in designing policies.  But given the 
OIE's small size and budget, its work is confined to 
the global and regional levels; the FAO must take the 
lead at the national level to implement programs 
designed with OIE support. The OIE budget does not 
allow it to undertake additional actions linked to the 
current crisis. 
 
¶10. The OIE operates five regional offices that 
participate in an OIE/FAO/ WHO partnership; currently, 
the FAO contribution is in the area of plant 
production. 
The OIE and the FAO collaborated on a funding request 
at Beijing for the design and coordination of regional 
policy on avian flu via the five regional offices.  95 
percent of the funding will go to the FAO, because most 
of the money will be spent at the national level. 
 
Potential Areas for US Engagement 
 
¶11.  U/S Dobriansky queried Vallat on potential areas 
of U.S.-OIE cooperation, as well as on OIE priority 
needs.  Vallat reported that the OIE has taken initial 
contacts with both USAID and US Department of 
Agriculture.  A potential area of cooperation would be 
application of the tool to evaluate the infrastructure 
of individual countries, and the identification of 
appropriate experts who could help apply the tool in 
pilot countries. 
 
¶12.  Vallat suggested a targeted approach.  The U.S. 
might want to select one or two regions on which to 
focus, providing support for regional activities, 
technical support and funding for meetings.  A limited 
focus will ensure that US assistance efforts have a 
higher profile. 
 
¶13.  Vallat highlighted the targeted approaches taken 
by Japan (who donated 8 million dollars to focus on 
Asia) and France (for coordination of a policy forum at 
the global level).  The EC would like to focus on 
Africa; he noted that a group to enhance Africa 
livestock - ALIVE, uniting the OIE, FAO, World Bank 
with USAID participation - already exists.  Vallat said 
that he had proposed that the EC provide resources to 
ALIVE for avian flu efforts. 
 
¶14.  U/S Dobriansky briefed Vallat on the international 
partnership on avian and pandemic influenza announced 
by President Bush in September 2005. U/S Dobriansky 
explained that the partnership serves to give 
prominence to this critical issue, opening doors for 
specialized international  organizations. 
 
Vaccination:  Not the "Golden Rule" 
 
¶15.  Queried by U/S Dobriansky on his views on 
vaccination as a means of countering avian influenza, 
Vallat responded that vaccination is a tool to be used 
when it is not possible to implement the "golden rule," 
killing exposed fowl, followed by disinfection.  The 
problem with vaccination is that the virus can remain 
alive in the population, but not display symptoms. 
When killing birds is not possible, vaccination can be 
a transitional means to reduce the virus load, before 
return to a policy of culling.  Vallat cited Viet Nam 
as an example.  Over the next one to two years, Viet 
Nam will conduct a vaccination campaign as it invests 
in infrastructure, and then turn to eradication of the 
virus using "classical methods."  China will follow a 
similar course, Vallat said, observing that China's 
size and decentralization pose problems in managing 
eradication efforts; that said, transparency in China 
has improved since a Director General for veterinary 
services -- independent of the production and export 
office - was named to a leading role. Vaccination will 
be an essential tool in Africa, Vallat said, predicting 
it would be a while before the continent could return 
to "classical methods." 
 
¶16.  On the Technical Level, Vallat explained, 
vaccination is costly, requiring two injections per 
bird, timed three weeks apart.  Birds are not safe for 
consumption for three weeks after vaccination.  OIE 
standards require that governments assume heavy 
surveillance of vaccination efforts, and offer 
compensation to encourage farmers to come forward. 
Every vaccination program should include an exit 
strategy, Vallat concluded. 
OLIVER