06PARIS1799
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iraq Belarus Elections
Tue Mar 21 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 001799 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iraq Belarus Elections 
U.S. - India Nuclear Accord Hamas 
PARIS - Tuesday, March 21, 2006 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Iraq 
Belarus Elections 
U.S. - India Nuclear Accord 
Hamas 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
Once again the tug-of-war between the government and the 
opponents to the youth employment legislation makes almost 
every front page, as strikes are called for March 28. PM 
Villepin met with student organizations and corporate 
executives, who for the most part support the CPE but with 
certain amendments: reducing the trial period from two to one 
year, and having to give a reason for breaking the contract. 
 
In international news, Iraq's three-year war is widely 
featured in Le Monde, while La Croix's editorial on Iraq (See 
Part C) comments on the "Pandora's box" mentioned by Zalmay 
Khaliizad in the L.A. Times. La Croix profiles Ambassador 
Khaliizad in a column entitled "a neo-con in Baghdad." Le 
Monde also carries a full-page profile of Ambassador Khalizad 
"the highest ranking Muslim official in Washington." In an 
interview in Le Monde on Iraq, King Abdallah says: "The risk 
of an inter-religious war in Iraq exists and it would be 
disastrous for us all. The influence of Iran on certain 
factions of Iraqi society, its solid ties with Syria and Hamas 
as well as with Hezbollah in Lebanon is a cause for great 
concern." 
 
Le Figaro devotes a story to Hamas and the Palestinian 
Authority, which may be "flirting with bankruptcy." (See Part 
C) In his report Patrick Saint Paul quotes President Chirac 
who said during a joint press conference with King Abdallah 
II: "EU aid to the Palestinians must be handled and 
distributed under the aegis of President Abbas, once Hamas has 
taken up its government positions." France Soir posits that 
the EU is stuck with the question "to pay or not to pay?" when 
it comes to funding the Palestinians in the wake of Hamas' 
electoral victory. It has said it won't fund Hamas, in the 
hopes the government would make concessions about Israel and 
armed struggle, but Hamas hasn't budged, and now the EU is "up 
against a wall." President Chirac has proposed an alternative 
that would permit the EU a decent exit from the problem: give 
assistance to the Palestinians under the "authority" of 
Mahmoud Abbas, the only player judged credible by the West. 
 
The editorial in Le Figaro on the Belarus elections is 
characterized by Pierre Rousselin as a "test." (See Part C) 
 
Also in Le Figaro political analyst Alain Barluet revisits the 
U.S. - India nuclear agreement, "and the inherent risks for 
the rest of the world." (See Part C) 
 
Liberation devotes major coverage to the government's draft 
law to regulate GMO crops. In his editorial Patrick Sabatier 
reports on the "persisting and massive hostility of the French 
towards GMOs" which in his view finds its roots in "mistrust 
in their government because of past scandals: mad cow, 
asbestos, etc. In all instances economic interests have 
prevailed over health concerns." France Soir and La Croix 
report on the Senate debate. France Soir contends that France 
is in infraction of a EU directive and must take up an 
"unpopular issue."  78% of the French would like to see a 
"temporary ban" on GMOs to further evaluate their impact on 
health and the environment. 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Iraq 
 
"Iraq, Three Years Later" 
Dominique Quinio in Catholic La Croix (03/21): "Protest 
marches in the U.S. did not bring together large groups. Yet 
more and more Americans are questioning the war in Iraq and 
making President Bush pay for their growing doubts, just as he 
is busy designating the nation's next number one enemy: Iran. 
While the intervention was instrumental in getting rid of 
Saddam and his regime, it has not brought peace to Iraq. The 
December elections have yet to bring about a government. 
Civilian deaths can be counted in the thousands while more 
than 2000 U.S. soldiers have died. American officials, while 
recognizing the fragile state of things, continue to argue 
that there have been democratic inroads and reject the notion 
of a `civil war.' Today's chaos is mostly being experienced by 
the Iraqis themselves. But this `Pandora's box,' now that it 
has been opened, as Ambassador Khalizad acknowledges, could 
free even more regional violence." 
 
"The Bush Conquest" 
Jean Levallois in regional La Presse de la Manche (03/21): 
"Three years after the Bush conquest, Iraq is afire. A civil 
war has erupted between the various religious communities. The 
country is in ruins. And in their attempts to re-conquer lost 
ground, the Americans have no choice but to revert to 
practices used in Vietnam and spray entire regions with bombs 
and missiles launched from helicopters. The first veterans 
from the Iraqi war are explaining to Americans at home the 
kind of quagmire President Bush has created, for Americans and 
the western world, with regard to the Muslim world. And the 
President who must deal with the midterm elections is having a 
hard time finding an honorable way out to his adventure." 
 
Belarus Elections 
 
"The Belarus Test" 
Pierre Rousselin in right-of-center Le Figaro (03/21): "More 
than ever, Belarus remains the `last dictatorship in Europe.' 
Secretary Rice's coined phrase has been validated. The Belarus 
 
SIPDIS 
opposition is still too weak and Lukashenko too adulated for a 
movement to topple him, at least in the near future. Time will 
be needed and all will depend on the democrats' ability to 
resist the government's repression. The EU cannot be stingy 
with its help. But it has limited means. Belarus is widely 
financed by Russia and its economy survives in autarchy. But 
supporting the political opposition in Belarus is essential. 
because it goes beyond Belarus itself and concerns all former 
Soviet Republics. Lukashenko must be sanctioned for his 
electoral manipulation of democracy. If not, his little games 
could well spread and deprive Ukraine and Georgia of their 
democratic achievements. The quick congratulations sent by the 
Kremlin prove that the Belarus `model' could be used 
elsewhere. We must not look away from Belarus just because our 
interest could be annoying to the Kremlin. Such a sign of 
weakness on our part might signal that Belarus may not remain 
the `last' dictatorship on our continent for long." 
 
U.S. - India Nuclear Accord 
 
"India, the U.S., and the Risks of Their Nuclear Pact for the 
World" 
Alain Barluet in right-of-center Le Figaro (03/21): "The U.S. 
signed a `historic' nuclear agreement with India; several days 
before that, President Chirac signed a declaration with India 
going in the same direction. The paradox is that by granting 
India a status outside the NPT, said treaty, imperfect as it 
is, can be weakened. This precedent can open the door to 
others that might want the same prerogative, like Pakistan. We 
must also consider the consequences of such deals on the 
Iranian nuclear crisis. The stance adopted by both Paris and 
Washington on commercial nuclear programs are not convincing 
Iran, which is fast to point out the inconsistencies of the 
agreement with India. `The Indian exception' will not be 
instrumental in making Iran soften its position. This is why 
the wager is a risky one. This does not necessarily mean it 
has to be abandoned. But we must push forward with our eyes 
open and set up a maximum number of guarantees. These must be 
the fruit of the U.S. Congress and the NSG." 
 
Hamas 
 
"Palestinian Authority on the Brink of Bankruptcy" 
Patrick Saint Paul in right-of-center Le Figaro (03/21): "By 
refusing to recognize Israel and the accords linking the 
Palestinian Authority with Israel, Hamas is running the 
virtual risk of seeing international financial aid cut off as 
soon as the government takes up its position. The U.S. has 
decided to suspend direct aid to a Palestinian Authority led 
by Hamas, a terrorist movement according to Washington. The EU 
is for its part trying to find a way to pursue its aid while 
not looking like it is helping an Islamic movement. Meanwhile 
Israel is set on making things as difficult as possible for 
Haniyeh's cabinet." STAPLETON