06PARIS5546
COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR AMBASSADOR PATRICIA MOLLER
Thu Aug 17 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXYZ0043
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHFR #5546/01 2291355
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 171355Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHJB/AMEMBASSY BUJUMBURA PRIORITY 0630
INFO RUEHXR/RWANDA COLLECTIVE
RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI 1139
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0450UNCLAS PARIS 005546 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT APER OTRA KE BY FR
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR AMBASSADOR PATRICIA MOLLER 
 
REF: BUJUMBURA 698 
 
¶1.  Embassy Paris warmly welcomes and provides country 
clearance for Ambassador Patricia N. Moller to travel to 
Paris, France, from August 22-25, 2006, to attend meetings 
with Embassy personnel and GOF officials. 
 
¶2.  Embassy point of contact for the visit is Political 
Assistant Robert Kaneda, who can be reached by e-mail at 
kanedarj@state.gov, by phone at (33-1) 43 12 27 44, via cell 
phone at (33-6) 20 43 40 91, or by FAX at (33-1) 43 12 26 63. 
 He can also be reached at home via the Embassy switchboard 
(24/7) at (33-1) 43 12 22 22.  Note:  If dialing from outside 
France, the country and area codes are 33-1 for fixed phones 
in the Paris region and 33-6 for cell phones nationwide.  If 
dialing from inside France, the respective prefixes are 01 
and 06. 
 
¶3.  We understand that Ambassador Moller has made her own 
hotel arrangements.  For further assistance regarding 
lodging, please contact Nicole Gnagni or Emmanuel Dumont at 
the American Embassy Travel Unit in Paris (33-1) 43 12 20 53 
or (33-1) 43 12 20 40.  We would like to point out that a 
48-hour notice is due in case of cancellation or modification 
in travel plans in order to avoid no-show charges.  Please be 
aware that check-in time for hotels in France is officially 
3:00 p.m.  If visitors want to guarantee the availablity of a 
room at an earlier time, visitors will have to pay lodging 
for the night before arrival and travel orders should reflect 
this requirement.  Concerning luggage, as a convenience, 
hotels may allow travelers to leave their personal luggage at 
their hotel prior to 3:00 p.m. on the day of check-in.  If 
travelers cannot pay an additional day for an early check-in, 
it is up to the traveler to negotiate with the hotel to leave 
baggage prior to check-in. 
 
¶4.  In the event of a crisis or serious international 
incident involving the United States, you must immediately 
contact your control officer. 
 
¶5.  Embassy media policy stipulates that any contact with 
visitors with the media be coordinated through the Embassy 
press office at (33-1) 43 12 28 33. 
 
¶6.  Embassy wishes to remind visitors that visas are required 
for holders of U.S. diplomatic or official passports on 
official business in France. 
 
¶7.  Action request:  Each visitor must bring a copy of 
his/her travel orders (or forward fiscal data) to cover costs 
of visit.  Each agency, organization, or visiting delegation 
will be charged for the actual costs attributed to their 
visit.  These costs include, but are not limited to, American 
and LES overtime, field travel by Embassy employees, vehicle 
rentals, long distance telephone calls, equipment rentals, 
representational events and all other costs that are directly 
attributable to the visits.  Airport pickup is provided only 
for employees at the rank of Assistant Secretary or above. 
Other visitors should take a taxi or Air France bus. 
 
¶8.  Following is current security information for France: 
 
(A)  Terrorism:  The current terrorism threat in France 
mirrors the general worldwide threat.  Trans-national terror 
groups such as al-Qaida likely have a presence in France and 
do present a general threat.  French law enforcement and 
intelligence services are effective in responding to this 
threat and remain in a heightened state of alert, but cannot 
completely negate it.  For this reason American citizens 
should practice good personal security when visiting France. 
Remaining unpredictable is perhaps the simplest but most 
effective way of ensuring personal safety.  This is 
particularly true when departing or arriving at your place of 
residence.  Being aware of your surroundings and suspicious 
persons or activities is also critically important.  Do not 
accept packages, do not open hotel doors to strangers and 
immediately report any suspicious activities to the police 
(telephone 17) and Regional Security Office telephone (33-1) 
43 12 27 96. 
 
(B) Crime:  Street crime in French cities is similar to that 
in most large metropolitan areas. The two most frequent 
crimes are pick pocketing and snatch/run theft.  These 
criminals most often ply their trade on public transportation 
routes used by tourists and at tourist sites.  In Paris, 
visitors should be particularly alert when using Metro lines 
numbers one and two, in addition to the RER trains serving 
the airports.  Tourist sites such as the Eiffel Tower, 
Montmartre, the major museums and the Avenue des Champs 
Elysees are all areas of heavy activity. Visitor should use 
hotel safes whenever possible to store valuables and excess 
cash.  Awareness should go up when conditions are crowded. 
Maintain control of cameras and bags, do not carry these 
items behind you.  Criminals on metros often push into you 
for distraction and pickpocket while doing so.  Another 
technique is to grab valuables and escape just as the metro 
doors are closing.  If credit cards are stolen, proceed to 
the nearest telephone and immediately notify the card issuer. 
 Stolen credit cards are used immediately.  Whenever 
possible, take a seat or keep your back to a wall when on the 
metro system.  It is also recommended that a photocopy of 
your passport identification page be carried in lieu of the 
passport itself.  Report any incidents to the Regional 
Security Office as soon as possible. 
 
(C) Electronic devices:  Privately-owned laptops and personal 
computers are prohibited in controlled access areas (CAAs) of 
the Mission and consulates.  Travelers with USG unclassified 
and classified laptop or notebook computers should review '95 
State 244394 (classified machines) and '95 State 243825 
(unclassified machines) and notify the Information Management 
Office (IMO) before bringing these machines into CAA. 
Cellular telephones are also prohibited in the CAA and must 
be left outside this area.  Questions concerning other types 
of electronic devices may be directed to the Information 
Management Office or Regional Security Office. 
 
(D) For additional threat assessment information regarding 
France and/or Europe, you may contact DS/ITA in the State 
Department at (202) 663-0787. 
 
¶9.  Health Concerns:  For up-to-date information on health 
precautions for France, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (CDC) website contains a detailed analysis of 
risks involved at: http:cdc.gov/travel/disease.htm. 
 
 
 
Please visit Paris' Classified Website at: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/paris/index.c fm 
 
HOFMANN