06PARIS404
USUNESCO GUIDANCE REQUEST:  TRANSFORMATIONAL
Fri Jan 20 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS PARIS 000404 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM USMISSION UNESCO PARIS 
E.O. 12958:    N/A 
TAGS: KPAO ECPS ETRD ECON EINT ETTC EAID UNESCO
SUBJECT:  USUNESCO GUIDANCE REQUEST:  TRANSFORMATIONAL 
DIPLOMACY AND ICT DEVELOPMENT - A UNESCO OPPORTUNITY. 
¶1.   (SBU) SUMMARY AND GUIDANCE REQUEST:  The UNESCO 
International Programme for the Development of 
Communication (IPDC), a UNESCO program established by 
 
the United States in the early 1980s to support the 
free flow of information in developing countries, will 
hold elections to its bureau in March 2006.  Mission 
has identified this UNESCO program -- with a proven 
track record of developing independent local media -- 
as an ideal conduit for supporting the Secretary's 
transformational diplomacy agenda.  The U.S., already a 
member of the IPDC council, now has the opportunity to 
run for its bureau, which makes all decisions on IPDC 
priorities and grants.  The high impact on democracy of 
these low-cost grants was underscored by African 
Ambassadors to UNESCO in a January 20 meeting with 
Ambassador David Gross, U.S. Coordinator for 
International Communication and Information Policy and 
U.S. Ambassador to UNESCO Louise V. Oliver (reported 
septel).  Mission requests guidance from IO/UNESCO, in 
coordination with relevant offices, on whether to 
pursue election to the IPDC bureau. (There is only one 
'group one' slot, and the Netherlands is now 
considering a bid for it. Unless we are willing to pony 
up resources to take on the job, it does not make sense 
to knock one of the program's largest contributor's out 
of the running.  The Netherlands may go ahead with its 
candidacy if we do not coordinate with them by the 
January 27.) Mission requests examples of what the USG 
can bring to the table in terms of governmental and 
private sector funding.  END SUMMARY AND GUIDANCE 
REQUEST. 
----------------- 
WHAT IS THE IPDC? 
----------------- 
¶2.  (U) The IPDC is the only multilateral forum in the 
UN system designed to mobilize the international 
community to discuss and promote media development in 
developing countries. It provides support for media 
projects while seeking agreement to secure a healthy 
environment for the growth of free and pluralistic 
media in developing countries.  Over the last 25 years, 
the IPDC focused its projects on the most urgent 
priorities in communication development. The efforts of 
the IPDC have had an important impact on a broad range 
of fields covering, among others, the promotion of 
media independence and pluralism, development of 
community media, radio and television organizations, 
modernization of national and regional news agencies, 
and training of media professionals. The IPDC continues 
today to use small grants generally ranging from 20,000 
USD to 100,000 USD to empower people to gain equitable 
access to knowledge and express themselves through free 
and pluralistic media.  In all, the IPDC has mobilized 
some US$ 90 million for over 1000 projects in 139 
developing countries and countries in transition since 
the early 1980s. 
¶3.  (U) Many Ambassadors and secretariat staff at 
UNESCO report that this kind of multilateral 
cooperation is effective for promoting media 
development.  For example, some NGOs and community 
groups might be uncomfortable accepting grants directly 
from certain countries for political reasons, or for 
fear that the public will perceive their objectivity as 
compromised. Grants from UNESCO's IPDC program have no 
such baggage. 
---------------------------- 
DONATIONS AND ACCOUNTABILITY 
---------------------------- 
¶4.  (SBU) Most G-8 Countries, the Netherlands and the 
Nordics are the current lead donor nations to the IPDC. 
Their total contributions over the 25-year history of 
the program, range from Germany's contribution of 23 
million USD to the Netherlands' contribution of 2 
Million USD.  The U.S. total contribution over the same 
period (during which we were absent for 20 years) is 
approximately 500,000 USD.  The Netherlands is 
considering running for the Group 1 seat:  Unless we 
are willing to pony up resources, it does not make 
sense to knock one of the program's largest 
contributor's out of the running. 
¶5.  (SBU) The Nordic nations, which have historically 
taken an active role in the IPDC, also completed a 
study of the program in 2002 and under the active 
leadership of the current IPDC President, Torben 
Krough, Chairman of the Danish National Committee to 
UNESCO, have implemented them.  IPDC now gives priority 
to projects promoting press freedom and media 
pluralism, development of community media, enhancing 
professional capacity and building partnerships for 
media improvements. It meets bi-annually while its 
Bureau, which Mission proposes running for, is assigned 
to take full responsibility in selecting and financing 
projects.  The reforms also allowed UNESCO Advisers 
based in field offices to assume greater 
responsibilities to realize more effective quality 
media development projects that empower people to gain 
equitable access to knowledge and express themselves 
through free and pluralistic media.  One such program 
is an Afghan Women's community radio station (Voice of 
Afghan Women), to which the USG donated 60,000 USD 
after re-joining UNESCO.  The station now covers 5 
provinces and has received a TV frequency as well. 
¶6.  (SBU)  In a January 20 meeting with Ambassador 
Gross and Ambassador Oliver reported septel, several 
African Ambassadors cited the high impact of the IPDC's 
grant programs, in particular, the effectiveness of 
community radio.  One feature of community radio 
stations is call in shows where the announcer responds 
to requests for information by searching the Internet 
and broadcasting the information found.  This helps to 
bridge two "digital opportunity" challenges: 
illiteracy, and access to material in non-ASCII 
languages on the Internet.  It also makes it possible 
for someone with no electricity, just a cell phone and 
battery operated radio, to access the Internet. 
¶7. (SBU)  COMMENT:  We note the Secretary's statement 
that "transformational diplomacy is rooted in 
partnership, not paternalism . . .we seek to use 
America's power to help foreign citizens better their 
own lives and transform their own futures"  The IPDC is 
an ideal means to deploy technology, leverage the 
UNESCO commitment to the free flow of information, and 
support high-impact low-cost ICT programs to empower 
people to build democracy and prosperity - community by 
community - worldwide.  END COMMENT. 
 
Oliver