06PHNOMPENH598
UN HUMAN RIGHTS REP BRIEFS COMS ON MARCH 18-28
Wed Mar 29 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO5505
OO RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #0598/01 0881121
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 291121Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6370
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM  PRIORITY
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA PRIORITY 1368
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 2132UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PHNOM PENH 000598 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/MLS; GENEVA FOR RMA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM KJUS PREL EAID CB
SUBJECT: UN HUMAN RIGHTS REP BRIEFS COMS ON MARCH 18-28 
VISIT TO CAMBODIA 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary.  UN Special Representative for Human 
Rights Yash Ghai met with COMs on March 24 to provide an 
outbrief of his meetings during his recent assessment visit. 
Ghai is not able to fully assess the political changes since 
his last visit but is willing to proceed on the assumption 
that the government is genuinely trying to improve; he hopes 
those positive changes will be reflected institutionally. 
The issues of greatest concern remain the same as outlined in 
his earlier report: judicial independence, legal revisions 
and updates to major laws, a number of pieces of stalled 
legislation, land disputes, use of criminal defamation to 
intimidate political opponents, and ensuring Cambodia's new 
laws are consistent with the Constitution and international 
treaties.  The Russian, Japanese, and Australian Ambassadors 
urged that Ghai's report more positively reflect the changed 
political atmosphere since 2005.  Ghai said no one with whom 
he met in the government had negative comments concerning his 
earlier report.  End Summary. 
 
Yash Ghai Discusses Human Rights 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  On March 24, UN Special Representative for Human 
Rights Yash Ghai briefed COMs on his visit to Cambodia, and 
ensuing discussions with RGC officials, NGOs, and donors 
regarding recent political developments in Cambodia.  The 
purpose of the visit, he said, was to get feedback on his 
earlier report (January 2006) and to compile updated 
information and recommendations for the Cambodian government 
before he submits them to the 62nd session of the Commission 
on Human Rights.  (Note:  Ghai explained that the uncertainty 
surrounding the Human Rights Commission's status could mean 
that his report is not submitted until June.  End note.) 
Ghai began his presentation by noting that virtually all his 
discussions had touched on the significance of recent 
political developments.  He had received many explanations, 
ranging from the government having undergone a fundamental 
change for the right reasons, to no real change at all -- 
simply a re-alignment of political forces without any change 
in political objectives.  Irrespective of why there has been 
a change, Ghai continued, it is important that it is 
reflected in rules and institutions.  The foundation is quite 
fragile, and depends on the will of one person -- the Prime 
Minister. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Ghai said that he sees no reason to change the 
fundamental nature of his earlier report, as the issues 
identified as most challenging and problematic remain; e.g., 
judicial independence, legal revisions and updates to major 
laws, a number of pieces of legislation are stalled, land 
disputes, use of criminal defamation to intimidate political 
opponents.  On the issue of legal independence, Ghai said 
that the PM's Iron Fist policy meant to promote the 
government's commitment to an independent judiciary may have 
been counterproductive.  Prosecutors became nervous about 
being singled out and therefore erred on the side of maximum 
sentencing -- the result is that the prisons are fuller than 
before but that alone is not a sign of judicial independence. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  On the issue of land grabbing and illegal 
concessions, Ghai noted that his predecessor, Peter 
Leuprecht, had done much research on land concessions and 
their impact on indigenous peoples.  Ghai said that today the 
situation remains unchanged.  The delays in policy decisions 
on protecting these lands means that there is more time for 
the lands of indigenous peoples to be taken away from them. 
The issue is divided among too many ministries, none of whom 
will take responsibility for it.  Ghai said that people are 
increasingly reluctant to take their cases to court because 
of a lack of trust in the judiciary.  Those who have gone to 
court believe their position is worse at the end of the case 
than before.  Wealthy, well-connected people, those in 
government, the police and the military are involved in land 
grabbing and there is nothing to stop them.  The UN rep 
criticized the recently proposed Land Authority as being more 
a policy-making body than a dispute resolution body.  The new 
Authority is comprised of people suspected of involvement in 
land grabbing, he added. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Yash Ghai criticized the slow progress on passage 
of eight laws deemed by the donors as a priority, and urged 
donors to hold the government to a strict timetable.  On the 
question of criminal defamation, Ghai said that Article 63 of 
the UNTAC law had been used to charge human rights activists 
and others in 2005.  The PM had committed to repealing it, 
and the Ministry of Justice has indicated that they have 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000598  002 OF 002 
 
 
advised judges and prosecutors not to rely on Article 63. 
Ghai noted that the recent MOJ instructions on Article 63, 
however, are unclear, and one could easily interpret the 
instructions as simply a repetition of Article 63.  Ghai 
related that he discussed the issue of criminal defamation 
with the team re-drafting the criminal code, and that he had 
differences with them over the proposed language. 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  On freedom of association and assembly, Yash Ghai 
said he had very positive discussions with the government on 
these issues.  It is important these freedoms are protected 
in the new codes being drafted, but there is an advantage to 
separate legislation on freedom of assembly, as some 
countries have done.  The RGC is not rushing to produce the 
legislation, but is willing to allow groups to contribute 
input to a new bill.  He said there would be further 
consultations and was pleased with the RGC's reassurances. 
Ghai noted he had helped other countries draft similar 
legislation and had offered Cambodia the same assistance. 
The Government had assured him they want to facilitate 
assembly, not suppress it; Ghai recognizes there are 
questions of state security and is sympathetic to RGC 
concerns. 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  Ghai said another objective of his was to ensure 
that the new laws being drafted for Cambodia are consistent 
with the Constitution and international treaties.  He met 
with the Constitutional Council during his visit, but said 
that they will probably not play an important oversight role 
in that regard.  The Constitutional Council cannot initiate 
an inquiry or review, but can only respond to a request from 
an institution; it is not easy to invoke their involvement, 
he said.  Consistency may have to be ensured through a 
different mechanism, and Ghai may make a recommendation. 
 
Donor Response 
-------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  Ghai said that he had heard from some donors 
during the course of his consultations that perhaps the 
government's dramatic turnaround in January 2006 warranted a 
reward for the Prime Minister.  In Ghai's opinion, rewards 
are dangerous as they could encourage the PM to crack down, 
ease up on the pressure, and once again take credit for being 
a generous leader.  Giving money to the government imparts a 
responsibility on all donors to ensure human rights are 
respected in Cambodia, continued Ghai; human rights are not 
just words in treaties and agreements. 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  The Australian COM urged Ghai to update his report 
with the changed status of the human rights activists, as all 
had now been released.  She noted that the Consultative Group 
references were out of date and should be updated in light of 
the March 2006 CG meeting.  She argued that the donors were 
advising the government to adhere to its commitment to 
complete the eight laws in 2006.  Another possible area for 
Ghai's attention might be impunity, she added.  The French 
Ambassador said it was important to encourage the National 
Assembly role and their responsibilities; the report should 
not focus entirely on the government.  Ghai acknowledged he 
needs to meet more MPs and Committee heads within the 
National Assembly.  Japan's Ambassador warned that the 
government may see Ghai's report as negatively biased and 
that the UN rep should also look for some positive things to 
say; the Australian and Russian Ambassadors agreed.  Ghai 
responded that his meetings with the MOI and MOJ were very 
cordial; DPM Sar Kheng characterized the report as very fair 
and the Minister of Justice said the report was good for 
Cambodia.  The Constitutional Council thought it was also 
fine.  Minister of Women's Affairs Ing Kantha Phavi had urged 
the UN rep to focus more on gender issues. 
Mussomeli