06PHNOMPENH2180
HUMAN RIGHTS DAY IN PHNOM PENH: MULTIPLE
Wed Dec 13 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO3804
OO RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #2180/01 3471124
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 131124Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7714
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PHNOM PENH 002180 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EAP/MLS, DRL AND EAP/RSP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL CB
SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS DAY IN PHNOM PENH: MULTIPLE 
CELEBRATIONS, LESS FIREWORKS THAN 2005 
 
 
¶1.  (U)  Summary.  Post participated in three celebrations of 
International human Rights Day, two of which received partial 
funding from USAID.  On December 8, the Cambodian senate 
organized its own celebration: focusing on the legislature's 
role in human rights and highlighting the needs of specific 
vulnerable groups including orphans, the blind, and land mine 
victims.  Approximately, 15 representatives of the 
international community attended, with the Office of the High 
Commissioner for Human Rights reportedly added to the group 
only at the last minute.  On December 9, the Cambodian Human 
Rights Action Committee (CHRAC) organized a symposium to 
focus on human rights and poverty, with participation by 
victims of land disputes in Phnom Penh.  On December 10, more 
than 10,000 people gathered at Olympic Stadium to hear 
speeches by NGO leaders, diplomats and government officials 
as well as view booths set up by NGOs.  The Ambassador 
delivered remarks that received broad press coverage.  RGC 
officials waited until the last possible minute to provide 
permission to the NGOs to use the public stadium.  In sharp 
contrast to 2005, however, the police did little to harass 
participants.  On December 12, the Prime Minister responded 
to the criticism by stating that by promoting development his 
government was furthering human rights.  End Summary. 
 
Multiple HR Events 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U)  On December 8, the Cambodian senate marked 
International Human Rights Day with a short ceremony focusing 
on the legislature's role in human rights.  The event 
highlighted the needs of specific vulnerable groups including 
orphans, the blind, and land mine victims and concluded with 
the Senate speakers symbolically providing bags of rice to 
approximately 20 representatives of each of those groups. 
Some 15 representatives of the international community 
attended, with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human 
Rights reportedly added to the group only at the last minute. 
 
¶3.  (U)  On December 9, the Cambodian Human Rights Action 
Committee (CHRAC) sponsored a forum for NGOs and civil 
society representatives on the importance of human rights in 
development and poverty reduction programs.  Keynote speaker 
Hina Jilani, a Special Representative of the United Nations 
for Human Rights Defenders, spoke of the linkage between 
respect for human rights and development.  Sok Sam Oeun, 
director of the Cambodian Defenders' Project, spoke about the 
sensitive issues of land rights and poverty in Cambodia. 
Margo Picken of the United Nations Office of the High 
Commissioner for Human Rights in Cambodia remarked that 
adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948 
was only a first step; people have made the declaration a 
living document.  Canadian Ambassador Donica Pottie noted 
that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was agreed 
upon by developed and developing countries when it was 
adopted.  She stressed that human rights are not just a 
Western concept and that all people want to live free of fear 
and have an equal chance in development.  Noting the wide 
prevalence of domestic violence in Cambodian society, Ung 
Chanthol, Executive Director of the Cambodian Women's Crisis 
Center, discussed the poor state of women's rights in 
Cambodia.  Theary Seng of the Center for Social Development 
asserted that corruption in Cambodia was the primary obstacle 
to both development and improvement on the human right front. 
 
 
¶4.  (U)  The CHRAC event featured a contentious question and 
answer session between audience members and CPP Senator Uk 
Kong.  One person, who had recently been evicted from his 
land, complained that the government was acting like the 
Khmer Rouge.  While thanking local NGOs and others for 
helping fight for his legal rights, the same land-dispute 
victim stated that he filed complaints with government 
officials but found no one willing to help.  In one case, the 
responsible Secretary of State at the Ministry of Interior 
was not at his job for months.  Kong, a member of the 
Senate's human rights commission, stated that the evictions 
in Phnom Penh were a complicated situation necessary to 
beautify and develop Phnom Penh.  Another audience member, 
who had also been evicted from his home in Phnom Penh, 
remarked that he had been living on land given by the PM in 
1979 to his community.  He questioned the senator as to why 
the government could not help people when local authorities 
and companies want to evict people from their property. 
Sidestepping the question, the senator remarked that in 1979 
no land conflicts took place; conflicts have only arisen 
recently as development pressures have increased. 
 
International HR Day:  No Problems 
---------------------------------- 
 
PHNOM PENH 00002180  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶5.  (U)  On December 10, nearly 10,000 people gathered at 
Phnom Penh's Olympic Stadium to listen to speeches by civil 
society leaders, diplomats, and RGC officials.  Focusing on 
the event's theme, "We Are All Human Rights Defenders"; the 
Ambassador spoke about the harsh conditions that human rights 
defenders have to work under in Cambodia; he noted how some 
have been killed while others have been imprisoned for their 
work.  The Ambassador added that certain Cambodian officials 
remain fearful of dissent and criticism.  He explained that 
while no official likes to be publicly criticized, such 
criticism can help further stabilize Cambodia and bring true 
peace and prosperity to its citizens.  Son Heng, Deputy 
Director General of the Cambodian Human Rights Committee, 
represented the Cambodian government; he is an associate of 
Om Yentieng, adviser to the Prime Minister and head of the 
Cambodian Human Rights Committee.  Although the Cambodian 
government granted permission to celebrate International 
Human Rights Day, Phnom Penh Municipal authorities waited 
until the last possible moment (Friday afternoon for a Sunday 
event) to issue the license to the NGO organizers.  The same 
license was granted nearly two weeks before the same event in 
¶2005.  Despite the short notice, NGO organizers were still 
able to plan a successful event, although King Sihamoni was 
not able to send a representative. 
 
¶6.  (U)  In contrast to 2005, little tension was manifest 
between the police and NGO organizers.  But at the Cambodian 
Center for Human Rights (CCHR) booth, the police were 
apparently displeased to see a 2 meter by 3 meter photograph 
of police in riot gear confiscating kites.  (Note:  On 
November 27, riot police had blocked NGO workers and 
lawmakers outside the National Assembly from flying kites to 
highlight the need for freedom of expression.  End Note.) 
Observers stated that police took photographs of the large 
photograph as well as made notes about the literature being 
distributed by the USAID/IRI-funded NGO.  No other problems 
were reported.  Pol/Econ Chief spoke with CCHR leader Kem 
Sokha following the close of the day's events, and Sokha was 
untroubled by what had happened. 
 
¶7.  (U)  On December 12, Prime Minister Hun Sen responded to 
the critiques levied during the weekend's events.  He argued 
that the RGC has been promoting human rights by providing 
people with "survival" rights.  The PM reiterated that 
"schools, irrigation systems, hospitals and pagodas are human 
rights."  He went on to argue that if not for the liberation 
of Cambodia from the Khmer Rouge no one would have been alive 
to demand human rights. 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  Comment:  It is unfortunate that the government 
still refuses to allow such gatherings to go forward without 
creating some sort of obstacle and still missed the point 
that constructive criticism can help Cambodia improve.  At 
the events on December 9 and 10, the government was 
represented by low-level people indicative of the disinterest 
shown by the RGC in working collaboratively with civil 
society.  By waiting until the last administrative day to 
release the license, the local authorities had hoped to 
dampen participation in the event, discourage speakers, and 
keep attendance numbers low.  End Comment. 
 
 
 
 
MUSSOMELI