06PHNOMPENH1235
CAMBODIA: 2ND QUARTER REPORT ON TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS
Wed Jul 05 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO9100
PP RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM
DE RUEHPF #1235/01 1861042
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 051042Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6985
INFO RUEHZS/ASEAN COLLECTIVE
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 1510UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 PHNOM PENH 001235 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR G/TIP, EAP/MLS and EAP/RSP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL KWMN CB
SUBJECT: CAMBODIA: 2ND QUARTER REPORT ON TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS 
 
REF: A. PHNOM PENH 1144 
 
      ¶B. PHNOM PENH 1153 
     ¶C. PHNOM PENH 1178 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary:  During the second quarter of 2006, the Cambodian 
police conducted 17 operations which resulted in the arrest of 26 
traffickers and pimps as well as the rescue of 20 trafficking 
victims.  Four foreign nationals, including an American citizen, 
were  arrested for sex crimes against children.  NGOs reported four 
court cases during the period, with conviction ranges from 5 to 10 
years imprisonment.  Reported abuses of labor migrants to Malaysia 
have increased, leading to concern for a better monitoring 
mechanism.  End Summary. 
 
----------------- 
Police Operations 
----------------- 
 
¶2.  (U)  The Ministry of Interior's Anti-Human Trafficking and 
Juvenile Protection Department (hereafter referred to as MOI 
anti-TIP police) reported the arrest of a woman in early April for 
having trafficked a 22 year old Vietnamese woman to Malaysia for 
prostitution.  The victim agreed to go to Malaysia with the suspect 
in July 2005, believing she had a job in a caf, but instead she was 
placed in a brothel.  After returning home to Cambodia in March, the 
victim submitted a complaint against the suspect for luring her into 
prostitution in Malaysia.  Currently, the suspect is in pretrial 
detention. 
 
¶3.  (U)  On April 4, Police of the Phnom Penh Anti-TIP Unit arrested 
three Vietnamese women, one of whom is the mother of the victim, for 
selling and buying an 11 month-old baby girl for 70000 riel (USD18). 
 The suspects were sent to court, and the baby was referred to an 
orphanage. 
 
¶4.  (U)  On April 8, in cooperation with NGO Action Pour Les Enfants 
(APLE), the Phnom Penh Anti-TIP unit arrested a Belgian national for 
sexually abusing a underage boy.  The man confessed to abusing the 
boy on a number of occasions. He was charged with debauchery and is 
under detention. 
 
¶5. (SBU)  In late April, the Battambang Anti-Trafficking Unit, in 
cooperation with NGO International Justice Mission (IJM), conducted 
a proactive investigation on a beer garden/brothel in Battambang. 
The investigation led to a raid, resulting in the arrest of the pimp 
and removal of ten sex workers.  Police closed down the 
establishment.  IJM reported that Battambang provincial court 
charged the suspect with pimping, but later released him on bail. 
Two of the sex workers were 16 and 17 years old. 
 
¶6.  (U)  On May 2, the Phnom Penh Anti-TIP Unit arrested a woman for 
supplying three underage virgins to an IJM undercover investigator. 
IJM said they had been following this case since March and concluded 
that the woman was a trafficker.  The victims were returned to their 
families.  The suspect was charged with human-trafficking. 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  On May 2, the MOI Anti-TIP Police and Siem Reap Police 
commissariat, arrested an owner of a Karaoke parlor in the province 
for pimping seven women.  One of the women was trafficked from Phnom 
Penh, and her parents submitted a complaint.  Police referred the 
women to AFESIP.  The brothel was closed for a while but reportedly 
reopened.  (Note:  AFESIP reported that six of the seven women have 
left the shelter.  Two of them filed complaints against AFESIP for 
detaining them against their will and physically abusing them. 
AFESIP denied the charges, saying it is not in the interest of 
AFESIP to abuse victims.  End Note.) 
 
¶8.  (U)  The MOI's Anti-TIP police conducted a proactive 
investigation of a Phnom Penh brothel which led to a raid of the 
brothel on May 4. This raid resulted in the arrest of a Vietnamese 
pimp and removal of five Vietnamese sex workers.  The suspect was 
charged with pimping.  Another suspected pimp escaped. The women 
returned to their families. 
 
¶9.  (U)  On May 9, the Phnom Penh Anti-TIP unit cooperated with 
AFESIP to raid a Phnom Penh brothel, removing six involuntary sex 
workers, aged between 23 and 28, and arresting two individuals. 
Police sent one of the arrested to court to face pimping charges and 
released the other for lack of evidence.  The women returned to 
their families. 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  AFESIP reported that on May 10, after receiving a 
mother's complaint, the police of the Ministry of Interior went to 
Battambang province to rescue a 14-year-old missing girl.  The girl 
was lured by her peers from Phnom Penh to Battambang province. 
AFESIP said that the perpetrators intended to traffic the girl to 
Thailand.  Police found the girl in a Battambang club under the 
influence of drugs.  Police arrested three suspects and charged them 
with trafficking.  (Note: The girl in question is the daughter of 
 
PHNOM PENH 00001235  002 OF 004 
 
 
Somaly Mam, AFESIP's President.  Somaly complimented the police on 
their great cooperation to find her daughter. End Note.) 
 
¶11.  (U)  On the same day, the police of the Sihanoukville Anti-TIP 
Unit cooperated with APLE to arrest a German national for sexually 
abusing four underage boys.  The boys, aged between 12 and 14, 
testified that the suspect abused them.  He reportedly used monetary 
benefits to entice the street children.  APLE said that they had 
been investigating the man for five months. 
 
¶12.  (SBU)  On May 31, the Phnom Penh Anti-TIP Unit arrested two 
owners of a Phnom Penh caf for providing three underage girls for 
sexual service.  The three victims aged 15 and 16 were taken to WHI 
shelter.  The suspects are under pretrial detention. 
 
¶13.  (U)  On June 1, the Anti-TIP Phnom Penh Unit raided a 
foreign-owned pub, and arrested two suspects (French and Vietnamese) 
and removed four women.  The raid was the result of a proactive 
investigation by the police.  Three of the women are under 18 years 
of age, and were sent to WHI shelter.  An adult woman was sent to 
AFESIP shelter.  The suspects have been charged with pimping. 
 
¶14.  (U)  On June 2, the Koh Kong Police cooperated with the Thai 
authorities to arrest a Cambodian man for trafficking a Cambodian 
woman for prostitution.  The man is an owner of a Thailand-based 
brothel along the Cambodia border.  The 20 year old victim is  from 
Pursat province and went to Thailand for better economic 
opportunities.  After managing to return home to Cambodia in March, 
she submitted a complaint to police against the suspect for luring 
her into prostitution.  Police investigated and eventually obtained 
an arrest warrant from the Koh Kong provincial court.  Police are 
seeking to arrest another accomplice. 
 
¶15.  (U)  According to AFESIP, another proactive investigation of 
the Phnom Penh Anti-TIP Unit led to a raid and arrest on June 12 of 
two individuals and rescue of three women who were sent to AFESIP 
and WHI.  The suspects were charged with pimping. 
 
¶16.  (U)  On June 17, MOI Anti-TIP Department and the Phnom Penh 
Anti-TIP Unit cooperated with IJM to arrest an American citizen for 
sexually abusing several underage Cambodian-Vietnamese girls (Refs A 
and B).  Four other women have also been arrested for procuring the 
underage victims.  On June 20, the prosecutor of the Phnom Penh 
Municipal Court charged the five suspects with debauchery, human 
trafficking, and conspiracy in human trafficking.  The suspects are 
under pretrial detention.  The American citizen is expected to be 
extradited to the U.S. under the PROTECT Act.  Four of the five 
identified victims, aged between 8 and 12, are under WHI's care; the 
adult fifth victim is at NGO Hagar. 
 
¶17.  (U)  On June 26, the MOI Anti-TIP Department cooperated with 
the Police of Kampot province to raid a brothel, removing ten sex 
workers.  Two individuals who allegedly ran the establishment were 
arrested and sent to court.  The women, aged 19 to 24, are under 
AFESIP's care.  The raid was initiated by the parents of a 
Vietnamese victim who submitted a complaint to the Vietnamese 
authorities, which in turn forwarded it to Cambodian police.  The 
brothel was closed. 
 
----------------------------- 
Victims Escaping On Their Own 
----------------------------- 
 
¶18.  (U)  ADHOC reported the trafficking case of a 18 year-old 
victim from Poipet.  The victim was tricked by a Vietnamese couple 
at her home in Poipet and sent to a brothel in Thailand.  She was 
forced to provide sexual services to no less than ten customers a 
day.  She managed to return to Cambodia with the help of a Cambodian 
client who visited the brothel. 
 
¶19.  (U)  PJJ reported receiving a trafficking case on May 18, 
involving a 15-year-old victim, who was lured, drugged, and confined 
for sexual service in a Kampong Cham guesthouse.  The accused is 
still at large.  The victim subsequently returned to her family. 
 
¶20.  (U)  CWCC received another trafficking case on June 16, 
involving a 13 year-old victim, who was lured and drugged by an 
unknown man to a brothel-like venue.  She eventually made her escape 
and went to CWCC.  Police are investigating. 
 
------------ 
Court Cases 
------------ 
 
¶21.  (U)  On April 19, the Kampong Cham provincial court conducted 
the hearing of an abduction case involving a 15 year old victim. 
The suspect was arrested in November 2005 while he was attempting to 
abduct the girl.  The court acquitted the suspect because the victim 
and her parents withdrew their complaint. 
 
PHNOM PENH 00001235  003 OF 004 
 
 
 
¶22.  (U)  On April 24, the Phnom Penh Municipal court tried an 
Australian national, who was arrested in December 2005 for 
debauchery and taking pornographic pictures of children.  He was 
sentenced to ten years imprisonment and ordered to pay civil 
compensation of 500 USD to each of his six victims. 
 
¶23.  (U)  On June 20, the Phnom Penh Court sentenced two individuals 
to five years imprisonment for pimping.  The Phnom Penh Anti-TIP 
Unit arrested the convicts in September 2005 for operating a 
brothel. 
 
¶24.  (U)  On June 21, the Phnom Penh Municipal court opened the 
trial of a pimping case and sentenced three suspects to five and six 
years of imprisonment.  The suspects were arrested in January for 
pimping three women aged 24 and 25. 
 
------------ 
Other Issues 
------------ 
 
¶25.  (U)  According to CWCC, during the reporting period the NGO has 
received four complaints from Cambodian women who either are going 
or have been to Malaysia through the government-licensed labor 
exporting companies.  The women reported being strictly controlled 
by the companies during their pre-departure training and were 
physically abused during their work in Malaysia.  They added that 
the company refused to help them get out of the exploited situation, 
because they were bound by a working contract. The company told them 
to pay off the debt incurred for their travel.  These cases 
highlight a need for monitoring a mechanism to ensure the safety and 
well being of Cambodian workers abroad. 
 
¶26.  (SBU)  NGOs noted some difficulties in obtaining police 
cooperation (Reftel C).   IJM claimed that police performance was 
worse during the first six months of the year compared to last year 
but reported a marked improvement in cooperation towards the end of 
June.  AFESIP reported having submitted nine cases to the 
Commissioner General of the National Police for action during the 
reporting period, but only one has resulted in an arrest and rescue. 
 The remainder are either under police investigation or somewhere in 
the chain of the command structure. 
 
¶27.  (SBU)  A raid conducted on April 20 in Siem Reap province by 
the police of the Anti-TIP Department resulted in no arrests or 
rescues.  The infamous Vimean Pkay Prak brothel closed down a day 
before the police raid.  AFESIP told us that during their 
investigation that they found underage girls being housed in that 
establishment for sexual purposes.  A newspaper article reported 
that this business was connected with a high-ranking government 
official.  (Note: During Emboffs investigation in the province in 
March, POLOFF also found out that this establishment offered 
underage girl for services upon clients' demand.  End Note.) 
 
¶28.  (SBU)  ADHOC reported receiving a victim of trafficking from 
the Stung Treng Anti-TIP police on May 15.  The woman, 22 years-old, 
originated from Kratie province.  She went to Stung Treng in June 
last year for a USD30 per month job with the help of a facilitator. 
Later, the owner told the victim that she owed USD250 for the 
commission for the facilitator and jewelry she brought for her, and 
that she had to work as a prostitute to pay it off.  The victim 
reluctantly agreed and went to work in a brothel.  But after almost 
a year of prostitution, the owner told her that she had to continue 
working to pay another USD150 for incrementing interests of the 
USD250 owed.  The pimp would not let the victim leave unless she 
paid the amount demanded.  The victim then called the Anti-TIP 
police for help.  Police rescued her and sent her to ADHOC. 
However, police did not arrest the pimp or close down the brothel. 
According to ADHOC, police thought that this was merely a conflict 
between the two parties. 
 
¶29.  (U)  The Cambodian Police, at the request of the U.S. FBI, 
arrested an American Citizen Richard Debski on June 29.  Richard 
Debski has been wanted by the U.S. FBI for sex crimes he committed 
against children in the US.  Cambodian Immigration police said that 
Cambodia made the arrest to satisfy FBI request made to the 
Commissioner General of the National Police.  Cambodian police have 
not attempted to investigate Depski for other crimes he may have 
committed in Cambodia. 
 
¶30.  (U)  At a two day conference in June in Ho Chi Minh City 
organized by Cambodia's Ministry of Interior, its Vietnamese 
counterpart and UNODC, Cambodia and Vietnam agreed to step up 
cooperation to fight cross-border human trafficking.  As part of the 
implementation of Cambodia-Vietnam MOU signed in October 2005, both 
countries will create and share a list of suspects and trafficking 
rings between the two countries.  The head of Cambodian delegation, 
General Un Sokunthea, expressed her commitment to work closely with 
Vietnam to tighten control over trafficking of Vietnamese women and 
 
PHNOM PENH 00001235  004 OF 004 
 
 
children into and inside Cambodia. 
 
MUSOMELLI