06PHNOMPENH1607
POLICE ACTION AGAINST PROSTITUTION -- CAUSE FOR
Thu Sep 07 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO3120
PP RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM
DE RUEHPF #1607/01 2500008
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 070008Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7264
INFO RUEHZS/ASEAN COLLECTIVE
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOMUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PHNOM PENH 001607 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
FOR G/TIP, EAP/MLS and EAP/RSP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL KWMN KJUS CB
SUBJECT: POLICE ACTION AGAINST PROSTITUTION -- CAUSE FOR 
CELEBRATION? 
 
 
¶1.  (U)  Summary:  Recently, the police of Toul Kork district 
started a campaign against prostitution,  rounding up 47 prostitutes 
from nine brothels and other venues in the area and referring them 
to NGO shelters.  Twenty-seven customers and two facilitators were 
arrested during the operations, but all were later released.  Police 
claimed these raids are part of the government's agenda to eliminate 
prostitution.  The NGO community believes that the police should be 
focusing on arresting pimps and brothel owners rather than merely 
removing sex workers from brothels.  End Summary. 
 
The Raids 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (U)  On August 24, local police authorities of Toul Kork 
districts raided nine brothels in Stung Meanchey area.  (Note: this 
area is a well-known red light district in Phnom Penh.  End Note.) 
The raid resulted in the removal of 35 voluntary sex workers and 
arrests of 27 customers who were visiting the brothels at the time 
of raid.  The women were referred to AFESIP for psychological 
counseling and social services.  The customers reportedly were 
counseled and released by the police. 
 
¶3.  (U)  A few days later, police authorities conducted a similar 
raid on street-based prostitutes along Street 336 in Tuol Kork who 
were deemed an eyesore to the public.  During this raid, police 
picked up 12 sex workers and two intermediaries.  Police referred 
the sex workers to the Department of Social Affairs for further 
referrals as AFESIP's shelter had reached full capacity.  The 
intermediaries were released after being counseled. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Mr. Hout Yaran, a police officer in charge of the 
operations, claimed the raids are part of the "drizzling campaign"-- 
a regular and steady operation to eliminate prostitution.  They were 
done following an order from the Phnom Penh Municipal Governor, he 
explained, noting that all districts in capital will have to 
implement this campaign.  However, no one was prosecuted as a result 
of this operation.  When asked, Yaran said that police have 
identified some suspects believed to be the organizers of 
prostitution rings and the police are trying to obtain arrest 
warrants from a court prosecutor. 
 
¶5.  (U)  Ung Sokunthea, Director of the Cambodian National Police's 
Anti-Human Trafficking and Juvenile Protection Department, 
corroborated that the raids were part of the implementation of the 
MOI's action plan from July 2005.  From that action plan, all the 
provinces and municipalities are responsible for eliminating 
prostitution in their territory of jurisdiction.  She could not 
explain as to why the Toul Kork police had not started implementing 
the order sooner. 
 
¶6.  (U)  AFESIP confirmed the receipt of 35 women removed from the 
first raid, and maintained that it is AFESIP's policy to provide 
assistance to these women, regardless of whether they are victims of 
trafficking or voluntary sex workers.  They have yet to determine 
the age and situation of these women.  Newspaper reports suggest 
that all the women are voluntary sex workers and no trafficking 
victims have been identified. 
 
NGO Reaction 
------------ 
 
¶7.  (U)  Christian Guth, advisor to the MOI, disapproved of the 
action in that it targets vulnerable sex workers.  Women turn to 
prostitution because of a lack of choice, he noted, and NGO shelters 
will not serve as their exit from prostitution.  Guth thinks that 
the raids may be another way to show the government's commitment 
against immoral acts, citing the National Assembly's recent passage 
of a law against adultery. 
 
¶8.  (U)  From the legal point of view, Sok Sam Oeun, Executive 
Director of NGO Cambodian Defenders Project, said there is no legal 
background for police action.  Pimping is illegal but prostitution 
is not.  Police should aim at eliminating pimping, rather than 
collecting prostitutes.  He noted from his experiences in training 
police that some police officers do not understand the difference 
between prostitution, pimping and trafficking. 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  Comment:  Targeting sex workers alone is not a viable 
solution to ridding Cambodia of prostitution nor is it particularly 
effective in addressing trafficking in persons.  The fact that no 
pimps or brothel owners have been held responsible after the raids 
on nine brothels raises questions as to the government's 
motivations.  Police could have done a better job identifying and 
arresting the pimps and closing down the brothels, instead of only 
rounding up the prostitutes and turning them over to AFESIP.  We 
agree with Christian Guth's assessment that the women will likely 
end up again on the streets.  The Embassy will continue to follow up 
with police to see if indeed there are any further arrests as a 
 
PHNOM PENH 00001607  002 OF 002 
 
 
result of recent actions.  End Comment. 
 
MUSSOMELI