06PHNOMPENH662
TIP ON THE COAST OF CAMBODIA
Fri Apr 07 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO5465
PP RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #0662/01 0970915
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 070915Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6422
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 1383UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PHNOM PENH 000662 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR G/TIP, EAP/MLS AND EAP/RSP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREL KWMN CB
SUBJECT: TIP ON THE COAST OF CAMBODIA 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary.  PolOff traveled to Cambodia's coastal 
regions to meet with anti-trafficking NGOs and government 
officials to assess the human trafficking problem and the 
efforts being made to combat TIP.  NGOs in the port city of 
Sihanoukville report good cooperation with the government and 
a decrease in human trafficking following sustained efforts 
to combat the problem.  NGOs in remote Koh Kong report that 
while cooperation with most government departments is good, 
the provincial anti-trafficking unit remains problematic and 
uncooperative.  End Summary. 
 
 
Sihanoukville 
------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  During meetings with PolOff, NGOs Adhoc, LICADHO, 
and AFESIP explained that human trafficking has decreased in 
the province over the past two years, primarily because of 
government efforts to combat human trafficking.  These NGOs 
explained many brothels have closed following police raids 
and that recent convictions of human traffickers have been 
effective deterrents.  LICADHO explained that the police have 
been very responsive to complaints, but expressed concern 
that the police were negotiating out of court settlements 
between the victims and the perpetrators, thereby 
circumventing the judiciary.  NGOs report dissatisfaction 
with the judiciary, asserting that prosecution efforts have 
been lax and prosecutors and judges unresponsive. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  AFESIP reported that there approximately 45 
commercial sex establishments employing about 275 direct and 
450 indirect sex workers.  AFESIP explained that it has 
access to all sex establishments and does not believe that 
many of the workers are victims of trafficking.  However, 
AFESIP did express concern about one high-end karaoke club 
that caters to wealthy Cambodian clientele.   AFESIP reported 
that although it has access to the workers of this club, it 
is possible that trafficking victims are hidden from view. 
PolOff conducted informal observation of the two primary 
brothel districts in Sihanoukville, Blue Mountain and the New 
Village, and did not observe any obvious underage girls; 
however, it is impossible to determine whether any had been 
forced, deceived or were in a situation of debt bondage. 
While there were a couple of Western customers, the majority 
appeared to be local Khmers and sailors from the nearby port. 
 
¶4.  (U)  The anti-trafficking department informed PolOff that 
there has been a significant decrease in the number of 
commercial sex establishments in the last two years because 
of increased police raids and government attention given to 
the problem of human trafficking.  The anti-trafficking 
police received two training courses in 2005, which has 
helped them to improve their investigations, victim 
interviews, and case management.  However, the department's 
chief explained that while his department is trying to take 
increased action, it does not have sufficient resources to 
conduct the investigations and must resort to using personal 
vehicles and gas for investigations. 
 
¶5.  (U)  Sihanoukville Governor Say Hak reported that 
combating human trafficking is a top priority for the 
government.   He explained that while the government is 
trying to attract increased tourism with the regional airport 
-- which is to be operational before the end of the year -- 
it is concerned that Sihanoukville could become a destination 
for sex tourism.  Hak explained that he has created a 
provincial plan, comprised of various departments and police, 
to prevent trafficking from increasing.  He explained that 
the Department of Women's Affairs has been active on the 
prevention front, conducting information campaigns throughout 
the province. 
 
Koh Kong 
-------- 
 
¶6.  (U)  The remote province of Koh Kong is quickly opening 
to the rest of Cambodia.  Governor Yuth Phouthang informed 
PolOff that the Thai government offered low-interest loans 
for road construction and grants for bridges to span the four 
rivers that are currently crossed via ferry and are to be 
finished by the end of 2006 and 2007, respectively. 
Phouthang explained that the government has prioritized 
combating human trafficking, in addition to illegal logging, 
fishing, and land grabbing.  The Governor stated that 
following receipt of a strict order from the central 
government to increase cooperation with NGOs and various 
government ministries on combating TIP, he established a 
committee to prevent human trafficking and domestic violence. 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000662  002 OF 002 
 
 
 The committee is comprised of all government departments and 
relevant NGOs in order to collect and coordinate information 
related to TIP and ensure that timely interventions are 
conducted.  The Department of Social Affairs (DoSVY) 
explained that the government met with its Thai counterparts 
to discuss anti-TIP strategies and is cooperating on 
establishing a transit center for deported immigrants and 
trafficking victims in the province. 
 
¶7.  SBU)  Anti-trafficking NGOs reported that cooperation 
with DoSVY and Women's Affairs is good; however, cooperation 
with the anti-trafficking unit continues to be problematic. 
NGOs complained that the police are reluctant to take action 
and often demand financial assistance to enlist their 
cooperation.  DoSVY explained that the anti-trafficking 
police do not conduct proactive investigations and have even 
ignored complaints submitted by NGOs.  However, DoSVY noted 
that this unwillingness could be explained by financial and 
technical constraints on part of the police, as they are 
badly resourced and ill equipped.  NGOs reported that the 
Phnom Penh anti-trafficking unit recently conducted 
operations in the province, resulting in successful raids and 
rescues. (Note: These raids were conducted in collaboration 
with and support by NGO International Justice Mission).  NGOs 
welcomed this outside action, as they have had to provide 
transportation and food to the provincial anti-trafficking 
unit in order to secure action from the police. 
 
¶8.  (U)  The anti-trafficking unit explained to PolOff that 
they had cooperated with the Phnom Penh unit in three recent 
successful raids.  The chief explained that the provincial 
unit had just been created in 2005 and that it has received 
very little training and even less funding.  He explained 
that his unit was not even equipped with a camera and was 
required to hire a professional photographer in order to 
document arrested traffickers. 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  AFESIP reported that there are 12-14 brothels in 
Koh Kong and approximately 95 sex workers.  PolOff conducted 
informal interviews with sex workers and observation of the 
various commercial sex establishments located in the area 
known as the Chicken Farm.  It is very difficult to ascertain 
the ages of the sex workers, but most appeared to be over 
eighteen and all claimed to be voluntary adults.  The workers 
explained that the majority of their customers are local 
Cambodians, with some Thai workers engaged in construction on 
the new road, and an occasional foreigner.  The women 
explained that they have never met customers from or traveled 
to the casinos along the border area.  There were no reports 
of commercial sex establishments located near the casinos on 
the border area, contradicting rumors that the Thais are 
traveling to Cambodia for gambling and girls. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  Although NGOs report very good cooperation with 
the anti-trafficking police in the principal provinces, 
cooperation in the remote regions like Koh Kong continues to 
be problematic.  While the central government's expression of 
political will to combat human trafficking has reached the 
provinces, the financial resources necessary to carry out the 
fight have not been as forthcoming.  End Comment. 
 
Mussomeli