06PHNOMPENH501
2006 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT FOR CAMBODIA
Wed Mar 15 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO9059
OO RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM
DE RUEHPF #0501/01 0740851
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 150851Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6258
INFO RUEHZS/ASEAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC 0600
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RUEAHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 18 PHNOM PENH 000501 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, IWI, EAP/RSP, EAP/MLS 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USAID/ANE 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PHUM ELAB SMIG KCRM KWMN KFRD CB
SUBJECT:  2006 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT FOR CAMBODIA 
 
REFTEL: STATE 3836 
 
¶1.  The following is Embassy Phnom Penh's contribution 
towards the preparation of the 2006 Trafficking in Persons 
Report for Cambodia, covering the period March 2005 - March 
¶2006.  Responses follow the questions outlined in reftel. 
The entire report is classified sensitive but unclassified 
(SBU). 
 
Overview of the Country's Activities, Statistics 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
1A.  Is the country a country of origin, transit or 
destination for international trafficked men, women, or 
children?  Specify numbers for each group.  Does the 
trafficking occur within the country's borders?  Does it 
occur within territory outside of the government's control 
(e.g. in a civil war situation)?  Are any estimates or 
reliable numbers available as to the extent or magnitude of 
the problem?  Please include any numbers of victims.  What 
is (are) the source(s) of available information on 
trafficking in persons or what plans are in place (if any) 
to undertake documentation of trafficking?  How reliable are 
the numbers and these sources?  Are certain groups of 
persons more at risk of being trafficked (e.g. women and 
children, boys versus girls, certain ethnic groups, 
refugees, etc.)? 
 
Cambodia is a source, destination, and transit country for 
trafficking in persons, including men, women and children. 
The majority of Cambodian trafficking victims are trafficked 
for labor purposes, due to Cambodia's relative poverty and 
poor economic conditions compared with its immediate 
neighbors; Cambodian women and girls are also trafficked for 
sexual exploitation.  Cambodians are trafficked primarily 
within the Mekong sub-region, particularly to Thailand and 
Malaysia.  Trafficking also occurs within Cambodia's 
borders, from rural areas to Phnom Penh and other secondary 
cities within the country. 
 
In Cambodia, commercial sex work goes on in guesthouses, 
karaoke clubs, massage shops, beer gardens, restaurants and 
nightclubs that provide direct and indirect sex workers. 
Barbershops, noodle shops, and other commercial 
establishments may also function as venues for commercial 
sex operations either on the premises or "on delivery" for 
clients.  Both TIP victims and voluntary sex workers are 
intermingled at such venues.  Many ethnic Vietnamese sex 
workers in voluntary sex work are or were originally 
trafficked to Cambodia through debt bondage.  Debt bondage 
is also a factor in the recruitment of Cambodian trafficking 
victims, who are convinced that they are accepting 
legitimate restaurant, factory, or other work opportunities 
in Phnom Penh or other cities and then forced into sex work. 
 
There are no firm estimates or reliable numbers available as 
to the extent or magnitude of the overall trafficking 
problem.  Two surveys have attempted to measure the 
commercial sex industry in the country:  a 1997 report by 
the Commission on Human Rights and a 2003 study by a former 
Fulbright researcher, Thomas Steinfatt.  The 1997 Commission 
on Human Rights for the National Assembly included a country- 
wide survey of brothels, and estimated that there were 
14,725 brothel workers in Cambodia (ignoring other venues) 
and that 81 percent of workers were Cambodian and 18 percent 
Vietnamese.  The study did not attempt to differentiate 
between voluntary sex workers and trafficking victims. 
 
Steinfatt's 2003 statistical study on the number of 
prostitutes and sex trafficking victims in Cambodia 
estimated 18,256 sex workers (all venues) in Cambodia, of 
which 65.6 percent were Cambodian and 32.8 percent 
Vietnamese.  The Steinfatt study estimated that there were 
2,000 sex trafficking victims in Cambodia, with 80.4 percent 
of the sex trafficking victims being ethnic Vietnamese. 
Steinfatt's trafficking estimates have been disputed by some 
who believe the actual victim numbers to be higher, although 
no separate data exist that accurately quantify sex 
trafficking victims. 
 
Limited trafficking statistics are available from RGC border 
authorities involved in the repatriation of Cambodians from 
neighboring countries.  Cambodian authorities, in 
cooperation with international organizations such as UNICEF 
and IOM, try to distinguish between illegal migrants and 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000501  002 OF 018 
 
 
trafficking victims, particularly children, and have some 
statistical information.  Within Cambodia, NGOs that provide 
services to victims referred by police, judicial, and social 
service officials often are another source of limited 
statistical information based on their respective 
operations. 
 
There are no studies that suggest minority groups are more 
susceptible to trafficking.  Some provinces, by virtue of 
their proximity to neighboring Thailand or Vietnam, are also 
source areas for trafficking victims.  In a 2004 survey, 
PACT-Cambodia found a correlation between residential 
origins of trafficking victims and communities along major 
highways. 
 
Thailand is the major destination country for trafficked 
Cambodians, but there are no reliable numbers on how many 
persons are trafficked to Thailand each year.  Cambodian men 
are trafficked to work in the Thai fish, construction and 
agricultural industries; women and young girls are 
trafficked for factory and domestic work, but are also 
subject to sexual exploitation in the Thai commercial sex 
industry. 
 
Children are not prevented from crossing the Thai border 
with strangers or alone, and Cambodians can buy a border 
pass to cross the border without needing to show any 
identification.  Poipet/Aranyaprathet is the primary 
Cambodia-Thai border post.  Children mainly from Banteay 
Meanchey and Battambang provinces in Cambodia's northwestern 
region continue to be trafficked to Thailand to beg, sell 
candy or flowers, and shine shoes.  IOM and UNICEF have 
contact with nearly all children repatriated from Thailand 
at the Poipet border crossing, and select out the 
trafficking victims for special care through IOM's Poipet 
Transit Center, which is staffed jointly by IOM and Ministry 
of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth (MOSAVY) staff. 
According to UNICEF, in 2005 there were 66 unaccompanied 
children deported from Thailand to Cambodia, some of whom 
were trafficking victims.  According to IOM/MOSAVY, Thai 
authorities repatriated 98 women and children who were 
identified as TIP victims and deported another 88 alleged 
TIP victims during 2005. 
 
Cambodian women continue to be trafficked via 
Thailand to Malaysia for commercial sexual exploitation, and 
others are trafficked directly to Malaysia for exploitation 
as agricultural laborers, domestic help, and sex workers. 
 
Children in three districts of Svay Rieng Province continue 
to be trafficked to Ho Chi Minh City in Vietnam for begging. 
Cambodian traffickers contract with the children's parents, 
with monthly payments ranging from 100,000 riel (25 USD) to 
150,000 riel (37 USD) per child.  IOM explained that 
Cambodian facilitators take three to four children at a time 
across the porous, unmonitored border to Vietnam.  A single 
trafficker may coordinate several facilitators.  Border 
controls are minimal and the children cross to Vietnam 
freely, according to IOM.  Cambodian traffickers personally 
supervise the children in Vietnam, and reportedly have few 
problems with police raids.  According to IOM, the number of 
those coming from Svay Tiep, one of the three problem 
districts, has significantly decreased in 2005, due in part 
to the creation of a new industrial park and more local 
economic activities.  According to MOSAVY, 1,216 people -- 
mostly child beggars - were returned by Vietnamese 
authorities and reintegrated in 2005. 
 
Vietnamese women and children, many in debt bondage, 
continue to be trafficked from Ang Giang, Contho, Soc Tzeug 
and other provinces in Vietnam to Cambodia for commercial 
sex work primarily in Phnom Penh.  Information from AFESIP, 
CWCC, and UNICEF indicates that Vietnamese women and girls 
are trafficked through Cambodia by organized Vietnamese 
criminal gangs to onward destinations in Thailand and 
Malaysia. 
 
A moratorium since 2002 on international adoption by some 
western countries, including the United States, has largely 
curbed reports of trafficking of infants for foreign 
adoption.  Concerns surrounding this type of trafficking led 
the RGC to redraft the country's adoption legislation, and a 
new law is currently being developed.  The Cambodian 
government is working with international organizations and 
other donors to ensure that international adoptions are 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000501  003 OF 018 
 
 
conducted properly in the future to diminish the trafficking 
of infants for profit. 
 
Changes in Trafficking Patterns; Political Will 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
1B.  Please provide a general overview of the trafficking 
situation in the country and any changes since the last TIP 
report (e.g. changes in direction).  Also briefly explain 
the political will to address trafficking in persons. Other 
items to address may include:  What kind of conditions are 
the victims trafficked into?  Which populations are targeted 
by the traffickers?  Who are the traffickers? What methods 
are used to approach victims? (Are they offered lucrative 
jobs, sold by their families, approached by friends of 
friends, etc.?)  What methods are used to move the victims 
(e.g., are false documents being used?) 
 
Cambodia has made important strides in combating trafficking 
over the past years.  The Ministry of Interior has 
implemented a national anti-TIP plan.  The RGC is moving 
ahead with drafting of a modern anti-trafficking law and has 
concluded MOUs on combating trafficking with its two biggest 
neighbors.  Symbolic of the high level of political will 
engaged in the fighting of trafficking was the Cambodian 
National Police effort to correct its mistakes in an earlier 
brothel raid through the investigation and then successful 
raid - leading to four convictions - of the Chhay Hour II 
hotel case. 
 
The Cambodian government at its most senior levels supports 
greater emphasis on the fight against trafficking in 
persons.  Prime Minister Hun Sen has spoken out on numerous 
occasions against trafficking.  On March 5, 2006, he called 
for more concerted action from the government and NGOs to 
fight human trafficking, and warned against Cambodia being 
labeled as a sex tourism destination.  While senior 
officials recognize that measures undertaken to date are 
insufficient to stem TIP within and out of Cambodia, the RGC 
recognizes that the problem must be addressed 
comprehensively and in accordance with internationally 
recognized standards regarding prosecution of traffickers, 
protection of victims, and public awareness campaigns and 
other programs to prevent people from falling victim to TIP. 
The RGC also recognizes that the problem is a regional one, 
and involves the cooperation of neighboring countries.  The 
RGC has cooperated with U.S.-supported and other NGOs 
operating in Cambodia on TIP. 
 
The lack of statistical data impedes attempts to 
characterize changes in the trafficking climate from one 
year to the next.  As long as the economies of Cambodia's 
neighbors continue to expand, Cambodian labor remains cheap 
and jobs inside the country are scare, Cambodians will 
continue to migrate out for labor purposes.  Some NGOs and 
government officials believe the number of trafficking 
victims for sexual exploitation has decreased in the past 
year due to increased law enforcement efforts to combat 
trafficking, greater political attention, and enhanced 
cooperation between the government and NGOs.  Other sources 
suggest that the problem may simply be more dispersed, 
better hidden and less obvious than in the past due to RGC 
law enforcement efforts. 
 
Due to poverty, lack of jobs, family problems and unequal 
access to educational opportunities; women and children, 
especially those in rural areas where 80 percent of the 
population resides, are the most vulnerable segment of 
society to sex trafficking.  These victims are particularly 
susceptible to the lure of employment, often via the 
intercession of relatives, friends, or unknown persons, to 
pay off personal or family debts incurred by factors such as 
drought or the serious illness of a family member.  NGOs 
have identified certain risk factors that increase the 
probability of a girl being lured into prostitution:  an 
older sister, relative, or friend already involved in the 
commercial sex industry; the parents of the girl have 
divorced or separated; one or both of the parents are dead 
and the girl is living with relatives or friends; one or 
both parents are drug addicts, alcoholics, or gamblers; the 
family is desperately poor; the girl has little or no 
education; and the girl is of the appropriate age for the 
sex industry.  NGOs report that domestic violence and rape 
are often precursors to trafficking, as girls who are raped 
are culturally stigmatized and left with little hope of 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000501  004 OF 018 
 
 
having a normal life. 
 
Traffickers of Cambodian women and children for sex can be 
known or distant acquaintances who promise work in Phnom 
Penh, or relatives, boyfriends or husbands that take the 
women or underage girls and sell them to a brothel. 
 
Asian men are often prepared to pay a premium to have sex 
with virgins, with one NGO reporting that clients will pay 
as much as USD 1,000 for three days with a virgin.  In one 
study, AideTous found that 55 percent of interviewed 
prostitutes had sex for the first time with a foreign 
client, and two-thirds were between the ages of 13-18 when 
they lost their virginity to a client. 
 
When Cambodians are moved abroad, they often are brought 
through the porous borders with Thailand or Vietnam without 
documentation.  Some women are reportedly trafficked to 
Thailand for sex by boat from the Cambodian province of Koh 
Kong.  In cases of human trafficking to Malaysia, women are 
reportedly entering the country with valid Cambodian 
passports, with allegations of complicity on the part of 
Thai and Malay border and immigration officials. 
 
When victims are trafficked out of Cambodia, NGOs claim that 
trafficking networks are involved.  The Vietnamese, Thai and 
Chinese-Malays are alleged to have regional networks that 
traffic drugs, guns, women and children to regional markets 
such as Thailand and Malaysia. 
 
In October 2004, the Cambodian Minister of Social Affairs, 
Ith Sam Heng, signed a memorandum on regional TIP under the 
Coordinated Mekong Inter-Ministerial Initiative on 
Trafficking process (COMMIT).  The COMMIT process required 
Cambodia and other signatories to develop detailed sub- 
regional plans of action and take a regional approach to 
combating TIP.  In October 2005, the Minister of Women's 
Affairs, Ing Kantha Phavi, signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding with Vietnam to eliminate trafficking in women 
and children and assist victims of trafficking. 
 
Numerous government ministries in 2005 continued to 
cooperate closely with international organizations and NGOs 
on a variety of projects focused on prevention, protection 
and prosecution.  The RGC, often in cooperation with these 
same organizations, played an active role in local and 
international fora on trafficking-related issues. 
 
The Ministry of Justice, with the assistance of the Japanese 
Institute for Legal Development, has drafted a new Anti- 
Trafficking Law consisting of nine chapters and 52 articles. 
The draft law has been modeled on other countries' anti- 
trafficking legislation, as well as the international 
conventions and treaties to which Cambodia is a signatory. 
The law is undergoing final review at the Ministry of 
Justice before moving to the Council of Ministers for final 
approval, after which it will be sent to the National 
Assembly for passage.  The new law will give police, 
prosecutors, and judges a wider array of legal authority to 
address TIP than currently exists under Cambodian law. 
 
The Ministry of Interior has implemented a nationwide anti- 
trafficking plan.  Police in each province have been 
identified as responsible for TIP and the Deputy Prime 
Minister/Minister of Interior called all TIP police, 
governors, and provincial police commissioners to the 
capital to brief them on TIP issues. 
 
Effective implementation will require comprehensive training 
of judges, prosecutors, and police in the provisions of the 
new law.  In addition to the anti-trafficking legislation, 
the Government of Japan has also worked with the MOJ to 
develop a revised comprehensive civil and penal codes, some 
of whose articles are relevant to prosecuting traffickers. 
The draft codes are also in the final stages of review 
before being submitted to the government for approval. 
 
Government Resource Limitations, Corruption 
------------------------------------------- 
 
1C.  What are the limitations of the government's ability to 
address this problem in practice?  For example, is funding 
for police or other institutions inadequate?  Is overall 
corruption a problem?  Does the government lack the 
resources to aid victims? 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000501  005 OF 018 
 
 
 
The Cambodian government is severely limited in its ability 
to effectively combat trafficking.  In general, Cambodian 
government institutions remain very weak as a result of 25 
years of civil war and genocide.  The lack of resources is 
acute; training and funding for law enforcement and courts 
are wholly inadequate; corruption is a major problem; and 
the overall level of human resources - trained and competent 
people - is still greatly affected by the legacy of decades 
of civil war.  Government resources for victim assistance 
are virtually non-existent and must be augmented by 
assistance from international organizations and foreign and 
domestic NGOs.  The government has also been slow in 
defining custody issues pertaining to victims and witnesses 
taken from brothels, as well as the legal authority of NGOs 
in the process. 
 
Most observers agree that law enforcement and judicial 
prosecution represent government weaknesses in anti- 
trafficking efforts.  While some NGOs report good 
cooperation with government authorities on TIP cases in 
Phnom Penh and at the provincial level, there are complaints 
regarding police officials at the provincial levels.  Some 
police and judicial officials involved in corruption have 
faced disciplinary action and dismissal during the year. 
 
The Supreme Council of Magistracy has the power to 
appoint and remove judges, but does not use this power 
except in rare situations, and there is evidence that 
disciplinary actions are often politically motivated.  The 
SCM also does not have investigative resources to respond to 
allegations of corruption.  The MOJ rotates judicial 
personnel every four years in the hope that the movements 
will lessen opportunities for corruption. 
 
Government anti-TIP Monitoring Efforts 
-------------------------------------- 
 
1D.  To what extent does the government systematically 
monitor its anti-trafficking efforts (on all fronts - 
prosecution, prevention and victim protection) and 
periodically make available, publicly or privately and 
directly or through regional/international organizations, 
its assessments of these anti-trafficking efforts? 
 
The Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans, and Youth 
Rehabilitation (MOSAVY) has a database to keep track of 
repatriated victims and the Ministry of Interior has a 
database to track police intelligence, investigations, and 
arrests of sex crime offenders.  The Ministry of Justice, 
with assistance from Asia Regional Cooperation to Prevent 
People Trafficking (ARCPPT), started collecting information 
in late 2004 for a database of trafficking court cases, 
which was expected to be available in late 2005.  The 
database is still not operational in 2006, and UNICEF is 
taking over the project.  Information included in all of 
these databases is often not public and is not consolidated 
in one location.  This role is supposed to be taken over by 
the Cambodian National Council for Children, which plans a 
database that will include secondary data from other 
government databases and NGOs, but this database is not 
expected to be up and running until the end of 2006.  At 
present, the Cambodian government does not issue assessments 
of its efforts to combat human trafficking. 
 
Child Brides 
------------ 
 
1E.  Does the practice of buying or selling child brides 
(brides under the age of 18 years) occur in the country?  If 
so, describe.  Do men of the country travel abroad to 
purchase child brides?  If so, describe. 
 
The legal age for a female to marry is 18, unless her 
parents give special permission.  Buying or selling child 
brides is not a practice in Cambodia, and Cambodian men do 
not travel abroad to purchase child brides.  There are 
reports of Cambodian women being trafficked for marriage to 
Chinese or Taiwanese men. 
 
Government Acknowledgment of TIP 
-------------------------------- 
 
2A. Does the government acknowledge that trafficking is a 
problem in that country?  If not, why not? 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000501  006 OF 018 
 
 
 
The Cambodian government openly acknowledges that 
trafficking is a serious problem, particularly the sex trade 
involving women and children.  As noted earlier, the Prime 
Minister in March 2006 spoke out against TIP and called for 
greater government efforts to combat the problem. 
 
In February 2006, an interministerial delegation of 
Cambodian government officials, headed by Minister of 
Women's Affairs visited Washington to outline government 
responses to TIP issues and request further support from the 
USG in addressing the trafficking problem in Cambodia. 
 
Government Agency Involvement in anti-TIP Efforts 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
2B. Which government agencies are involved in anti- 
trafficking efforts and which agency, if any, has the lead? 
 
Several ministries and agencies in the Cambodian government 
have responsibility for combating trafficking in persons, 
including:  the Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans, and 
Youth Rehabilitation; the Ministry of Labor and Vocational 
Training, the Ministry of Interior (which oversees the 
National Police); the Ministry of Women's Affairs; the 
Ministry of Justice; the Ministry of Tourism; the Ministry 
of Information; the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and 
International Cooperation; and the inter-ministerial 
Cambodian National Council for Children, which has a Sub- 
Commission on Trafficking and Sexual Exploitation of 
Children. 
 
Government-run anti-TIP Information/Education Campaigns 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
2C. Are there or have there been government-run anti- 
trafficking information or education campaigns?  If so, 
briefly describe the campaign(s), including their objectives 
and effectiveness.  Do these campaigns target potential 
trafficking victims and/or the demand for trafficking (e.g. 
"clients" of prostitutes or beneficiaries of forced labor). 
 
Working with NGOs, the Cambodian government implemented a 
national campaign to raise public awareness regarding the 
dangers of human trafficking through posters, television and 
radio campaigns, and the use of traditional Cambodian 
theater.  With USAID funding, IOM is assisting the MOWA in 
expanding a nationwide information campaign begun in 
September 2002 to cover all 18 Cambodian provinces.  The 
information campaign includes district-level meetings with 
high-level government officials, videos or theater (often 
attended by thousands of rural Cambodians), and question-and- 
answer sessions and distribution of educational materials. 
 
In April 2005, IOM and the MOWA collaborated on an 
information campaign designed to target local leaders 
(village chiefs, local authorities), who were selected and 
trained to disseminate information related to human 
trafficking and labor migration.  IOM's impact assessment 
report showed that the campaign increased public awareness 
about the dangers of trafficking and available options 
should people find that they are trafficking victims. 
 
The Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans, and Youth 
Rehabilitation has worked closely with UNICEF and local NGOs 
to set up community-based networks aimed at conducting early 
intervention programs in Prey Veng and Svay Rieng provinces. 
Community volunteers are recruited to help identify children 
at risk and bring their cases to the commune level for local 
protection.  More difficult cases are forwarded to the 
district level. 
 
During 2005, the Ministry of Interior's anti-TIP police 
visited numerous schools in Phnom Penh and conducted 
intervention programs to teach students about the risks of 
trafficking and their rights under the law.  During 2005, 
the program reached 12 schools and approximately 1,800 
students.  During the first two months of 2006, the anti-TIP 
Department conducted the same program in 12 schools in Siem 
Reap province, educating approximately 1,400 students. 
 
The Ministry of Tourism, in collaboration with World Vision, 
has produced pamphlets and advertisements for tourist 
brochures and maps that warn tourists of the penalties for 
engaging in child sex.  In the past, the Ministry conducted 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000501  007 OF 018 
 
 
workshops for child vendors in the tourist centers of Siem 
Reap and Sihanoukville to warn them of the dangers of sexual 
exploitation by tourists.  The MOT also provided workshops 
to hospitality industry owners and staff on how to identify 
and intervene in cases of trafficking or sexual exploitation 
of children.  Some of the more active organizations involved 
in general public awareness campaigns regarding trafficking 
have been UNICEF, IOM, and the Women's Media Center. 
 
Other Government-Supported Prevention Programs 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
2D. Does the government support other programs to prevent 
trafficking?  (e.g., to promote women's participation in 
economic decision-making or efforts to keep children in 
school.)  Please explain. 
 
The government, working closely with NGOs and international 
organizations, continues to be engaged in a broad effort to 
devote more resources to women's and children's issues. 
Areas being addressed include domestic violence, gender and 
human rights, improved and more accessible education for 
girls, preventative health care, improved nutrition, more 
effective treatment for communicable disease, and improved 
access to family planning services and information.  The 
Ministry of Women's Affairs in cooperation with NGOs and 
donors, has developed its own strategic plan of action to 
address trafficking and women's empowerment issues in 
Cambodia. 
 
In September 2005, the National Assembly passed a new 
domestic violence law.  The law criminalizes domestic 
violence, seeks recourse to protect victims, and authorizes 
authorities and neighbors to intervene. 
 
ILO/IPEC has, in close cooperation with selected provinces, 
identified pilot areas to test income generation projects as 
a strategy to combat trafficking for labor migration.  World 
Education has identified similar pilot projects to focus on 
improving the socio-economic opportunities for girls to 
prevent their being trafficked. 
 
PACT-Cambodia has begun a three-year program for women's 
empowerment through micro-enterprise development.  Supported 
by the State Department's Women's Issues Fund, this program 
will focus on rural literacy and math skills among 
populations identified in a 2004 study as being most at risk 
for trafficking.  The second year of the program will 
establish village-led savings and investment programs for 
women. 
 
Government Support for Prevention Programs 
------------------------------------------ 
 
2E. Is the government able to support prevention programs? 
 
Because of severe resource constraints, the Cambodian 
government depends heavily on assistance from international 
organizations, bilateral donors, and foreign and domestic 
NGOs to carry out prevention programs in Cambodia.  This 
situation is likely to continue into the foreseeable future. 
 
Government/IO/NGO/Civil Society Relations 
----------------------------------------- 
 
2F.  What is the relationship between the government and 
officials, NGOs, other relevant organizations and other 
elements of civil society on the trafficking issue? 
 
There is good cooperation among the Cambodian government, 
international organizations and NGOs, the donors, and 
foreign and domestic NGOs on the trafficking issue.  Through 
training seminars, workshops and other programs, including 
awareness campaigns and treatment and rehabilitation of 
victims, there is enhanced cooperation between all parties 
on the trafficking.  Many NGOs refer the clients they have 
rehabilitated to MOSAVY to help trace family members and for 
reintegration follow-up.  NGOs refer cases of disappearance, 
suspected trafficking or abuse to the Ministry of Interior's 
hotline or to a hotline managed by the Ministry of Social 
Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation.  NGOs and donors 
are regularly consulted in the drafting of new laws or 
regulations. 
 
However, there continue to be NGO concerns over the 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000501  008 OF 018 
 
 
Cambodian government's generally poor record in reducing 
corruption and improving governance, and these concerns are 
also expressed with respect to trafficking.  The NGO 
statement in February 2006 to the Consultative Group of 
Donors alleged that Cambodian government officials, police 
and military are involved in human trafficking networks, but 
provided no evidence or details to support their claims.  In 
response, the Minister of Women's Affairs as well as 
officials from the MOI and MOJ urged NGOs involved in anti- 
trafficking efforts to provide corruption-related 
information to the government or to the attention of 
international organizations and members of the donor 
community so that appropriate action may be taken. 
 
Government Border Monitoring 
----------------------------- 
 
2G.  Does the government adequately monitor its borders? 
Does it monitor immigration and emigration patterns for 
evidence of trafficking?  Do law enforcement agencies screen 
for potential trafficking victims along borders? 
 
The Cambodian government's ability to monitor land borders 
with Vietnam, Laos and Thailand, as well as its coastline, 
continues to be marginal.  Because of its limited resources, 
the government does not have the ability to screen for 
potential trafficking along the borders. 
 
In 2003, the RGC set up a computerized immigration system in 
its national airport.  Australia has worked with the 
Immigration Department of the Ministry of Interior to 
install similar systems at land border crossings, with an 
emphasis on deterring corruption, visa fraud, people 
smuggling, transnational crime and pedophilia. 
 
Government Coordination on TIP Issues 
------------------------------------- 
 
2H.  Is there a mechanism for coordination and communication 
between various agencies, internal, international, and 
multilateral on trafficking-related matters, such as a multi- 
agency working group or a task force?  Does the government 
have a trafficking in persons working group or single point 
of contact?  Does the government have a public corruption 
task force? 
 
Several multi-agency working groups and task forces have 
been established for the purpose of coordinating, in concert 
with international organizations and civil society groups, 
various initiatives to address the issue of human 
trafficking.  As part of the UN's Interagency Project on 
Trafficking in Women and Children in the Mekong Sub-Region 
(Cambodia, China, Laos, Burma, Thailand, and Vietnam), the 
Ministry of Women's Affairs chairs the project's 
Coordination Committee in Cambodia.  In order to support 
Cambodia's MOU commitments under the regional COMMIT 
process, an interagency working group also headed by the 
MOWA continues to meet regularly and work on the sub- 
regional action plan for Cambodia. 
 
An anti-corruption unit was established in 1999 under the 
Council of Minister as part of the government's legal reform 
agenda, but is now largely defunct.  Donor countries have 
continued to press the government on anti-corruption efforts 
and the passage of an anti-corruption law that is consistent 
with international standards.  The draft law remains 
inadequate and donors have requested the government to amend 
the law by summer 2006.  Donors have also pushed for the 
establishment of an independent anti-corruption commission. 
 
National Plan of Action for TIP 
------------------------------- 
 
2J. Does the government have a national plan of action to 
address trafficking in persons?  If so, which agencies were 
involved in developing it?  Were NGOs consulted in the 
process?  What steps has the government taken to disseminate 
this action plan? 
 
With the assistance of UNICEF, the Cambodian government is 
currently in the process of creating the second five-year 
national plan of action.  The new plan will harmonize 
Cambodia's ongoing activities with the responsibilities 
Cambodia assumed under the COMMIT MOU of October 2004.  The 
new plan was developed and finalized in 2005, and is 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000501  009 OF 018 
 
 
expected to be approved by the Council of Ministers by the 
end of 2006. 
 
The Cambodian government in 1999 established an inter- 
ministerial body known as the Cambodian National Council for 
Children (CNCC) to address child labor and other related 
issues; in July 1999, the CNCC developed in cooperation with 
its member Ministries and international and national 
organizations, the first national five-year 
Plan against Trafficking and Sexual Exploitation of Children 
(2000-2004), which delineates the responsibilities of 
nineteen ministries and provincial governments. 
 
The Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth 
Rehabilitation has developed a three-year National Action 
Plan for the implementation of Cambodian-Thai MOU under 
COMMIT in October 2005. 
 
The Ministry of Interior in July 2005 also developed an 
action plan to combat human trafficking and exploitation of 
women and children.  The MOI's anti-TIP Department started 
the implementation of the action plan by disseminating the 
content to local authorities through out the countries.  The 
Deputy Prime Minister/Minister of the Interior called in to 
Phnom Penh all governors, provincial police chiefs and other 
TIP police to brief them on the plan. 
 
Investigation and Prosecution of Traffickers 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
3A.  Does the country have a law specifically prohibiting 
trafficking in persons - both trafficking for sexual 
exploitation and trafficking for non-sexual purposes (e.g. 
forced labor)?  If so, what is the law?  Does the law(s) 
cover both internal and external (transnational) forms of 
trafficking? If not, under what other laws can traffickers 
be prosecuted?  For example, are there laws against slavery 
or the exploitation of prostitution by means of coercion or 
fraud?  Are these other laws being used in trafficking 
cases?  Are these laws, taken together, adequate to cover 
the full scope of trafficking in persons? Please provide a 
full inventory of trafficking laws, including civil 
penalties, (e.g., civil forfeiture laws and laws against 
illegal debt). 
 
The most recent legislation relevant to TIP is the January 
1996 Law on the Suppression of the Kidnapping, Trafficking 
and Exploitation of Humans.  Other relevant laws pertain to 
the protection of women and children, and the Labor Law, 
which prohibits debt labor, slavery, and the labor of minors 
(under 15 years) - the latter situation is illegal but has 
no penalty under the law.  The Labor Law also prohibits the 
hiring of someone to pay off debt. 
 
According to NGO and government reports, although the Law 
on the Suppression of the Kidnapping, Trafficking and 
Exploitation of Humans is considered a valuable legislative 
instrument regarding sex trafficking, there are many 
weaknesses in its implementation and interpretation.  The 
law lacks detail and contains unclear clauses that make 
enforcement difficult.  Corruption and a lack of training, 
supervision, and resources have also led to major flaws in 
the implementation and effectiveness of the law. 
 
Cambodia's labor laws make child labor under the age of 15 
illegal, but confusion regarding the issue of parental 
consent and the lack of specific penalties for child labor, 
have prevented successful prosecutions of child labor 
traffickers in Cambodia. 
 
The Ministry of Justice, with the assistance of the Japanese 
Institute for Legal Development, has drafted a new Anti- 
Trafficking Law that is now at the Ministry of Justice for 
final review before being resubmitted to the Council of 
Minister.  With the recommendations from civil society and 
the Ministry of Women's Affairs, the law has undergone 
substantial amendment.  Effective implementation will 
require comprehensive training of judges, prosecutors, and 
police in the provisions of the new law.  The Australian 
Government, through AUSAID, plans to provide training 
through its Asia Regional Cooperation to Prevent People 
Trafficking Project (ARCPPT). 
 
Penalties for Sexual and Labor Exploitation 
------------------------------------------- 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000501  010 OF 018 
 
 
 
3B.  What are the penalties for traffickers of people for 
sexual exploitation?  For traffickers of people for labor 
exploitation? 
 
The Law on the Suppression of the Kidnapping, Trafficking 
and Exploitation of Humans includes a jail sentence of 
15 to 20 years for any person convicted of sex trafficking 
persons under 15 years of age; the penalty is from 10 to 
15 years for sex trafficking of persons over the age of 15. 
This law allows for the prosecution of traffickers as well 
as other exploiters, such as facilitators, pimps, and 
brothel owners. 
 
According to Article 368 of the Labor Law, employers who 
employ children less than 18 years of age are liable to a 
fine of 31-60 days of the base daily wage.  For the hiring 
of someone to pay off debt, the penalty is a fine of 61-90 
days of the base daily wage.  However, there are no cases of 
these laws being used to prosecute traffickers of children 
under the Labor Law, and lawyers have claimed it is not 
feasible to prosecute traffickers under this law. 
 
Penalties for Rape or Forcible Sexual Assault 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
3C.  What are the penalties for rape or forcible sexual 
assault?  How do they compare to the penalty for sex 
trafficking? 
 
Rape is a criminal offense, and punishable by a 5-10 year 
prison sentence, according to Article 33 of the UNTAC Law. 
Although Cambodia's penal code provides penalties for rape, 
convictions are often not rendered due to the weak judicial 
system.  The penalty of sex trafficking of children under 
the age for 15 is punishable by between 15 to 20 years in 
prison; and for persons over the age of 15, the penalty is 
10 to 15 years in prison. 
 
Prostitution:  Legalized or Decriminalized 
------------------------------------------ 
 
3D. Is prostitution legalized or decriminalized? 
Specifically, are the activities of the prostitute 
criminalized?  Are the activities of the brothel 
owner/operator, clients, pimps, and enforcers criminalized? 
Are these law enforced? If prostitution is legal and 
regulated, what is the legal minimum age for this activity? 
Note that in many countries with federalist systems, 
prostitution laws may be covered by state, local, and 
provincial authorities. 
 
Prostitution in Cambodia has not been legalized, but the 
activities of prostitutes are not criminalized.  The 1996 
Law on the Suppression of the Kidnapping, Trafficking and 
Exploitation of Humans permits prosecution of exploiters of 
persons for sex work, such as facilitators, pimps, human 
traffickers, and brothel owners.  Prostitutes may not be 
prosecuted for engaging in voluntary sex work.  As applied 
to traffickers and other exploiters of persons for the sex 
trade, these laws are being enforced.  Under Cambodian law, 
the legal age of consent to sexual activity is 15, which is 
why penalties for offenses differ depending on the age of 
the victim. 
 
Government Prosecution of Traffickers 
------------------------------------- 
 
3E.  Has the Government prosecuted any cases against 
traffickers?  If so, provide the numbers of investigations, 
prosecutions, convictions, and sentences, including details 
on plea-bargaining and fines, if relevant and available. 
Are the traffickers serving the time sentenced:  If no, why 
not?  Please indicate whether the government can provide 
this information, and if not, why not? 
 
From 1996-1999, the Cambodian government arrested 342 
offenders of sexual exploitation and trafficking.  From 2000- 
2004, the government's arrest record increased to 1,009 
offenders, due to the formation on May 13, 2002 of the 
Ministry of Interior's Anti-Trafficking Unit.  The Unit 
consists of seven bureaus in major provinces and urban 
areas, as well as a section within the police departments of 
other provinces. 
 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000501  011 OF 018 
 
 
The Ministry of Interior Department of Anti-Trafficking and 
Juvenile Protection reported 84 cases of human trafficking, 
involving 117 perpetrators in 2005.  Seven foreigners were 
arrested for debauchery during the year.  During the first 
two months of 2006, two foreigners were arrested, one of 
whom is an American citizen.  A French national who was 
arrested for debauchery in 2003 was sentenced to 15 years 
imprisonment by a Phnom Penh court in 2005.  Traffickers 
generally serve the time sentenced. 
 
Additional statistics obtained from the LEASEC project 
within the Ministry of Interior indicate that in 2005 there 
were 73 offenders arrested for human trafficking offenses; 
in 2004 there were 33 arrests. 
 
Statistics from the Ministry of Justice indicate that the 
courts in three provinces and municipalities have worked on 
58 cases of human trafficking (including cases left over 
from 2004), leading to the successful prosecution of 13 
cases. The Ministry of Justice is in the process of 
collecting statistics from other provincial and municipal 
courts, but data collection is hampered by a lack of human 
resources and means for transferring case files from the 
provinces to Phnom Penh.  The ARCPPT-supported database on 
trafficking court cases expected to be operational in late 
2005 experienced technical problems and its deployment has 
been delayed.  UNICEF has taken over the project and is 
redeveloping the database. 
 
The most significant trafficking prosecution within the 
reporting period for 2005 was that of Chhay Hour II, based 
on the second investigation of the hotel and subsequent raid 
on September 7, 2005, that led to the arrest of six persons. 
Three minors were identified in the second raid.  On 
February 17, 2006, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court sentenced 
two women to ten years for human trafficking and two 
managers of Chhay Hour II Hotel to four years each for 
colluding in and providing a venue for human trafficking. 
 
Who are the Traffickers? 
------------------------ 
 
3F.  Is there any information or reports of who is behind 
the trafficking?  For example, are the traffickers freelance 
operators, small crime groups, and/or large international 
organized crime syndicates?  Are employment, travel and 
tourism agencies or marriage brokers fronting for 
traffickers or crime groups to traffic individuals?  Are 
government official involved?  Are there any reports of 
where profits from trafficking in persons are being 
channeled? (e.g. armed groups, terrorist organizations, 
judges, banks, etc.) 
 
Reliable information regarding traffickers is difficult to 
obtain and substantiate.  Children trafficked to Thailand 
for begging are generally recruited by neighbors who then 
provide the children to Thai traffickers after they have 
crossed the border.  Children trafficked to Vietnam to beg 
most often stay with their Cambodian trafficker (often 
someone from their village) while in Vietnam before being 
returned to their parents at the end of the contract. 
 
In Cambodia, interviews with rescued victims suggest that 
the trafficking system is not highly organized and many 
victims know those involved in trafficking.  According to 
the International Justice Mission, two-thirds of the 
traffickers are women operating small-scale brothel 
businesses (between five-ten women). 
 
Traffickers bringing Vietnamese girls for the sex trade in 
Cambodia or transiting for onward trafficking to a 
neighboring country appear to have more sophisticated 
networks.  NGOs that interview rescued trafficked victims 
report that the trafficking of Vietnamese women to Cambodia 
and Thailand is more organized and involves Vietnamese 
criminal gangs.  Cambodians trafficked for sex to Thailand 
are often sold by brothel owners after first having been 
trafficked internally in Cambodia.  There are a growing 
number of cases of Cambodian women being trafficked for sex 
to Malaysia via Thailand, but the police have only 
apprehended individual traffickers who are not part of a 
larger organization.  NGOs, however, claim that victims' 
interviews suggest that Vietnamese gangs and Chinese-Malay 
criminal groups are involved in the trafficking. 
 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000501  012 OF 018 
 
 
In general, trafficking of Cambodian women for sex within 
Cambodia also is informally organized, with traffickers 
often convincing girls to go with them to Phnom Penh for 
legitimate employment.  In other cases, friends, boyfriends, 
or relatives may engage in trafficking/selling of a woman to 
a brothel.  While there are numerous venues in Phnom Penh 
where there are suspected TIP victims, there is no evidence 
to indicate that girls were procured through a single 
trafficking network.  The role of organized trafficking in 
Cambodia remains unclear, and prosecutions have focused on 
single individuals. 
 
Govrnment Investigations of Trafficking Cases 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
3G.  Does the government actively investigate cases of 
trafficking? (Again, the focus should be on trafficking 
cases versus migrant smuggling cases.)  Does the government 
use active investigative techniques in trafficking in 
persons investigations?  To the extent possible under 
domestic law, are techniques such as electronic 
surveillance, undercover operations, and mitigated 
punishment or immunity for cooperating suspects used by the 
government?  Does the criminal procedure code or other laws 
prohibit the police from engaging in covert operations? 
 
Police raids on brothels are common, and Cambodian law 
enforcement officials often work in concert with civil 
society to rescue people at risk.  Under the LEASEC project, 
a group of four international NGOs/IOs has supported the 
Ministry of Interior in developing special Anti-Trafficking 
and Juvenile Protection police units, and set up a hot line 
against child sexual 
exploitation that also handles trafficking cases. 
 
The International Justice Mission (IJM) has provided 
training sessions to the police in Phnom Penh, and conducted 
undercover operations to obtain evidence for successful 
prosecutions of traffickers.  IJM searches brothels for 
underage girls and trafficking victims, cooperates with 
police to conducts raids and removes the victims.  The 
Cambodian police have also worked closely with the U.S. 
Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) in 
investigating pedophilia cases for prosecution in the United 
States under the PROTECT Act. 
 
Cambodia generally lacks the training and other resources to 
use electronic surveillance or sophisticated equipment to 
investigate cases, as well as the planning skills needed to 
conduct comprehensive undercover investigations. 
 
Government-Sponsored Anti-Trafficking Training 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
3H.  Does the government provide any specialized training 
for government officials in how to recognize, investigate, 
and prosecute instances of trafficking? 
 
The government, in cooperation with national and 
international organizations and businesses such as IJM, 
LEASEC, ARCPPT and Microsoft, conducted training for police 
officers on investigation techniques, surveillance, case 
preparation and management of trafficking cases.  So far, a 
total 4,655 police officers have attended specialized 
training courses, workshops and conferences, and meetings on 
human trafficking and law enforcement. 
 
UNICEF has supported the Cambodian Bar Association in the 
past to train lawyers of the Legal Aid Department in 
children's rights and to build their capacity in 
representing children.  The government relies heavily on 
training assistance from foreign governments, international 
organizations and NGOs.  Cambodian law enforcement officials 
have participated in training at the International Law 
Enforcement Academy (ILEA) in Bangkok, but Congressional 
restrictions prevent training on issues, including human 
trafficking, for Cambodian officials above a certain level 
in the government. 
 
Government-to-Government TIP Cooperation 
---------------------------------------- 
 
3I.  Does the government cooperate with other governments in 
the investigation and prosecution of trafficking cases?  If 
possible, can post provide the number of cooperative 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000501  013 OF 018 
 
 
international investigations on trafficking? 
 
The government continues to cooperate willingly with U.S. 
law enforcement officials on trafficking issues and other 
criminal cases, and also cooperates with other countries. 
The United States and a number of other countries have laws 
to prosecute their nationals who travel abroad to sexually 
exploit children.  The Cambodian government has cooperated 
with the U.S. in ten PROTECT ACT cases, and numerous cases 
involving other nationals.  The first three successful 
prosecutions worldwide under the PROTECT ACT were achieved 
with the cooperation of RGC authorities.  A total of seven 
foreign nationals were arrested for debauchery in 2005 and 
two additional suspects detained in the first two months of 
¶2006. 
 
The governments of Cambodia and Thailand signed a Memorandum 
of Understanding on Bilateral Cooperation for Eliminating 
Trafficking in Children and Women and Assisting Victims of 
Trafficking on May 31, 2003.  The MOU requires the two 
governments to cooperate with each other to investigate and 
uncover domestic and cross-border trafficking of children 
and women, to conduct repatriation through diplomatic 
channels, and to promote bilateral cooperation in the 
judicial procedures against trafficking.  In October 2005, 
Cambodia and Vietnam signed a similar MOU on trafficking. 
The Cambodian Police and Ministry of Justice cooperate with 
the Malaysian police on cross-border TIP cases, but the 
process is still in its infancy.  According to LEASEC, The 
Cambodian government has made the Malaysian government aware 
of TIP cases involving Cambodian nationals in Malaysia since 
early 2002.  Cambodia is now negotiating a similar MOU with 
Malaysia. 
 
During the Vietnamese PM's March 2006 visit to Cambodia, 
Vietnamese and Cambodian officials discussed cross-border 
trafficking cases concerning Cambodian child beggers in 
Vietnam. 
 
Extradition 
----------- 
 
3J.  Does the government extradite persons who are charged 
with trafficking in other countries?  If so, can post 
provide the number of traffickers extradited?  Does the 
government extradite its own nationals charged with such 
offenses?  If not, is the government prohibited by law from 
extraditing its own nationals?  If so, what is the 
government doing to modify its laws to permit extradition of 
its own nationals? 
 
The governments of Cambodia and Thailand reached agreement 
on an extradition treaty in Bangkok in May 1998.  The 
Cambodian National Assembly ratified the treaty in September 
1999 and its Thai counterpart in December 2000; 
representatives of the two countries signed the implementing 
protocol in March 2001 in Phnom Penh, and the treaty came 
into force in April 2001.  The bilateral treaty 
with Thailand provides a basis for future cooperation to 
address trafficking issues.  In March 2005, a Cambodian 
women was sentenced to 85 years by a court in Thailand for 
trafficking eight underage Cambodian girls to Thailand for 
sexual exploitation.  The sentenced was reduced to 50 years, 
after the woman pleaded guilty.  The case was hailed as a 
breakthrough in bilateral cooperation between Thailand and 
Cambodia that led to successful prosecution of a Cambodian 
trafficker.  The Cambodian government continues to cooperate 
with foreign governments to expel persons charged with 
pedophilia for acts committed in Cambodia so that they can 
be prosecuted in their countries of citizenship. 
 
As per above, despite the lack of a bilateral extradition 
treaty, Cambodia has cooperated to render into U.S. custody 
numerous American accused of being child sex offenders. 
 
Government Involvement in Trafficking 
------------------------------------- 
 
3K.  Is there evidence of government involvement in or 
tolerance of trafficking, on a local or institutional level? 
If so, please explain in detail. 
 
The Cambodian government as an institution does not tolerate 
human trafficking.  Because corruption is pervasive in 
Cambodia, it is widely believed that some individual 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000501  014 OF 018 
 
 
Cambodian officials - including police and judicial 
officials - are involved in various aspects of human 
trafficking, but firm evidence leading to the prosecution of 
RGC officials is so far uncommon. 
 
Prosecution of Government Officials for Trafficking 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
3L.  If government officials are involved in trafficking, 
what steps has the government taken to end such 
participation? Have any government officials been prosecuted 
for involvement in trafficking or trafficking-related 
corruption?  Have any been convicted?  What actual sentence 
was imposed?  Please provide specific numbers, if available. 
 
Senior government officials have often stated that official 
corruption that aids or abets trafficking or other crimes 
will not be tolerated.  During the year, several police 
officials were apprehended on trafficking-related corruption 
charges.  Colonel Touch Ngim, former Deputy Director of the 
Anti-Human trafficking and Juvenile Protection Department, 
and two other officials under his supervision were 
disciplined for taking money from karaoke owners in the 
raided parlors in Kompong Spue province. Touch Ngim was 
arrested and charged by the Phnom Penh court in December 
2005, and remains in pretrial detention. 
 
Meng Say, Chief of the Phnom Penh Anti-Trafficking Unit, was 
suspended in January 2006 for extorting money from Korean 
nationals.  Meng Say arrested the Korean nationals who came 
to Cambodia to marry Cambodian women in October  2005, 
accusing them of human trafficking.  He then ordered the men 
to pay him 30,000 USD in return for their release from 
custody.  The men were released after paying more than 
10,000 USD; after which, they submitted a complaint to the 
Ministry of Interior and to the Prime Minister's office. 
Following the issuance of an arrest warrant by the Phnom 
Penh Municipal Court, Meng Say disappeared and is presumed 
to be in hiding. 
 
Child Sex Tourism Issues 
------------------------ 
 
3M.  If the country has an identified child sex tourism 
problem (as source or destination), how many foreign 
pedophiles has the government prosecuted or 
deported/extradited to their country of origin?  Do the 
country's child sexual abuse laws have extraterritorial 
coverage (like the U.S. PROTECT Act)? 
 
Cambodia is identified as a destination point for 
pedophiles.  In 2005, seven foreign nationals were arrested 
and sent to court for sexually abusing Cambodian children. 
A French national was convicted during the year to 15 years 
for debauchery.  To date, four American pedophiles have been 
rendered into U.S. custody under the PROTECT Act framework, 
and one additional case is pending. 
 
The draft Cambodian anti-trafficking law under consideration 
has extraterritorial coverage, allowing for the prosecution 
of Cambodian citizens committing similar crimes in another 
country, and the prosecution of foreigners committing a 
crime involving Cambodian victims in another country. 
 
International Instruments 
------------------------- 
 
3N.  Has the government signed, ratified, and/or taken steps 
to implement the following international instruments? 
Please provide the date of signature/ratification if 
appropriate. 
 
--ILO Convention 182 concerning the prohibition and 
immediate action for the elimination of worst forms of child 
labor:  The National Assembly has ratified the new ILO 
Convention 182 on the Worst Forms of Child Labor on August 
29, 2005. 
 
--ILO Convention 29 and 105 on forced or compulsory labor: 
The government ratified the Forced Labor Convention (ILO 29) 
on 24 February 1969 and the Abolition of Forced Labor 
Convention (ILO 105) on 23 August 1999.  It should be noted 
the Cambodia is the second nation in Asia after Indonesia to 
ratify all seven fundamental conventions of the ILO. 
 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000501  015 OF 018 
 
 
--Convention on the Rights of the Child:  The Cambodian 
government ratified this convention on 15 October 1992. 
According to the CNCC, relevant ministries have formulated 
internal policies and programs for the implementation of the 
convention. 
 
--The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of 
the Child (CRC) on the sale of children, child prostitution, 
and child pornography:  The Cambodian government ratified 
this convention on 30 May 2002. 
 
--The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking 
in Persons, especially Women and Children, supplementing the 
UN Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime: The 
Cambodian government ratified this protocol on 11 November 
¶2001. 
 
Protection and Assistance to Victims 
------------------------------------ 
 
4A.  Does the government assist victims, for example, by 
providing temporary to permanent residency status, relief 
from deportation, shelter and access to legal, medical and 
psychological services?  If so, please explain.  Does the 
country have victim care and victim health care facilities? 
If so, can post provide the number of victims placed in 
these care facilities?  Are trafficking victims offered 
HIV/AIDS screening or otherwise tested for HIV/AIDS?  If so, 
what are the results? 
 
The government's record in assisting victims of trafficking 
is reasonably good, in view of its limited resources and 
lack of institutional capacity.  Victim assistance is 
usually conducted by an NGO or international organization, 
or combination of the two.  MOSAVY operates temporary 
shelters for victims of trafficking, rape and domestic 
violence in Phnom Penh, but the facility only provides 
temporary shelter and basic assistance until victims can be 
placed with an NGO-operated shelter and reintegration 
program.  MOSAVY works closely with AFESIP, IOM, UNICEF, 
World Vision and a variety of NGO-managed shelters 
throughout the provinces to assist initial reintegration of 
victims and follow-up investigations.  Cambodian citizens 
are technically provided free health care through Cambodia's 
national hospitals and clinics, but this does not happen in 
practice.  Services provided at these facilities are 
inadequate in normal circumstances, and non-existent for 
victims of trafficking, rape and domestic violence who 
require specialized care. 
 
Many NGOs give victims trafficked for sexual exploitation 
the opportunity to be tested for HIV/AIDS, but do not 
require the victims to be tested.  Most NGOs provide basic 
counseling to trafficking victims. 
 
When TIP victims are repatriated to Cambodia from Thailand, 
an IOM-run Transit Center in Poipet staffed with MOSAVY and 
IOM staff conduct preliminary assessments and assist in 
tracing family members and reintegrating victims into their 
home communities, or placing victims at appropriate NGO 
shelters to serve their needs. 
 
For children who cannot be reintegrated into their 
communities, the USG supports IOM and other NGOs activities 
provide long-term care and reintegration assistance such as 
vocational training, job placement, and income generation. 
 
IOM also has cooperated in training Cambodian government 
officials from MOSAVY and MOI to repatriate Vietnamese 
victims.  Ten victims were repatriated under this process in 
¶2005.  Since the initiation of this project in June 1999, 59 
persons have been repatriated to Vietnam. 
 
Government-Funded Support to NGOs for Victims 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
4B.  Does the government provide funding or other forms of 
support to foreign or domestic NGOs for services to victims? 
Please explain. 
 
Because of inadequate resources, the Cambodian government 
relies heavily on bilateral donors and multilateral 
institutions for approximately 50 percent of its total 
annual budget, and has few resources to devote to 
trafficking victims.  The government relies on foreign and 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000501  016 OF 018 
 
 
domestic NGOs to provide services to victims of trafficking, 
a situation that will likely persist for some time.  The RGC 
supports Seva Kapia Komar (SKK), a Cambodian NGO with 
primary responsibility for placement of TIP victims with 
NGOs for additional care and support.  On occasion, the RGC 
also provides in-kind contributions to partnerships with 
NGOs, such as land, office space and staff support. 
 
Screening/Referral Process for Victims 
-------------------------------------- 
 
4C.  Is there a screening or referral process in place, when 
appropriate, to transfer victims detained, arrested or 
placed in protective custody by law enforcement authorities 
to NGOs that provide short- or long-term care? 
 
The government-supported SKK receives TIP victims and refers 
them to appropriate NGOs.  The police often referred victims 
directly to NGOs, but SKK's role has been recently 
reinforced as the primary clearinghouse for victims.  World 
Hope International plans to build an assessment center in 
Phnom Penh for referral of TIP victims. 
 
Through an IOM project on repatriation and reintegration of 
victims, DOSAVY officials and IOM staff screen and 
refer victims repatriated from Thailand to appropriate 
NGOs.  There is no such system for victims returning 
from Vietnam.  For victims of trafficking outside of Phnom 
Penh, local DOSAVY offices screen and place victims with 
NGOs. 
 
Rights of Victims 
----------------- 
 
4D.  Are the rights of victims respected, or are victims 
also treated as criminals?  Are victims detained, jailed, or 
deported?  If detained or jailed, for how long?  Are victims 
fined?  Are victims prosecuted for violations of other laws, 
such as those governing immigration or prostitution? 
 
The rights of victims are respected in practice, and victims 
are not treated as criminals.  Victims are not detained, 
jailed, fined, or deported.  Cambodia was widely condemned 
in 2002 for mistreatment of victims, but that is no longer 
the case. 
 
Victim Participation in Legal Action 
------------------------------------ 
 
4E.  Does the government encourage victims to assist in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking?  May victims 
file civil suits or seek legal action against the 
traffickers?  Does anyone impede the victims' access to such 
legal redress?  If a victim is a material witness in a court 
case against the former employer, is the victim permitted to 
obtain other employment or to leave the country?  Is there a 
victim restitution program? 
 
The anti-TIP police and prosecutors have become more 
effective at gaining witness testimony, but credible fears 
of retaliation from traffickers still pose major impediments 
to witness testimony.  The Ministry of Interior's LEASEC 
project works with victims to investigate and collect 
evidence before referring the cases to government 
prosecutors.  Victims may file civil suits and seek legal 
action against traffickers, and a number of NGOs in the 
legal, human rights, and social services areas, 
including the Cambodian Defenders Project (CDP), encourage 
victims to do so; the NGOs provide or refer victims to legal 
services.  However, Cambodia's corrupt legal system has been 
a serious impediment to the success of cases brought by 
individuals. 
 
Government Protection for Victims/Witnesses 
------------------------------------------- 
 
4F.  What kind of protection is the government able to 
provide for victims and witnesses?  Does it provide these 
protections in practice?  What type of shelter or services 
does the government provide? Does it provide shelter or any 
other benefits to victims for housing or other resources in 
order to aid the victims in rebuilding their lives? Where 
are child victims placed (e.g. in shelters, foster-care type 
systems or juvenile justice detention centers)? 
 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000501  017 OF 018 
 
 
The government has no practical ability to protect witnesses 
at this time.  NGO shelters represent the safest place for 
witnesses during the trial phase of a case against a 
trafficker.  The government is planning to expand facilities 
at the MOI in order to temporarily hold victims and 
witnesses.  Police have no practical ability to protect 
NGOs, victims, or witnesses in high-profile cases.  A number 
of shelters and foster home program are available for child 
victims of trafficking. 
 
Government Training to RGC Officials for Victims 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
4G.  Does the government provide any specialized training 
for government officials in recognizing trafficking and in 
the provision of assistance to trafficked victims, including 
the special needs of trafficked children?  Does the 
government provide training on protections and assistance to 
its embassies and consulates in foreign countries that are 
destination or transit countries?  Does it urge those 
embassies and consulates to develop ongoing relationships 
with NGOs that serve trafficked victims? 
 
The LEASEC project has a training component sensitizing 
police officials to the special needs surrounding the 
trafficking and sexual exploitation of children, including 
developing procedures and training police in investigating 
cases of sexual exploitation and trafficking in children, 
and court procedures. 
 
Embassies and consulates in foreign countries do not receive 
training or sensitization related to trafficking and victims 
assistance.  Cambodian NGOs working with Cambodian 
trafficking victims in Malaysia voice frustration over the 
RGC officials' indifference toward trafficked victims, as 
well as their lack of cooperation.  However, there are some 
Cambodian officials who are willing to cooperate with the 
NGOs and take a more proactive approach to helping Cambodian 
victims outside the country. 
 
Government Assistance to Repatriated Nationals 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
4H.  Does the government provide assistance, such as medical 
aid, shelter, or financial help, to its repatriated 
nationals who are victims of trafficking? 
 
In this area, the government relies heavily on international 
organizations, foreign and domestic NGOs, and other 
countries, to provide medical aid and shelter to its 
repatriated nationals who are the victims of trafficking. 
MOSAVY is mandated by the Cambodian government to provide 
care and protection to the most vulnerable population in the 
country, especially women and children, but in practice 
lacks the resources to do so without international or NGO 
assistance. 
 
International Organization and NGOs 
----------------------------------- 
 
4I.  Which international organization or NGOs, if any, work 
with trafficking victims?  What type of services do they 
provide?  What sort of cooperation do they receive from 
local authorities? 
 
Approximately 70 NGOs work on trafficking issues, and of 
those, roughly 40 NGOs provide some form of service to 
trafficking victims.  The services include shelter (which 
usually includes food, sleeping accommodations, basic health 
care, counseling, literacy, and sometimes vocational 
training), legal assistance, drop-in centers, and re- 
integration assistance.  Cambodian government cooperation 
with these NGOs is good. 
 
 
¶2.  (U)  Political Officers Margaret McKean and Kurt 
Stoppkotte drafted this submission and estimates that the 
drafting of this report required 30 hours of staff time, 
including 10 hours of a local FSN political assistant. 
Embassy POC for this cable is Section Chief Margaret McKean 
(T. 855-023-728-125). 
 
Abbreviations are used in this report: 
 
ADHOC: Association de Defense des Droit de l'Homme (Human 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000501  018 OF 018 
 
 
Rights Defense Association) 
AFESIP: Agir pour les Femmes en Situation Precaire 
APLE: Action Pour Les Enfants 
ARCPPT: Asia Regional Cooperation to Prevent People 
Trafficking 
CDP: Cambodian Defender's Project 
CNCC: Cambodian National Council for Children 
CNCW: Cambodian National Council for Women 
COMMIT: Coordinated Mekong Ministerial Initiative against 
Trafficking 
CWCC: Cambodian Women's Crisis Center 
CWDA: Cambodian Women Development Agency 
DOSAVY:  Department of Social Affairs, Veterans, and Youth 
Rehabilitation 
IJM: International Justice Mission 
ILEA: International Law Enforcement Academy 
ILO-IPEC: International Labor Organization-International 
Program on the Elimination of Child Labor 
IOM: International Organization for Migration 
LEASEC: Ministry of Interior Law Enforcement Against Sexual 
Exploitation of Children Project 
LSCW: Legal Support for Children and Women 
MOI: Ministry of Interior 
MOJ: Ministry of Justice 
MOSAVY: Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans, and Youth 
Rehabilitation 
MOLVT: Ministry of Labor and Vocational Training 
MOT: Ministry of Tourism 
MOWA: Ministry of Women's Affairs 
RGC: Royal Government of Cambodia 
RSJP: Royal School of Judges and Prosecutors 
SKK: Seva Kapiar Komar (Service for Protection of Children) 
UNOHCHR: United Nations Office of the HQ Commissioner for 
Human Rights 
UNDP: United Nations Development Program 
UNIAP: United Nations Inter-Agency Project Against 
Trafficking of Women and Children in the Mekong Sub-Region 
UNICEF: United Nations Children's Fund 
UNTAC: United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia 
USAID: United States Agency for International Development 
WMC: Women's Media Center 
 
 
MUSSOMELI