06QUITO978
REGIONAL IAEA CONFERENCE ENCOURAGES NUCLEAR
Fri Apr 21 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Quito
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHQT #0978/01 1110012
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 210012Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY QUITO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4120
INFO RUEHWH/WESTERN HEMISPHERIC AFFAIRS DIPL POSTS IMMEDIATE
RHMCSUU/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA IMMEDIATE 0010
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FLUNCLAS QUITO 000978 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KNNP PTER KTIA IAEA CARICOM EC
SUBJECT: REGIONAL IAEA CONFERENCE ENCOURAGES NUCLEAR 
SECURITY COOPERATION 
 
REF: STATE 50915 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: PolOffs on April 3-4 represented the USG 
at the first Pan-American IAEA Meeting on Strengthening 
Implementation of International Instruments for Enhanced 
Nuclear and Radiological Security.  During the two-day 
conference, IAEA organizers explained international efforts 
to counter malicious nuclear and radiological acts by 
non-state actors, highlighting that status of various 
conventions and treaties enacted to enhance global nuclear 
security.  Technical experts, including Los Alamos National 
Laboratory Project Manager Marti Larson, explained steps 
their governments had taken to secure nuclear and 
radiological material.  In a surprise move, the Caribbean 
Group attempted to include unacceptable language in the 
outcome document calling for the cessation of the 
transshipment of nuclear and radiological material through 
the Caribbean Sea.  In coordination with ISN/NESS PolOffs 
attempted to negotiate acceptable language, finally agreeing 
to forgo an outcome document in favor of the rapporteur,s 
report as the official record of the conference.  End Summary. 
 
IAEA Conference Positive 
------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (U) Nuclear and radiological experts and diplomats from 
the Western Hemisphere on April 3-4 met in Quito for the 
first Pan-American IAEA Meeting on Strengthening 
Implementation of International Instruments for Enhanced 
Nuclear and Radiological Security.  The session opened with 
sparring over meeting chairs (the compromise suggested by El 
Salvador, permitted four vice chairs distributed by 
subregion, with Cuba withdrawing in the face of Caribbean 
support for Jamaica, and the USG and Canada nominating Mexico 
to represent North America). 
 
¶3.  (U) Participants from 28 American nations discussed 
international efforts to secure nuclear and radiological 
material, while highlighting success stories offered by 
presenters from Argentina, Colombia, Paraguay, and others. 
The Mexican delegate explained the Canada-U.S.-Mexico 
security and prosperity partnership, while Los Alamos 
National Laboratory Project Leader Martie Larson effectively 
outlined USG efforts under the International Radiological 
Threat Reduction Program.  Some nations expressed concern 
over limited resources needed to enhance nuclear and 
radiological security.  PolOff reaffirmed USG commitment to 
financial and technical assistance, adding that effective 
implementation requires building basic infrastructure in each 
country, including a legal, regulatory, and institutional 
framework. 
 
Caribbeans Push for Transshipment Cessation 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) In parallel discussions of a GOE-drafted 
declaration, Caribbean countries led by Barbados, St. Kitts, 
and Jamaica first insisted on downgrading the draft to an 
outcome document, and then insisted on including a preambular 
insertion &noting the concerns of Caribbean States regarding 
the grave risk posed by the transshipment of nuclear and 
radiological material through the Caribbean Sea and the goal 
for its cessation, bearing in mind that nuclear and 
radiological terrorism is one of the greatest threats to 
society8 in the draft outcome document. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) PolOffs objected to the insertion, arguing that 
safety issues were best dealt with in other fora, and not 
germane to the security focus of the conference.  The CARICOM 
group rejected the USG proposal to add &noting further that 
such shipments have an excellent safety record carried out 
under stringent IAEA and IMO standards, and that other states 
regard such shipments as posing no risk to human life or the 
environment.8  After several failed attempts to reach a 
modified agreement, the working group chair suggested that 
the language be put to a vote in the plenary.  PolChief noted 
USG concerns over including the statement, and warned that if 
adopted without balancing language, the U.S. would seek to 
add its own qualifying language or would be forced to 
disassociate itself from the document. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) During side conversations with Central American 
delegates, the Salvadoran Ambassador suggested another 
compromise -- forgoing the outcome document, and instead 
using the rapporteur,s report (faxed to ISN/NESS, and 
including USG as well as Caribbean interventions) as the 
official conference document.  PolOffs discussed the proposal 
with the Department and Caribbean representatives; they 
 
deferred to the Ecuadorian hosts.  We then presented the idea 
to the Chair, Ecuadorian Vice-Foreign Minister Diego 
Ribadeneira, who agreed to the compromise. 
 
Venezuelan Antics Offend 
------------------------ 
 
¶7.  (SBU) As the outcome document working group was 
concluding its work on the second day, the Venezuela delegate 
went on a bizarre rant, demanding that Spanish Ambassador 
Garcia-Sauco, who had been invited by the IAEA to facilitate 
discussions, be removed as the working group chair, since 
Garcia was not a national from a state in the Pan-American 
region.  Garcia, despite strong protests from other working 
group members, subsequently removed himself from the 
proceedings. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) This first regional meeting on nuclear and 
radiological security was well received by representatives 
present, and hopefully will encourage greater cooperation in 
the Americas.  We appreciate the Department's guidance on the 
substantive issued raised in the conference. 
JEWELL