06RABAT971
NATIONAL WAR COLLEGE FIELD STUDY IN MOROCCO
Fri May 19 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Rabat
VZCZCXYZ0019
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRB #0971/01 1391847
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 191847Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY RABAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3781
INFO RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS 3992
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 4204
RUEHCL/AMCONSUL CASABLANCA 1711
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 0170
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS RABAT 000971 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/MAG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO MARR MO MOPS PGOV PREL
SUBJECT: NATIONAL WAR COLLEGE FIELD STUDY IN MOROCCO 
 
REF: A. USNATO 00258 
 
     ¶B. RABAT 00024 
     ¶C. 05 RABAT 02227 
     ¶D. RABAT 00918 
 
¶1.  (U) This cable is sensitive but unclassified.  Please 
protect accordingly. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  A delegation of National War College 
(NWC) students and faculty, led by Commandant Major General 
Teresa Marne Peterson and Deputy Commandant Ambassador 
Marcelle Wahba, visited Morocco May 13-18, 2006 as part of 
their Field Studies in National Security program.  The group 
met with officials from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
including Director General of Bilateral Affairs Youssef 
Amrani, selected parliamentarians, and member of the former 
Equity and Reconciliation Commission (IER), Abdelhay Moudden. 
 The delegation's discussion with MFA officials centered on 
the Western Sahara, NATO participation, terrorism, broader 
Middle East issues, and reform.  Amrani stressed Morocco's 
autonomy plan will be "inclusive, democratic, and efficient 
and in line with King Mohamed VI's vision."  The group also 
enjoyed an open and frank dialogue with parliamentarians on 
the IER, parliament's interaction with constituents, and the 
2007 parliamentary elections.  Several parliamentarians also 
shared their concerns regarding U.S. involvement in Iraq, 
U.S. positions on Palestine, and U.S. views on the Western 
Sahara.  Moudden, on the other hand, stressed the need for 
the implementation of the IER's recommendations, including 
judicial reform.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs Reviews Key Issues 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  On May 15, the NWC delegation met with MFA 
Director General of Bilateral Affairs Youssef Amrani and MFA 
Director of American Affairs Salaheddine Tazi to review and 
gain a greater understanding of Morocco's reform efforts to 
date and plans for the future.  Amrani highlighted the GOM's 
position on several key issues, including the Western Sahara, 
NATO involvement, terrorism, Middle East Peace Process, and 
Iran.  Commenting on the Western Sahara, Amrani noted the 
ongoing internal consultations and discussion on Morocco's 
autonomy proposal, stressing that Morocco's autonomy plan 
will be "inclusive, democratic, and efficient and in line 
with King Mohamed VI's vision."  Changing to another topic, 
Amrani explained that Morocco is committed to NATO and has 
always shown interest in having a constructive cooperation 
with members, noting that Rabat's decision to host last 
month's North Atlantic Council (NAC) meeting demonstrated 
Morocco's will and level of engagement (reftel a).  On 
terrorism, Amrani said Morocco has and always will condemn 
fanaticism and extremism.  He added that Morocco is very much 
concerned by this "global threat" and is taking steps to 
combat different sources of support to terrorism, to include 
working on a new law against money laundering. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Turning to other issues, Amrani noted that Morocco 
has always been very active in the search for peace between 
Israel and Palestine.  While acknowledging US concerns with 
the current HAMAS leadership, Amrani said "we have to give 
peace a chance in the region."   The more than one million 
Israeli Jews of Moroccan descent gives Morocco a "special 
connection" to this region, Amrani explained.  Shifting to 
Morocco's views towards Iran, Amrani said the GOM shares many 
of the U.S.'s concerns and that Morocco would like the 
international community to aim for a diplomatic and mutually 
agreed upon solution with respect to Iran.  Underscoring that 
Morocco does not want Iran to become a "nuclear power" in the 
region, Amrani warned against a military solution because it 
could be "devastating." 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Amrani explained that the subject of reform is a 
continuous debate for Morocco, with several segments of 
society having different views on the topic.  Amrani noted 
that because of King Mohamed VI's courage Morocco has been 
able to realize progress on several fronts, such as the law 
on political parties, the family code, and the IER.  He, 
explained, however, that there is still work to be done and 
the "new priority" is human development, through the King's 
National Initiative for Human Development (INDH).  Morocco 
cannot have a strong country without the human dimension, he 
said.  He underlined Morocco's commitment to continuing its 
reforms from within, at its own pace, and according to its 
own specificity.  Amrani closed the meeting by adding, 
"Morocco does not want to be a model, Morocco wants to be 
modest." 
 
Exchange Of Views With Parliamentarians 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The delegation met May 16 with a select group of 
women members of parliament (MPs).  The women MPs included 
Khadija Belaftouh, Constitutional Union (UC) MP and president 
of the lower chamber's Foreign Affairs and Defense 
Commission; Amina Ismaili Idrissi, Popular Movement Union 
(UMP) MP; Jamila El Mossalli, Party for Justice and 
Development (PJD) MP; Rachida Benmessaoud, Socialist Union of 
Populist Forces (USFP) MP; and Zohra Chagaf, Popular Movement 
Union (UMP) MP.  While all MPs uniformly relayed thanks to 
the NWC for their visit to Morocco and the high level of 
US-Morocco bilateral relations, several of the MPs expressed 
concern about US involvement and violations of human rights 
in Iraq and urged the US to support Morocco's claims to the 
Western Sahara.  Mossalli explained that Moroccans look at 
the United States with a great deal of admiration, but are 
concerned about US foreign policy.  She noted that there is a 
distinction in the minds of most Moroccans between the "US 
administration" and the "US people."  Benmessaoud highlighted 
the "standing problem of the Western Sahara" and claimed this 
issue concerns all Moroccans.  Noting Morocco's "historic 
legitimacy," she hoped the US would support Morocco's 
position. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Following their discussion with women MPs, the 
group met with Socialist Union of Popular Forces (USFP) lower 
chamber caucus leader Driss Lachgar, PJD MP and lower chamber 
Vice President Lahcen Daoudi, Istiqlal MP Tayieb Masbahi, and 
National Rally of Independents (RNI) MP and president of the 
lower chamber's Productive Sectors Commission Moulay El 
Bashir Badalla.  The delegation enjoyed a frank and open 
discussion covering a broad range of issues, such as the 
Equity and Reconciliation Commission (IER), parliamentarians' 
interactions with their constituents, the future of 
privatization, and the 2007 legislative elections.  Lachgar 
noted that the IER and its recommendations were the result of 
a long struggle.  He added that the road to democracy will 
follow the same path, i.e. democracy will be a long struggle 
for Morocco. Masbahi argued that Moroccan parliamentarians 
play the same role as other parliamentarians do across the 
world.  He explained that in addition to being asked to 
respond to local issues, his constituents have repeatedly 
asked him what the US position is on the Western Sahara and 
Palestine. (NOTE: Masbahi's comment was likely meant to draw 
out a response from the delegation, rather than relaying 
actual concerns from his local constituents. END NOTE.)  On 
privatization, Masbahi said Morocco is in the process of 
making industries more competitive.  He also commented that 
Morocco is trying to turn once considered "useless" parts of 
Morocco into "useful" parts of Morocco.  Masbahi added that 
Morocco looks to the US for help in learning more about the 
American market.  Several of the MPs agreed that as a result 
of the law on political parties and potential alliances in 
the run up to the 2007 legislative elections, there will only 
be 5 or 6 political parties left standing after the 2007 
elections. 
 
Views On Morocco's Truth Commission 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) The NWC delegation met on May 16 with Abdelhay 
Moudden to discuss the Equity and Reconciliation Commission 
(IER).  Moudden served on the seventeen-member royally 
mandated commission throughout its existence (reftels b and 
c).   Like other former IER members, Moudden travels to other 
countries to discuss IER process, findings, and 
recommendations.  With the NWC delegation, he stressed the 
need for the implementation of the IER's recommendations, 
including judicial reform which will lead to separation of 
the judicial branch of the GOM from the executive and 
legislative branches and necessitate constitutional reform 
(reftel d).  The political parties, according to Moudden, are 
willing and capable of acting on the IER's recommendations 
through the parliament.  He pointed out that the parliament 
is currently working on a bill to propose that the prime 
minister be accountable to the parliament.  (NOTE: In order 
for this to happen, constitutional change must first take 
place.  END NOTE.) 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The NWC asked whether or not the King knew what 
changes he had "set in motion"" by establishing the IER and 
accepting the recommendations.  Moudden responded that the 
King is the seventeenth ruler in the Alaouite Dynasty (NB: 
The dynasty began in 1666.), and the King desires to preserve 
the dynasty and knows the only way to accomplish this is 
through a process of democratization.  Moudden was positive 
about the changes precipitated by the King's acceptance of 
the IER's recommendations.  He noted as a professor at 
Mohammed V University in Rabat he feels that he has more 
academic freedom the he had in the past.  At the same time, 
he recognized that there are those who do not support the 
changes.  These individuals or groups are not, however, 
voicing their opposition.  Moudden identified these 
individuals as those who benefit from a lack of transparency 
in the judiciary or have illegal wealth. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) This is the fourth year in a row the NWC has sent 
a delegation to Morocco.  The Moroccans, whether government 
or NGOs, have been responsive to these visits, and this year 
was no exception.  Between the meetings in Rabat and 
Casablanca, and a reception for the group hosted by the 
Ambassador, we hope the delegation left with a full 
appreciation of the progress and challenges that Morocco is 
making and faces on the broad range of political, economic, 
and social issues, and particularly in the area of reform, a 
recurring topic during the visit. 
 
¶11.  (U) The NWC delegation did not have an opportunity to 
clear this cable. 
****************************************** 
Visit Embassy Rabat's Classified Website; 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/nea/rabat 
****************************************** 
 
Riley