06SANJOSE488
COSTA RICA: GUATEMALAN CAMPAIGN LOOKS WEAK FOR
Fri Mar 03 00:00:00 +0100 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy San Jose
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SAN JOSE 000488 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/03/2016 
TAGS: PREL CS PGOC UNSC
SUBJECT: COSTA RICA: GUATEMALAN CAMPAIGN LOOKS WEAK FOR 
NON-PERMANENT UNSC SEAT 
 
REF: STATE 27055 
 
Classified By: DCM Russell Frisbie for reasons 1.4 (b&d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Costa Rica will support Guatemala's efforts 
to win the rotational Latin seat on the UNSC.  The Foreign 
Minister and Director of Foreign Policy told us separately 
that Guatemala needs to campaign more aggressively, 
particularly in the Caribbean, and offered to assist.  These 
officials are pessimistic about Guatemala's chances.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. (C) Ambassador Langdale discussed reftel points with 
Foreign Minister Tovar on March 2, 2006.  Tovar confirmed 
that Costa Rica will support Guatemala's campaign in the 
October elections.  Tovar stated that Latin support for 
Guatemala was solid "north of Colombia," but lamented what he 
called a "weak" campaign on Guatemala's part.  Tovar felt 
Guatemala was relying too much on the argument that it has 
never held a seat on the Security Council, and that this 
argument was failing to convince many in the face of 
incentives offered by Venezuela.  Tovar regretted Ecuador's 
withdrawal from the race and wished a stronger candidate, 
like Colombia, were available. 
 
¶3. (C) With the Ambassador looking on, Tovar phoned Costa 
Rican UN Permrep Bruno Stagno for a read-out.  According to 
Tovar, Stagno believes Europe supports Guatemala, but 
Venezuela has made good progress in Africa.  Venezuela also 
has the lead in the Caribbean, according to Tovar.  Tovar 
said that since the ballot is secret, the Caribbean will not 
vote as a block.  Tovar added that Costa Rica would be 
helpful in peeling a number of Caribbean votes away from 
Venezuela. 
 
¶4. (C) Comparing Guatemala's campaign to Costa Rica's 
successful bid for Secretary General of the OAS, Tovar 
remarked that it was important for the United States to 
maintain a low profile.  Cuban and Venezuelan lobbying 
against the "U.S. candidate" in the Caribbean had been a key 
part of Costa Rica's victory, Tovar said. 
 
¶5. (C) Polcouns separately discussed reftel demarche with 
Ambassador Jose Joaquin Chaverri, Director of Foreign Policy 
at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, during a meeting on 
February 27.  While Chaverri reiterated Costa Rica's support 
for Guatemala's candidacy, he expressed doubt that Venezuela 
will be denied. 
 
¶6. (C) Chaverri also stated that Guatemala's road to the UNSC 
will necessarily go through CARICOM via Belize. 
Since CARICOM includes 14 of the 33 UN votes in GRULAC, 
winning support from the Caribbean bloc is essential. 
Chaverri thought that without Belizean support before 
CARICOM, the bloc will have a convenient excuse to vote for 
Venezuela, which has long courted the Caribbean nations. 
 
¶7. (C) Given Venezuela's well-financed campaign, traditional 
support from CARICOM, and stated support from at least 5 
additional GRULAC countries, Chaverri rated Guatemala's 
chances of defeating Venezuela as very slight.  He said that 
if Guatemala was really serious, its foreign minister will 
need to campaign by traveling to every country in the 
hemisphere. 
LANGDALE