06SANTIAGO2014
MEDIA REACTION - VENEZUELA'S UNSC CANDIDACY
Mon Sep 25 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Santiago
VZCZCXYZ0019
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSG #2014 2682034
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 252034Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0041
INFO RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 1090UNCLAS SANTIAGO 002014 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR IIP/G/WHA, INR/R/MR, WHA/BSC, WHA/PDA, INR/IAA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO PGOV CI VE
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION - VENEZUELA'S UNSC CANDIDACY 
 
 
September 23-25 dailies ran considerable commentary by columnists on 
Venezuela's bid for a seat in the United Nations Security Council. 
Following are excerpts: 
 
¶1.   On September 24, conservative, influential newspaper-of-record 
"El Mercurio", (circ. 260,108) Maria de los Angeles Fernandez, of 
think tank Fundacion Chile 21, outlines the advantages of voting for 
Venezuela in the UNSC in a column entitled, "Venezuela and the UN: 
The Day After."  Quote: 
 
"Wouldn't it be more convenient to use soft power...and integrate 
Venezuela into the UN, forcing it to make a commitment...in the 
organization's effort to promote peace and international security? 
Plus, integrating those with positions such as Venezuela's would 
contribute to give the United Nations greater legitimacy and remove 
the suspicion that the Security Council is chained to the United 
States." 
 
¶2.   On September 24, conservative, influential newspaper-of-record 
"El Mercurio", (circ. 260,108) columnist Carlos Pea, "Chavez' 
Defense."  Quote: 
 
"With his manners that seem to mock standards...Chavez is the 
typical nationalist and populist leader with hands full of money 
that little by little builds an ambitious platform of influence in 
the region.  But Chavez is not outdated...or exotic.  Don't all 
countries use their money to influence when they have the chance? 
.... We must stop seeing Chavez as an exotic clown, because he is 
not.  He is a populist, nationalist leader, of those the world has 
seen many times....  We must also cease to find revolting the idea 
of voting for Venezuela in the UNSC.  After all, the arena of 
international politics is one place where principles...are not the 
rule....  And if we look at the consequences, voting for Venezuela 
is not bad.  It is a way of restraining Bush's foreign policy, which 
truly lacks manners and rules and knows about kicking around when it 
comes to defending its interests.  Next to this...Chavez is not 
exotic, he is an example of the French Illustration." 
 
¶3.   On September 23, conservative, independent "La Tercera," (circ. 
195,626) column by former House Chairman Jorge Schaulsohn (PPD) 
entitled, "Stepping into Traps."  Quote: 
 
"I'm always awed by the naivet of some politicians who fall into 
traps....  Chavez, unlike our politicians, ...knows that being a 
member of the UNSC amounts to nothing.  His interest is not winning 
the election, but in running.  His goal is to use the bid as a 
platform to give his Bolivarian revolution ideological content and 
international legitimacy...and provide a mechanism for countries 
such as China or Russia to fix old scores with the United States, 
for they see the vote for Venezuela as a way to show their 
independence." 
 
 
¶4.   On September 24, conservative, independent "La Tercera," (circ. 
222,084) Alvaro Vargas Llosa column entitled, "Neither Venezuela nor 
Guatemala."  Quote: 
 
"Estimates are that neither of the two countries running have the 
two thirds needed to win the seat in the Security Council. 
Therefore, Washington's strategy is not to impose Guatemala, but to 
block Chavez' victory and wait for a third candidate to emerge." 
 
¶5.   On September 25, conservative, influential newspaper-of-record 
"El Mercurio," (circ. 129,000) Andres Oppenhimer column entitled, 
"If Chavez Wins, United Nations Loses."  Quote: 
 
"If Venezuela wins the seat, the greatest loser would not be the 
United States, but United Nations....  As a high-ranking Latin 
American official told me, with a stray bullet as Chavez focusing 
all the attention in the Security Council, 'large nations would be 
more than tempted to pick up their bags and leave.'  Bush has 
already done the United Nations a lot of damage with his unilateral 
diplomacy and Chavez' victory could mean closing the coffin." 
 
YAMAUCHI