06SANJOSE1299
COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR CAROLINE BREARLEY AND LARRY
Tue Jun 13 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy San Jose
VZCZCXYZ0019
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSJ #1299/01 1641634
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 131634Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE
TO RUEHSN/AMEMBASSY SAN SALVADOR 4015
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5325UNCLAS SAN JOSE 001299 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS TO USAID 
EMBASSY SAN SALVADOR PASS TO USAID 
FOR LAC/CEN EL SALVADOR DESK 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV OTRA EAID ES CS
SUBJECT:  COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR CAROLINE BREARLEY AND LARRY 
BRADY FROM USAID EL SALVADOR 
 
REF: SAN SALVADOR 001519 
 
¶1.  Embassy San Jose is pleased to grant country clearance 
to Caroline Brearley and Larry Brady, USAID Mission in San 
Salvador, Officials to travel to Costa Rica O/A 06/27- 
28/2006.  Purpose of the visit: is to iIntroduce the 
Rregional tTrade pProgram to the U.S. Embassy and to 
counterparts in the local government. 
 
¶2.  Control Officer: Jackeline Jaquelyn Rosholt, xxx,, (506) 
519-2502, or Cel. (506) 379-4340xxxx..  The Embassy after- 
hours emergency phone number is (506) 220-3127. 
 
¶3.  Upon arrival in country all TDY visitors are to make 
contact with their Embassy Control Officer for information 
regarding a security briefing. 
 
¶4.  Accommodations:  Post has made reservations at Palma 
Real Hotel; telephone number (506) 506-290-5060, Fax number 
(506) 290-4160.  The room rate is $83.80 per day with Buffet 
Breakfast and taxes included.  The per diem rate for San 
Jose is $104.00 for lodging, and $67.00 M&IE.  The 
confirmation will be sent via email.  Hotels in San Jose 
require a minimum notice of 72 hours if canceling or 
changing reservations.  Travelers must notify the embassy 72 
hours in advance if schedule changes.  Hotels will assess a 
one-day charge if they do not receive advance notice of 
cancellation or changes.  Prior to arrival in Costa Rica, 
travelers need to provide the RSO office with name of your 
hotel and/or phone numbers for point of contact, as this is 
required information for TDY registration/Emergency contact. 
 
¶5.  Transportation:  The only taxis available at the airport 
are the Taxi Aeropuerto orange taxis found outside the 
arrival hall.  Tickets for the orange taxis are sold at a 
ticket booth located immediately outside the arrival hall 
exit doors.  Fares (payable in U.S. dollars or local 
currency) vary according to destination but the cost of a 
standard orange taxi ticket to the Embassy is $10, to the 
Intercontinental Hotel is $12 and to downtown San Jose is 
$10. Vans are also available at increased cost.  If you miss 
the ticket counter or otherwise need assistance with orange 
taxi service, the company has an individual posted curbside 
from where the orange taxis are dispatched.  Taxi Aeropuerto 
also offers pick-up service and transportation to the 
airport for departing passengers. Reservations can be made 
24 hours a day by phoning (506) 221-6865. 
 
Elsewhere in San Jose, official taxis are considered safe 
when using standard security precautions.  Official taxis 
have a yellow triangle on the door, an identification 
number, a taxi light on the roof of the car, and generally 
have working meters.  Ask if the meter is functioning before 
entering the cab.  If the meter is not functioning, the cost 
of the fares should be negotiated prior to entering the cab. 
Official taxis are also easily obtainable from hotels. 
 
Unofficial taxis come in all shapes and sizes and should be 
avoided. 
 
¶6.  Public Affairs:  Please note that the Public Affairs 
Office is the Embassy's designated point of contact with the 
press.  If visitors have been scheduled for press events by 
local partner organizations or others, please inform the 
Embassy's Public Affairs Office.  Should visitors be 
approached by the press with questions or a request for an 
interview, they should refer the press to the Embassy Public 
Affairs Office.  In short, Post requests that visitors not 
speak with the press before consulting with the Public 
Affairs Office 506 (519-2287). 
 
¶7.  Travel documents/Threat assessment/Local conditions: All 
official visitors must travel with passports, preferably 
official or diplomatic.  Without a valid passport, a visitor 
lacks official status in the eyes of the Costa Rican 
Government.  However, no repeat no visa is necessary. 
 
During this time of heightened security alerts, all 
travelers should consult the Department's website for the 
latest public announcements or other safety notices at 
ww.usembassy.or.cr or www.usembassy.or.cr/osac.html. 
 
Costa Rica is currently rated as a "high" crime threat post. 
The increasing use of violence during the commission of a 
street crime is a threat to all visitors.  Travelers are 
urged to exercise caution, as in any large city.  Local law 
enforcement agencies do not act according to U.S. standards 
and have limited capabilities.  Jewelry should not be worn 
 
on the streets.  Large amounts of cash should not be 
displayed.  The downtown area of San Jose should be avoided 
at night because of the increase of criminal activity that 
occurs in this area. 
 
Credit card fraud and credit card "number skimming" is a 
rapidly growing crime.  Visitors should avoid using debit 
cards for point-of-sale purchases, as a skimmed number can 
be used to clean out an account.  Visitors should check 
their credit card accounts frequently. 
 
Visitors are advised to avoid unofficial moneychangers who 
may offer better rates but who often trade in counterfeit 
currency.  The present rate of exchange is approximately 510 
Costa Rican colones to one dollar.  Accommodation exchange 
is available at a comparable rate at the airport. 
 
Visitors should exercise caution if they will be driving in 
Costa Rica.  The combination of poor road conditions, 
erratic driving, and pedestrian and animal traffic on the 
roads make driving very treacherous.  Costa Rica has one of 
the highest accident rates per automobiles in the world. 
The Embassy strongly recommends against driving outside of 
the San Jose area at night.  Vehicles should not be left 
unattended or packages left visible inside them. 
Costa Rica is an earthquake zone and periodically 
experiences significant tremors. 
 
Visitors should be careful not to eat peanuts or products 
made from peanuts grown in Costa Rica because they may 
harbor aflatoxin, which is suspected in the causation of 
liver cancer. 
 
¶8.  Please note:  Effective January 1, 2005, all American 
personnel traveling to post for a TDY of 30 days or more 
will need to certify in the country clearance request that 
they have completed mandatory overseas personal security 
training as outlined in State cable 066580, dated 25 MAR 
¶2004. 
 
¶9.  Please be advised that State Department regulations 
prohibit installation or use of privately-owned computers in 
any State Department building.  Visitors must notify the 
Regional Security Office in advance if they intend to use 
U.S. Government-owned portable computers in the Chancery. 
 
FRISBIE