06SANJOSE1182
COSTA RICA'S 2006 AMBASSADOR'S FUND FOR REFUGEES
Wed May 31 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy San Jose
VZCZCXYZ0009
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSJ #1182/01 1512124
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 312124Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5203UNCLAS SAN JOSE 001182 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR PRM/ECA JJOYCE, WHA/CEN JMACK 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF CS
SUBJECT: COSTA RICA'S 2006 AMBASSADOR'S FUND FOR REFUGEES 
PROPOSAL 
 
REF: STATE 41367 
 
¶1.  Please find following Embassy San Jose's submission for 
the 2006 Ambassador's Fund for Refugees. 
 
¶2.  Description of project: USD 18,618 to set up and operate 
a training center in San Jose to provide English language and 
computer skills training.  The center will provide English 
training from basic to advanced, with an emphasis on 
providing refugees sufficient English skills to find 
employment within Costa Rica's burgeoning tourism and service 
sectors.  In addition, the center will offer courses in basic 
computer operation, as well as introductory courses in 
Microsoft Office and Web publishing, also focused on 
preparing students for integration into the local economy. 
The center will be located in the centrally located 
headquarters of the Asociacion de Consultores y Asesores 
Internacionales (ACAI), UNHCR's local NGO partner.  Teachers 
at the center will be hired from local vocational centers, 
with additional tutoring and teaching assistance from local 
university students.  ACAI estimates that there is 
significant demand for such a center and anticipates 
enrollment of approximately 500 students per year, depending 
on class size and facility accommodations. 
 
¶3.  Justification for this request: While Costa Rica's 
economy was historically dominated by agriculture, tourism 
has become the largest single component of GDP, followed 
closely by high-tech manufacturing and services.  English and 
computer skills are becoming important to finding a good job, 
since the vast majority of tourists are American or European, 
and many service jobs cater to an English-speaking clientele. 
 Many of Costa Rica's 14,000 refugees who lack English and 
computer skills are unable to find work in the burgeoning 
tourism sector.  Costa Rica's refugee population is made up 
primarily of semi-educated Colombians, and virtually all the 
rest are from other Spanish-speaking countries in Latin 
America.  Lacking the vocational skills necessary for 
employment and without their traditional family support 
network, many refugees are economically marginalized and are 
forced to work in the dwindling agricultural sector.  ACAI 
hopes to provide a means for these refugees to gain the 
skills necessary to find employment in San Jose and other 
urban areas. 
 
¶4.  Agency responsible for implementation/management of the 
project funds: UNHCR's local NGO implementing partner, 
Asociacion de Consultores y Asesores Internacionales (ACAI). 
UNHCR representative Agni Castro referred post to ACAI for 
suggested projects, and is supportive of this initiative. 
 
¶5.  Budget: USD 18,618. 
-USD 8,830 for seven (7) computer workstations, one central 
printer and software license acquisition.  Computers will be 
purchased through Dell, which provides a local on-site 
service warranty, thereby reducing maintenance costs.  The 
language software to be used is Rosetta Stone, which will be 
deployed in a server structure.  The server-based version of 
the program is both less expensive and prevents theft of 
individual CD-ROM discs.  ACAI has already implemented the 
Microsoft Office suite within their office and will purchase 
seven additional licenses to allow for expanded usage in the 
learning center. 
-USD 800 for facilities upgrades to ACAI's office space.  The 
space to be used currently serves dual purpose as a garage 
and meeting room, but will be repurposed expressly to house 
the learning center.  This requires telephone and network 
wiring installation, air conditioning installation, and alarm 
system expansion to encompass the space. 
-USD 7,488 for one-year part-time instructor salaries.  ACAI 
estimates that it can host 36 hours of classes per week: 24 
hours of English, and 12 hours of computer training.  The aim 
is to have four English classes for two hours a day each, 
offered on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, and three computer 
courses, also two hours each, on Tuesday and Thursday.  Local 
instructors are available for USD 4.00 per hour.  USG funds 
would finance the first year of instruction, while small 
tuition fees charged to the students will be used to fund 
continuing instruction.  ACAI estimates that students will 
have to pay approximately USD 10 per month for course 
enrollment in order to maintain the program. 
-USD 1,500 for furniture, floor covering, whiteboards, paper, 
printer supplies, and miscellaneous materials costs. 
 
¶6.  Post certifies that it has the authority and capacity to 
award a grant to the intended recipient agency prior to the 
end of the fiscal year (September 30, 2006). 
 
¶8.  ACAI supports the six core principles of the UN 
Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC), and post can fax the 
required documentation to demonstrate this at PRM's request. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LANGDALE