06SANAA259
MEDIA REACTION -- HAMAS VICTORY.
Sun Feb 05 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

050337Z Feb 06UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SANAA 000259 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA, NEA/ARP, NEA/PD, NEA/RA, 
DS/OP/NEA, S/CT, RRU/NEA 
CENTCOM FOR POLAD 
NEA/PPD FOR AFERNANDEZ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM KMPI PGOV PHUM PREL YM
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION -- HAMAS VICTORY. 
 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY.  Almost all media outlets reacted 
positively to the victory of Hamas in the recent 
Palestinian parliamentary elections.  They also 
hailed the election process as democratic, free, 
and fair.  In particular, they commended the 
Palestinian Authority for immediately accepting 
the Hamas victory.  Local commentators, citing the 
principles of democracy, have criticized the U.S. 
and EU for threatening to cut aid to the 
Palestinian Authority if Hamas does not change its 
governing principles.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  EDITORIAL COMMENTARY: 
 
¶A. In the Islah-affiliated independent weekly 
Annas (circulation:  15,000) (01/30), regular 
commentator Dr. Fuad Al-Badani wrote:  "The Hamas 
victory was a surprise to Israel, U.S., the EU and 
most Arab regimes.  It is obvious that Islamist 
groups are making remarkable progress in those 
elections in which they participate." 
 
¶B.  Also in Annas (01/30), regular contributor 
Mohammad Al-Ghabri observed that negotiation with 
Israel will be the most complicated issue Hamas 
will have to deal with and concluded that, if true 
democratic elections took place throughout the 
Arab world, Islamist movements would be in power 
tomorrow. 
 
¶C.  In a third commentary in Annas (01/30) Ahmad 
Al-Faqeh commented:  "Hamas's victory rang the 
danger bell for Israel, EU and the United States, 
all of whom began to deal differently with the 
Palestinian Authority following the Hamas 
victory."  He concluded that some believe the 
Hamas victory was planned by Israel to set up an 
allegedly extremist group as rulers of Palestine 
and thereby justify their refusal to permit the 
establishment of a Palestinian state. 
 
¶D.  The weekly Islah-affiliated weekly Al-Asimah 
(circulation:  25,000) editorialized (01/29): 
"With the Hamas victory, the Palestinian people 
sent a message to the world that it is capable of 
making its own choices and not what others want. 
It elected those it believed most capable of 
running the country's internal and external 
affairs." 
 
¶E.  The Islah-party mouthpiece weekly Al-Sahwa 
(circulation:  25,000) editorialized (01/30): "The 
Palestinians elected Hamas because they know that 
Hamas will clear up the mess in the Palestinian 
territories and improve their living conditions as 
well as block frequent Israeli atrocities against 
the Palestinian people." 
 
¶F.  The weekly mouthpiece of the Popular Forces 
Union party Manbar Al-Shura (minor circulation) 
editorialized (01/29):  "Why all the U.S. and 
European contempt regarding the Hamas victory 
while Hamas was the choice of the Palestinian 
People?" 
 
¶G.  In the independent weekly Al-Wasat, Saeedah 
Tayeb wondered (02/01): "How will Hamas deal with 
the internal and external changes of Palestine at 
a time when its own capability to remain in power 
is doubted?...If Hamas's victory is a catastrophe, 
it is only a catastrophe for those who fear 
democracy and freedom." 
 
¶H.  In the widely-read, Islah-affiliated website 
Alsahwa.net (02/03), Naser Yahya noted that "The 
peaceful transfer of power between Fatah and Hamas 
represents a real commitment to democracy." 
 
¶I.  The official government daily Al-Thawra 
(circulation:  40,000) editorialized (01/27): 
"The Hamas victory was attributable to the Israeli 
atrocities against the Palestinian people..." 
 
¶J.  In a second editorial, Al-Thawra (01/31) wrote 
that:  "Those who are trying to implement the 
democratic project in the region should respect 
the will and choice of the Palestinian people even 
if the Hamas victory conflicts with their 
interests.  It is also unfair to demand that Hamas 
recognize and peacefully coexist with Israel while 
turning a deaf ear to Israeli aggression against 
Palestinians." 
KHOURY