06SOFIA1068
LEBANON: BULGARIA CONDEMNS QANA ATTACK, CALLS FOR
Tue Aug 01 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sofia
VZCZCXRO7179
PP RUEHAST
DE RUEHSF #1068 2131444
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 011444Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY SOFIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2300
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SOFIA 001068 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL IS LE BU
SUBJECT: LEBANON: BULGARIA CONDEMNS QANA ATTACK, CALLS FOR 
CEASE-FIRE 
 
REF: STATE 124950 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY/COMMENT: The Bulgarian government has closely 
coordinated its position with that of the EU from the outset 
of the Israel/Hezbollah conflict.  On July 13, the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs issued a statement calling for maximum 
restraint from all parties, condemning the kidnapping of 
Israeli soldiers, calling for Hezbollah to release the 
soldiers and cease rocket fire into Israel, and for Lebanon 
to establish control over its territory.  The MFA also 
condemned Israel's bombing of Lebanon, and called on the 
former to restrain their actions and not violate the borders. 
 However, the MFA released another statement on July 31, 
strongly condemning Israel's recent air raids in Qana and the 
deaths of civilians, including many children, and calling for 
a cease-fire.  The recent statement also calls for an 
international force to assist the Lebanese Army in 
establishing control in the South.  This differs in tone from 
their original statement on July 13, which castigates both 
sides - but lays the blame on Hezbollah for initiating 
things.  Ambassador Beyrle is meeting August 3 with 
Parliament's leadership to brief them using reftel guidance. 
END SUMMARY/COMMENT 
 
¶2.  Minister of Foreign Affairs Ivailo Kalfin, expressly 
stated in an interview on July 31 that while Israel had the 
right to defend itself, its reaction has been extremely 
disproportional.  Kalfin says that there should be a 
cease-fire as soon as possible, which he pointedly notes, 
differs from the U.S. policy of giving Israel more time to 
deal with Hezbollah.  Bulgarian public opinion also seems to 
be shifting away from Israel, which is perceived as causing 
the death of innocent civilians, many of whom are children. 
The Israeli air raids, especially the recent Qana attack 
sparked at least one rally in Sofia, where hundreds protested 
Israel's actions.  In addition, the front pages of almost all 
newspapers ran heartrending pictures of Lebanese rescuers 
pulling dead bodies of children out of the debris in the 
village of Qana. 
 
¶3.  Statement issued July 31: Declaraton of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs on the sitution in Lebanon 
 
The Republic of Bulgaria expreses serious concern over the 
continuing escalatio in violence between Israel and 
Hezbollah over te last few days. 
 
We strongly condemn Israeli ai raids on the Lebanese town of 
Qana on 30 July 206, killing dozens of civilians, most of 
whom wer children.  We express our most sincere condolence 
on the inexcusable death of innocent people.  Te unbalanced 
use of power, which has grave conseuences for the civilians 
in Lebanon, only worsensthe crisis that cannot be solved by 
force. 
 
Vocing satisfaction with Israel's decision to suspen air 
strikes for 48 hours, we reconfirm our stan that only a 
total cease-fire can crate conditions for further 
negotiations between the concerted countries, ensure 
application of UN resolutions and an agreement on deployment 
of international forces, which will assist the Lebanese armed 
forces in establishing full control over South Lebanon. 
 
¶4.  MFA statement issued July 13: 
 
The Republic of Bulgaria expresses deep concern over the 
escalation of tension and the deterioration of the security 
situation in the region of the Middle East recently.  Without 
doubt, violence cannot bring an acceptable solution to any 
side.  In connection with that, we appeal to all the 
countries concerned to display maximum restraint and not to 
resort to the use of force and other measures which are 
contrary to international law standards. 
 
We condemn sharply the kidnapping of the two Israeli 
soldiers.  We consider that the Shiite Lebanese organization 
Hezbollah needs to release them immediately and to cease the 
rocket fire to Israel's territory.  The Lebanese government 
also needs to undertake all necessary measures in order to 
establish control over its territory and to prevent further 
attacks against Israel. 
 
We condemn sharply Israeli Army bombardments of Lebanon which 
lead to the killing of tens of innocent Lebanese citizens. 
Israel needs to refrain from such actions and to not violate 
the borders of the Lebanese state. 
 
We appeal to Israel and Lebanon to respect the border between 
the two countries, determined by the UN after the withdrawal 
of Israeli forces from South Lebanon in 2000. 
Beyrle