06TALLINN784
CODEL KOLBE THANKS ANSIP FOR SUPPORT IN IRAQ AND
Mon Aug 28 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tallinn
VZCZCXYZ0008
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTL #0784 2401420
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 281420Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY TALLINN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 8961UNCLAS TALLINN 000784 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
CODEL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MOPS ENRG CVIS RS EN
SUBJECT:  CODEL KOLBE THANKS ANSIP FOR SUPPORT IN IRAQ AND 
AFGANISTAN 
 
¶1.   (U) Summary.  During a meeting in Tallinn on August 24, a 
congressional delegation led by House Subcommittee on Foreign 
Operations, Export Financing and Related Programs Chairman James 
Kolbe(R-AZ) thanked Prime Minister Andrus Ansip for Estonia's 
support for the Global War on Terror.  PM Ansip said Estonian troops 
will continue to serve in Iraq.  PM Ansip and the Congressmen also 
discussed energy issues, Russia, and the Visa Waiver Program.  The 
delegation, which included Representatives Frederick Upton (R-MI), 
Brian Baird (D-WA), and Alexander Crenshaw (R-FL) also attended an 
American Chamber of Commerce Business After Hours event.  End 
Summary. 
 
War on Terror 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Chairman Kolbe began the meeting with PM Ansip by thanking 
Estonia for its commitments in Iraq and Afghanistan.  PM Ansip, who 
has himself visited Iraq, noted that Estonia feels both an 
obligation and a national interested to serve in Iraq and will 
continue to do so.  He stated that Estonian soldiers consider it the 
highlight of their military careers to serve in Iraq alongside 
American troops. 
 
Energy 
 
¶3.  (SBU) In response to an inquiry from Congressman Kolbe, PM Ansip 
explained that Estonia is not as dependent on unreliable Russian 
energy supplies as are some other countries in the region.  Estonia 
has the capability to produce 100% of its electricity from 
locally-mined oil shale.  In fact, Estonia currently exports 
electricity to Latvia, Lithuania, and soon to Finland via a new 
underwater cable.  While Estonia does import some natural gas from 
Russia, this is used to meet only about 10% of Estonia's heating 
requirements.  PM Ansip emphasized that Estonia is in no way 
dependent on Russian gas.  Despite Estonia's fortuitous oil shale 
reserves, PM Ansip confided that oil shale as an energy source may 
encounter big problems under the Kyoto Protocol and EU environmental 
regulations.  The oil shale industry faces an uncertain future due 
to the carbon dioxide emission regulations that will be in full 
force after 2012.  PM Ansip expressed Estonia's desire to ultimately 
become part of an integrated Nordic and Western European power grid. 
 
 
Russia 
 
¶4.  (SBU) PM Ansip explained to the Congressmen that deep problems 
exist in the relationship between Estonia and Russia.  For example, 
PM Ansip noted, the border agreement between Russian and Estonia 
remains unresolved.  According to PM Ansip, the biggest issue 
currently between the countries, however, is cooperation at the 
border, where commercial trucks are currently facing lengthy border 
crossing delays as the Russians thoroughly search each vehicle.  PM 
Ansip did not know the reason the Russians had adopted this approach 
or if it was a deliberate attempt to impede trade.  He did note that 
since Estonia's accession to the EU in 1994, trade volume with 
Russia has actually increased.  Further, Estonia's accession to NATO 
has helped stabilize the relationship between the countries as 
Estonia now has less reason to be afraid of its northern neighbor. 
 
Visa Waiver Program 
 
¶5.  (SBU) PM Ansip expressed his frustration that Estonia is not yet 
eligible for the Visa Waiver Program due to its visa refusal rate. 
In response to Chairman Kolbe's statement that tightened visa 
restrictions are due in part to post-9/11 security concerns, PM 
Ansip commented that Estonia is part of the solution, not part of 
the problem; concerns about terrorism should not prejudice Estonia's 
chances to participate in the Visa Waiver Program.  PM Ansip 
encouraged the Congressmen to support legislation that would help 
make it easier for new EU member states like Estonia to enter the 
Program, stating that the country's exclusion is a serious and 
emotional issue for the Estonian public. 
 
Meeting with Local Business Representatives 
 
¶6.  (U) Following the meeting with the PM Ansip, the delegation 
attended an American Chamber of Commerce Business After Hours event. 
 The delegation immediately engaged with the local business 
community and was reluctant to leave the event, which the 
Congressmen deemed very worthwhile. 
 
¶7.  (U) Codel Kolbe did not have the opportunity to clear this cable 
before their departure from Tallinn. 
 
Goldstein