06TAIPEI18
KEELUNG HARBOR PREPARING FOR CSI VISIT
Wed Jan 04 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TAIPEI 000018 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/TC 
DEPT PASS TO AIT/W 
HONG KONG FOR DHS/ICE MARK STEELE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EWWT TW
SUBJECT: KEELUNG HARBOR PREPARING FOR CSI VISIT 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: During a December 29 meeting with AIT/T 
econoff Taiwan Customs officials at Keelung expressed 
support for the proposal to implement the Container Security 
Initiative (CSI) in Keelung.  However, they also presented 
data that underscored the low level of container traffic 
from Keelung to the United States and made comments that 
suggested they believe that implementation of CSI at Keelung 
is unnecessary.  The officials pointed out that because of 
Keelung's geographic situation, effective implementation 
would require two non-intrusive inspection machines.  End 
summary. 
 
¶2. (U) AIT/T econoff visited Taiwan Customs officials at Keelung 
Harbor December 29 to discuss initial preparations for the planned 
CSI assessment visit to be conducted by a Department of Homeland 
Security Immigration and Customs Enforcement (DHS/ICE) team 
February 13-17.  Lee Jung-ta, Director of the Keelung Customs 
Office, said that it would be an honor to have the CSI program 
implemented at Keelung.  Deputy Director Chiang An-hsiung added 
that the Keelung Customs staff had already been in touch with the 
Port of Kaohsiung to become more familiar with CSI operations 
there. 
 
¶3. (SBU) However, Lee's staff also gave a short presentation on 
traffic at the harbor that underscored the low level of direct 
cargo traffic to the United States.  Chou Tsung-pin, Chief of 
Keelung Customs Inspection Division, noted that of Keelung's 
75,000 twenty-foot equivalent units (TEUs) of monthly outbound 
container traffic, 5,260 TEUs are destined for the United States. 
Chou also pointed out that of 4,200 TEUs of monthly transshipped 
container traffic U.S. bound containers sometimes number fewer 
than 10 per day. 
 
¶4. (SBU) In addition, Lee and his staff made other comments that 
suggested they believed that implementation of CSI at Keelung is 
unnecessary.  Lee observed that even if no CSI staff are placed in 
Keelung, Keelung Customs officials could send shipping information 
to the Kaohsiung CSI unit for review.  During a tour of the 
harbor, Chou pointed out more than once that the development of 
the Port of Taipei at the mouth of the Danshuei River would reduce 
container traffic at Keelung Harbor.  Note: The first container 
terminal at the Port of Taipei is scheduled to be completed March 
¶2008.  In all, seven container terminals should be operational by 
2014 with a total capacity exceeding 2 million TEUs per year. 
This is bound to have an impact on container traffic at Keelung, 
which totaled 2.07 million TEUs in 2004, but observers disagree on 
the level of impact.  In comparison, container traffic in 
Kaohsiung totaled 9.71 million TEUs for 2004.  End note. 
 
¶5. (U) During the visit, Keelung Customs officials emphasized the 
need for two non-invasive inspection machines in order to 
implement CSI effectively.  There are container terminals on each 
side of harbor with no way to transfer individual containers 
conveniently from one side to the other.  They reported that 
Taiwan Customs has requested funding to purchase non-intrusive 
inspection equipment for Keelung for five years, but the 
Legislative Yuan has denied the request. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Comment: The comments of Keelung Customs officials may be 
colored by the additional burden that the CSI program will impose 
on their workload.  We report their observations to ensure that 
DHS and other Washington agencies have a complete picture of 
circumstances at the port.  Customs officials in Taipei have 
expressed support for the program's implementation in Keelung. 
AIT is ready to support fully the implementation of the CSI 
program in Keelung.  End comment. 
 
PAAL