06TRIPOLI410
THE VISA BLUES: TRIPOLI CONSULS SING IN UNISON
Thu Aug 10 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tripoli
null
Brooke F Adams  08/10/2006 05:16:07 PM  From  DB/Inbox:  Brooke F Adams

Cable 
Text:                                                                      
                                                                           
      
UNCLAS        TRIPOLI 00410

SIPDIS
CXCAIRO:
    ACTION: POL
    INFO:   RSO PA ORA OMC LEGAT IPS ECON DEA DCM DAO CONS
            AMB AID

DISSEMINATION: POL
CHARGE: PROG

VZCZCCRO096
RR RUEHEG
DE RUEHTRO #0410/01 2221247
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 101247Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1096
INFO RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 0383
RUEHTRO/AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI 1233UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TRIPOLI 000410 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ODIP CMGT LY
SUBJECT: THE VISA BLUES: TRIPOLI CONSULS SING IN UNISON 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Consular officers from fifteen foreign embassies with 
representation in Libya gathered last week at the home of the 
Pakistani consul to discuss common challenges faced in obtaining 
visitor, business, and diplomatic visas to Libya. In addition to 
TDY Conoff/Econoff from Embassy Tripoli, consuls from the 
Philippines, Italy, Yemen, Poland, Russia, Korea, Bangladesh, 
Afghanistan, Malaysia, India, Pakistan, Serbia, and South Africa 
attended the meeting.  The meeting's goal was to formulate a 
common approach to working with the GOL on ameliorating the 
problems that all non-Arab nationals are having obtaining 
tourist, business, and diplomatic visas to Libya. 
 
COMMON CHALLENGES 
 
¶2. (SBU) 
 
-----Diplomatic visas: Obtaining diplomatic visas in a timely 
manner continues to be a challenge for most of the countries 
represented. In an extreme example, the consul from the Embassy 
of Russia expressed frustration over waiting seven months for 
his visa, apparently linked to the fact that the Russians had 
denied a Libyan traveling on an official passport a visa because 
he was on their restricted security list. A diplomat from the 
Philippines easily obtained a visa in her home country due to a 
personal connection with the Libyan Embassy in Manila, but 
because it wasn't processed through the normal official 
channels, faced great difficulty in converting it to a residency 
permit here. 
 
----- Business visas: Obtaining business visas is not an easy 
feat for most western nationals, due to the long list of 
requirements necessary to receive a visa. Most agreed that this 
could be partially intentional on the part of the government, 
but may also be in part a matter of organization as 
pre-approvals must be faxed to their embassies abroad from 
Tripoli, which can easily be lost or misplaced. For all 
countries facing this challenge, there is a trend for 
businesspeople to enter on tourist visas, which are relatively 
easy to obtain via well connected travel agencies. 
 
-----Third Country Nationals: Employing third country nationals 
at foreign embassies is a growing difficulty. The Korean consul 
linked this to the Manpower Minister's supposed mandate to 
drastically reduce the Libyan unemployment rate. He also noted 
that Korean companies are having trouble obtaining work visas 
for many of their nationals who are slated to work at Korean 
companies based in Libya, the implication being that Libyans 
must be employed instead. The Pakistani consul's son was offered 
a job at Schlumberger, but his visa has been stalled, possibly 
for the same reason. The Italian consul was informed that 
effective last month, all visas that go through the protocol 
office will also  be vetted through the manpower office, 
presumably to ensure that Libyans are being employed as often as 
possible. 
 
SIGNS OF IMPROVEMENT 
 
¶3. (SBU) 
 
-----Tourist visas: All nationalities, with the exception of the 
U.S., are having relative success obtaining tourist visas via 
travel agencies who set up package tours. Travel agencies with 
good connections in the government are said to have the highest 
success rate of obtaining tourist visas. Cruise ships stopping 
at Mediterranean destinations frequently disembark in Tripoli 
Harbor and unload several hundred tourists at a time. Short term 
visas upon generally granted upon arrival, though it takes one 
to two hours of processing. 
 
-----Dip visas at the airport: Officials from the GOL told 
consuls from other Embassies that they are considering issuing 
visas to diplomats at the airport, though a pre-approval from 
the MFA would still be required. 
 
FUTURE GOALS 
 
¶4. (SBU) Consuls decided to hold monthly meetings to exchange 
information and share updates on visa issues. In addition, a 
steering committee composed of the Philippine, Pakistani, and 
Italian consuls was formed to draft a proposal to work on the 
following goals: 
 
-----Visa Reciprocity: Engage with the Libyan authorities on 
dedicating themselves to enforcing visa reciprocity. Most 
countries represented at the meeting issue visas for Libyan 
nationals within seven to ten working days for all categories, 
but few were receiving similar treatment. 
 
-----Ambassadorial Meeting: Discuss a possible effort to request 
some of our ambassadors collectively meet with GOL officials 
regularly on areas of common concern to foreign embassies 
regarding visa issues. While several in the group wanted the US 
to take an active leadership role in this initiative, Conoff 
explained that we might not be as persuasive a spokesman as 
other countries because we don't have visa issuing capability 
yet. 
 
¶5. Comment. The GOL has told post repeatedly that until we 
establish full visa operations in Tripoli, they will reciprocate 
by limiting visa services to Americans. Once post begins issuing 
visas, we anticipate some relief to the additional challenges 
U.S. travelers face in obtaining Libyan visas. However, the 
experience of other foreign missions that have full visa 
issuance authority in Tripoli is far from perfect and indicates 
that visa difficulties are endemic to Libya's dealings with its 
foreign guests. 
BERRY