06TUNIS637
Special Media Reaction: A/S Welch visit to Tunis
Fri Mar 17 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tunis
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTU #0637/01 0761554
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 171554Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY TUNIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0145
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS TUNIS 000637 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR NEA/FO (DONICK,GRAY) NEA/RA (FOX) NEA/MAG (LAWRENCE) 
NEA/PPD (WHITE, AGNEW) NEA/PA NEA/IPA I/GNEA CWG-PD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO OIIP TS
SUBJECT: Special Media Reaction: A/S Welch visit to Tunis 
March 14- 16, 2006 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary. Tunisian media provided wide and 
positive coverage of the March 14 -16 visit of Assistant 
Secretary Welch.  Headlines in all papers focused on the 
 
SIPDIS 
strength and "excellence" of U.S.-Tunisian relations and 
referred to "discussions of international issues of 
mutual concern."  Two of the more independent private 
newspapers reported accurately on A/S Welch's comments on 
the need for further political reform in Tunisia, as did 
the AP wire service.  The government-owned newspapers 
capitalized on the visit in editorials praising Tunisian 
diplomacy and its "balanced foreign-policy."  While 
broadcast media covered A/S Welch's meetings with GOT 
officials, including the President, Tunisian television 
and radio did not cover the press conference.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) All of the March 15, 2006 Tunisian dailies led 
with photos and articles dedicated to the visit of A/S 
Welch.  All papers published an article written by the 
official Tunisian news agency (TAP) on A/S Welch's 
meeting with President Ben Ali with headlines emphasizing 
the strength of Tunisian-American relations and a "common 
will to reinforce" these bilateral relations.  Some of 
these papers also sub-headlined the fact that the 
meetings had included discussions of "international 
questions of mutual interest such as the Palestinian- 
Israeli conflict."  The TAP article also contained 
excerpts from A/S Welch's stand-up after the meeting, 
highlighting the fact that he had passed to President Ben 
Ali the warm greetings of American officials such as the 
President, the Vice-President, and Secretary Rice and 
that they had discussed the issues of Iran, instability 
in Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, and the Palestinian territories. 
Tunisian television and radio also reported on the 
meeting with President Ben Ali, highlighting the same 
issues as the print media. 
 
¶3. (U) Two of the March 15 government-owned newspapers 
also carried a TAP article on A/S Welch's meeting with 
Minister of Development and Economic Cooperation Mohamed 
Nouri Jouini.  The article highlighted A/S Welch's praise 
for the fact that Tunisia had accomplished political 
stability and significant socioeconomic progress that 
made it attractive to American investors.  Three of the 
government-owned newspapers also carried editorials 
citing the visit of A/S Welch as further proof of 
Tunisia's diplomatic skills and "balanced foreign 
policy." 
 
¶4. (SBU) While most papers covered the March 15 press 
conference, there was a clear divide in the nature of the 
reporting by the government-owned and government- 
controlled private press and that of the more independent 
private press and the international wire services.  The 
government-owned newspapers again highlighted A/S Welch's 
praise for Tunisia and then focused on his explanation of 
the events in Jericho and the US position in Hamas.  The 
government-controlled private Tunisian newspapers focused 
their reporting on the press conference almost 
exclusively on the situation in Jericho, Hamas, and "the 
difficult situation" in Iraq, with passing mention of 
American readiness "to support human rights, democracy, 
and free enterprise in Tunisia."  The more independent 
privately-owned papers, while also highlighting the 
Assistant Secretary's praise for Tunisia, accurately 
reported on A/S Welch's comments that those who do not go 
forward on the path of reform, go backwards as well as 
the call for political reform to include "the right to 
free and peaceful assembly, civil society, more channels 
of information and free internet access."  The AP wire 
story on the press conference focused almost exclusively 
on A/S Welch's call for reinforcing human rights and 
democracy in Tunisia.  There was no television coverage 
of the press conference. 
 
¶5. (U) Sample headlines on the visit include: 
 
"La Presse" (government-owned French language daily): 
"President Ben Ali receives the American Assistant 
Secretary for Middle East affairs.  Tunisian-American 
 
SIPDIS 
relations excellent in all areas, declares Mr. David 
Welch."  "Press Conference with Mr. David Welch, 
Assistant Secretary of State: `Our partnership with 
Tunisia will remain strong.' `President Bush gives great 
importance to the counsel and views of President Ben 
Ali.'" "Tunisia has much to be proud of in its great 
accomplishments.'" "Tunisia-US economic cooperation: 
 
Tunisia, an attractive destination for American 
investments." 
 
"Le Renouveau" (ruling party French language daily): 
"President Ben Ali receives the American Assistant 
Secretary for Middle East affairs.  Tunisian-American 
 
SIPDIS 
relations excellent in all areas."  "Tunisia-USA:  Homage 
to the socio-economic progress realized by Tunisia." 
 
 "Ash Shourouq" (private Arabic language daily): 
"Bilateral relations and developments on the 
international scene were on the agenda of President Ben's 
meeting with A/S Welch", "Tunisia-American partnership is 
strong" 
 
"Le Temps" (private French language daily): "The Chief of 
State receives A/S David Welch.  Exemplary relations. 
Review of international issues of common concern."  "For 
50 years, the US has been a partner to Tunisia.  And we 
still support it in the deepening of its reforms." 
 
"As Sabah" (private Arabic language daily): "A/S Welch: 
`Relations with Tunisia are excellent in all areas.'", 
"David Welch in a press conference: `This is what 
happened in Jericho, and if we had the choice to stay, we 
would have done so.'""Tunisia has a lot to be proud of at 
various levels". 
 
"Le Quotidien" (private French language daily): "Tunisia- 
USA: Common will to reinforce bilateral relations." "US 
Assistant Secretary for Middle East and North African 
affairs: The situation in Iraq is difficult." 
 
AP wire story: "Washington exhorts Tunisia to engage more 
resolutely on the path to democracy." HUDSON