06WELLINGTON341
NEW ZEALAND IVs EMERGE AS MEDIA LEADERS
Wed May 03 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WELLINGTON 000341 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/PD-AGRIMES, EAP/ANP-DRICCI, EAP/P-KBAILES, 
ECA/PE/V/R/F-TBlatt, JHathaway 
 
E.O. 12985: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA KIRC OIIP MNUC KPAO KMDR OPRC NZ
SUBJECT: NEW ZEALAND IVs EMERGE AS MEDIA LEADERS 
 
¶1. BEGIN SUMMARY: While some New Zealand participants in the IV 
program remain in their same influential roles, others have had 
diverse experiences, including being offered employment by Al 
Jazeera, becoming the host of a radio show, and being promoted to 
management. Until recently we were able to send two journalists per 
year on IV programs, but recent cutbacks are making this increasing 
difficult. We hope that any negative impact will be offset by the 
establishment of programs like the Edward R. Murrow program. From 
our experience there are few programs that make as much impact on 
present and future decision-makers as the first-hand understanding 
gained through participation in the International Visitor Program. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. PARTICIPANT UPDATES (Participation date in parentheses): 
 
CLIFF JOINER (October 2002): Cliff Joiner was recently offered a job 
working for Al Jazeera International but turned it down because of 
concerns about his daughter's schooling. Since Cliff's participation 
as an IV he left TVNZ to work for rival network, TV3. Cliff now 
works in Christchurch, where he often acts as bureau chief with 
responsibility for the network's entire South Island coverage. (Note 
that we are about to launch a Virtual Presence Post for the South 
Island to increase our impact there.)  Both television news networks 
regard Cliff as a possible future political editor. 
 
KATHRYN RYAN (July-Aug 2004): Next week Kathryn will cease to be 
Radio New Zealand's political editor because her talents have been 
recognized and rewarded with her own daily three-hour program, 
Nine-to-Noon. Nine-to-Noon has a nationwide audience and rates 
second only to the network's flagship breakfast program, Morning 
Report. 
 
GUYON ESPINER (August-Sept 2001): When Guyon went on an IV program, 
he was the political editor of the weekly newspaper, The Sunday Star 
Times. Soon after returning to New Zealand Guyon switched media. 
Guyon left The Sunday Star Times and joined TVNZ as their deputy 
political editor. He has since been promoted to become the political 
editor of the nation's most-watched television network. 
 
AUDREY YOUNG (May 2004): Audrey continues to be the Political Editor 
of New Zealand's largest daily newspaper, The New Zealand Herald. 
 
NICK VENTER (October 2002): When he participated in his IV program, 
Nick was the Dominion Post's political editor; he has since been 
promoted to management by becoming the newspaper's Assistant Editor. 
He is also responsible for writing most of the leader content 
(editorials) for the newspaper. Nick's latest editorial was on the 
bilateral relationship and was entitled, "Let's Make Up and Be 
Friends." 
 
GARTH BRAY (October 2004): Since his return to New Zealand, Garth 
has worked on TVNZ's flagship current affairs program, Sunday, and 
has been the fill-in/back-up presenter and interviewer for Agenda, 
TVNZ's weekly half-hour program on diplomatic and political 
happenings. In June Garth will become TVNZ's Australian Bureau 
Chief, a role reserved for the network's rising stars. In his new 
job Garth will continue to investigate New Zealand's role in 
regional security and the relationships between the three former 
ANZUS allies. 
 
ALI IKRAM (June 2005): Ali is now regarded as so integral to TVNZ's 
coverage that the network has made him a prominent face in 
advertising for the network. TVNZ also asked him to move from 
Wellington to their head office in New Zealand's most multi-cultural 
city, Auckland.  He is widely regarded as the New Zealand journalist 
with the best contacts in the Islamic community; and while he 
continues to cover a wide variety of issues, he has increasing 
responsibility for the channel's intercultural and religious 
coverage. 
 
JUSTINE SHORT (June-July 2002): Justine continues to be Chief of 
Staff at TV3 the country's second-largest television network.  The 
network's ratings are sky-rocketing, and viewer numbers in the 
influential Auckland market have overtaken their more established 
competitor, TVNZ. 
 
¶3. Open-mindedness, field of influence, and the multiplier effect of 
potential candidates are prime considerations during our selection 
process, and investment in Embassy contacts outside the media have 
also yielded positive, sustained results.  For example, NZ Labour 
Member of Parliament and former IV, WINNIE LABAN (November-December 
2002) recently requested an Embassy meeting for her entire staff. 
Ms. Laban wanted to challenge her staff's perceptions of America and 
American foreign policy. 
 
¶5. We repeat that we regard IV programs as exceptionally influential 
and maintain that the impact of such programs should not be 
underestimated. We underscore our appreciation and gratitude to the 
team in the EAP International Visitor Bureau. 
 
Thanks and regards, McCormick