07AITTAIPEI1107
MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S WHO BID, TAIWAN POLITICAL
Wed May 16 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1107/01 1362322
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 162322Z MAY 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5280
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6783
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8030UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001107 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - LLOYD NEIGHBORS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S WHO BID, TAIWAN POLITICAL 
DEVELOPMENT, U.S.-JAPAN SECURITY PACT 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies continued to 
focus news coverage May 16 on Taiwan's setback in its bid to join 
the World Health Organization (WHO); on the new cabinet to be headed 
by Straits Exchange Foundation Chairman Chang Chun-hsiung; on the 
island's Han Kuang No. 23 military exercise; and on other local 
issues.  In terms of editorials and commentaries, a column in the 
mass-circulation "Apple Daily" satirized Taiwan's WHO bid, saying it 
was a worthy attempt for the DPP after all, as whatever the DPP 
government has missed in its diplomatic attempt, it will gain it 
back domestically.  An editorial in the pro-independence "Liberty 
Times," on the other hand, urged the government to try harder for 
its bid to join international organization.  An editorial in the 
critical-of-the-government "China Times" criticized the Chen 
Shui-bian government for working against the international trend and 
reality in its WHO bid.  An op-ed in the same paper discussed Frank 
Hsieh's role as the DPP presidential candidate and the DPP 
government's cross-Strait policy.  The article said that if Hsieh 
could influence President Chen to resume dialogue with Beijing, it 
will be conducive for Taiwan's economic growth and Taipei-Washington 
ties.  An op-ed in the limited-circulation, pro-independence, 
English-language "Taipei Times" discussed the U.S.-Japan security 
pact and said "Taiwan's long-stalled arms procurement package has 
weakened its ability to defend itself."  End summary. 
 
¶2. Taiwan's WHO Bid 
 
A) "Diplomacy That Hits One's Head against the Wall" 
 
Columnist Antonio Chiang commented in the mass-circulation "Apple 
Daily" [circulation: 520,000] (5/16): 
 
"... Taiwan has been attempting to obtain observer status at the 
World Health Assembly (WHA) using the nomenclature of 'health 
entity' for the past ten years.  But despite its enduring 
humiliation and insults, the island has yet to see any concrete 
results.  Taiwan changed its strategy this year and applied for 
membership in the World Health Organization (WHO) using the name 
'Taiwan.'  Taiwan citizens can barely tell the difference between 
WHA and WHO, but the failed attempt this year was more like a simple 
and clear-cut death compared to the slow and painful dying process 
for the island's WHO bid using the nomenclature of 'health entity.' 
In addition, this year's failure can offer [the government] a chance 
to make an issue of it during its campaigning and for its future 
referendum.  Whatever [the government] has missed in its diplomatic 
attempt, it will gain it back domestically, anyway, so it was a 
worthy attempt for the DPP after all. ..." 
 
B) Taiwan Should Bravely Speak up [for Itself] to Break China's 
Containment in the International Community" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 500,000] 
editorialized (5/16): 
 
"... It is a real pity that pro-Blue people echo China in its 
united-front tactics against Taiwan; they imposed pressure on our 
government to accept everything that is unfavorable for the Taiwan 
people through folk dramas like the KMT-CPC forum.  Pan-Blue people 
say it out loud in Taiwan that they safeguard the Republic of China, 
but when going abroad, they start to join hands with the Communist 
Party of China to restrain Taiwan or even the ROC, working jointly 
with their erstwhile enemies to pursue ultimate unification.  In 
this context, pan-Blue legislators have been trying hysterically to 
block the arms procurement package that Taiwan needs desperately. 
Pan-Blue legislators also overlooked the fact that the general 
budget [for the central government] remains stalled, and they visit 
China in groups to show off the united-front tactics. ... 
 
"Taiwan is a democratic country whose sovereignty belongs to its 
people.  In the face of China's containment in the international 
community, Taiwan should speak up for itself bravely.  The island's 
bid to join the WHO and its other attempts over the past few years 
have demonstrated its determination to the world and have thus 
gained more and more resonance and support.  The setback at the WHA 
this year reminded us that we need to work harder.  All the more, 
the Taiwan people need to elect legislators and a president who will 
safeguard the island and pursue our dignity in the international 
community for our 23 million people. ..." 
 
C) "Taiwan's Distance with WHO Is Getting Wider" 
 
The critical-of-the-government "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (5/16): 
 
"... Foreign relations are unlike internal issues, anyway, and most 
of the variables are not in Taiwan's control.  In the face of 
Beijing's suppression, Taiwan is in an unfavorable position in the 
international community; in particular, it has limited bargaining 
chips and thus can hardly control the situation.  The most 
DEVELOPMENT, U.S.-JAPAN SECURITY PACT 
 
reasonable approach that Taiwan should adopt is to be realistic, to 
take advantage of the [international] trend, and to choose the most 
pragmatic and effective survival strategy.  But what the Chen 
Shui-bian administration has been doing is completely the opposite. 
The international reality is that China is rising rapidly and has 
increasing bargaining chips to lure away Taiwan's diplomatic allies, 
while the United States is caught in the quagmire of the war in Iraq 
and is thus unwilling to engage in any conflict with Beijing over 
cross-Strait issues.  In contrast, Chen's approach over the past few 
years has been constantly to step on the red line across the Taiwan 
Strait, starting from calls for 'one country on either side of the 
Taiwan Strait,' 'name-change,' 'cessation of the National 
Unification Council,' to the recent 'Four Wants.'   He not only did 
not value the long-term friendly relationship and mutual trust 
between Taiwan and the United States, but he also failed to put 
himself in the shoes of Taiwan's allies and gave Washington the 
feeling that its goodwill has been abused or taken advantage of. 
What's worse is that Taiwan has thus been viewed as a troublemaker, 
sabotaging security in the Asia-Pacific region.  The United States, 
as a result, proactively defined a circle [for Taiwan] and joined 
hands with Beijing to 'manage' the Taiwan issue.  Any rash moves by 
Taiwan heedless of the international reality will face more 
stringent restrictions than before to avoid [Taiwan] creating more 
trouble for the United States. ..." 
 
¶3. Taiwan Political Development 
 
"Turning Point for Reconciliation and Co-existence between the Two 
Sides of the Taiwan Strait?" 
 
Edward Chen, professor of Tamkang University's Graduate Institute of 
American Studies, opined in the critical-of-the-government "China 
Times" [circulation: 400,000] (5/16): 
 
"... Evidently, under the strong influence of Frank Hsieh, the new 
cabinet to be headed by Chang Chun-hsiung will be the DPP's 
strongest-ever 'cross-Strait cabinet.'  All the more, the DPP 
government's cross-Strait policy will likely be tilted toward 
'reconciliation and co-existence.' ...  Third, over the past three 
years, U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and State Department 
officials have repeatedly expressed their hope that Taiwan will 
resume dialogue with mainland China.  Their intention is that they 
do not want to see Taiwan absent from the process of economic and 
trade coordination in the Asia-Pacific region or being increasingly 
marginalized.  If Hsieh could influence Chen Shui-bian to push for 
the resumption of cross-Strait dialogue, it will not only be 
conducive for [the island's] economic growth but will also help to 
improve Washington-Taipei ties. 
 
"Fourth, over the past year,  AIT Taipei Director Stephen Young has 
said more than once in his lectures that he hopes to see both sides 
of the Taiwan Strait start direct transportation, and he even linked 
the direct transportation with the talks of U.S.-Taiwan Free Trade 
Agreement.  If Hsieh could urge Chen to conclude talks over 
cross-Strait direct transportation, he could then ask Young to 
fulfill his promise of starting talks between Taipei and Washington 
over the Free Trade Agreement. ..." 
 
¶4. U.S.-Japan Security Pact 
 
"The Arms Bill and the US-Japan Alliance" 
 
Shen Chieh, a U.S.-based freelance journalist, opined in the 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] (5/16): 
 
"... The US and Japan employ a two-pronged strategic approach to 
cope with China's rise:  They use military deterrence coupled with 
political and diplomatic means to influence China to move toward 
positive, constructive development.  The military deterrence has not 
changed, but the diplomatic approach aimed at inducing China to play 
a responsible international role shows changes in terms of rewards 
and punishment. ...  Nevertheless, diplomatic pressure alone is not 
likely to transform China into a peaceful and responsible nation. 
The US and Japan have therefore maintained strong military 
deterrents to contain China, but Taiwan's long-stalled arms 
procurement package has weakened its ability to defend itself. 
 
"It was no coincidence that American Institute in Taiwan Director 
Stephen Young voiced Washington's concerns over the arms bill after 
the US-Japan meeting was over.  The continued delay of the 
arms-procurement bill in the legislature has caused the US to doubt 
Taiwan's will to defend itself.  The US is also concerned that 
Taiwan may relinquish its own defense responsibility, which could 
lead to a military imbalance and enhance risks for across the 
Strait." 
 
YOUNG