07AITTAIPEI2648
MEDIA REACTION: SECRETARY RICE'S STATEMENT ON TAIWAN'S UN
Thu Dec 27 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0009
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #2648/01 3610908
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 270908Z DEC 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7673
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 7586
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 8857UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 002648 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: SECRETARY RICE'S STATEMENT ON TAIWAN'S UN 
BID REFERENDUM 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage December 27 on Taiwan's Central Election Commission (CEC)'s 
retreat from insistence on the "one-step" voting format at the 
upcoming legislative election; and on the alleged vote-buying cases 
in various legislative precincts.  Taiwan's Ministry of Education's 
decision in putting a frame around the statue of Chiang Kai-shek in 
the Taiwan Democracy Memorial Hall (formerly known as the Chiang 
Kai-shek Memorial Hall) received half-page coverage in both the 
centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" and the pro-unification "United 
Daily News." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, an op-ed article by 
former DPP Chairman Yu Shyi-kun in the pro-independence "Liberty 
Times" described the U.S. opposition to Taiwan's UN bid referendum 
as yielding to China's pressure.  An op-ed article in the 
pro-unification "United Daily News" said the U.S. is already a 
player, rather than a spectator, in the cross-Strait game after its 
recent series of comments on the referendum.  Commentary by the 
centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" noted that repairing U.S.-Taiwan 
relations will be the first priority for Taiwan's next president.  A 
news analysis in "China Times" suggested that the U.S. is no longer 
interested in Chen Shui-bian's thinking and words.  End Summary. 
 
A) "Searching for the Founding Spirit of the U.S." 
 
Former Chairman of the ruling Democratic Progressive Party Yu 
Shyi-kun, who is also the leading signer of the petition for a 
referendum on joining the UN under the name of "Taiwan," wrote in 
the pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation 720,000] (12/23): 
 
"... I must say the U.S. opposition to Taiwan's referendum on the UN 
bid is shirking responsibility because the U.S. is incapable of 
dealing with the rise of China and the imbalance in the Asia-Pacific 
region.  From the viewpoint of the Taiwan people, this is nothing 
but the U.S. yielding to China's pressure while ignoring the 
Taiwan's right to survive. 
 
"... I want to tell our American friends, there is no return for 
Taiwan's democracy!  Taiwan has been one of the most supportive 
countries of the U.S.  The U.S. should be careful not to create one 
more anti-American nation in Asia just because of a temporary 
misjudgment. ..." 
 
B) "The U.S. Exit Mechanism: U.S.-China Co-Management" 
 
Professor Philip Y. M. Yang, Department of Political Science, 
National Taiwan University, commented in the pro-unification "United 
Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] (12/24): 
 
"If the UN bid referendum is approved, its two worst effects will be 
(1) on Taiwan and (2) on cross-Strait relations.  The internal 
effect will be that Taiwan becomes more fundamentalist.  Supporters 
can claim that Taiwan independence advocacy has won legitimacy by a 
majority vote.  New waves of populism will surge with regard to 
sovereignty and identity issues.  Taiwan will be seen as a trouble 
maker in East Asia and become a fundamentalist player in the 
region. 
 
"...  The serial U.S. criticism means the U.S. is already a player, 
not just a spectator.  The U.S. has joined the game in the hope to 
influence the result of the UN bid referendum.  If the U.S. is 
already in, then what is its 'exit mechanism'?  Should the 
referendum be passed and the cross-Strait confrontation worsens, 
will the U.S. stay in the game and send aircraft carriers again?  Or 
does Taiwan need to take care of itself?  This, of course, depends 
on how the actual situation develops and changes.  However, Rice's 
warning revealed a message. 
 
"... If Beijing indicates that it does not intend to occupy Taiwan 
but to vanquish Taiwan in the political arena, then the U.S. exit 
mechanism may well be very clear: since the U.S. crisis management 
measures have failed to change the fundamentalist inclination of 
Taiwan, as long as Taiwan remains autonomous, and U.S. foreign 
relations, and military and democratic interests will not be 
seriously harmed, co-management by the U.S. and China of the 
cross-Strait situation will become more definite." 
 
C) "No Need to Take Over the Mess" 
 
A commentary by the centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" 
[circulation: 400,000] said (12/24): 
 
"In order to deal with the aftermath of the UN bid referendum, no 
matter who is next elected as president, his first priority must be 
to try to repair U.S.-Taiwan relations.  That is, to make new 
promises on cross-Strait relations. 
 
"With lessons learned from Chen Shui-bian, it is expected that 
BID REFERENDUM 
 
Washington is certain to ask Taiwan's new president for open pledges 
that are more concrete and more difficult to break.  Unfortunately, 
the new president, who has tried hard to break away from Chen 
Shui-bian's shackles, will then get new chains from Washington and 
even Beijing.  This will hurt not only Taiwan's dignity, but also 
our common interest. 
 
"... In fact, things can be less complicated.  As long as we 
disregard the false logic set by Chen Shui-bian and think about 
whether this referendum event is necessary or effective; then decide 
whether to take the referendum ballots and how to cast them, the 
answer will be very clear.  If so, the people and the new president 
of Taiwan will not need to pay the high, but entirely unnecessary, 
price for clearing up the mess." 
 
D) "Rice Remarks Are Like a Two-edged Sword.  It's Hard to Tell 
Whether the Turnout Rate Will Be Reduced" 
 
Journalist Chiang Hui-chen wrote in the centrist, KMT-leaning "China 
Times" [circulation: 400,000] (12/23): 
 
"U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice attacked Taiwan's UN bid 
referendum as provocative.  It has brought about polarized 
responses: the opposition party is worried while the ruling party 
secretly feels good.  The phenomenon is really paradoxical and 
 
SIPDIS 
ironic. 
 
"... However, Rice's remarks fully reflect the fact that the 
Americans no longer want to hear or care about Chen Shui-bian's 
thinking or words.  The Bush administration, bogged down by 
international diplomatic issues starting four years ago, cannot 
spare any efforts to deal with the irresolvable cross-Strait 
turmoil.  The stepping up of U.S. criticism indicates that the U.S. 
has no intention to open the door of communication for the rest of 
Bian's term.  During this period, U.S.-Taiwan interactions will be 
an unprecedented period of [the U.S. making] frank remarks." 
 
WANG