07ANKARA459
TURKEY 7TH ANNUAL TIP REPORT: INVESTIGATION AND
Thu Mar 01 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXYZ0012
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAK #0459/01 0600943
ZNR UUUUU ZZH(CCY AD8C6B7E VSG0203 634)
P 010943Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1145
INFO RUEAHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHDC
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDCUNCLAS ANKARA 000459 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM 
DEPARTMENT FOR IWI, EUR/SE, EUR/PGI 
DEPARTMENT FOR USAID 
 
C O R R E C T E D C O P Y - TEXT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB TU
SUBJECT: TURKEY 7TH ANNUAL TIP REPORT: INVESTIGATION AND 
PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS 
 
REF: A. 06 ANKARA 6672 
     ¶B. 06 SECSTATE 202745 
 
¶1.  (U)  Sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
¶2.  (U)  Post's responses are keyed to questions in Reftel A. 
This is part 2 of 3 (septels). 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Investigation and Prosecution of Traffickers 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶A.  (U)  Chapter 1, Article 80 of the Turkish Penal Code 
specifically defines human trafficking and prescribes 
penalties for traffickers and their accomplices.  The law 
covers both internal and transnational forms of trafficking. 
Penalties range from eight to twelve years of imprisonment 
(up from five to ten years in earlier versions of the law), 
and, at judicial discretion, an additional penalty of up to 
ten thousand days.  Trafficking crimes can also be (and have 
been) prosecuted under statutes of the Law on Combating 
Benefit-Oriented Criminal Organizations, Turkish Citizenship 
Law, Labor Law, Law on Motivating for Prostitution, Law on 
Working Permits for Foreigners, and the Law on the Prevention 
of Money Laundering. 
 
As noted septel, the Turkish President signed into law 
amendments (passed by the Turkish parliament on December 5, 
2006) to two key articles in the Turkish Penal Code (TPC) 
that will improve anti-trafficking efforts in Turkey once 
implemented (ref b and septel).  Lawmakers added forced 
prostitution to Article 80, the primary anti-trafficking 
article, and removed forced prostitution from the Law on 
Motivating to Prostitution (Article 227), the prostitution 
and pimping article.  Statistics on prosecution of 
TIP-related crimes will be more reflective of the real story 
as most TIP crimes are tracked under Article 80 prosecutions. 
 
 
Chapter 1, Article 80:  Human Trafficking (as amended 
December 19, 2006): 
 
(1)  A person who procures or kidnaps persons or who takes or 
transports persons from one place to another or who harbors 
persons with a view to force them to work or to provide a 
service, made them be involved in prostitution or to subject 
them to slavery or similar practices or to donate their 
organs by exerting threats, pressure, force or violence, by 
abusing his authority, by deceit or by obtaining their 
consent through taking advantage of the opportunities they 
have to control them or of their helplessness shall be 
sentenced to imprisonment for a term of eight to twelve years 
and a judicial fine imposed of up to ten thousand days. 
 
(2)  In the event of actions which are undertaken for the 
purposes referred to in the first paragraph and which 
constitute an offense, the consent of the injured party shall 
be deemed void. 
 
(3)  Where juveniles under eighteen years of age are 
procured, kidnapped, taken or transported from one place to 
another or harbored for the purposes referred to in the first 
paragraph, the perpetrator shall be sentenced to the 
penalties referred to in the first paragraph, notwithstanding 
that none of the acts instrumental to the offense has been 
resorted to. 
 
(4)  Security measures shall be taken for legal entities on 
account of the above-mentioned crimes. 
 
On June 1, 2005, Article 80 replaced the following 
anti-trafficking statutes in effect since August 3, 2002; 
some court cases are continued under this article during the 
reporting period: 
 
Turkish Penal Code Article 201(b): 
 
(1)  Those who provide, kidnap, take or transfer from one 
place to another and house other individuals with the 
intention of making them work or serve by force, subject them 
to slavery or similar treatment, threaten, pressure, use 
force or coercion to persuade them to give up their bodily 
organs, use undue influence, secure their consent by 
 
 
deception or by using the desperation of such individuals 
shall be sentenced to five to ten years of heavy 
imprisonment and a heavy fine of not less than one billion 
liras. 
 
(2)  If the actions that constitute a crime attempted with 
the intentions laid out in the first paragraph exist, the 
victim is assumed not to have given his/her consent. 
 
(3)  If children below the age of eighteen are provided, 
kidnapped, taken or transferred from one place to another or 
housed with the intentions specified in paragraph one, even 
when no intermediary actions in relation to the crime are 
committed, the penalties foreseen in paragraph one shall 
still be applied to the perpetrator. 
 
(4)  If the crimes listed in the paragraphs above are 
committed in an organized manner, the penalties foreseen for 
the perpetrators shall be doubled. 
 
¶B.  (U)  The revised Penal Code provides penalties for 
traffickers of eight to twelve years of imprisonment and, at 
judicial discretion, an additional ten thousand days 
imprisonment.  The penalties apply to both traffickers of 
people for sexual exploitation and traffickers of people for 
labor exploitation. 
 
¶C.  Labor exploitation can be prosecuted under Article 80, 
which carried penalties of eight to twelve years imprisonment 
and heavy fines (see B above).  There is no evidence that 
Turkey is a labor source country and it is a very limited 
destination country. 
 
¶D.  (U)  Chapter 1, Section 6 of the revised Penal Code 
provides varying degrees of penalties for sexual assault, 
rape, and sexual abuse of adults and minors, as noted below. 
Penalties may range from two years to life imprisonment, 
depending upon the circumstances.  Penalties for rape can be 
less or more than penalties for trafficking, depending on the 
situation.  The new Code excludes several controversial 
articles from the previous law.  For example, under the 2004 
revisions, rape is considered a crime against the individual, 
rather than a crime against society. 
 
Under the previous Code, rapists could escape punishment by 
marrying their victims, and punishments for rape varied 
depending on the marital status of the victim and whether the 
victim was a virgin. 
 
 Section 6:  Offenses Against Sexual Integrity 
 
  Article 102:  Sexual Assault 
 
  (1)  The perpetrator who violates the physical integrity of 
another person by means of sexual conduct shall be imprisoned 
for a term of two to seven years upon the complaint of the 
victim. 
 
  (2)  Where the act is committed by means of inserting an 
organ or similar object into the body, the perpetrator shall 
be imprisoned for a term of seven to twelve years.  If the 
act is committed against the spouse, legal investigation and 
prosecution shall be initiated if the victim lodges a 
complaint. 
 
  (3)  If the offense is committed, 
 
   a) Against a person who is physically or mentally 
incapable of defending him/herself, 
   b) By breaching of duties and/or abusing the functions 
pertaining to the official status, 
   c) Against a person of first, second, or third degree 
blood relation or a relative by marriage, 
   d) By using weapons and with the cooperation of more than 
one person, 
 
  penalties imposed in accordance with articles above shall 
be increased by half. 
 
  (4)  In case excessive violence is exerted on the victim 
during the commitment of the offense, the perpetrator shall 
also be punished for deliberate wounding. 
  (5)  In case the offense causes damage to the physical or 
mental health of the victim, the perpetrator shall be 
 
 
imprisoned for a term of not less than ten years. 
  (6)  If, as a result of the crime, the victim enters into a 
vegetative state or dies, the sentence will be strict life 
imprisonment. 
 
  Article 103:  Sexual Abuse of Children 
 
  (1) The perpetrator of child abuse shall be imprisoned for 
a term of three to eight years.  Sexual abuse means: 
 
  a)  any act of a sexual nature against a minor who has not 
reached fifteen years of age, or, if over fifteen years of 
age, lacks the competence to perceive the legal meaning and 
consequences of such acts. 
 
  b)  sexual acts against other minors depending on use of 
force, threat, deception, or by any other reason affecting 
the will of the child. 
 
  (2)  Where the sexual assault occurs as a result of 
insertion of an organ or similar object into the body, a 
penalty imprisonment from eight to fifteen years shall be 
imposed. 
 
  (3)  Where the sexual assault is committed by a first, 
second or third degree blood relative, step-father, the 
person who has adopted the person concerned, guardian, tutor, 
teacher, caretaker, or other person in charge of providing 
health services or who bears the obligation for protection or 
supervision, or through abuse of the service relation, the 
penalty to be imposed, in accordance with the above 
paragraphs, shall be increased by half. 
 
  (4)  Where the sexual assault is committed against a minor 
indicated in paragraph 1(a) as a result of force or threat, 
the penalty to be imposed, in accordance with the above 
paragraphs, shall be increased by half. 
 
  (5)  Where the force and compulsion used with the aim of 
sexual assault lead to aggravated consequences of the offense 
of deliberate wounding, provisions of the offense of 
deliberate wounding shall apply additionally. 
 
  (6)  In case the offense results in damage to the physical 
or mental health of the victim, the perpetrator shall be 
imprisoned to strict life imprisonment. 
 
  (7)  Where the offense leads the victim into a vegetative 
state or to death, the perpetrator shall be sentenced to 
strict life imprisonment. 
 
¶E.  (U)  Prostitution in Turkey is legal and regulated.  Sex 
workers must have Turkish citizenship; foreign citizens 
cannot legally practice prostitution.  Trafficking, smuggling 
with the intent to traffic, pimping, enforcing, or in any 
other way supporting the activities of a trafficking 
operation is illegal.  The law also prohibits and provides 
punishment for individuals who own, operate or work to 
support the operation of brothels associated with human 
trafficking.  The minimum age for prostitution in Turkey is 
¶18. 
 
¶F.  (U)  According to figures provided by the Ministry of 
Interior, security forces apprehended a total of 422 persons 
in 2006, an increase from 217 in 2005.  In 2006, 156 
suspected traffickers were arrested, 127 were freed to be 
tried on release, 115 persons are being sought on arrest 
warrants and 24 persons were released without charges. 
 
According to charts provided by the Ministry of Justice's 
Judicial Records Statistics Bureau via the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, Turkey's Heavy Penal Courts opened 26 
Article 80 cases involving 116 suspects and continued work on 
116 cases (under Article 80 and other relevant articles) 
involving 477 suspects from January through June, 2006. 
Forty-three cases involving trafficking under several law 
articles (including some under the old penal code) were 
resolved with 192 suspected traffickers:  102 were acquitted; 
29 were remanded to other courts or dismissed; 36 were 
convicted.  Of the 36 convicted, one received only a judicial 
fine while the rest received varying jail terms and fines. 
 
Statistics for the July-December 2006 term and the first term 
of 2007 were not yet available.  The Ministry of Justice does 
 
 
not yet have a computerized database, causing Ankara to rely 
on each province faxing in reports. 
 
There is no evidence that Turkey is a labor source country. 
Labor exploitation can be prosecuted under Article 80, which 
carried penalties of eight to twelve years imprisonment and 
heavy fines. 
 
Post was unable to obtain detailed statistics on actual time 
served by convicted traffickers.  The GOT does not have a 
central database or tracking system for incarcerated 
individuals and must seek information from each province by 
fax. 
 
¶G.  (SBU)  IOM statistics claim that a solid majority of 
trafficked individuals have no more than a middle school 
education; less than one-third have graduated from high 
school.  These individuals are recruited mostly through 
personal contacts, such as a person posing as a friend or by 
an actual relative.  While the trafficking rings are believed 
to be operated by men, the recruiters are overwhelmingly 
female, some of whom are former trafficking victims 
themselves.  These recruiters often work under pressure from 
the traffickers, who threaten to kill their children or 
family members unless they cooperate.  Women recruiters are 
prized because they more easily gain the trust of their 
female victims.  Foreign victims trafficked to Turkey are 
typically recruited by small networks of operators.  Groups 
may be as small as four or five people.  Trafficking networks 
operating as tourist agencies or firms in source countries 
bring women to Turkey with official work permits.  We have no 
evidence that government officials are involved.  Most 
reports indicate that profits are channeled into expanding 
the networks' capacity and affluence.  Networks tend to 
deposit proceeds in source country bank accounts through the 
Turkish banking system.  Jandarma and other officials 
repeatedly insist trafficking in humans, arms, and narcotics 
are closely connected. 
 
¶H.  (U)  According to GoT officials, Turkey actively 
investigates cases of trafficking using special investigative 
techniques, including undercover operations, electronic 
surveillance, and mitigated punishment in TIP cases. 
 
In December 2004, Turkey revised its Code of Criminal 
Procedures to codify TIP-Specific surveillance, undercover 
operations, and mitigated punishment for suspects in 
trafficking crimes.  The Code regulates how to conduct 
criminal procedures in TIP investigations, as well as the 
rights, powers, and obligations of individuals involved in 
the process.  This Code does not prohibit police from 
engaging in covert operations. 
 
¶I.  (U)  The Turkish National Police (TNP) has 
institutionalized TIP-related training internally and 
conducts regular train-the-trainer sessions with its cadre. 
TNP also participated in several joint trainings with various 
countries at the Turkish Academy to Fight Against Drugs and 
Organized Crime (TADOC).  In 2006, a total of 1150 police 
were trained on topics such as: 
 
  - What is human trafficking? 
  - The difference between human trafficking and illegal 
immigration 
  - Who are human trafficking victims? 
  - National and international regulations in the fight 
against human trafficking 
  - The importance of national and international coordination 
in the fight against human trafficking 
  - The UN Palermo Convention and supplemental protocols and 
international implementation in the fight against TIP 
  - Bilateral cooperation agreements in the fight against 
human trafficking 
  - Elements to pay attention to in operations against human 
trafficking 
  - How to approach a victim 
  - The importance of cooperating with NGOs while approaching 
victims 
  - Administrative arrangements on approaching a victim 
  - Case studies 
 
In 2007, the TNP also began efforts to educate the media on 
trafficking, particularly the difference between illegal 
foreign prostitutes and trafficking victims, as well as the 
 
 
difference between trafficking in persons and human 
smuggling.  The media often reports inaccurately on both 
topics. 
 
During the reporting period the Jandarma continued training 
its personnel via its mobile training unit using a course 
titled, "The Importance of the Fight Against Trafficking and 
Necessary Measures."  It continued to distribute thousands of 
copies of a "Guide to Fight Human Trafficking Crimes" to all 
relevant Jandarma officers.  The guide includes all national 
and international legal documents, the aspects that one 
should bear in mind during an investigation, how evidence 
should be collected for the investigation, protection of 
witnesses and how to talk to victims. 
 
In June 2006, the Turkish Directorate General on the Status 
of Women organized a regional conference called "Assessment 
of Regional Needs and Tendencies in Combating Human 
Trafficking -- the Role of NGOs" in Antalya, Turkey (septel). 
 
Under the auspices of an EU-twinning project, the Ministry of 
Interior continued a project called "Strengthening the 
Institutional Capacity in the Fight Against Human 
Trafficking," in conjunction with the Ministries of Justice, 
Labor, Social Security, Health and Foreign Affairs, as well 
as the Social Services and State Orphanages Directorate and 
the Directorate General on the Status of Women. Its aim is to 
achieve the necessary standards to reduce human trafficking 
and strengthen the involved institutions involved in 
combatting TIP.  The project will also adopt a new 
comprehensive strategy against TIP to be adopted by the 
National Task Force and implement several related 
sector-specific action plans. 
 
¶J.  (SBU)  During the rating period, the GOT signed a 
bilateral cooperation protocol to fight trafficking with 
Kyrgyzstan in September 2006, in addition to previously 
signed protocols with Belarus, Georgia, Ukraine and Moldova. 
The MFA claims good cooperation via these protocols with 
Moldova particularly, and to a lesser extent Ukraine and 
Belarus.  The GOT is undertaking a series of visits to 
Georgia in February and March 2007 to improve law enforcement 
cooperation with Georgia.  The TNP public order department 
complained, however, that source countries do not conduct 
thorough investigations of alleged traffickers in response to 
Turkish law enforcement requests.  They report that law 
enforcement officials in source countries respond to their 
requests for investigative assistance on suspects too quickly 
and cite no information found, which the TNP claims 
demonstrates a less-than-thorough investigation. 
 
¶K.  (SBU)  The universal jurisdiction norm is recognized by 
the Turkish Criminal Code on the basis of certain offenses 
and crimes.  Included in this norm are migrant smuggling and 
trafficking in human beings.  A foreigner or Turkish 
trafficker is indictable and punishable in Turkey.  The 
Turkish Minister of Justice may request a trial process be 
launched in Turkey against an accused person who has already 
been through the legal system in conjunction with these 
offenses in another country.  We have no information 
regarding the extradition of persons charged with 
trafficking from other countries during the reporting period. 
 
¶L.  (SBU)  We do not have evidence of government involvement 
in or tolerance of trafficking at higher levels. There were 
reports of approximately 10 low-level police or Jandarma 
officials arrested for crimes related to trafficking during 
the reporting period, although exact statistics were not 
available.  Contacts state there is some tolerance of foreign 
prostitution as long as it is kept within certain limits. 
 
¶M.  (SBU)  We do not have statistics on the exact number of 
police or Jandarma officials taken to trial for trafficking. 
Press reports and contacts provide an estimate of about 10 
officials arrested and prosecuted.  We do not have 
information on how many have been convicted during the 
reporting period. 
 
¶N.  (SBU)  We do not have evidence that Turkey is a source or 
destination country for organized child sex tourism.  IOM 
reported 11 underage TIP victims during the reporting period. 
 
¶O.  (U)  Turkey has adopted the following conventions: 
 
 
- ILO Convention 182 (Ratified early 2001). 
- ILO Convention 29 and 105 on Forced or Compulsory Labor 
(ILO Convention 29 went into effect on January 27, 1998 and 
ILO Convention 105 on December 21, 1960). 
- Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the 
Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution, and Child 
Pornography (Ratified May 9, 2002). 
- The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish 
Trafficking-in-Persons, especially Women and Children, 
Supplementing the UN Convention Against Transnational 
Organized Crime (Signed December 2000; Ratified January 31, 
2003 and implemented February 4, 2003). 
 
Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
WILSON