07ANKARA193
ANKARA'S LEAHY HUMAN RIGHTS VETTING PROCEDURES
Wed Jan 31 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAK #0193/01 0310745
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 310745Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0767
INFO RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS ANKARA 000193 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AADP MARR MASS PHUM PINR PINS PREL EU TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA'S LEAHY HUMAN RIGHTS VETTING PROCEDURES 
 
1.(U) In accordance with the Leahy Amendment all candidates 
for training or assistance funded pursuant to the Foreign 
Operations, Export Financing, and Related Programs 
Appropriations Act (FOAA), must be vetted on human rights, 
corruption, narcotics, or criminal grounds.  Vetting is 
required to assure that, to the Embassy's best knowledge, the 
USG does not fund travel, training, or material assistance to 
individuals (or groups of individuals) who have engaged in 
gross violations of human rights or other disqualifying 
activities. The legal requirements governing the necessity of 
vetting vary depending on whether the activity is financed by 
FOAA funding or Department of Defense funding.  Post's 
standard operating procedure for vetting is set forth in para 
2 below. 
 
-------------------- 
FOAA Funded Training 
-------------------- 
 
2.(U) To vet candidates for FOAA-funded activities, post will 
follow these procedures: 
 
--    Step 1:  An officer or section at post learns of 
foreign military and/or law enforcement joint 
activity/request, e.g., that unit(s) or individuals are to be 
trained or provided with other assistance using FOAA funding. 
 That officer/section chooses a POC to vet the case. 
 
--    Step 2:  At least 20 days prior to the date of 
potential travel, the POC distributes names and biographic 
data of potential trainees to appropriate agencies at post 
for vetting.  Relevant post sections review paper and 
electronic classified and unclassified files for credible 
evidence of gross human rights violations perpetrated by 
unit(s) or individuals proposed for training.  POC searches 
Abuse Case Evaluation System (ACES) for such evidence. 
Relevant agencies may include:  POL, PMA, RSO, ORA, Legatt, 
DEA, CONS, DAO, and ODC. 
 
--    Step 3:  Within five working days, each section 
responds in writing to the POC with the result of their 
search.  Each section shall appoint a point-of-contact to 
receive and perform vetting. 
 
--    Step 4:  POC reviews findings.  If credible derogatory 
information is found that an individual or unit is 
responsible for gross violations of human rights, POC will 
strike the name from the list to be sent to Washington for 
clearance, enter appropriate information into the ACES 
database, and cable Washington. 
 
--    Step 5: POC notifies the Department by cable of the 
list of names of individuals or units on whom no derogatory 
information was found and asks for clearance.  The cable 
shall include the complete name, the date of birth and 
nationality of each candidate.  Post will strive to send 
distinguishing information for individuals who share the same 
name or a common name.  Post shall provide Washington with at 
least ten working days to conduct name checks and reply back 
to post. 
 
--    Step 6: The desk officer conducts his or her own 
vetting by checking the names against bureau files and 
records and INR's database, which INR makes available to 
appropriately cleared individuals from the regional bureaus 
for this purpose. 
 
--    Step :  If no derogatory information is found, the 
desk officer formats the clearance into a reply cable 
(reproducing all the information as provided in the original 
cable from post) and forwards it to DRL/PHD and PM/PPA for 
clearance.  If these offices identify no derogatory 
information, they will clear and the regional bureau 
transmits the cable to post indicating that 
training/assistance may proceed.  If vetting at the 
Department reveals derogatory information, the regional desk 
officer informs post and training may not proceed.  In 
addition, the L Bureau (L/LFA) now requires an information 
copy of the reply cable if derogatory information or other 
issues arise in the vetting process. 
 
3.(U) We understand that there is no "good-for" period that 
applies to vetting.  The individual's (or unit and unit 
commander's) name must be betted and submitted each time they 
are nominated for training. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Department of Defense Funded Training 
------------------------------------- 
 
4.(U) The Department of State is not legally required to vet 
DOD-funded training pursuant to the Leahy Amendment 
provisions.  Post, accordingly, will only vet for DOD-funded 
training when the DOD requests it.  Should DOD request 
vetting, Post will follow the steps set forth above if the 
request is received within 20 days of the scheduled travel or 
activity.  If therequest is received with less time, POC 
will ttempt to conduct an informal vetting of the 
candidate(s) by reviewing the political section's hard files, 
electronic files, and ACES database. 
 
5.(U) Full vetting determinations for DOD-funded cases are 
valid for one-year.  Therefore, to avoid last-minute time 
pressures, DOD should submit requests for vetting to the POC 
well in advance of the training date. 
 
6.(U) If derogatory information is found on a unit or 
individual proposed for DOD-funded training/assistance, the 
Department will report derogatory and/or any mitigating 
information to DOD, and the POC will inform the Chief of 
Mission.  DOD, however, is entitled to make its own 
determination as to whether to proceed with the training. 
 
Visit Ankara's Classified Web Site at 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/ankara/ 
 
WILSON