07ANKARA1257
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed May 23 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO4115
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1257/01 1431416
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 231416Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2239
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8088
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 2744
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 1971
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 5924
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 5702
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2314
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001257 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, MAY 23, 2007 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Blast Kills 6, Wounds 100 in Ankara 
All papers report a bomb at a crowded shopping center on Tuesday 
evening in the heart of Ankara killed six and injured more than 100 
people.  Some papers report that a Pakistani was among the killed 
and most report that six Pakistanis who were in Ankara for the 
defense industry fair "IDEF 2007" organized by the Turkish military 
were also among the wounded.  Police detained eight suspects in 
connection with the powerful blast in the city's historic Ulus 
district.  There are some reports that TAK, an arm of the PKK 
terrorist organization too credit for the blast, but other papers 
report that there was no immediate claim of responsibility. Most 
papers and TV broadcasts note the A-4 explosives used in the blast 
pointed to the PKK.  It's not clear yet whether the bomb was placed 
at a bus stop or was the work of a suicide bomber.  Hurriyet and 
Radikal note the explosion occurred along the route which General 
Buyukanit and many defense ministers and chiefs of staff would 
travel to the International Defense Industry Fair (IDEF) 2007 
reception, speculating that the attack may have been an 
assassination attempt. 
 
Prime Minister Erdogan, opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal, and the 
Turkish General Staff (TGS) chief General Yasar Buyukanit visited 
the site, all denouncing the strike.  Erdogan said "We have seen a 
ruthless terror attack at Ankara's busiest time.  We must work 
together against terror in all countries around the world.  We see 
the results of it in America, Britain, Spain, Italy and all places." 
 Buyukanit told the press, "This was done by an organized terror 
group," warning, "From now on, you can expect this in any big city." 
 
 
Several papers and TV news broadcasts carry a statement the US 
Embassy Ankara released last night, in which the US expressed "shock 
and horror at the tragic event," and said it remains steadfast in 
its "determination to work together with the government of Turkey to 
combat terrorism in all its forms." 
 
Edip Baser Remarks following his Dismissal from the Position of 
Counterterrorism Special Envoy 
All papers report that at a press conference yesterday retired 
General Edip Baser who was fired on Monday by the government as the 
special envoy to counter terrorism, said that he was unhappy with 
the way he was dismissed and that his remarks concerning the 
Presidential election were the main reason.  Meanwhile, US State 
Department spokesman Sean McCormack stressed that the US special 
envoy for countering terrorism General Ralston will continue his 
duties. 
 
General Buyukanit Accuses Western Countries of Supporting the PKK 
Milliyet, Cumhuriyet, Hurriyet and others:  In an article in Defense 
and Aviation Magazine TGS Chief General Buyukanit said that PKK 
terrorists are enjoying unprecedented freedom in Northern Iraq and 
added that an even more alarming issue than this is the support 
extended by Europe to PKK.  Buyukanit stressed that many of the 
countries that ignore Turkey's fight against terrorism are NATO 
members. 
 
Admiral Mullen Seeks Turkish Support for Naval Security 
Mainstream Milliyet carries an interview with Admiral Michael 
Mullen, the US Chief of Naval Operations, who paid a visit to Ankara 
and Istanbul for talks.  Mullen said during his meetings in Ankara, 
he asked for Turkey's contribution to the project of a "world 
armada" of a thousand ships which will enforce security on the seas. 
 "Some 90 percent of immigrant, drugs, and arms trafficking is 
carried out on the seas.  Not only Turkey, but several other 
countries will contribute to the partnership," Mullen said.  He 
noted Turkey's leadership is important for the sake of naval 
security and information sharing in the Black Sea exercises of 
Blackseafor and Black Sea Harmony.  Mullen also voiced support for 
 
ANKARA 00001257  002 OF 003 
 
 
the transfer of two US frigates to Turkey, an issue still being 
discussed in the US Congress, and added that his Turkish counterpart 
Admiral Yener Karahanoglu, too, supported the transfer. 
 
Turkey to Host International Energy Conferences 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports Ankara will host June 5, 
"Turkey and the EU: Together in European Energy Politics" conference 
to discuss the EU's search for energy partnerships with Turkey. 
Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul, EU Expansion Commissioner Olli Rehn 
and EU Energy Commissioner Andris Piebalgs will participate in the 
conference to which Russia will send a high level official.  In 
Istanbul, energy ministers from Turkey, Egypt, Kazakhstan, 
Turkmenistan, Israel, India and China as well as OPEC head Bin 
Dhalen al-Hamdi and EU officials will take part in "East Meets West: 
New Horizons in Energy Security" conference on June 26-28 under the 
auspices of President Sezer.  Armenian Energy Minister Armen 
Movsisyan, too, will participate in the gathering.  The main topic 
of both meetings will be the future of Turkey-Europe Natural Gas 
Pipeline (Nabucco,) says Cumhuriyet. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Democracy, Secularism in Turkey 
Mehmed Ali Birand writes in the tabloid daily Posta: "How should we 
interpret the unexpected midnight warning issued by Turkish army on 
April 27? The absence of politically motivated press briefings by 
the TGS such as the ones before the February 28, 1997, situation 
indicates that the Turkish military is staying away from direct 
intervention.  Instead it has a new approach as evidenced by the 
increased communication between secularists and the Turkish.  The 
opposition party CHP forms the political wing of this spectrum while 
the Higher Board of Education symbolizes the university sector.  The 
judicial bureaucracy and secular leaning non-governmental 
organizations are also part of the spectrum.  The secular media 
serves as a communication tool for public opinion.  The Turkish army 
sometimes orchestrates these groups, and sometimes it becomes the 
address to respond to the demands coming from them.  If we take a 
close look at the April 27 statement and concentrate on the 
developments before and after, we can conclude that the Turkish army 
is in the process of changing [in a non-interventionist fashion]." 
 
Hasan Cemal writes in the mainstream daily Milliyet: "Secularism 
should not be a taboo -- it should be a subject of discussion just 
like in any normal democracy.  Debate on secularism does not 
necessarily indicate going against the regime.  The definition of 
secularism in Turkey narrows the arena of faith and religion to 
private life, but in practice, the state casts a shadow on religion 
and controls it.  Secularism requires the state to maintain an equal 
distance from all religions and faiths, which is not the case here 
in Turkey.  Creating taboos and drawing undisputable areas are not 
only habits of totalitarian regimes, but also they pave the way for 
separatism.  For example, the Turkish army warning issued on April 
27 was the biggest separatist step in Turkey.  In a democracy, 
everything and anything should be expressed and should be discussed. 
 Nothing should be exempt from criticism.  Otherwise Turkey moves 
toward more polarization which is the very root of separatism." 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV (6 A.M.) 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Opposition CHP MP for Hakkari Esat Canan has resigned from his 
party.  Canan had participated in the presidential elections despite 
a CHP decision to boycott the voting. 
 
- A Turkish F-16 jetfighter crashed near the central Anatolian city 
of Konya.  The pilot survived the crash with slight injuries. 
 
- Prime Minister Erdogan has rejected the invitation of CHP leader 
Deniz Baykal to appear together in a live TV debate. 
 
 
ANKARA 00001257  003 OF 003 
 
 
- Retired general Armagan Kuloglu claims the counter-terrorism 
coordination mechanism was designed by the US to delay Turkey's 
fight against terrorism. 
 
International News 
 
- Bulgaria's Rights and Freedoms Movement, the majority of its 
members ethnic Turks, earned the right to send five deputies to the 
European Parliament, increasing the number of parliamentarians of 
Turkish origin in the Strasbourg-based assembly. 
 
- Israel has warned Hamas that none of its leaders were safe from 
attack after a rocket fired by Gaza militants killed a woman in the 
town of Sderot. 
 
- The Israeli daily Ma'ariv has published a list of names and photos 
of Palestinian militant leaders the Israeli forces intend to 
assassinate. 
 
- British prosecutors announced they would seek the extradition of 
Russian businessman Andrei Lugovoi to charge him with poisoning 
Kremlin critic Alexander Litvinenko last November. 
 
WILSON