07ANKARA2634
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Oct 24 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO8165
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #2634/01 2971444
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 241444Z OCT 07
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4141
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8442
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3449
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2398
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6211
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6017
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2608
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002634 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, OCTOBER 22, 2007 
 
Turkey Outraged at PKK's Killing of 12 Soldiers 
All papers report the Turkish General Staff (TGS) announced that 12 
soldiers were killed, 16 were wounded and eight were missing after 
clashes with PKK terrorists in Hakkari province on the border with 
Iraq.  Some 250 PKK members crossed into Turkey from northern Iraq 
and attacked an infantry brigade in Daglica region of Hakkari 
province in the early hours of October 21.  In a statement posted on 
its website the Turkish General Staff reported that 32 terrorists 
were killed in the ensuing pursuit. 
 
Emergency talks were held on Sunday night to plot Turkey's response 
to the attack.  After the talks - which included President Abdullah 
Gul, Prime Minister Erdogan, the head of the Turkish General Staff 
(TGS) Yasar Buyukanit and other top security officials - a statement 
released from the president's office said, "Turkey respects the 
territorial integrity of Iraq.  Turkey, however, will not shy away 
from paying whatever price is necessary to protect its rights, its 
indivisible unity and its citizens." 
 
President Abdullah Gul told the press before the emergency summit 
that Turkey did not have designs on Iraq's territory.  "However, if 
Iraq keeps harboring terrorists, Turkey has the right to destroy 
this threat.  Turkey's fully determined in this matter; the 
parliament has already authorized actions to be taken if necessary." 
 
 
Defense Minister Vecdi Gonul told the press in Kiev after talks with 
Defense Secretary Robert Gates that Turkey was planning a 
cross-border incursion, but "not urgently." "We'd like to do these 
things with the Americans," added Gonul. 
 
Prime Minister Erdogan said after the summit meeting that Secretary 
Rice had asked Turkey not to take action against the PKK terrorists, 
and give the US "a few days." 
 
Opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal said a "covert war" was waged 
against Turkey and called for a cross-border incursion.  MHP leader 
Devlet Bahceli said the government should not delay further the 
launch of cross-border operations against the PKK, and that Turkish 
authorities also should consider measures such as a declaration of 
emergency rule in the region.  Erdogan responded to Bahceli, "Not 
emotions but common sense should prevail in the struggle against 
terrorism.  We cannot declare a state of emergency just because some 
people demand it." 
 
Iraq's government said on Sunday it was taking important steps to 
end the "terrorist actions" of the PKK.  Prime Minister Nuri 
al-Maliki's office said in a statement Iraq condemned the PKK.  In a 
joint news conference with Kurdistan regional president Massoud 
Barzani, President Jalal Talabani refused a demand to hand the PKK 
elements over to Turkey, calling it "a dream that will never come 
true."  Talabani statement that "we will not even hand over a 
Kurdish cat, let alone a man" was termed provocative by the Turkish 
press.  Talabani renewed calls for the PKK to end violence.  In an 
interview with private television channel Kanal D late Sunday night, 
Talabani said they could not arrest PKK leaders hiding in the 
mountains, "out of Iraq's range of authority."  He said Turkish 
soldiers have not crossed the Iraqi border yet, and noted they asked 
Turkey to work in cooperation with the Iraqi government.  Kurdish 
regional government leader Massoud Barzani said Turkey should offer 
the PKK peace, and that the PKK could be called terrorist if they 
reject the offer.  "We are not going to be caught up in the PKK and 
Turkish war, but if the Kurdistan region is targeted, we are going 
to defend ourselves," Barzani told reporters after meeting with 
Talabani. 
 
Papers report President Bush on Sunday condemned as "unacceptable" 
attacks by the PKK and said they must stop.  "President Bush 
strongly condemns the violent attacks in Hakkari province and 
extends his condolences to the families who lost loved ones and to 
 
ANKARA 00002634  002 OF 003 
 
 
all the people of Turkey," White House National Security Council 
spokesman Gordon Johndroe said in a statement.  Papers also report 
Ambassador Ross Wilson's statement that he is "committed to working 
with Turkey and Turkish authorities to eliminate the PKK terrorist 
threat to the people of Turkey." 
 
"Turkey is outraged, our patience comes to an end," say papers on 
Monday, reporting that in several provinces tens of thousands took 
to the streets Sunday to condemn the attack on Turkish soldiers. 
Mainstream Hurriyet says in a page one headline, "We are behind you. 
 The Turkish people rally tightly behind their army and parliament." 
 "Enough already!" says a Cumhuriyet banner headline, denouncing the 
"treacherous" ambush that has killed 12 soldiers.  Under the 
headline "All of Turkey protests," liberal Radikal reports 
spontaneous protest rallies across Turkey. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Iraq/PKK 
Gungor Mengi commented in the mainstream Vatan (10/22):  "These days 
are filled with colossal sadness and fury.  Things can become very 
destructive unless this sentiment is controlled properly.  It is 
certainly unacceptable to be attacked heinously, but it is also 
wrong to lose common sense in reaction.  PKK wants to drag Turkey 
into northern Iraq and become part of the quagmire.  Therefore, we 
have to make the right decision.  Are we going to continue ignoring 
Barzani, or are we going to find ways for cooperation with him?  The 
local Iraqi administration in the north is obviously making politics 
about PKK, but the overall goals of the PKK and the northern Iraqi 
administration are not necessarily parallel to each other.  The 
local administration does not want to be a subject of Turkey's 
military operation or experience an embargo by Turkey.  It is 
expected that PKK will orchestrate even more violent attacks to get 
Turkey to run out of patience.  This is a provocative act to drag 
Turkey in there. We have to be very careful.  In fact, since the US 
is responsible for this ongoing bloody and treacherous game we 
better listen to what Washington has in mind about what to do. 
Thus, the upcoming meeting between PM Erdogan and President Bush is 
very important." 
 
Semih Idiz wrote in the mainstream Milliyet (10/22):  "It is very 
important that PM Erdogan made a call to PKK members to lay down 
arms and suggested they should try politics.  Given the 
circumstances of violent attacks and fury, the PM's statement is an 
indication of political courage.   The fact of the matter is that 
when we think about the deep roots of the problem, political, social 
and economic steps are really needed.  We should not consider such 
steps as bowing to the terrorist PKK.  The UK set a good example on 
this.  The IRA issue was resolved through such steps.  All of this 
does not mean that Turkey has to underplay the security aspect of 
terrorism, but the fight against terror cannot be limited to that 
only.  The struggle has other aspects as well." 
 
People Vote "Yes" in the Referendum for Constitutional Amendment 
All papers report that even though the referendum was overshadowed 
by the terrorist attack in Hakkari, voter turnout was still 67 
percent.  Sixty-nine percent of the electors said 'yes" while 31 
percent said "no".  The amendment package allows the election of 
future presidents by popular vote; foresees that general elections 
are held every four years instead of five; the presidential term is 
lowered from the current seven years to five; the president can 
stand for re-election for a second term; and a quorum of one-third 
of the total number of MPs is required to open a parliamentary 
debate.  PM Erdogan held a press conference after the results were 
announced and said that the referendum will contribute to the 
stability of the country. 
 
US Troops Killed A Turkish Truck Driver 
Hurriyet, Bugun, Posta:  A Turkish truck diver from Kilis, 24 year 
old Muhammet Gani Ikidisli, was transporting goods to a US base in 
northern Iraq.  On October 10, while driving from Dohuk to Mosul in 
a US convoy, his truck broke down.  While he was trying to repair 
 
ANKARA 00002634  003 OF 003 
 
 
his truck, a few US soldiers from the convoy who were annoyed with 
the situation came next to the driver, shot him and continued 
driving.  Mr. Ikidisli was taken to the hospital in Dohok by Iraqi 
people, but died in the hospital a few days after the incident. 
Hurriyet says that the driver's father brought his son's body to 
Diyarbakir for an autopsy and buried him in their hometown, Kilis. 
 
TV News: 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Prime Minister Erdogan said after consultations with colleagues 
that he would not change his plans to travel to Britain, and will 
depart after the Council of Ministers meeting Monday.   Erdogan said 
he will deliver a lecture at Oxford University on Monday evening, 
and meet with the British and Israeli prime ministers on Tuesday. 
 
- Turkish Ambassador to the US, Nabi Sensoy, returned to the US on 
Sunday.  "I hope that the time I spent in Turkey has been a serious 
message showing our strong reaction.  I will now continue working to 
further the Turkey-US ties," Said Sensoy. 
 
- The strike of Turk Telekom workers has been marred by reports of 
alleged sabotage by the workers. 
 
International News 
 
- French President Sarkozy said no new chapters of Turkey's 
accession talks with the EU will be opened before the bloc makes a 
decision about the appointment of a group of wise men to study 
Europe's long-term future and borders. 
 
- Iran's Foreign Ministry said Ali Larijani, who resigned as the 
country's top nuclear negotiator, would attend talks on Tuesday in 
Rome alongside Iran's new top negotiator, Saeed Jalili, and the EU's 
foreign policy chief. 
 
- The exit poll results show the right wing Swiss People's Party and 
the Greens as the main winners in Swiss elections. 
 
WILSON