07BAGHDAD265
IRAQ: 2006 COUNTRY REPORTS ON TERRORISM
Thu Jan 25 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #0265/01 0251855
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 251855Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9254
INFO RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC//NSC// PRIORITYUNCLAS BAGHDAD 000265 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
S/CT FOR RHONDA SHORE AND NCTC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER ASEC PGOV IZ
SUBJECT: IRAQ: 2006 COUNTRY REPORTS ON TERRORISM 
 
¶1. Embassy POC: Allison Monz; monza2@state.gov.  Telephone: 
914-822-9289. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Iraq remains at the center in the global war on 
terror battling al-Qaida and affiliated terrorist 
organizations; insurgent groups fighting against Coalition 
Forces (CF); along with militias and death squads 
increasingly engaged in sectarian violence; and criminal 
organizations taking advantage of Iraq's deteriorating 
security situation.  Terrorist organizations and insurgent 
groups continue to attack Coalition Forces primarily 
utilizing Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) and 
Vehicle-Borne Improvised Explosive Devices (VBIEDs).  The GOI 
universally condemns terrorist groups and supports Coalition 
Forces (CF) against al-Qaida and its affiliates.  The June 7, 
2006 death of al-Qaida's Iraq leader, Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, 
damaged the group's leadership, but did not diminish attacks 
against CF and Iraqis nor halt overall increasing attack 
trends by the group. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Al-Qaida and affiliated groups continued attacks on 
Iraq's infrastructure and claimed responsibility for 
kidnappings and attacks against CF.  Tribal leaders in 
Ramadi, a volatile city in Anbar province, banded together in 
late 2006 and pledged to fight against al-Qaida instead of 
CF.  While their full effectiveness remains uncertain, this 
represents an important step in the fight to defeat al-Qaida. 
 GOI-sponsored reconciliation programs aimed at reducing the 
sources of violence.  The government has organized 
conferences involving tribal and religious leaders, 
politicians and civil society organizations, to both counter 
support for terrorist organizations and promote dialogue 
between Iraq's ethnic and religious groups in an effort to 
decrease violence. 
 
4.(SBU) In 2006 the extent of Iraq's sectarian divide emerged 
following the February 22 bombing of the al-Askari Mosque, 
one of the holiest sites to Shia Muslims, located in Salah ad 
Din.  While violence against both CF and Iraqis had been 
increasing prior to the bombing, this event exacerbated 
sectarian tensions and led to increased violence in Iraq's 
ethnically-mixed areas, especially Baghdad.  Sectarian 
attacks, including car bombs, suicide vests, sniper fire, and 
targeted assassinations, occur on a daily basis with Iraqi 
civilians suffering the majority of causalities.  Iraq's 
sectarian violence furthers the terrorists' goals by creating 
instability and weakening the GOI. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Neighboring countries, specifically Iran and Syria, 
continue to interfere in Iraq's internal affairs smuggling 
weapons, people and materials to terrorist, insurgent and 
militia groups inside Iraq.  Iranian agents and sympathizers 
utilize an 800-mile long, porous border with limited security 
to transport their goods. Increasingly, these materials 
include Iranian-made weapons such as Explosively Formed 
Projectiles (EFPs) or their components, which have proven 
effective in attacks against CF. 
 
¶6. (SBU) In recent statements GOI leaders, including the 
Prime Minister, the President and the Foreign Minister, have 
called on neighboring countries to stop interfering in Iraq's 
internal affairs and to stop supporting elements actively 
fighting against Iraq's elected government.  In 2006 Syria's 
Foreign Minister traveled to Baghdad and agreed to cooperate 
more closely on border security in an effort to reduce the 
number of foreign fighters entering Iraq.  Senior GOI 
officials, including Iraqi President Talabani, traveled to 
Iran throughout 2006 encouraging the Iranian government to 
support Iraq's political process and to stop material support 
of terrorist groups and 
militias. 
 
¶7. (SBU) In an effort to further demonstrate that the GOI 
would not allow Iraq to become a safe-haven for terrorist 
organizations, the GOI has taken a proactive position against 
the Kurdistan Workers Party (Kongra-Gel/PKK), an 
internationally designated terrorist organization.  In late 
2006, Iraqi Prime Minister, Nouri al-Maliki, appointed the 
Minister of State for National Security, Shirwan al-Waeli, as 
the Iraq coordinator for PKK issues.  Tension between Turkey 
and the GOI increased in late 2006 as GOT leaders expressed 
increasing frustration at what they viewed as GOI inaction 
against the PKK. 
 
¶8. (SBU) As the GOI continues to build its capacity to fight 
terrorist organizations, continued USG and international 
support will be required.  While a proven ally in the war on 
terror, Iraq's developing security forces require further 
training and resources before they can effectively address 
the groups already operating within their borders.  Iraq's 
intelligence services continue to improve in both competency 
and confidence but they also require additional support 
before they will be able to adequately identify and respond 
to internal and external terrorist threats.  The 
international community's support for investment and 
reconstruction are critical components needed to ensure that 
the GOI's plans to reduce violence, improve services and 
increase economic opportunities are successful. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Known terrorist groups in Iraq, in addition to the 
Kongra-Gel/PKK include: 
 
-- Al-Qaida Iraq (Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad 
al-Rafidayn) and the Islamic State of Iraq:  This group is 
ideologically affiliated with al-Qaida and is responsible for 
attacks against CF and Iraqis.  The June 7 death of Zarqawi 
damaged the group's leadership structure, although it did not 
change its central mission of expelling CF from Iraq and 
toppling Iraq's elected government.  Its current leader is 
known as Abu Hamza al-Muhajir.  In Janaury 2006 press reports 
indicated that AQI teamed with several smaller Sunni Islamist 
groups devoted to continuing the insurgency calling 
themselves the Mujahideen Shura Council.  By late 2006, this 
group renamed itself the Islamic State of Iraq.  The group 
claimed responsibility for kidnapping two US soldiers in June 
¶2006. 
 
-- Ansar al-Sunnah: This Sunni-dominated extremist group has 
fought against CF since 2003.  It is dedicated to expelling 
CF and establishing an Islamic state based on Sharia law.  In 
2006 this group took responsibility for several kidnappings 
and targeted assassinations 
 
-- Mujahedin-e Khalq (MEK): This group formed in the 1960s in 
Tehran University as a response to Iran's Shah who the 
founders believed to be corrupt.  The group was exiled from 
Iran in 1979 after the Islamic Revolution.  Saddam Hussein 
offered the group refuge in exchange for support during the 
Iraq-Iran war in the 1980s.  In 2003 MEK members were 
targeted by CF due to previous ties with Saddam.  They 
immediately negotiated a cease-fire and have since been 
living in CF-protected camps in Iraq. 
KHALILZAD