07BAGHDAD439
DAILY LIFE IN MUTHANNA PROVINCE:  ASSORTED
Fri Feb 09 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO2747
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #0439/01 0400810
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 090810Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9520
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BAGHDAD 000439 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV SCUL ECON IZ
SUBJECT: DAILY LIFE IN MUTHANNA PROVINCE:  ASSORTED 
VIGNETTES 
 
¶1.  This is a PRT Muthanna cable. 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶2.  In many important ways, daily life in Muthanna Province 
differs little from that of life in 18th and 19th century 
Islamic society in Iraq. Religious dominance in daily life, 
rampant unemployment and persistent security concerns 
determine a daily existence rooted in hard work (mainly 
agricultural, petty business or governmental work), the 
search for work and religious rituals; there is hardly much 
time available for social interactions of the kind prevalent 
in western societies.  There is however evidence of several 
changes in the Post Saddam era, and there is evidence that 
further changes may occur, even though they are more likely 
to be movements back to the way things were in the Pre-Saddam 
era. An examination of social, religious, economic and 
political activities generally addresses daily life in the 
province and seeks to identify those changes that have 
occurred.  End summary. 
 
----------------- 
Social Activities 
----------------- 
 
¶3.  There are extremely limited social outlets in Post Saddam 
Muthanna. As is typical in most Islamic societies, there is 
practically no intermingling of adult males and females in a 
social context. This social taboo contributes directly to the 
limited social space. 
 
¶4.  In the Saddam era, a large bar operated in downtown 
Samawah that was usually open from approximately 0900 to 0200 
hours daily. This bar served as a meeting house, coffee shop, 
point of intellectual exchange and source of cultural 
enlightenment, even though the actual clientele is uncertain 
and it may have only catered to out of town Baathists and/or 
government officials.  The persistent rumor that this bar 
also served beer and whisky may help explain some of the 
nostalgia associated with its existence.  In the Post Saddam 
era, the religious leaders closed the bar in recognition of 
its perceived influence on the community. In central Samawah, 
the capital city, tea sellers, coffee sellers and hooka 
owners still do a relatively thriving business. Coffee shops 
prevail in market places, especially covered ones, and 
operate from 1000 to 0100 hours daily. Some measure of 
socializing occurs through "walk arounds" in the market 
places. 
 
¶5.  Prostitution, long held in check by the dominant 
religious influences in the community, began to grow in the 
period after the 1980s war with Iran. Many families became 
desperately poor when the main "breadwinner" either did not 
return from the war or returned incapacitated.  Even though 
many families did receive compensation in the form of lands 
to build homes and/or cultivate, particularly in the Shahada 
district, poverty inevitably followed.  A few homes in Al 
Samawah are still identified as homes of prostitution, even 
though the local religious leaders have threatened to close 
them down. 
 
¶6.  Marriage continues to be arranged between families, 
particularly the women, and even though an adult male may get 
a quick glimpse of a partial face in the market place and try 
to get his sisters and other female family members to acquire 
information on looks, pedigree, personality for him, the 
decision is ultimately still that of the families.  A recent 
innovation that may soon revolutionize this institution 
hinges on the cell phone. Adult males relate that youngsters 
are now engaging in secret text messaging and cell phone 
calls, which may ultimately undermine the system of arranged 
marriages and introduce courtship in the more familiar 
western sense. 
 
¶7.  A "gymnasium" exists in the capital city of Samawah and 
is usually open from 0800 to 1400 hours daily.  During 
opening hours soccer, basketball and dominoes are allowed, 
but there are, reportedly, few takers.  There are reports of 
casinos (four) on the banks of the Euphrates, in Samawah, but 
the clerics have threatened to close the doors and they have 
been repeatedly threatened by the Jaysh )al - Mahdi (JAM) 
militias. 
 
¶8.  There are several primary, secondary and tertiary schools 
in the Province, including an Agricultural Institute. 
Primary and Secondary school hours are 0800 to 1300 hours. 
Schools are reportedly well attended.  Recently, provisions 
were made for the rapid inclusion of children of over 700 
displaced families from Baghdad and its surroundings that 
moved in, largely with relatives, in the province. 
 
BAGHDAD 00000439  002 OF 004 
 
 
 
¶9.  No public transportation system exists.  Private 
mini-buses ply the roads and an average 20 minute ride around 
the city of Samawah costs 250 Iraqi Dinars (approximately $US 
0.20).  There is a large train station in Samawah, but 
passenger trains no longer run North through Baghdad to the 
Northern provinces or South to Basra, due to security 
concerns.  Occasionally industrial freight trains from Basra 
rumble by. 
 
¶10.  Media activity in the province is muted, even though 
several national newspapers, including two large dailies ) 
The "Sabah" and "Zaman" along with several local newspapers 
are sold.  The Government owned daily "Al Samawa" last 
published an edition on December 18, 2006.  There are, 
reportedly, few readers and circulation is extremely limited. 
 A local TV station and radio station (same owners) broadcast 
one-hour inserts of national news daily. There are satellite 
dishes in most urban and rural homes; even the Bedouins are 
proud owners.  There is a government owned TV station and a 
local TV Station ) Al Samawa.  Internet services are under 
private sector control and several companies compete. Average 
subscription costs are $40.00 (US) monthly.  Most Muthanna 
internet customers use internet cafes, and several have 
sprung up in the cities of Samawa, Rumaitha and El Khidr. 
 
¶11.  Residents point out that social activities in the 
province do exist, but consist of home visits among friends. 
They do, however, admit that even during these periods of 
"socializing" men go to one part of the home and discuss 
matters of import, while women go to another part of the home 
to discuss "women's matters". 
 
-------------------- 
Religious Activities 
-------------------- 
 
¶12.  Religious activities in Muthanna province, where over 97 
percent of the population are Shiites, remains much as it has 
been for the last several hundred years.  The most important 
change in the post-Saddam period is the competition for 
religious authority between those with traditional religious 
schooling and credentials, and those who lack these 
particular attributes but rely instead on popular appeal, 
demagoguery and street power. There are several Sunni mosques 
in the main cities of Samawa and Rumaythah, and the calls to 
prayer five times daily continue to determine the rhythm of 
daily life.  There is much speculation that financial support 
for most of the religious centers, which engage in helping 
the poor and religious instructions for all, is provided by 
Iran and Saudi Arabia principally, and also by the Gulf 
States.  The power of the religious clerics continues to 
grow, as evidenced by their ultimatums to groups and 
businesses such as the casinos, bars and houses of ill 
repute.  The growing power of the clerics is only kept in 
harness by the return to power of the tribal sheikhs who have 
won for themselves some measure of political power in the new 
Iraq. 
 
------------------- 
Economic Activities 
------------------- 
 
¶13.  Economic activity within the province remains largely 
linked to agriculture, which has experienced a steady decline 
since the 1980s, when government support dwindled.  PRT 
activity within the province has focused heavily on 
revitalizing this sector, and several projects have been 
planned and examined.  A list of these projects was submitted 
to PRT Muthanna on January 15, 2007 at a meeting with the 
Provincial Reconstruction Development Council (PRDC) and at a 
meeting with the Agricultural Working Committee on January 
16, 2007.  Prior meetings with the Agricultural committee had 
examined several agricultural sub-sectors, and wheat, dates 
and rice production, coupled with related de-salinization and 
canal cleaning operations had been thoroughly discussed, 
costed and examined with a view to determining who and how 
many Iraqis would benefit from each project.  The agriculture 
group also hopes to benefit significantly from a USAID plan 
to disburse over 100 million dollars (US) to the provinces 
for agricultural projects in 2007 (400 million over 5 years). 
 A seminar on the Provincial Development Strategy (PDS) and 
Sector Planning, planned for Amman, in February of 2007 will 
also assist in agricultural planning in the province. 
 
¶14.  Iraqis within the province note that most of the goods 
provided in the market places are of Iranian, Turkish, Syrian 
or Gulf State origin.  These imports range from fresh 
vegetables and fruits to clothing and heavy equipment. Iraqi 
intermediaries are beginning to conduct a brisk trade, 
limited only by low median incomes within the province. Shops 
are open from 0900 to 1900 hours with some closures for 
 
BAGHDAD 00000439  003 OF 004 
 
 
prayers.  A more often seen business innovation is the 
wheeled tray on which items for sale are openly displayed. 
These "shops" move from place to place, following 
pedestrians.  Many of the vegetable "traders" purchase their 
vegetables from Basra, Najaf and the closest Iranian towns 
and villages. 
 
¶15.  Twenty percent of the working population are employed in 
the public sector.  These include the police, army, teachers, 
and civil servants in such ministries as the ministry of 
immigrants and immigration, which has an office in Al 
Samawah. A cement factory, owned by the government in Samawah 
reportedly hires approximately 100 employees, and has plans 
to expand to over 2,500 by August 2007.  Local newspapers for 
January 15, 2007 claim that the Al Samawa cement factory has 
started operating the third production line, after 8 months 
of renovation and rebuilding, and that a fourth production 
line will soon be ready. The publications however warned that 
operations will continue to be affected by electric power and 
transportation shortages. Power Generators, which were funded 
by the Japanese government and constructed by a local 
contractor, reportedly remain unoperational due to 
maintenance issues and neglect. There is also a government 
owned Salt factory and six government owned gas stations in 
the province.  According to recent newspaper reports, the 
provincial council is seeking to open the factory to private 
investors.  The Provincial Council is reported to be working 
assiduously at creating new jobs. Several citizens are 
currently employed in cleaning the cities for the 
municipalities. 
 
¶16.  There is a tiny private sector.  There are, reportedly, 
more than 18 small family owned Brick factories and 10 
private gas stations, which receive some help from the 
government. The mayor of Al khidr also reports that there are 
two Bee keeping operations in the province.  Private tea and 
coffee sellers in the market places amount for a sizeable 
portion of the private economic activity within the province. 
 The informal private sector does however employ a 
substantial number of persons, especially in construction 
wage labor. 
 
¶17.  On Monday, January 15, 2007, The Al Rumaythah city 
council publicly confirmed that many projects were in fact 
completed in 2006 within the town.  They also stated that a 
list of priorities for 2007 was currently being coordinated 
with the various economic sectors and funding agencies. 
 
-------------------- 
Political Activities 
-------------------- 
 
¶18.  The political arena is currently dominated by the 
Provincial Councils, the Tribal Chieftains and the Shiite 
militias, particularly Muqtada al Sadr's JAM.  There are 
several political parties, which following the last 
provincial elections, comprise the provincial council: 
 
--SCIRI ) 8 Seats 
--ISLAMIC FADILAH ) 6 Seats 
--MIDDLE EUPHRATES PARTY ) 6 Seats 
--INDEPENDENT ISLAMIC ORGANIZATION ) 5 Seats 
--DAWA ) 4 Seats 
--ASSEMBLY OF MUTHANNA ) 4 Seats 
--ALLEGIANCE COALITION ) 3 Seats 
--IRAQI NATIONAL ACCORD ) 3 Seats 
--IRAQI COMMUNIST PARTY ) 2 Seats 
 
¶19.  The Provincial Council, comprising several committees 
and sub-committees, meets in Samawah on a regular basis, and 
appears to be under the direct and able control of Governor 
Muhammad Ali Hassani of Muthanna.  Twenty Five percent (25%) 
of the Council, in keeping with constitutional directives, 
are women.  There are two highly vocal women councilors in 
this group. They are self-proclaimed leaders of female 
oriented NGOs in the region.  Ms. Bedur al-Yassiri, the more 
vociferous of the two, heads the "Free Women Organization" 
NGO, which focuses on internet courses in sewing and related 
"feminine" issues.  The NGO reportedly receives substantial 
funding from International donors, and the office building 
itself was reportedly rehabilitated by Coalition Forces. 
 
¶20.  A very few NGOs, such as the Iraqi Red Crescent, the 
Free Women Organization and the Iraqi Reconstruction 
Institute (IRI - an NGO which focuses on agricultural issues) 
continue to operate in the province.  These NGOs are largely 
subsidized and, in the case of the IRI, utilized by 
international donors.  Orphanages for children without 
parents are scarce, but a new Orphanage building, built by 
the local government, is currently nearing completion in 
Samawah. 
 
 
BAGHDAD 00000439  004 OF 004 
 
 
¶21. There are several tribes in Al Muthanna, and there is 
some confusion over the exact definition of tribes and 
sub-tribes. Some of the known tribes in the Muthanna region 
are: 
 
a. Bani Zraige ) 70,000 approx. ) strong tribe 
b. Al Ajib ) 30,000 approx. 
c. Al Zayad ) 20,000 approx. 
d. Al Tauba ) 3,500 approx. 
e. Albu Jayash ) 20, 000 approx. 
f. Al Abbas ) the criminal heavyweights in the province 
g. Albu Hassan ) a dominant tribe ) 30,000 ) many JAM 
members.  Governor belongs to this tribe 
h. Al Duwalim - 
j. Al Sufran 
k. Al Burkat 
l. Al Ghanim 
m. Al Attawa 
n. Al Juwabir 
o. Al Furtose 
p. Al Mohssen 
 
¶22.  The tribes have begun to play a major role in political 
negotiations within the province, providing support for the 
provincial government when tribal members have been attacked 
by militias or inconvenienced by stringent curfews in 
response to militia attacks. They have brokered agreements 
with JAM, threatened to fight the militias with the Iraqi 
military and Para-military forces and experienced an enhanced 
profile in the political space. 
 
-------- 
Security 
-------- 
 
¶23.  Muthanna Province is fortunate to have a strong acting 
Police Commander, Lcol Ali, and a committed Army commander in 
Col. Salam Jabar ) 2/10 IA Brigade.  Lcol Ali has faced down 
the militias in at least two recent encounters, insisting on 
upholding the law, while the army commander has indicated his 
commitment to eradicating the militias, if permitted.  PRT 
Muthanna has established strong working relations with both 
commanders, and training for the Iraqi Army continues under 
the Australian Overwatch Brigade.  Recent efforts by Baghdad 
to replace the Police Chief with Brigadier Basim of Baghdad 
met stony defiance from the provincial council.  Even though 
there is currently a Baghdad inspired investigation to 
determine what role, if any, Lcol Ali played in the torture 
of four recent JAM prisoners, the prospects for continued 
security in the province appear to be good. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶24.  Whereas political activity in Muthanna has grown 
significantly, and the provincial council appears to be a 
model of a young democracy at work, social activities have 
changed little and some security concerns remain within the 
province.  Life in Muthanna province continues at the 
leisurely pace it has always been known for (except perhaps 
in the 1920s when it was a hotbed of anti-British activity), 
and PRT Muthanna has managed to engage in constructive 
dialogue with both the Qadas (local governments) and the 
Provincial Council.  Bringing the two entities together is a 
realizable goal.  Muthanna Province appears ideal for 
experiments in capacity building, State Owned Enterprise 
revitalization and large scale agricultural activities. The 
presence of strong tribal affiliations coupled with the 
willingness of the tribes to defend their own against the 
militias and the current strength of local Police and Army 
commanders augurs well for the development of the Province. 
End comment. 
KHALILZAD