07BAGHDAD2067
IRAQ'S HANDLING OF THE CURFEW AT THE BAGHDAD AIRPORT
Sun Jun 24 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO4266
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #2067/01 1751446
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 241446Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1844
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 002067 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID EAIR PREL IZ
SUBJECT:  IRAQ'S HANDLING OF THE CURFEW AT THE BAGHDAD AIRPORT 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: Following the recent al-Askiri Mosque bombing, the 
Government of Iraq imposed a curfew. Curfews, of course, have 
complex consequences. The GoI's successful handling of the curfew in 
regard to passenger traffic at the Baghdad International Airport 
showed its increased abilities to plan and to execute its plans. END 
SUMMARY. 
 
------------------------ 
Al-Askiri Mosque Bombing 
------------------------ 
 
¶2. On June 13 one of the holiest sites in Shi'a Islam, the al-Askari 
Mosque, was bombed for a second time in two years. On the day of the 
bombing, an indefinite curfew was placed on Samarra by the Iraqi 
police.  Beginning at 3 p.m. of the same day, a curfew was also 
placed on vehicle traffic and large gatherings in Baghdad. The 
Baghdad curfew had originally been set to expire on Saturday, June 
16, 2007. It was lifted, however, at 5 a.m. on Sunday, June 17th. 
 
------------------------- 
Iraqi's Respond to Curfew 
------------------------- 
 
¶3. During the three-day curfew airport managers at Baghdad 
International Airport (BIAP) faced a problem that even major world 
airports have found difficult: What do you do when a large group of 
people are stranded at your airport? 
 
¶4. Due to the ban on most vehicular traffic, anyone arriving at BIAP 
who didn't have access to either a PSD or a helicopter ride was 
essentially stranded. Under the direction of BIAP Director Mr. 
Khaldoon, the Iraqi airport staff took charge. First, they notified 
all airlines with incoming flights to immediately stop bringing in 
non-Coalition passengers. Next, they notified all staff members to 
be prepared to work longer shifts in order to cover for their 
coworkers who were trapped at home by the curfew. They then 
converted office space into sleeping quarters so that airport 
workers would have a place to rest between their extended shifts. 
 
¶5. Even after the number of incoming Iraqi passengers had been 
reduced to a minimum, there were still several hundred people 
stranded in the main terminal. Airport staff arranged for food to be 
served from the Airport Cafe and they placed cases of bottled water 
around the terminal.  Passengers were allowed to place blankets and 
other covers on the floor in an effort to make themselves as 
comfortable as possible. Despite the cramped quarters and difficult 
situation, most people were in good spirits. People were seen 
sharing their portable DVD players with their new-found neighbors, 
giving the impression of several small movie theaters scattered 
about the terminal. The airport convenience store reportedly gave 
out candy and soft drinks to the many children who had unexpectedly 
become airport residents. Airport staff also contacted 
representatives of the US Embassy's Transportation Attache's Office 
to advise them that additional food and water might be required in 
the days to come. 
 
¶6. As it turned out, the extra supplies weren't needed. The airport 
staff made arrangements with the Prime Minister's office to obtain a 
waiver from the curfew. They then arranged for the Iraqi National 
Police and the Iraqi military to provide security for several buses 
to transport passengers to pre-arranged points around Baghdad (they 
used police stations). From there, Iraqi police personnel drove the 
passengers to their homes. The reverse evacuation took approximately 
36 hours to complete, but in the end, virtually everyone made it 
home. 
 
--------------- 
Iraq's Airports 
--------------- 
 
¶7. From May 2005 to May 2006, the monthly average for civilian 
take-offs and landings was 1,537. From May 2006 to May 2007, the 
monthly average for civilian take-offs and landings was 2,734. This 
represents a 78 percent increase in the average-number of civilian 
flight activity from one twelve-month period to the next. The good 
news is that much of this traffic is controlled by Iraqi controllers 
at four of the civilian airports - Baghdad, Basrah, Erbil, and 
Sulaimaniyah. The monthly average for the full 24-month period was 
2,135 civilian take-offs and landings. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
USG Assistance to Airport Infrastructure 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. From 2005 to date, the USG has spent approximately $32M in IRRF 
on construction activities at BIAP as well as training of relevant 
personnel. Major projects include the critical rehabilitation of 
BIAP facilities from electrical to water and sewer, installation of 
Visual Aids for aircraft traffic, powering the new radar system, 
street lighting, bringing BIAP into compliance with international 
navigational aid standards. The USG also provided Operations and 
Maintenance training for ICAA personnel using the air traffic 
control system, flight safety training and certification for Flight 
 
BAGHDAD 00002067  002 OF 002 
 
 
Safety Inspectors, tools for critical communication redundancy, and 
Air Traffic Control training and English language training. 
Moreover, the USG funded and facilitated the Air Navigation Systems 
Commissioning Flight Inspection, which will allow flights to land 
and depart from BIAP with less than visual flight conditions. 
 
¶9. Prior to 2005, USAID reportedly spent approximately $20M in IRRF 
funds on BIAP infrastructure work including the rehabilitation and 
modernization of the Air Traffic Control Tower, repair of Terminal C 
and administration offices, construction of security checkpoint and 
240-car parking lot, installation of VSAT communications system and 
6.5 megawatt power generators, repair of perimeter security fence, 
and the restoration of substation transformers and generators. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶10. COMMENT: The challenge of dealing with the curfew prompted by an 
act of terrorism demonstrated some promising outcomes in terms of 
Iraqi officials taking the lead. Without guidance and with only a 
small amount of assistance from the USG, Iraqi leadership at BIAP 
put into place an action plan that rapidly, effectively and 
efficiently responded to an emergency situation. Apart from crisis 
management we are also seeing Iraqi's embrace and improve day-to-day 
management of the airport. The Iraqis are playing the leading role 
in restoring air travel to Baghdad. END COMMENT.