07BEIJING6197
CORRECTED COPY: SEPTEMBER 18 MFA PRESS BRIEFING
Thu Sep 20 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO3058
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #6197/01 2630925
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 200925Z SEP 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2066
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 006197 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV SENV UNSC CH JA KN FR SF IN SU
SUBJECT: CORRECTED COPY: SEPTEMBER 18 MFA PRESS BRIEFING 
 
 
¶1. Key points at the September 18 MFA Press Briefing were: 
 
-- No new date has been set for the Six-Party Talks. 
 
-- The Chinese government opposes the Dalai Lama's meeting 
with German Chancellor Merkel. 
 
-- China and Japan will hold consultations on the East China 
Sea in late October. 
 
-- The first shipment of 50,000 tons of Chinese heavy oil has 
arrived in North Korea. 
 
-- Assistant Foreign Minister (AFM) Zhai Jun will lead the 
Chinese delegation for high-level consultations on Darfur on 
September 21 in New York. 
 
-- FM Yang Jiechi will lead the Chinese delegation to UN 
talks on climate change on September 24. 
 
-- VISITS: Indian Special Envoy Menon is visiting China and 
met with FM Yang Jiechi and AFM He Yafei.  DPRK Vice Foreign 
Minister for Asian Affairs Kim Yong Il is visiting China and 
met with FM Yang Jiechi and Vice Foreign Minister Wu Dawei. 
Vice President Zeng Qinghong will meet with South African 
Deputy President Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka December 23-26 for 
the third meeting of the China-South Africa Bi-National 
Commission. 
 
Six Party Talks 
--------------- 
 
¶2. At the September 18 regular MFA press briefing, 
spokeswoman Jiang Yu said that the Chinese government is 
consulting with other participants in the Six-Party Talks to 
set a new date for talks to begin  Asked to clarify when 
U.S. State DepartmentAssistant Secretary Christopher Hill 
would reurn to China, she advised the journalist to check 
with Hill himself. 
 
German Chancellor's Meeting With Dalai Lama 
------------------------------------------- 
¶3.  Responding to a request for comment on the Dalai Lama's 
planned meeting with German Chancellor Angela Merkel, Jiang 
emphasized that Tibet is a part of China and that the Dalai 
Lama is not merely a religious figure, but a political force 
involved in efforts to split the motherland.  The Chinese 
government hopes that other countries recognize these 
"splittist" activities and further hopes that no country, 
including Germany, will meet with the Dalai Lama. 
 
East China Sea Consultations 
---------------------------- 
¶4. When asked about the upcoming Chinese-Japanese talks on 
the East China Sea, Jiang replied that the talks are slated 
for late October, but no specific date has yet been set.  She 
added that China is maintaining a pragmatic and optimistic 
viewpoint and is looking forward to continued work with Japan 
on this issue. 
 
Heavy Oil Shipments to DPRK 
--------------------------- 
¶5.  In response to a question on the Chinese shipment of 
50,000 tons of heavy oil to North Korea, Jiang said that the 
delivery is "under implementation," and that the first ship 
had arrived at Nampo on September 16.  She later clarified 
that the shipment is underway, but not yet complete.  Jiang 
said she "hoped it would conclude soon." 
 
Darfur Consultations in New York 
-------------------------------- 
¶6. Jiang said AFM Zhai Jun will lead China's delegation to 
the second high-level consultations on Darfur in New York. 
During the consultations, China plans to discuss the 
political situation, human rights, security, development, 
reconstruction and the need to respect Sudanese sovereignty 
while finding a political means to realize peace and 
stability via the tripartite mechanism of the African Union, 
the UN and the Sudanese government. 
 
Climate Change 
-------------- 
¶7. FM Yang Jiechi will lead China's delegation to the 
September 24 UN High-Level Event on climate change.  China 
fully supports the objectives of this meeting and looks 
forward to multilateral negotiations within the UN framework, 
which will increase cooperation and be good for the 
negotiations. 
 
Chinese-Indian Relations 
------------------------ 
¶8. Asked to comment on Indian Foreign Minister Mukherjee's 
remarks on the importance of China to India and that both 
 
BEIJING 00006197  002 OF 002 
 
 
countries have "enough space for common development," Jiang 
said the Foreign Ministry has taken note of the comments and 
that China is striving to move forward in a strategic 
partnership with India.  Vice Foreign Minister Dai Bingguo 
and Indian Special Representative and National Security 
Advisor M. K. Narayanan will meet in China for the eleventh 
time September 24-26, during which time both countries will 
seek solutions to problems which are "acceptable to both 
countries, according to the relevant principles."  She also 
said Menon had met with Yang Jiechi and He Yafei to exchange 
views on bilateral issues and issues of common interest. 
 
France's Fighting Words on Iran 
------------------------------- 
¶9. Asked for comment on French Foreign Minister Bernard 
Kouchner's recent comments that the international community 
must "prepare for the worst," with Iran, Jiang said that 
countries must respect one another to resolve their 
differences, and that a government-negotiated peaceful 
settlement is the best means.  She said China opposes the use 
of force in international affairs. 
 
Aid to DR Congo 
--------------- 
¶10. In response to a question about rumors of China's 
providing USD5 billion in aid to the Democratic Republic of 
Congo, Jiang replied that she too had heard the rumors and 
would check on them. 
 
DPRK Vice Foreign Minister's Visit 
---------------------------------- 
¶11. Asked about DPRK Vice Foreign Minister for Asian Affairs 
Kim Yong Il's visit to China, Jiang said Kim is visiting 
China at the invitation of the Chinese Foreign Ministry and 
will meet with Yang Jiechi and Wu Dawei, as well as visiting 
other cities.  When asked if Kim's visit is related to the 
cancellation of the Six-Party Talks, she reiterated that Kim 
is visiting at the invitation of the Foreign Ministry. 
 
Upcoming Visit of South African Deputy President 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
¶12. Jiang said Chinese Vice President Zeng Qinghong will meet 
South African Deputy President Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka 
December 23-26 on the occasion of the third meeting of the 
China-South Africa Bi-National Commission. 
Randt