07BEIJING6732
OCTOBER 18 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: DALAI LAMA VISIT
Thu Oct 18 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO2870
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #6732/01 2910954
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 180954Z OCT 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2897
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 0349
RUEHHI/AMEMBASSY HANOI 3669
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 8823
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI 4453
RUEHGO/AMEMBASSY RANGOON 4628
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 1613
RUEHROV/AMEMBASSY VATICAN 0108UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 006732 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM CH BM TU VM VT IN RS KN
SUBJECT: OCTOBER 18 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: DALAI LAMA VISIT 
AND FALLOUT, VATICAN RELATIONS, SIX PT, JAPAN, VIETNAM 
 
 
BEIJING 00006732  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. Key points at the October 18 MFA Press Briefing: 
 
-- China regards the Dalai Lama's visit to the United States 
as blatant interference in China's internal affairs that has 
greatly undermined the relationship between the United States 
and China.  FM Yang strongly protested the visit in an 
October 18 meeting with the U.S. Ambassador. 
 
-- China is willing establish diplomatic relations with the 
Vatican if the Vatican ends diplomatic recognition of Taiwan 
and stops interfering in China's internal affairs in the name 
of religion. 
 
-- The implementation of the October 3 joint statement is a 
sign of the progress of the Six Party Talks. 
 
-- China has noted investigations of embezzlement at the 
Japanese company responsible for the disposal of abandoned 
chemical weapons in China.  China hopes the allegations will 
not affect weapons disposal and that Japan will settle the 
issue quickly. 
 
-- China congratulates Vietnam on its election to the UN 
Security Council and welcomes improved relations between 
Vietnam and North Korea. 
 
-- China's interactions in Burma have been "responsible" and 
"constructive." 
 
-- Regarding the Turkish Parliament's authorization of a 
deployment of troops to Iraq, China hopes the "relevant 
parties" in Iraq can solve the "relevant issues" through 
dialogue and consultation. 
 
-- Visit: The Foreign Ministers of China, Russia and India 
will meet October 24 in Harbin, China to explore "further 
cooperation" on political, economic, regional and 
international issues. 
 
Dalai Lama Visit Has "Greatly Undermined" Relations 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶2. At the October 18 regular MFA press briefing, MFA 
Spokesman Liu Jianchao said the Dalai Lama's meetings with 
senior U.S. officials and his receiving of the Congressional 
Gold Medal were "blatant interference in China's internal 
affairs" that "severely hurt the feelings of the Chinese 
people" and "greatly undermined the relationship" between the 
United States and China.  Liu said FM Yang had on October 18 
strongly protested the visit to Ambassador Randt.  (Note: Liu 
was present at the meeting in which Foreign Minister Yang 
protested the Dalai Lama,s U.S. visit to the Ambassador ) 
septel.)  Liu said that Tibet is an inseparable part of 
China, that Tibet is a "wholly internal affair" of China and 
that China is "resolutely opposed to any interference in 
China's domestic affairs by any nation or any individual 
taking advantage of the Dalai Lama issue."  Liu said China 
considered the Dalai Lama's meetings in Washington a serious 
violation of the "fundamental norms of international 
relations" and stressed China's "firm resolve to safeguard 
national sovereignty and territorial integrity."  He urged 
the United States to "cease supporting the conniving 
separatist activities of the Tibetan independence forces," to 
"stop interfering in China's internal affairs," to take 
"effective measures" to remove the "terrible impact of its 
erroneous act" and to take "concrete steps to protect the 
U.S.-China relationship."  When asked about concrete 
consequences, Liu reiterated that U.S. actions have 
undermined the U.S.-China relationship and that the United 
States should stop supporting the "conniving activities" of 
separatists.  When asked twice more for specific details of 
the consequences, Liu replied that he had already answered 
the question. 
 
Dalai Lama is a Purely Internal Issue 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. Asked about the Dalai Lama's statements that he does not 
seek independence, Liu replied that the "Chinese people know 
better than anyone what kind of person the Dalai Lama is." 
Liu said that in Tibet in the past there existed a system of 
"serfdom" led by the Dalai Lama.  Liu said that in 1959, the 
Dalai Lama planned and participated in a military revolt and 
since his flight abroad following his defeat he has "never 
 
BEIJING 00006732  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
ceased conniving and manipulating" Tibetans abroad to split 
China.  Liu said that independence is the essence of all the 
Dalai Lama's claims.  The Dalai Lama's statement that China 
should not station troops in Tibet is "independence in 
disguise."  Liu further noted that "any attempt to split 
China is doomed to failure."  When asked if China is willing 
to receive the Dalai Lama's envoys, Liu responded that the 
Dalai Lama's previous actions show that he lacks sincerity. 
 
Aftermath of the Visit 
---------------------- 
 
¶4. Asked what concrete steps China hopes the United States 
will take, Liu replied that China has made representation to 
the United States and that the United States is clear on what 
China wants.  He urged the United States to stop interfering 
in China's internal affairs.  Asked about President Bush's 
statement that the Dalai Lama should be allowed to return to 
China, Liu said that how China deals with the Dalai Lama is 
China's internal affair and others should not interfere. 
Asked if NPC Chairman Wu Bangguo would go to the United 
States and, if not, was the cancellation related to the Dalai 
Lama, Liu responded that he "hadn't heard of the 
arrangement."  When asked about a phone call between 
President Bush and Chinese President Hu Jintao, Liu again 
responded that he "hadn't heard of the arrangement." 
 
Diplomatic Relations with the Vatican 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. Asked about rumors that China is willing to establish 
diplomatic relations with the Vatican if it breaks diplomatic 
relations with Taiwan, Liu said that China sincerely hopes 
that relations can be normalized, but two preconditions 
exist: first the Vatican must accept a one-China policy and 
recognize Taiwan as an inseparable part of China; second, the 
Vatican must stop interfering in China's internal affairs in 
the name of religion. 
 
Implementation of the Six-Party Talks Joint Statement 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶6. Asked about the return of the Six-Party Talks team of 
experts to Beijing and the progress of the "second phase 
action" to implement the October 3 joint statement, Liu said 
that implementation of the joint statement is a "signal for 
new and important progress in the Six-Party Talks," and China 
hopes the joint statement will be smoothly implemented in a 
"comprehensive, balanced way." 
 
Embezzlement at Chemical Weapons Disposal Company 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶7. Liu said China has taken note of investigations of 
embezzlement at Pacific Consultants International, a Japanese 
company handling the disposal of abandoned chemical weapons 
in China.  He said that the work of dealing with abandoned 
chemical weapons is important for the Chemical Weapons 
Convention as well as for the memorandum of understanding 
between Japan and China.  He expressed hope that the 
investigation will not affect the progress of the work, and 
that Japan will "be responsible" and settle this issue at an 
early date. 
 
Vietnam on the UN Security Council 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶8. Asked to comment on Vietnam's election to the UN Security 
Council (UNSC), as well as on the Secretary General of the 
Vietnamese Communist Party's visit to North Korea, Liu said 
that China supports and congratulates Vietnam.  He added that 
China has "friendly neighborly relations" with both Vietnam 
and North Korea and welcomes improved relations between them. 
 
 
China and Burma 
--------------- 
 
¶9.  Asked about allegations that China has been using its 
influence in the UNSC to block resolutions on Burma, Liu 
responded that China has been "responsible" and will continue 
to be "constructive" in the region. 
 
Turkish Troops to Northern Iraq 
 
BEIJING 00006732  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
------------------------------- 
 
¶10. Asked to comment on the Turkish Parliament's 
authorization of the deployment of troops to Kurdish northern 
Iraq, Liu said China follows developments in the region and 
hopes the "relevant parties" can solve the "relevant issues" 
through dialogue and consultation. 
 
Political Statements during the Olympics 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. When asked if China would "condemn" athletes who made 
political statements during the Olympics about topics like 
Falun Gong, human rights or the Dalai Lama, Liu responded 
that China welcomes athletes, trainers and other connected 
with the Olympics, as well as all the world's people to come 
participate, China hopes that people will bring a spirit of 
fair competition to make the event a success and strengthen 
friendship around the world. 
 
Amnesty International Allegations 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  When asked about an Amnesty International report that 
the Chinese government had locked up dissidents during the 
17th Party Congress, Liu responded that he hadn't seen the 
report. 
 
Meeting of Three Foreign Ministers 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶13. Visit: The Foreign Ministers of China, Russia and India 
will meet October 24 in Harbin, China to explore "further 
cooperation" on political, economic, regional and 
international issues. 
Randt