07BERLIN434
BUNDESTAG LARGELY SUPPORTIVE OF U.S., P5+1 ON IRAN
Fri Mar 02 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Berlin
VZCZCXRO3741
PP RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDIR RUEHKUK
DE RUEHRL #0434 0611645
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 021645Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7298
INFO RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHDIR/IRAN RPO DUBAI
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS BERLIN 000434 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR AGS, NEA/IR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL IR GM
SUBJECT: BUNDESTAG LARGELY SUPPORTIVE OF U.S., P5+1 ON IRAN 
POLICY 
 
 
¶1.  (U)  SUMMARY: In a March 1 parliamentary debate on Iran 
policy, the four main German parties presented a relatively 
unified message in support of P5 1/UN efforts on Iran and 
making Iran responsible for the next steps.  Speakers 
emphasized the clandestine nature of Iran's nuclear program, 
its violations of the NPT, and its drive for hegemony in the 
region.  Several speakers praised the U.S. policy shift on an 
Iranian civilian nuclear program and the decision to attend 
the upcoming Iraq conference.  While not entirely free of 
criticism towards the U.S., the debate is a welcome sign that 
the Bundestag's foreign policy heavy hitters are on the same 
page as their government (and us).  END SUMMARY. 
 
 
¶2.  (U)  In a March 1 parliamentary debate on Iran policy, 
four of the five German political parties expressed support 
for P5 1 efforts thus far.  A bill introduced by the Left 
Party (which holds only 54 of the 614 total Bundestag seats) 
called for the government to forbid U.S. use of German air 
space or territory for staging a military attack against 
Iran, while also criticizing the implementation of any 
further sanctions by the UN against Iran.  The other bill, 
introduced by the Greens, called for the government to 
continue EU-3 framework negotiations parallel to UNSCR 1737, 
to make clear to the US that military escalation would be 
harmful for international unity on the issue, to urge the US 
to offer Iran security guarantees and lift sanctions (as in 
the case of North Korea), and to increase dialogue with 
Iranian civil society and support of human rights.  At the 
close of debate, both bills were forwarded to the Foreign 
Relations Committee. 
 
¶3.  (U)  What could have turned into an anti-U.S. discussion, 
however, instead aimed the majority of criticism at Iran, as 
speakers emphasized the clandestine nature of Iran's nuclear 
program and its violations of the NPT and its drive for 
hegemony in the region.  Foreign Relations Committee chair 
Ruprecht Polenz (CDU) emphasized that it is Iran that must 
make a decision whether to take the offer of cooperation or 
to continue down the path of self-isolation. 
Nonproliferation subcommittee member Rolf Muetzenich 
(SPD--also serves as German-Iran Parliamentary Friendship 
group chair) praised Secretary Rice for having done much 
recently to bring the process forward via diplomacy.  Polenz, 
Muetzenich, and Green Party Foreign Policy Spokeswoman 
Kerstin Mueller criticized the Left Party for building paper 
tigers, unsettling the public with a "false debate" and for 
drawing false parallels to the international community's 
discussion on Iraq in 2002-03. 
 
¶4.  (U)  Polenz, Muetzenich, and FDP MP Werner Hoyer praised 
the U.S. policy shift on an Iranian civilian nuclear program 
(and European diplomacy's role in that shift), as well as the 
decision to attend the upcoming Iraq conference.  Polenz also 
expressed hope that the U.S. would seek out discussion at the 
conference with Iran and Syria.  Polenz cited a statement by 
General Pace that he categorically excludes an attack on 
Iran.  All four politicians called for the continued 
application of the "double approach," offering negotiations 
while also instituting sanctions. 
 
¶5. (U)  Critique points towards the U.S. included Muetzenich 
reminding the U.S. that while Iranians may be against their 
regime, they also want respect for their nation and their 
successes.  He added that Germany should remind the U.S. that 
the Iranian society is one with which diplomacy is possible. 
Mueller criticized "contradictory" signals from the U.S., 
calling them counterproductive and undermining the 
credibility of the entire negotiation process. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  COMMENT:  In an environment where the media has 
been drumming up fears of imminent U.S. or Israeli military 
action towards Iran, the Left Party apparently formulated 
their bill to spark Bundestag debate on our refusal to rule 
out a military option on Iran.  Instead, the other parties 
brought out their influential foreign policy voices to 
present a relatively unified message emphasizing support for 
P5 1/UN efforts on Iran and placing the responsibility for 
the next steps squarely on Iran's shoulders.  While not 
entirely free of criticism towards the U.S., the debate is a 
welcome sign that the Bundestag's foreign policy heavy 
hitters are on the same page as their government (and us). 
As the debate was held after editorial deadlines last night, 
it may not receive the press coverage that could have been 
helpful with the German public. 
KOENIG