07BEIJING1267
FEBRUARY 27 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: KIM KYE-GWAN TO
Tue Feb 27 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO8762
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1267/01 0581107
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 271107Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5036
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001267 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL CH NK JP CE BM
SUBJECT: FEBRUARY 27 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: KIM KYE-GWAN TO 
US, US-DPRK FINANCIAL TALKS, DPRK BORDER-CROSSING, IRAN, 
MILITARY BUILDUP, BURMA, REMOVAL OF AMBASSADOR TO ROK, SRI 
LANKA ATTACK 
 
 
¶1. Key points made at the February 27 MFA press conference 
were: 
 
-- Kim Kye-gwan has no plans for meetings with Chinese 
officials en route to the United States and China hopes that 
the United States and the DPRK can realize full diplomatic 
relations. 
 
-- Qin called China's military buildup natural in relation to 
its long borders while criticizing Japan's new militarism and 
calling for greater transparency. 
 
-- Responding to VP Cheney's criticisms, Qin emphasized 
China's assistance with the DPRK and called for greater 
dialogue. 
 
-- The MFA confirmed Ambassador to ROK Li Bin has been 
dismissed, but did not respond to speculation on charges of 
divulging state secrets. 
 
-- Qin gave no comment on the house arrest of a pro-democracy 
leader in Burma, adding that such issues are the internal 
affairs of Burma. 
 
-- Deputy Secretary of State Negroponte will visit China 
March 3-5. 
 
Kim to United States, Macau Financial Talks 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. MFA Spokesperson Qin Gang said at the February 27 regular 
press briefing that DPRK diplomat Kim Kye-gwan was in Beijing 
en route to visit the United State, but had no plans to meet 
with Chinese officials.  Qin added that meetings between the 
United States and the DPRK aimed at the normalization of 
relations will be an important step toward the 
denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.  China hopes the 
two sides can resolve outstanding issues and move toward the 
full normalization of relations. 
 
¶3. The spokesman referred all questions regarding meetings of 
United States officials in Macau addressing the freezing of 
North Korean assets to the Macau SAR government. 
Additionally, he had "no exact information" with respect to 
the timetables of the five working groups to be established 
under the agreement reached in the Six-Party Talks. 
 
¶4. Qin had not seen an Amnesty International report that two 
North Korean soldiers were to be executed for assisting 
refugees escape into China, but maintained that China has 
always addressed the issue of "illegal border-crossers" 
according to domestic and international law. 
 
Sanctions on Iran not the Goal 
------------------------------ 
 
¶5. Questioned about China's recent participation in the 
London talks regarding the Iran nuclear situation and China's 
position on further sanctions against Iran, Qin confirmed 
that China participated in the meeting and reiterated 
whatever UN Security Council actions taken should be 
conducive to a peaceful solution through diplomatic means. 
 
China Defensive Military Build-up "Natural" 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. Qin ardently defended China's rising military spending in 
the face of recent criticisms by Japan Liberal Democratic 
Party leader Nakagawa and United States Vice President 
Cheney.  Qin said with China's lengthy borders, large size 
and population it is "natural" that the country should have 
adequate defensive power and reiterated China's commitment to 
peaceful development.  He pointed to Japan's huge military 
expenditures and linked demands for China to increase 
transparency with calls for Japan to follow suit while 
questioning the motives behind Japan's military buildup. 
 
¶7. In response to Cheney's comments, Qin emphasized China's 
role in working to solve the Korean Peninsula issue, 
opposition to the proliferation of weapons of mass 
destruction and commitment to the peaceful use of outer 
space.  He noted that the international community praises 
China's peaceful development and called for strengthening 
dialogue while forging constructive cooperative relationships. 
 
Dismissed Ambassador to ROK Leaked State Secrets? 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶8. Asked repeatedly for more information regarding the 
investigation of ex-Chinese envoy to Korea Li Bin for leaking 
 
BEIJING 00001267  002 OF 002 
 
 
state secrets, Qin would only say that Li has been moved from 
his post. 
 
China Not to Interfere in Internal Issues of Burma 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶9. State Councilor Tang Jiaxuan has completed a three-day 
visit to Burma, in which the two sides exchanged views on the 
bilateral relationship.  Asked for comment on the house 
arrest of pro-democracy leader Aung San Suu Kyi, Qin replied 
that such internal issues are for the people of Burma to 
solve, as Burma is a sovereign country. 
 
U.S. Ambassador Victim of Attack in Sri Lanka 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. Asked for comment on today's Tamil rebel attack which 
wounded foreign diplomats including the United States 
ambassador to Sri Lanka, Qin had not heard reports of the 
attack, but affirmed China's support for the Sri Lankan 
government in its road topeace and development.  TheSri 
Lankan president is currently paying a state visit to China. 
 
Deputy Secretary Negroponte's Visit 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶11. Deputy Secretary of State Negroponte will visit China 
March 3-5 to exchange views on bilateral relations and 
important national and regional issues of common interest, 
Qin said. 
RANDT