07BEIJING7557
SED SESSION II: INTEGRITY OF TRADE, DECEMBER 12, 2007
Thu Dec 20 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO6338
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #7557/01 3540702
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 200702Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4119
INFO RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUEAUSA/DEPT OF HHS WASHINGTON DC
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEAEPA/HQ EPA WASHDC
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLASSIFIED SECTION 01 OF 04 BEIJING 007557 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM SECOR/YAMAMOTO 
STATE PASS USTR STRATFORD/WINTER/MAIN 
STATE PASS IMPORT SAFETY WORKING GROUP 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ECON ETRD EAGR TBIO BEXP HHS CH
SUBJECT: SED SESSION II: INTEGRITY OF TRADE, DECEMBER 12, 2007 
 
(U) THIS MESSAGE IS SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  PLEASE HANDLE 
ACCORDINGLY.  NOT FOR DISTRIBUTION OUTSIDE USG CHANNELS. 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  During a December 12 working lunch, the United 
States and China stressed that product quality and the safety of 
food and drugs pose a complicated new challenge in a global economy. 
 Both sides said trading partners should increase dialogue and 
cooperation and called for science-based regulations and responses 
to these issues.  Warning that "finger-pointing" is 
counterproductive, Chinese officials claimed that quality and safety 
issues only affect a small percentage of Chinese exports.  Health 
and Human Services (HHS) Secretary Michael Leavitt said product 
quality and food/drug safety were global problems and that USG and 
American public interest in this issue was not exclusive to China. 
Both sides welcomed new agreements in the area of food and product 
safety.  Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson said the cooperative way 
the two governments have dealt with these issues within the 
Strategic Economic Dialogue should serve as a model for dealing with 
other bilateral issues.  On transparency, SCLAO Vice Chairman Zhang 
Qiong said both sides had agreed to respect and build upon their 
international obligations on transparency and noted the importance 
of public participation in the drafting of regulations.  End 
Summary. 
 
Food and Product Safety: a Global Challenge 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) During a December 12 working lunch, Vice Premier Wu Yi 
said the issues of product quality and the safety of food and drugs 
pose a new challenge that requires joint efforts by all trading 
partners.  She welcomed the December 11 signing of two agreements 
for bilateral cooperation: one between Health and Human Services 
(HHS) and AQSIQ on food and feed and another between HHS and SFDA on 
drugs and medical devices.  HHS Secretary Michael Leavitt said the 
two agreements were the beginning of a long process of working 
together, and that the United States and China had an opportunity to 
show leadership in creating new tools and mechanisms needed to 
ensure the quality of products traded in a global marketplace. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Leavitt described five important lessons he learned during 
the negotiations of the two binding Memoranda of Agreement and in 
leading President Bush's interagency working group on import 
safety: 
 
1) The issue of quality and safety of imports reflects the 
maturation of the global marketplace and will require new tools 
developed by governments and the private sector. 
 
2) There are multiple perspectives on the issue within and between 
governments, requiring better communication and cooperation within 
and between governments. 
 
3) Certifiable international standards are necessary to provide 
interoperability between different systems in different trading 
economies, in order to achieve our common goals. 
 
4) Transparency is essential for promoting greater  trust which 
leads to smoother and faster trade transactions and success in a 
global market. 
 
5) Product quality and safety is not a short-term issue.  It will 
require continued cooperation and course corrections over a long 
period of time. 
 
China's Ministry of Health (MOH) 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Newly-appointed Minister of Health Chen Zhu said the 
inclusion of food safety on the SED agenda showed the vision of both 
governments in addressing an issue that affects every household in 
the world, since potential threats know no national boundaries. 
Chen said MOH plays an important role in ensuring the safety of food 
in China through licensing of the catering and restaurant industry. 
MOH is also working on a standardized system of nutritional labeling 
for food products.  Minister Chen said that MOH is combining law 
enforcement with efforts to educate the public.  In the past three 
months, he said, MOH and local authorities have inspected 3.7 
million businesses and found 99.5% were operating in compliance with 
their licenses. 
 
BEIJING 00007557  002 OF 004 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Minister Chen described the creation of the Chinese 
government's Leading Group on Food Safety, chaired by Wu Yi, as a 
milestone.  He said the Chinese government's approach follows a 
risk-based process grounded on sound science.  He noted that the 
food risk evaluation process in China has actually helped goods from 
the United States enter the Chinese market, citing a case in which 
Chinese scientists disproved allegations that whiskey from the 
United States contained dangerous substances. 
 
MOH Seeks Bilateral Cooperation 
------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Minister Chen said bilateral cooperation should take into 
account differences between Chinese and American food production 
practices.  He claimed Chinese agricultural producers engaged in 
"natural" farming, and were not familiar with using chemicals and 
pesticides, in contrast to the industrial agricultural system of the 
United States.  He also raised the issue of diet, citing the example 
of high levels of the antibiotic ractopamine in pork imported from 
the United States.  This posed a threat in China, he said, because 
unlike Americans, Chinese eat pork livers where residue of the drug 
accumulates.  The Minister called for science-based bilateral 
dialogue, as opposed to media-driven discussion, and assured the 
American side that China enforces its rules equally regardless of 
whether foodstuffs are domestically produced or imported. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Chen said MOH needs scientific cooperation from the USG on 
evaluating food for contamination and disease, and on models for 
monitoring food safety.  He also urged better cooperation between 
the two governments on publicizing information on food safety.  He 
welcomed the two Agreements between HHS and counterpart agencies, 
and also noted that MOH had renewed an agreement with HHS on 
HIV/AIDS prevention, care, treatment and research.  Finally, Chen 
reported that he had discussed with Secretary Leavitt the inclusion 
of traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) in the agenda for future SED 
meetings.  Secretary Leavitt said he had agreed to seriously 
consider the idea, which Vice-Premier Wu Yi welcomed.  (Note:  HHS 
has approached MOH to propose that, rather than placing TCM directly 
inside the SED, the two sides should make TCM part of a US-China 
Health and Medical Symposium, or the United States-China Health Care 
Forum, either of which could take place contiguously to SED IV.  End 
note.) 
 
SFDA: Translating Words into Action 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Picking up on the theme of drug safety and product quality 
as global challenges, State Food and Drug Administration (SFDA) 
Commissioner Shao Mingli said no country can rely only on its own 
system to guarantee the quality and safety of imports.  He noted 
that SFDA has cooperated with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) for many years and welcomed the December 11 agreement on drugs 
and medical devices.  Shao said SFDA was interested in increasing 
cooperation because China and the United States have common 
interests, despite having different social systems.  Shao said SFDA 
is interested in more bilateral exchanges to share information on 
adverse drug reactions and adverse incidents with medical devices, 
in regular exchanges of personnel, and in joint investigations of 
cases of counterfeit drugs and medical devices. 
 
Secretary Gutierrez: Innovation Conference 
 
SIPDIS 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶9. (SBU) Commerce Secretary Gutierrez reported the results of the 
December 10 Innovation Conference which attracted over 100 leaders 
from business, government and academia.   Gutierrez said innovation 
was best fostered where there is rule of law, transparency, 
market-based policies and merit-based competition.  He said he was 
very pleased by the commitment from Vice Minister Li of the Ministry 
of Science and Technology (MOST) to cooperate with the United States 
under the principles of equality, achievement sharing, and respect 
for international practices, and that the United States Department 
of Commerce looks forward to further cooperation with MOST. 
 
AQSIQ 
----- 
 
¶10. (SBU) AQSIQ Minister Li Changjiang noted that AQSIQ cooperates 
with counterpart agencies in the United States, including the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and that a pending AQSIQ-EPA 
agreement on regulating trade in waste materials will be the newest 
 
BEIJING 00007557  003 OF 004 
 
 
achievement of strengthened bilateral cooperation.  Only with 
cooperative mechanisms in place, he said, can the United States and 
China guarantee the safety and quality of imports and exports. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Li said the quality of Chinese exports to the United 
States and Japan is "ninety-nine percent" satisfactory, but that 
media coverage in the United States focuses only in the 
non-satisfactory "one percent."  However, he said the "one percent" 
is important--only by addressing these problem goods can the United 
States and China achieve their common goal.  The Minister stressed 
that all exporting countries, including the United States and Japan, 
have a problem "one percent."  "We have a long way to go," he said, 
"to achieve zero risk."  Minister Li said AQSIQ was interested in 
learning from HSS and FDA's vast experience, and looked forward to 
further cooperation to build mutual trust. 
 
MOFCOM 
------ 
 
¶12. (SBU) Vice Premier Wu Yi introduced Vice Minister of Commerce 
Chen Deming, whom she said the State Council Standing Committee 
would name Minister on December 20.  Chen Deming described MOFCOM's 
role in ensuring product quality and food safety, particularly a 
pilot program for information-sharing between relevant Chinese 
government ministries now being implemented in Shenzhen 
Municipality, which MOFCOM will extend nationally.  Chen said the 
program targets export producers, and seeks to control export market 
access through compulsory certification and inspections. 
Information shared between quality inspectors, tax collectors and 
other agencies enables MOFCOM to track the compliance of companies 
with product quality and safety regulations, and to hold them 
accountable.  He noted that 444 companies have been penalized in 
Shenzhen under the program so far, and two companies have had their 
licenses revoked in connection with tainted pet food cases. Chen 
said MOFCOM is setting standards based on international norms, and 
is conducting training programs on product safety and international 
standards.  Chen Deming said that "finger pointing" was not helpful, 
and that the key to ensuring safe exports lies in effective 
cooperation. 
 
Paulson: Model for Bilateral Engagement 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) Treasury Secretary Paulson closed the discussion by noting 
that no one had envisioned discussing these issues when the SED was 
first established.  He said the SED allows for bilateral engagement 
on this issue with a minimum of acrimony, and said this is the way 
the United States and China need to work together on other bilateral 
issues.  (Note:  At the closing press conference a day later, 
Secretary Paulson commented that the agreements reached on safety of 
 
SIPDIS 
food/feed and drugs/medical devices were proof of the value of the 
SED process.  "Rather than engaging in finger-pointing," he said, 
"our two governments were quick to come together and work out a way 
forward," he said.  End note.) 
 
SCLAO: Regulatory Transparency 
------------------------------ 
 
¶14. (SBU) Zhang Qiong, Vice Chairman of China's State Council 
Legislative Affairs Office (SCLAO), commended recent efforts at 
strengthening bilateral cooperation on regulatory transparency.  He 
reported that the United States and China had reached agreement on 
four points related to transparency: 
 
1) It is important and valuable for governments to solicit public 
opinion on draft rules and regulations, which Zhang said is 
consistent with President Hu Jintao's call for legislators to seek 
the views of the general public in carrying out their legislative 
work. 
 
2) Both sides agreed to establish a mechanism to discuss 
administrative rule-making and administrative licensing.  (Note: 
Zhang raised the transparency of the U.S. visa process as an 
illustrative example.  End note.) 
 
3) Both sides would respect and build upon their international 
commitments on transparency. 
 
4) The two sides will continue discussing means to foster the 
participation of stakeholders in the drafting of laws and 
regulations. 
 
 
BEIJING 00007557  004 OF 004 
 
 
¶15. (SBU) Vice Premier Wu described the discussion of transparency 
as highly productive, and said she agreed with Secretary Leavitt's 
view that transparency can foster trust, make the process of 
regulation an inspection smoother, and increase competitiveness for 
those companies that have good records of compliance with 
regulations. 
 
Randt