07BERLIN321
REPORT OF FIRST G-8 LYON-ROMA MEETING OF GERMAN
Fri Feb 16 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Berlin
VZCZCXRO9744
OO RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA
RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHRL #0321/01 0470652
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 160652Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7078
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW IMMEDIATE 1700
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA IMMEDIATE 0957
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO IMMEDIATE 1371
RUEABND/DEA HQS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEAHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEAWJC/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RHMCSUU/FBI WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEFHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0432UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 BERLIN 000321 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR KCRM OTRA PTER UNGA KJUS GM
SUBJECT: REPORT OF FIRST G-8 LYON-ROMA MEETING OF GERMAN 
PRESIDENCY: FEBRUARY 12-15, 2006 
 
ENTIRE TEXT SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  NOT FOR INTERNET 
DISTRIBUTION. 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  The first meeting of the G-8 Lyon-Roma 
Anti-Crime and Terrorism Group (LR/ACT) under the German 
Presidency was held in Berlin from February 12-15, 2006.  The 
U.S. delegation was co-chaired by INL DAS Elizabeth Verville 
and S/CT Director for Trans-Regional Affairs Roopa 
Rangaswamy, and included representatives from the Departments 
of State, Justice, and Homeland Security.   Highlights 
include: 
 
- Substantial German resistance to moving forward in 
Lyon-Roma on any aspect of the U.S. cash smuggling initiative 
(perhaps based for some on lack of understanding of discrete 
law enforcement aspects on which they invited a U.S. 
follow-on paper); 
- Resistance by the Japanese to the text of the political 
declaration on the need for all states to adopt and enforce 
effective child pornography laws including possession (U.S. 
to coordinate follow-on); 
- Cooperative counterterrorism efforts between the G-8 and EU 
and recommendations on how to implement the efficiency and 
effectiveness of the UN CT work; 
- Agreement to three U.S. project proposals on Critical 
Energy Infrastructure; 
- Cooperative actions to promote UN Convention Against 
Corruption and UN Transnational Organized Crime Convention 
implementation; and 
- Finalizing a U.S.-led best practices paper on quality 
control of data submitted to Interpol's lost and stolen 
travel document database for use by Interpol's advisory 
group.  END SUMMARY 
 
CASH COURIER INITIATIVE 
------------------------ 
 
¶2. (SBU)  The U.S. urged support for its initiative/project 
that sought to address law enforcement aspects of the use of 
bulk cash smuggling as means for financing terrorist 
activities.  The German chair expressed strong opposition, 
denied that bulk cash smuggling is a means of financing 
terror, saw no role for the Lyon/Roma group, and recommended 
that the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) or Finance 
Ministers tackle the issue.  Italy also suggested that the 
initiative be pursued by Finance Ministers, but was willing 
to consider Lyon-Roma participation for any law enforcement 
related projects.  Japan thought the project could help raise 
awareness of the threat and also thought that Lyon-Roma could 
address law enforcement related projects.  The United Kingdom 
and Canada both provided support for the U.S. proposal, but 
observed that in their territories bulk cash smuggling was 
largely an issue related to organized crime and narcotics 
trafficking.  The UK noted that the cash courier projects 
could provide valuable intelligence relating to the strategic 
routes used by smugglers to transfer funds across borders. 
The European Commission noted that on July 15 new legislation 
will go into effect requiring states to put measures in place 
to detect the physical cross-border transportation of 
currency over Euros 10,000.  The United States agreed to 
revise its concept paper by the end of February to further 
refine the threat posed by cash smuggling and to delineate 
work that Lyon-Roma could appropriately address to complement 
FATF. 
 
DECLARATION ON COMBATING CHILD PORNOGRAPHY 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (SBU) The U.S. presented its draft declaration intended 
for JHA Ministers outlining the serious nature of the problem 
of child pornography and the need for strong action to 
implant the international legal framework against it.  Most 
delegations support a strong statement, but Japan expressed 
concerns with its emphasis on addressing all forms of 
criminal activity relating to child pornography, including 
possession and receipt, as Japan does not criminalize receipt 
or possession without intent to distribute.  Side discussions 
with Japan produced possible compromises, but U.S. and others 
made clear that dilution of the statement was not acceptable. 
 Several delegations will provide written comments and we 
 
BERLIN 00000321  002 OF 005 
 
 
will send out another draft. 
 
UN RELATED COUNTERTERRORISM EFFORTS 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Germany briefed the L/R Heads on UN actions in New 
York including the adoption of the UN global counterterrorism 
(CT) strategy and the establishment of a CT Implementation 
Task Force.  The group discussed a Russian draft non-paper 
containing possible G-8 CT priorities.  G-8 partners decided 
not to pass the Russian paper to the UN task force and 
clarified that the 2006 St. Petersburg CT Summit Statements 
should serve as a blueprint for advancing CT work at the UN. 
Partners agreed to convey bilateral priorities separately. 
 
¶5. (SBU) As part of the 2006 St. Petersburg Declaration on 
Counter-Terrorism, the G-8 agreed to report in 2007 on 
results of efforts to support and strengthen UN CT efforts 
and to enhance the role of the entire UN system in 
coordinating its work.  Germany agreed to circulate a draft 
report in the next month for consideration by the G-8 
partners. 
 
¶6. (SBU) CCIT:  All G-8 partners reiterated support for the 
conclusion of the UN's Comprehensive Convention on 
International Terrorism and shared initial reactions to the 
proposed Greek draft compromise on section 18.5.  All members 
agreed that the original draft remains optimal, and supported 
Germany's proposed tactic to await a response from the 
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) before formally 
responding to the new proposed compromise text. 
 
¶7. (SBU) UNSCR 1624:  The United Kingdom distributed a 
compilation of reports prepared by G-8 partners on 
implementation of UNSCR 1624.  Given that only 69 countries 
have submitted reports on implementation of UNSCR 1624, the 
UK stressed the importance of sharing G-8 experiences on 
implementation to serve as an example for other states.  The 
United States and Japan referred to Constitutional and other 
limitations on the ability of their governments to 
participate in an effort to develop best practices.  Canada 
raised the diversity of G-8 partners, legal systems.  The UK 
acknowledged these sensitivities and proposed a discussion of 
next steps at a meeting in New York in three weeks. 
 
RADICALIZATION AND RECRUITMENT OF TERRORISTS 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) The UK circulated a proposal to hold a seminar on 
deradicalization in September/October.  The project would 
enable the G-8 to learn from the experiences of countries 
that have established deradicalization and rehabilitation 
programs for terrorists.  While the G-8 would be heavily 
involved in organizing the seminar, it would not be 
characterized as a G-8 event.  The European Commission 
reported it is spending Euros 750,000 on radicalization 
projects and studies focused on cross-cultural dialogue, 
ideologies and youth awareness. 
 
TWO PROBLEMATIC GERMAN CT PROPOSALS 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) The U.S. Delegation worked closely with Germany and 
Russia to successfully narrow the scope of two problematic 
German counterterrorism proposals.  Germany's proposed 
project to examine expulsion and surveillance measures for 
terrorists was revised to focus on elaboration and sharing of 
domestic laws and authorities to facilitate the removal of 
persons with a known or suspected terrorist background.  The 
German proposal to examine measures taken against news 
broadcasters was revised to focus on television and radio 
broadcasters owned or controlled by, or acting on behalf of 
terrorist organizations. 
 
Afghanistan Ad hoc Experts Group 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) The ad hoc meeting on Afghanistan experts met on 
February 12.  Despite broad areas of agreement, there was no 
consensus on eradication, and the U.S. was alone in its 
 
BERLIN 00000321  003 OF 005 
 
 
support of herbicides.  The UK will be handing over the G-8 
CN matrix to the UN Office of Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and 
will be developing a new matrix to address G-8 lobbying 
targets.  The European Commission offered to develop an 
"action oriented" paper to enhance coordination on CN and 
justice issues.  Italy will be hosting a Rome Conference in 
May to address the justice sector and rule of law.  Lastly, 
the Russian Federation handed out a draft resolution on Drug 
Trafficking Routes.  They would like for it to be a G-8 
sponsored resolution for the CND; however, Canada and Germany 
expressed concern about a G-8 sponsored resolution.  The U.S. 
reserved its position.  Germany reported on the Experts Group 
in Heads, and several countries praised the usefulness of the 
meeting, and Germany announced plans for another one in 
April. 
 
Subgroups 
--------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) The Migration Experts Subgroup finished the final 
Secure and Facilitated Travel Initiative (SAFTI) project on 
the facilitation of visa issuance processes.  The best 
practices paper emphasized the need to abide by domestic law 
and policies, while enhancing security and streamlining 
procedures.  The subgroup also revised and finalized the U.S. 
best practices paper on quality control of data submitted to 
Interpol's lost and stolen travel document database.  The 
subgroup requested that Lyon-Roma heads approve the work and 
provide it for use by Interpol's advisory group.  In 
addition, the subgroup agreed to conduct another joint 
interdiction exercise aimed at fraudulent passports from 
Brazil and Korea. 
 
¶12. (SBU) The Criminal-Legal Affairs Subgroup discussed the 
U.S. project on extraterritorial jurisdiction for child sex 
offenses, but was unable to agree on best practices for 
prosecuting such cases.  Participation by other states was 
limited, as they had not brought experts or submitted the 
U.S. paper for review prior to the meeting.  We intend to 
continue efforts to produce a report by April on the 
experience of G-8 countries.  The group also agreed to pursue 
a Canadian proposal to hold an eight-way video conference in 
April to discuss developments in mutual legal assistance and 
extradition and promote the use of video conferencing 
technology. 
 
¶13. (SBU) The Law Enforcement Subgroup focused on several new 
projects.  The German IPR project was approved subject to the 
U.S. caveats that the nature of the project's final product 
be reconsidered after questionnaire responses have been 
provided and that it not duplicate the principles developed 
by the IPR experts' group last November.  There were initial 
discussions on two of the three U.S critical energy 
infrastructure projects.  Russia offered to cosponsor both 
projects. 
 
¶14. (SBU) On UK child protection proposals, the international 
most wanted web site was approved and the G-8 Day of Action 
was deferred pending completion of the HODs JHA Ministerial 
declaration on child pornography.  The revised U.S. proposal 
addressing distribution of controlled drugs via the Internet 
was also approved.  Russia informally broached a project that 
would share best practices for counter narcotics and 
counterterrorism personnel training methods. 
 
¶15. (SBU) LEPSG addressed several ongoing projects.  Under 
the UK lead, agreement has now been reached on a DNA Search 
Request Network utilizing the Interpol 24/7 secure 
communications system.  Initial testing of the network will 
occur this spring.  The Group was briefed on the outcome of 
the Radicalization and Recruitment/Neighborhood Policing 
experts' meeting and all agreed that the project is complete. 
 The UK will present a follow-on proposal on 
de-radicalization at the next meeting.  The U.S. briefed the 
prison radicalization project, and all agreed that an 
experts' meeting will be held in conjunction with the April 
meeting to review the project's conclusions and consider 
whether a follow-on project should be proposed. 
 
¶16. (SBU) The Counterterrorism Practitioners enjoyed a 
 
BERLIN 00000321  004 OF 005 
 
 
productive session.  The subgroup agreed to update the 
U.S.-drafted analytic assessment on terrorist safe havens and 
circulate it for final review at the April meeting, after 
which it will be provided to Heads of Delegation's (HODs) for 
their use within Counterterrorism Action Group (CTAG).  On 
the projects relating to securing critical energy 
infrastructure, the subgroup agreed to expand the existing 
project of compiling analytical assessments of the terrorist 
threat to oil and gas infrastructure to include all other 
aspects of critical energy infrastructure.  There was also 
consensus to hold several ad hoc experts meetings in the 
coming months, including a March 14 meeting in Moscow for G-8 
Improvised Explosive Device (IED) experts to update a 
compendium of IEDs used in combat zones, and two meetings to 
be held in Berlin on the Monday preceding the April meetings, 
dealing with prison radicalization and aviation security 
issues.  The U.S. also agreed to raise a German request that 
we will consider hosting this year's annual gathering of G-8 
hostage rescue and personnel recovery experts in the fall. 
Germany and Canada hosted the previous two meetings of the 
group. 
 
¶17. (SBU) The High-Tech Crime Subgroup's continuing mandate 
is to enhance the abilities of law enforcement to prevent, 
investigate and prosecute criminal and terrorist acts that 
make use of computer networks and other new technologies.  To 
this end, the HTCSG agenda focused both on terrorist 
exploitation of the Internet, and law enforcement use of the 
Internet for criminal investigations and open-source data 
collection on terrorist groups.  Other topics of discussion 
included malicious software (viruses and worms), online 
payment systems, and critical information infrastructure 
protection.  The HTCSG also discussed the current state of 
the 24/7 Network of high-tech crime points of contact which 
is managed by the group. 
 
¶18. (SBU) The Transportation Security Subgroup considered and 
agreed upon next steps for three projects led by the United 
States related to explosives detection technology research 
and development, the use of behavior observation techniques 
in the aviation environment and identifying future threats to 
civil aviation.  Canada furthered its project on security 
management systems and addressed a new project approved in 
November 2006 in the area of transportation security 
clearances.  Canada and Japan sponsored a new project to 
establish best practices in auditing the security of port 
facilities, which is undertaken for the purpose of sharing 
results with the International Maritime Organization (the 
reference to which was removed as a result of interventions 
by European Commission observers, a point of contention for 
the U.S.).  One other new project led by France was 
considered as a future proposal.  It deals with Chemical, 
Biological, Radiological (CBR) decontamination and business 
recovery. 
 
Conclusion 
---------- 
 
¶19. (SBU) Prior to the Lyon-Roma meeting, the Egyptians 
demarched some of the Eight bilaterally to gauge whether they 
could attend the LR/ACT meeting as observers.  The Germans 
responded informally that observer status for Egypt was not 
possible.  After extensive discussion, including 
possibilities for engaging Egypt in other ways and fora, the 
Heads of Delegation decided that the informal German response 
was adequate and agreed to pursue any relevant CTAG issues 
with the Egyptians bilaterally. 
 
¶20. (SBU) COMMENT:  The Germans ably chaired the first 
meeting of LR/ACT.  As outlined above, we have been able to 
identify several projects for presentation at the Justice and 
Home Affairs Ministerial.  As we have not received any 
indication on possible CT deliverables for the German 
Presidency, we should continue to press the Germans for a 
robust CT initiative, including our cash courier and 
Federally Administered Tribal Area (FATA) proposals, which we 
outlined for Heads.  END COMMENT 
 
¶21. (U) This cable was drafted and cleared by the U.S. 
delegation prior to departure from post. 
 
BERLIN 00000321  005 OF 005 
 
 
TIMKEN JR