07BEIJING7577
DECEMBER 20 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: PRODUCT
Thu Dec 20 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO6611
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #7577/01 3541147
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 201147Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4145
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 007577 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM MARR EIND CH BM IN KS KN
VM, JP, BL 
SUBJECT: DECEMBER 20 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: PRODUCT 
SAFETY, SIX-PARTY-TALKS, ROK ELECTION, BURMA, INDIA, 
DISPUTED ISLANDS 
 
¶1. Key points at the December 20 MFA Press Briefing: 
 
-- On U.S. Presidential candidate Barack Obama's 
reported call for a ban on U.S. imports of Chinese 
toys, China believes that a few defective products 
should not be the grounds for an overall ban. 
 
-- China believes all sides will continue work within 
the framework of the Six-Party process regardless of 
political changes in South Korea. 
 
-- VFM Wu Dawei has observed that disablement at the 
North Korean nuclear facility in Yongbyon is 
"proceeding smoothly" and China stresses the 
importance of the principle of "action-for-action." 
 
-- China has "indisputable sovereignty" over the 
disputed islands and adjacent waterways of the South 
China Sea. 
 
-- Chinese-Indian joint anti-terror military exercises 
are being held from December 19-27. 
 
-- China is ready to strengthen cooperation on Burma 
with the EU and other parties and encourages ASEAN to 
play a larger role. 
 
Product Safety 
- - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  Asked about U.S. Presidential candidate Barack 
Obama's reported call for a ban on U.S. imports of all 
Chinese toys, MFA Spokesperson Qin Gang said that the 
Chinese government attaches great importance to 
product safety, has introduced changes to its laws and 
regulations and has strengthened enforcement and 
industry supervision.  In general, Qin said, Chinese 
products are reliable and safe, and if problems are 
found with a few products this should not be grounds 
for an overall ban.  He added that, especially during 
the Christmas season, Chinese products can bring 
"happiness and joy" to American consumers. 
 
Six-Party-Talks and South Korean Election 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3.  Qin expressed China's congratulations to ROK 
President-elect Lee Myung-bak, adding that China is 
ready to work with the new government to promote the 
development of the "comprehensive cooperative 
partnership" between China and the ROK.  China 
believes the DPRK and ROK will continue to work within 
the framework of the Six-Party process regardless of 
the change of government in South Korea.  Qin said 
that China seeks peace, stability, development and 
good neighborly relations with North Korea, and also 
seeks to maintain its partnership with the ROK.  China, 
he stressed, adheres to its principle of non- 
interference in the internal affairs of other 
countries and hopes that dialogue will improve 
relations between North and South Korea. 
 
VFM Wu Dawei Sees "Smooth" Progress on Disablement 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4. Qin reported that Vice Foreign Minister (VFM) Wu 
Dawei visited the DPRK December 17-19, where he met 
with the North Korean Foreign Minister and inspected 
disablement activities at the nuclear reactor at 
Yongbyon.  Qin noted that during the visit the DPRK 
expressed willingness to fulfill "earnestly" its 
obligations under agreements reached in the Six-Party- 
Talks, including disablement.  Qin said that 
disablement is "proceeding smoothly" and stressed the 
importance of the principle of "action-for-action" for 
a "balanced" completion of the disablement process. 
 
¶5.  Asked about progress on obtaining a declaration on 
North Korea's nuclear program, Qin said that such a 
declaration is called for in joint statements by the 
six parties, but requires further discussion by "the 
parties concerned."  He expressed China's hope that 
all parties will "fulfill their respective roles" as 
described in the joint statements and said that the 
PRC continues close consultations with the six parties. 
He added that China remains prepared to honor its own 
commitments and continues to support the Six-Party 
process. 
 
Incorporation of Disputed Islands into "Sansha City" 
 
BEIJING 00007577  002 OF 002 
 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6.  Asked about China's recent decision to incorporate 
the Spratly, Paracel and other South China Sea Islands 
into a new city called "Sansha," Qin asserted that 
China has "indisputable sovereignty" and effective 
jurisdiction over the islands of the South China Sea 
"and the adjacent waterways."  Qin acknowledged 
Vietnam's disputing of the Chinese claim on the 
islands and pledged that China would continue 
consultations with Vietnam to avoid affecting 
relations with Vietnam and stability in the region. 
 
Chinese-Indian Military Exercises 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7.  Chinese-Indian joint anti-terror military 
exercises are being held from December 19-27, Qin said. 
The exercises aim at increasing the mutual trust and 
understanding between the two countries and their 
militaries.  When pressed on the border dispute 
between the two countries, Qin said India and China 
share many common interests.  He acknowledged some 
differences exist, but said this is "normal" and that 
even close allies such as the Unites States and Japan 
do not agree on every issue.  Qin said that the two 
sides seek to resolve the boundary issue at "an early 
date."  Qin also said that China and India are capable 
of resolving the issue themselves and have established 
the political guiding principles for a solution. 
Until the boundary issue is resolved, Qin said that 
China would maintain peace and stability in the 
disputed area and prevent the issue from becoming an 
obstacle to bilateral relations. 
 
Burma 
- - - 
 
¶8.  Asked how China perceives its role in Burma, Qin 
said that stability there is not only a concern of 
Burma, but also China, because of the two countries' 
common border.  He stressed that China hopes for 
stability, democratization and reconciliation. 
However, he said, the people of Burma themselves will 
solve the issues in Burma through dialogue and 
consultation.  China will respect the sovereignty of 
Burma and continue to play a constructive role in the 
resolution of the issues there.  Qin said that China 
supports the efforts of UN Special Envoy Ibrahim 
Gambari as well as a larger role for ASEAN.  Qin added 
that China is also ready to strengthen cooperation 
with other parties, including the EU, to play a 
constructive and positive role in Burma. 
 
Visits 
- - - - 
 
¶9.  China and Japan are currently making arrangements 
for the visit of Japanese Prime Minister Yasuo Fukuda 
and will announce the details soon.  Bolivian Foreign 
Minister David Choquehuanca will call on Chinese Prime 
Minister Wen Jiabao and Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi 
during his visit this week.  Consultations are 
currently underway for a visit from British Prime 
Minister Gordon Brown, though a date has not yet been 
announced. 
 
RANDT