07BERLIN269
GOVERNMENT AND NGO REPORTS EVALUATE GERMAN EFFORTS
Fri Feb 09 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Berlin
VZCZCXRO3370
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHLZ
DE RUEHRL #0269/01 0401519
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 091519Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6991
INFO RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVE
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELSUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BERLIN 000269 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/AGS, EUR/PGI, DRL/IL, G/TIP, INL/HSTC, AND PRM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN ELAB SMIG ASEC PGOV GM
SUBJECT: GOVERNMENT AND NGO REPORTS EVALUATE GERMAN EFFORTS 
AGAINST TIP DURING THE 2006 WORLD CUP 
 
REF: A. 06 BERLIN 2266 AND PREVIOUS 
 
     ¶B. 06 MUNICH 347 
     ¶C. 06 FRANKFURT 4232 AND PREVIOUS 
     ¶D. 06 HAMBURG 15 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  Reports prepared by the German Federal 
Interior Ministry and Federal Family Ministry, as well as the 
International Organization for Migration (IOM) and key German 
anti-trafficking NGOs independently conclude there was no 
significant increase in trafficking in persons (TIP) during 
the June-July 2006 Soccer World Cup championship.  The 
reports credit extensive government-funded public awareness 
and prevention campaigns, as well as comprehensive police 
measures, enhanced international coordination, and strong 
cooperation among government agencies, counseling centers, 
and NGOs.  German officials briefed the EU Council's 
trafficking working group in January on measures implemented 
during the World Cup and presented their analysis of how the 
German experience might be used to develop best practices for 
future large-scale public events.  End Summary. 
 
World Cup Security Concept Included TIP 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) The German Federal Cabinet approved the Government's 
final report on the 2006 Soccer World Cup Championship on 
December 6, 2006.  The report was compiled by the Interior 
Ministry with input from numerous other ministries, as well 
as the Federal Chancellery and each of Germany's sixteen 
states.  The 200-page report focuses on the nationwide 
security concept German authorities implemented during the 
World Cup, including measures taken to prevent and combat 
trafficking in persons. 
 
¶3. (U) According to the report, "significant measures" were 
enacted to combat the potential increase in human trafficking 
and forced prostitution, including enhanced international law 
enforcement cooperation among the Federal Office of Criminal 
Investigation (BKA), Interpol, and Europol, as well as the 
inclusion of TIP in federal and state police planning for the 
World Cup.  The report notes police planning took into 
consideration local particularities and incorporated input 
from local counseling centers, specialized anti-TIP police 
units, anti-TIP NGOs, and law enforcement expertsspecialized 
in combating trafficking crimes. 
 
ermany Presents Conclusions to EU Working Group 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
¶4. (SBU) German officials briefed members of the EU Council's 
trafficking working group January 4 abut lessons learned 
during the World Cup.  The Geman presentation focused on how 
the German experence might be used to develop best practices 
forfuture large-scale public events in Europe.  A Family 
Ministry official told us the EU will use two internal 
reports prepared by the German Interior and Family Ministries 
to develop tried-and-tested approaches against TIP for future 
events.  Post has received copies of the two reports and has 
forwarded them to EUR/AGS and G/TIP. 
 
Police Measures against TIP 
--------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) The Interior Ministry report presents the results of 
the Ministry's post-World Cup survey of the experiences of 
all sixteen State Offices of Criminal Investigation (LKA) and 
nineteen anti-TIP NGOs.  The report describes pre-World Cup 
police strategies and concepts, including the World Cup 
National Security Strategy, the state-federal law enforcement 
information-sharing framework developed for the World Cup, 
and other police and NGO initiatives.  Preventive measures 
included greater police presence in red light districts; 
additional surveillance, inspection, and raids on commercial 
sex venues; selective reinstatement of border controls; 
efforts to raise awareness among hotels; and enhanced 
cooperation with social institutions and expert advisory 
agencies. 
 
¶6. (SBU) According to police and NGOs surveyed in the report, 
the number of prostitutes working in cities hosting World Cup 
events increased in the run up to the World Cup primarily 
because of an influx of prostitutes from other regions of 
Germany.  The report also found a significant number of 
prostitutes returned home before the end of the World Cup 
because the anticipated increase in the number of clients did 
not take place.  According to the Interior Ministry, of the 
33 TIP-related investigations reported by LKA anti-TIP units 
during the World Cup, five were related to the World Cup. 
 
BERLIN 00000269  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) The report notes the greater police presence also 
had a deterrent effect with regard to other crimes that 
typically take place in the vicinity of commercial sex 
venues.  The report concludes the increase in TIP feared by 
some organizations did not occur during the World Cup and 
notes that safeguards put in place by the government counter 
human trafficking and forced prostitution proved to be 
successful. 
 
NGO Campaigns 
------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) The internal Family Ministry report describes 
government-funded NGO counter-TIP campaigns during the World 
Cup and evaluates their activities.  (NOTE: The 
government-funded Federal Association against Trafficking in 
Women (KOK) has published a document describing the 
twenty-one counter-TIP campaigns conducted by NGOs in Germany 
during the World Cup.  Each of these campaigns received at 
least partial funding from government sources.  Post has 
forwarded a copy of this document to EUR/AGS and G/TIP.  END 
NOTE.)  The Family Ministry directly funded several of the 
most prominent campaigns, as well as two of the three 
NGO-operated nationwide telephone hotlines for TIP victims, 
potential clients, and others. 
 
¶9. (SBU) At the Ministry's request, NGOs analyzed the success 
of the hotline initiative after the World Cup.  Phone calls 
to the hotlines led to the discovery of fifty-one cases of 
forced prostitution.  The NGOs concluded, however, that none 
of the cases was connected to the World Cup.  Callers also 
used telephone hotlines to obtain general information on 
violence against women and help in cases of domestic 
violence. 
 
¶10. (SBU) The Family Ministry report concludes the World Cup 
was an important platform for sensitizing the general public 
about TIP.  Counseling centers and NGOs, most 
government-funded, succeeded in forging a broad alliance for 
further action and nationwide awareness-raising activities. 
Public awareness and prevention initiatives reached a wide 
and multi-faceted spectrum of civil society far beyond the 
women's movement and other organizations normally engaged on 
the issue.  Counseling centers reached similar conclusions to 
those of law enforcement.  Indeed, counseling centers 
actually reported a decline in the number of forced 
prostitution cases during the World Cup.  The report credits 
the effectiveness of police and NGO measures. 
 
IOM: No Increase in TIP 
----------------------- 
 
¶11. (U) In September 2006, IOM and the Swedish government 
Agency for International Development Cooperation (SIDA) 
published a draft report on their study of the possible 
connection between TIP and the 2006 World Cup.  The goal of 
the study was to determine whether there was an increase in 
victims during the event, analyze the German approach, and 
recommend potential counter-trafficking measures for similar 
events in the future.  The IOM report concluded: "Despite the 
host of international pressure in the immediate run-up to the 
World Cup, the research findings revealed that the German 
authorities had actually begun developing concepts and 
planning of action with regard to an increased risk of human 
trafficking during the World Cup well before the media 
coverage started -- in autumn 2005."  The report continues: 
"All data, information and expert statements that are 
available to this date strongly indicate that an increase in 
trafficking in human beings before and during the World Cup 
did not occur." 
 
¶12. (U) The report credits a number of factors, including 
prevention campaigns, increased police focus, and the 
character of the fan-base, which was comprised mainly of 
groups, couples, families.  The report also cites the success 
of fan festivals in host cities in minimizing violence and 
fan misconduct.  The report laments the amount of 
sensationalism and "hysteria" in some pre-World Cup media 
reporting and suggests a coordinated media approach, 
accompanied by media training, would have limited 
misinformation while helping to ensure the issue of 
trafficking received adequate public attention.  According to 
IOM Germany, the final report will be published later this 
year. 
 
NGOs Evaluate World Cup Public Awareness Campaigns 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
BERLIN 00000269  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
¶13. (U) The twenty-one regional and national NGO public 
awareness campaigns during the World Cup included efforts to 
sensitize the general public, educate potential clients, 
provide assistance and counseling for victims, and pressure 
federal, state, and local politicians to implement additional 
measures to improve protection and benefits for TIP victims. 
According to KOK, the NGO campaigns attracted significant 
attention nationally and internationally and succeeded in 
raising public awareness.  State legislatures in each of the 
sixteen federal states discussed TIP.  The NGO recommended 
that World Cup campaigns continue in order to attain a 
sustainable effect. 
 
Final Whistle Campaign 
---------------------- 
 
¶14. (U) One of the most widely recognized counter-TIP World 
Cup initiatives was the government-funded "Final Whistle" 
campaign organized by the German Women's Council (GWC), under 
the patronage of Berlin's Mayor and the President of the 
German Soccer Association (DFB).  The campaign was conducted 
in cooperation with the Council's 50 member organizations and 
13 other groups.  The Council's public awareness campaign 
used the media and local and national events to raise TIP 
awareness, reaching out to the general public and soccer fans 
throughout Germany. 
 
¶15. (U) According to the GWC, the campaign resulted in over 
80 regional "Final Whistle Actions." Close to 1,000 local and 
regional groups participated in the campaign.  By the end of 
the campaign, approximately 80,000 people had signed the 
campaign's petition, which called for increased funding for 
counseling centers, police training, and public awareness 
efforts.  Another 100,000 people reportedly signed petitions 
organized by several Catholic women's associations. 
According to a GWC spokesperson, the campaign received 
"overwhelming worldwide media attention."  The spokesperson 
stated "the responsible and sensitive" approach used by 
police, in addition to the GWC campaign and other efforts, 
contributed to the fact that there was no significant 
increase in forced prostitution during the World Cup.  On 
January 16, the Council presented the list of signatures and 
their petition to Susanne Kastner, the Vice President of the 
German Bundestag.  According to Henny Engels, the GWC's 
Executive Director, the Council will continue its campaign in 
¶2007. 
 
TIMKEN JR