07BOGOTA923
VIOLENCE AGAINST HUMAN RIGHTS ACTIVISTS ON
Thu Feb 08 00:00:00 +0100 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Bogota
VZCZCXYZ0018
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBO #0923/01 0391918
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 081918Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY BOGOTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2584
INFO RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 8662
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ FEB LIMA 4730
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO 5385
RUEHGL/AMCONSUL GUAYAQUIL 3872C O N F I D E N T I A L BOGOTA 000923 

SIPDIS 

SIPDIS 

E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/07/2017 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV KJUS CO
SUBJECT: VIOLENCE AGAINST HUMAN RIGHTS ACTIVISTS ON 
ATLANTIC COAST LEADS GOC TO REVIEW PROTECTION MEASURES 


Classified By: Political Counselor John Creamer.  Reason: 1.4 (b,d) 

------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 

¶1. (U) On January 31, unknown gunmen killed human rights 
activist Yolanda Izquierdo, who had been warning the GOC of 
death threats against her.  The killing followed violence, 
threats, and arson against other groups involved with human 
rights, displaced persons, and paramilitary victims' rights 
on the Atlantic coast.  In reaction, President Uribe sent a 
senior police official to lead the investigation into the 
Izquierdo murder, vowed that the assets of 2,600 demobilized 
paramilitaries be frozen, and announced a 50 million peso 
(23,000 USD) reward for information on the killing.  The GOC 
is reviewing its protection programs to improve security for 
threatened individuals.  End Summary. 

--------------------------------------------- 
GUNMEN KILL ACTIVIST FOR PARAMILITARY VICTIMS 
--------------------------------------------- 

¶2. (U) On January 31, unknown gunmen killed human rights 
activist Yolanda Izquierdo outside of her home in Monteria, 
Cordoba Department.Izquierdo was a leader of the Popular 
Housing Organization (OPV), a group that assists Internally
Displaced Persons (IDPs) to reclaim land seized by 
paramilitary groups.  Izquierdo served as one of two leaders 
of a delegation of victims who attended the voluntary 
confession (version libre) of ex-para chief Salvatore Mancuso 
Izquierdo reportedly began receiving death threats after 
attending Mancuso's version libre in December 2006.  She 
subsequently requested protection from the Prosecutor 
General's Office, the local Human Rights Ombudsman, and the 
Administrative Department for Security (DAS), but never 
received protection measures.  Minister of Interior and 
Justice (MOIJ) Carlos Holguin, whose ministry runs a 
protection program for threatened individuals, blamed a 
"bureaucratic error" for Izquierdo's lack of protection. 
Human rights groups charged Izquierdo's murder was designed 
to intimidate victims prepared to testify against 
paramilitary leaders in the Justice and Peace Law process. 

--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
VIOLENCE AGAINST HUMAN RIGHTS ACTIVISTS ON ATLANTIC COAST 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 

¶3. (U) There have been other cases of threats and violence 
against human rights activists on the Atlantic Coast.  On 
January 28, unknown gunmen killed Freddy Abel Espitia, 
president of the Committee of Displaced Persons of Cotorra, 
in Cordoba Department.  On January 20, a suspected arsonist 
burned down a community center of the League of Displaced 
Women (League) in Turbaco, Bolivar Department.  Both the 
League and the Cartagena Office of the Association for 
Displaced Afro-Colombians (AFRODES) had reported threats 
declaring their organizations "military targets" of newly 
emerging criminal groups.  The GOC increased police patrols 
around the League and AFRODES's offices after the Embassy 
brought the threats to its attention, but the patrols did not 
protect the League's community center. 

------------ 
GOC REACTION 
------------ 

¶4. (C) The day after Izquierdo's murder, President Uribe 
announced a 50 million peso (23,000 USD) reward for 
information on the perpetrators, vowed to freeze the assets 
of all 2,600 demobilized paramilitaries participating in the 
Justice and Peace Law process, and appointed the homicide 
chief of the Judicial Police (DIJIN) to personally lead the 
investigation.  Head of the Presidential Program on Human 
Rights Carlos Franco told us February 1 the GOC is providing 
protection to Izquierdo's OPV colleague, as well as OPV's 
lawyer (see  septel).  DIJIN Chief General Naranjo told us 
February 6 the DIJIN had identified Sor Teresa Gomez as the 
intellectual author of Izquierdo's murder and that a warrant 
has been issued for her arrest.  The DIJIN expects to detain 
Gomez shortly, and is also close to identifying the 
murderers.  He confirmed that pursuant to Uribe's order, the 
DIJIN seized assets belonging to Mancuso.  Naranjo cautioned, 
however, that additional seizures would be slow due to legal 
and resource constraints. 

¶5.  (C) Similarly, two days after the January 20 fire at the 
League of Displaced Women, the GOC convened an interagency 

security meeting with League XXXXXXXXXXXX, local 
authorities, law enforcement, the military, the Prosecutor 
General's Office, and the MOIJ's protection program.  The GOC 
offered to rebuild the damaged building, construct a police 
box next to the League's grounds, set up a Marine command 
post in the neighborhood, and provide private security guards 
at the site.  XXXXXXXXXXXX told us February 2 she had rejected 
the GOC offer to rebuild the building, accepting an offer 
from the local UN Office of the High Commissioner on Refugees 
to do so instead.  She attributed the fire to local political 
leaders, including Turbaco Mayor Silvio Carrasquilla, who 
feared that her work with the women's group threatened their 
political control.  The League has been a recipient of USAID 
funding through a housing project for displaced women. 
XXXXXXXXXXXX also recently presented a funding proposal to USAID 
for the League's human rights-related activities. 

--------------------------------------------- 
VIOLENCE TO HASTEN PROTECTION PROGRAM REFORM?
--------------------------------------------- 

¶6. (SBU) Franco told us the violence has triggered a GOC 
review of its methods of assigning and providing protection 
to threatened individuals.  Currently, the Colombian National 
Police (CNP) provides bodyguards to around 2,000 threatened 
individuals and the DAS safeguards 600-700 journalists, union 
leaders, human rights activists, and other vulnerable 
individuals with funding provided by the Ministry of Interior 
and Justice's Protection Program (MOIJ).  The MOIJ program 
also provides threatened individuals with transportation, 
communication equipment, bullet proof vests, and/or armored 
offices.  The National Prosecutor's Office (Fiscalia) 
protects a small number of witnesses, and the military also 
runs a small protection program.  The DAS has proposed 
shifting its bodyguard duties to the CNP, but Minister 
Holguin has not yet approved the move.  In total, more than 
8000 individuals benefit from GOC protection programs. 

¶7. (C)  Franco said the current system is overly bureaucratic 
and does not provide broad enough coverage.  The agencies 
involved do not share threat information, and the risk 
assessment process is too time-consuming.  He said the 
Fiscalia's witness protection program is grossly 
understaffed, and cannot protect the large number of 
witnesses expected to testify in the Justice and Peace Law 
process.  Similarly, the MOIJ is overly narrow and is not 
designed to protect all witnesses or victims.  Franco said 
the GOC is looking to better integrate the different 
protection programs to provide more complete coverage.  In 
the short-term, it will expedite the dissemination of threat 
information within the GOC, with an emphasis on making such 
information available to local CNP commanders.  DAS Director 
Andres Penate also told us the DAS will commit to conducting 
rapid investigations of threats, believing this will help 
deter violence against threatened individuals. 

--------------- 
EMBASSY ACTIONS 
--------------- 

¶8. (SBU) The Embassy alerted the Presidential Program on 
Human Rights and the MOIJ's protection program of the threats 
against the League and AFRODES on January 11 after receiving 
a letter from U.S.-based human rights groups.  Both programs 
promised to review the security schemes for AFRODES and the 
League and to notify the local CNP office.  The MOIJ had been 
already providing limited protection measures to the League. 
After the fire, we stressed the need for a thorough 
investigation--as well as for additional protection 
measures--to Franco, Penate, and the Cartagena office of the 
Fiscalia.  We also met with League XXXXXXXXXXXX and 
visited the AFRODES office in Cartagena.  We supported 
XXXXXXXXXXXX's request to select her own personal security 
detail, and the GOC agreed to pay for it.  XXXXXXXXXXXX asked 
that we follow-up on the arson case; we committed to send a 
Poloff to Cartagena in early March to visit the League's 
office and discuss the case with local officials. 

¶9.  (SBU)  We did not receive information about the threats 
againstIzquierdo prior to her killing, but met subsequently 
with Franco, Penate, and Naranjo to highlight the need for 
the GOC to identify and punish those responsible for her 
death.  We will also continue to work with the GOC to improve 
protection for witnesses, human rights activists and other 
threatened individuals. 
DRUCKER 

=======================CABLE ENDS============================