07BRASILIA2087
BRAZIL: CEO Forum recommendations report to USG and
Mon Nov 05 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO8229
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #2087/01 3091700
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 051700Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0354
INFO RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 5378
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 1116
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 7325UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRASILIA 002087 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: ECON ETRD BR
SUBJECT: BRAZIL: CEO Forum recommendations report to USG and 
Brazilian government officials October 11, 2007 
 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY:  The Brazilian and American CEOs participating in 
the CEO Forum reported their recommendations to President Lula's 
Chief of Staff Dilma Rousseff, Minister of Development, Industry and 
Trade (MDIC) Miguel Jorge, Commerce Secretary Carlos Gutierrez and 
National Economic Council Director Al Hubbard on October 11.  The 
CEOs highlighted that their priority recommendation was completion 
of a bilateral tax treaty between Brazil and the United States and 
development of a "benchmarking" system to evaluate investment 
climate improvements.  The CEOs also presented recommendations 
supporting a rapid conclusion of the Doha WTO round; mechanisms to 
settle investment disputes; development of viable infrastructure 
projects and modalities; improvement of technology sharing and 
communication regarding investment opportunities; partnerships in 
education and workforce development; increased joint research and 
development; and amelioration of impediments to trade, investment 
and travel flows.   END SUMMARY 
¶2. (U) Josue Gomes da Silva, President of Coteminas and Chair of the 
Brazilian Section, welcomed the government representatives with a 
note to "be careful what you wish for" in encouraging Brazilian and 
American CEOs together to develop joint recommendations.  He 
acknowledged the recommendations were ambitious, but noted the CEOs 
agreed, "the danger is not to reach too far and miss, but to reach 
too near and make it."  He highlighted that the most important 
priority recommendations for the Forum was to achieve a bilateral 
tax treaty.  He underlined that the CEOs wished to emphasize that 
this treaty would be of enormous reciprocal benefit to both 
countries' companies and that CEOs very much want an accord signed 
and implemented by May or June 2008 when next the CEO Forum meets. 
¶3. (U) Gomes da Silva continued that the other priority 
recommendation the Forum wished to highlight was the development of 
"benchmarks" or best practices with particular emphasis on the 
regulatory framework.  The CEOs would welcome "harmonization" toward 
a set of best regulatory practices in order to increase trade and 
investment between our countries. 
TRADE AND ECONOMIC GROWTH 
¶4. (U) Tim Solso, CEO of Cummins Inc. and Chair of the US Section 
underlined that the themes President Lula had offered at the dinner 
hosted for the Forum participants - peace, democracy and free, just 
trade - were themes the CEOs supported.  He noted the importance of 
competitiveness in a global market that includes China and India. 
In that light, he again emphasized the need for a bilateral tax 
treaty and underlined CEO support for conclusion of the WTO Doha 
Round.  He briefed that CEOs were not prepared to go as far as 
recommending a bilateral investment treaty (BIT) or a free trade 
area agreement (FTA), but did strongly support international 
arbitration of investment disputes.  Solso noted Forum desire for 
more coherence in tax structures and briefed that the visa 
discussion had been very emotional, with CEOs seeing visas as a 
barrier to trade and many wishing to do away with the reciprocal 
visa system.  Finally, he noted CEO calls for tax incentives for 
education and technology development.  He noted that US CEOs want to 
help their partners to be more competitive, but should not have to 
"drag" them along ("not our weight to carry").  Gomes da Silva added 
that his CEOs believe they must help the other blocks that they work 
with (for example, Mercosul), because integration is huge concern 
for all society.   Jorge Gerdau, CEO of Grupo Gerdau, offered that 
in addition, Brazil cannot take on China alone, but if all the 
Americas work together, anything is possible.  Gerdau welcomed 
development of a regional infrastructure initiative that would 
include the World Bank, BNDES and the private sector.  He 
highlighted positive cooperation on biofuels. 
COMPETITIVENESS 
¶5. (U) Marco Stefanini, President of Stefanini IT Solutions, noted 
Forum recommendations in the area of education (particularly English 
language learning), youth skill development and exchange programs. 
Craig Barrett, Chairman of the Board of Intel noted information 
technology, investment in research and development, infrastructure 
(with particular emphasis on spectrum allocation and broadband 
development), and harmonization of venture capital standards are all 
important. 
¶6. (U) Rick Wagoner, CEO of General Motors turned to biofuels, 
welcoming the growing US and Brazilian production, calling for joint 
research, particularly in cellulosic technologies, that would yield 
more energy and would be better for the environment.  A Brazilian 
CEO noted the research and development centers in Brazil and 
underlined the importance of intellectual property rights 
protection. 
CEO CONCLUDING REMARKS 
¶7. (U) Josue Gomes da Silva noted that the Forum wanted to meet 
every six months with governments to develop metrics and evaluate 
progress.  Tim Solso noted that the CEOs that have adopted each 
subject will develop one or two, only, of the suggestions under each 
heading, in order to develop metrics and come back to the 
governments to report:  "Here is what we are doing; what are you 
doing?"  Otherwise, CEOs feel nothing concrete will be accomplished. 
 He emphasized that "the meat is going to be what we do now until 
six months from now.  The crux is what we can concretely develop to 
get done after this too-rushed day." 
GOVERNMENT REACTIONS 
 
BRASILIA 00002087  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶8. (U) MDIC Minister Miguel Jorge noted the Forum had started an 
important, never done before process.  The most important factor, 
for him, was that companies had engaged to work together and to 
speak together to governments.  Casa Civil head Dilma Rousseff spoke 
at length and with great enthusiasm.   She said the Forum 
demonstrated the ambition to create progress.  She agreed on the 
importance of addressing taxes, "whether or not a tax treaty is the 
right way."   Rousseff noted "we live in similar worlds," and 
regulatory issues and investment questions are good objectives to 
address, even if the challenge is to find concrete solutions in 
practice.  She underlined that the Brazilian government wants to 
increase competitiveness, although she stressed she would not imply 
the Americas are currently incapable of competing against Asia. 
Rousseff underlined that, in the next few years, increasing 
international investments was definitely in Brazil and the US' 
interests.  She noted the relationship between Brazil and the US was 
a strategic one and she had great hopes for the future. 
¶9. (U) Rousseff lauded the Brazil-US biofuels partnership and agreed 
with the Forum on the need to increase cooperative research and to 
increase exchanges on bio-combustibles.  She highlighted access to 
education as one of the most difficult problems a government faces. 
She noted that universal education was an important goal for the 
Brazilian government, and looked forward to drawing on the expertise 
of the United States in this area.  She spoke in support of 
technological exchange as well.  Rousseff noted the importance of 
respect for intellectual property rights and affirmed that contracts 
must be respected.  She concluded by underlining that democracy and 
fair trade are linked concepts for the Brazilian government. 
¶10. (U) Secretary Gutierrez welcomed the CEO Forum report and noted 
the US continues to learn much from other parts of the world.  He 
lauded the CEOs' proposal to prioritize and develop specific ideas 
from among the report's recommendations.  Secretary Gutierrez 
affirmed the Forum had been an enormous success because it was 
focused on priorities, metrics and further developing results-based 
recommendations.  Regarding CEO Forum language on "harmonization," 
Gutierrez cautioned CEOs to focus instead on "pragmatic" steps for 
regulatory simplification that would be most likely to succeed.  He 
noted governments did not want to go in the direction of 
"harmonization" in the sense that EU internal regulations are 
"harmonized" among EU member states.  He endorsed "pragmatism with a 
strategic view." 
¶11. (U) The Commerce Secretary noted that improving education is not 
a short-term goal and noted the United States has its own challenges 
in this area.  He added that, if we had Americans who spoke 
Portuguese in the next generation, this would be a true measure of 
success in demonstrating the partnership goes both ways. 
¶12. (U) NEC Director Hubbard said he noted six particular challenges 
among the CEO recommendations:  1. Visas - we need to figure out how 
to improve within the next six months with given resources; 2. Tax 
treaty - he urged CEOs on both sides to continue to pressure 
governments, otherwise "the bureaucrats will talk forever;" 3. Doha 
- he emphasized business pressure on governments was crucial for 
coming to closure;  4.  Bilateral investment treaty - Hubbard 
acknowledged understanding why CEOs had chosen to focus on dispute 
settlement mechanisms rather than a full BIT, but urged them to keep 
the BIT idea on the table;  5.   Tax systems - he encouraged Brazil 
to fix its tax system and noted US tax system problems, including 
the highest corporate tax rate outside Japan.  He assured CEOs that 
the executive branch intended to have a proposal to improve the US 
tax system by the time of the State of the Union.  "I hope you will, 
too;" and 6.  Education - he noted this was a knotty challenge for 
both sides. 
¶13. (SBU) COMMENT:  The Forum was widely viewed as a success among 
government and business participants.  Embassy was particularly 
impressed by the strength of Dilma Rousseff's enthusiastic support, 
both in front of the CEOs and with the press after the Forum 
concluded.  The head of Casa Civil is an influential figure in 
deciding priorities and ensuring action in the Brazilian government, 
and her support augers well for positive movement on joint private 
sector priorities.  END COMMENT 
¶14. (U) The delegation has cleared this message. 
SOBEL