07BRASILIA694
COUNTRY CLEARANCE APPROVAL FOR DOE A/S KARSNER DELEGATION
Thu Apr 19 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO0638
OO RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #0694/01 1091252
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 191252Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8709
INFO RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO IMMEDIATE 9659
RHEBAAA/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 4227
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 6521UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRASILIA 000694 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR OES/SAT 
STATE FOR WHA/BSC FOR WPOPP 
STATE FOR WHA/MEX FOR FCONEILLE 
STATE PLS PASS TO DOE/PI FOR CGILLESPIE 
STATE PLS PASS TO DOE/EE/GERMANTOWN HQ FOR CGILLESPIE 
STATE PLS PASS TO DOE/EE/GERMANTOWN/HQ FOR SJOHNSON 
STATE PLS PASS TO DOE/EE FOR DWORMLEY 
STATE PLS PASS TO DOE/NREL FOR MSHAFFSTALL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TRGY ENRG SENV KSCA OTRA US BR
SUBJECT:  COUNTRY CLEARANCE APPROVAL FOR DOE A/S KARSNER DELEGATION 
TO BRAZIL, APRIL 2007 
 
REF:  (A) STATE 51101, (B) STATE 51237, (C) STATE 50729, (D) STATE 
51681 
 
¶1.  Mission warmly welcomes and grants country clearance for U.S. 
Department of Energy Assistant Secretary Alexander "Andy" Karsner, 
and his delegation, to Sao Paulo and Brasilia, Brazil, April 22-25, 
¶2007.  Members of the Assistant Secretary's delegation include 
Courtney Gillespie, Michael Mills, Helen Chum and Brad Barton. 
 
¶2.  A/S Karsner and delegation members will attend the International 
Partnership for the Hydrogen Economy (IPHE) in Sao Paulo, and 
participate in Mission organized activities both in Sao Paulo and 
Brasilia.  Mission has been in contact with delegation members in 
arranging activities and a final schedule will be sent separately. 
 
¶3.  Mission views your visit to Brazil, just weeks after the visit 
of President Bush to Brazil and President Lula to the United States, 
as an opportunity to solidify and enhance the bilateral partnership 
in renewable energy. 
 
¶4. Hotel reservations were made, as requested: 
In Sao Paulo at Intercontinental Hotel Sao Paulo located at Alameda 
Santos, 1123, Tel: +55 11 3179-2600, Fax: +55 11 3179-2666; 
In Brasilia at Blue Tree Brasilia, Blue Tree Park Brasilia, located 
at SHTN Trecho 1, Conj 1B, Bloco C, Tel 55 61 3424-7000, Fax 55 61 
3424-7016 
Guest is responsible for no-show and cancellation of reservation 
should be made at least 48 hours in advance by fax to the Science 
Section 55 61 312-7646 and to the appropriate U.S. consulates when 
necessary 
 
¶5. Visitors are reminded that all US citizens traveling to Brazil 
for any purpose require visas, which must be obtained in advance 
from a Brazilian Embassy or Consulate. "Airport visas" do not exist, 
and immigration authorities will refuse entry to anyone without a 
valid visa.  All Brazilian visas are considered invalid regardless 
of validity if not used within 90 days of issuance. 
 
¶6. Visitors should be current with all immunizations required for 
Brazil.  Those arriving from flights that do not originate in the 
United States are advised to ensure that their yellow fever 
vaccination is up to date, and that they have their WHO yellow cards 
with them to prove it.  If you require a yellow fever vaccination 
and it is for the first time, not a booster, it should be given at 
least 10 days before travel to be effective.  Please consult with 
appropriate medical authorities before traveling. 
 
¶7. The U.S. Embassy continues to receive reports from official 
visitors and tourists of recent VARIG domestic and international 
flight cancellations due to the airline's financial difficulties. 
These cancellations continue to result in missed connecting flights 
in Sao Paulo and Rio, and disruption of travelers' itineraries. 
Although the airline has been purchased by a new buyer, both 
domestic and international flights are likely to operate at a 
significantly reduced confidence level during their restructuring 
period. 
 
U.S. citizens should keep this in mind when making travel plans. 
 
¶8. All official visitors must attend the RSO Security briefing. 
 
¶9. Mission understands that no Embassy/Consulate assistance is 
required.  Control officer and Embassy point of contact for this 
visit is: 
 
-- Science Counselor, Patricia Norman, Tel (55)(61) 3312-7401 or 
(55)(61)3312-7432, Fax (55)(61) 3312-7646 (Science Section), 
cellular phone (55)(61) 9665-1439, home:  3364-6447, email: 
NormanPD@state.gov 
 
-- Sao Paulo Coordinator is Mr. Peter Higgins, Tel. (11) 5186-7247, 
home(11) 5685-1545, Cellular phone: (11) 9250-7062, email: 
HigginsJP@state.gov 
 
¶10. Persons entering Brazil under the USG auspices have an important 
role to play in strengthening U.S. - Brazil cooperation.  Please 
keep this priority in mind during your visit and inform the embassy 
or nearest consulate promptly of any opportunities or problems that 
arise.  As a result of the imposition of biometric enrolment of the 
US-VISIT program, the Government of Brazil started fingerprinting 
 
BRASILIA 00000694  002 OF 003 
 
 
and photographing arriving U.S. citizens in January 2004.  Present 
GOB policy is not to fingerprint U.S. travelers arriving on official 
or diplomatic visas.  It is possible, however, that official 
visitors could be asked to submit to a fingerprinting through 
administrative error.  The Embassy hopes that visitors will comply 
with reasonable requests from the Brazilian immigration authorities. 
 Any unusual delays or unreasonable treatment should be brought to 
the attention of the Management Officer so they can be relayed to 
the GOB.  Full cooperation with the identification procedures is 
advisable. 
 
¶11. MEDICAL EVACUATION, INSURANCE AND HEALTH UNIT ACCESS ISSUES: 
 
Direct Hire employees (not contractors) of the Department of State, 
USAID, DOD, and CDC need not take further action. Direct Hire 
employees of other U.S Government Agencies must provide their 
control officer by cable or e-mail a name and 24-hour point of 
contact for their agency that can authorize medical evacuation.  For 
employees whose agencies are not authorized to fund medevacs, 
individuals will be responsible for obtaining their own medevac 
insurance and providing the information to their control officer. 
 
The USG does not cover contract employees for medevac.  Therefore, 
all USG contractors (regardless of the government agency they are 
contracted to)  must provide their control officer prior to arrival 
the name, phone number, and policy number of their medevac insurance 
provider(s) for use in case of emergency. 
 
Contractors do not have access to services in the Health Units at 
Post. In an emergency, the Health Unit will try to facilitate access 
to care on the local economy or facilitation with their medevac 
provider. Contractors need to be advised that for any medical care 
needs they will need to use services provided on the local economy. 
 
¶12. Please find below some information on Administrative procedures 
and requirements: 
 
¶A. Each visitor, regardless of length of stay, must bring/forward 
fiscal data to pay for direct costs of the visit.  Each agency, 
organization or visiting delegation will be charged for the actual 
costs attributed to its visit.  Direct charge costs include, but are 
not limited to: 
 
-- American and LES overtime (for such services as airport 
expediting, cashier accommodation exchange, control room staffing, 
representational event support); 
Travel and per diem costs incurred by post personnel in support of 
visitor's field travel; 
-- Rental of vehicles and other equipment; 
-- Long distance telephone calls; 
-- Office supplies; 
-- Gasoline and other vehicle maintenance costs; 
-- Departure tax and other airport fees. 
 
Post will not provide service if fiscal data is not provided for the 
direct charges. 
 
¶B. For TDYers remaining at post over 30 days, there is a charge for 
ICASS support services. This charge is for the following ICASS 
services and will be billed thru the ICASS TDY module, based on a 
per-capita-basis, prorated for the length of stay. For example, a 
TDY visit by one USG employee of 06 months' duration would be 
counted as 0.5: 
-- Basic Package; 
-- Community Liaison - CLO; 
-- Health Services. 
 
¶C. If your sponsoring agency is not signed up for ICASS services at 
post, please be prepared to sign a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) 
document for ICASS support services upon arrival.  The agency should 
provide post with a written communication generated by the 
traveler's headquarters that confirms the agency will pay ICASS 
charges for the TDYer. The communication should include the agency 
ICASS billing code to which the TDY support should be charged and 
authorize the traveler to sign the ICASS invoice generated by the 
TDY module.  Agencies will not be billed until the accumulated 
invoice cost for TDY support exceeds Dols 2,500 for the fiscal year. 
 Where travel is urgent, the TDYers should bring this documentation 
with him/her to ensure there are no interruptions in the provision 
of service.  Post will not provide any service to a TDYer staying in 
 
BRASILIA 00000694  003 OF 003 
 
 
excess of thirty days without provision of this documentation before 
day 31 of the TDY. 
 
¶13. Crime is the principal and real threat to visitors to Brazil. 
The crime threat level in Brasilia, Rio de Janeiro, Sao Paulo and 
Recife is critical.  Armed street robberies are common in these 
cities.  The area in and around the hotel sector in Brasilia is 
extremely dangerous, especially at night.  Embassy visitors have 
been robbed under gunpoint while walking on the street.  Taxis and 
private vehicles should be used to move about. 
 
¶14. In addition, individuals and organizations with ties to 
extremist groups operate in the tri-border area between Brazil, 
Paraguay and Argentina - this includes the Iguacu falls area. 
Official visitors contemplating travel to this area should contact 
the Embassy before doing so, as well as Embassy Asuncion and/or 
Embassy Buenos Aires if they plan to cross into Paraguay and/or 
Argentina. 
 
¶15. Visitors should practice common sense preventative security 
techniques, just as they would in any large city in the world.  Some 
of the more important tips that you should follow to avoid becoming 
a crime victim are: 
 
-- Do not carry or wear valuable items that will attract the 
attention of thieves.  If you need to wear expensive jewelry or 
carry a camera; conceal it until you arrive at your destination. 
 
-- Be aware of the street environment and avoid contact with those 
who may be looking for robbery targets.  Seek a safer location.  Go 
into a store, bank or simply cross the street. 
 
-- Do not physically resist any robbery attempt.  While this is a 
personal decision, statistics show that resistance leads to injury. 
 
-- Do not answer your hotel room door until you positively confirm 
who is on the other side.  Look out the peephole, or call the front 
desk to confirm the visitor. 
 
-- Do not walk on the beaches after dark.  Assaults are common. 
 
-- Avoid city buses.  Many pass through high crime areas and are 
susceptible to robberies. 
 
¶16. Visitors who intend to bring U.S. Government portable 
microcomputers into the embassy or consulate must obtain prior 
approval from the systems manager and the RSO/PSO.  The use of 
privately owned computers is discouraged in any government 
facility. 
 
SOBEL