07BRASILIA1850
Brazilian Senators Welcome U.S. Outreach, Exchange
Thu Sep 27 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO0223
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #1850/01 2702051
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 272051Z SEP 07
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0051
INFO RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 7169
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 0877
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 5168
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES 5022
RUEHMN/AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO 7033
RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION 6309
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO 6442
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRASILIA 001850 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL SCUL BR
SUBJECT:  Brazilian Senators Welcome U.S. Outreach, Exchange 
Prospects 
 
 
Ref: Brasilia 1568 
 
¶1.  (U)  Summary.  As part of a broad outreach to Brazilian senators 
August 7-8 on a number of topics, Ambassador Sobel found very high 
receptivity to the prospects of an increase in bilateral 
congressional exchanges.  Interest is not limited to members of the 
foreign affairs committee, and topics of interest include bilateral 
and international trade, regional integration, national security, 
energy, and others.  A Brazilian delegation on biofuels could be 
visiting Washington as early as this October.  End summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
Foreign Relations Committee Chair Encourages Exchanges... 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶2. (U) Senator Heraclito Fortes (DEM - Democrats, center-right 
opposition party; of Piaui), chairman of the Foreign Relations and 
National Defense Committee, told Ambassador over lunch on August 8 
that he had been on an official trip to the U/K recently with two 
other senators and three deputies.  (Reftel reports Fortes's broader 
foreign policy comments.)  He traveled in his capacity as chairman 
of the Foreign Relations and National Defense Committee.  He said 
Brazilian legislators often travel to other countries and to 
international organizations, and a trip to the U.S. in the near 
future is essential, if only to discuss the trade relationship, 
although there is much more to discuss.  He also emphasized the 
importance of learning about other countries and sharing information 
about one's own country.  Senator Fortes said there is an increased 
desire in Brazil for dialogue between congresses, that congresses 
must work toward bringing countries together, in spite of inevitable 
ideological differences, and these dialogues should focus on their 
countries' interests, not just the presidents of the respective 
countries. 
 
--------------------- 
...As Do Other Senators 
--------------------- 
 
¶3.  (U) Fortes reiterated his interest in exchanges in remarks at an 
August 8 dinner organized and hosted for the Ambassador by Senator 
Joao Tenorio (PSDB - Brazilian Social Democracy Party - center-left 
opposition party; of Alagoas), chairman of the biofuels subcommittee 
of the agriculture committee.  With the exception of Fortes and 
foreign relations committee vice-chair Eduardo Azeredo (PSDB, of 
Minas Gerais), most of the dinner attendees were members of the 
biofuels subcommittee. Marcos Montes (DEM, of Minas Gerais), a 
member of the Chamber of Deputies special committee on bioenergy, 
also attended.  The ten senators and one deputy at the dinner 
repeatedly expressed their pleasure -- and even surprise -- at the 
Ambassador's effort to reach out and their interest in increasing 
exchanges with the U.S. Senate.  Along with Fortes, Tenorio talked 
about the important common interests that the U.S. and Brazil share, 
cited the numerous times he and his committee had already had 
contact with senior USG officials, and expressed his hope that such 
contacts could increase. 
 
¶4.  (U) Invited to address the guests, Senator Marisa Serrano (PSDB, 
of Mato Grosso do Sul) also welcomed the outreach, but stressed the 
importance of our countries working together in "partnership," a 
theme repeated by many Brazilians.  Noting what an honor it was for 
the United States that so many senators to have taken time out 
during their busy schedules to attend the dinner, the Ambassador 
stressed his interest in spurring exchanges and working closely with 
the Brazilian congress on our common interests.  Visiting House 
Western Hemisphere Subcommittee staff director Jason Steinbaum also 
encouraged such cooperation, noting that Subcommittee Chairman Rep. 
Eliot Engel (D-NY) hoped to lead a delegation to Brazil in the fall. 
 Over the course of the dinner, Tenorio made clear that his 
committee would be interested in a trip focused on biofuels, perhaps 
as early as October.  (Separately, staffers told emboffs that 
Tenorio would probably look for an invitation before making plans.) 
 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The outreach events included some of the most respected 
leaders in the Senate.  A dinner in the Ambassador's honor given on 
August 7 by Jorge Werthein, executive director of the Latin American 
Technological Information Network, included ten leading senators. 
On that occasion, Ambassador spoke with Gerson Camata (PMDB - 
Brazilian Democratic Movement Party, a non-ideological party in the 
government coalition; of Espirito Santo) about Camata's likelihood 
of becoming the next Senate president within weeks.  Camata told 
 
BRASILIA 00001850  002 OF 002 
 
 
Ambassador that he would be interested in assuming the presidency if 
he had the backing of the government, even though it could take 
several more weeks for the Calheiros affair to be resolved.  Senate 
president Renan Calheiros (PMDB, of Alagoas), under fire for alleged 
corruption, will probably be forced out of both the Senate and the 
Senate presidency, and Camata is the most likely successor.  (Note: 
Support for Calheiros from the Presidential Palace has waned, 
according to media reports.  Although Calheiros is personally 
well-liked by many senators, his situation has become untenable and 
he will probably leave the Senate presidency, and possibly even the 
Senate.  The next president will probably come from the PMDB, since 
the largest party in the Senate normally holds the presidency. 
Camata's probable opponent is Jarbas Vasconcelos (PMDB, Pernambuco). 
 Camata is the more likely winner because he would be a good 
consensus candidate; Vasconcelos is well-known for his anti-Lula 
views.  The Calheiros affair will probably be resolved within a 
month or two.  End note.) 
 
¶6. (SBU)  Comment:  The reception senators have given our outreach 
effort was unexpectedly warm and enthusiastic, which bodes well for 
work on several fronts, including the legislative resolution of our 
property issues. Although suffering through the Calheiros corruption 
scandal, the  Congress will play a key role in shaping the Brazilian 
approach to such items as energy policy, biofuels, and trade.  As 
opinion makers, both in Brasilia and in their home districts, their 
understanding of U.S. policy and the way in which our government 
operates can be essential to helping advance our objectives and 
enhance our bilateral relationship.  Embassy will look for ways to 
build on these initial outreach efforts, especially through 
exchanges between the U.S. and Brazilian congresses. 
 
 
SOBEL