07CARACAS2049
COUNTRY CLEARANCE APPROVAL FOR AVIATION SAFETY
Fri Oct 19 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Caracas
VZCZCXYZ0008
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHCV #2049/01 2922202
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 192202Z OCT 07
FM AMEMBASSY CARACAS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9939
INFO RHMCSUU/FAA NATIONAL HQ WASHINGTON DC
RHMCSUU/FAA MIAMI ARTCC MIAMI FLUNCLAS CARACAS 002049 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR OTRA ASEC VE
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE APPROVAL FOR AVIATION SAFETY 
INSPECTORS JOE MAIORANA AND QUENTIN CRUZ. (10/21/07 - 
10/27/07). 
 
REF: MIAMI FL 0 
 
¶1. The Embassy grants country clearance for the visit to 
Venezuela of Joe Maiorana and Quentin Cruz of the Federal 
Aviation Administration (FAA) for the period of October 21, 
2007 through October 27, 2007.  This approval is granted on 
the condition that the traveler will be traveling with an 
appropriate Venezuelan visa.  (See paragraph titled, Passport 
Requirements.) 
 
The purpose of the visit is to conduct a substantial 
maintenance facility inspection during the performance of a C 
check inspection on N905TA at Aeropostal Alas de Venezuela. 
 
Embassy point of contact will be Joshua Temblador.  Address: 
Embassy of the United States, Calle F con Calle Suapure, 
Colinas de Valle Arriba, Caracas, Venezuela. 
Telephone: Office 58-212-907-8527 
Fax: 58-212-907-8033 
Cellphone: 416-614-8925 
Embassy after-hours direct line for Marine Security Guard is 
58-212-975-9821. 
 
No Embassy assistance has been requested. 
 
SECURITY 
-------- 
The Department of State has rated Venezuela a critical threat 
country for crime.  Travelers to Venezuela  should exercise 
caution and good personal security at all times.  All USG 
visitors to Caracas are required to attend an RSO provided 
security briefing.  Specific concerns include the following: 
 
CRIME 
----- 
The crime environment has deteriorated rapidly over the last 
several years.  Since 1998, there has been a rapid and 
serious increase in criminal incidents to include murder, 
kidnapping, assaults and residential burglaries.  Police and 
security officials are often involved, threatening victims to 
keep quiet, suggesting much of the crime goes unreported. 
 
Most incidents appear to be crimes of opportunity committed 
by individuals or small groups of common street criminals. 
Cheap gas coupled with at sharp increase in available 
vehicles has allowed criminals to move outside of their 
neighborhoods and target areas of perceived wealth.  Visitors 
should remain alert to their surroundings and maintain 
control of personal items.  Under no circumstances should 
expensive or flashy jewelry be worn in Venezuela. 
If you are confronted in a robbery situation, remain calm and 
comply with your assailant's demands.  Do not attempt to run 
or antagonize the perpetrator.  Most criminals seek only cash 
or other valuables and will not resort to violence unless you 
resist their demands. 
 
TERRORISM AND POLITICAL VIOLENCE 
-------------------------------- 
While terrorism concerns have not yet risen to the critical 
level, RSO notes that Embassy Caracas is one of a very small 
number of posts throughout the world that have fallen victim 
to a terrorist attack within the last year.  In October 2006, 
two pipe bombs were placed at different points outside the 
embassy compound.  Reporting suggests terrorism is a growing 
concern in Venezuela, with multiple indigenous and 
transnational groups increasingly allowed to operate within 
Venezuelan borders. 
 
Security forces within Venezuela have a reputation for heavy 
handed tactics when dealing with anti-Chavez demonstrators or 
other uprisings not supported by the government. 
Demonstrations have resulted in serious injury to 
participants, although demonstrations in front of the US 
Embassy have historically been peaceful.  Visitors should 
avoid demonstrations at all times.  If you find yourself 
caught in a demonstration, remain calm and leave the area as 
quickly as possible.  Do not identify yourself as an American 
citizen or US Government employee. 
 
TRAVEL TO COLOMBIAN-VENEZUELAN BORDER REGION 
-------------------------------------------- 
Venezuela is involved in a regional conflict with Colombian 
guerrillas along the border region.  With the exception of 
Maracaibo, the area within 50 miles of the Colombian border 
is off limits to embassy personnel without written approval 
from the Chief of Mission.  Requests to travel to this 
restricted area must be made by memorandum from your control 
officer to the COM, through the DCM and RSO at least 15 days 
in advance.  Failure to abide by this restriction will result 
in denial of future country clearance to Venezuela and/or 
 
 
disciplinary acion in accordance with 3 FAM 4370. 
 
MAIQUETIA AIPORT 
----------------- 
The Embassy strongly reommends visitors arrange flights so 
as not to arive in Caracas between the hours of midnight and5:00am.  The section of road between the first tunnl 
(Boqueron I) and the El Trebol (cloverleaf) isparticularly 
hazardous due to assaults involvingthe blocking of the 
target vehicle by one or mor vehicles and the use of 
violence. 
USG personnl arriving in Caracas should contact their 
sponsoing office to arrange USG authorized transportatio. 
Many drivers--often wearing badges identifyingthem as 'taxi 
officials"--have been known to robunwary travelers.  If 
someone asks if you are wih the American Embassy do not give 
your name, rater ask for the name of the person he is 
seeking nd request to see their identification.  Do not go 
with the person if he cannot give you the informtion 
requested. 
 
CREDIT CARD FRAUD 
---------------- 
Credit card fraud is rampant, and numerou embassy employees 
and visitors have fallen victm to this crime.  Visitors 
should use cash whenever possible.  If a credit card must be 
used, RSO recommends you keep the credit card within sight at 
all times and write down the name of the individual to which 
the card was given.  In addition, it is recommended you check 
your credit reports for unusual activity upon departure from 
Venezuela. 
 
REQUIREMENT FOR CI BRIEFING 
--------------------------- 
Official visitors are required to obtain a country specific 
counterintelligence briefing from their parent agency prior 
to departure to Venezuela.  Should you or your parent agency 
need assistance with this briefing, DS/CI may be contacted 
for guidance.  State Department personnel and contractors 
should contact the Bureau of Diplomatic Security's Office of 
Investigations and Counterintelligence at 571-345-7641 or 
DSICICIDISTRO@state.sgov.gov to schedule a briefing. 
DS/ICI/CI is located at SA-20, 1801 N. Lynn St., Rosslyn, 
Virginia 20522-2008.  You may also be required to attend a 
post specific security briefing upon arrival in country. 
Upon arrival in Caracas, TDY personnel should contact the 
Regional Security Office to determine the level of briefing 
required. 
 
SECURITY TRAINING 
----------------- 
All personnel transferring to an overseas location under 
Chief of Mission authority or performing TDY for more than 30 
days must complete appropriate overseas personal security 
training prior to travel.  You are required to provide 
certification to the RSO that security training will be or 
has been completed prior to arrival at Post. 
 
ELECTRONIC DEVICES 
------------------ 
Personnel who intend to bring US Government portable 
microcomputers (laptops) for use in CAA or non-CAA areas must 
notify RSO in advance.  Personal Electronic Devices (PED), 
Personal Digital Assistants (PDA) e.g. Palm Pilot, MP-3 
players, etc. are NOT authorized in CAA spaces and are not 
authorized connectivity within OpenNet unclassified or 
classified networks, or stand-alone PCs. 
 
PASSPORT REQUIREMENTS 
--------------------- 
All passengers who enter Venezuela on official travel 
(including third country nationals) require a visa. Official 
travelers are prohibited from using tourist passports. DOD 
personnel participating in GOV-approved deployments and 
exercises, and arriving with military orders, are exempt from 
the visa requirement. 
 
Venezuelan immigration requires citizens of the United States 
and certain other countries to have at least six months 
validity remaining on their passports to enter Venezuela. 
While this law has not been uniformly enforced, some U.S. 
citizens have been denied entry.  Ensure your passport has at 
least six months validity from the date of arrival in 
Venezuela. 
 
COMPUTER POLICY 
--------------- 
State Department TDY Visitors requiring OpenNet-Plus Systems 
access during their stay should inform the control officer 
prior to arrival. Caracas is a full Active Directory post, so 
 
 
all users with existing OpenNet accounts can login using 
their existing account and receive their e-mail via Outlook 
Web Access (OWA).  Users should confirm with their local IT 
system staff, prior to departure that no roaming profiles or 
login scripts are assigned to their user account.  In special 
cases a local account may be set up to provide OpenNet 
access.  Contact the control officer if this is required. 
Visitors may bring a current (completed within the last year) 
Systems Security certification briefing form or will be 
required to attend the briefing and complete a Network Access 
Request Form. 
 
¶2.  The following pertains to transportation and departures, 
exchange rate, medical considerations, weather, and press. 
For additional information, consult the Consular Information 
Sheet for Venezuela, which can be found on the web at: 
http://travel.state.gov/venezuela.html 
 
CURRENCY / EXCHANGE RATE 
------------------------ 
The exchange rate is USD 1 = 2144 Bolivares (Bs). 
Visitors should bring a major credit card.  Traveler's checks 
are not recommended as they are honored in only a few 
locations.  The Embassy suggests that travelers try to obtain 
local currency before departing the airport.  Should the 
airport exchange facility be closed, it is possible to 
exchange cash at approved exchange offices near major hotel 
chains in Caracas, (personal checks and traveler's checks are 
not accepted).  Based on currency laws hotels may no longer 
provide accommodation exchange. 
 
TRANSPORTATION 
-------------- 
"Saeca Carlson Wagonlit" is the travel contractor for the 
Embassy. If necessary, ask to use the telephone at the kiosk 
to call the Embassy.  Their kiosk is located downstairs in 
front of the Continental/Copa Airlines counters. 
 
DEPARTURE EXPENSES 
------------------ 
An airport user fee of Bs. 94,080 (approx. $44) is levied 
upon departure for holders of official and diplomatic 
passports.  Holders of tourist passports must pay the user 
fee plus an exit tax, for a 
total of Bs. 131,712 (approximately $62).  Payment of both 
must be made in Bolivares.  In some cases the airport tax is 
already included in the ticket. Please bring your ticket to 
the Embassy travel office for confirmation. 
 
CAR RENTAL 
--------- 
Car rentals must be pre-authorized with the Agency 
responsible for your visit. 
 
MEDICAL 
------- 
Measles Vaccination.  After February measles outbreak airport 
authorities now require all departing travelers to show proof 
of vaccination.  Passengers may be directed to vaccination 
kiosks if immunization cannot be proved. Enforcement appears 
to be haphazard. 
 
Tap water is considered contaminated.  Drink only bottled 
water or carbonated soft drinks and avoid ice. Do not eat raw 
vegetables or fruits unless they have been disinfected, 
peeled or cooked.  Wash your hands often with hot, soapy 
water. 
 
Cases of dengue fever and malaria are reported throughout 
Venezuela each year.  Travelers planning to spend time 
outdoors should bring insect repellent; wear long trousers; 
and avoid wet areas.  Information about Yellow Fever 
vaccination requirements may be obtained from the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention's Internet site at 
http://www.cdc.gov/travel. 
 
For TDYers remaining at post over 30 days, there is a charge 
for ICASS support services. This charge is for the following 
ICASS services and will be billed thru the ICASS TDY module, 
based on a per-capita-basis, prorated for the length of stay. 
For example, a TDY visit by one USG employee of 07 months' 
duration (one month without charge   six chargeable) would be 
counted as 0.5 for only the following services: 
 
* Basic Package 
* Community Liaison - CLO 
* Health Services 
 
If your sponsoring agency is not signed up for ICASS 
services, please be prepared to sign a Memorandum of 
 
 
Understanding (MOU) document for ICASS support services upon 
arrival.  The agency should provide post with a written 
communication, generated by the traveler's headquarters that 
confirms the agency will pay ICASS charges for the TDYers, 
provides the agency ICASS billing code the TDY support 
charges should be applied to, and authorizes the traveler to 
sign the ICASS invoice generated by the TDY module.  Agencies 
will not be billed until the accumulated invoice cost for TDY 
support exceeds $2,500 for the fiscal year.  Where travel is 
urgent, the TDYers should bring this documentation with 
him/her to ensure there are no interruptions in the provision 
of service.  Post will not provide any service to a TDYer 
staying in excess of thirty days without provision of this 
documentation before day 31 of the TDY. 
 
WEATHER 
------- 
Daytime temperatures in Caracas range between 75 and 85 
degrees Fahrenheit.  During the rainy season, roughly from 
April through November, afternoon rain showers are common. 
Evenings can be cool at any time of the year.   Travelers 
should bring a sweater or light jacket for evening outings, 
and an umbrella, no matter the time of year. 
 
COMMUNICATIONS WITH THE PRESS 
----------------------------- 
Travelers are reminded that the office of Public Affairs is 
responsible for handling press arrangements for both mission 
personnel and official visitors. Contact the Public Affairs 
Officer or the Press Attach upon arrival if you believe you 
may have contact with the press while in Venezuela. 
 
DUDDY