07CAIRO3351
UPDATE ON DETENTION OF MECA ACTIVISTS
Wed Nov 28 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0222
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #3351 3321647
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 281647Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7571
INFO RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS CAIRO 003351 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
NSC STAFF FOR WATERS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM PGOV EG
SUBJECT: UPDATE ON DETENTION OF MECA ACTIVISTS 
 
REF: CAIRO 3256 
 
 ¶1.  (SBU)  Summary:  Three members of the Toronto-based 
Middle Eastern Christians Association (MECA) arrested on 
November 10 (ref) remain in custody.  In a November 25 
meeting, their lawyer expressed "cautious optimism" that they 
will be released soon.  The lawyer also provided additional 
details regarding the arrests, including some excerpts from 
internet discussions that may have been the basis for the 
detentions.  Post has raised the case on numerous occasions 
with GoE interlocutors, but we have not received an 
explanation of the charges or any prediction on the outcome 
of the case. End summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  On November 25, we met with the lawyer, Ramzi El 
Naggar, and his son and partner, Peter. El Naggar said that 
the three had not yet been charged, but that a judge had 
extended the detention for an additional fifteen days.  El 
Naggar said he is in regular contact with the public 
prosecutor investigating the case, and expressed "cautious 
optimism" that the three will be released, without charges, 
at the end of the current fifteen day period.  If the three 
are released, El Naggar said the case will be held in 
abeyance, giving the prosecutor the option to file formal 
charges in the future. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  El Naggar provided additional information about 
the basis for the arrests.  At least two of the three 
detainees engaged in religious discussions on the "Pal Talk" 
internet site.  El Naggar acknowledged that some of the 
comments posted by his clients could be considered offensive 
by Muslims.  In Naggar's office, we also listened to excerpts 
from the internet discussions, which were in Arabic.  These 
included sexual and scatological references to Mohamed and 
his wife, Aisha.  We were unable to download these 
discussions ourselves from the website and conclude they are 
no longer available.  The audio stream downloaded by Naggar 
would indeed be incriminating under Egyptian law.  The 
comments were made in the context of similar remarks by 
Muslim discussion participants regarding Christian religious 
figures. 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  We have raised these arrests on numerous occasions 
with GoE interlocutors.  On November 12, the DCM raised the 
case with Deputy Foreign Minister Wael Abdoulmagd. 
Abdoulmagd agreed to look into the case, but in a telephone 
conversation on November 25, he said he had no information. 
In a meeting on November 27, Abdoulmagd repeated that he 
still had no information.  In a November 28 conversation, 
Abdoulmagd said that he had made appropriate inquiries but 
still had no information.  Also on November 28, we raised the 
case with the State Security Investigative Services official 
responsible for human rights, Colonel Hisham Abdel Hamid. 
Abdel Hamid said that he was unable to comment on the case as 
it was now "in the hands" of the Public Prosecutor's Office. 
Our Justice Attach will meet with the Public Prosecutor's 
deputy later this week and raise our concerns with that 
office as well. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  GoE motives in this case are unclear.  Our GoE 
interlocutors recognize the attention this case has 
attracted.  A Coptic political activist suggested to us that 
this may be an attempt by the GoE to appear "balanced" in the 
wake of recent arrests of Muslim Brotherhood members. Other 
sources suggest the Ministry of Interior regards MECA as 
provocative and capable of stirring religious animosity and 
possibly violence between Copts and Muslims.  They hope that 
a few weeks in jail will persuade these individuals to adopt 
a less provocative approach. 
RICCIARDONE