07DAKAR1753
A WALK THROUGH DAKAR UNIVERSITY: THE STUDENTS SPEAK
Mon Aug 27 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXRO1138
RR RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHDK #1753/01 2391213
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 271213Z AUG 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO REHC/SECSTATE WASHINGTON DC
INFO RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DAKAR 001753 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/W, AF/RSA, DRL AND INR/AA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PINR ECON SOCI SG
SUBJECT: A WALK THROUGH DAKAR UNIVERSITY: THE STUDENTS SPEAK 
 
DAKAR 00001753  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
Summary 
------- 
¶1. (SBU) In a series of interviews conducted with University of 
Cheikh Anta Diop (UCAD) students from all disciplines, student 
leaders, and university professors concerning their political views 
and their educational experience, "Failing exams is the rule" and 
"Success is the exception" was an oft-repeated refrain.  With living 
and learning conditions reminiscent of a prison, a once politically 
active student body has become increasingly torpid.  End Summary. 
 
Voting Behavior of Students 
--------------------------- 
¶2. (SBU) A mixture of shiny cufflinks, 2pac and Jay-Z 
T-shirts, and African fabrics whirled back and forth in crowded 
hallways as students come and go from massive corkboards displaying 
end of term results.  The semester is roaring to a close at a 
decrepit UCAD, where over 55,000 students attend a facility 
originally designed for 15,000. 
 
¶3. (SBU) While asserting a certain political impotence, many 
students affirmed that they now use their vote as the primary tool 
for political change instead of protests, pickets, and sometime 
violent marches.  Since President Wade came to power they have 
transformed their political strategy whereby they are now trying to 
work with and within the system, rather than outside and against it. 
 Some students explained that this stance was driven out of fear of 
a regime which, they claim, was not above throwing people in jail 
for disagreeing with it.  One female student leader blamed the 
passivity of the Senegalese people and opposition parties for the 
country's failures.  She believes that people are too fearful of 
Wade and the PDS to fight for change.  At a recent meeting during a 
rally, the student leader recalled how she told the opposition 
leaders that they were all "cowards". 
 
Views of Wade's Administration 
------------------------------ 
¶4. (SBU) Political affiliations were diverse, and many students 
noted a change in their peers' attitudes from a traditional sense of 
solidarity to a strong new sense of individualism.  By and large, 
students chose not to affiliate themselves with a political party so 
they could be "fundamentally free."  According to them, party 
affiliations require you to wholeheartedly support the party line, 
whether or not you agree with it.  Speaking against your own party 
is betrayal.  This is similar with religious affiliations, as a 
student leader explained: "Even if I disagree with what the 
Democratic Party of Senegal (PDS) is doing I could not go against my 
marabout, and he supported Wade." 
 
¶5. (SBU) Whether the students supported President Wade or not, they 
all agreed that both the educational system and the general 
governance of the country were not working.  All of them cited 
rising living costs, the lack of job opportunities, and the horrid 
learning conditions at UCAD as key problems.  Those supporting the 
President believe that democratic ideals were thriving and saw 
potential in their leader.  Those disagreeing contend that the 
system is not transparent and democratic ideals have given way to 
the misuse of resources by those in power.  PDS supporters are 
united in their belief that Wade is acting in the best interests of 
students and that the party cares for their needs.  They cite 
donations of computers and the building of a new library as 
evidence.  Others see Wade's regime as a failure, saying that their 
verbal support of education seldom materializes into concrete 
actions.  Dissenters cite the lack of desks and chairs at the new 
library and the cramped dorms, made for two, with eight students 
living on top of one another. 
 
A Monarchy in the Making? 
------------------------- 
¶6. (SBU) When asked whether or not they believed Wade was preparing 
for the succession of his son Karim, many students felt that this 
was "impossible."  "This isn't a monarchy," said almost every 
respondent, making it clear that students believe Wade had only a 
limited margin of error before he butts up against the backlash of 
the people.  During a roundtable discussion with eight English 
students, the topic of Karim sent the students into frenzy with many 
agreeing Wade is setting stage for his son's rise, but also 
contending that he will have to be elected into office like anyone 
else. 
 
Where the future lies 
--------------------- 
¶7. (SBU) No matter the political affiliation, every student agreed 
that there is hope for of Senegal.  One student contended that 
"Senegal has a future, for those that work".  Though the present 
trend is considered grim, students believe in their own potential. 
A student called for an "awakening" in order for the Senegalese to 
reduce the level of corruption in government and politics, and to 
begin working for the people.  The students are eager to serve their 
country and to promote the welfare of Senegal; however only if they 
can find a job. 
 
DAKAR 00001753  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
 
Comment 
------- 
¶8. (SBU) The PDS party seems to be doing enough to pacify and the 
students and teachers, but not enough to improve their situation, 
exposing them to a vicious cycle seemingly designed for failure. 
They seem eager to see their country change and, while they desire 
to make their lives in Senegal, they bemoan the lack of resources 
and opportunities to accomplish their goals. 
 
SMITH