07DAMASCUS775
Iraq, Lebanon, Islam, Palestinian Territories, Peace
Mon Jul 30 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0005
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0775/01 2111422
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 301422Z JUL 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3947
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6997
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4682
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 3341
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7811
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1913
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 5240
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1442
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7552UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000775 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT:  Iraq, Lebanon, Islam, Palestinian Territories, Peace 
Process (7/30) 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers on July 30 reported Deputy Foreign 
Minister Faisal al-Miqdad's meeting on July 29 with Under Secretary 
of the Iraqi Foreign Ministry Mohammad al-Haj Mahmoud focusing on 
bilateral relations, developments in Iraq and the effects of the 
increasing influx of Iraqi citizens to neighboring countries and the 
difficulties that the governments of these countries endure to 
provide their basic needs. Al-Miqdad stressed that the occupying 
forces in Iraq must take responsibility for the urgent situation of 
the Iraqi people, stating that Syria is willing to cooperate with 
the Iraqi government and the international community to provide 
their needs.  He reiterated the importance of preparing conditions 
for their return to their homes as soon as possible.  For his part, 
Mahmoud expressed the gratitude of the Iraqi government and people 
for Syria's hospitality in hosting Iraqi citizens, affirming the 
Iraqi government's determination to shoulder its responsibilities 
toward its citizens. 
 
Papers also featured deliberations of the ministerial consultative 
meeting to meet the health needs of Iraqis in neighboring countries, 
which kicked off on July 29.  The meeting was organized by the World 
Health Organization (WHO) with the participation of Health 
Ministries in Syria, Jordan, Egypt and Iraq and related UN 
organizations.  Syrian Health Minister Maher al-Hussami highlighted 
the health services provided to Iraqi citizens in Syria who left 
their country due to the loss of security and stability in Iraq. 
Al-Hussami criticized negligence of the international community in 
providing aid to the increasing number of Iraqis in neighboring 
countries.  He also stated that the deteriorating health services in 
Iraq are one of the main reasons of immigration from Iraq. 
 
All papers reported that 100 scholars and imams from the five 
continents took part in an international one-week Forum for Islamic 
scholars and Imams, which started on July 29 to promote moderation 
and show values of coexistence among Islamic nations.  The Forum was 
held at Sheikh Ahmad Kuftaro Foundation in Damascus where the 
foundation's Director General Salah al-Din Kuftaro, along with 
scholars from Algeria, Kuwait and Iraq, stressed that the aim of 
this Forum is to draft a plan for cooperation and rapprochement 
among Islamic organizations in the world. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Deputy Foreign Minister al-Miqdad reviews impacts of the increasing 
influx of Iraqi citizens to neighboring countries with al-Haj 
Mahmoud, Under Secretary of the Iraqi Foreign Ministry, stressing 
the necessity of the occupation to shoulder its responsibilities" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 7/30) 
 
"Under-Secretary of the Iraqi Foreign Ministry expresses gratitude 
for Iraq's government and people for Syria's hospitality in hosting 
Iraqi citizens. 
 
"Moratinos:  The Lebanese are responsible for solving their crisis. 
French Foreign Minister Kouchner:  I will come back to Beirut" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 6/30) 
 
"The first anniversary of the second Qana massacre was commemorated 
in Lebanon.  Kouchner sees progress in his talks in Lebanon" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 7/30) 
 
"President Bush's generosity to Israel:  Maintaining Israel's 
military supremacy over countries of the region, and an additional 
$30 billion in US aid.  Rice and Gates to the region today to 
promote a rotten commodity" (Government-owned Tishreen, 7/30) 
 
"Scores of Palestinians pass to Gaza.  Abbas in Moscow seeking 
support" (Independent al-Watan, 7/30) 
 
"An international Forum for Scholars and Imams calling for 
moderation and values of coexistence" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
7/30) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
--------------------- 
 
"A Scenario Underway" 
 
--------------------- 
 
Abd-al-Fattah Al-Awad, Chief Editor of government-owned Al-Thawra, 
wrote (7/30):  "There are a number of future American scenarios with 
regard to the Iraqi war and the region.  One of these scenarios is 
an announcement by the US Administration, under pressure from home 
and abroad, that the time has come for withdrawal from Iraq because 
of the failure of the Iraqi government to accomplish its mission and 
play its role.... 
 
"Another scenario is further American indulgence in the military and 
political madness through the expansion of the regional conflict.... 
 
 
A third scenario is the search for a publicity breakthrough where 
the failure is covered up by an opportunity for success 
somewhere.... The current American talk about peace in the Middle 
East in this context can be seen within this context.... 
 
"Other scenarios include authorizing Israel to ignite the region, 
and spreading instability in the Middle East through the creation of 
sectarian strife and other conflicts...." 
 
------------------ 
 
"Alarming Signal" 
 
------------------ 
 
Ahmad Dawwa, an editorialist in government-owned    Al-Thawra, wrote 
(7/30):  "The United States is dealing with the crisis of the Iraqi 
refugees as a secondary problem....  We wonder if the 
American-British occupation seeks to drive Iraqis to vacate Iraq.... 
 
 
"All indications and information say that the problem is continuing 
and escalating and that the occupation is not taking any real 
measures to guarantee the return of these refugees in the 
foreseeable future.  This creates a new tragic situation to these 
refugees.... 
 
"Providing the necessary assistance to Iraqi refugees in the 
countries that host them is important and urgent.  Failure to do 
this would only worsen their problems and heighten their tragedy in 
light of their long stay.  But this is not the alternative to the 
solution; namely, working speedily to provide the circumstances for 
their return to Iraq as soon as possible.  Here, the basic 
responsibility lies with the occupation and also with the 
international community and its establishments, which were lax in 
their opposition to the occupation of Iraq, especially the Security 
Council, which deals with the issue of Iraqi refugees as if it does 
not exist.... 
 
"The US Administration's approach to the issue of Iraqi refugees 
indicates that it wants either to tamper with Iraq's demography or 
export the problems that resulted from the occupation to the 
neighboring countries in the hope that this would help to promote 
the 'creative chaos' theory.... 
 
"The international community must pressure the occupation to 
shoulder its responsibility by looking after the existing refugees 
and stopping the Iraqi exodus at any price...." 
 
------------------------------------- 
 
"The End of the Al-Maliki Government" 
 
------------------------------------- 
 
Marwan Qabalan, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Watan, wrote 
(7/30):  "The political and security developments in Iraq indicate 
that the fall of the al-Maliki government is imminent....  After 
 
more than one year in power, the Al-Maliki government has "failed to 
score any tangible achievements on the level of either the national 
reconciliation process or the control of the wild sectarian violence 
and the achievement of a reasonable degree of stability.... 
 
"Instead of acting as a prime minister of the entire Iraqi people, 
Al-Maliki established himself as a leader of a party or a trend that 
prevailed over part of its country and people. 
 
"The only factor delaying the fall of the Al-Maliki government is 
the American desire to evade a political earthquake hindering the 
Iraqi parliament's approval of a number of laws, notably the oil and 
gas Law...." 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
"An International Conference, Bush's New Lie" 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
Salim Abbud, a columnist in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(7/30):  "President Bush's desire for peace in the Middle East and 
his call for a peace conference in September is an attempt to 
re-draw attention to the American role, which is suffering a serious 
fracture in the region and the rest of the world.... 
 
"Bush is working to further divide the Arab world into moderates and 
extremists and serve Israel and its expansionist objectives.... 
 
The joint visit by Condoleezza Rice and Robert Gates to the region 
suggests that the US Administration is preparing for one of two 
things, or for both:  First to recruit parties in the region to 
support Bush's policy in Iraq, and second is to mobilize the 
energies of the countries of the region in the face of the so-called 
Iranian threat or the Hizbollah threat...." 
 
Corbin