07DAMASCUS431
Syria/Cuba, Syria/Libya, Syria/US, Syria/France, Lebanon,
Wed May 09 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0039
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0431/01 1291337
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 091337Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3433
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6785
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4514
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 3135
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7658
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1733
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 5068
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1275
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7400UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000431 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Syria/Cuba, Syria/Libya, Syria/US, Syria/France, Lebanon, 
Iraq (5/9) 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers on May 9 reported Information Minister 
Mohsen Bilal's meeting on May 8 with Cuban MP Kenia Serrano, during 
which Bilal stressed Syria's concern to achieve stability and 
security in the Middle East through a just and comprehensive peace 
based on UN resolutions.  Talks also dealt with the role of the 
media in demonstrating nations' common issues, referring to the 
importance of activating media exchange between Syria and Cuba in 
the interest of both countries.  On Iraq, Bilal confirmed Syria's 
support of Iraq's territorial integrity and of reconciliation among 
the Iraqi people as a way out of their dilemma.  Serrano stressed 
Cuba's support of Syria's positions on Arab issues. 
 
On Syrian/Libyan relations, papers reported Deputy Foreign Minister 
Faisal Miqdad's meeting on May 8 with Mohammad al-Taher Hammodah 
Sealah, Assistant Secretary of the Libyan General People's Committee 
for Foreign Liaison and International Cooperation, who is 
participating in meetings of the Syrian-Libyan Joint Committee in 
Damascus.  Talks centered on the latest political developments in 
the region, particularly in Iraq and Palestine, bilateral relations 
and the situation in Africa.  Dr. Miqdad briefed the Libyan official 
on Syria's positions on events in the region, referring to the 
importance of boosting joint Arab action to face regional 
challenges.  Mr. Sealah expressed satisfaction with Syrian-Libyan 
relations, stressing the importance of meetings of the Syrian-Libyan 
Joint Committee. 
 
All papers reported a lecture on May 8 at the Faculty of Civil 
Engineering at Damascus University by Hizbollah Deputy Secretary 
General Sheikh Naeem Qasem, who maintained that "President Asad's 
wisdom and honorable positions have made Syria respected by 
everyone."  He confirmed that "Syria's strength and steadfastness 
give strength to the National Resistance in Lebanon."  Sheikh Qasem 
also praised the Syrian people's assistance to the Lebanese people 
during the Israeli war on Lebanon last July.  Al-Qasem criticized 
attempts by some superpowers, along with Israel, to control the 
region's resources, saying that "these superpowers sow sedition to 
achieve their goals."    He called for confronting these plans 
through cooperation and by eliminating sedition. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Deputy Secretary General of Hizbollah Sheikh Naeem Qassem: 
President Asad's wisdom has made Syria respected by everyone. 
Lebanese opposition:  Al-Saniora's provocative statements are a new 
attempt to please Feltman" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 5/9) 
 
"Syrian-Cuban talks on media cooperation.  Bilal: Peace must be in 
accordance with international resolutions" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 5/9) 
 
"Deputy FM Miqdad reviews current regional developments and horizons 
of Syrian-Libyan relations with Mohammad al-Taher Hammodah Sealah, 
Assistant Secretary of the Libyan General People's Committee for 
Foreign Liaison and International Cooperation" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 5/9) 
 
"Israeli occupation troops attack Khan Yunis and Beit Hanoun as 
prelude to an extensive military operation.  The Israeli army plans 
to establish a buffer zone in Gaza" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 
5/9) 
 
"Secret talks between Olmert and Abbas.  An open meeting will be 
held next week" (Independent al-Watan) 
 
"Former Palestinian PM Qurei is to visit Damascus soon to pave the 
way for a meeting of Palestinian factions in Cairo" (Independent 
al-Watan, 5/9) 
 
"Victims of explosions in Baghdad, Diyala and Kufa exceed 100.  Two 
US soldiers killed.  New US troops will be sent to Iraq" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 5/9) 
 
"Democrats enter the circle of confrontation:  Bush must change his 
policy in Iraq before the end of the year" (Government-owned 
 
Al-Ba'th, 5/9) 
 
"Additional US troops will be sent to Iraq.  The US presidential 
race enflames confrontation between Bush and the Congress" 
(Independent al-Watan, 5/9) 
 
"Protests continue in France:  995 vehicles burned, 740 individuals 
arrested.  Mediterranean unity is top priority for Sarkozy" 
(Independent al-Watan, 5/9) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
--------------------------- 
"The Constructive Dialogue" 
--------------------------- 
Omar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (5/9):  "The US administration has supposedly realized 
that Syria is not to blame for the problems and tensions that 
afflict the region and that Syria was and still is a factor of 
stability and a country seeking good relations with all countries of 
the world, and with the United States in particular, as the 
superpower and the sponsor of the peace process.  The US 
Administration has also supposedly realized that dialogue with Syria 
is a constructive process that serves common American and Arab 
interests, which are numerous, when it is held on the basis of 
international law, UN resolutions, human rights, and even values of 
the US constitution itself. 
"From the Baker-Hamilton report and recommendations, which stressed 
the need for dialogue with Syria in view of its pivotal role in the 
region, to the successive visits to Damascus by American and 
European figures and delegations, to the dialogue that was held with 
Condoleezza Rice in Sharm al-Sheikh, facts have proven that the 
American boycott of Syria is unjustified and that it does not serve 
US policy as the US administration endeavors to remove tensions and 
find effective solutions to pending problems in the region. 
"The leaking of press reports on the results of all these meetings 
shows that the principle of managing crises, rather than resolving 
them, is no longer useful, and that the Arab region no longer 
tolerates playing on contradictions.  The region has suffered a 
great deal as a result of foreign interference and the failure to 
observe international resolutions, so much so that the peoples of 
this region see in US policy nothing but futile adherence to a 
strategy that conflicts with the logic of law and justice, 
especially when it comes to Israel.... 
"It is now hoped that the US Administration has revised its 
calculations and sensed the soundness of Syria's position toward the 
entire situation in the region.  It is hoped that it has realized 
that pressure and boycott are not the right ways, but rather UN 
resolutions and constructive dialogue on the basis of rights and the 
law.  This is Syria's permanent demand." 
--------------------------- 
"Beginning of an Awakening" 
--------------------------- 
Ali Qasim, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote (5/9): 
 "The conflict between the Congress and the White House over Iraq 
and the need for withdrawal of American forces from that country 
shows that Americans have started to wake up from the state that 
drove them to unconditional support for everything the US 
Administration did and unquestioning belief in everything it 
said.... 
"The US domestic scene is now rife with ideas and views that are not 
only different from what the US Administration is proposing, but 
that also can open the doors to new discussions that can put an end 
to the adventure in US policy...." 
-------------------------------- 
"The New Identity of the Elysee" 
-------------------------------- 
Dr. Sa'id Musallam, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
wrote (5/9):  "We hope that the tension that Chirac caused in 
Syrian-French relations will end now that France has a new 
president. 
"We hope that French policy, under Nicolas Sarkozy, will pay less 
attention to the criteria from which the previous administration 
proceeded and will focus on higher interests, not personal 
issues.... 
"Relations between the two countries need to be purified, especially 
 
 
since Sarkozy wants France to continue to play an prominent 
political role in the Mediterranean region.  This requires that the 
political identity of his term in office be determined in a way that 
suits this hoped-for role.  This depends on Sarkozy's next 
policies...." 
Corbin