07DAMASCUS363
Syria/Israel, Syria/Palestinian Authority, Lebanon, Iraq,
Mon Apr 16 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0015
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0363/01 1060941
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 160941Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3322
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6732
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4469
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 3083
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7617
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1687
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 5024
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1231
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7356UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000363 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Syria/Israel, Syria/Palestinian Authority, Lebanon, Iraq, 
Pelosi, Lantos (4/13-14) 
 
¶1.  Summary:   Syrian papers on Apr. 15 featured a statement by the 
Syrian Foreign Ministry on Apr. 14 that statements by US national of 
Syrian origin, Ibrahim Suleiman, who visited Israel and met with the 
Israeli Knesset Foreign and Security Committee, do not reflect the 
Syrian viewpoint, adding that "Syria, which is keen to realize a 
just and comprehensive peace, has repeatedly rejected holding any 
secret talks with Israel or using unofficial channels."  It added 
 
SIPDIS 
that it was natural for Ibrahim Suleiman or any other expatriate of 
Syrian origin to visit his motherland, just like any other who 
offers to play a role in the peace process.  He has heard Syria's 
position that rejects conducting talks in the dark or through 
unofficial channels.  All papers reported a statement by Minister of 
Information Mohsen Bilal to Syrian TV on Apr. 14 confirming that 
Ibrahim Suleiman's visit to Israel, and his  statements and 
viewpoints do not reflect the Syrian viewpoint. 
 
Papers also reported FM Walid Mouallem's meeting on Apr. 12 with a 
delegation representing the Palestinian Legislative Council, headed 
by Abdul Rahman Zidan, who reiterated the importance of 
strengthening Palestinian national unity to enhance the capability 
of confronting the Israeli practices targeting the Palestinian 
people's existence and unity.  FM Mouallem stressed Syria's 
continuous support for the Palestinian people and their legitimate 
rights to establish an independent Palestinian state with Jerusalem 
as its capital.  Members of the Palestinian delegation briefed FM 
Mouallem on the situation in the occupied Palestinian lands and the 
suffering of the Palestinian people due to the siege imposed by the 
Israeli occupation authorities.  They expressed appreciation for 
Syria's national stances towards the Palestinian cause, expressing 
thanks for the efforts it has exerted for formation of the 
Palestinian national unity government. 
 
Government-owned Al-Thawrah on Apr. 13 reported US House Speaker 
Nancy Pelosi's remarks to NBC News describing her visit to Syria as 
good and noted the importance of dialogue with Syria.  The paper 
noted that Pelosi rejected the White House's criticism of the visit 
and said "Bush wants to act as a king and to have carte blanche to 
conduct foreign policy as he wishes." 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Damascus reiterates rejection of secret talks with Israel.  Foreign 
Ministry:  Suleiman's statements don't reflect Syria's viewpoint. 
Bilal:  Suleiman's statements express his own point of view" 
(Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 4/15) 
 
"President Asad condemns the terrorist bombings in Algiers and 
Casablanca" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 4/13) 
 
"FM Mouallem reiterates to the Palestinian Legislative Council 
delegation the importance of unifying ranks in the face of Israeli 
practices" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 4/13) 
 
"Pelosi:  My visit to Syria was good;  Bush will not get carte 
blanche to conduct foreign policy as he wishes" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 4/13) 
 
"More than 17 Palestinians wounded in Balain and Salamona.  Israeli 
occupation uses Palestinian youths as human shields" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 4/14) 
 
"Al-Hoss calls on the government to resign.  Karami holds the 
government responsible for the continuing crisis.  Lahoud: 
Endorsing the International Tribunal on the basis of Chapter 7 means 
civil war" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 4/15) 
 
"Lebanese circles warn against the return of the civil war 
atmosphere.  Re-arming Lebanese militias aims at enforcing foreign 
conspiracies" (Government-owned Tisheen, 4/14) 
 
"The February 14 figures place their wagers on internationalization" 
(Government-owned Tisheen, 4/14) 
 
"Killing of 5 US soldiers in Iraq raises death toll among US 
 
soldiers in Iraq to 3298.  US Democratic Senator Harry Reed 
criticizes Bush:  What progress are you talking about?" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 4/14) 
 
"A suicide bomber manages to reach the heavily guarded Iraqi 
parliament in the Green Area" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 4/13) 
 
"Blix, Top UN Weapons Inspector, rules out the pos 
sibility of a US 
attack against Iran" (Government-owned Tishreen, 4/14) 
 
"While Tehran announces readiness to repel any aggression, 
Washington:  A military solution is not inevitable.  We will be 
patient" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 4/15) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
----------------------- 
 
"King Bush's Illusions" 
 
----------------------- 
 
Isam Dari, Chief Editor of government-owned Tishreen, commented 
(4/14):  "In a press interview with NBC News, US House Speaker 
Pelosi stated that President Bush 'ignores facts and does not want 
to enter dialogue....' 
 
"Pelosi also said that 'Bush wants to act as a king and to have 
carte blanche to conduct foreign policy as he wishes....' 
 
"Facts have started to appear before the US public, which was 
deceived for years and frightened by massive threats to its security 
at home....  The US Administration is fabricating lies to launch 
wars in Afghanistan and Iraq and level accusations against Iran, 
Syria, and anyone who stands in the way of the neoconservatives' 
ambition to control the entire world.... 
 
"President Bush thought he was a king and that none of his 
'satellites' had the right to disobey him or break his will and 
visit Syria, so as not to find out the truth and convey it to 
Americans, who thought their Administration was forced to wage wars 
to defend them and protect their security, stability, and 
prosperity.... 
 
"Not only did the US Administration fail to admit its failure and 
correct the mistakes of its foreign policy, but it also attacked 
anyone who spoke the truth.... 
 
"The White House, which is occupied by neoconservatives, -- or let 
us say the spokesman for this White House -- was so rude as to 
criticize Pelosi because she said that Syria wants peace!  Even such 
a statement, which is based on the conviction of the Speaker and the 
truth of the Syrian position, has become a violation bordering on a 
crime punishable by the law of neoconservatives and Bush's Zionist 
administration.... 
 
"It is true that Bush is not a king, as Mrs. Pelosi said, but his 
actions, policies, positions, and intellectual, political, and 
military terrorism against his opponents at home and abroad make him 
a king, indeed a dictator with a tight grip on the necks of nations 
and Americans themselves, who pay a heavy price with their money and 
the blood of their sons for the adventures of this dictator, who is 
acting outside American and international law and all worldly and 
divine norms and conventions.... 
 
"It is fortunate that there are sensible people in the United States 
who still believe in dialogue among nations and oppose their king 
and his illusions and mad adventures, which brought further wars, 
destruction, and terrorism upon the world and disasters and shame 
upon the American people...." 
 
--------------- 
 
"Bush Is Alone" 
 
--------------- 
 
 
Adnan Ali, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawrah, wrote 
(4/14):  "US Congressman Tom Lantos' stated that he intends to visit 
Syria once again and that he rejects the US administration's policy 
toward Damascus.... 
 
"Statements by Lantos, who is not known as a friend of Syria, 
reflect a growing opposition within the political elite in the 
United States, including the Congress, to the policy of Bush's 
administration, which is being described in the United States itself 
as arrogant and stupid because it is basically based on the use of 
force and the attempts to exclude and isolate others.... 
 
"Bush today finds himself alone more than ever before. But he has 
not yet learned the lessons, and there are those who still feed his 
illusions in Iraq and the region and, indeed, motivate him to commit 
new follies, perhaps against Iran or others...." 
 
--------------------- 
 
"Pretending Speaker" 
 
-------------------- 
 
Izz-al-Din al-Darwish, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
wrote (4/14):  "In a recent statement, Lebanese Christian leader 
Samir Jeajea attacked the Lebanese national resistance, played down 
its sacrifices, and said that it has become a burden to Lebanon.... 
"Jeajea is a bloodsucker who, as a warlord, killed 14,000 people 
during the Lebanese civil war.... 
 
"Jeajea handed over Lebanese citizens to Israel during the war and 
is now sending his militias to receive training in Israel, as 
reported by Lebanese, Israeli, and Jordanian media....  The leader 
of the Lebanese Forces party, who represents only a small group of 
Lebanese, is trying to drag Lebanon toward civil strife and new 
civil war.... 
 
----------------- 
 
"Impasse in Iraq" 
 
----------------- 
 
Muhammad Ali Buzah, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
wrote (4/14):  "President Bush arrogantly refuses to admit his 
failure in Iraq and the defeat of his plan.... 
 
"The honorable steps that would bring US policy out of its current 
crisis and lay the foundations for a just, strong, and comprehensive 
peace that guarantees security and stability in the region and the 
world, are:  acknowledging failure, reconsidering and rationalizing 
wrong policies, setting a timetable for withdrawal from Iraq, 
leaving the region for its people, stopping interference, ending 
support for Israel, refraining from waging Israel's wars by proxy, 
and forcing Israel to comply with international resolutions ...." 
 
Corbin