07DAMASCUS913
Syria/Iraq, Syria/Iran, Middle East Peace Conference,
Thu Sep 06 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0913/01 2491231
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 061231Z SEP 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4145
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 7071
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4752
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 3418
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7874
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1989
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 5317
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1500
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7593UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000913 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ELA, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR: JPAUNESCU AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND JFOLEY, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Syria/Iraq, Syria/Iran, Middle East Peace Conference, 
Non-Allied States Ministerial, Syria/US, Lebanon (9/4-5) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers on September 4 reported that President 
Asad chaired a meeting the Central Leadership of National 
Progressive Front. During the meeting, President Asad briefed the 
Front's members on the latest political developments in the region. 
He referred to the role played by "some superpowers to instigate 
conflicts instead of finding serious solutions to them as a result 
of lacking objective vision of the real situation in the region and 
prospects of solution to it in a way that realizes development and 
preserves stability."  President Asad pointed out to efforts exerted 
by Syria in all different circumstances to contain disorder and 
frustration fed by "powers hostile to the Arab nation." 
 
Papers on September 5 reported FM Mouallem's participation in the 
Arab League Ministerial meeting held in Cairo on September 4 in 
preparation for the upcoming peace conference organized by the US in 
the fall.  Papers featured two press statements by Egyptian FM 
Abul-Ghait in Cairo, and another statement by Austrian Chancellor 
Gusenbauer in Vienna reiterating the importance of involving Syrian 
in any effort to revive Middle East peace.  All papers reported that 
FM Shara will be visiting Rome on September 5 and will meet with FM 
Prodi and Lamberto Dini, Chairman of Foreign Affairs Committee at 
the Italian Senate.  He will also convey a message from President 
Asad to the Pope Benedict XVI.  Apparently Italy is mediating to 
involve Syria in the upcoming peace conference in the fall. 
 
On Syria-Iranian relation, papers on September 4 reported that 
Iranian President Ahmedinejad's meeting with FM Mouallem on 
September 3 who conveyed a message from President Asad on bilateral 
relations and latest regional developments.  Earlier, Minister 
Mouallem chaired Syria's delegation to the Ministerial meeting of 
Non-Aligned Countries opened in Tehran on  September 3. 
 
As for developments in Lebanon, papers on September 5 reported a 
press conference in Beirut on September 4 by General Shawqi 
al-Masri, Lebanese Chief of Staff and George Khouri, Head of 
Lebanese Army Intelligence, denying any connection between Fateh 
al-Islam group and Syria or Syrian intelligence, saying that Fateh 
al-Islam is entirely connected with al-Qaeda organization. 
 
On Iraq, papers on September 4 reported President Bush's sudden 
visit to Iraq on September 3 and his meetings with Iraqi officials 
and American military commanders.  Papers noted that the US 
president, accompanied by senior administration officials, arrived 
in the American military base in Al-Anbar "in complete secrecy" 
while the British forces were withdrawing from the southern Iraqi 
city of Basra. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"President Asad presides over a meeting by the National Progressive 
Front and briefs on latest political developments in the region: 
Some superpowers instigate conflicts in the region and Syria strives 
to contain factors of disorder and frustration" (Government-owned 
Al-Ba'th, 9/4) 
 
"US Senator Dennis Kucinich: Syria has presented a lifeline for 
millions of Iraqis.  The UN calls for supporting Syria.  The UN 
calls for supporting Syria's efforts in hosting Iraqi refugees" 
(Independent al-Watan, 9/4) 
 
"President Asad sends a message to Pope Benedict XVI. 
VP Shara visits Rome today to meet the Pope and Italian FM Prodi" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 9/5) 
 
"Foreign Minister Mouallem participates in the Arab League 
Ministerial in Cairo.  Egyptian FM Abul-Ghait reiterates the 
importance of involving Syria in any effort to revive Middle East 
peace" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 9/5) 
 
"Iranian President Ahmedinejad receives a message from President 
Asad convoyed by Foreign FM Mouallem" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
9/4) 
 
"Ahmedinejad:  We have proof that no country will dare launch attack 
 
against Iran" (Independent al-Watan, 9/4) 
 
"Deputy Foreign Minister Miqdad to the Non-Aligned Countries 
Ministerial in Tehran:  Israel seeks to obliterate the history of 
occupied Golan" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 9/5) 
 
"Austrian Chancellor Gusenbauer calls for involving Syria in the 
Middle East peace conference.  Mubarak, Blair, Italian FM D'Alima 
and Jordanian Monarch Abdullah prepare for the Bush conference" 
(Independent al-Watan, 9/5) 
 
"Few hours after the pullout of British troops from al-Basra, and 
few days before the Petraeus-Crocker Report, Bush suddenly in 
Baghdad: Reducing US forces is feasible" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 
9/4) 
 
"Lebanese calls to investigate into the emergence Fateh al-Islam 
group and exposing perpetrators.  Lebanese warnings against 
repercussions of rejecting the Parliament Speaker's initiative" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 9/4) 
 
"The Lebanese Army: Fateh al-Islam group is entirely connected to 
al-Qaeda organization" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 9/5) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
-------------------- 
 
"Figures of Failure" 
 
-------------------- 
 
Ezz-Eddin Darwish, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
wrote (9/3):  "The rising number of Iraqi and American deaths in the 
past few months show the failure of the American strategy in Iraq, 
contrary to the claims of American war theorists, who are trying to 
convince the world that progress is being made.... We do not expect 
the Petraeus-Crocker report in the middle of this month to be in 
favor of the US Administration. 
 
"Iraq was plagued by the American invasion.  It was fully destroyed 
as a result of this invasion.  It lost more than one million of its 
sons as direct victims. Four million Iraqis were displaced at home 
and abroad. Killing and destruction continues to be the main 
headline in Iraq more than four years into the occupation.  So what 
more does the Bush Administration wants to end its occupation and 
leave the Iraqis determine their future...? 
 
"What was not achieved in four years cannot be achieved in months. 
This means that an end to this tragedy begins with the removal of 
occupation and the launch of a genuine Iraqi political process to 
unify all Iraqi groups, consolidate the country's territorial 
integrity, and provide comprehensive security and stability.  This 
is what the Bush Administration is supposed to acknowledge, today 
before tomorrow...." 
 
---------- 
 
"Hot Days" 
 
---------- 
 
Ali Qasim, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote (9/4): 
 "The US campaign against Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki is the 
beginning of the US Administration's attempt to find a way out of 
its Iraq predicament.... 
 
"It is no secret to anyone that the American search for an exist 
appears futile at a time when the administration of President Bush 
is getting more confused, especially after the series of setbacks it 
suffered and the departure of most of the war hawks from the White 
House.... 
 
"In light of this, the US nervousness is at its worst ever leading 
to further blunder and offhandedness in both decisions and practice. 
 
 
"The world that faced the grave consequences of the US 
Administration's decisions when it was not under the pressure of 
time and embarrassment, now expects more disastrous decisions than 
those the repercussions of which it is experiencing today...." 
 
--------------------------- 
"What A Fall Bush Expects!" 
 
--------------------------- 
 
Dr. Sa'id Musallam, a columnist in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(9/4):  "As fall begins, US President Bush and those who remain with 
him, hawks or doves, are in a hurry to score any victory to cover 
their defeats in Iraq.... 
 
"Bush's call for a Middle East peace conference in Washington is 
part of this effort.... Preparations for the conference coincide 
with the start of the British withdrawal from Iraq, the announcement 
by the American ambassador in Iraq about the difficult position of 
his country there and the failure of the US policy and strategy in 
Iraq, the growing criticism of the Iraq war inside the United 
States, and attempts to blame the Al-Maliki government for the 
failure in Iraq.... 
 
"So the Bush team is left only with the fall opportunity.  Some 
believe it is the only option left for him, whether through fire or 
dialogue.  Some fast-food meals would be enough to prepare the last 
supper to celebrate the lost peace to the tune of the withdrawing 
troops from Iraq, the fall of the lackeys and followers in Lebanon 
and the region, and the outcry of the free peoples of the region: 
Leave our countries, good riddance, and call it victory anyway you 
like!" 
 
------------------------- 
 
"Persistence in Mistake" 
 
------------------------- 
 
Umar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(9/4):  "The US Democratic Congressman Dennis Kucinich heard from 
President Asad important words about US -Syrian relations and the 
possibility of advancing the peace process and maintaining security 
and stability in the region.... 
 
"The US Congressman praised Syria's important role in the region and 
reiterated the need for dialogue with Damascus....  Similar 
arguments were made by US House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and many other 
American politicians who visited Syria, as well as by the 
Baker-Hamilton report.... Yet, the US Administration continues to 
look at the issues of the region with an Israeli eye and to insist 
on completing the Zionist-American plan that embroiled the United 
States in a unilateral policy that led to a clear failure 
unbefitting of the role and reputation of this superpower.... 
 
"The policy of the Bush administration, which is built on the 
principle of force, hegemony, and promotion of 'creative chaos, 
presented models of failures and tragedies and brought the hatred of 
peoples and the resentment of a large sector of the American 
officials who hope their country will play a constructive role in 
the whole world, unlike the ugly role it played in Iraq.  They hope 
the United States will adopt neutral positions and respect the 
options of nations, not control them based on colonialist whims and 
tendencies and Israeli plans that violate Arab rights...." 
 
Corbin