07DAMASCUS456
Asad Nomination/Referendum, Mouallem, Syria/France,
Wed May 16 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0456/01 1360704
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 160704Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3471
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6798
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4525
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 3148
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7669
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1745
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 5080
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1286
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7411UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000456 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Asad Nomination/Referendum, Mouallem, Syria/France, 
Syria/Russia, Iraq, Blair, Palestinian Territories, Peace Process 
(5/15) 
 
¶1.  Summary:  The press campaign for President Asad's second term in 
office continues, with papers publishing articles and reports 
praising his policies and noting Syria's accomplishments under his 
rule.  A curious electoral sidelight is the report on the website of 
the opposition National Salvation Front that a would-be opposition 
presidential candidate has filed papers to become a presidential 
candidate. 
 
 Papers reported FM Mouallem's meeting in Brussels on May 14 with 
the Committee for "Activating the Arab Peace Initiative" and the 
European Union's Foreign Ministers' Council.  In these meetings 
Mouallem renewed Syria's commitment to achieve a just and 
comprehensive peace, based on the Madrid Conference and the Arab 
Peace Initiative, and said that Arab-EU cooperation restores hope in 
the possibility of realizing peace.  He expressed hope that "efforts 
can shift words to deeds;  the factor of time is particularly 
important in this regard."  Arab Ministers referred to the 
importance of the international community helping find a solution to 
the Arab-Israeli conflict without imposing criteria that distinguish 
one party from another.  They added that the international community 
has to oblige Israel to stop practices aiming at changing reality, 
including building of settlements and separation walls and 
excavations under the al-Aqsa mosque.  Later, FM Mouallem held 
separate closed-door meetings in Brussels with the German and 
Norwegian Foreign Ministers, Frank-Walter Steinmeier and Jonas Gahr 
Stre, about resuming the peace process. 
 
 Papers also reported FM Mouallem's meeting in Brussels on May 14 
with British Foreign Secretary Margaret Beckett.  They discussed 
relations between Syria and Britain and developments in the Middle 
East, particularly in Iraq, Palestine, and Lebanon.  The importance 
of Iraq's unity and independence and of achieving security and 
stability in the country, and the need to achieve national 
reconciliation were emphasized.  With regard to the Arab-Israel 
conflict and the Arab peace plan, the two sides stressed the need to 
implement relevant Security Council resolutions and the importance 
of working to achieve a just and comprehensive peace in the region, 
as this serves the interests of all parties.  They also discussed 
the need to urge all Lebanese parties to overcome the existing 
crisis in Lebanon.  FM Mouallem had similar discussions on May 14 
with Spanish FM Miguel Angel Moratinos. 
 
On Syrian-French relations, papers reported PM Ottri's meeting on 
May 14 with Lucien Bitterlin, Chairman of the Arab-French Solidarity 
Association.  Talks focused on the latest regional and international 
developments and on relations of friendship and culture between the 
Syrian and French peoples. 
 
Papers also featured a statement in Moscow on May 14 by Anatoly 
Yogorin, Chairman of the Scientific Center for Russian-Arab 
Dialogue, to the Syrian Arab News Agency, praising Syria's foreign 
policy under President Asad.  He said that recent developments have 
shown that the US has begun to recognize the correctness of Syrian 
positions, referring to the meeting of Foreign Minister Mouallem 
with US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice in Sharm al-Sheikh. 
"The time has come for Washington to engage in dialogue with Syria, 
which has a policy of peace and plays a pivotal role in the region," 
he concluded. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Political and media figures and circles renew their appreciation of 
Syria's Policy:  President Asad is leader of the national project 
and most capable to pursue a victorious march" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 5/15) 
 
"An unprecedented incident:  Syrian lawyer nominates himself for the 
presidency" (Free Syria Website, 5/15) 
 
"In Brussels, Foreign Minister Mouallem meets British Spanish, 
German and Norwegian Foreign Ministers.  Mouallem expresses hope 
that efforts can shift words to deeds.  Muoallem confirms: 
Syrian-European cooperation revives hope for achieving peace" 
 
 
(Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 5/15) 
 
"Chairman of the Scientific Center for Russian-Arab Dialogue, 
Anatoly Yogorin:  Syria deserves congratulations for renewing 
President Asad's presidency" (Government-owned Tishree, 5/15) 
 
"PM Ottri discusses regional and international developments with 
Lucien Bitterlin, Chairman of the Arab-French Solidarity 
Association" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 5/15) 
 
"Ten US and Danish soldiers killed and injured in Iraq" 
(Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 5/15) 
 
"Palestinian Minister of Interior Kawasmeh submits his resignation. 
Hanieh serves as Interior Minister until a replacement is named. 
The Palestinian Authority warns against a conspiracy to separate the 
West Bank from the Palestinian Territories.  Perets:  Occupying the 
Gaza Strip is a matter of time" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 5/15) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
--------------------------------- 
 
"A New Stage for a Better Future" 
 
--------------------------------- 
 
Dr. Ibrahim Zu'ayr, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawrah, 
wrote (5/15):  "President Asad spent seven years of nonstop work to 
change and develop Syria toward new hopes for a better future. 
 
"Syrians have the right to be proud that their President Asad 
expresses their ambitions for a homeland regaining the last inch of 
its occupied Golan, a homeland that has always been too strong to be 
harmed from within or from outside, a homeland standing fast in the 
face of the strong black winds that blow from every direction.... 
 
"The Syrian people will today say yes to a new presidential term for 
their president, who, with his mind and wisdom, embodies the hopes 
of Arabs for unity against the Zionist tyrants and their American 
allies...." 
 
--------------- 
 
"A Later Frost" 
 
--------------- 
 
An unsigned editorial in independent English-language monthly "Syria 
Today" (May, 2007) reads:  "The last month has been something of 
curate's egg.  On the international front Syria received visits from 
high-profile figures including the Speaker of US House of 
Representatives, Nancy Pelosi, and the new head of the UN Ban 
Ki-Moon.  After years of isolation, Syria seems to be making strides 
to rehabilitate its reputation in the West although the 
international tribunal on the assassination of former Lebanese PM 
Rafki al-Hariri, is an ongoing blot on Syria's half-year report 
card.... 
 
"Domestically, however, Syria has witnessed lackluster parliamentary 
elections.  The ruling Baath Party built on its entrenched position 
and voter turnout was far higher than expected (56 percent), but the 
contest was largely characterized by a certain froideur.... 
 
"With an eye on the Presidential referendum, which is expected to be 
held by the end of the month, the fact that the National Progressive 
Front increased its majority in the People's Assembly should pave 
the way for a triumphant renewal of President Asad's mandate for a 
second term.... 
 
 
------------- 
 
"Quick Sands" 
 
 
 
------------- 
 
Izz-al-Din al-Darwish, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (5/15):  "The US Administration made a mistake from the 
very beginning when it launched the war on Iraq, made another 
mistake in the management of the occupation in the past four years, 
and is now making a bigger mistake in the way it is addressing its 
previous mistakes.... 
 
"Syria was the first country to warn against the perils of the Iraq 
invasion.... President Asad was the first to warn against sinking in 
the Iraqi mud, and the American officials definitely remember 
this.... 
 
"Syria's warning was based on its direct contact with the affairs of 
the region and wide and accurate knowledge of the Iraqi situation 
and its domestic complications.... 
 
"Syria has always worked to help Iraqis overcome their suffering.... 
Today Syria hosts about 2 million Iraqis who have fled the inferno 
in their country...." 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
"Wishes Are Insufficient to Achieve Peace" 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
Ali Sawahah, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawrah, wrote 
(5/15):  "Peace has never been Israel's choice, because Israel was 
created in the heart of the Arab region by the West in general, not 
to be a message of civilization, fairness, and development for the 
peoples of the region, but to be, as it has proven since its 
creation, a message of treachery and coercion to tear this nation 
apart.... 
 
"Arabs have no confidence that the United States and Europe can 
apply any pressure on Israel to force it to accept a just 
peace...." 
 
------------------- 
 
"Fall of Last Ally" 
 
------------------- 
 
Nadya Dimyati, a columnist in government-owned Al-Thawrah, wrote 
(5/15):  "Tony Blair is the latest European leader to pay the price 
of the alliance with Washington.... 
 
"Blair supported the United States and Israel in the criminal July 
war against Lebanon and ignored calls by most of his party leaders 
for a cease-fire.... 
 
"The phantom of war will haunt Blair, who left a heavy legacy for 
his successor...." 
 
Corbin