07DAMASCUS476
Syria/Pakistan, Syria/Lebanon, Palestinian Territories,
Sun May 20 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0006
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0476/01 1401314
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 201314Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3499
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6810
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4533
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 3158
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7677
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1754
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 5088
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1294
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7419UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000476 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT:  Syria/Pakistan, Syria/Lebanon, Palestinian Territories, 
Iraq, Blair (5/18-20) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers on May 18 reported President Asad's oral 
message to Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf about bilateral and 
regional developments, particularly in the Palestinian territories 
and Iraq.  The message was conveyed by Foreign Minister Mouallem 
when President Musharraf received him on May 17.  President 
Mush 
arraf expressed keenness to boost and develop ties with Syria in 
all domains.  FM Mouallem also held talks with Pakistani FM Khurshid 
Mehmood Kasouri about developments in the Middle East and Central 
Asia, mainly in Iraq and Afghanistan.  A memorandum of understanding 
was signed by Mouallem and Kasouri at the end of the official talks. 
 The memorandum provides for the holding of periodical meetings, 
alternately in Damascus and Islamabad, to review bilateral relations 
and exchange opinions on regional and international issues. 
 
On Syrian-Lebanese relations, papers reported PM Ottri's meeting on 
May 19 with Lebanese Islamic Scholar Fethi Yakan.  Talks touched on 
the pressures and challenges facing the Arab and Islamic nation. 
Papers also reported VP Shara's meeting on May 17 with former 
Lebanese Prime Minister Salim al-Hoss about the latest developments 
in Lebanon and the region.  The two agreed on the importance of 
national accord to strengthen civil peace, internal security, and 
Arab identity in Lebanon to serve the interests of both countries. 
Al-Hoss also met separately on May 17 with PM Ottri and Mahmmoud 
al-Abrash, Speaker of the People's Assembly. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"A message from President Asad to President Musharraf" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 5/18) 
 
"Syrian-Pakistani political talks in Islamabad.  FM Mouallem reviews 
mutual cooperation and regional developments with Pakistani FM 
Kashri" (Government-owned Tishreen, 5/19) 
 
"Al-Hoss:  I reject endorsement of the International Tribunal at the 
Security Council.... America uses Lebanon as a pressure card" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 5/18) 
 
"Prime Minister Ottri discusses developments in Lebanon and the Arab 
and Islamic world with Islamic scholar Fethi Yakan.  PM Ottri and 
Yakan:  The resistance is facing plots of hegemony" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 5/20) 
 
"Eight US soldiers killed in Iraq simultaneously with Blair's 
arrival.  Missiles shell the Green Zone" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 
5/20) 
 
"President of the Palestinian Authority Abbas calls on US Secretary 
of Sate Condoleezza Rice to restrain Israel and stop its violations 
against Palestinians" (Government-owned Tishreen, 8/20) 
 
"Fatah and Hamas reach a new agreement on ceasefire and reiterate 
the importance of commitment to their agreement in confronting 
Israeli aggression" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 5/20) 
 
"Israeli tanks penetrate into northern Gaza.  39 Palestinians killed 
and injured in the Israeli incursions into Gaza.  Factions of 
Palestinian resistance threaten to retaliate.  Israeli settlers 
evacuate Sedrot settlement" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 5/18) 
 
"Amr Mousa:  Olmert's call to meet Arab leaders is unacceptable" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 5/19) 
 
"Iran expects failure of the Arab peace initiative.  Saudi Arabia 
objects" (Independent al-Watan, 5/20) 
 
"Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Sultanov: Ratification of the 
international court under Chapter 7 is a problem for Russia" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 5/20) 
 
"Welch failed to get approval on presidential candidacy.  The 
Opposition:  No secret agreement on the International Tribunal" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 5/19) 
 
"Lahoud:  Welch's visit offered a dose of encouragement for the 
illegitimate government.  The Opposition rejects a neutral 
government:  The solution starts by reshaping the government 
 and 
foiling foreign custody" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 5/18) 
 
"Carter:  The Bush Administration is the worst in US history... 
Blair is bad, subservient and a blind supporter of the war in Iraq" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 5/20) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
"National Unity to Confront a Genocidal War" 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
Isam Dari, Chief Editor of government-owned Tishreen, wrote (5/19): 
"Israel can use its formidable war machine, including the 
American-made air force, in the genocidal war it is launching 
against the Palestinian people while still assured that no one will 
act to support a people that is being slaughtered in broad 
daylight.... 
 
"The United Nations has never issued a binding resolution against 
Israel under Chapter Seven of the UN Charter even though the entire 
world knows that Israel has engaged in blatant aggression against 
independent member states of the United Nations, and that there is 
occupation of Arab territories, and flagrant violations of the UN 
Charter.... 
 
"Chapter Seven was not created to be used against Israel;  it was 
created to be used exclusively against Arabs.... They use this 
chapter in their search for the killers of one person, but they 
prevent the United Nations from issuing a single resolution, even 
without being based on this chapter, condemning Israel and its 
practices and crimes, which leave hundreds of victims.... 
 
"What is disgusting is the US argument that what Israel is doing is 
self-defense against terrorists.... This American position is not 
surprising.... Those who annihilated millions of people, from the 
days of the Red Indians to this day, and who used atomic bombs to 
destroy cities and who used cruise missiles in Afghanistan and Iraq, 
do not feel ashamed when they support those who use the same methods 
against innocents and peaceful people...." 
 
------------------ 
 
"Action Is Needed" 
 
------------------ 
 
Ahmad Hamadah, a commentator in government-owned 
Al-Thawra, wrote (5/18):  "The Islamic world is now facing a serious 
challenge - that from the American occupation of Iraq and 
Afghanistan.... It has grave security consequences for their 
collective security.... 
 
"The Israeli occupation of Arab territories poses a threat to the 
security and peace of the entire Middle East.... 
 
"The seed of sectarian and ethnic strife that the West is trying to 
sow is another serious challenge the Islamic world is facing.  In 
light of this, the Islamic nation needs to draw up immediate plans 
and act collectively and effectively on more than one level to 
safeguard the interests of its peoples, the stability of its 
countries, and the security of its regional environment...." 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
"Indications of Blair's Stepping Down from the Political Theater" 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
Ribal al-Ahmar, a commentator in government-owned   Al-Ba'th, wrote 
(5/18):  "It is likely that British Prime Minister Tony Blair's 
 
 
decision to step down will be a prelude to the fall of Bush and 
other leaders of his Republican administration.... 
 
"Bush and Blair deceived their own peoples before they tried to 
deceive the international will, when they decided to launch their 
aggression on Iraq, ignoring millions of voices rejecting their 
policies and their barbaric aggression on Iraq.... 
"Blair's departure will leave Bush alone, because Blair's successor 
will try to learn the lessons of the past as much as possible and 
avoid Blair's mistakes regarding the relationship with the US 
Administration...." 
 
-------------------------- 
 
"Outcome of Steadfastness" 
 
-------------------------- 
 
Muhammad al-Khadr, a commentator in government-owned Al-Ba'th, wrote 
(5/18):  "Syria, which has come under unprecedented American and 
European pressure in the past few years, managed the crisis in a way 
that not only spared Syria the ramifications of the major political 
earthquakes, but also maintained Syria's outstanding regional 
position, which Washington, Paris, and some Arabs who move in their 
orbit, tried to steal from Syria.... 
 
"Under President Asad, Syria in the past seven years passed serious 
tests that tried to harm its pan-Arab role, its commitments toward 
the Arab-Zionist conflict, its support for the Lebanese resistance, 
and its bright rejection of the American occupation of Iraq when 
everyone remained silence on that crime.... 
 
"Syrians, while renewing the pledge for the president, proceed 
behind his banner toward further progress for Syria and the foiling 
of all attempts to isolate it...." 
 
 
Corbin