07DAKAR1764
MAURITANIAN REFUGEES: THE DILEMMA OF RETURN
Tue Aug 28 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXRO1955
RR RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHDK #1764/01 2401205
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 281205Z AUG 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9077
INFO RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DAKAR 001764 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/W, AF/RSA, DRL AND INR/AA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL PREF MR SG
SUBJECT: MAURITANIAN REFUGEES: THE DILEMMA OF RETURN 
 
REF: A) Dakar 1570 B)Dakar 1577 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
¶1.  (SBU) On July 31, Poloff visited refugee villages in Dagana and 
Dodel to seek the opinions of refugees regarding recent initiatives 
by the Mauritanian Government inviting them to return home and 
President Wade's statement that those who wish to remain in Senegal 
will be granted Senegalese citizenship.  Poloff also visited the 
local UNHCR office in Podor.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Many refugees welcomed a high level Mauritanian delegation 
led by the Minister Interior sent to Senegal to visit them.  The 
refugees stated that this was an: "acknowledgement of the 
government's responsibility for their deportation in 1989."  The 
refugees demand that their return be organized under the auspices of 
UNHCR and that full reparations be paid for prejudices sustained. 
These conditions and the insistence by some for the prosecution of 
Mauritanian officials they accuse of having committed crimes at the 
time of deportation are significant obstacles ahead.  There appears 
to be a dilemma for many refugees we spoke to who are proud of their 
Mauritanian citizenship, reject President Wade's offer of Senegalese 
citizenship, but who also fear that their economic situations may 
deteriorate after they return home and that their children will lose 
the educational opportunities they currently have in Senegal. 
 
THE MAURITANIAN GOVERNMENT CARES 
-------------------------------- 
¶3.  (SBU) One of the youth leaders in the refugee village of Dagana 
indicated that many refugees living in the River Valley, up to Bakel 
were visited by the Minister of Interior's delegation.  He noted 
with satisfaction that: "the Government of Mauritania has recognized 
the deportation we suffered and has asked for forgiveness."  He 
commented that there is goodwill and openness on the part of the 
Government of Mauritania which inspires confidence that this time 
the initiative for return is serious.  He noted that the only time 
the Mauritanian delegation was uncooperative is when refugees raised 
the issue of prosecuting those crimes perpetrated by security forces 
during the deportation. 
 
UNHCR IS UNDERTAKING A NEW CENSUS 
--------------------------------- 
¶4.  (SBU) UNHCR has recently completed the census of the refugee 
population.  The census was carried out by university students 
attending the University of Cheikh Anta Diop in Dakar and the 
University of Gaston Berger in St Louis.  Almost all villages have 
been taken into account except those of nomadic herdsmen who have 
traveled south with their cattle in search of grazing land.  This 
new census will provide updated figures to correct the estimate of 
20,000 that has been used for several years. 
 
OBSTACLES TO ORGANIZED RETURN 
----------------------------- 
¶5.  (SBU) Refugee leaders emphasized the need for a signed agreement 
between Mauritania, UNHCR, and Senegal to offer them guarantees 
about the conditions under which they will return.  They are 
particularly concerned about their lands and homes which are now 
occupied by others, and the reinstatement of civil servants to their 
former jobs.  They demand reparations for property lost and crimes 
committed during the deportation.  Meanwhile, many refugees who have 
been living for 18 years in Senegal have now acquired or been given 
land and have their children in local French-language schools and 
universities.  The fear is that their children will lose these 
educational opportunities after they return to a totally different 
Mauritanian education system dominated by the use of Arabic. 
 
MEETING UNHCR 
------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) During a stop in the border town of Podor, Poloff called on 
UNHCR's local representative, Thian Doum, who works for a local NGO 
that UNHCR contracted to manage the issue of Mauritanian refugees. 
This one-man office has responsibility for all of the refugees in 
some 280 villages along a 450 km swath of border from Dagna to 
Bakel.  Mr. Doum told us that in 1989 there were over 60,000 
refugees in Senegal and that he believes today's number could be 
significantly higher than the oft-quoted 20,000 as many have had 
families while in Senegal.  While visiting the village of Dagna, we 
were shown a questionnaire that UNHCR had handed out to all the 
refugees and were told that by the aforementioned youth leaders 
their worry that many of the questions were extremely open-ended. 
Of particular concern were those related to property and previous 
employment focusing only on people who used to work for the civil 
service rather than herdsman and farmers who make up the bulk of the 
refugees.  When asked about this, Mr. Doum asked not to be quoted 
and then agreed, adding it was very likely that UNHCR had used a 
generic format. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
DAKAR 00001764  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶7.  (SBU) For several years the Senegalese and past Mauritanian 
Governments have conspicuously avoided the divisive issue of 
refugees to maintain a fragile entente cordiale.  The recent visit 
of the Mauritanian President to Senegal and the steps that both 
governments and UNHCR have since taken to address an issue which has 
been a bone of contention since 1989 is encouraging.  The current 
Mauritanian government's approach has warmed relationships between 
the two countries and created hopes for the refugees.  However, 
negotiating conditions of return acceptable to all parties may prove 
to be a frustrating and lengthy process. 
 
SMITH