07DAMASCUS470
Palestinian Territories, Syria/Iran, Asad/ Referendum,
Thu May 17 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0025
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0470/01 1371340
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 171340Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3488
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6805
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4530
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 3154
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7674
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1751
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 5085
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1291
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7416UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000470 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT:  Palestinian Territories, Syria/Iran, Asad/ Referendum, 
Iraq, Rice, Syria/US (5/17) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:   Syrian papers on May 17 featured an official Syrian 
statement issued on May 16 expressing Syria's deep concern about the 
bloody clashes among  Palestinians in Gaza.  "Fighting among 
Palestinians comes at a time when they must close ranks and boost 
national unity in the framework of the Mecca Accord in order to 
confront the expansionist Israeli occupation which continues to 
swallow Palestinian lands, above all, Jerusalem," the official 
statement noted.  It added, "Syria calls for an immediate cease-fire 
among Palestinians to prevent bloodshed and bury sedition, in order 
to maintain the centrality of the Palestinian issue in Arab and 
international public opinion." 
 
Papers also reported Foreign Minister Mouallem's meeting on May 16 
with Iranian FM Mottaki on the sidelines of the meeting of the 
Organization of Islamic Conference in Islamabad.  Talks focused on 
bilateral relations and the latest developments in the occupied 
Palestinian territories.  Talks also reiterated the importance of 
intensifying efforts to achieve national reconciliation in Iraq and 
to establish a timetable for the withdrawal of foreign troops. 
 
On Syrian-Russian relations, papers cited a statement in Moscow on 
May 16, by Yevgeny Primakov, Chairman of the Chamber of Commerce and 
Industry in Russia, describing President Asad as a prominent 
political leader with a deep strategic vision in dealing with 
regional issues and international relations.  Primakov, a former 
Russian PM, said, "Recent events have proven that President Asad was 
defending Syria's interests and seeking to boost the country's role 
in the region."  On Middle East issues, he called on Israel to 
implement the requirements of the Arab peace initiative, especially 
the land-for-peace principle, which means, for Syria, restoration of 
the occupied Golan.  Primakov added that Syrian-Russian relations 
are progressing in all domains, particularly in the economic field. 
 
Syrian papers continued to publish reports, articles, and interviews 
showing support for President Asad and highlighting Syria's 
achievements under his rule in anticipation of the forthcoming 
public referendum on his nomination for a new 7-year term in 
office. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Foreign Minister Mouallem discusses bilateral relations and latest 
developments in the occupied Palestinian territories with Iranian FM 
Mottaki" (Government-owned Tishreen, 5/17) 
 
"FM Mouallem and Iranian FM Mottaki reiterate the necessity for 
continuing consultation and coordination between the two friendly 
countries to realize security and stability in the region" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 5/16) 
 
"Chairman of the Chamber of Commerce and Industry in Russia, Yevgeny 
Primakov:  President Asad is the best political leader in defending 
Syria's interests" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 5/17) 
 
"Syrian Official Source:  Syria watches with deep concern the bloody 
clashes among the Palestinian brothers in Gaza.  The source calls on 
Palestinians to adopt the language of dialogue and reason" 
(Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 5/17) 
 
"Ceasefire in reached between Fatah and Hamas.  14 Palestinians 
killed in Gaza yesterday.  Damascus calls for immediate ceasefire; 
the world community denounces infighting" (Independent al-Watan, 
5/17) 
 
"The visit to Beirut by US Assistant Secretary for Near Eastern 
Affairs, David Welch, unveils reality of American intervention" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 5/17) 
 
"An Israeli draft resolution at the Knesset calling for a popular 
referendum on any decision on withdrawal from the Golan" 
(Independent al-Watan, 5/17) 
 
"Violence reaps the lives of 80 Iraqis.  Iraq rejects an Islamic 
peace-keeping force" (Independent al-Watan, 5/17) 
 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
--------------------------------------- 
 
"Referendum, Dedication of Nationalism" 
 
--------------------------------------- 
 
Dr. Sa'id Musallam, a columnist in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(5/17):  "The referendum on Al-Asad's new term acquires exceptional 
importance this time because it represents the major strategic 
option of Syria and the region.... 
 
"Al-Asad is the guarantee of stability, security, and calm for 
Syria's generations in the present and the future.... Al-Asad has 
confronted with a great deal of wisdom and ability the attempts to 
bring Syria to its knees." 
 
"'Yes' to Al-Asad means yes to national sovereignty, national unity, 
and adherence to the resistance option and the liberation of the 
occupied territories...." 
 
------------------------------- 
 
"Constancy in a Variable World" 
 
------------------------------- 
 
Isam Dari, Chief Editor of government-owned Tishreen, wrote (5/17): 
"Despite all the international storms and changes that have driven 
even superpowers to submit fully or partially to the will of the 
United States, Syria, thanks to a farsighted political vision, has 
managed to overcome the ordeals and crises at minimal loss and 
without budging an iota from its positions, policies, and national 
and pan-Arab principles, which were the reason behind all those 
pressures, threats, accusations, sanctions, and attempts to isolate 
it.... 
 
"Syria today is stronger and more secure and stable.... Attempts to 
isolate Syria have failed and the world is now reopening doors of 
dialogue with Damascus in light of its status, role, and weight as 
an important regional country that cannot be ignored.... 
 
"Syria has achieved all this thanks to its national unity, its 
rational, objective, and farsighted political decisions, and the 
cohesion between the popular base and the enlightened political 
leadership represented by President Asad...." 
 
---------------------- 
 
"Between Two Projects" 
 
---------------------- 
 
Khalid al-Ashhab, en editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
wrote (5/17):  "Syria's confrontation of the American campaign 
against it and the region in the past few years was balanced and 
patient.... Syria, in this confrontation, remained committed to 
national and pan-Arab principles and sought to create a deep and 
effective crack in the American plan through resistance and by 
depriving the American occupation of stability and a sense of 
security.... 
 
"In Iraq, the American military and human bleeding have increased 
despite all the successive security plans, convincing the Americans 
that their plan there is definitely losing.  In Lebanon, the valiant 
resistance succeeded in dispelling the aspects and pictures of the 
American and Israeli military superiority, and indeed in defeating 
the entire plan, not only obstructing it.... 
 
"Today, the American plan publicly continues its retreat in the Arab 
region and even inside the United States politically and 
ideologically, while Syria continues to score successes and 
dismantle the structures of the American-Zionist siege around 
it...." 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
"The Arab Initiative is the Bottom Line for Negotiations" 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
Dr. Mahdi Dakhlallah, former Information Minister, commented in 
Tishreen(5/17):  "It is surprising that Arabs, who offered a peace 
initiative that included the minimum Arab demands and rights, now 
appear willing to negotiate this plan with Israel.... 
 
"Negotiations mean offering concessions.  We wonder if Arabs are 
willing to go below the level of their peace initiative.... It is 
dangerous to relinquish the Palestinian right of return, for 
example.... 
 
"It is strange that some Arabs are more Americanized than Americans 
and are willing to offer more concessions than what Israel itself 
can ask for.... 
 
"We wonder where ignorance will lead Arabs." 
 
--------------------------------------- 
 
"Rice in Moscow:  an Impossible Mission" 
 
--------------------------------------- 
 
Hanan Hamad, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(5/17):  "US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice's mission in Moscow 
is not at all easy in light of President Putin's recent 
anti-American positions and statements.... 
 
"Washington does not have the ability to pressure Moscow, as it now 
needs Russia's support with regard to the Iranian nuclear file and 
other issues in the Security Council...." 
 
Corbin