07DAMASCUS351
Special Report: Wolf, Pelosi and Issa Codels (April 2-6)
Thu Apr 12 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0351/01 1020908
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 120908Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3298
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6719
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4458
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 3074
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7609
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1679
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 5013
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1223
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7348UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000351 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Special Report: Wolf, Pelosi and Issa Codels (April 2-6) 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers welcomed the visit to Damascus by 
members of US House of Representatives Frank Wolf, Joe Pitts, and 
Robert Aderholt on March 30-31, Speaker Nancy Pelosi and six other 
Representatives on Apr. 3-4, and Representative Darrell Issa on Apr. 
¶5. 
 
The three government-owned dailies on Apr. 2 published only the 
brief Syrian News Agency reports on the meetings that Wolf, Pitts 
and Aderholt held with President Asad and FM Mouallem in Damascus on 
Apr. l, offering no further reporting and making no comment. 
 
 Independent al-Watan, on the other hand, referred to the statement 
that the three representatives issued after the meetings, describing 
it as "a slap in the face of the hoped-for Syrian-American 
dialogue."  The paper said the Representatives' statement 
"reiterated the US Administration's demands of Syria and brought us 
back to square one."  From the statement, al-Watan quoted the 
following:  "During all our meetings, we raised the need to prevent 
foreign fighters who kill innocent American and Iraqi soldiers from 
entering Iraq via Syria and the need to halt support for Hizbollah 
and HAMAS and to recognize Israel's right to exist in peace and 
security and to stop interference in Lebanon."  Al-Watan also quoted 
the visitors' statement that they met with "businessmen, religious 
leaders, former political prisoner and current opposition leader 
Riad Seif, and other members of Syrian civil society." 
 
In another article on Apr. 2, entitled "Damascus Sees in US House of 
Representatives Speaker Nancy Pelosi's Visit an Opportunity for 
Dialogue," al-Watan quoted an unnamed high ranking Syrian official 
as saying the following:  "Damascus views this visit with interest, 
as it appreciates Pelosi's positions, which represent American 
public opinion as revealed by the latest election, especially the 
opposition to the war on Iraq and the need to find a peaceful 
solution to the problem through dialogue with the influential powers 
in the region."   "Damascus finds in visit of the Speaker of the US 
House of Representatives an opportunity to express its position and 
explain that Syria has never been part of the problems of the region 
and that the problem lies with the US Administration's ideology, 
which Pelosi and the American voters reject."   "The meeting with 
Pelosi is an opportunity for the dialogue that Syria calls for and 
considers to be the solution to the problems of the region." 
 
Papers reported Pelosi's arrival in Damascus on Apr. 3 and her 
meetings with President Asad, VP Shara and FM Mouallem on Apr. 4. 
Headlines featured President Asad's statement to Pelosi that "direct 
dialogue could clarify a number of realities and tackle the main 
issues which are of mutual concern between Syria and the US, as well 
as the security of the region".  "The visit of Mrs. Pelosi and the 
accompanying delegation to Syria conveys a clear message that 
dialogue and peace are the common language among nations," President 
Asad added. 
 
President Asad renewed Syria's commitment to peace, referring to the 
role played by Syria and the US since the launch of peace process in 
Madrid, to the following negotiations, and to Syria's adoption of 
the Arab peace initiative, a fact that proves the credibility of 
Syria's peace approach as a strategic option. 
 
On Iraq, the President underlined Syria's keenness for Iraq's unity, 
independence, stability and security through a comprehensive 
national reconciliation and a timetable for the withdrawal of 
foreign troops. 
 
"Accordance among the Lebanese is the basic factor to tackle the 
main issues which guarantee restoration of stability in Lebanon," 
President Asad said. 
 
Mrs. Pelosi stressed that her visit to Syria aims at "opening 
horizons of dialogue between Syria and the US to deal with the main 
regional issues," pointing to the positive impressions she and her 
accompanying delegation took from Syria. 
 
Pelosi described her talks with President Asad as productive, saying 
"we came in friendship, hope, and determined that the road to 
Damascus is a road to peace." 
 
"Our visit to Syria was very necessary based on the recommendations 
of the Baker-Hamilton Committee on Iraq and on the determination of 
Head of the House Foreign Affairs Committee to visit Syria," Mrs. 
Pelosi told a news conference with FM Mouallem. 
 
She added, "the talks of the US delegation in Damascus concentrated 
on the necessity of achieving peace in the Middle East, combating 
terrorism, and regional issues", stressing that peace in the Middle 
East is a priority for the American people, the region and the 
world. 
 
Mrs. Pelosi expressed relief over President Asad's reassurances made 
to the US delegation that Syria was ready to resume the peace 
process in the Middle East. 
 
FM Mouallem underscored Syria's readiness to engage in dialogue, 
based on mutual respect, renewing Syria's commitment to achieve a 
just and comprehensive peace based on Israeli withdrawal from 
occupied Arab lands, including the Syrian Golan. 
 
"Differences in viewpoint between Syria and the US is because of the 
absence of dialogue and because Syria lives in this region which 
witnesses disorder," FM Mouallem said, describing the visit as a 
contribution to narrowing those differences. 
 
"Syria is ready to realize a just and comprehensive peace according 
to the Arab peace initiative," he reiterated. 
 
On HAMAS, Mouallem said it is a basic part of the political process 
in Palestine, having won the elections there. 
 
Regarding Iraq, the Syrian Minister added, "We explained to the US 
delegation the measures taken by Syria to prevent any infiltration 
along the Syrian-Iraqi borders," noting the formation of Syrian and 
Iraqi committees for the purpose. 
 
On Lebanon, Minister Mouallem said Syria aspires to excellent 
relations with brotherly Lebanon based on encouraging dialogue among 
the Lebanese parties to reach national accordance.  He denied any 
arms' smuggling from Syria to Lebanon. 
 
"This visit paves the way for a constructive dialogue in the future 
to establish best relations between the Syrian and American 
peoples," FM Mouallem added. 
 
Government-owned Al-Thawra on Apr. 3 cited Syrian Ambassador in 
Washington Imad Mustafa's press statement describing Pelosi's visit 
as a "positive step."  He noted that leaders of both the Democratic 
and Republican parties "have made many public statements on the need 
for public engagement in a dialogue with Syria."  "According to 
media reports, the US Administration was shocked by the visit.  I 
read in The New York Times that President Bush personally intervened 
to prevent the visit, but Pelosi said she came based on the 
recommendations of the Baker-Hamilton committee."  The ambassador 
said the visit is "part of the calm dialogue and a reminder of the 
basic fact that we might have different policies but we must remain 
diplomatically engaged in a dialogue to reach some understandings." 
 
All papers on Apr. 4 featured Pelosi's press statement in Beirut on 
Apr. 3 describing her visit to Damascus as important and expressing 
hope that reciprocal trust could be built by this visit. 
 
Papers on Apr. 6 reported President Asad's meeting on Apr. 5 with 
Representative Darrell Issa.  Talks dealt with developments in the 
region and means and mechanisms to start relations on a correct 
basis between Syria and the United States.  Issa also met with FM 
Mouallem, who emphasized Syria's commitment to dialogue with the US 
on all issues and asserted the importance of the recent visits paid 
by US Congressmen to Damascus for finding solutions to the problems 
of the region.  Issa reiterated the importance of continuing 
dialogue between Syria and the US, adding that "the latest visits by 
US Congressmen to Syria constitute a new start for joint action to 
solve pending issues between the two countries."  Issa said his 
meeting with President Asad was "very constructive."  In a press 
statement at the end of his talks in Damascus, Issa underscored that 
he joins his voice to that of Pelosi and supports the 
recommendations of the Baker-Hamilton Committee regarding the 
necessity of dialogue with Syria.  "At some point we will have a new 
Ambassador," he said. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Pelosi talks about opening horizon for dialogue, confirming her 
good impressions.  President Asad: Dialogue and peace are common 
language among peoples... Syria is committed to peace as a strategic 
option" (Government-owned Tishreen, 4/5) 
 
"Speaker of US House of Representatives Pelosi leaves Damascus with 
good impressions:  Damascus is the road to peace.  FM Mouallem:  We 
are ready to realize a just and comprehensive peace according to the 
Arab peace initiative" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 4/5) 
 
"Information Minister Bilal:  Speaker of US House of Representatives 
Pelosi's visit to Syria was fruitful and positive" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 4/5) 
 
"President Asad reviews the situation in Iraq and the region with a 
delegation of US House of Representatives.  FM Mouallem:  The 
dialogue is to reach common denominators that would help find 
solutions to the crises in the region" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
4/2) 
 
"Pelosi, Welcome to dialogue.  Mustafa, Syrian Ambassador to 
Washington:  A positive step towards a calm dialogue" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 4/3) 
 
"Pelosi in Beirut:  Syria has hope for trip to Syria" 
(Government-owned Syria Times, 4/3) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
------------------------ 
 
"And Pelosi to Damascus" 
 
------------------------ 
 
Izz-al-Din al-Darwish, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
wrote (4/3):  "US legislators from both the Republican and 
Democratic parties realize that there is disorder in US policy 
toward the region.  They also realize that they have to work to 
redress this disorder, beginning with the mistakes of the war on 
Iraq and relations with Syria and ending with US foreign policy in 
general. 
 
"In this context come the visits to Syria by US parliamentary 
delegations from the Republican and Democratic parties.  These 
visits will reach their highest point tomorrow with US House of 
Representatives Speaker Pelosi's visit.... 
 
"Ms. Pelosi comes to Damascus with a large number of facts collected 
by previous delegations on the true Syrian constructive role in 
dealing with the issues of the region.  This role was accurately 
sensed by the US Republican Representatives who came to Damascus 
before her -- Frank Wolf, Joe Pitts, and Robert Aderholt.... 
 
"Everyone, both in and outside the United States, knows that Syria 
is open to dialogue with the US administration.... Syria is 
interested in listening to US views and ensuring that Americans know 
its true stands. 
 
"People can remove a lot of misunderstanding and learn about 
policies through dialogue and discussion.... 
 
"Syria is known at the world level for being committed to 
international legitimacy.  It does not need to present evidence in 
this respect, and Americans know this fact well.  Syria has asserted 
to them many times that it is interested in working with the 
neighboring states to help Iraq overcome its tragedies, proceeding 
from the fact that Iraq is a fraternal country and a neighbor. 
 
"Syria also asserted to Americans that it is interested in 
re-launching the peace process and achieving peace, security, and 
stability in the region in accordance with the Arab peace initiative 
and on the basis of the relevant UN Security Council resolutions. 
 
"That is Syria before, during, and after the visits by Ms. Pelosi 
and other US officials:  Inclination toward constructive dialogue, 
efforts to achieve peace, security, and stability, and adherence to 
international charters. 
 
"Ms. Pelosi, welcome to Damascus, and there is great hope that 
balance will be restored to US policy in the region." 
 
---------------------------------------- 
 
"Dialogue Is the Route to Understanding" 
 
---------------------------------------- 
 
Umar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, said 
(4/3):  "Pelosi will find out in Damascus that Syria reaches out for 
a serious and sincere dialogue with US officials and that Syria's 
true image is different from the one that entails unfairness and 
preconceptions.... 
 
"The US House speaker will personally see the truth of Syria's 
position and the extent of its seriousness in solving all pending 
problems, whether to establish security in the region or to build 
fruitful and constructive relations with the United States.... 
 
"Pelosi knows that Syria has an important and constructive role 
based on the criteria of justice and the international resolutions, 
and that it is not possible to do without Syria in any serious 
attempt to correct the accumulating mistakes, from the problem of 
the Israeli occupation of Arab land to Israel's failure to comply 
with UN resolutions, which upsets the balance in the region, to the 
situation in Iraq.... 
 
"Syria has always stressed that dialogue, not estrangement, is the 
way to reach understanding and establish correct and balanced 
relations.... 
 
"We have great hope in the results of Codel visits and dialogue. 
Pelosi, who is welcome in Syria, might,  through her visit, help 
correct the situation and restore balance to Syrian-American 
relations." 
 
---------------- 
 
"Pelosi's Visit" 
 
---------------- 
 
Ahmad Dawwa, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawrah, wrote 
(4/3):  "Pelosi's visit to Syria shows that US officials are 
convinced of the importance of dialogue with Syria and of Syria's 
key role in the region.... Also, the visit reflects an explicit 
admission that Bush's policy of isolating Syria has failed.... 
 
"Statements by Pelosi and Democrats in general about Syria and 
problems of the region, which substantially disagree with Bush's 
policy, open the door for a serious and constructive dialogue 
between Syria and the United States to find acceptable common 
denominators about the sensitive issues in the region and, 
consequently, prevent deterioration in the region's security and 
stability.... 
 
"Syria welcomes Pelosi's visit and any visit by any American 
official who opts for dialogue and cooperation to solve the problems 
of the region.  Those who believe Syria will offer concessions or 
bargain over its rights are wrong.  All that Syria wants is to spare 
the region further damage as a result of the US Administration's 
policy and to safeguard Arab rights.  If any party must make 
concessions, then it is the US Administration, which believed that 
pressure could force Syria to change its positions.... 
 
"Pelosi's visit to Syria acquires its importance from the delicate 
and sensitive situation in the region and from the position that 
Pelosi occupies at the helm of the US House of Representatives.... 
 
"Pelosi is in Damascus not because she loves this beloved city but 
because she realizes that it is impossible to ignore Syria's role. 
Others, who also realize this fact, need to wake up." 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
"Importance of the Visit is in the Event Itself" 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
Muhyi-al-Din al-Muhammad, a commentator in government-owned Tishrin, 
wrote (4/3):  "Pelosi's visit to Damascus is an important step in 
the right direction because it is part of Syria's dialogue with the 
United States and the rest of the world and because the US House of 
Representatives Speaker strongly opposes the war in Iraq and knows 
that the problems of the region are connected and that Syria can 
play an important role in finding solutions.... 
 
"It can, therefore, be said that the importance of the visit lies in 
the visit itself, regardless of the results it will produce.  This 
is because this visit by the Speaker of the House of Representatives 
revives the Syrian-American dialogue over issues of the region.  It 
is also consistent with Syria's desire to push the political process 
in Iraq forward, help Lebanon overcome its problem, and revive the 
Middle East peace process based on the terms of reference of the 
Madrid conference and the relevant UN resolutions, especially 
Resolutions 242, 338, and 194, while taking into consideration what 
was accomplished before the suspension of the negotiations between 
Syria and Israel.... 
 
"Syria today receives Nancy Pelosi with an open heart and mind and 
with deep realization that it is difficult, if not impossible, to 
have identical views on all the issues that might be raised on the 
discussion table.  But we trust that the continuation and deepening 
of the dialogue is a demand by Syria and the countries of the 
region, and that if the dialogue does not help attain all the 
desired results, it at least revives hope for reduced tension and 
for better results in the next dialogue rounds, no matter how long 
it takes." 
 
----------------------------------- 
 
"Dialogue and Respecting the Other" 
 
----------------------------------- 
 
Isam Dari, Chief Editor of government-owned Tishrin, commented 
(4/4):  "With all realism, we acknowledge that Mrs. Pelosi's visit, 
important as it is, will not be able to remove all the obstacles 
blocking the restoration of Syrian-US relations to normalcy or 
overcome the phase of misunderstanding or dissipate the heavy dark 
clouds that hover in the sky of these relations and prevent mutual 
understanding and dialogue. However, this does not mean that the 
visit will not achieve any positive results.  Although we do not 
consider the mere visit as a positive development irrespective of 
the results that it will produce, we believe that the dialogue which 
she will hold in Damascus will be of great importance...." 
 
-------------- 
 
"The Hot Spot" 
 
-------------- 
 
Khalid al-Ashhab, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(4/4):  "Pelosi's visit to Damascus is the first cloud of the white 
smoke that began to appear and clear the air of the Syrian-American 
relations." 
 
"If President Bush's administration, through the policies of 
injustice, occupation, and repression, failed to answer the historic 
American question 'why do they hate us?' that was asked after 9/11, 
then Mrs. Pelosi and her team, who are willing to uphold and 
translate the true American values, are able, if they want, to make 
the world once again yearn for America's culture and high ethical 
values...." 
 
 
-------------------- 
 
"Back to Square One" 
 
-------------------- 
 
Thana al-Imam, a commentator in independent al-Watan, said (4/2): 
"The statement that three US Republican Congressmen issued at the 
end of a visit to Damascus was something like a slap in the face of 
the hoped-for dialogue between Syria and the United States.... 
 
"The American statement contained no reference to the need to 
achieve a just and comprehensive peace in the region and strongly 
supported President George Bush's strategy in Iraq. 
 
"The congressmen called for stopping support for Hizbollah and 
HAMAS, preventing fighters from crossing into Iraq, recognizing 
Israel's right to live in peace, and refraining from intervening in 
Lebanon....  This means that we are back to square one.  For these 
American demands have not changed for more than three years.... 
 
"The statement also achieved a US objective through the announcement 
that the representatives met with Riyad Sayf, former People's 
Assembly member, especially since the US administration allocated 
funds to support the Syrian opposition, something that Damascus does 
not view with satisfaction.... 
 
"Observers believe that the only positive thing in the Congressmen's 
statement was their call for a strong diplomatic effort to address 
the unresolved issues in the region.  And even here, the Congressmen 
failed to specify that the main problem in the region is the 
Arab-Israeli conflict.... 
 
"The official Syrian report on the Representatives' meeting with 
President Asad was very brief.... This proves that the US 
Representatives' visit to Damascus was not as successful as was 
hoped for. 
 
"Pending the arrival in Damascus of Nancy Pelosi, it is clear that 
Syria is left with no option but to wager on the contradictions 
between the Republican Party, which controls the White House, and 
the Democratic Party, which controls the Congress, to serve its 
interests, especially through a search for solutions to the issue of 
a just and comprehensive peace, to start with." 
 
Corbin