07FRANKFURT501
Islamic Religious Classes in Baden-Wuerttemberg: Positive
Fri Feb 02 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Frankfurt
VZCZCXRO6437
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHLZ
DE RUEHFT #0501 0331355
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 021355Z FEB 07
FM AMCONSUL FRANKFURT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9340
INFO RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVEUNCLAS FRANKFURT 000501 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/AGS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM SCUL KISL GM
SUBJECT: Islamic Religious Classes in Baden-Wuerttemberg: Positive 
Initial Reports 
 
REF: 2005 Frankfurt 2478 
 
Sensitive but unclassified; not for internet distribution. 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: In September 2006, Baden-Wuerttemberg (B-W) became 
the latest German state to offer Islamic religious instruction in 
public schools.  On January 17, the Consul General and state 
officials observed a class at the Rosensteinschule in Stuttgart, one 
of twelve elementary schools taking part in the pilot program. 
School officials say parental interest is high and initial reviews 
are positive.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Immigrant Parents Involved and Learning As Well 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶2. (U) In an effort to help integrate its substantial and growing 
Muslim population (approximately 600,000 or 5.7 percent), the state 
of Baden-Wuerttemberg recently introduced Islamic religious 
instruction in public schools (reftel).  While many German states 
offer Islamic instruction in various forms, Baden-Wuerttemberg is 
the first to field a religious curriculum for public schools that 
state officials and Muslim groups have agreed upon (along the lines 
of approved curricula for Protestant, Catholic, and Jewish faiths). 
Since the start of the 2006/2007 school year, Islamic religious 
courses have been offered on a trial basis at twelve elementary 
schools throughout B-W.  Instruction is in German, something 
welcomed by immigrant parents, and initial reactions are positive. 
Due to strong demand, six to eight additional teachers will be hired 
for the 2007/2008 academic year.  In the city of Mannheim, for 
instance, there are forty children on a waiting list for classes. 
 
¶3. (U) On January 17, the Consul General visited an Islamic class at 
Stuttgart's Rosensteinschule along with Dr. Barbara Lichtenthaeler, 
the B-W Education/Cultural Ministry official responsible for the 
program.  Rosensteinschule has approximately 400 pupils of which 
eighty percent come from an immigrant/minority background 
(representing thirty-two different nations including Turkey, 
Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iran, Egypt and Bosnia) and is one of two 
schools in state capital Stuttgart participating in the project. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Schools, teachers, and public officials have worked for 
several years to bring the program to fruition and they are anxious 
to see it succeed.  Lichtenthaeler said it had taken over seven 
years to introduce the curriculum (reftel) and that an important 
factor in the program's success is parental consent and involvement. 
 The teacher, Ms. Goekcen Tamer-Uzun, told us of the deep interest 
parents are showing in the classes and of her efforts to get to know 
parents.  School principal Ingrid Macher echoed these sentiments. 
According to Tamer-Uzun, many parents have only a basic knowledge of 
Islam and see the classes as a chance to learn more about their 
religion.  Tamer-Uzun pointed out that some parents actually prefer 
the public school curriculum over classes held in mosques, since 
parents have less influence and feedback from mosque-based 
instruction. At present, Tamer-Uzun is the only teacher for both 
Stuttgart schools; she tries to portray the Islamic faith in the 
context of German culture as well. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Public school Islamic religious instruction -- made 
possible by the traditional interaction of church and state in 
German school system -- is an important step in Baden-Wuerttemberg's 
efforts to integrate its growing Muslim population.  The state now 
needs to expand the program with additional teachers and a secondary 
school curriculum (the current program applies only to elementary 
schools).  Curriculum development was a sticking point in this 
prolonged endeavor, given the Muslim community's religious 
fragmentation (reftel).  The state also needs to bolster instruction 
at B-W universities in order to train future teachers.  Despite 
these challenges, all sides welcome the program, which could serve 
as a model for other German states. 
 
¶7. (U) This cable was coordinated with Embassy Berlin. 
 
POWELL