07FRANKFURT671
Social Democratic Leader on Trans-Atlantic Relations, U.S.
Mon Feb 12 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Frankfurt
VZCZCXRO4927
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHLZ
DE RUEHFT #0671/01 0431414
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 121414Z FEB 07
FM AMCONSUL FRANKFURT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9508
INFO RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVE
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELSUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 FRANKFURT 000671 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/AGS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR GM
SUBJECT: Social Democratic Leader on Trans-Atlantic Relations, U.S. 
Military Presence, and EU Presidency 
 
Sensitive but unclassified; not for internet distribution. 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: On February 1, national SPD Chairman and 
Rheinland-Pfalz Minister-President Kurt Beck spoke with the Consul 
General at the state chancellery in Mainz, praising trans-Atlantic 
relations, raising concerns about military stationing issues, and 
offering his take on goals for the German EU/G-8 presidencies.  Beck 
is the most likely SPD candidate for chancellor in 2009; insiders 
tell us contingency planning for a potential run has already begun. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
Transatlantic Relations and Military Presence 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Beck characterized the German-U.S. relationship as bound by 
"deep emotional ties" formed during the immediate postwar period 
which have continued despite occasional political differences.  He 
welcomed U.S. military expansion/investment at Ramstein and 
Spangdahlem airbases, but voiced concern over the future of 
Baumholder.  (NOTE: Baumholder is a U.S. Army training site in 
Rheinland-Pfalz whose future is uncertain under current force 
restructuring plans.  In the event of U.S. army pullout, 
Rheinland-Pfalz has asked the German government to transform 
Baumholder into a civil-military training site, e.g. to train for 
peace-keeping duties and available for use by German, U.S., and 
third-country units, but it is unclear whether German federal 
authorities will proceed with the plan. END NOTE.) 
 
¶3. (SBU) Calling Ramstein a central hub for the U.S., Europe and the 
Middle East, Beck characterized Baumholder as an important component 
of the military's operations in the region.  During his recent trip 
to NATO headquarters in Brussels, he mentioned his interest in the 
U.S. maintaining a strong profile in Germany.  He also expressed a 
desire that Congressional delegations meet with him or other German 
officials, whenever possible, as they transit the region or visit 
Ramstein/Landstuhl. 
 
¶4. (U) Beck welcomes his increased contact with Ambassador Timken, 
as a result of the time he spends in Berlin in his role as national 
SPD chairman.  Beck says he plans to visit the U.S. within the next 
year. 
 
German EU/G-8 Presidencies 
-------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) Beck sees three major issues on the German agenda for the 
first half of 2007: 
 
-- The European Constitution: Beck conceded that due to obstacles 
such as the May presidential election in France, this goal cannot be 
fully realized during the German EU Presidency.  However, according 
to him, Germany must reach out to constitutional treaty opponents 
(such as France, Netherlands, others) to convince them of the merits 
of the constitution. 
 
-- Europe needs a social dimension -- There is a need to re-connect 
the people of Europe with the ideals that European unity stands for 
(including solidarity, stability, and freedom according to Beck). 
In addition, Brussels must carefully think through the consequences 
of its decisions and be more accessible to the people. 
 
-- Neighborhood Policy -- Europe needs to improve its relationship 
with its southern and eastern neighbors, Russia in particular. 
 
¶6. (U) On the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome (March 25), 
Beck argues that Germany must take advantage of this commemoration 
to remind Europeans of the ideals of Europe and how far they have 
come in the last half-century.  As for the G-8, Beck hopes that 
Germany can inject new momentum into the WTO and global economic 
discussions.  Bilateral economic agreements are a less-satisfactory 
solution according to Beck.  He also believes that regulation of 
international finance needs to be improved, but offered no 
substantive solutions. 
 
Is Beck Positioning Himself for Chancellor Run in 2009? 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) As national SPD chairman, M-P Beck claims the right of 
first refusal for a run as the SPD candidate for chancellor in 2009. 
 Rheinland-Pfalz state chancellery insiders tell us that Beck 
considers Berlin Mayor Klaus Wowereit, Federal Environment Minister 
Sigmar Gabriel, and Federal Finance Minister Peer Steinbrueck to be 
his main competitors at this point.  Although Beck has been somewhat 
evasive about his plans for 2009, a Beck associate told us privately 
that a special committee has been formed at the R-P state 
 
FRANKFURT 00000671  002 OF 002 
 
 
chancellery to start preparing for a potential campaign -- a 
campaign that, according to the contact, will focus on economic and 
reform issues.  Members of the state parliament and political 
insiders also told us that they are convinced Beck will make a run 
for chancellor in 2009.  SPD HQ staff has told Berlin that they also 
consider Beck to be the likely chancellor candidate in 2009. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Beck and his cabinet in Mainz have generally been favorable 
to the U.S. and recognize the economic importance of the significant 
U.S military presence in the state (including Ramstein, Spangdahlem 
and Landstuhl Regional Medical Center).  On the domestic side, Beck 
continues to maintain a tight grip on the SPD in Rheinland-Pfalz and 
does not appear ready to hand the reins over to a successor.  Though 
time remains before the 2009 national elections and Beck has yet to 
announce his plans, his inner circle has already begun the 
preparations for a potential run at the chancellorship.  A 
significant strategy question facing Beck will be whether to step 
down as M-P, should he be named chancellor candidate, or remain in 
office through the election -- having been re-elected as M-P last 
year, his term lasts until 2011.  Should he step down, a national 
defeat could leave him with nowhere to go. 
 
¶9. (U) This cable was coordinated with Embassy Berlin. 
 
POWELL