07GUANGZHOU108
U/S Hughes and PD Envoy Kwan Engage Guangzhou
Wed Jan 24 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Guangzhou
VZCZCXRO6574
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHGZ #0108/01 0240902
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 240902Z JAN 07
FM AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5714
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUANGZHOU 000108 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR ECA AND EAP/CM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO PREL OVIP CH
SUBJECT: U/S Hughes and PD Envoy Kwan Engage Guangzhou 
Audiences in Public Diplomacy Visit 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: The January 21-23 visit to Guangzhou of 
Undersecretary for Public Diplomacy Karen Hughes, American 
Public Diplomacy Envoy Michelle Kwan, and Ambassador Clark 
¶T. Randt, Jr. was an unprecedented opportunity to showcase 
American public diplomacy programs reaching out to 
previously untapped audiences (including elementary 
students and broadcast journalists) and listened to Chinese 
views about ways to move the Sino-U.S. relationship 
forward.  U/S Hughes numerous times pointed out that the 
selection of Michelle Kwan as America's very first Public 
Diplomacy Envoy was a sign of the great importance the USG 
places on Sino-U.S. relations.  In interviews with two 
major Guangdong TV stations and in her remarks at the 
Guangdong University of Foreign Studies, U/S Hughes 
emphasized that the United States seeks a deeper, broader, 
more mature relationship with China, one that encourages 
the two countries to work together more effectively to 
solve problems and to bring a greater hope of peace and 
security to the world.  She encouraged increased cultural 
and student exchanges, adding that there was more that 
united us than divided us.  Ms. Kwan attracted positive and 
favorable attention, particularly since her father was born 
in nearby Zhongshan and her mother in Hong Kong.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
Guangzhou English Training Center for the Handicapped 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶2. The first event of January 22 - a visit to the Guangzhou 
English Training Center for the Handicapped - was in many 
ways a template for the remainder of the schedule, a 
demonstration how America can support preexisting 
institutions that are working creatively to assist those 
who are in need and already helping themselves.  The first 
voluntary, non-profit college in China for the physically 
challenged that specializes in English language study and 
computer applications, the Center is committed to fostering 
an environment as expressed by its motto of "dedicated love 
and disciplined learning."  The Center, which has partnered 
with Zhongshan University and Haizhu Labor Union, has 
approximately 60 students, all of whom are competitively 
selected.  School officials told the delegation that 96% of 
the school's graduates generally find jobs as interpreters, 
office clerks, secretarial staff, or in joint venture 
enterprises due to their English language and computer 
skills.  U/S Hughes and Ms. Kwan spoke with the students 
about the importance of hard work and pursuing one's 
dreams, and heard first-hand what the Center has meant to 
the students.  Several students spoke of how their 
education at the Center has changed their lives, giving 
them greater opportunities, self-confidence, and a sense of 
contributing to society in a culture that does not always 
embrace the physically challenged.  The students pay no 
tuition and are not asked to pay back the school, rather 
they are asked to "pay it forward" to society.  During the 
visit, U/S Hughes and Ms. Kwan presented specially designed 
exercise equipment to the Center's Director. 
 
Television Interviews 
--------------------- 
 
¶3. U/S Hughes and Michelle Kwan were interviewed by two of 
the Province's most watched TV stations for broadcasts of 
taped programs in the next two weeks on Guangdong TV's 
"Number One Dialogue" (which targets officials, academics, 
students, and local citizens) and Guangzhou TV's "Expat 
Chat."  Both interviews focused on the importance of public 
diplomacy and exchanges in strong bilateral relationships, 
America's cultural diversity, and our shared values, 
particularly on the importance of families.  The most 
influential TV station in the Province, Guangdong TV is 
connected via satellite to all of China and neighboring 
countries, especially Southeast Asian countries, 
potentially 60 million viewers.  Guangzhou English Language 
TV has a customer base of over 1 million (and still 
growing), and its viewers are interested in learning more 
about the United States. 
 
Guangdong University of Foreign Studies (Guangwai) 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶4. The development of an innovative society and President 
Hu's own hopes for a harmonious society depend on the free 
flow of information, U/S Hughes told Guangdong University 
of Foreign Studies students and faculty.  She expressed USG 
appreciation for China's spirit of partnership in hosting 
the Six-Party Talks and its cooperation on Iran, and 
reiterated that America welcomes a peaceful and prosperous 
China that is a responsible stakeholder in the world 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000108  002 OF 002 
 
 
community.  While this does not mean that the United States 
and China will agree on every issue, the U.S. does view 
China as a new, and very important, global neighbor.  U/S 
Hughes clarified that the United States still has 
"concerns" over China's military modernization, and 
respectfully hopes China will be more transparent in its 
affairs. 
 
¶5. In a very lively question and answer session, U/S Hughes 
pointed out the United States understands that the pace of 
change differs in each country.  In response to a question 
about what America was doing to enhance human rights, U/S 
Hughes said that while some may consider speaking out on 
human rights an interference in China's affairs, America 
believes that speaking out on such issues is our obligation 
because of our beliefs in the importance and value of the 
individual.  U/S Hughes said that encouraging NGO's can 
actually promote a harmonious society by providing an 
outlet for peoples' views.  She told the audience that one 
job that public diplomacy needs to do is to show China that 
the America they see on TV is not necessarily the America 
that people lived in.  Chinese may be surprised to learn 
that America was the number one donor to the World Food 
Program, has committed millions of dollars to eradicate 
HIV/AIDS and malaria in Africa, and was the number one 
donor - through WHO - of food and medicine to the 
Palestinian people.  U/S Hughes admitted that the USG is 
not going to change peoples' minds overnight, but that it 
is a long-term effort whose aim is to build bridges of 
understanding in the world, adding that an important way to 
do so is by reinvigorating cultural exchanges.  In a 
closing statement at the school, U/S Hughes said that what 
was important for journalists to remember is their role of 
"comforting the afflicted and afflicting the comfortable," 
and to ensure that problems were raised and reported so 
that they could be confronted. 
 
Michelle Kwan Visits Changle Elementary School 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶6. While U/S Hughes spoke with students at Guangwai, 
Michelle Kwan visited Changle Elementary School faculty and 
students, telling them that, like her, they could make 
their dream come true through dint of hard work.  Ms. Kwan 
told them how pleased she was to have the opportunity to 
talk with China's youth.  Ms. Kwan also read to over 100 
students, toured the campus, and watched a jump rope 
performance by the students who had been selected to appear 
on national television during the Chinese New Year. 
Afterwards, she participated in some games with the 
students. 
 
U/S Hughes Administers Oath to Adoptive Parents 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶7. The entire delegation reassembled to participate in the 
swearing in of American parents adopting Chinese orphans at 
the Consulate's Tian Yu facility.  U/S Hughes administered 
the oath to the new parents, after which she, Ms. Kwan, 
Ambassador Randt, and the Consul General chatted with the 
parents and their children and posed for pictures. 
Guangzhou's adoption facility handled nearly 6,500 
adoptions in 2006 and is the busiest U.S. adoption facility 
in the world, processing one-third of all U.S. 
international adoptions. 
 
Meeting with Executive Vice Governor Tang 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. At the end of the day January 22, the delegation paid a 
courtesy call on Executive Vice Governor Tang Bingquan, who 
welcomed them to Guangdong, and expressed his appreciation 
for their taking time to make Guangzhou a key part of their 
China trip.  He thanked the Ambassador and the Consul 
General for their work in improving bilateral relations, 
and highlighted Guangdong's growing economy.  U/S Hughes 
praised Guangdong's economic "dynamism" and encouraged the 
development of better relations through educational and 
cultural exchanges.  She noted the opportunity for cross- 
cultural exchanges offered by the 2008 Beijing Olympics and 
emphasized Michelle Kwan's public diplomacy role as a 
bridge to China given her cultural and ethnic ties to 
China.  U/S Hughes reiterated U.S. support for a strong and 
prosperous China. 
 
GOLDBERG