07GUANGZHOU624
Fuzhou Hospital Struggles With Drug-Resistant TB and
Fri Jun 01 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Guangzhou
VZCZCXRO2177
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHGZ #0624/01 1520559
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 010559Z JUN 07
FM AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6105
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEAUSA/DEPT OF HHS WASHDC
RUEHPH/CDC ATLANTA GA
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 GUANGZHOU 000624 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR OES/IHA 
HHS FOR MCKEOWN 
HHS FOR OFFICE OF GLOBAL HEALTH AFFAIRS 
CDC FOR COORDINATING OFFICE FOR GLOBAL HEALTH 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TBIO PGOV SOCI CH
SUBJECT: Fuzhou Hospital Struggles With Drug-Resistant TB and 
Migrant Patients 
 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: Fuzhou Lung Diseases Hospital emphasizes increased 
training and public education to prevent the spread of infectious 
diseases.  The growing drug-resistance of infectious diseases, 
particularly tuberculosis, and the large number of migrant patients 
continue to challenge prevention and treatment efforts.  Local 
governments in Fujian are supportive of the hospital's efforts and 
understand the importance of infectious disease control, according 
to health officials.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (U) Congenoff visited Fuzhou Lung Diseases Hospital on May 18. 
It is Fujian's only hospital specifically designated for the 
treatment and prevention of respiratory diseases.  Approximately 
half of its patients are from Fuzhou municipality, while the 
remaining patients come from rural areas.  In addition to providing 
comprehensive outpatient medical services, the hospital has ten 
specialized sections for different types of respiratory diseases. 
The hospital focuses primarily on tuberculosis (TB) and lung cancer. 
 Hospital administrators claim to have all the advanced equipment 
needed for testing and diagnosis of respiratory diseases, including 
CT, color B-mode ultrasound imaging, and advanced diagnostic 
laboratory equipment.  The 355-bed facility employs about 420 staff, 
over 100 of which hold advanced degrees.  The Hospital was built in 
1952 and is affiliated with Fujian Medical University. 
 
Drug resistance and migrant patients 
------------------- ---------------- 
 
¶3. (U) TB is one of the major focal points of the hospital's 
prevention efforts.  According to hospital administrators, China is 
one of 22 countries with a "serious" TB problem.  Growing 
drug-resistance and China's large migrant population are significant 
obstacles as doctors have difficulty finding appropriate antibiotics 
to treat drug-resistant TB and in tracking their migrant patients. 
Research into more effective treatment methods remains a priority. 
 
Government efforts on infectious disease control 
--------------------- -------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) Dr. Yang, Chief of the TB Prevention Section, told us that 
the local government is supportive of the hospital's infectious 
respiratory disease prevention efforts.  The Fuzhou Municipal 
Government has formed a TB prevention working group.  Fuzhou is also 
one of the few governments that have established local regulations 
on this issue.  In 2005, Fuzhou started to provide free medical care 
for TB patients who meet certain government criteria.  The hospital 
has assigned the primary responsibility for infectious diseases 
control to one of its vice presidents.  It has also established a 
reward and penalty mechanism for infectious diseases reporting. 
Although the hospital is state-owned, it still requires other 
funding and what it gets from provincial and municipal governments 
is not sufficient to cover operating expenses.  The hospital charges 
most patients for their medical care based on price levels approved 
by the Fujian Provincial Government's Pricing Bureau. 
 
¶5. (U) Zheng Boxun, Deputy Director of the Fujian Health Bureau's 
International Medical Exchange Center, added that the central 
government maintains a strong CDC network for infectious disease 
monitoring and emergency reaction to public health incidents.  Zheng 
said that this network was strengthened after the SARS crisis. 
Hospitals play an increasingly important role as part of the disease 
reporting network.  According to Zheng, the local government has 
devoted more resources to educating the public about infectious 
diseases, so that people will not panic when an outbreak occurs. 
 
More emphasis on training and staff quality 
------------------------- ----------------- 
 
¶6. (U) Since the SARS crisis, the hospital has made on-the-job 
training mandatory to ensure that staff can better recognize various 
infectious diseases and take appropriate protective measures. 
Hospital officials also send their staff to other hospitals around 
the country to learn best practices. 
 
¶7. (U) The hospital has no difficulty recruiting new staff.  The 
hospital's party secretary, Ms. You, said they understand that 
quality medical staff is key to the hospital's success.  Competition 
is fierce for medical staff positions at the hospital, according to 
Ms. You, who added that there are usually at least six applicants 
for each position, three of whom are chosen for an interview. 
 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000624  002 OF 002 
 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Local governments are paying more attention to public 
health, as it influences China's economic development and social 
stability.  Health officials are focusing more on infectious disease 
control by strengthening the reporting network, training medical 
staff, and providing free treatment to some patients. However, 
Chinese officials need to improve their transparency in information 
sharing with the international community. 
 
GOLDBERG