07GUANGZHOU499
South China Leadership Changes; Political Highlights
Fri Apr 27 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Guangzhou
VZCZCXRO9006
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHGZ #0499/01 1170743
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 270743Z APR 07
FM AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6009
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUEHRC/USDA FAS WASHDC 0943
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RHHMUNA/HQ USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 GUANGZHOU 000499 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM AND DRL 
USDA FOR FAS/ITP AND FAS/FAA 
USDOC FOR 4420/ITA/MAC/MCQUEEN 
USPACOM FOR FPA 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV SOCI EAGR EINV CH
SUBJECT: South China Leadership Changes; Political Highlights 
 
REFERENCE: A) Guangzhou 3993; B) Guangzhou 3991; C) 05 Guangzhou 
31940 
 
(U) This document is sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: Guangdong Party Secretary Zhang Dejiang is poised 
to move to Beijing to become a Vice Premier and current Beijing 
Mayor Wang Qishan may become the next Guangdong Party Secretary. 
Beijing, which has long had reservations about whether Guangdong's 
leaders serve central government interests, has strengthened control 
over the province by assigning a new disciplinary inspection 
secretary from outside of the province; in addition, per national 
 
SIPDIS 
directives, Guangdong has reduced by half the positions of deputy 
party secretaries inside CPC committees.  Promotion opportunities 
continue to favor officials with both Communist Youth League (CYL) 
experience and regional ethnic backgrounds in Guangdong.  A 
semi-retired senior official at the vice governor rank has been 
punished to send a strong anti-corruption message to current 
officials.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Zhang Dejiang: Central Government Support Despite Setbacks as 
Governor and "Shanghai Gang" Affiliation 
--------------------- ------------------- --------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Announcement is likely at the Guangdong CPC annual session 
in May that Guangdong Party Secretary Zhang Dejiang, who has 
survived a number of political crises, will take on a new position 
as Vice Premier in the State Council.  News reports indicate that 
his successor might be current Beijing Party Secretary and former 
Guangdong Executive Vice Governor Wang Qishan. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Zhang's tenure in Guangdong has been rocky at times.  It 
included the SARS outbreak in 2003, during which time Guangdong 
authorities were criticized for concealing information, and the 
Dongzhou incident in December 2005, in which police killed at least 
three farmers during a dispute related to land compensation (reftel 
C).  However, Zhang survived each of these crises.  The central 
media, including CCTV and People's Daily, published footage and 
articles praising Guangdong's success in fighting SARS and 
maintaining social harmony not long after each crisis. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Local media reports on April 3 revealed a pension scandal 
in Guangzhou in which RMB one billion (USD 125 million) was misused 
in the 1990's in failed real estate projects - half of the amount 
might not be retrievable.  Some analysts have suggested that this 
scandal might be targeted at hindering Zhang's promotion.  Zhang is 
not likely to be hurt as the scandal occurred before his arrival and 
he does not bear responsibility.  The official reviewing the case, 
Guangdong Congress' Chairwoman Huang Liman, Huang also belongs to 
the "Shanghai Clique," to which Zhang supposedly bellows, and should 
have no interest in damaging Zhang.  Unlike "Shanghai Clique" member 
Chen Liangyu, the former Shanghai Party Secretary who is currently 
under investigation, Zhang has not opposed but has closely followed 
Beijing's decisions.  When Beijing emphasized social stability and 
harmony, Zhang set strict local guidelines for sufficient 
compensation to farmers who lost their land.  When Beijing promoted 
the concept of "a new socialist countryside," Zhang responded by 
stationing more than ten thousand officials in poor local villages 
to support local development. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The People's Daily published an article on February 6 
complimenting Guangdong's impressive success in maintaining rapid 
GDP growth while lowering its consumption of resources and pollution 
discharge for each unit of GDP produced - indirectly recognizing 
Zhang's implementation of the "scientific development approach" of 
General Secretary Hu Jintao.  Zhang is also credited with initiating 
the "Pan Pearl River Delta Cooperation Program" in November 2003, 
which promotes regional economic and social cooperation and 
integration among provinces in South and Southwest China plus Hong 
Kong and Macao. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Other positive signs for Zhang are his previous assignments 
heading central CPC delegations on overseas visits; this is one way 
Beijing is able to observe how well a future national leader will 
perform and to introduce him/her to the outside world.  During the 
past five years, Zhang has headed central CPC delegations to South 
America (November 2003), Africa (October 2004), and the Middle East 
(June 2006). 
 
¶7. (SBU) Congenoff's interlocutors from business circles who have 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000499  002 OF 004 
 
 
close relations with local provincial leadership also mentioned 
early this year that Zhang is almost certain to move up to Beijing, 
the only question being which position he would take.  Since Chen 
Liangyu is already out, the "Shanghai Clique" may see in Zhang a 
defender of its prerogatives. 
 
Wang Qishan: Beijing Mayor with Guangdong Background Tops List for 
Party Secretary 
------------------------ -------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Reuters released a news report on April 3, citing two 
sources in Beijing, predicting that Wang Qishan would become 
Guangdong's next Party Secretary.  Before assuming his current 
position is Beijing's Deputy Party Secretary, Deputy Mayor and then 
Mayor, the 59-year old Wang was Executive Vice Governor (in charge 
of finance) and CPCC Standing Committee Member in Guangdong from 
1997 to 2000.  Wang, the son-in-law of the late CPC senior official 
Yao Yilin, has considerable central and local administration 
experience, financial industry expertise and an academic background 
in both rural and financial research.  In Guangdong, he was 
responsible for handling the aftermath of the disastrous bankruptcy 
of the Guangdong International Trust and Investment Co., which had 
borrowed heavily from overseas financial institutions and invested 
in local projects, most of which were failures. 
 
Guangdong CPC Committee: Trimming Deputy Party Secretaries, 
Appointments from Beijing to Disciplinary Positions 
------------------------ ------------------------------ 
 
¶9. (SBU) Guangdong is following a national directive to reduce the 
number of its deputy party secretaries to two.  Of the original five 
deputy party secretaries, one was transferred to Zhejiang and two 
received new appointments to less powerful organizations and may 
soon lose their titles as deputy party secretaries.  The two 
remaining positions are those of Huang Huahua, Guangdong Governor, 
and Liu Yupu. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Wang Huayuan, former Deputy Party Secretary of Guangdong, 
was transferred to Zhejiang as the province's Standing Committee 
Member in charge of disciplinary inspection.  No new deputy party 
secretary was appointed to fill his vacancy.  In November 2006, Zhu 
 
SIPDIS 
Mingguo (born 1957) was transferred from Chongqing to become a 
Guangdong Standing Committee Member, taking over Wang's disciplinary 
inspection responsibilities. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Cai Dongshi and Ou Guangyuan, though retaining their 
titles as Guangdong Deputy Party Secretaries, are expected to soon 
leave the Standing Committee following their assignments as Vice 
Chairs of Guangdong's CPPCC and Congress, respectively, in February 
¶2007.  This year Cai will be 60 years old and Ou will be 59, thus 
reaching or soon to reach retirement age.  Assignments to less 
important positions in the CPPCC and Congress signify a departure 
from the core power circle.  Similar staffing patterns of one party 
secretary and two deputy party secretaries have already been 
 
SIPDIS 
established in CPC committees at the municipal and district levels 
throughout Guangdong. 
 
¶12. (SBU) In recent years, Beijing has attempted to strengthen its 
control over local provinces, particularly in significant economic 
areas such as Guangdong, by appointing officials from outside the 
province to hold key positions in the provincial standing 
committees.  For example: 
-- Guangdong's current Deputy Party Secretary Liu Yupu originally 
worked in Shanxi and came to Guangdong in 2000. 
-- Guangdong's current Organization Department's Director General Hu 
Zejun came from the Justice Ministry and landed in Guangdong in 
¶2004. 
-- Now, Zhu Mingguo, also from outside Guangdong, is taking over 
Guangdong's anti-corruption authority and will help the central 
government supervise Guangdong, which is known for its resistance to 
Beijing's control.  Zhu spent most of his career in Hainan with a 
background in law enforcement and CPC personnel issues.  In 2001, he 
was transferred from the position of CPC Standing Committee Member 
and Vice Governor of Hainan to become a Standing Committee Member in 
charge of law enforcement as well as the Director General of 
Chongqing's Public Security Bureau (PSB). 
-- Also new to the CPC Standing Committee, and with a Beijing 
background, is Lin Xiong, the new Director General of the Guangdong 
Propaganda Department.  Lin (born 1959) spent his early career in 
the State Council and then became a Director General-ranking 
secretary and is said to have worked for Wen Jiabao.  He came to 
 
SIPDIS 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000499  003 OF 004 
 
 
Guangdong in 1994 and worked in several prefectures including 
Dongguan, Maoming, and Zhaoqing.  His last position was as Party 
Secretary and NPC Chair of Zhaoqing. 
 
SIPDIS 
-- Lin's predecessor, Zhu Xiaodan, who is still a Standing Committee 
Member and has a CYL background, assumed the position of Party 
Secretary of Guangzhou in July 2006. 
 
SIPDIS 
-- Liang Guoju (born 1947), former CPC Standing Committee member in 
charge of law enforcement and justice issues and the Director 
General of the Guangdong PSB, took a new job as a Vice Chair of the 
CPPCC.  This move indicates that he is likely to leave the CPC 
Standing Committee and PSB position because of his age. 
-- A police contact told us that that Liang's successor will be Zhu 
Suisheng, current Deputy Director General of Guangdong PSB and 
former Director General of the Guangzhou Municipal PSB. 
Zhu Mingguo, Lin Xiong, and Zhu Suisheng are likely to serve in the 
new Standing Committee to be elected in May. 
 
Vice Governorships Maintain Hakka and Chaoshan Ties 
--------------------------- ----------------------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) The Guangdong government has promoted three vice governors 
since 2006: Tong Xing, Lin Musheng, and Huang Longyun.  Former vice 
governors You Ningfeng and Xu Deli resigned because of age in 
February 2006.  Tang Bingquan, Executive Vice Governor born in 1949, 
is supposed to retire soon and join You and Xu to leave room for the 
newcomers. 
 
¶14. (SBU) Senior homegrown leaders in Guangdong are from three main 
areas: the Hakka area in the north, including Meizhou, Shaoguan, and 
Heyuan; the Chaoshan area in the east, covering Shantou, Shanwei, 
Chaozhou, and Jieyang; and the Pearl River Delta (PRD).  The Hakka 
and Chaoshan areas have their own dialects and cultures and are 
known for their strong preference for cadres from the same 
hometowns.  Senior officials representing these areas always hold 
important positions at the provincial level.  Promotions of these 
officials have not necessarily been tied to their competence in 
developing the economy, since the Hakka and Chaoshan areas remain 
economically backward.  The most prominent official from the Hakka 
area is current Guangdong Governor Huang Huahua, and the Chaoshan 
area was represented by the late former Party Secretary Xie Fei. 
Officials with CYL ties who also come from these areas were blessed 
during the recent vice governor promotions in Guangdong. 
 
¶15. (SBU) New Vice Governors: 
-- Huang Longyun, who is a Standing Committee Member of the 
Guangdong CPC, is now Guangdong's Executive Vice Governor.  He is a 
native of Meixian in the Hakka area.  Huang spent most of his early 
career in the Guangzhou Steel Factory, which was a source of many 
senior Guangzhou officials from 1973 to 1991.  His principal 
experience includes serving as the Party Secretary and Mayor of 
Zhuhai and later Foshan.  His Hakka background is helpful as he 
fills the position left by You Ningfeng, also a Hakka native. 
-- Lin Musheng (born 1956), was the former Party Secretary of 
Shantou.  He spent 10 years in the Guangdong CYL from 1985 to 1995, 
and has been the Secretary of the Guangdong CYL since 1991.  He is a 
native of the Chaoshan area.  He was Party Secretary and Mayor of 
Shantou and Jieyang from 1995 to 2006 and is believed to have been 
selected to replace retired Chaoshan Vice Governor Xu Deli. 
-- Tong Xing (born 1951), is the former Party Secretary of Dongguan. 
 He spent his early career in Guangdong's CYL from 1977 to 1990, 
becoming Deputy Secretary.  In Dongguan, where he spent 16 years, 
Tong upgraded the city's industrial structure to take on a more 
high-tech and value-added dimension. 
 
Corruption: Beijing Sends a Message in Case of Retired Senior 
Official 
------------------------- ---------------------------- 
 
¶16. (SBU) Guangdong filed 3,743 investigation cases in 2006 against 
officials who violated the law, according to the Guangdong CPC 
Disciplinary Inspection Committee.  The committee punished 23 cases 
involving 23 officials at the director general rank, and 224 cases 
involving 236 officials at the division chief rank.  In all, cases 
involving 686 officials were transferred to the PSB for criminal 
penalties. 
 
¶17. (SBU) The most senior official punished recently was Liu 
Weiming, Executive Vice Chair of the Guangdong CPPCC and former Vice 
Governor of Guangdong.  Liu was sacked from the Guangdong CCPCC in 
January for "serious violations of discipline."  Liu also lost his 
CPC membership and national delegate qualification.  According to 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000499  004 OF 004 
 
 
Xinhua, Liu, who is said to be the nephew of the late President Liu 
Shaoqi, helped his son obtain a lucrative loan from a provincial 
state-owned enterprise for a real estate project in Shenzhen in 
¶1992.  It is very unusual for the CPC to punish a semi-retired 
senior official for a misdemeanor occurring 15 years ago.  Similar 
cases in which retired corrupt officials were punished have also 
occurred recently in Henan and Jiangsu.  These cases are believed to 
be serious warnings from Beijing to provincial and local officials. 
 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶18. (SBU) Beijing is likely to continue to tighten its control over 
Guangdong through official appointments and anti-corruption efforts. 
 However, the CPC personnel appointment mechanism has shown little 
improvement in its overall transparency and fairness.  The 
appointments of Guangdong Vice Governors Tong Xing and Lin Musheng 
show that officials with CYL backgrounds continue to be favored for 
promotion. 
 
GOLDBERG