07HILLAH163
NAJAF AND KUFA DISTRICTS LOCAL COUNCILS REQUESTED PRT
Sat Dec 01 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
REO Hillah
VZCZCXRO1145
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHKUK
DE RUEHIHL #0163/01 3351347
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 011347Z DEC 07
FM REO HILLAH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0999
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEHIHL/REO HILLAH 1063UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HILLAH 000163 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL IZ
SUBJECT: NAJAF AND KUFA DISTRICTS LOCAL COUNCILS REQUESTED PRT 
ASSISTANCE 
 
HILLAH 00000163  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
This is a PRT Reporting Cable. 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: During a November meeting with the PRT, members of 
the local councils (LC) from Najaf and Kufa districts requested 
USG assistance to help build capacity - including the funding of 
an office and training of staff, particularly in the U.S.  Najaf 
LC members, Adnan Hussein Mohammed and Jasim Mustafa Mohammed, 
and Kufa district LC members, Hamza Jawed Kadim and Kahtan 
Muhsen Ali were present in the meeting, in addition to Maki 
Shaker Hureeb of RTI, a USAID-sponsored NGO.  The LC members 
lamented the lack of space to hold meetings, as well as the lack 
of supplies and equipment; furthermore, they noted the lack of 
transportation means, and the resources to invite members of 
other LCs to discuss matters of mutual concern. They 
acknowledged also that they are struggling to clarify their 
vaguely defined constitutional role. END SUMMARY 
 
¶2. PRT Leader welcomed the guests to the first meeting of the 
PRT and the Najaf Local Council in over a year.  He noted that 
understanding the activities of the LC was the most important 
goal of the meeting.  Mr. Maki Shaker Hureeb from RTI noted that 
he had earlier worked for the Provincial Council of Najaf.  He 
found, however, that the LC has more understanding of the 
concerns of the citizens than the Provincial Councils.  He noted 
that there are three District Councils within Najaf Province and 
seven Sub-District Councils. 
 
¶3. A constant theme resonating throughout the meeting was the 
lack of material support for the LCs.  Perhaps most important 
was that they do not have office space in which to meet or 
discuss matters of importance.  Moreover, the LCs have no 
furniture, no equipment, no transportation facilities, and have 
received no training.  On several occasions, they pointed out 
that no one from the LC has been sponsored outside of Iraq for 
training.  (NOTE: Many LC members, however, had earlier been 
invited to go to the U.S. for training, but declined the 
invitations.  It is worth noting that the Najaf and Kufa LCs are 
now interested. END NOTE)  In addition, the LC at this meeting 
mentioned that they would like to find funding for laptop 
computers and cell phones. 
 
¶4. Members of the LC stated that the educational level must be 
high in order to qualify as a candidate for a position within 
the LC.  A candidate, for example, must have a minimum of a 
university degree.  Many members of the LCs have master's 
degrees and some even doctorates.  LC members also pointed out 
that often, LC subcommittee members are experts in the subject 
area of the subcommittee.  For example, the person who is the 
head of the Subcommittee on Tourism and Antiquities is a noted 
authority on the antiquities of Iraq.  The LC members were quick 
to highlight that the election of the LC members was the first 
democratic event that took place in Iraq.  The Najaf LC has 33 
members while Kufa has 14.  All seats on the LCs were 
apportioned by population.  Kufa LC members also noted that Kufa 
is the third largest district in Iraq after Fallujah and Baquba. 
 The LCs of Kufa and Najaf regularly cooperate together to 
tackle issues as necessary. 
 
¶5. The Najaf LC members expressed concern for Al Alanzar, a 
neighborhood that has reported an inordinate number of cancer 
cases.  Although this area has been surveyed and studied by 
different groups of health professionals, no one had positively 
identified the genesis of this high cancer rate.  The LC members 
asked for the establishment of a modern testing lab in Najaf 
specifically to find the cause of this alarming number of cancer 
cases. 
 
¶6. Various LC members brought up Order 71 of the Coalition 
Provisional Authority (CPA) entitled "Local Governmental Powers" 
that specifies how PCs as well as LCs shall be constituted.  The 
Order also defines the respective responsibilities of each.  The 
LC members maintained that the PC is required to allocate 33% of 
its budget to LCs.  One LC member at the meeting stated that 
Order 71 requires that LCs receive funding directly from the 
National Government and not through the Provincial Government. 
There is no provision in Order 71 articulating how LCs shall 
receive funding other than a comment in Paragraph 1 of Section 
4, entitled 'Local Councils,' that says: 
 
"Local councils are responsible for representing their 
constituents; ensuring that public services respond to local 
needs; organizing the operations of the local administration; 
reviewing local ministry plans; collecting and retaining local 
revenues, taxes and fees; identifying local budgetary 
requirements through the national budgeting process; and 
recommending appropriate action to Governorate Councils with 
respect to government officials, on the basis of misconduct, 
inefficiency or Ba'athist Party affiliation." 
 
¶7. PC members stated that the LC office currently offers proof 
of residence and certificates of good character for passport 
applicants free of charge, because the Council of 
 
HILLAH 00000163  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
Representatives has not given legal approval to charge fees. 
One complaint voiced by the LC members was that they do not have 
the resources to meet with their counterparts in other areas. 
There is nothing in Order 71 requiring such meetings except that 
Paragraph 7 of Section 5, entitled "Mayors and Deputy Mayors," 
states:  "Mayors shall meet regularly with other Mayors to 
ensure that services are being provided equitably and 
efficiently."   The LC members from Najaf and Kufa were not 
aware of any such meetings that have taken place. 
 
¶8. The LC committees have undertaken studies of educational and 
health needs in their districts, according to the LC members. 
They hold regular meetings with the religious "hawza" 
representatives. 
 
¶9. LC members expressed their frustration at the lack of support 
from Baghdad, especially since they have stood by central 
government in every situation.  The Local Councils, however, 
have little interaction with the central government currently, 
except through their own personal and informal contacts.  This 
interaction mostly occurred when the central government debated 
the local governance law and other local governance issues.  The 
members also mentioned that Najaf has 260 "moktars", respected 
individuals in the community who provide direct services to the 
residents.  Kufa district has 60 moktars. 
 
¶10. COMMENT: Interestingly, several LC members are now open to 
training opportunities of every kind.  This may be symptomatic 
of an important change in attitudes in Najaf (and Karbala 
province.)  The LCs are struggling to find their place and their 
role in the body politic.  They claim they are closer to the 
people and their needs than the Provincial Councils, which are 
largely dominated by party (read religious party) politics.  The 
Najaf and Kufa Local Councils are anxious to find ways to be 
more effective in carrying out their ill-defined and unfunded 
constitutional responsibilities.  Heretofore, they have either 
largely been ignored or have had an antagonistic relationship 
with the PCs which control central government allocated funds. 
On a more positive note, the RTI program of promoting joint 
training activities between the PCs and LCs is beginning to have 
success in facilitating the cooperation of the two bodies on 
various occasions. 
 
¶11. COMMENT CONTINUED: The PRT will look for ways to work with 
the LCs in building capacity while making it clear that it is an 
Iraqi matter.  It is up to the LCs themselves to work within the 
Iraqi body politic to clarify their constitutional role. END 
COMMENTCLEVELAND