07HONGKONG1661
CLIMATE CHANGE DEMARCHE:  ENGAGING HONG KONG AND
Thu Jun 21 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXRO1391
PP RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHHK #1661/01 1720619
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 210619Z JUN 07
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2032
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HONG KONG 001661 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM AND OES/EGC 
STATE FOR OES/ENV AND OES PDAS 
NSC FOR WILDER 
STATE PASS CEQ FOR BERGER, VAN DYKE 
DOE FOR INTERNATIONAL/HARBERT, PUMPHREY AND GEBERT 
EPA FOR INTERNATIONAL/MCASKILL 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV ENGR SOCI EAID EPET TRGY KPAO CH HK MC
SUBJECT: CLIMATE CHANGE DEMARCHE:  ENGAGING HONG KONG AND 
MACAU ON ENERGY AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
 
REF: A. STATE 75287 
 
     ¶B. STATE 80334 
     ¶C. HK PD RESULTS REPORT MAY 11 2007 
 
 ¶1. (SBU) Summary:  AmConGen Hong Kong has actively engaged 
the governments and the general public of the Hong Kong and 
Macau Special Administrative Regions on U.S. climate change, 
renewable energy and other environmental programs.  Post 
developed and actively promoted the Pollution Prevention and 
Energy Efficiency Initiative (P2E2), a financing model that 
allows Hong Kong and mainland Chinese companies to reduce 
their energy usage and improve polluting factories without 
incurring any upfront costs.  There are currently about 30 
projects in various stages of development using these P2E2 
technologies in China.  We are facilitating additional 
financing for the installation by Hong Kong companies of P2E2 
technology upgrades at factories, power plants and real 
estate projects throughout the mainland.  Following up on 
Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) Chairman James 
Connaughton's visit last year, the Consul General showcased 
American technological innovation and the need for 
market-based solutions to combat environmental problems 
during a recent speech.  The Hong Kong government (HKG) and 
press responds favorably to this message.  HKG officials have 
begun to showcase U.S. approaches towards reducing air 
pollution as an appropriate solution to environmental 
degradation problems in the Pearl River Delta (PRD) region of 
southern China.  Consulate staff also met Macau energy and 
environmental officials to explain U.S. initiatives and the 
need for sustainable economic growth.  The Macau Special 
Administrative Region government (MSARG) responded by 
requesting additional information and collaboration with the 
U.S. Department of Energy the Environmental Protection Agency 
on developing long-term energy and environmental strategies 
in the PRD.  Consulate staff have actively engaged civil 
society groups and schools on the U.S. approach to 
environmental protection and sustainable development with 
another outreach event planned for late June.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (U) Since 2005, AmConGen Hong Kong has developed and 
promoted the P2E2 program, a market-based financing model 
that encourages investment in pollution-reducing technologies 
at mainland Chinese factories and power plants.  The program 
enables firms in mainland China -- some 80,000 of which are 
owned by Hong Kong investors -- to upgrade their facilities 
with the help of Hong Kong Environment and Energy Service 
Companies and Hong Kong banks.  The project has begun to 
yield results in addressing air, water and ground pollution. 
Through fostering increased energy efficiency, the program 
also helps participating companies gain a competitive edge 
over their rivals.  The idea that pollution prevention and 
increased energy efficiency are profitable is an important 
message to convey to investors in the cut-throat business 
environment of southern China.  To date, there are 
approximately 30 P2E2 technology projects under development 
in China and, through the Asian Development Bank and IFC, 
AmConGen Hong Kong is facilitating the commitment in 2007 of 
up to US$800 million in new loan guarantees and loans to Hong 
Kong commercial banks for this initiative.  This program not 
only allows us to publicize the U.S. approach to climate 
change, but also provides Hong Kong and mainland Chinese 
companies with a reliable market-based platform to reduce 
emissions through technological innovation. 
 
¶3. (U) On May 11, the Consul General spoke publicly to the 
Chinese General Chamber of Commerce in Hong Kong about U.S. 
efforts to increase energy security through recent fuel 
initiatives and investments in clean energy research and 
technology, including highlighting recent mandates for the 
use of ultra-low sulfur diesel, expanding the market for 
hybrid vehicles, and developing biofuels and new renewable 
energy sources.  Extensively drawn from material provided by 
CEQ, the speech highlighted the importance of the market and 
the role that businesses can play in spurring innovation and 
in promoting energy efficiency.  This message has been 
well-received by HKG officials.  Hong Kong Secretary for the 
Environment, Transportation and Works Sarah Liao has quoted 
the Consul General by name when discussing American 
market-based approaches to clean energy and pollution 
prevention during her recent public speeches on climate 
change and the environment. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Twelve local and international media representatives 
attended the event and the Consul General's lengthy question 
 
HONG KONG 00001661  002 OF 002 
 
 
and answer session on U.S. efforts to improve the environment 
and diversify our energy sources.   Radio Television Hong 
Kong and five Hong Kong newspapers, including Oriental Daily, 
Ming Pao, The Sun, South China Morning Post and (the 
pro-Beijing) Ta Kung Pao (with a combined circulation of 
816,000) covered the speech with positive reports.  Over 60 
members of the local community attended, representing the 
Chinese General Chamber of Commerce, environmental 
organizations, industry representatives, and the HKG.  USINFO 
also ran an article based on the speech, which is available 
on the websites of AmConGen Hong Kong and the Chinese General 
Chamber of Commerce in Hong Kong. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Hong Kong is working to diversify its energy 
sources.  China Light and Power (CLP) recently increased its 
use of coal in its power plants due to a dwindling supply of 
natural gas in Hainan, a large island off the coast of 
Southern China.  It is now working with the HKG to build an 
LNG terminal on a remote island in Hong Kong to secure a 
stable supply of natural gas and decrease its dependency on 
coal.  Although some local environmental groups oppose the 
project due to its potential impact on sea life, HKG 
officials generally support the construction of the new 
terminal as it would expand the territory's energy sources, 
make it less dependent on Hainan and other PRC sources for 
its LNG, and contribute to improved air quality.  To date, 
Hong Kong has not invested much money in renewable energy. 
 
¶6. (SBU) EconOff recently visited Macau to discuss energy and 
environmental issues with Arnaldo Santos, Director of the 
MSARG Office for the Development of the Energy Sector and 
Vong Man Hung, Acting President of the Executive Committee of 
the MSARG's Environment Council.  Due to tremendous economic 
growth of the gaming sector and the accompanying development 
of hotel, transportation and convention industries, Macau i 
struggling to meet its energy needs.  Macau larely relies on 
diesel for electricity production and is working with 
mainland Chinese counterparts o build nw power plants and 
LNG terminals, and o develop renewable energy sources in the 
PRD.  nlike Hong Kong, Macau is tying its energy security 
very closely to mainlad China.  But, officials expressed a 
keen interet in learning more what Macau can do to promote 
lean energy in mainland China as the territory's ai quality 
is adversely impacted by Chinese polluton.  Santos was 
particularly interested in sharing technologies and best 
practices with U.S. counterparts for harnessing wind, solar 
and other forms of renewable energy in a compact urban area. 
Both Santos and Vong requested increased collaboration with 
the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection Agency. 
 They also invited USG energy and environment specialists to 
Macau when they next visit mainland China or Hong Kong. 
 
¶7. (U) Post has conducted active public diplomacy programs to 
support the President's energy and climate change initiatives 
-- from op-ed pieces in the local press to public events on 
the importance of sustainable development and economic growth 
at schools and with other civic groups.  Post plans an 
additional outreach event in late June on sustainable 
development with a focus on the importance of balancing 
preservation and economic growth. 
Cunningham