07ISTANBUL914
NBA AND STARKEY FOUNDATION'S SLAM DUNK IN ISTANBUL
Thu Oct 11 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Istanbul
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIT #0914/01 2841030
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 111030Z OCT 07
FM AMCONSUL ISTANBUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7584
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 7176UNCLAS ISTANBUL 000914 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/SE:PMALIK 
STATE FOR EUR/PPD:SALTMAN-WINANS;LDAVIS;CGRAFFEY 
STATE FOR ECA:NBISHOP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SCULKPAOECONTU
SUBJECT: NBA AND STARKEY FOUNDATION'S SLAM DUNK IN ISTANBUL 
 
Unclassified 
 
SIPDIS 
 
¶1. Summary:  In the midst of a tense period in U.S.-Turkish 
relations, there is good news on the sports front, as the NBA's 
Minnesota Timberwolves spent the first week of October in Istanbul 
practicing people-to-people diplomacy at its best. While the 
headline event was an exhibition game with Turkey's premier league 
Efes Pilsen team, accompanying NBA officials, including Commissioner 
David Stern, made a major effort on the PR front by refurbishing 
basketball courts and fitting 2000 children with hearing aids, 
courtesy of the Minnesota-based Starkey Hearing Aid Foundation. 
 
¶2. Consul General Wiener spoke at an Iftar dinner in honor of the 
visit, highlighting for an audience of three hundred the spirit of 
American philanthropy and the mission's support for cooperation 
between American and Turkish NGOs.  Although the Timberwolves ended 
up the victors on October 6 in a down-to-the wire game with Efes 
Pilsen, prevailing 84-81, the real winners were disadvantaged 
Turkish youth.  The continuing popularity of basketball in Turkey 
and the success of the summer youth basketball camps sponsored by 
State's Youth Empowerment Program (YEP) and ConGen Istanbul offer 
bright possibilities for continuing cooperation in sports diplomacy, 
civil society cooperation and people-to-people outreach even when 
dark clouds appear on the political horizon. End Summary. 
 
¶3. The Minnesota Timberwolves took Istanbul by storm the first week 
of October.  In association with "NBA's 2007 Europe Live" program of 
exhibition games throughout Europe, the "T'wolves" suited up for a 
friendly exhibition with leading Turkish professional club "Efes 
Pilsen."  Basketball is wildly popular in Turkey, and the 
10,500-seat arena where the game was held was nearly sold out. 
Numerous political and business leaders including State Minister for 
Sports Murat Baseskioglu and Prime Ministerial advisor Egemen Bagis, 
had raced from an Iftar dinner in honor of the Prime Minister to 
attend the game.  The NBA used the visit to promote its community 
outreach initiatives, entitled "NBA Cares," partnering with the 
(American) Starkey Hearing Foundation to fit 2000 hearing aids for 
hearing-disabled disadvantaged youth during the week they were in 
Istanbul.  The NBA also sponsored the refurbishing of a basketball 
court in partnership with Adidas at an "Education Park" run by a 
local NGO and dedicated a brand new court at a "Learn and Play 
Center," with additional funding by Turkish Zorlu Holdings. 
Timberwolves current players and retired NBA greats also attended 
some of these events. 
 
¶4. ConGen Wiener spoke at a 300-person gala Iftar hosted by 
Starkey's Turkey chapter for representatives of civil society, 
business and government.  The CG - a native of Minnesota - noted the 
way sports has provided opportunities in America for people of all 
backgrounds to cross racial, socioeconomic, gender and religions 
lines to build communities and teach good sportsmanship.  She 
highlighted that the U.S. spirit of volunteerism, philanthropy and 
charitable giving are key to the American way of life.  She also 
noted the ongoing U.S. support for Turkey's flourishing NGO sector 
and the importance of the NBA and Starkey Foundation's donations 
during Ramazan, a time known for charitable outreach. 
 
¶5. No anti-American spirit was apparent during the actual exhibition 
game, just a lot of loud cheering by enthusiastic Efes Pilsen fans, 
who rooted their team on to a superb effort against the visitors, 
forcing the Timberwolves to play all out down the stretch as a 4th 
quarter rally barely failed, resulting in a nail-biting loss for the 
home team, 84-81.  Hundreds of children attending the game courtesy 
of the Starkey Foundation waved U.S., Turkish and Canadian flags 
(representatives from Starkey's Canadian arm were also there). 
Retired NBA greats Dr. J (Julius Irving), Clyde Drexler and B.J. 
Armstrong received a prolonged, roaring, standing ovation from the 
crowd.  The importance of this event to the NBA was evident by the 
presence of NBA Commissioner David Stern.  The NBA is keenly aware 
of basketball's popularity throughout Turkey and the consumer 
potential of its growing middle class, and opened its first ever 
European NBA-Adidas "Concept Store" on Istanbul's famous walking 
street, Istiklal Caddesi. 
 
¶6. Another crowd pleaser was the NBA's quarter and halftime 
entertainment. The league went all out to promote itself in Turkey, 
and the entertainment was a highlight for many. Drawing on a small 
army of performers and backstage support, supplemented with 
elaborate props, the shows featured amazing acrobats who, propelled 
by trampolines, dunked basketballs while coming out of somersaults; 
NBA cheerleaders; and audience participation contests, mostly 
related to basketball, with the exception of the bed-making contest 
between two women from the crowd. (The taller woman won.) 
 
¶7. The T'Wolves visit was widely covered in the press, although 
mostly from a sports and high-society angle.  The game was broadcast 
live and the gala received extensive coverage.  The Efes Pilsen 
coach was quoted after the match extolling the game and the good 
 
sportsmanship that prevailed. NBA and Starkey's humanitarian efforts 
were given limited mention in connection with the other events. 
(Apparently the charter flight that brought the team to Istanbul 
showed "Midnight Express", the Oliver Stone film widely considered 
anti-Turkish because of its depiction of harsh conditions in Turkish 
prisons in the 70s. This was reported in the press. There didn't 
appear to be any follow-on problems, however, and ConGen alerted NBA 
reps to the sensitivity of the issue soon after their arrival.) 
 
¶8. Following on the success of YEP, Embassy and Congen support of 
the Turkish Basketball Federation and University of Delaware summer 
camps this year, the NBA and Timberwolves sojourn in Turkey is 
another reminder of the place that basketball holds in the hearts of 
Turks and of its value in demonstrating a positive side of American 
culture. Basketball has enormous potential for further public 
diplomacy outreach activities in Turkey. Our experience with the TBF 
camps in Erzincan and Usak reminded us of the values that can be 
shared in the context of excellent basketball mentoring by 
well-chosen American coaches. We see the YEP events as models for 
future events, and hope that the YEP basketball programs will be 
continued and expanded in Turkey. Wiener