07JAKARTA1835
HAWAII GOVERNOR LINGLE VISITS INDONESIA:  NATIONAL
Fri Jul 06 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXRO4795
RR RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM
DE RUEHJA #1835/01 1870918
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 060918Z JUL 07
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RHHJJPI/USPACOM HONOLULU HI
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5323
INFO RUEHZS/ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 0875
RUEHWL/AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON 1569UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 JAKARTA 001835 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/MTS COMLEY (TO CONVEY TO NGB FINNEY) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MARR PGOV EFIS ID
SUBJECT: HAWAII GOVERNOR LINGLE VISITS INDONESIA:  NATIONAL 
GUARD PARTNERSHIP, TSUNAMI WARNING, DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
 
¶1. Hawaii Governor Linda Lingle (R) in Jakarta on June 10-12 
explored potential partnerships related to disaster 
preparedness, investment and trade, women's leadership, 
health, education and regional development.  Her 
interlocutors included Vice President Kalla, Defense Minister 
Sudarsono, Legislative Foreign and Security Affairs Committee 
Chairman Sambuaga, Aceh Provincial Governor Irwandi Yusuf, 
officials at the Department of Marine Affairs and Fisheries 
and AmCham leaders.  The highlight of the visit was the 
inauguration of the State Partnership Program (SPP) between 
the Hawaii National Guard and the Indonesian Armed Forces 
(TNI), in coordination with the U.S. Pacific Command 
(USPACOM).  Hawaii National Guard Adjutant General Robert 
Lee, who accompanied the Governor, met separately with TNI 
officials on modalities for the SPP.  AmCham Board members 
expressed concern over possible new restrictions on U.S. 
military assistance to Indonesia and Governor Lingle said she 
would lobby Hawaii Senator Daniel Inouye to oppose such 
restrictions. 
 
¶2. Lingle also discussed disaster preparedness, including the 
Hawaii-based Pacific Ocean Early Warning System (EWS), with 
GOI officials.  Governor Lingle held a Women Leaders' Forum 
with prominent Indonesian senior and future women leaders and 
announced plans to invite Indonesian women to her Fourth 
Annual International Women's Leadership Conference in 
Honolulu in September.  A roundtable discussion with the 
Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) will be 
reported septel.  End summary. 
 
MEETING WITH VICE PRESIDENT KALLA 
 
¶3. Governor Lingle discussed disaster relief, economic 
development and tourism with Indonesian Vice President Yusuf 
Kalla.  On disaster relief, the Vice President said the 
military remained the most capable force in Indonesia for 
disaster relief and humanitarian assistance and was therefore 
an appropriate counterpart for the State Partnership Program. 
 The Governor described how the National Guard in the United 
States could be mobilized by both the federal and state 
governments.  Kalla said local governments in Indonesia did 
not have access to any such force; although the TNI had a 
network of territorial commands, TNI forces remained formally 
under the control of the national government, although they 
could be and often were detailed to assist local civilian 
authorities. 
 
¶4. On the economy, Kalla said foreign investment was 
particularly welcome in fossil fuel extraction, palm oil 
plantations, mining, manufacturing and tourism.  The Governor 
mentioned deep-water fish farming and bio-diesel processing 
as two areas in which Hawaiian businesses could provide 
expertise to Indonesia.  On tourism, the VP described the 
various security improvements in Bali since 2002 and quipped 
that the U.S. travel warning represented a "success" for the 
terrorists since it had dissuaded Americans from visiting 
Indonesia.  Bali had the highest ratio of police to 
population, he said, and security had been tightened at 
airports and seaports. 
 
DPR COMMISSION CHAIRMAN THEO SAMBUAGA 
 
¶5. Governor Lingle told Theo Sambuaga, Chairman of the 
Foreign Affairs and Security Commission in the Indonesian 
legislature (DPR) that Hawaii wanted to cooperate with 
Indonesia on avian influenza, to which Hawaii's isolated bird 
species were especially vulnerable.  Sambuaga welcomed this 
and said Indonesia was very much in need of cooperation on 
AI.  On defense cooperation, Sambuaga noted that Indonesia 
needed assistance in maintaining Indonesia's ageing fleet of 
U.S. F-16, F-5 and C-130 aircraft and was working with the 
Pentagon to obtain the necessary parts.  Underscoring the 
dampening effect of the State Department's travel warning on 
Indonesia, Sambuaga urged that it be relaxed.  Lingle said 
the warning had recently been softened and said she 
personally encouraged all Americans to visit Indonesia in 
order to witness its transformation. 
 
STATE PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM AND DEFENSE ASSISTANCE 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶6. DEFENSE MINISTER SUDARSONO:  Governor Lingle and Defense 
Minister Dr. Juwono Sudarsono inaugurated a joint State 
Partnership Program (SPP) between the Hawaii National Guard 
and the Indonesian Armed Forces (TNI).  Lingle described the 
National Guard's role in disaster relief and cited the 
 
JAKARTA 00001835  002 OF 003 
 
 
experience of recent earthquakes in Hawaii, which had 
occurred in remote areas, as an example.  Major General 
Robert Lee noted that the Hawaiian National Guard had Army 
and Air Force units but no Navy component.  Although small, 
Hawaii was an archipelago of islands like Indonesia.  This 
made the Hawaii National Guard a natural partner for the TNI. 
 
¶7. Defense Minister Juwono Sudarsono described Indonesia as a 
poor country.  One priority was to reform the judicial 
infrastructure and to make the rule of law affordable to all. 
 Although Indonesia had a large Muslim majority, it was not 
an Islamic state and Indonesians espoused religious 
tolerance.  Some political parties advocated the 
establishment of sharia law, but those parties were losing 
public support.  The TNI's job was to defend the integrity of 
the Indonesian state.  Indonesia welcomed assistance in the 
training of its military officers. 
 
¶8. At the press conference, Sudarsono explained that it 
focused on military-to-military, military-to-civilian and 
civilian-to-civilian cooperation.  Military-to-military 
initiatives emphasized professional development for officers 
and NCOs.  Military-to-civilian activities included 
preparation for military support to civilian authorities 
during times of natural disaster.  The civilian-to-civilian 
activities included exchanges in domestic emergency 
readiness, search and rescue operations and enhancement of 
democratic institutions.  Governor Lingle thanked Sudarsono 
for the opportunity to partner with Indonesia and welcomed 
his proposal to cooperate on disaster response and search and 
rescue.  She announced that the first event, beginning in 
July, would entail training on helicopter maintenance in 
Hawaii. 
 
¶9. TEMPEST EXPRESS EXERCISE:  Separately, Governor Lingle 
visited and received a briefing on a disaster relief workshop 
(Tempest Express 12) which was being held in Jakarta during 
the week of her visit, as an example of the sort of 
activities conducted by the U.S. Pacific Command (USPACOM) 
and the TNI in which the Hawaii National Guard could 
participate. 
 
¶10. TERRITORIAL SYSTEM:  MG Lee met separately with 
Hotmangaradja Pandjaitan, Commander of the Army Territorial 
Center, which oversees Indonesia's far-flung network of 
territorial commands.  Lee briefed on the structure, 
functions and role of the National Guard and Panjaitan 
described the Territorial System.  Lee said the National 
Guard was looking forward to sharing its expertise with the 
TNI.  The discussion pointed up differences between the TNI's 
centralized structure, while the National Guard was organized 
at the state level and subordinate to state governors.  Lee 
noted the interaction might open a way for development of an 
Indonesian force which could respond directly to local 
civilian authorities regarding disaster relief.  He toured 
the Indonesian National Defense Institute (LEMHANAS) and 
discussed the program of instruction.  Adjutant Major Toto 
Riyanto, the school's Deputy Governor, invited the Hawaii 
National Guard to send a guest lecturer to the institute, 
which Lee said he would consider. 
 
FISHERIES, DISASTER MANAGEMENT AND TSUNAMI EARLY WARNING 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶11. DEPARTMENT OF MARINE AFFAIRS AND FISHERIES:  Dr. Gellwynn 
Jusaf in the Department of Marine Affairs and Fisheries 
described legal reforms under way to protect and improve 
Indonesia's ocean resources.  A Fisheries Management Act 
passed in 2006 reserved primary access to Indonesia's 
fisheries for domestic enterprises and international partners 
interested in developing value-added products with Indonesia. 
 A National Coastal Zone Management Law, developed with USAID 
assistance and slated for enactment later in June 2007, was 
patterned after the U.S. Coastal Zone Management Act. 
Gellwynn noted the department had a number of exchanges and 
partnerships with the University of Hawaii and other agencies 
located in Hawaii.  He also said Indonesia would host the 
Global Ocean Summit in Manado, North Sulawesi in 2009.  The 
Governor outlined potential areas of future collaboration, 
including developing off-shore deep-water aquaculture, 
protecting and empowering coastal communities and enhancing 
the role of the radio internet (RANET) system in Indonesia's 
Tsunami Early Warning System to improve its service to small 
 
SIPDIS 
islands. 
 
¶12. NATIONAL DIASTER MANAGEMENT AGENCY:  The Governor met 
 
JAKARTA 00001835  003 OF 003 
 
 
with officials from the Indonesian Coordinating Agency for 
Disaster Management (BAKORNAS) to compare U.S. and Indonesian 
practices in coordinating command and control of emergencies. 
 BAKORNAS officials said the Indonesian Disaster Management 
Law enacted in March 2007 had expanded BAKORNAS' scope of 
disaster-response activities to include preparedness, 
mitigation, response, recovery and rehabilitation.  The 
restructuring process was to be completed by October 2007. 
The agency was also in the process of adopting a 
U.S.-developed Incident Command System (ICS) as the agency's 
approach to command and control in disaster response.  The 
ICS was particularly useful in integrating military and 
civilian logistics and activities.  The Governor noted 
Hawaii's expertise in ICS training and civil-military DR 
coordination, described the importance of the National Guard 
as a first responder and discussed practical aspects of 
coordinating military and civilian responses. 
 
¶13. BUREAU OF METEOROLOGY AND GEOPHYSICS:  Director General 
Sri Woro of the Indonesian Bureau of Meteorology and 
Geophysics (BMG) hosted a briefing and discussion for the 
Governor and Dr. Charles McCreery of the Pacific Tsunami 
Early Warning Center in Hawaii.  Participants compared the 
Indonesian and Hawaiian early-warning systems.  Other topics 
were the mechanics of transmitting warnings from national to 
provincial and local authorities and the handling of "false" 
warnings.  Although Hawaii was already providing assistance 
in this area, as none of Indonesia's provinces yet possessed 
a functional TEWS, much remained to be done.  The Hawaii TEWS 
and its services to Indonesia figured prominently in a 
subsequent press conference with Indonesian media. 
 
WOMEN'S LEADERSHIP PROMOTION 
 
¶14. Governor Lingle met with over a dozen prominent 
Indonesian women leaders to discuss the role of women in 
government, education, business, publishing, broadcasting and 
law.  Other topics included Indonesia's high illiteracy and 
maternal mortality rates, human trafficking, domestic abuse 
and prosecution of sexual crimes.  Key observations: 
 
-- Indonesia has the highest maternal mortality rate in ASEAN. 
-- Many international organizations are helping with maternal 
health, including with mid-wife programs. 
-- Males take priority in education; if money is short for 
school fees, sons are given preference. 
-- Traditional thinking is still a great obstacle for women 
in Indonesia. 
-- Women prosecutors tend to handle cases in which women are 
the victims, such as trafficking and rape. 
-- A gender bias still exists in many organizations in 
Indonesia, where women are expected to do more menial work. 
 
The Governor announced plans to convene the Fourth Annual 
International Women's Leadership Conference in Honolulu on 
September 25. 
 
ACEH GOVERNOR IRWANDI YUSUF 
 
¶15. Governor Lingle met in Jakarta with Irwandi Yusuf, the 
recently elected Governor of Aceh Province, to discuss 
possible cooperation.  Irwandi described a new program with 
Aceh banks to provide subsidized credits to the poor through 
micro-loans with no collateral and a five-percent interest 
rate.  The program had been immensely popular, with 60,000 
borrowers registered so far.  Lingle outlined three potential 
areas of assistance:  1) investments by Dole or another 
company in the processing of agricultural products, 2) 
university scholarships and exchanges, including with the 
University of Hawaii's Tropical Agriculture Department and 3) 
deep-ocean aquafarming, which raised fish in large underwater 
cages and shipped them live to Japan for sashimi.  Irwandi 
Yusuf expressed interest in this technology and requested 
more information.  (Note:  Embassy is following up with 
Governor's office to explore this further.) 
HUME