07KABUL1036
PRT MEHTARLAM: SIX MONTH REPORT ON SECURITY,
Thu Mar 29 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO8656
RR RUEHDBU RUEHIK RUEHYG
DE RUEHBUL #1036/01 0880957
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 290957Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7150
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3888
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 KABUL 001036 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SCA/FO DAS GASTRIGHT, SCA/A 
STATE PASS TO USAID FOR AID/ANE, AID/DCHA/DG 
NSC FOR HARRIMAN 
OSD FOR SHIVERS 
CENTCOM FOR CG CJTF-82 POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MCAP MOPS PREL PGOV PTER PHUM AF
SUBJECT: PRT MEHTARLAM: SIX MONTH REPORT ON SECURITY, 
POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS 
 
REF: A. KABUL 5651 
     ¶B. KABUL 4327 
 
¶1. (SBU)  Summary.  Laghman province is positioned to take 
advantage of new attention to governing capacity and 
increases in developmental funding after heightened 
anti-government activity in 2006.  The security situation 
worsened somewhat in the second half of 2006 due to limited 
Coalition presence and lack of Afghan National Security 
Forces (ANSF) capacity.  A major security operation in 
December stabilized the situation and with the exception of 
a heightened IED threat, 2007 thus far has seen a drop-off 
in attack levels.  Poppy cultivation continues at low 
levels in Laghman but provincial leadership is dedicated to 
its eradication.  Governor Gulab Mangal and the Provincial 
Development Council are beginning to provide strong 
leadership in setting provincial developmental priorities. 
The Afghan Army and Police are showing some improvement 
through PRT assistance and a new commander but progress is 
gradual.  Laghman's agrarian economy has potential but 
needs infrastructure development.  The provincial 
government has established some interim developmental 
priorities focused on road and agricultural infrastructure 
that will greatly assist the PRT with CERP, USAID, and 
other donors in providing reconstruction funding.  The 
electrical power grid and media capacity are set to 
expand.  Women's affairs programs suffer from lack of 
capacity.  End Summary. 
 
Security -- Early Improvement After Heightened 2006 
Anti-Government Activity 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) The security situation in Laghman province has 
improved slightly from the heightened  levels of 
anti-government activity expierienced in 2006.  Local 
insurgent activity is led by the Taliban and the Hezb-I 
Islami Gulbuddin (HIG) with most of the financing coming 
from the Taliban via outside sources.  Casualties and lack 
of funding limited PRT reconstruction efforts and outreach 
in the second half of 2006.  IED attacks increased in the 
fall and included an unsuccessful assassination attempt 
against Governor Mangal that resulted in the death of a 
provincial government engineer (reftel A).  Coalition 
operations in late 2006 directly affected insurgent 
leadership and their ability to conduct operations in the 
province.  There have been no attacks directed against the 
PRT in 2007.  Governor Mangal, Chief of Police Abdul Kariem 
Omaryar, and PRT mobile patrols report that the population 
no longer lists security as a leading concern; obtaining 
sufficient job opportunities and health care are now the 
biggest priorities. 
 
IED Attacks Slowed Pace of Reconstruction in 2006 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶3. (SBU) During November and December of 2006, the IED 
threat intensified due to the presence of an active IED 
cell in Laghman.  Earlier in the year, the regional IED 
threat focused on Nuristan Province and the Korengal 
District of Kunar province to Laghman's north and east and 
the IED cells targeted heavily transited routes and 
Coalition/ISAF patrols.  The IED threat remained constant 
throughout the summer and did not change until late October 
2006 when the insurgents shifted their focus to Laghman 
because they perceived the province as a safe haven and saw 
fresh targeting opportunities including the main road in 
Alingar District.  The introduction of a large ISAF led 
operation in Alishang District in late 2006 prompted the 
insurgents to introduce an IED cell with an increased 
capability into Mehtarlam District.    This cell targeted 
the two roads transiting Alingar and Alishang because they 
are the only means of moving vehicle traffic along river 
valley routes and the volume of Coalition/ISAF and GoA 
traffic has increased.  The Alingar road will continue to 
be a location for IEDs as more supplies and material are 
 
KABUL 00001036  002 OF 007 
 
 
moved into Nuristan province and northern Alingar. 
 
Poppy Cultivation Ongoing, Eradication Efforts Are Strong 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Poppy cultivation continues at low levels in 
Laghman but provincial leadership is dedicated to its 
eradication.  The major cultivation areas are in Dawlet 
Shah and Alingar Districts with smaller amounts cultivated 
in the outlying regions of Alishang District.  Insurgents 
cultivate poppy to finance illegal weapons trafficking and 
have recently increased their efforts to safeguard the crop 
from eradication.  Governor Mangal is strongly opposed to 
poppy cultivation.  The provincial government qualified for 
USD 150,000 from the Good Performers Program because less 
than 1,000 hectares of poppy was harvested in 2006.  (UNODC 
statistics report that Laghman's total cultivation area was 
2,750 hectares in 2004 and 709 hectares in 2006.)  Governor 
Mangal and the Director of Agriculture, Hussin Safi 
estimate that over 300 additional hectares of poppy have 
been eradicated in early 2007. 
 
New Attention to Governing Capacity 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) Provincial Governor Gulab Mangal has begun to 
provide strong leadership in setting provincial 
developmental priorities.  Governor Mangal demonstrates 
interest and skill in including departmental directors, 
district governors, and village elders in discussions about 
provincial priorities.  His abilities are based in part on 
his prior experience as a member of the Emergency Loya 
Jirga, South East Regional Coordinator for the 2002 
Constitutional Commission, and his recent tenure as 
Governor of Paktika province.  Mangal informed PRToff that 
he has no family or other political ties to President 
Karzai and believed Karzai chose him for his current 
appointment based on past good performance.  He added that 
he intends to stay in the job until told his services are 
no longer needed.  His current focus is on power, roads, 
and education. 
 
Afghan Army and Police Showing Some Progress 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) The capabilities of the Afghan National Army 
(ANA), Afghan National Police (ANP) and NDS in Laghman has 
fluctuated since the summer of 2006.  The ANA rotated four 
new companies through the province during the last ten 
months.  While the operational capabilities have increased 
within each company, this rotation negatively impacted the 
coordination between the ANA, ANP, and NDS. 
 
¶7. (SBU) ANP performance improved with the arrival of 
provincial Chief of Police Abdul Kariem Omaryar in October 
¶2006.  The ANP have steadily increased their capabilities 
over the last ten months and, with the exception of the 
Dawlet Shah District, are now able to project their 
influence into all of the districts with limited success. 
The major problems with the ANP continue to include a lack 
of adequate equipment and corruption.  The ANP are more 
capable of providing security of the district centers, 
however, beyond those locations, their capabilities are 
severely limited.  PRT officials considered Omaryar's 
predecessor, Mohammed Leqha, somewhat effective but very 
corrupt (reftel B).  The PRT is enhancing the ANP's public 
standing and capability with its Police Training Assessment 
Team (PTAT) course on police tactics and procedures.  The 
course focuses on imparting police ethics, professional 
image and basic techniques to include suspect and vehicle 
searches and patrolling.  Graduates will train fellow ANP 
officers when they return to their duties.  The PRT plans 
to conduct two 10-15 man courses per month throughout the 
spring.  A provincial communications center building built 
with CERP funds in Mehtarlam will enhance capability by 
allowing Afghan security forces to coordinate responses to 
 
KABUL 00001036  003 OF 007 
 
 
provincial emergencies. 
 
Agrarian Economy Has Potential, Needs Infrastructure 
Development 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶8. (U) According to provincial government statistics, 80 
percent of Laghman's population of 593,000 depends on 
agriculture and animal husbandry for their livelihood 
according to provincial government statistics.  The main 
crops produced from about 116,000 hectares of cultivatable 
land are wheat, rice, corn, beans, various vegetables and 
cheese.  Laghman has significant water resources; however, 
inadequate and badly damaged irrigation systems limit 
farmers' ability to harness the resource effectively.  One 
of the most common requests from provincial officials and 
citizens and one of the most promising options for 
increasing agricultural output is the construction of 
dams.  However, the lack of hydrological and seismologic 
data makes donors unwilling to fund such activity. 
According to the province's Director of Agriculture, a lack 
of improved wheat seeds and modern agriculture machinery 
poses a significant challenge for Laghman's farmers. 
Inadequate roads and electricity limit access to markets 
from remote areas and make it difficult to establish a 
manufacturing base.  The last industrial plant, a plastics 
factory, closed when it could not compete with Pakistani 
firms.  The provincial Director of Economics stated that 
the province would like to open a plant to process 
sugarcane when sufficient power sources become available. 
An early draft of a provincial development strategy 
identifies shrinking job opportunities as the cause for 
Laghman's youth either traveling to foreign countries to 
seek jobs or resorting to illegal activities. 
 
Governor Mangal and PDC Energizing Reconstruction Efforts 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶9. (U) Laghman made strides in setting priorities for 
reconstruction efforts over the last six months.  In August 
and September 2006, the USAID Field Program Officer (FPO) 
from Jalalabad led a strategic planning workshop that 
involved over 60 Laghman government officials, ulema, and 
top elders.  These sessions yielded a consensus list of 
strategic development goals to form the basis of a 
provincial development plan.  However, from late September 
through December, MRRD in Kabul did not provide a mentoring 
team to guide the interim PDC through the Provincial 
Development Plan building process. 
 
¶10. (U) The addition of a USAID FPO to the PRT and a visit 
from the CJTF-82 commander seeking CERP funding proposals, 
have motivated provincial leadership to identify 
reconstruction priorities and begin drafting a provincial 
development strategy.  The provincial government considered 
its developmental priorities in coordination with UNAMA, 
USAID, the MRRD, and the PRT.  Projects were identified in 
part for their ability to address specific criteria 
proposed by CJTF-82, including their likelihood for 
providing short and long term economic and security 
benefits.  The process identified three projects for road 
construction, three projects for water supply, four 
projects for flood protection, and a request for heavy 
equipment to assist in planting and harvesting.  A more 
comprehensive provincial development plan addressing 
security, governance, social and economic sector issues is 
currently underway.  Participants are presently awaiting 
additional guidance and training from the MRRD in Kabul. 
 
¶11. (U) The top priority is the widening, leveling and 
surfacing of a 46 kilometer road from Mehtarlam, the 
provincial capital, to the Dawlet Shah District Center. 
Approximately USD 8 million of CERP funding for the road is 
pending CJTF-82 approval - roughly enough for the stretch 
from Mehtarlam to the upper Alishang river valley (between 
the Alishang and Dawlet Shah District centers).  This 
 
KABUL 00001036  004 OF 007 
 
 
funding level would be enough to connect two of Laghman's 
five district centers, Mehtarlam and Alishang, and more 
than 100 villages, facilitating access to markets and 
services for more than 50,000 people.  The existing road is 
unimproved, extremely rocky and uneven, narrow and 
degrading rapidly.  In some areas it is simply the clearest 
path through large boulders.  An improved road would also 
provide faster and safer access for ANA, ANP, and ISAF 
forces to remote and unstable areas in the northeast of the 
province.  The road priority complements the USD 8.4 
million Army Corp of Engineer project to widen and 
resurface the road from Mehtarlam to Nuristan province in 
Alingar District scheduled for completion in September 
¶2007. 
 
¶12. (U) CJTF-82 approved USD 500,000 in CERP funds at the 
beginning of January 2007 for the PRT and is reviewing an 
additional USD 1.5 million for projects identified above as 
priorities by Governor Mangal and the PDC.  Projects under 
consideration for funding include the Gonapal Road and 
Dumbulam Bridge in Alishang District as well as another 
road and vehicle bridge in the Kundagal valley.  Both 
projects would help extend government presence and market 
access to two remote valleys and enhance security in these 
areas.  Other projects address PDC requests for flood 
protection walls, improvements to irrigation systems and 
canals, refurbishment of buildings to establish a 
provincial motor pool maintenance facility, and purchase of 
five tractors and associated equipment. 
 
¶13. (U) Prior CERP projects have also focused on current 
provincial development priorities.  CERP funds have 
supported 50 projects worth USD 1.77 million during FY06 
and FY07 with an emphasis on roads, bridges, the power 
grid, and water infrastructure.  The PRT has also 
concentrated CERP expenditures on education, health care, 
religious, and government related projects. 
 
¶14. (U) USAID has already provided USD 6.5 million toward 
provincial development goals under the Alternative 
Livelihoods Program (ALP) during FY 05 and 06.  A similar 
amount is budgeted for FY 07.  Examples of ALP programs in 
Laghman include infrastructure development, cash-for-work, 
fruit orchard development, and institutional management 
training classes for the provincial government. 
 
¶15. (U) In spring 2007, USAID is implementing 5 projects 
worth about USD 470,000 under the Local Governance and 
Community Development Program (LGCD) focused on 
constructing irrigation canals and flood protection walls. 
An assessment of provincial and municipal capacity to 
deliver services and address citizen needs is currently 
underway and should be completed in April, 2007.   Once the 
assessment is complete future LGCD projects in the area of 
capacity building for such institutions will be considered. 
 
Electricity Slowly Becoming Available 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶16. (U) Laghman is slowly obtaining greater access to power 
through grid construction in Mehtarlam and PRT-funded 
micro-hydro projects.  Power distribution in the province 
is limited to Mehtarlam, the provincial capital.  The 
Russians installed the original power grid in 1984 with the 
intent of covering Mehtarlam District and used six 160 
kilowatt Czechoslovakian generator sets as the primary 
power source.  The original power cables were subterranean 
and supplied power to an ice factory, plastics shop, metal 
fabricators, carpenters and a few residences.  During war 
with the Soviets and under Taliban rule, rocket attacks 
against one of the power plants, stolen parts, and cut 
cables gradually degraded the system.  Makeshift repairs 
did little to keep the system up and running. 
 
¶17. (U) The PRT has made initial efforts to reconstruct the 
power grid in Mehtarlam.  In May 2006, the preceding PRT 
 
KABUL 00001036  005 OF 007 
 
 
command signed a contract for rebuilding the electric 
transmission distribution network that will provide 800 
homes with power.  A new 250 kilovolt CAT diesel and 
another new 500 kilovolt generator will power the system. 
In addition to the city system, there are about 100 
micro-hydro plants (MHP) in the province built with funding 
from the PRT, the NSP program, or individual communities. 
The Mehtarlam project has been slow to take off since the 
contractor lacks the experience and technical guidance to 
handle safety issues.  With additional PRT funding and 
technical assistance, the project will add greatly to 
Mehtarlam's power infrastructure. 
 
¶18. (U) The PRT is addressing the heavy reliance on small 
individually owned diesel generators for power in the rest 
of the province.  The PRT has completed or started eight 
MHPs in Laghman; these water driven turbines each generate 
15-25 kilowatts and power 25-300 houses.  Most residents 
pay approximately 30-60 Afghanis a month for a light bulb 
used mostly at night.  During the day the channeled water 
can also be used for operating a grinding mill or hot water 
tank for washing clothes.  In addition to the PRT-provided 
MHPs, there are a couple of cases, such as the village of 
Ghaziabad in Alishang District, where private citizens have 
invested in their own MHPs and charge approximately 60 
Afghani per month to power their village from a pair of 7.5 
kilovolt systems.  This is a model that the PRT is pointing 
out to other villages as an example of how to keep their 
MHP profitable and operational once it is up and running. 
 
¶19. (U) In the medium term, Laghman may acquire additional 
power resources.  In 2010, a main power grid from the 
Surobi Dam is slated to bring power up from Qarghayi 
District to Mehtarlam. The extent of the transmission line 
is unknown at this time. 
 
Refugee Returns Ebb, Possible Small Surge in 2007 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶20. (U) UNHCR-Jalalabad reports that Laghman has aQeady 
received most of the returnees expected in the province and 
UNHCR is closing out most of its project activities.  From 
2002 to October 2006, 648,169 persons or 115,400 families 
have returned to Laghman.  Of this total, 3,501 persons or 
569 families returned in 2006 (March-October timeframe). 
Returnee totals are divided evenly along gender lines. 
UNHCR anticipates the 2007 closure of two refugee camps in 
Peshawar that may result in up to 30,000 returnees to the 
eastern provinces covered by the Jalalabad office.  Laghman 
would be a likely recipient of some portion of this 
amount. 
 
¶21. (U) UNHCR is phasing out its activity in Laghman in 
relation to the overall decrease in the returnee rate and 
plans to end project support in 2007.  In 2006, UNHCR 
coordinated its general support of returnees with the MRRD 
and provided 340 shelters for returnees throughout Laghman 
but the majority of assistance focused on projects in 
Mehtarlam and Qarghayi Districts.  UNHCR assistance in 
these two districts included resettlement of 18 families 
relocating from Kabul to Qarghayi, a beekeeping project for 
income generation, food distribution, two school tents, a 
protection wall, and a micro-hydro plant. 
 
Women's Issues Need More Attention 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶22. (U) Provincial government interest in promoting women's 
affairs remains a low priority.  The Director of Women's 
Affairs lacks capacity to plan and organize projects and 
was sent by Kabul-based officials without a program budget 
and told to approach the PRT for resources.  Outreach from 
the PRT military officer for humanitarian affairs is one of 
the only sources of assistance and mentoring support in the 
last year.  Recent activities include DAI (USAID 
implementing partner) funded English training classes for 
 
KABUL 00001036  006 OF 007 
 
 
female employees of the Department of Women's Affairs, a 
skills training program supported by Afghan Blind 
Migration, and a celebration of International Woman's Day. 
However, the province needs effective leadership and 
additional funding to create more opportunities in this 
area. 
 
Media Outreach Will Expand With New Radio Transmitters 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶23. (U) Radio, television, and print media exist to varying 
degrees in Laghman.  The province has one 150 watt 
transmitter (97.2 FM) that operates for six hours a day and 
offers music and limited newscasts developed at the 
provincial level; there are no rebroadcasts of Kabul 
programs.  Current transmissions cover only the central 
portion of Laghman although listeners can receive 
broadcasts from neighboring provinces depending on 
location.  Residents in the Najil area of the upper 
Alishang district told PRToff that they cannot receive 
radio transmissions for example.  A USD 350,000 CERP 
project will expand radio coverage by adding two 500 watt 
transmitters and broadcast center building in Mehtarlam and 
repeaters in Alishang and Dawlet Shah Districts by April 
¶2007.  One of the transmitters will be government owned; 
the other will be an independent radio station.  (Comment: 
Governor Mangal debuted a weekly call-in radio show on 
January 29, a welcome development since he has not been 
using this resource to communicate his vision for the 
province or progress on security or reconstruction 
efforts.  End Comment.) 
 
¶24. (U) Television and especially print media remain 
underdeveloped and provincial directors lack capacity to 
marshal resources to widen their use.  Television from 
Kabul is rebroadcast for two hours a day and there is 
widespread interest in watching.  Print media is nearly 
nonexistent; the government produces about 1000 copies of 
the provincial newspaper two times per month, Alingar 
District issues an occasional magazine, and Mehtarlam has 
an occasional paper aimed at young adults.  Printing 
services are contracted in Kabul and Jalalabad due to the 
lack of printing presses in the province.  The Directors of 
Radio/TV and Information/Culture do not have sufficient 
capacity to develop media resources or communication 
strategies.  Governor Mangal would like to replace them. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶25. (U) There is good reason to be cautiously optimistic 
about the future of Laghman province   Governor Mangal is a 
positive influence and new capacity building efforts will 
likely improve the effectiveness of the PDC, subject to the 
constraints posed by a lack of financial resources and 
authority.  The noticeable lack of NGO presence needs 
attention and is a potential significant source of funding 
and capacity building, particularly in the areas of women's 
affairs, health, and education.  Laghman's agrarian economy 
has potential to expand and provide job growth.  New 
infrastructure and investment are vital to maintain gains 
in counterinsurgency efforts.  Laghman's population is 
telling us that jobs are their main concern, not security, 
but the province needs to maintain the current reduction 
from the 2006 threat level to allow reconstruction to 
progress rapidly and extend the reach of the government to 
remote areas.  PRT efforts to train the ANA and ANP and 
build their professional image are vital in this regard. 
The population residing nearby specific development 
projects appears grateful.  However, more could be done to 
build general awareness of the total ISAF and GoA effort 
throughout the province.  Governor Mangal's recent radio 
outreach is a step in the right direction but we should 
seek out opportunities to advertise successes through 
public speaking and media outreach. 
 
 
KABUL 00001036  007 OF 007 
 
 
NEUMANN