07KABUL1574
MESHRANO JIRGA "DRAFT RESOLUTION" ON RECONCILIATION
Wed May 09 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO0436
OO RUEHDBU RUEHIK RUEHPW RUEHYG
DE RUEHBUL #1574/01 1291901
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 091901Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7956
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASH DC PRIORITY
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHMFISS/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY 0023
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 4047UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 KABUL 001574 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SCA/FO DAS GASTRIGHT, SCA/A 
STATE PASS TO USAID FOR AID/ANE, AID/DCHA/DG 
NSC FOR HARRIMAN 
OSD FOR SHIVERS 
CENTCOM FOR CG CFC-A, CG CJTF-76 POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PGOV PHUM PREL AF
SUBJECT: MESHRANO JIRGA "DRAFT RESOLUTION" ON RECONCILIATION 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) Meetings with a member of the Meshrano Jirga 
(Upper House of Parliament) and a senior Parliamentary 
staffer provided some clarity on the intent of the 
reconciliation resolution passed on May 8.  According 
to these contacts, the intent of the resolution passed 
by the Meshrano Jirga was to support discussions 
between the Government of Afghanistan (GoA) and 
insurgents who are Afghan nationals, in order to 
encourage reconciliation and national unity.  The 
resolution (informal translation at para 12) calls on 
Coalition forces to cease operations against 
insurgents as long as Coalition forces are not under 
attack.  Our contacts explained this is meant to 
ensure that Coalition forces would not target 
insurgents who are faithfully participating in the 
reconciliation process.  The resolution also states 
that, once Afghan security forces are capable of 
defending Afghanistan, a schedule for drawing down 
foreign troops should be established.  End Summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) According to Senator Abdul Khaliq Husaini, 
the Second Secretary of the Meshrano Jirga (Upper 
House), the issue of reconciliation has been the 
subject of much discussion over the past five months. 
As a result, the National Reconciliation Commission 
was established, comprised of representatives of other 
Meshrano Jirga commissions.  A core group of 40-50 
senators expressed strong support for the concept of 
opening the door for discussions (leading to 
reconciliation) with any Afghan insurgent.  During 
deliberations on the floor of the Meshrano Jirga, the 
resolution received unanimous support - 72 of 72 
senators in attendance voted in favor.  (Note: 
Although press reports have referred to the 
"Reconciliation Bill", the language that was voted on 
is translated as "the draft".  We have not received 
confirmation that the text is, in fact, a draft bill, 
and accordingly, use the term "resolution."  End 
Note.) 
 
Key Points of the Resolution 
---------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Afghan vs. Other Insurgents: The resolution 
distinguishes between Afghan and non-Afghan 
insurgents. According to Mr. Mulki Khan Shinwari, 
Director of the International Relations Department of 
the Meshrano Jirga (the office responsible for liaison 
with the international community), this distinction 
was fundamental to many senators' support.  The 
resolution states that Afghan insurgents oppose (the 
current) government, while Pakistan Taliban and the 
al-Qaeda network are enemies of "the Afghan nation." 
According to the resolution, the GoA should find ways 
to negotiate with Afghan insurgents towards 
the end of reconciliation, peace, and support for the 
current government.  The government should not attempt 
to negotiate with Pakistan Taliban and al-Qaeda. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Activity of Coalition Forces: The resolution 
stipulates "military operations of the coalition and 
Afghan forces should be stopped as long as they are 
not attacked."  Both Senator Husaini and Mr. Shinwari 
clarified the intent of this language - that after an 
Afghan insurgent has entered into negotiations or 
reconciliation with the GoA, and if that insurgent is 
not actively attacking the Coalition, he should not be 
targeted by Coalition or Afghan forces.  This language 
 
KABUL 00001574  002 OF 005 
 
 
refers to specific operations not the general 
operations/presence of Coalition forces in 
Afghanistan.  They also pointed out that the 
resolution acknowledges (implicitly) that Coalition 
and Afghan forces should defend themselves if 
attacked. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Withdrawal of Coalition Forces: The 
resolution calls for the strengthening of the ANA and 
ANP and states that once Afghanistan has security 
forces sufficient to operate independently against the 
threats the nation faces, a gradual plan for 
withdrawal of Coalition forces should be established. 
Senator Husaini emphasized that this is not expected 
to occur over the near-term. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Clauses Not Covered by the Media: The 
resolution mentions other steps that that would 
contribute to peace in Afghanistan including the 
repatriation of refugees, showing more Islamic TV 
programs, building more Afghan schools and Madrassas 
(Note: Madrassa is the term used for all religious 
schools/seminaries as opposed to secular schools.  End 
note.), and negotiating with regional neighbors. 
 
Relationship to the Amnesty Bill 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Senator Husaini stated that there was 
overwhelming support for this reconciliation concept 
because it attempts to end internal war and bloodshed. 
As such, this reconciliation resolution is meant to 
benefit all Afghans.  He contrasted this to the 
Amnesty Law (reftel Kabul 834 and 1246), which he 
said benefited only a handful of people.  For this 
reason, a number of senators who voted against the 
Amnesty Law, including the Senator Husaini, voted in 
favor of this language. 
 
Mechanics and Way Ahead 
----------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) According to Mr. Shinwari, the draft that was 
passed yesterday is not the final version that will be 
sent to the Wolesi Jirga.  Other commissions will have 
the opportunity to add language to this resolution, 
via weekly meetings of Meshrano Jirga Commissions' 
Chairmen.  If any additions are proposed, the entire 
Meshrano Jirga would have to vote on the new language. 
But, none of the language that was approved yesterday 
can be removed.  Once the resolution is finalized, it 
will be forwarded to the Wolesi Jirga and, if it is 
approved in the lower house, to the President.  (Note: 
Articles 95 and 97 of the Constitution stipulate that 
legislation can be originated in either house.  End 
note.) 
 
Comment: 
------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) A number of press reports characterize this 
resolution as more extreme than explanations offered 
by our contacts at the Meshrano Jirga.  While the 
logic and language of the text is far from clear, the 
resolution, as explained to us, is not inconsistent 
with public statements made by President Karzai and 
other GoA officials, calling for outreach to encourage 
reconciliation, including through the PTS program. 
According to Senator Husaini and Mr. Shinwari, the 
language calling for a cessation of attacks on 
insurgents not attacking the coalition should be read 
in the context of the attempt to facilitate 
reconciliation.  There are undoubtedly as many agendas 
behind this resolution/bill as there are (and will be) 
interpretations of it.  Whether it will actually 
 
KABUL 00001574  003 OF 005 
 
 
encourage an increase in the number of Afghan 
insurgents willing to approach the government and turn 
away from violence remains to be seen. 
 
10  (SBU) Post will continue to engage Afghan 
leadership to reiterate the importance of 
distinguishing clearly between "negotiations" and 
"discussions leading to reconciliation."  We will also 
emphasize the imperative of avoiding restrictions on 
Coalition activities against insurgents.  End Comment. 
 
Unofficial Translation of the Resolution 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (U) Below is a preliminary draft translation of 
the preface and resolution.  A more precise 
translation will be forwarded separately. 
 
¶12. (U) Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, National 
Assembly, Upper House, National Reconciliation 
Commission, 1386 (2007) 
 
The question may rise, why the National Reconciliation 
Commission was formed in the framework of other 
commissions of Meshrano Jirga? 
 
The main cause for formation of such a commission is 
to analyze and study the incidents, events and 
happenings of the last few decades, specially the 
unrest of approximately five past years in the south, 
southwest and east of the country.  Now it is about to 
spread all over the country and this is to seek 
logical solutions to resolve these challenges. 
 
The commission prioritized those issues which ensure 
national interest, Afghan values, Afghan history and 
National sovereignty. We will try to consider internal 
and external dimension of war in a country with a 
logical balance, considering the current situation and 
various complications.  Also we want to carry out 
our responsibility before the existing and future 
generation of this country.  This is a heavy burden 
which has been laid on our shoulders; none of the 
members of the National Assembly of Afghanistan should 
ignore this responsibility.  We all are responsible 
and accountable before our people. 
 
Unfortunately, it has been common that Groups and 
Political Regimes have called themselves and / or 
their favorite party and government the saving angels 
for the people of Afghanistan and have addressed their 
opposition parties with such words and impolite ways 
that in courtesy is even not writable.  War is not 
the means to a solution.  War never has an ultimate 
winner; in war both parties are losers. The most 
important means to stop war and fratricide, in 
which the undefended Afghan nation is the victim, is 
discussion and mutual understanding between rival and 
engaged forces in the war.  Peaceful solutions for the 
cause of the disagreement can save our society from 
long lasting disasters that resulted to human loss, 
and loss to the economy, social and culture life. 
 
The main cause of war in Afghanistan 
 
We have not been able to understand each 
other yet.  We are just examining the culture of 
tolerance and sacrifice, but we have not succeeded. 
The general backwardness of our society, low level of 
political maturity, and an inappropriate understanding 
of society are the reasons that caused the current 
abnormal situation and continuation of war and 
violence in the country.  A wound can not be cured 
by stirring salt into it. 
 
 
KABUL 00001574  004 OF 005 
 
 
The following issues have also caused tension and 
instability in Afghanistan: 
 
a. Lack of complete implementation of a balanced 
internal policy; 
b. Lack of correct and reasonable realization of 
people's active participation in the government and 
its relations with the desires of society; 
c. Conducting a series of reforms in hurry, false 
movements and promises; 
d. Inadequate implementation of social, economical and 
cultural developments in accordance with the 
expectation and needs of people and in a timely 
manner; 
e. Inadequate usage of resources and paved conditions 
of international community for the reconstruction of 
country; and 
f. Lack of creating job opportunities and employment 
for the people. 
 
Therefore, the commission of National Reconciliation, 
considering the above mentioned points, has prepared a 
comprehensive and acceptable draft for all involved 
Afghan sides in consideration with social 
sensitivities which, God willing, will be enforced 
after approval of the general session of the Meshrano 
Jirga.  We emphasize that the most important need of 
the Afghan people in the current situation is ensuring 
peace and national unity and understanding. And 
ultimately if any one is asked, whether he/she prefers 
war or peace, everyone will say with one voice: peace 
 
The Draft 
 
First, members of the National Reconciliation 
Commission intend in consultation with the Upper, 
Lower House and the Government of Islamic Republic of 
Afghanistan, to work towards peace, security and 
reconciliation directly with all involved Afghan 
sides, and open the doors for negotiation and talks 
inside the country. 
 
An accurate and logical distinction should be made 
between Afghan Taliban, Pakistani Taliban and the 
terrorist Al-Qaida. 
 
Peace negotiation should only be held with Taliban and 
opponents who are Afghan nationals. 
 
Taliban and opponents should be convinced to obey and 
accept the constitution and other laws of Afghanistan 
and announce their support for the current 
government. 
 
We should listen to all reasonable and logical 
recommendations, ideas and drafts from all sides and 
should utilize them for ensuring peace and security in 
the country. 
 
Afghan Taliban are those individuals who are only 
fighting against the government, while the so called 
Pakistani Taliban and Al-Qaida network are those who 
in addition to fighting against our government, are 
also the enemy of our nation, people and our soil. 
 
Efforts should be made to give the Taliban and 
opponents a chance to initially express their demands 
and drafts during the negotiation. 
 
Preparing an organized program and negotiation with 
the international community and host countries for 
honorable repatriation of refugees and their placement 
in their original areas and creating proper job 
opportunities in accordance with their status in the 
country. 
 
KABUL 00001574  005 OF 005 
 
 
 
Censoring and preventing broadcast of commonplace 
(Mubtazal) films and TV programs that are aimed 
against the ideology, customs and Afghan culture, and 
which cause damage to the feelings of our people. 
There should be more Islamic religious programs on TV, 
which will be effective in bringing the people and 
government close to each other.  The cooperation of 
the Ministry of Information and Culture is needed in 
this regard. 
 
After approval, confirmation and announcement of a 
National Reconciliation Draft, the military operations 
of the coalition and Afghan forces should be stopped 
as long as they are not attacked. 
 
The Afghan National Army (ANA) and Afghan National 
Police (ANP) should be nationally strengthened, 
recruited and supplied. 
 
Upon the strengthening of the ANA and ANP, and gaining 
the ability to conduct operations independently 
against the threats of war, tension and terrorism, we 
will then be able to present a logical and timely 
schedule for NATO and Coalition Forces soldiers' exit 
and return to their countries. 
 
The government should take similar and balanced steps 
to built schools and Madrassas in all the regions of 
the country. The Afghan government should enroll those 
Afghan Taliban who are studying religious subjects in 
Pakistanis Madrasaas inside of Afghan Madrassas. 
 
Negotiations should be held with neighboring 
countries, especially with Pakistan, to ensure 
security and stability in Afghanistan, and efforts 
made to convince them that they can also benefit from 
peace in Afghanistan.  In order to ensure peace, all 
Afghan nationals living in or outside the country, and 
also neighboring countries and the international 
community are requested to cooperate and assist us in 
this regard. 
 
Finally, we Afghans deserve to live in peace and 
security and to have prosperous lives.  It is worth 
mentioning that the descendants of our martyrs and 
disabled heroes, who fought in the holy fronts of 
Jihad, freedom and independence of our country, have 
announced their support for this draft. 
WOOD