07KAMPALA526
NORTHERN UGANDA NOTES (March 10-23, 2007)
Tue Mar 27 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kampala
VZCZCXRO6292
RR RUEHGI RUEHRN RUEHROV
DE RUEHKM #0526/01 0860805
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 270805Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY KAMPALA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8484
INFO RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0564
RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUEHXR/RWANDA COLLECTIVE
RUEHTO/AMEMBASSY MAPUTO 0391
RUEHSA/AMEMBASSY PRETORIA 3202
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KAMPALA 000526 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PASS TO USAID AND OFDA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREF PREL MOPS ASEC CASC EAID UG SU
SUBJECT: NORTHERN UGANDA NOTES (March 10-23, 2007) 
 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary: Post presents the sixteenth edition of Northern 
Uganda Notes to provide information on the situation on the ground 
and USG activities aimed at meeting Mission's objectives in northern 
Uganda.  These objectives include promoting regional stability 
through peace and security, good governance, access to social 
services, economic growth, and humanitarian assistance.  Post 
appreciates feedback from consumers on the utility of this product 
and any gaps in information that need to be filled.  End Summary. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
PEACE AND RECONCILIATION PROCESSES 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Minister of Internal Affairs Ruhakana Rugunda described 
the discussions between Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) leader Joseph 
Kony and United Nations Special Envoy for LRA-Affected Areas Joaquim 
Chissano on March 11 as "positive and constructive."  Rugunda said 
that he anticipated another meeting between Kony, the GOU, and 
Government of South Sudan to work through the LRA's concerns about 
the Juba venue.  Rugunda stated that the LRA did not demand a change 
in venue, but that its complaints about the mediation secretariat 
were technical and administrative in nature and could be remedied. 
On March 23, Rugunda announced the date for the resumption of formal 
talks at Juba would be April 13.  Rugunda and other ministers 
traveled to Khartoum from March 19-21 to attend a Joint Ministerial 
Committee for the improvement of relations between Khartoum and 
Kampala.  LRA issues were discussed, but no details have been 
given. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) LRA spokesman Martin Ojul requested that President 
Museveni's half-brother, Salim Saleh, join the negotiating team. 
Rugunda stated that the LRA would not dictate the membership of the 
GOU team, but that Saleh would be available to play a 
behind-the-scenes role as appropriate.  In December 2006, Kony had 
also requested Saleh's participation in the negotiations. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Thirteen major humanitarian organizations sent a letter to 
the U.N. Security Council expressing support for the mission of U.N. 
Special Envoy Chissano.  The letter requested a Presidential 
Statement from the Security Council repeating its demand of 16 
November 2006 that the LRA immediately release all women, children, 
and other non-combatants in accordance with UNSC Resolution 1612 
(2005).  Other requests include increasing the representation of 
women and community leaders in the decision-making process at Juba, 
and a call on the GOU to report on progress made to date on the 
Peace, Recovery, and Development Plan. 
 
¶5.  (U) Chissano delivered his report to the U.N. Secretary General 
on March 22.  He announced that the talks would resume in mid-April 
and that he was optimistic that a settlement could be reached 
between the parties.  The U.N. Security Council issued a 
presidential statement reiterating its support for an expeditious 
negotiated settlement and that those responsible for serious human 
rights violation be brought to justice.  The UNSC also urged the LRA 
to release women, children, and other non-combatants. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) European donors met with the U.N. Office for the 
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UNOCHA) in Kampala on March 19 
to discuss issues related to the Juba Initiative Fund (JIF).  One of 
the key complaints of the LRA delegation to Juba was the 
"mismanagement" of the fund.  The JIF was an added responsibility to 
an overstretched UNOCHA office in Juba and a key problem was the 
approval mechanism, which required the GOSS to approve payments. It 
was slow to do so, prompting the LRA delegates to claim that the 
GOSS' non-payment of allowances was tied to their failure to 
"deliver" at the negotiating table.  Another problem was that 
guidelines for acceptable expenditures were never developed.  The 
donors agreed that UNOCHA would send a letter to donors to request 
that the costs of African Union representatives to the Cessation of 
Hostilities Monitoring Team could be covered by the fund.  Donors 
were still considering whether or not to pay allowances or "pocket 
money" to LRA delegates.  Another issue would be determining the 
amount of the allowances. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) USG Activities: On March 15, PolChief and USAID Peace and 
Security Team leader met with Ambassador Busho Ndinyenka, Uganda's 
Consul in Juba.  Busho believed the talks would resume by the end of 
March, but was pessimistic that there would be any progress made. 
He said that for a peace deal to be signed, Kony and Otti would have 
to be convinced of their own security and that of their fighters. 
According to Busho, Kony and Otti do not believe that President 
Museveni would keep his end of a deal.  He was pleased that a 
representative of Congolese President Kabila participated in the 
 
KAMPALA 00000526  002 OF 003 
 
 
meeting with Kony and Otti.  Busho's skepticism was echoed by Moses 
Byaruhanga, Museveni's political advisor, who told PolChief that the 
key obstacle to persuading Kony and Otti to give up was that the LRA 
leaders do not believe they can live safely in Uganda. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) DCM Chritton and PolChief met with Human Rights Watch's 
(HRW) Director for the International Justice Program, Richard 
Dicker, and Elise Keppler, Counsel for the International Justice 
Program on March 15.  Dicker and Keppler spent ten days in northern 
Uganda examining the prospects for a peaceful resolution to the 
conflict and justice for those LRA members indicted by the 
International Criminal Court (ICC).  Human Rights Watch supports a 
peaceful resolution of the conflict, but does not want the "price" 
for a peace settlement to be the bargaining away of justice for the 
victims.  Dicker and Keppler found that an ICC trial was 
appropriate, but not enough to address the horrific crimes 
committed.  The team suggested a truth and reconciliation mechanism 
to allow victims to come together and give testimony as a way to 
heal communities.  Overall, most northerners want justice, but 
Dicker noted that there was some dissent over whether or not the 
Acholi traditional practice of reconciliation (Mato Oput) would be 
sufficient to cover all of the LRA's victims. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Ambassador Browning attended a briefing by Acholi 
traditional leader David Rwot Acana on March 21.  Acana discussed 
the outcome of the Acholi Conference held in Juba from March 2-4. 
He stated that he understood that the process of reconciliation must 
extend beyond Acholiland.  The purpose of the gathering of Acholi 
leaders in Juba was to "get the Acholi house in order" before 
meeting with leaders in Teso, Lango, and West Nile.  Acana also 
stated that land problems were becoming a much more contentious 
issue.  He bemoaned the fact that in the past, elders settled 
squabbles, but now other groups were staking out claims of their 
own.  He said there would be more outreach to donors for help in 
addressing land issues. 
 
- - - - - - - - 
SECURITY UPDATE 
- - - - - - - - 
 
¶10.  (U) As a result of the improved security in Kitgum, a number of 
NGOs have stopped using military escorts. UN agencies in the 
district access some 17 of 25 IDP camps without military escort. 
Many agencies also were able to spend nights in the camps, while a 
number of them have permanently deployed staff at project areas such 
as health centers in the camps.  Child night commuting in the 
district may be coming to an end with efforts by child protection 
agencies to phase out completely the phenomenon.  Along with 
improved security, the support by UNICEF and its partners to assess 
the situation of the night commuter caseload and provide outreach 
activities in areas of return has contributed to a dramatic 
reduction in night commuter numbers. 
 
¶11.  (U) The improved security in northern Uganda also has led to 
increased access to land for cultivation and food security. 
Agencies in the district have begun distribution of agricultural 
inputs including seeds and tools to over 50,000 households in IDP 
camps.  The water situation in Kitgum was likely to improve with the 
movement of people from the camps and recent efforts by humanitarian 
agencies to provide water points at most areas of return. 
Sanitation remains appalling in most camps, however, with average 
latrine coverage of 78.4 persons per latrine compared with a minimum 
sphere standard of 20. 
 
¶12.  (U) The judiciary's program to eliminate backlogged court cases 
and decongest prisons in northern Uganda was restarted on March 19. 
Principal Justice James Ogoola launched the second round of court 
sessions, which will take place in five cities.  A backlog of 340 
cases could be cleared in Lira at the completion of the sessions. 
 
¶13.  (U) The Ugandan Police Force expressed disappointment that only 
60 of the 500 candidates for recruitment were women during a recent 
recruitment exercise in northern Uganda.  The UPF's target for 
female recruitment is 30 percent. 
 
¶14.  (U) Press reports indicated that the LRA killed one person on 
March 20 in Southern Sudan.  Some 1,500 persons were allegedly 
displaced in eastern Equatoria, southern Sudan, according to the 
Sudan Tribune as reported in Ugandan newspapers.  The rebels looted 
food from a town nine miles east of Torit. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE AND ECONOMIC RECOVERY 
 
KAMPALA 00000526  003 OF 003 
 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶15.  (SBU) On March 9, the Government of Uganda issued a second 
draft Peace, Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP) for Northern 
Uganda, for consultations with stakeholders and development 
partners.  The overall goal of the three-year PRDP is to consolidate 
peace and security and lay the foundation for recovery and 
development.  This is to be achieved through four strategic 
objectives:  (1) consolidation of state authority (peace, security, 
justice, law and order, strengthened local governance); (2) 
rebuilding and empowering communities (return and reintegration of 
IDPs, community rehabilitation and development, protection of the 
vulnerable); (3) revitalization of the economy (production and 
marketing, services and industry, rehabilitation of critical 
infrastructure, sustainable environmental and natural resource 
management); and (4) peace-building and reconciliation (information, 
counseling, intra/inter-communal and national conflict resolution, 
socioeconomic reintegration of ex-combatants). The estimated cost of 
the plan is $539 million or $65 per person over a three-year period. 
 The original PRDP request was for approximately $350 million. 
 
¶16.  (U) Problems with the food pipeline for northern Uganda caused 
World Food Program (WFP) to announce cuts in rations for IDPs and 
refugees.  WFP is cutting ration sizes to 40 percent of kilocalorie 
(kcal) needs for 1.2 million IDPs in northern Uganda, as well as 
183,000 refugees in various locations throughout northern and 
western Uganda.  Currently, approximately 15 percent of the IDPs are 
already at 40 percent kcal ration, with the remaining at 50 or 60 
percent kcal ration.  Additionally, WFP reports that there are not 
enough resources to continue with school lunches for 600,000 
students across the LRA affected areas, refugee camps, and in 
drought stricken Karamoja.  Drought relief for 500,000 people in 
Karamoja was slower than anticipated due to IDP resettlement 
patterns in northern Uganda and a reduction in overall contributions 
to WFP/Uganda, which led to the food aid cuts.  The level of USG 
contributions to WFP/Uganda in dollar value was virtually unchanged 
from last fiscal year at this time: March 2006 ($28 million) and 
March 2007 ($27.4 million). 
 
¶17.  (U) Even with the cuts in ration size and school feeding, the 
most recent WFP projections show the pipeline breaking in May absent 
significant contributions.  WFP states that potential consequences 
of the cuts include worsening nutritional status especially for 
children, women, and the elderly, as well as the potential for the 
adoption of risky coping mechanisms by the IDPs.  USAID believes 
that the cuts could affect resettlement efforts because WFP does not 
have sufficient stocks to provide 3-month resettlement or 
repatriation packages to IDPs or refugees, respectively.  WFP was 
unable to fulfill a GOU request to WFP to provide resettlement 
packages to 130,000 IDPs in Gulu District.  The three-month food aid 
resettlement packages are viewed as critical for resettling IDP 
households as they return to their home or to smaller camps closer 
to their agricultural lands. 
 
¶18.  (SBU) USG Activities: The USAID Mission Director signed an MOU 
with the Governor of the Bank of Uganda on March 14 to formalize the 
opening of a USAID satellite office in Gulu, housed in the Regional 
Office of the Bank of Uganda. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
FROM THE MEDIA AND THE WEB 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶19.  (U) International Crisis Group and the Center for American 
Progress launched their "ENOUGH" campaign on March 14 to "galvanize 
public and political leaders to effectively confront mass violence 
against innocent civilians" in Darfur, northern Uganda, and eastern 
Congo.  The campaign includes reports, analysis, and policy 
recommendations aimed at decision-makers, activists, and the public. 
 The press release stated that ENOUGH would benefit from ICG's 
experts on the ground to produce a series of policy papers focused 
on what the international community, particularly the United States, 
could do to prevent mass atrocities and genocide.  According to 
ENOUGH's co-founder Gayle Smith, the group's strategy is to promote 
durable peace efforts, provide protection for the innocent victims 
of mass atrocities, and punish the perpetrators to break the cycle 
of impunity. 
BROWNING