07KHARTOUM1136
DELAYS RAISE CONCERNS AT AEC NATIONAL ASSEMBLY MEETING
Mon Jul 23 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKH #1136/01 2040815
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 230815Z JUL 07
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7954UNCLAS KHARTOUM 001136 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG, AF/EPS, EB/IFD, AND EB/ESC 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR, AND ALSO PASS USAID 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EFIN ECON SOCI AID SU
SUBJECT: DELAYS RAISE CONCERNS AT AEC NATIONAL ASSEMBLY MEETING 
 
REF: 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY:  In a July 16 Assessment and Evaluation Committee 
(AEC) meeting at the National Assembly, the chairman, Mr. Tom 
Vraalsen, and international observers expressed their concerns and 
questions about delays in the formation of the Political Parties 
Commission and National Civil Service Commission and the overall 
slow rate of legislation.  Responding to these and other concerns, 
representatives from the Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM) 
and National Congress Party (NCP) stated that the National Assembly 
values consensus over voting and stated that many important acts are 
almost complete.  Occurring one week after the second anniversary of 
the signing of the Interim National Constitution, this AEC meeting 
provided an opportunity to reflect on the overall implementation of 
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), and signaled that the 
Government of National Unity's (GNU's) deadlines for this 
implementation grow closer with each passing day. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U) After an overview of the National Assembly's work by Ghazi 
Salahudin (NCP) and Aligo Manoa (SPLM,) Chairman Vraalsen  expressed 
his concern about the length of time taken by the Presidency to 
establish both the Political Parties and National Civil Service 
commissions.  The National Assembly passed each of these bills in 
February 2007 and neither commission has yet been formed.  Vraalsen 
added that six months is too long to form the Political Parties 
commission, and if this commission's formation is delayed much 
longer, there may be consequences for the timeframe of elections as 
a whole.  SPLM representatives seconded Vraalsen's concerns.  (NOTE: 
The Political Parties Act required the Political Affairs Commission 
to be established 90 days after the act was passed by parliament.  A 
functioning commission is a prerequisite for elections. All 
political parties must register with the commission in order to 
participate in the 2009 elections. END NOTE.) 
 
¶3.  (U)  International observers also asked for more information 
regarding which bodies are responsible for initiating and drafting 
laws.  SPLM and NCP representatives stated that there is no single 
mechanism for drafting or initiating laws, adding that the Council 
of States, the Executive Committee, and different ministries have 
all been involved in the legislative process.  They stated that many 
laws are based off of existing laws, with drafting privileges given 
to the particular ministry affected.  For example, the Sudanese 
police helped draft and provide technical assistance for the 
National Police Act, which will likely be passed in the next 
session.  They added that on other occasions the Council of 
Ministers or presidential decrees have provided the initial impetus 
and/or language for particular bills.  SPLM representatives noted 
that one delay on the Political Parties Act was the requirement that 
all parties commit themselves to the CPA.  "This is a requirement we 
insist on," they noted. 
 
¶4.  (U) International observers also voiced their concerns about the 
slow pace of legislation and its potential impact on the overall 
timeframe designated by the CPA.  Of the 47 laws designated for 
revision by the Ministry of Justice, only seven have been reviewed 
and enacted into law by the National Assembly.  SPLM and NCP 
representatives stated that in addition to the laws passed by the 
assembly, there has been significant progress on a number of other 
acts, the following of which have almost been finalized in draft by 
the National Assembly:  the Human Rights Act, the National Security 
Act, and the National Police Act.  These representatives urged 
international observers not to concentrate on the number of bills 
that remain, adding that a large number of bills require little 
revision and will be quickly passed.  When Chairman Vraalsen and 
others voiced their concerns about the delay on the Media and Press 
law, one representative from the National Assembly responded that 
due to the relative freedom of press in Sudan, observers should not 
be too concerned about its delay. 
 
¶5.  (U) SPLM and NCP representatives reported that the National 
Assembly values consensus over voting, stating that the latter is 
used only as "a last resort."  They acknowledged that some observers 
"say the Assembly is not effective, but we are doing our best in the 
framework given."  This consensus-building slows down the work of 
lawmaking even though NCP/SPLM represents 80% of the National 
Assembly's members. 
 
¶6.  (U)  Draft minutes and the following handouts from the July 16 
meeting have been e-mailed to the Sudan Programs Group: 
       - Overview on the work of the National Legislature and its 
two Chambers 
       - Overview on the work and organization of the Council of 
States 
       - Overview on the Council Performance 
       - Agreements passed by the National Assembly on December 
14th, 2006 and  to date 
       - Bills passed by the National Assembly from December 2006 
until July 2007 
       - Report of the Peace and National Reconciliation Committee 
on the position of CPA implementation 
       - laws for the 5th  National Assembly Session 
 
FERNANDEZ