07KHARTOUM1469
DEVELOPING PEACE DIVIDENDS IN DARFUR
Tue Sep 18 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO0405
PP RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1469 2611152
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 181152Z SEP 07
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8557
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS KHARTOUM 001469 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE, SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREC PHUM EAID UN SU
 
SUBJECT:  DEVELOPING PEACE DIVIDENDS IN DARFUR 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: On September 16, the Darfur Donors Coordination 
Group convened for the first time in several months to discuss 
criteria for resuming the DJAM and possible activities taking place 
in Darfur outside the DJAM framework. In addition to core donor 
representatives, non-traditional donors (China, India and Egypt) 
were also present. Though security is still unstable, there was some 
consensus that the time is right to examine a "bottom up" type of 
early recovery strategy in Darfur, especially in areas where 
populations had refused to participate in violence. End summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The September 16 meeting was one in a string of recent 
meetings in which donor partners have discussed the possibility of 
reinvigorating the defunct Darfur Joint Assessment Mission (DJAM), 
abandoned one year ago amidst increasing insecurity on the ground. 
Two criteria were identified for its resumption: security and the 
real possibility of inclusive consultations. (Note: At the last Core 
Contact Group (CCG) meeting in March, it was decided to hold off on 
the DJAM; the Sudanese government representatives objected, while 
the SLM representatives did not. The Dutch will convene another CCG 
meeting in the coming weeks. End note.) 
 
¶3. (SBU) While agreeing that the primary focus of international 
assistance in Darfur should remain humanitarian, the group also 
debated what types of mostly early recovery activities could be 
implemented in the coming weeks and months. CDA Fernandez, pointing 
out that while the criteria for resuming the DJAM were still valid, 
there would never be a guarantee of one hundred percent security 
throughout all of Darfur at any given time. The October peace talks 
could provide an impetus to begin some small development activities 
in areas where there had been no forced expulsions or where local 
populations had refused to take part in fighting. We should reward 
these areas, he said. On its part, the World Bank stressed the need 
to look at microfinance projects and activities that would put 
people's livelihoods back in their own hands. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Non-traditional donors such as China and India were more 
positive in their assessment of the current security situation in 
Darfur. (Note: Several Asian ambassadors recently visited Darfur 
accompanied by Sudanese government representatives. End note.) Much 
of their current or proposed funding in Darfur is water-related; CDA 
and others pointed out that while water is a tremendous issue in 
Darfur, we must be careful not to formalize the structures that 
created the conflict, and questions of ownership and land rights are 
paramount. The Egyptian representative also briefly referred to the 
October Arab donors conference on Darfur, though had no specifics to 
offer. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Comment: It is clear that the resumption of the DJAM is 
still many months off. The UN and World Bank estimate 3-6 months 
before they can complete necessary validation studies and 
outstanding consultations. There are also lingering suspicions 
surrounding the DJAM based on its connection to the DPA. However, 
small, carefully selected development and early recovery projects 
within communities who have remained outside of the violence in 
Darfur could serve as both an incentive in the peace process (and 
perhaps inform the upcoming negotiations in Libya), as well as a 
"reward" for those communities. Such activities would not have to be 
directly linked to benchmarks in the political process, but could 
also exist outside of it. End comment. 
 
FERNANDEZ