07KHARTOUM947
EMBASSY'S PROPOSED RESPONSE TO GOVERNMENT OF SUDAN
Thu Jun 14 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKH #0947/01 1651536
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 141536Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7613UNCLAS KHARTOUM 000947 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR AF A/S FRAZER, AF S/E NATSIOS, AND AF/SPG 
ALSO DS/IP/AF and DS/DSS/ITA. NSC FOR PITTMAN AND SHORTLEY 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ASEC AMGMT SU
 
SUBJECT: EMBASSY'S PROPOSED RESPONSE TO GOVERNMENT OF SUDAN 
ANNOUNCEMENT OF RE-OPENING OF ALI ABDEL LATIF STREET 
 
Ref: Khartoum 925 and previous 
 
¶1.  This is an action cable.  See para. 4. 
 
¶2. On June 12 the Embassy's Regional Affairs Officer and Regional 
Security Officer met with the Sudanese National Intelligence and 
Security Services (NISS) in order to seek clarification concerning 
the Sudanese Government's intention to reopen the street directly in 
front of the Chancery.  The Embassy Officers were unable to obtain 
any clarity on just what the Government means by "re-opening" or on 
the time frame in which this is expected to happen, although they 
were assured that change will happen.  They were further informed 
that any additional discussion on the street re-opening should be 
addressed to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs rather than the NISS. 
 
¶3.  Given the lack of clarity, the Embassy proposes that the 
following text be submitted to the MFA via diplomatic note as its 
formal response to the Government's announcement.  The aim of the 
note is to be responsive yet at the same time not weaken in any real 
manner the Mission's security posture.  Some of the proposed 
measures are actions that post is already taking.  Others are 
relatively cosmetic.  The Embassy will continue in its efforts to 
persuade the Government of Sudan to reverse its decision to reopen 
the street to traffic or, at a minimum, to do so in a manner that 
will not lessen our security posture. 
 
Begin Text: 
      The Embassy of the United States of America presents its 
compliments to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of 
the Sudan and has the honor to propose a list of actions that it is 
prepared to undertake in response to the Government's decision to 
reopen the street directly in front of the U.S. Chancery.   The 
Embassy believes that these actions will mitigate the inconvenience 
felt by the community surrounding the Embassy as well as ensure at 
the same time the security of U.S. Government personnel, both 
American and Sudanese, and the inviolability of the facilities, as 
agreed to by the Government of Sudan under the Vienna Convention. 
      With the concurrence of the Government of Sudan, the Embassy 
will implement the following measures: 
      --  Embassy will not obstruct pedestrian traffic. 
      --  Embassy will allow access to the controlled streets to 
vehicles with business to be undertaken, after appropriate security 
inspections. 
      --  Embassy will allow residents and vendors to enter its 
security perimeter and park, after a security inspection of each 
vehicle. 
      -- Embassy will provide inspection to each vehicle on a 
first-come, first-served basis, with no special treatment for U.S. 
Government vehicles, other than those of the Chief of Mission and 
the Deputy Chief of Mission. 
      --  Embassy will provide attractive shelters for the 
Diplomatic Police assigned to security work at the Chancery. 
      --  All signs on the Compound Access Control (CAC) points will 
be changed from English to Arabic. 
      --  Embassy will restrict parking of U.S. Government vehicles 
on Ali Abdel Latif Street to no more than four vehicles at one 
time. 
      --  Embassy requests the stationing of a National Intelligence 
and Security Service (NISS) officer at each CAC for more effective 
liaison on security issues and threats. 
      --  Embassy commits to removal of the CACs and to return the 
street to its original or better condition immediately upon 
occupation of the new U.S. Embassy now being built, (estimated to be 
completed in May of 2009). 
      --  The Embassy will sponsor an "Adopt a Street" program which 
will focus on keeping the streets adjacent to the Chancery building 
free of litter and rubbish. 
      --  The Embassy is willing to explore the option of seeking 
funding for turning the streets adjacent to the Chancery into a 
"pedestrian urban park."  This would be a vehicle free zone of trees 
and grass maintained for the benefit of all Sudanese in this area of 
Khartoum. 
 
      The Embassy of the United States of America avails itself of 
this opportunity to renew to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs the 
assurances of its highest consideration. 
 
End text 
 
¶4.  The Embassy requests the Department's concurrence that the 
above-referenced diplomatic note be transmitted forthwith to the 
MFA. 
 
¶5.  Comments:  The Embassy is currently drafting a detailed 
contingency plan in the event that the Government rejects our 
proposal.  The Mission is envisaging several different scenarios:  a 
relatively immediate reopening of the street (i.e., within 30 days) 
and a reopening of the street in 3 months. 
 
 
FERNANDEZ