07KHARTOUM1929
AEC CHAIRMAN VRAALSEN ARGUES FOR MORE INDEPENDENCE AT FINAL
Thu Dec 06 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO5067
RR RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #1929/01 3400844
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 060844Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9459
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KHARTOUM 001929 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KSCA OTRA EAID CDC SU
SUBJECT: AEC CHAIRMAN VRAALSEN ARGUES FOR MORE INDEPENDENCE AT FINAL 
PRESS CONFERENCE 
 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: AEC Chairman Tom Vraalsen, wrapping up a contentious 
two year stint in Khartoum, held a final press conference December 
¶3.  He used his statement to warn of the dangers of the current 
NCP-SPLM stalemate and to argue for a more pro-active AEC led by a 
chairman with increased independence.  The press conference was 
well-attended by Sudanese journalists and received widespread 
coverage in the local press.  However, there was no attendance by 
members of the international media, who were probably distracted by 
the "teddy bear drama" across town.  This was unfortunate, as 
Vraalsen was probably hoping to garner international coverage that 
would translate into increased pressure on Khartoum.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Samples of Media reaction 
------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) According to an AEC official, many of the questions posed 
by the Sudanese journalists attending the press conference focused 
on the circumstances surrounding Vraalsen's resignation (itself 
rather old news), such as whether he had been pressured to resign by 
the NCP.  The actual coverage reported Vraalsen's denials, and did 
not report any of the background to the story - that Vraalsen had in 
fact felt constantly checked by an NCP determined to limit his 
freedom of action. 
 
¶3.  (U) The independent "Khartoum Monitor" English daily newspaper 
bore the front page headline: "Vraaslen: Assessment and Evaluation 
Commission Should be Transparent."  Its coverage stressed Vraalsen's 
judgment that the CPA partners have not made proactive use of the 
commission, leaving the AEC to operate as a passive monitoring 
agency. 
 
¶4. (U) The independent "The Citizen" English daily carried the very 
misleading headline on its front page: "CPA Chairman bows out with 
praise for NCP, SPLM."  The article noted that Ambassador Vraaslen 
stated that his resignation was based only on a two-year contract he 
signed with the Norwegian government to serve as chair of AEC.  He 
insisted there was no pressure on him to resign, it reported. 
 
¶5. (U) The semi-independent NCP "Al Ray Al Aam" Arabic-language 
daily newspaper of Sudan Vice President Osman Taha carried the 
front-page headline: "Vraaslen: My resignation was not due to any 
pressure from NCP."  It said that Ambassador Vraaslen stated his 
resignation was for private reasons, with no pressure from any 
source.  Amb. Vraaslen called upon the NCP and SPLM, as CPA 
partners, to build a genuine partnership and mutual understanding to 
implement sensitive and complex CPA clauses. 
 
¶6. (U) The Pro-NCP "Al Hayyat" Arabic-language daily and pro-DUP 
"Wahdi" Arabic daily also carried the story on their front pages, 
with the headline: "Vraaslen: Dialogue and Understanding between the 
two partners Represents an Essential Element for resolving the 
outstanding Problems."  The papers highlighted Vraaslen's statement 
urging the NCP and SPLM as CPA partners to stop using the media for 
trading accusations, but rather to build a constructive partnership 
to resolve the contentious issues, especially Abyei. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) COMMENT:  At the press conference, Chairman Vraalsen 
successfully shifted attention from the circumstances of his 
resignation to his "message:" that the two CPA parties should begin 
working as true partners for the good of the country, and that the 
AEC chairman should be granted more freedom of action.  At least in 
the Khartoum press, the message came through.  Unfortunately, 
Vraalsen was ignored by the international press.  Our AEC source 
gloomily noted that not a single foreign reporter had attended the 
farewell press conference, acknowledging the sad reality that "they 
must all have been across town covering the teddy bear affair."  In 
fact, Vraalsen was probably hoping for some international coverage 
in order to pressure the NCP.  He has long argued that the AEC 
Chairman should enjoy the freedom to address the press, as he 
repeated in his final remarks (attached below).  Vraalsen's decision 
to hold the press conference at all (despite the NCP's stated 
position that this requires the approval of both parties) seems a 
disgruntled short-timer's parting shot and perhaps an effort to 
establish a precedent for the next AEC chair. 
 
TEXT OF VRAALSEN STATEMENT 
-------------------------- 
 
¶8. (U)  Below is attached the text of AEC Chairman Tom Vraalsen's 
introductory statement at the December 3 press conference, as 
distributed by the AEC: 
 
 BEGIN TEXT OF VRAALSEN STATEMENT: 
 
Opening Statement by Ambassador Tom Vraalsen 
At the Press Conference held on 
December 3d, 2007 in Khartoum 
 
As some of you know, my term as Chairman of the Assessment and 
Evaluation Commission is soon coming to an end.  I have requested 
 
KHARTOUM 00001929  002 OF 003 
 
 
the Norwegian Government to assign me to other duties.  I am 
scheduled to depart from Khartoum next week. 
 
I wanted to meet with you before my departure to talk about the CPA 
and the AEC. 
 
I wish to make it clear that I am not speaking for the collective 
membership of the AEC.  You will readily understand that my remarks 
do not reflect the views of all Commission members.  What I wish to 
share with you today is my own personal observations based on two 
years service. 
 
The Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA): 
---------------------------------------- 
 
On CPA implementation which has been the subject of considerable 
political debate lately, the track record of the parties is uneven. 
 
 
As you will see from the AEC factual report "CPA implementation 
2007", much has been achieved.   You will find the report on the AEC 
webpage: www.aec-sudan.org. 
 
As I said, much has been achieved.  The cease-fire is holding apart 
from the serious incident in Malakal in November 2006.  Federal and 
State administrative structures are in place including the GONU and 
the GOSS. The INC, ICSS and State Constitutions have been adopted. 
 
This, if I may say so, has been the easy part of CPA implementation. 
 Now, the Parties are engaged in dealing with core issues concerning 
security, politics and economics.  Such complex and sensitive issues 
can only be professionally dealt with through a genuine partnership. 
 Dialogue, understanding, will to seek common ground, flexibility 
and compassion are key elements in founding a working relationship. 
 
 
The Parties claim to be partners.  Of course, they are `as 
signatories to the CPA.  However, it is difficult for the outside 
observer to see a genuine partnership in action.  It is essential 
for NCP and SPLM to build that kind of relationship.  Public 
haggling over facts, mutual accusations, allegations and 
recriminations do not help build a constructive partnership. 
 
There are provisions in CPA of great political importance where 
implementation is seriously behind schedule.  I would not be too 
worried when delays occur if the Parties are in agreement on how to 
deal with the situation.  The problem arises when the parties accuse 
each other of violating the peace agreement without agreeing on how 
to handle the situation and move forward. 
 
The present political problems with regard to CPA implementation are 
a matter of serious concern to all of us. The stalemate carries in 
it seeds of lasting damage to the partnership which is needed in a 
CPA context.  The door to a solution to the present problems must be 
unlocked immediately.   The alarm bells are ringing louder here. 
They are also ringing louder in neighboring countries. 
 
The leadership of both Parties has repeatedly reaffirmed their 
commitment to implementing the CPA.  I urge the Parties to deliver 
on their commitments.  They owe it to the people of Sudan. 
 
The Assessment and Evaluation Commission (AEC): 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
The Commission has during its 25 months existence held 26 Regular 
Plenary Sessions, 13 Special Plenary Sessions and numerous Working 
Group meetings.  Through hard work over 12 months the Commission has 
produced a "Factual Report on the Status of CPA Implementation 
2007". 
 
The Commission has by no means been dormant or passive as some are 
alleging.  It has however, not been visible in the public domain. 
This is due to built in constraints and limitations imposed by the 
Presidential Decree establishing the Commission and in the 
Commission's own Rules of Procedure.  Another point is that I don't 
believe in megaphone diplomacy.  I don't believe in big headlines. 
You often achieve more through a quiet and responsible approach. 
 
Of late, much has been said about the Commission.    It rose into 
prominence during the political crises in October/November. 
 
In his press conference on October 21 st, Vice-President Ali Osman 
Taha stated that the AEC is a CPA mechanism that enables the two 
parties to jointly and objectively gauge the extent of progress 
being made and control the pace of implementation. The 
Vice-President voiced expectations and encouragement for the AEC to 
engage in efforts to get CPA implementation back on track. 
 
During the first two years of AEC's existence, the Parties have not 
made pro-active use of the Commission.  The same is the case for the 
 
KHARTOUM 00001929  003 OF 003 
 
 
international members and observers.  The Commission has operated as 
a passive monitoring agency. 
 
The Commission has the potential to develop into a pro-active 
mechanism that can facilitate and promote implementation of CPA.  To 
achieve that the working methods of the Commission must undergo 
fundamental changes. 
 
The Chair has to be given more freedom of movement and expression. 
He/she must be allowed to speak the truth even if that implies 
criticism of one Party or the other or even both.  The Chair must be 
empowered to decide on his own to attend meetings called to consider 
CPA implementation and to address such meetings. I have been subject 
to severe limitations on both accounts. 
 
The Commission should open up for public view.  It should be 
transparent in its operation.  Documents produced by the Commission 
and its staff should as a general rule be made accessible to the 
public.  This would be one measure through which the public can be 
better informed and in a position to contribute to implementation of 
CPA. 
 
Thank You. 
 
END TEXT OF VRAALSEN STATEMENT. 
 
FERNANDEZ