07KINGSTON803
JAMAICA: OPPOSITION LEADER HOPES TO WIN AT LEAST
Thu May 24 00:00:00 +0200 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Kingston
VZCZCXYZ0003
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKG #0803/01 1441630
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 241630Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY KINGSTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4811
INFO RUCNCOM/EC CARICOM COLLECTIVE
RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0479
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FLC O N F I D E N T I A L KINGSTON 000803 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR (RANDALL BUDDEN) 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/22/2016 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER PINR ECON SOCI ENRG KCOR JM
VZ, XL 
SUBJECT: JAMAICA: OPPOSITION LEADER HOPES TO WIN AT LEAST 
37 OF 60 PARLIAMENTARY SEATS IN IMPENDING NATIONAL 
ELECTIONS, BUT DECRIES CHAVEZ'S GROWING INFLUENCE 
 
REF: A. KINGSTON 393 (211315Z MAR 07) 
 
     ¶B. KINGSTON 705 (111640Z MAY 07) 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Brenda L. Johnson, reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
Summary 
-------- 
 
1.(C)  Leader of the Opposition Jamaica Labour Party (JLP) 
Bruce Golding: 
 
-- confidently predicts the JLP will win at least 37 of 60 parliamentar 
seats in impending national elections; 
 
-- has "now confirmed the arrival" in Jamaica of 4 to 6 million U.S. 
dollars in cash given by Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez to finance th 
upcoming election campaign of Prime Minister (PM) Portia Simpson Miller 
(PSM)'s ruling People's National Party (PNP); 
 
-- decries Chavez's growing influence in Jamaica, and asks "whether the 
U.S. is merely a spectator, or is going to register serious concerns;" 
 
-- sees no signs of election violence. 
End Summary. 
 
Chavez alleged to have given millions to influence impending national 
elections 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
2.(C)   At his request, Opposition Jamaica Labour Party (JLP) Leader 
Bruce Golding met privately with Ambassador (accompanied by PolOff) the 
afternoon of May 21 in his office at JLP Headquarters.  Ambassador bega 
by asking about Golding's recent visit to New York; he said he had held 
an excellent meeting with former Governor George Pataki two weeks ago, 
and had discussed at some length the prospects for Jamaica's impending 
national elections.  He had "now confirmed the arrival" in Jamaica of 4 
to 6 million U.S. dollars in cash given by Venezuelan President Hugo 
Chavez to finance the upcoming election campaign of Prime Minister (PM) 
Portia Simpson Miller (PSM)'s ruling People's National Party (PNP) 
(Reftel A).  JLP supporters had "seen signs of this money at work on th 
ground."  He then said: "at the risk of being blunt, the question is 
whether the U.S. is merely a spectator, or is going to register serious 
concerns."   The Ambassador reiterated Washington's deep reservations 
about Chavez's political and economic influence throughout the region, 
and assured Golding that we had expressed these concerns to the 
Government of Jamaica (GoJ); however, the U.S. was unable to intervene 
directly in the electoral processes of other countries. 
 
Petrocaribe and Petrojam 
------------------------ 
 
3.(C)  Golding then said he had asked Opposition Energy Spokesman 
(Member of Parliament for St. James West Central) Clive Mullins to 
"investigate" the deal recently struck by the GoJ to sell 49 percent of 
Jamaica's national oil company Petrojam to Venezuela for only 63-69 
million U.S. dollars.  He said the valuation of Petrojam should be 
determined by the level of investment and shareholding; he understood 
that the company's valuation recently had been estimated at 300 
million U.S. dollars.  PNP insiders had "told me it has gotten to the 
point that whatever Chavez wants, Chavez gets."  Golding then maintaine 
that the JLP's "real fear" was that "when we take power, we'll find tha 
the previous Government has made agreements without public discourse." 
 
Meeting with DAS Duddy 
---------------------- 
 
4.(C)  Golding then said he had appreciated his recent meeting at the 
State Department with DAS Duddy, whose "disquiet" over growing 
Venezuelan influence in Jamaica had been "obvious."   But the question 
"as to whether this was a serious issue with the U.S." was another 
matter.  Ambassador said she understood that Golding had been very 
favorably received in Washington, and also noted that Gov. and Mrs. 
Pataki were her personal friends. 
 
 
JLP's Funding Difficulties 
-------------------------- 
 
5.(C)  Golding then noted that, historically, the JLP had relied on 
corporate donors for 70 percent of the Party's  funding; however, the 
"levels of money needed" had "grown beyond corporate donors' ability." 
 He estimated the election would cost 250 million Jamaican dollars 
(3.7 million U.S.).  Once the elections had been called, the JLP's 
donors would be "more forthcoming." However, the most recent results 
from pollster Bill Johnson, published in the Jamaica Gleaner newspaper, 
purporting that the PNP currently enjoyed a seven-point lead nationally 
were "not helpful" in raising donations.  The JLP was "going after" 
about nineteen constituencies normally held by the PNP, and money was 
"key" in swinging the marginal constituencies. 
 
Timing of Elections 
------------------- 
 
6.(C)  In response to Ambassador's inquiry about the timing of 
elections, Golding observed that the "most recent speculation" was that 
PSM would announce in late June that the elections would be held in 
July.  Ambassador noted that PSM was scheduled to address an ILO meetin 
on June 12 in Geneva and to meet with Prince Charles on June 13, and 
also had indicated she would attend the Caribbean 20/20 Conference in 
Washington June 19-21.  Golding noted that PSM might announce elections 
the last week of June, following her return; alternatively, she might 
cancel one or more of her commitments. He then said he was unsure 
whether the latest poll had "buoyed" the PNP, but his PNP contacts had 
told him they were "worried."  The JLP planned to be on the campaign 
trail "three-to-four days per week over the next six weeks." 
 
Corruption Endemic: Polls Suspect 
--------------------------------- 
 
7.(C)  Golding then observed that there were "not many things in Jamaic 
without a price tag: newspaper stories are for sale."  He described 
corruption as "endemic," and acknowledged its presence within the JLP. 
Casting cold water on the Bill Johnson poll in the Jamaica Gleaner, he 
said "if you want a poll, it's for sale." 
 
JLP to win at least 37 of 60 seats 
---------------------------------- 
 
8.(C)  In response to Ambassador's inquiry, Golding confirmed that he 
and PSM had agreed to hold three debates within seven days following 
nomination day: the first to focus on the leaders themselves, the secon 
on the economy, and a third on social services. He then noted that, as 
had been the case in the recent budget debates in Parliament (Reftel B) 
PSM would enjoy the advantage of low expectations, and thus needed only 
one sound bite to look good; in contrast, "I must perform for 90 
minutes."  In response to Ambassador's inquiry, Golding said that forme 
PM P.J. Patterson was giving the PNP "tactical advice," but was not out 
in the trenches.  He then maintained the JLP was "confident of winning 
37 seats (of total 60), and possibly as many as 41."    He said there 
were 18 ) 19 seats which were "really difficult for the JLP."  He noted 
that, in the Southwest St. Ann constituency, a traditional PNP 
stronghold, divisions among contending PNP factions gave the JLP a 
chance for victory. 
 
No signs of election violence 
----------------------------- 
 
9.(C)  In response to Ambassador's inquiry as to whether the 
elections might be marred by the kind of violence Jamaica had 
experienced in past years, Golding said he saw "little indication of 
violence;" it had become "politically unacceptable."  While there alway 
would be some risk of spontaneous incidents, he detected "no signs of 
any violence being planned." Ambassador concluded by reiterating U.S. 
hopes that the two parties would continue to eschew violence, and 
that the country would benefit from peaceful and clean elections; this 
would serve the mutual interests of Jamaica and the U.S. 
Johnson