07KIGALI1115
SUMMARY OF G/TIP SMALL GRANTS PROJECT OUTCOMES
Tue Dec 11 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kigali
VZCZCXYZ0010
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHLGB #1115/01 3451003
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 111003Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY KIGALI
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4966UNCLAS KIGALI 001115 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/TIP: AMY LEMAR, MARK FORSTROM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV RW
SUBJECT: SUMMARY OF G/TIP SMALL GRANTS PROJECT OUTCOMES 
 
REF: SECSTATE 206165 05 
 
¶1. (U) Embassy Kigali welcomed the opportunity to use FY 2005 
Economic Support Funds (ESF) for anti-trafficking in persons 
projects, and submits the following summary of project 
outcomes. (Note: Final narrative project reports have been 
submitted to G/TIP via e-mail.  End note.) 
 
------------------------------ 
International Rescue Committee 
------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (U) The International Rescue Committee used ESF to support 
a local NGO, the Street Ahead Children's Center Association 
(SACCA) to implement community reintegration activities for 
street children, and pilot a community-based prevention and 
response family/child separation project.  The project's 
primary objective was to provide support to five existing 
residential centers for vulnerable children, to set up a 
third center for vulnerable girls, and to support related 
outreach, reintegration and independent living programs. 
This was successfully achieved, with existing centers 
receiving support and a new center for girls being built.  At 
the start of the project, 89 children were identified for 
reintegration, 80 of whom were successfully reintegrated into 
their families or taken into residential care.  During the 
project, several other children were identified and 
successfully reintegrated.  The second objective of the 
project was to implement two "prevention of separation" 
projects in rural communities and to develop linkages with 
community groups, civil society and local government to 
address the problem of street children.  This phase was also 
generally successful.  Prevention committees composed of 
community members, community-based social workers, and 
children were formed in the two targeted areas and members 
were trained by the SACCA prevention team.  They then worked 
to identify vulnerable children and families and provide them 
with assistance.  An income-generating project was developed 
to sustain prevention activities.  The project was not able 
to develop a sustained prevention mechanism linking 
prevention committees and local and provincial governments, 
but did assist families and youth and began to establish 
connections between groups. 
 
 
-------------- 
Sharing Rwanda 
-------------- 
 
¶3. (U) The local NGO Sharing Rwanda received ESF for its 
project, "Combating Human Trafficking Through Sensitization 
and Capacity Building for Victims and the Community."  The 
project had two objectives - prevention of trafficking 
through sensitization and education of citizens, and 
counseling and capacity building for trafficking victims - 
and was focused in the Gikondo sector of Kigali.  The first 
objective was achieved through the collection of data on 150 
former child prostitutes and the creation and broadcast of 12 
radio programs focusing on trafficking-related topics.  The 
second objective was met through the provision of counseling 
for the 150 children over eight months, and through training 
programs for the youth in the production of various goods, in 
agricultural techniques, and nutrition.  The children set up 
an income-generating project making and selling soap. 
Sharing Rwanda monitored, evaluated, and reported on these 
activities throughout the duration of the program, and the 
outcome was positive.  The 150 former child prostitutes and 
their 17 children are being reintegrated into the community. 
The life skills they have developed and the income they earn 
from their business have reduced their vulnerability to 
falling back into prostitution. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARIETTI