07KINGSTON215
JAMAICA/VENEZUELA: FORMER PRIME MINISTER WARNS OF
Tue Feb 13 00:00:00 +0100 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Kingston
VZCZCXYZ0017
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKG #0215/01 0441150
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 131150Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY KINGSTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4321
INFO RUCNCOM/EC CARICOM COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0462
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FLC O N F I D E N T I A L KINGSTON 000215 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR (RANDALL BUDDEN) 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/10/2016 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER PINR ECON SOCI CARICOM KCOR JM
VZ, CU, XL 
SUBJECT: JAMAICA/VENEZUELA: FORMER PRIME MINISTER WARNS OF 
CHAVEZ'S INFLUENCE IN IMPENDING NATIONAL ELECTIONS 
 
REF: A. 06 KINGSTON 2251 
     ¶B. 06 KINGSTON 2021 
     ¶C. KINGSTON 89 
     ¶D. KINGSTON 158 
     ¶E. KINGSTON 133 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Brenda L. Johnson, reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
Summary 
-------- 
 
1.(C)  In impending national elections, the opposition 
Jamaica Labour Party (JLP) has "good reason to fear" 
Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez's provision of cash to fund 
the reelection campaign of current Prime Minister (PM) Portia 
Simpson Miller (PSM), according to former PM Edward Seaga. 
In his estimate: 
 
-- PSM will call elections if the upcoming Cricket World Cup 
(CWC) series and/or the Government's budget presentation in 
April/May lift the spirits of the electorate; if not, she 
will delay until the end of the year. 
 
-- With its formidable public relations machinery, PSM's 
ruling People's National Party (PNP) may well come from 
behind to defeat the JLP. 
 
-- a terrorist attack against the upcoming CWC is unlikely; 
transportation difficulties between Kingston and Jamaica's 
north coast are a greater worry. 
 
-- Venezuela is "moving in the direction of bitterness among 
the people, who face shortages of the basics." 
End Summary. 
 
2.(SBU)   Edward Seaga served as the Member of Parliament 
(MP) for Western Kingston for nearly 43 years, as Leader of 
the Jamaica Labour Party (JLP) from 1974 until 2005, and as 
Prime Minister (PM) 1980-89.   He is widely credited with 
having stabilized the Jamaican economy in the 1980s after 
years of high inflation and deficits.  Still alert and active 
at 77, Seaga remains highly influential among JLP supporters. 
 Ambassador (accompanied by Poloff) paid a courtesy call on 
February 9 in his office on the Mona Campus of the University 
of the West Indies (UWI), of which he is one of only four 
Distinguished Fellows. 
 
3.(SBU)  Seaga began by expressing satisfaction that the 
Peace Corps was celebrating its 45th anniversary, noting that 
he had played a role in bringing the first volunteers to 
Jamaica back in 1962; for decades the organization had done 
superb work in the country, and he wished it might receive 
more recognition from the media.  The Ambassador observed 
that the last year had been an eventful one in Jamaica, with 
a new PM and Governor General taking office, preparations for 
the upcoming Cricket World Cup (CWC) series underway, and 
widespread speculation about the timing of national elections 
(which must be held within the next year). 
 
Impending National Elections 
---------------------------- 
 
4.(C)  Seaga said Prime Minister Portia Simpson Miller (PSM) 
had had a brief "window of opportunity" to call elections for 
February, but that she now was unlikely to do so until after 
the conclusion of CWC in April.  Historically, he observed, 
in order to capitalize on the "feel good factor" in the 
nation, PNP (People's National Party) governments had called 
elections in the wake of major successful events.  However, 
whether CWC would generate such feelings was uncertain: this 
would depend on the performance of the West Indies team, the 
economic benefits derived from hosting the series, and 
whether it all had gone smoothly.   The Government also might 
shape its budget presentation in April/May to generate public 
gratitude, and then call elections in June.  But if neither 
CWC nor the budget presentation lifted the spirits of the 
electorate, PSM would delay the elections as long as 
possible.   Seaga said the most recent polls showing the JLP 
2-3 points ahead of the PNP in popularity "don't count too 
much."  He recalled that in 2002 the JLP had been ahead until 
June, but that the PNP Government had used a massive World 
Youth Cup Festival in July to boost its standing-- and then 
had gone on to win the elections.  At present, the JLP should 
be further ahead; at least a ten-point lead was needed.  The 
JLP had used a huge annual conference (Reftel A) and 
revelation of the Trafigura scandal (Reftel B) to boost its 
support.  However, with its formidable public relations 
machinery, the PNP might well come from behind to win the 
elections; they had done so before. 
 
Chavez Providing Cash to PNP? 
----------------------------- 
 
5.(C)  In response to Ambassador's inquiry regarding JLP 
Leader Bruce Golding's recent allegations that Venezuela's 
Hugo Chavez was providing cash to finance the PNP's 
reelection campaign (Reftels C, D), Seaga said Golding "had 
good reason to fear this."  In socialist societies, no 
distinction was drawn between the government and the ruling 
political party; donations thus flowed easily.  Chavez wanted 
to broaden Venezuela's influence in the Caribbean, but this 
was not a new policy: he himself had faced the same problem 
back in 1980, when Carlos Andres Perez (CAP) had funneled 
support to PM Michael Manley (fortunately, CAP had been out 
of power before the Jamaican elections).  A strong interest 
in the Caribbean had been part of Venezuela's foreign policy 
for decades. 
 
6.(C)  In response to the Ambassador's observation that much 
of the available information regarding Cuba's Fidel Castro 
seemed to come from Chavez these days, Seaga noted that the 
latter had an interest in portraying himself as an ally and 
close confidant of the former.  Venezuela now was "moving in 
the direction of bitterness among the people, who face 
shortages of the basics."  Interestingly, Seaga then 
described a recurring pattern among authoritarian socialist 
regimes:  (a) as in Zimbabwe, misguided economic policies 
eventually led to chronic shortages; (b) then, the ruling 
party blamed shopkeepers and merchants for "sabotaging the 
revolution;" (c) the regime then used this "sabotage" as a 
pretext to justify further political repression and amass 
more power. 
 
Crime and Tourism 
----------------- 
 
7.(SBU)  Ambassador then inquired about the alarming rise in 
Jamaica's murder rate over recent months.  Seaga pointed out 
that, historically, whenever the police had focused special 
attention and cracked down on crime in Kingston, the 
criminals quickly had moved to other areas of the country; 
this pattern now was being repeated.  The Ambassador noted 
that some 72 percent of Jamaica's tourists were from the 
U.S., and the police needed to curb crime to avoid serious 
disruption of the vital tourism industry.  Seaga observed 
that "in Jamaica there always has been an underlying 
understanding: don't interfere with tourism;" this was why 
few serious crimes were committed against tourists. 
 
Cricket World Cup (CWC) 
----------------------- 
 
8.(U)  Ambassador then mentioned that the U.S., U.K., and 
Canada were cooperating with the Caribbean nations in 
counter-terrorism preparations for CWC.  Seaga said he didn't 
"see the motive for terrorism;" the logistics of a terrorist 
attack would be difficult, and there would be "only limited 
damage to the U.S."  He was more concerned about the 
difficulties and delays that many fans would face in 
traveling back and forth between Kingston and the Jamaica's 
north coast: from Montego Bay, it may take up to five hours 
to reach Kingston's Sabina Park stadium; this would cause 
great frustration among visitors.  In his view, a ring road 
around Montego Bay should have been completed long ago, but 
certainly in preparation for CWC.  Ambassador said she had 
enjoyed her recent visit to the new stadium in Sabina Park, 
which was most impressive.  Seaga wondered how the new 
Trelawny stadium would be used after CWC; Ambassador noted 
she had discussed this question recently with former PM P.J. 
Patterson (Reftel E), and that perhaps it could become a 
multi-purpose facility.  Seaga said he recently had suggested 
to the Spanish Ambassador that the Trelawny stadium be used 
as a soccer camp by visiting Spanish trainers in order to 
improve the level of play among teams in the north of the 
island. 
JOHNSON