07LIMA57
COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR FAA PERSONNEL: HECTOR O.
Tue Jan 09 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Lima
VZCZCXYZ0022
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHPE #0057/01 0091506
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 091506Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY LIMA
TO RHMFIUU/FAA MIAMI SO IFO23 MIAMI FL
INFO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3548
RHMCSUU/FAA NATIONAL HQ WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS LIMA 000057 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR OTRA ASEC PE
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR FAA PERSONNEL: HECTOR O. 
HERMOSILLA AND TEELUCKDARIE KOODIE 
 
REF: FAA 051943Z JAN 07 
 
¶1. (U) The Embassy grants country clearance for the visit to 
Peru of Hector O. Hermosilla and Teeluckdarie Koodie from 
February 5-9, 2007.  The purpose of this trip is to conduct a 
FAA 14 CFR Part 129.14 inspection of Trans-American airlines 
DBA Taca Peru. No embassy assistance has been requested. 
 
When departing Lima by air, the Republic of Peru imposes an 
airport departure tax on any outbound passenger of 30.25 USD 
for international flights and 6.05 USD for domestic flights. 
 
¶2. (U) POINT OF CONTACT, TELEPHONE NUMBERS, ADDRESS AND 
COMPUTER USE: 
 
Point of contact for the visit is Economic Officer Marcos 
Mandojana, office telephone number (51)(1)618-2411, cellular 
telephone 9-632-0869, e-mail:  mandojanamc@state.gov. 
Embassy after-hours direct line for Marine Security Guard is 
(51)(1)618-2936.  The Embassy address is Av. La Encalada, 
Cuadra 17, in the Monterrico Sur Section of Lima.  Control 
officer should be notified as soon as possible upon arrival 
in country if you are not met at the airport. 
 
State Department TDY visitors requiring OpenNet-Plus Systems 
access during their stay should directly contact Daniel 
Siebert, ISO, in advance of their arrival so a computer 
account can be created if needed. 
 
Any employee who intends to bring U.S. Government portable 
microcomputers (laptops) for use in CAA or non-CAA areas must 
notify post,s ISSO and RSO in advance of travel.  12 FAH-6 
h-314 prohibits the installation or use of any privately 
owned computer in a government building where classified 
information is processed or stored.  Accordingly, post policy 
prohibits Personal Electronic Devices (PED), Personal Digital 
Assistants (PDA) e.g. &Palm Pilots8, MP-3 players, etc. 
within the Chancery facility.  Such devices are never 
authorized in CAA spaces and are not authorized connectivity 
within OpenNet unclassified or classified networks, or 
stand-alone classified PCs.  Personnel who wish to bring PDAs 
authorized under the Department of State,s Secure Wireless 
Extended Enterprise Technology (SWEET) program into the 
Chancery must notify Post,s ISSO and RSO in advance of 
travel.  Find information concerning the SWEET program at 
http://sweet.irm.state.gov.  Please refer to 03 STATE 286036 
for detailed guidance regarding Post,s Information Systems 
security requirements. 
 
¶3. (U) PASSPORT/VISAS: 
 
To ensure full protection for travelers, the mission requires 
that all visitors eligible for official/diplomatic passports 
use them with appropriate visa.  Travelers should not use 
tourist passports.  In exceptional cases where official 
travelers must use tourist passports/visas, specific 
authorization must be obtained in advance.  Foreign citizens 
bearing tourist passports who come to Peru to work, either 
officially or in technical or cultural cooperation, must 
enter the country with an official work visa. 
 
DOD personnel on personal travel must use a tourist passport. 
 If official visitors arrive via military ship, a passport is 
not required unless the individual is required to exit Peru 
via commercial or military air.  If an official visitor is a 
Peruvian National serving in the U.S. Armed Forces, a valid 
Peruvian (maroon) passport is absolutely necessary in all 
cases in order for the individual to enter or exit Peru. 
Proof of residency in the U.S. (green card) is required for 
return to the U.S.  All visas for onward travel should be 
obtained prior to arrival in Peru. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) SECURITY: 
 
Post reminds all TDY personnel requesting country clearance 
for temporary duty of 30 days or more of the requirement to 
complete mandatory personal security training effective 
January 1, 2005.  Personnel requesting country clearance for 
periods of 30 days or more must certify that they have or 
will complete the required training prior to their travel, or 
may request a waiver as per the above policy.  For extended 
TDY requests, individual bureaus (not the Bureau of Human 
Resources) are responsible for ensuring that their staff, in 
all employment categories (Civil Service, Foreign Service, 
WAE, PSC, etc.), meets the training requirement.  See 04 
State 66580 for more information about the mandatory personal 
security training requirement. 
 
Country clearance is granted for travel to non-Embassy 
restricted areas only.  Visitors who plan to travel to 
 
Embassy restricted areas must request Post approval upon 
arrival.  A list of these areas can be obtained from the RSO. 
 It is imperative that the Mission be notified immediately of 
delays or changes in plans or itinerary.  Personnel must not 
change hotels without first notifying control officer.  The 
State Department has designated Peru as high threat for 
indigenous terrorism, medium threat for transnational 
terrorism and political violence, and critical threat for 
crime.  Two terrorist groups operate in Peru:  Sendero 
Luminoso (SL) and Movimiento Revolucionario Tupac Amaru 
(MRTA).  Both organizations continue to be potential threats 
and have targeted U.S. facilities in the past.  Due to GOP 
efforts, the activities of the SL and MRTA have been greatly 
reduced and are now largely confined to rural areas. 
Overland travel outside of Lima and other large cities during 
the hours of darkness is prohibited due to unsafe road 
conditions and the threat of armed criminals.  Terrorist 
groups operate with relative impunity in some interior areas 
and are known to target vehicular traffic.  Crime is a 
serious problem in metropolitan Lima and popular tourist 
areas such as Arequipa, Cuzco, and Machu Picchu.  Most crimes 
involve petty theft, pickpocketing, bag slashing, 
grab-and-run, and theft from occupied and unoccupied 
vehicles.  More violent crimes include armed robbery, 
carjacking, and choke-and-rob.  Criminals frequently react 
violently when resistance is encountered.  In almost all 
instances it is advisable not to offer resistance.  Most 
areas of downtown Lima are dangerous and should be avoided 
during the hours of darkness.  Visitors are cautioned to 
remain alert to their surroundings at all times, particularly 
when in crowded areas, such as on public transportation, at 
outdoor markets, and at tourist sites.  Countermeasures 
against crime also protect against terrorism.  Special care 
should be exercised at the Jorge Chavez International Airport 
in Callao.  Criminals frequent this area, especially at 
night, and are known to target foreigners both inside and 
outside the terminal. 
 
Security briefings are mandatory for all official visitors to 
Peru.  Briefings are given in the RSO Conference Room at the 
Embassy, on Wednesdays, promptly at 9:00 a.m. 
 
¶5.  (U) ICASS TDY Policy and Action Request: 
 
Each visitor, regardless of length of stay, must 
bring/forward fiscal data to pay for direct costs of the 
visit.  Each agency, organization, or visiting delegation 
will be charged for the actual costs attributed to their 
visit.  Direct charge costs include, but are not limited to: 
American and LES staff overtime (e.g., expediter, 
accommodation exchange, representational event support), 
field travel-lodging and M&IE by Embassy employees, vehicle 
rentals, long distance telephone calls, equipment rentals, 
office supplies and all other costs that are directly 
attributable to the visit.  Also, for TDYers over thirty (30) 
days, there is a charge for ICASS support services.  If your 
sponsoring agency is not signed up for ICASS services at 
post, please be prepared to sign a MOU for ICASS support 
services upon arrival.  The agency should provide post with a 
written communication, generated by the traveler,s 
headquarters that confirms the agency will pay ICASS charges 
for the TDYers, provides the agency ICASS billing code the 
TDY support charges should be applied to, and authorizes the 
traveler to sign the ICASS invoice generated by the TDY 
module.  Where travel is urgent, the TDYers should bring this 
documentation with them to ensure there are no interruptions 
in the provision of service.  Post will not provide any 
service to a TDYer staying in excess of thirty days without 
provision of this documentation before day 31 of the TDY. 
 
¶6.  (U)  HEALTH CONCERNS: 
 
Travelers to the jungle areas of Peru should have up-to-date 
yellow fever vaccine and malaria prophylaxis for 
chloroquine-resistant strains of malaria.  Primary prevention 
against malaria and dengue fever includes avoiding the 
mosquito vectors of these diseases: using insect repellant, 
appropriate protective clothing, and bed netting. Hepatitis A 
and B vaccinations are strongly recommended for all persons 
before coming to Peru. Rabies is present in country, and 
those individuals whose work and/or leisure activities might 
expose them to wild animals or feral dogs should consider 
receiving the rabies vaccine. Travelers diarrhea/dysentery is 
quite common in Peru. Visitors should substitute bottled 
beverages for potentially contaminated water.  Fish, 
shellfish, and vegetables should not be eaten unless well 
cooked, and all food should be eaten while still hot.  Fruits 
with a peel are generally safe, provided they are peeled 
before being eaten. Typhoid vaccine is also recommended. 
Cholera is endemic in Peru and disease rates reach high 
 
levels from January to May--the same food and bottled water 
precautions apply.  Travelers planning to travel to high 
altitude areas of Peru, such as Cuzco, Machu Picchu, and 
Puno, should consult with their health care provider first, 
and be fully aware of the health dangers of high altitudes 
and measures to minimize these dangers. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) MEDICAL CLEARANCES: 
 
All employees, including WAEs and Civil Service Employees, 
who are in TDY status for more than 60 days (cumulatively) in 
a calendar year are required to have up-to-date medical 
clearances from the Office of Medical Services (Ref: SecState 
243096) in order to receive full State Department medical 
benefits including: 
 
--Fully cleared TDY personnel receive supplemental medical 
coverage from M/MED for conditions that arise overseas. This 
coverage is in addition to, but does not replace, private 
insurance coverage; 
 
--Fully cleared TDY employees are eligible for full MEDEVAC 
benefits should it become necessary to transport them from 
their assigned posts for medical reasons by other than 
standard commercial carrier; 
 
--Fully cleared TDY personnel are entitled to use the 
facilities of the Medical Unit at post on the same basis as 
other permanently assigned personnel. 
 
It is important to understand that if an employee is at a 
post without a medical clearance and the embassy medical 
provider determines that the employee has a condition that 
cannot be adequately cared for at that post, the employee may 
not be granted access to the embassy medical unit. Moreover, 
an employee at post without a medical clearance is not/not 
covered under M/MED for medical evacuation. While M/MED 
cannot provide MEDEVAC coverage for TDY employees without 
full clearances, private MEDEVAC insurance is available at 
reasonable cost and the employee is strongly encouraged to 
purchase the insurance. Private air ambulance medevacs can 
cost upwards of $100,000. In addition, it is important for 
the employee to review private health insurance coverage. 
Many HMO type policies do not cover hospitalization costs 
incurred outside of the USA. The employee will need to have a 
policy type that will reimburse them for medical expenses 
overseas. 
 
A medical clearance can be obtained as follows: 
 
If the WAE or other TDY employee lives in the Washington, DC 
area, they can schedule a medical clearance exam by calling 
(202) 663-1779 or e-mail to medclearances@state.gov. 
Availability of examination dates depends on demand and 
M/MED's standard priorities. If the exam is conducted in 
Washington, there is no cost to the employee. If the employee 
lives outside Washington, they may have their medical 
clearance exam performed by a private doctor. TheWAE or TDY 
employee can obtain the forms that the doctor needs to 
complete by calling (202) 663-1668. Clearance exams performed 
outside of MED are at the expense of the employee. 
 
Contractors or other long-term TDY employees who are not 
direct-hire USG employees are not covered under the 
Department of State Medical Program and so would, in general, 
fit under the guidelines above for TDY employees without a 
medical clearance. They are not covered by M/MED for medevac 
and should be covered by medevac insurance through their 
contracting company. Access of these employees to the embassy 
medical units is a post decision made by the Chief of Mission 
or his designate acting upon the advice of the Regional 
Medical Officer. Please contact the Embassy Health Unit for 
further details. 
 
Employees working TDY for less than 60 cumulative days 
annually are not required to have medical clearances and are 
not covered under the procedures above. Unfortunately these 
short-term TDY employees frequently may have significant 
health problems that may be exacerbated by overseas travel or 
work and that may require a level of medical care that is not 
available at the post where the TDY employees are working. 
As with any international traveler on personal or business 
travel, these employees should consult with their personal 
physician regarding the safety or advisability of this 
travel. 
POWERS