07MANAGUA1392
POST REQUESTS EXTENSION OF RLA PROGRAM
Fri Jun 01 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #1392/01 1521453
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 011453Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0390
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEABND/DEA HQS WASHINGTON DC
RHMCSUU/FBI WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS MANAGUA 001392 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP, WHA/CEN 
JUSTICE FOR OIA, AFMLS, NDDS, OPDAT 
TREASURY FOR FINCEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EINV KCOR KCRIM SNAR KJUS NU
SUBJECT: POST REQUESTS EXTENSION OF RLA PROGRAM 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 1327 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 605 
     ¶C. MANAGUA 911 
 
¶1.  This is an action request.  See para 3. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  Ambassador requests serious consideration 
by State INL and DOJ-OIA of a continuation of the highly 
effective Resident Legal Advisor (RLA) position at Embassy 
Managua.  Over the past three years, the RLA program has 
allowed this post to forge closer bonds at an institutional 
level with key members of the law enforcement and legal 
community, and to conduct critical instruction and training 
for professional-level law enforcement personnel.  These 
programs have dovetailed perfectly with our USAID Rule of Law 
programs, allowing us to make significant inroads in the 
battle against corruption and organized crime, and forging 
closer relations at the working level with Nicaraguan 
prosecutors and law enforcement authorities.  Among other 
accomplishments, we have finally managed to establish a 
single vetted unit of the Nicaraguan National Police to 
investigate and prosecute crimes related to narcotrafficking, 
international organized crime and corruption.  We also have 
established a more direct, clear, and institutional 
relationship with the new Chief of Police, Aminta Granera, 
which has resulted in increasing success in the battle 
against narcotrafficking and transnational crime in 
particular.  Continuation of this type of 
technical/professional-level cooperation will be especially 
important under the new Sandinista regime of Daniel Ortega, 
which has pledged to continue cooperation with the United 
States on international law enforcement matters, but at the 
same time is forging closer relations with rogue nations such 
as Venezuela, Iran and North Korea.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶3.  (U) Our Resident Legal Advisor (RLA) exercises primary 
responsibility for coordinating and monitoring post's 
anticorruption program, activities critical to the success of 
our mission's Rule of Law and Administration of Justice 
efforts.  Post requests funding to extend the Resident Legal 
Advisor (RLA) program for fiscal year 2008.  In order to 
share costs for the program, the RLA slot could expand to 
include regional training responsibilities.  Currently, there 
are two DOJ representatives who cover Nicaragua:  a judicial 
attach? in El Salvador charged with extradition cases for the 
Office of International Affairs; and an FBI representative 
based in Panama with operational responsibilities for Panama 
and Nicaragua.  Neither DOJ representative has any training 
responsibilities, a key component of Nicaragua's program. 
 
Background on Post's RLA Program 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4.  (SBU) In Nicaragua, corruption within the judiciary is an 
obstacle to all law enforcement efforts.  Ineffective law 
enforcement institutions cannot currently deter crimes 
related to corruption, as the weakened and politically 
manipulated system justice system is vulnerable to undue 
influence.  Indeed, transnational criminal organizations have 
taken advantage of the corruption within the criminal justice 
system, with Nicaragua fast becoming a haven for these 
organizations. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Post consequently decided to develop a specialized 
unit to with high-profile financial, narcotics and corruption 
related crimes.  The unit will bolster intelligence gathering 
and information sharing, centralize knowledge and capacity to 
increase the effectiveness law enforcement efforts and take 
over sensitive cases from ordinary law enforcement agencies 
that have been perceived as corrupt.  The unit is centralized 
at the national level and staffed with hand-picked, vetted 
specialists -- currently only members of the Nicaraguan 
National Police are part of the unit, but we plan to include 
independent prosecutors as well as other law enforcement 
personnel.  It is located in its own building and reports 
directly to the police chief.  This provides a buffer against 
political and administrative interference.  Ultimately, this 
arrangement will prevent corruption within the different 
components of the criminal justice system. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Post first established the RLA office in the summer 
of 2004 to assist the GON in its efforts to combat 
corruption.  The RLA supported the Nicaraguan Offices of the 
Attorney General and National Prosecutor, as well as the 
Economic Crimes Unit of the National Police by providing 
training and technical assistance to prosecutors and police 
on how to investigate and prosecute corruption cases.  The 
RLA for FY 2005-2007 focused primarily on standing-up and 
training the vetted unit described above and coordinating 
Embassy anti-corruption efforts.  There is no FBI or DHS 
representative at post, and the RLA acts as the liaison 
between the Embassy and DOJ on legal and law enforcement 
matters and assistance programs.  Post is committed to 
ensuring the success of the vetted unit.  Post estimates that 
USD 400,000 is needed for administrative costs to continue 
the RLA program. 
 
Accomplishments 
- - - - - - - - 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The RLA holds primary responsibility for 
coordinating the Embassy's anti-corruption efforts and is 
critical in assisting with efforts to combat financial 
crimes.  Accomplishments include: 
 
- Developing a Vetted Unit 
 
After several years of planning, the GON, in cooperation with 
the Embassy, has established a new vetted unit that will 
conduct high profile and, at times sensitive, corruption, 
drug trafficking, drug-related weapons, and money laundering 
investigations.  The unit is interdisciplinary, addressing 
both corruption, financial crimes and drug trafficking cases. 
 The RLA was critical in setting up the unit and has 
developed a comprehensive multi-disciplinary training program 
to provide the unit's personnel with the necessary 
specialized knowledge to enforce the law against those who 
commit acts of corruption (MANAGUA 1327).  In only the first 
month of existence, RLA provided training on investigative 
techniques and a seminar to develop a handbook on 
investigating financial crimes.  The RLA worked with other 
law enforcement agencies for technical assistance and 
training support. The objective is for this unit to take 
charge of the investigation and prosecution of key corruption 
cases. 
 
- Continuation of Anti-Corruption Program and Training 
 
The RLA coordinated post's anti-corruption program, working 
closely with Embassy staff and Nicaraguan officials to 
identify corruption concerns and effectively address these 
concerns.  He also provided training to enhance the ability 
of Nicaraguan prosecutors and investigators to work together 
and successfully target, investigate and prosecute corruption 
and financial crime cases.  Most notably, the RLA recently 
organized a technical assistance project that assisted 
Nicaraguan law enforcement officials in developing a 
framework to work collaboratively to combat corruption.  The 
three-day workshop was run by the RLA, a program manager from 
OPDAT, and an FBI agent who helped the attendees draft a 
handbook of best practices for investigating and prosecuting 
corruption and related crimes (MANAGUA 911). 
 
- Legislative Analysis and Reform 
 
The RLA has provided analysis of high profile cases of 
interest to the Embassy, such as the Volz and Almanza cases 
(MANAGUA 605).  He analyzes Nicaraguan laws and procedures 
with an eye toward potential changes which would facilitate 
the investigation and prosecution of corruption cases and was 
a key partner in USAID efforts on the new criminal code.  The 
RLA also provides guidance to the Embassy and GON on laws and 
cases involving money laundering, alien smuggling, and 
trafficking in persons. 
 
Future plans 
- - - - - - - 
 
¶8.  (SBU) With no DHS or FBI presence at post, it is 
essential to retain the RLA position to coordinate 
anti-corruption programs.  Also, post does not have a 
Narcotic Affairs Section, only a Political Officer 
coordinating the INL portfolio.  Thus, the expertise of an 
RLA is invaluable to other INL programs at post.  Over the 
next year, the primary goal of the RLA program would be to 
help further develop the vetted unit, as well as assisting 
the GON in anti-corruption activities by helping law 
enforcement officials and prosecutors build their capacity to 
investigate and prosecute corruption cases.  Towards this 
end, the RLA has developed a training schedule for the unit 
over the next six months which will enable the unit to engage 
in investigations of significant corruption cases.  The RLA 
will also foster cooperation with Procuraduria and Fiscalia 
-- working to ultimately include them in the unit. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Post believes that it essential to support the 
vetted unit and ensure that the unit is well-trained and 
capable of pursuing national investigations for domestic 
prosecution in Nicaraguan courts as well as helping with 
international cases.  This commitment by the Embassy, INL, 
the RLA program and DEA furthers the USG's policy to assist 
Nicaragua in developing a credible program to combat its 
rampant public and private corruption. 
 
TRIVELLI