07MANAGUA444
BOLANOS TO SECRETARY LEAVITT - DEMOCRACY IS NOT
Tue Feb 20 00:00:00 +0100 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0005
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0444/01 0511312
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 201312Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEAUSA/DEPT OF HHS WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9143
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0955
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 000444 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
HHS FOR SECRETARY LEAVITT 
MCA FOR AMBASSADOR DANILOVICH 
DEPT FOR WHA A/S SHANNON AND WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/13/2017 
TAGS: EAID ECON EFIN KDEM NU PGOV PINR PREL
SUBJECT: BOLANOS TO SECRETARY LEAVITT - DEMOCRACY IS NOT 
EASY 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul A. Trivelli. Reasons 1.4 (B,D). 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY:  On January 10, the U.S. Presidential 
Delegation (Presdel), led by Health and Human Services (HHS) 
Secretary Michael Leavitt, discussed with outgoing President 
 
SIPDIS 
Enrique Bolanos his plans for a virtual presidential library, 
his future role in the National Assembly and his perspective 
on Daniel Ortega's presidency. Bolanos shared details from a 
recent four-hour-long meeting with Ortega.  He also remarked 
on the importance of the Millennium Challenge Corporation 
project to Nicaragua. END SUMMARY 
 
Democracy is not easy, nor is serving as President 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  (C) After inquiring about the health of Bolanos' son 
Javier (who is receiving treatment for cancer in the United 
States) Secretary Leavitt began the conversation by remarking 
that this was an historic day for Nicaragua.  Bolanos 
responded that Daniel Ortega's inauguration may be a step 
backwards for Nicaragua and that "democracy is not easy." 
Secretary Leavitt asked Bolanos what he had learned during 
 
SIPDIS 
his tenure as president.  Bolanos commented that nothing 
about being president "was easy," that he had found "nothing 
rewarding" about his tenure and, he lamented he had to give 
up his private life for a "mostly ungrateful" public. 
 
¶3.  (C) Bolanos relayed his future plans to create an 
"electronic" presidential library accessible via 
the Internet.  He is seeking funding sources and university 
support for the project.  Secretary Leavitt, in turn, shared 
his experiences with creating a library of the official 
documents from his term as Governor of Utah and promised to 
put Bolanos in touch with universities in the United States 
that might support his effort.  The President indicated that 
"as soon as he is a free man," he intends to visit former 
President George H.W. Bush and to tour his Presidential 
Library, at Texas A&M University in College Station, Texas. 
Bolanos also mentioned the books that he is writing -- a 
history of the Nicaraguan presidency, an account of the 
political attempts by Daniel Ortega and Arnoldo Aleman to 
unseat him, and a detailed account of the political 
maneuverings in Nicaragua that resulted in the passage of the 
Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) by the National 
Assembly.  The President claimed he is working on 12 books 
simultaneously and that he rises every morning at four 
o'clock to write.  Bolanos added that he wholeheartedly 
supports a Freedom of Information Act, and that even though 
the National Assembly refuses to approve the bill, he will 
make all his presidential papers available to the public. 
 
Uncertain future 
- - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4.  (C) Bolanos speculated on the future political situation 
and emphasized that Ortega and Aleman will control all four 
branches of the Nicaraguan Government (the Executive, the 
Judiciary, the Legislative and the Electoral Authority), a 
situation that is "tantamount to a dictatorship."  The 
President said, in his view, the essence of democracy is the 
diffusion of decision-making; "That's over" in Nicaragua, he 
said.  For Bolanos, the Pact is as strong as ever, and the 
National Assembly's passage of the Ley Organica (Ways and 
Means Law) by overruling a presidential veto is another sign 
of the "marriage between Ortega and Aleman."  He believes 
National Assembly Deputies voted for the Ley Organica because 
they were offered a "bribe" -- included in the legislation 
was an item that allows all Deputies and their replacements 
to import two vehicles, free of tax.  (Note:  Aleman actually 
sent a letter to Bolanos to argue that as a National Assembly 
Deputy -- regardless of his legal status -- he is entitled to 
the same benefit.  The President refused to reply.  End 
Note.)  Bolanos believes Ortega needs Aleman to help retain 
control.  With the Pact still strong, Bolanos doubts local 
mayors or other officials will have any autonomy.  Sadly, 
Bolanos remarked, "most Nicaraguan politicians are ruled by 
money, not values." 
 
¶5.  (C) Secretary Leavitt responded to Bolanos' remark by 
stating that every legislative body needs a conscience and 
that Bolanos could serve that role.  Bolanos said he plans to 
attend National Assembly sessions "every once and a while" 
 
for key votes, though he doubts his influence, since he would 
be "only one voice out of 92."  "If they need my vote, I will 
be available," he said.  He also remarked a recent rule would 
require Deputies to attend the majority of sessions, which 
would make his plan impossible. 
 
¶6.  (C) The Secretary commented that the situation Bolanos 
described is a "difficult recipe" for the country.  He 
praised Bolanos for his contributions and urged him to 
continue to serve the people of Nicaragua.  Bolanos replied 
that democracy is a process -- "countries are never 
completely built; we need to continue building."  He added 
that, unfortunately, the Nicaraguan people are scared, and 
investors are concerned about the new Government.  The 
President added, "Ortega had the benefit of the doubt; now 
people will doubt the benefit."  Outgoing Health Minister 
Margarita Gurdian commented that 60 percent of the Nicaraguan 
people did not vote for Daniel Ortega and that the municipal 
elections in 2008 could provide an opportunity to change the 
current situation. 
 
"I wish I knew Ortega's heart" 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7.  (C) Bolanos commented that Ortega does not understand how 
to be an administrator and that his Olof Palme decision is a 
clear example of his failings. (Note:  Ortega declared that 
he would not use the current presidency building; instead he 
will move his offices into the old convention center -- Olof 
Palme.  He contracted for repairs of the building without 
following any of the Government procurement regulations. End 
Note.)  Bolanos said he had discussed the issue with Ortega 
during a four-hour meeting the previous week.  They also 
discussed CAFTA at length, and Bolanos commented that, at the 
end of the discussion, Ortega reluctantly admitted that CAFTA 
should be protected. 
 
¶8.  (C) In response, the Secretary asked if Ortega's "heart 
had changed."  Bolanos replied that he wished he "knew 
Ortega's heart."  He added Ortega is not necessarily the 
problem, rather the "anarchists" that surround him, and 
mentioned by way of example Sandinista ideologues Orlando 
Nunez (the new Coordinator for the Council for Food Security 
and Food Sovereignty) and Ruth Selma Herrera (the new head of 
Water and Sewage Services, ENACAL).  Bolanos believes that if 
Ortega had more moderate advisors, he "might change." 
 
¶9.  (C) Bolanos concluded by saying that "we need to build on 
what we have," and emphasized the importance of the MCC 
project to Nicaragua.  He also mentioned the success of a 
project he had supported during his presidency -- the 
construction of a road to Kukra Hill on the impoverished 
Atlantic Coast.  Before the project, the area had been 
virtually inaccessible by land.  After road construction was 
completed, the prices of consumables fell by 50 percent, 
which immediately provided economic relief to the residents. 
Ambassador Trivelli assured Bolanos the United States will 
not abandon Nicaragua and will continue to work with 
democratic partners.  He emphasized the U.S. Government is 
fully aware of his concerns and potential problems with the 
new administration.  MCC Chief Executive Officer (CEO) 
Ambassador John Danilovich added his thanks for Bolanos' 
leadership, which made the MCC compact with Nicaragua 
possible. 
 
¶10.  (U) Participants: 
 
Nicaragua: 
President Enrique Bolanos Geyer 
Chief of Staff Leonardo "Nayo" Somarriba 
Senior Political Adviser Frank Arana 
Health Minister Margarita Gurdian 
 
U.S.: 
Secretary Michael Leavitt 
 
SIPDIS 
MCC CEO John Danilovich 
Assistant Secretary Tom Shannon 
Ambassador Paul Trivelli 
DCM Peter Brennan 
HHS Special Assistant to the Secretary William Steiger 
Political Officer/notetaker Nicole Chulick 
 
¶11.  (U) This cable was cleared by Secretary Leavitt and MCC 
CEO Danilovich. 
TRIVELLI