07MANAGUA385
MISKITO COMMUNITY COMMITTED BUT FRACTURED
Fri Feb 09 00:00:00 +0100 2007
CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0385/01 0402130
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 092130Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9050
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 000385 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN SCHIFFER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/06/2017 
TAGS: KDEM KIRF PGOV PINS PREL PHUM SOCI EAID NU
SUBJECT: MISKITO COMMUNITY COMMITTED BUT FRACTURED 
 
REF: A. 2006 MANAGUA 02441 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 00268 
     ¶C. MANAGUA 00334 
 
Classified By: Classified by Ambassador P. Trivelli for reasons 1.4b 
 
¶1.  (C) SUMMARY: Poloff talked with political and civil 
society leaders in Puerto Cabezas, Northern Autonomous Region 
(RAAN) about the situation there and their views on the 
Ortega Administration.  Leaders of the Moravian church, the 
historical bedrock of the indigenous Miskito community, 
admitted the church is weak, leaving pastors and parishioners 
vulnerable to Sandinista influence.  Miskitos insist that 
YATAMA leader Brooklyn Rivera works as a "hatchet man" for 
Ortega, but they lack the coordination and resources to oust 
him from power.  Miskitos may lose their right to 
democratically elect their leaders if Rivera succeeds in 
amending the law of autonomy for the Atlantic Coast.  Despite 
Ortega's election campaign promises of peace and 
reconciliation, non-Sandinista Miskitos face mounting 
economic and social discrimination.  These non-Sandinista 
forces seek our assistance in forming a coordinating 
committee composed of Miskito political and civil society 
organizations to define a common vision and priorities and 
fund specific programs developed to achieve these priorities. 
 Without assistance, the Miskito community will remain 
divided, leaving it vulnerable to the Sandinistas' aggressive 
efforts to win hearts and minds in the region.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (C) On February 2-3, poloff visited Puerto Cabezas RAAN 
to meet with political and civil society leaders to discuss 
their views on the opportunities and challenges presented by 
the Ortega Administration.  During the visit, poloff met with 
the newly-elected Superintendent of the Moravian Church; 
leaders of the YATAMA No-Sandinista movement; several 
interfaith religious leaders forming an indigenous advisory 
committee; representatives from the Council of Elders; a 
splinter group of women from the indigenous women's 
organization AMICA who have aligned themselves with YATAMA 
No-Sandinista; representatives of YATAMA President and 
National Assembly deputy Brooklyn Rivera; and, leaders from 
the indigenous political party PAMUC.  While each group 
talked of their particular needs, a number of common themes 
emerged which could help unify the indigenous communities. 
 
Moravian Church on the Decline 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3.  (C) According to Cora Antonia, the first-ever woman 
elected as Superintendent of the Moravian Church, the church 
has been on the decline since the Sandinistas came to power 
in 1979.  Prior to 1979, the church ran a seminary, a nursing 
school, two hospitals, and several schools.  Never wealthy, 
the church provided the communities with spiritual guidance, 
education, and health services.  It formed the core of the 
Miskito community and was important in protecting and 
maintaining Miskito culture.  Antonia revealed that the 
situation has changed.  The church faces growing pressure 
from pastors and parishioners to provide material assistance 
that the church is unable to provide. 
 
¶4.  (C) Although Antonia affirmed that the church is "open to 
all, both YATAMA and Sandinistas", she admitted that she and 
other church and community leaders are "worried about 
changes, given our past experience" and that "we must analyze 
Ortega's true intentions."  She cited Ortega's recent attempt 
to change the National seal as a "bad sign of the President's 
behavior" that "makes the population fear him."  Despite this 
wariness, the church's limited effectiveness in recent years 
to help the communities is forcing the communities to look 
elsewhere for assistance. 
 
¶5.  (C) Of particular concern to Antonia are the church's 
pastors.  They are extremely influential in the communities, 
but their poverty -- pastors earn just 350 Cordobas ($19 
dollars) per month -- and lack of political astuteness may 
make them vulnerable to influence.  Working through the 
pastors, she believes, the Sandinistas could gain the 
confidence of the communities, overcoming their natural 
skepticism (Ref. A).  To counter this, she highlighted the 
need for better salaries and specific training on the 
electoral process with emphasis on civic responsibilities / 
participation and ethics.  (Comment: If the Sandinistas 
employ the Moravian pastors as a tool to increase their 
influence in the communities, opposition parties could lose 
more ground to the Sandinistas in the 2008 municipal 
elections.  End Comment). 
 
¶6.  (C) To combat the challenges facing the Moravian church 
and the Miskito communities, Antonia is formulating a 
five-point plan focusing on communication, administration, 
social programs, education, and  inter-gender / generation 
relations.  Because so many Miskito communities are isolated, 
Antonia hopes to first create a church newsletter -- written 
in native languages -- that would deliver unified news and 
information and act as a counterweight to the local 
activities of the Sandinistas. 
 
YATAMA Leader Without Support 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7.  (C) There was universal agreement among the Miskito 
leaders that YATAMA President Brooklyn Rivera does not 
represent the will of the Miskito people.  They believe he 
struck a deal with the Sandinista National Liberation Front 
(FSLN) and Daniel Ortega to stay in power and now works as a 
"hatchet man" for Ortega.  They insisted that Rivera is a 
traitor and the biggest threat to the Miskito community. 
Despite this widespread discontent, the Miskito community has 
not been able to move him from power.  According to YATAMA 
bi-laws, a sitting president can only be removed by the 
majority vote of a General Assembly.  However, the Miskitos 
have not been able to convene a General Assembly due to lack 
of inter-community coordination and financial resources. 
Until Brooklyn is removed, leaders insisted, little can be 
done to stop the influx of Sandinista money and influence. 
 
Liberal Supporters Black-Listed 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8.  (C) Since the elections, Rivera has publicly threatened 
opposition leader Osorno Coleman ("Comandante Blas") (Ref. B) 
and repeatedly warned people who voted for the Liberal 
opposition parties that "their time is coming."  Leaders 
reported that Rivera has publicly promised to channel 
government and NGO support and programs to FSLN supporters, 
creating fear and confusion in the Miskito communities. 
Further, it appears that Brooklyn has created a "black list" 
of people who voted for the opposition.  People on the list 
cannot get government jobs, qualify for loans or 
scholarships, or get jobs with FSLN-aligned private 
businesses in the communities.  Opposition supporters have 
also been ostracized and excluded in neighborhoods and 
communities. 
 
Law 28 Reforms - Undermines Democratic Elections 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶9.  (C) As a National Assembly deputy, Rivera also reportedly 
seeks to amend Law 28, the law that defines the terms of the 
RAAN's autonomy.  According to Miskito leaders, Rivera is 
coordinating an effort with FSLN supporters in the RAAN to 
introduce legislation that would eliminate popular elections. 
 Instead, insisted the leaders, pre-selected candidates would 
be put before a General Assembly only for the purpose of 
ratification.  Leaders believe Rivera is trying to justify 
this subversion of democracy under the guise of the Miskito's 
traditional practice of convening popular assemblies to vote 
on issues affecting the community.  If this legislation is 
introduced, stressed the leaders, support from the Liberal 
parties will be critical to defeat the measure. 
 
Opposition Skeptical of Sandinista Promises, but Offers Little 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶10.  (C) In light of Ortega and the Sandinistas' history in 
the RAAN, there was unanimous skepticism among the various 
leaders that Ortega will be able to fulfill his election 
promises.  Instead, they suspect that programs and support -- 
as Rivera has announced -- will be strategically targeted at 
FSLN supporters and key influencers in the communities, 
including former Contra fighters, to maximize the political 
and public relations impact.  Leaders acknowledged that 
"assistance is assistance," but believe the FSLN's intentions 
are disingenuous, designed only to win enough support to tip 
the scales in the FSLN's favor in 2008 municipal elections. 
 
¶11.  (C) Miskito leaders begrudgingly admitted, however, that 
while they are skeptical and critical of the FSLN and 
Rivera's offers of support, they have little to offer their 
communities aside from anti-Sandinista rhetoric emphasizing 
the atrocities of the past.  They understand that they must 
counter-balance the Sandinistas with programs and support of 
their own, but complained that they lack the robust social 
infrastructure of the Sandinistas vis-a-vis  a network of 
NGOs and community organizations.  With a Sandinista 
government now in power that has a declared intention to help 
FSLN supporters, leaders lamented that they will fall even 
further behind in the race to win hearts and minds in the 
RAAN. 
 
Battle for Identity Within YATAMA 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶12.  (C) Given the damage inflicted on the RAAN by Rivera, 
leaders expressed a strong desire to disassociate from him 
either by forming a new indigenous movement or by expelling 
him from YATAMA.  Many of the Miskito leaders favored the 
formation of a new movement.  Poloff mentioned that forming a 
new movement poses two immediate problems.  First, doing so 
does not remove Rivera from his official position as the 
leader of YATAMA, but simply creates a competing 
organization.  Second, YATAMA has universal name recognition 
in the RAAN.  A new movement would have to create name 
awareness which, even in the best of circumstances takes 
time, good communications, and resources, none of which the 
YATAMA No-Sandinista movement has.  Further, Rivera -- 
through his alliance with Ortega -- would certainly stir up 
strong resistance to such an effort.  Instead, poloff 
suggested creating an integrated plan that unites the 
factions of the YATAMA No-Sandinista movement around a common 
goal of convening a General Assembly to elect new YATAMA 
leadership.  Removing Rivera from YATAMA would rob Ortega of 
his most valuable ally in the RAAN and could impede Ortega's 
aspirations in the region. 
 
YATAMA in Lock-Step with Ortega Government 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶13.  (C) Rivera's representatives were keenly aware of the 
resistance and resentment among the Miskito people towards 
Rivera and the FSLN, but believe it stems from fear of change 
and lack of understanding.  Upon aligning itself with the 
FSLN, they explained, YATAMA proposed -- and the FSLN 
accepted -- a 17-point plan to help the region.  They 
insisted that the alliance will continue only as long as the 
FSLN complies with its obligations under the plan.  The 
plan's key initiatives include: 
 
- election of one national deputy and one regional deputy to 
the National Assembly and one deputy to the Central American 
Parliament (Note: This objective was accomplished.  End Note); 
 
- continuing with property demarcation and titling of 
indigenous lands (Ref. C); 
 
- payment of indemnities in the Rio Coco area for loses 
caused by the Sandinistas in the 1980s (Ref. B); 
 
- resolution of a case before the Inter-American Commission 
on Human Rights that prohibited YATAMA participation in the 
2000 elections as well as electoral reforms; and 
 
- reform of Law 28 in support of candidate approval by 
General Assembly; 
 
Montealegre Continues to Ignore RAAN 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶14.  (C) While YATAMA and the FSLN are moving forward on a 
common strategy, the YATAMA No-Sandinista leaders complained 
that they continue to be ignored by the leadership of the 
Nicaraguan Liberal Alliance (ALN), despite having won 17,000 
votes for the ALN in the RAAN in the 2006 presidential 
elections (Ref. B).  Leaders blasted ALN candidate Eduardo 
Montealegre for never acknowledging their efforts in the RAAN 
on his behalf and opined that he lacks the strength to lead 
the ALN in the lead-up to the 2008 municipal elections. 
Poloff suggested that the YATAMA No-Sandinista leadership 
provide a specific list of "good faith" gestures to 
Montealegre that would demonstrate his continued commitment 
to his allies in the RAAN. 
 
Comment - Miskito Risk - Failure to Launch 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶15.  (C) Without exception, the leaders of the various 
anti-Sandinista groups, including the Moravian 
Superintendent, stressed the need to organize community 
assemblies to discuss their problems and strategize 
solutions.  With the exception of the inter-faith religious 
leaders, however, each group did so with the intention of 
solving its own particular problems -- even though each group 
used almost identical vocabulary and identified common 
obstacles to achieving their goals.  What they lack is a 
coordinating committee to identify common problems and 
develop common solutions.  When the idea of such a committee 
was raised, each group saw the advantage, but thought their 
organization should take the lead, even though most of the 
groups have no legal charter, no experience in developing 
plans or implementing projects, and little understanding of 
the work and resources required. 
 
¶16.  (C) To start, these anti-Sandinista groups must agree to 
the concept of a coordinating committee, select 
representatives from their groups, identify a leader, and 
develop a set of common priorities around which they can 
begin to formulate a plan.  This coordinating committee must 
include a representative from a legally chartered 
organization with capacity and experience in project 
development and execution through which it can eventually 
implement its strategy.  Both the Miskito NGO FURCA and the 
indigenous government of Karata - established under 
Nicaraguan law as a parallel structure to the State's 
municipal government system - are strong candidates.  Failure 
to take these initial steps will result in more of the same - 
words without action.  The USG can play a strategic role by 
encouraging these groups to meet, facilitating their initial 
planning, and funding specific programs and projects within 
the overall plan.  Doing so will promote a democratic 
counterweight in the RAAN and could help keep the 
Sandinistas' efforts in check. 
 
 
 
 
TRIVELLI