07MANAGUA538
CODEL NELSON MEETS WITH LIBERAL LEADERS IN
Wed Feb 28 00:00:00 +0100 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0013
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0538/01 0591429
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 281429Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9267
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0973
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 000538 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN AND H FOR MIKE SMITH 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/20/2017 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR OVIP VE NU
SUBJECT: CODEL NELSON MEETS WITH LIBERAL LEADERS IN 
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 
 
 
Classified By: CDA Peter Brennan for reasons 1.4 (b and d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: The heads of the Nicaraguan National Assembly 
Liberal caucuses recently shared with Senator Nelson their 
skepticism over President Ortega's professed commitments to 
democracy and reconciliation and believe that the Assembly 
and international community must serve as checks to Ortega's 
totalitarian ambitions.  Maria Eugenia Sequeira of the 
Nicaraguan Liberal Alliance (ALN) and Maximino Rodriguez of 
the Liberal Constitutional Party (PLC) confessed to fears of 
retribution from the Sandinistas for criticizing the 
administration, but agree that Liberal deputies must accept 
risk for the good of the country.  Both Sequeira and 
Rodriguez supportQe goal of unifying the two Liberal 
parties and forming a united front in the Assembly, but 
disagree on methodology and the role the party leaders should 
play in the process.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) Codel Nelson met with the Liberal caucus chiefs on 
February 19 to discuss the future of Nicaragua under 
President Ortega and the role of the opposition.  The meeting 
originally included Edwin Castro of the Sandinista National 
Liberation Front (FSLN), and Victor Hugo Tinoco of the 
Sandinista Renovation Movement (MRS), but ultimately Castro 
and Tinoco could not attend.  Consequently, the conversation 
became an open "family chat" between the two Liberals. 
 
The Direction of Nicaragua under the Ortega Administration 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3. (C) When Senator Nelson inquired about the future of 
Nicaragua under the Ortega Administration, Sequeira replied 
that Nicaraguans had hoped for the best and were encouraged 
by the FSLN's message of peace and reconciliation before the 
inauguration.  Unfortunately, she commented, Ortega's message 
has changed during and after the inauguration as Ortega has 
sought support from hard-line governments in Venezuela and 
Iran and attempted to centralize control of the government in 
the Presidency.  Sequeira specifically mentioned the 
Administration's direct violation of laws by taking control 
of the Olof Palme convention center without reimbursing the 
managing institution and granting powers and budgets to newly 
created citizen councils. 
 
¶4. (C) Rodriguez stated that Ortega is a "hostage" of his 
inner circle of advisors, most of whom are not competent. 
Commenting on Ortega's "double talk" regarding relations with 
the U.S. and extremist regimes, he said that Ortega wants to 
"be favored by God and the Devil."  Rodriguez criticized 
Ortega's refusal to destroy Nicaragua's stock of portable 
surface-to-air missiles (MANPADS), claiming that Ortega's 
intransigence could scare off investors and tourists who 
could perceive Nicaragua as unstable and insecure. 
 
¶5. (C) Despite their skepticism, both Sequeira and Rodriguez 
believe that moderating factors will prevent Nicaragua from 
reverting to a full-fledged dictatorship.  Sequeira mentioned 
pressure from the private sector and opposition control of 
the National Assembly.  Rodriguez agreed that the Assembly 
will take a close look at Ortega's agreements with Iran and 
Venezuela and propose constitutional reforms to limit the 
President's powers.  He also believes that Nicaragua's need 
for assistance from international organizations and the donor 
community will hold Ortega in check. 
 
Opposition Leaders Must Accept Risk, Despite Fears of 
Retribution 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
- - 
 
¶6. (C) Referencing the chaotic atmosphere and extra-judicial 
killings that occurred in the post-revolution period, Senator 
Nelson asked the deputies if they fear for their personal 
safety.  Sequeira responded that she never left Nicaragua 
during the 1980s, enduring "ten years of terror."  She 
believes that the Sandinistas have become more 
"sophisticated" in their intimidation tactics, although her 
children warn her not to criticize Ortega too openly, and she 
admitted that she is afraid to drive at night.  Nevertheless, 
Sequeira stated that the deputies have a responsibility to 
overcome their fears for the sake of the country. 
 
¶7. (C) Rodriguez recounted his experience as a contra fighter 
and agreed that the opposition deputies must "accept some 
level of risk."  He said that Ortega's supporters are still 
assassinating their critics, mentioning the case of a 
journalist who was gunned down two years ago.  Rodriguez, who 
maintains his residence in the department of Matagalpa (which 
he represents), was advised not to commute to give the 
Sandinistas less opportunity to kill him in an "accident." 
 
The Future of the Opposition and Liberal Unity 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8. (C) Rodriguez and Sequeira engaged in a lively but 
respectful discussion sparked by questions from Senator 
Nelson and Ambassador Trivelli regarding Liberal unity and 
the future of the opposition.  Both agreed that Liberal unity 
is essential to block Ortega's totalitarian tendencies and 
reverse the Sandinistas' recent electoral gains in municipal 
and national elections.  Sequeira insisted that PLC leader 
(and ex-President and convicted money launderer) Arnoldo 
Aleman is beholden to his political pact with Ortega and 
should retire to allow ALN leader Montealegre to assume the 
unquestioned mantle of Liberal leadership.  Rodriguez did not 
defend Aleman, but faulted Montealegre's lack of charisma and 
suggested that both leaders step aside.  Senator Nelson 
reminded them that Chavez owes his power to the infighting of 
Venezuelan opposition forces and urged them not to let that 
happen in Nicaragua. 
 
¶9. (U) Participants: 
 
Nicaragua: 
 
ALN Caucus Chief Maria Eugenia Sequeira 
PLC Caucus Chief Maximino Rodriguez 
 
USG: 
 
Senator Bill Nelson 
Mrs. Grace Nelson 
Ms. Caroline Tess 
Ms. Sherry Davich 
Captain Gene Moran 
Ambassador Paul Trivelli 
DCM Peter Brennan 
Polcouns Victoria Alvarado 
Poloff Timothy L. Smith, note taker 
Poloff Irene Marr, control officer 
 
¶10. (U) This cable was cleared by Codel Nelson. 
TRIVELLI