07MANAGUA194
NICARAGUA: AMBASSADOR CALLS ON NEW MINISTER OF
Wed Jan 24 00:00:00 +0100 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0194/01 0241858
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 241858Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8749
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 000194 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
WHA/CEN/GSCHIFFER, WHA/ESPC, EB/TPP/BTA, EB/CBA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/22/2017 
TAGS: ECON EAID EINV NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA: AMBASSADOR CALLS ON NEW MINISTER OF 
FINANCE 
 
 
Classified By: AMB Paul Trivelli, Reason: E.O. 12958 1.4 (b) (d) 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary. In a January 22 introductory meeting with 
the Ambassador, newly minted Minister of Finance and Public 
Credit Alberto Jose Guevara Obregon sressed that the clear 
intention of the Ortega administration is to maintain 
macroeconomic stability.  Guevara reported that he is talking 
to the IMF, World Bank, Interamerican Development Bank, among 
other institutions, about continuing programs.  In his view, 
an IMF program is particularly important to send the right 
signals to international investors and donors.  He said that 
the government has no plans to expropriate property, close 
off investment in sensitive sectors, nor to do anything that 
might damage the investment environment.  Guevara assured the 
Ambassador that his Ministry will continue to work with the 
Embassy to resolve property expropriation cases from the 
1980s, though it may "take a while to become acquainted with 
the cases."  He expressed interest in USAID's program with 
the Ministry of Family on results-based budgeting, stating 
that improving ministry performance is his "number one 
priority."  Throughout, Guevara reiterated the intention of 
the Ortega Administration to fulfill its promise to reduce 
poverty in Nicaragua. End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) On January 22, the Ambassador paid a courtesy call on 
new Minister of Finance and Public Credit Alberto Jose 
Guevara Obregon.  The meeting was cordial and at the end 
staff took a photograph of the two shaking hands.  Guevara 
commented that President Bush's telephone call on the eve of 
Daniel Ortega's inauguration was well-received.  He said that 
his door is always open to address any topic that the 
Ambassador would like to raise.  Guevara did not invite any 
staff to attend the meeting, and took his own notes.  The DCM 
and Econoff attended. 
 
U.S. Assistance 
--------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) The Ambassador mentioned several areas where U.S. 
technical assistance intersected with the Ministry of 
Finance, including U.S. Treasury and USAID-sponsored 
technical advisories in the areas of debt management and 
taxation.  In addition, USAID and nongovernmental 
organization ProNicass had worked with the Ministry of Family 
on results-based budgeting.  This effort had oriented 50% of 
the ministry's budget toward achieving ministry objectives, 
up from 20%.  The Ambassador said that USAID and ProNicass 
are willing to work with Guevara to help other ministries 
manage their resources better.  Guevara took note of the 
technical advisories and the ProNicass program, adding that 
improving ministry performance is his "number one priority." 
Guevara also praised the U.S. Millennium Challenge Account 
model, commenting that it is one that Nicaragua should 
replicate. 
 
Property Claims 
--------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Ambassador stressed the need to resolve property 
claims stemming from expropriations that took place in the 
1980s.  While the number of cases had been reduced from 
around 4500 to less than 700, it is still necessary to finish 
the job.  The Ambassador handed over a list of high profile 
cases nearing completion.  Guevara assured the Ambassador 
that his Ministry will continue to work with the Embassy to 
resolve outstanding claims, "though it may take a while to 
become acquainted with the cases." 
 
Economic Policy 
--------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) After the events following President Ortega's 
inauguration, where Ortega signed a series of political and 
economic agreements (still not publicly available) with 
Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez, Bolivian President Evo 
Morales, Cuban Vice President Jose Ramon Machado Ventura, and 
then Iranian President Maumoud Ahmadinejad, the Ambassador 
noted that U.S. investors had begun questioning what sort of 
economic model the new government plans to pursue.  Guevara 
stressed that the overriding objective of the Ortega 
administration is to reduce poverty.  As a poor country, 
Nicaragua is open to any investment that would help to 
develop the country.  In this vein, the government's clear 
intention is to maintain macroeconomic stability and a sound 
investment climate.  Guevara said that he is talking to the 
IMF, World Bank, Interamerican Development Bank, among other 
institutions, with respect to continuing programs to ensure 
macroeconomic stability.  In particular, he noted the 
importance of maintaining an IMF program as a way of 
signaling to investors and donors that the Ortega 
administration is not contemplating a break with the past. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Guevara added that the Ortega government has no 
plans to expropriate property (as in the 1980s) nor do 
anything that will damage the favorable investment climate 
that currently exists.  In answer to a question as to whether 
the government is thinking about limiting foreign investment 
in sensitive sectors, such as energy or coastal property, 
Guevara hesitated a moment before saying that "Nicaragua is 
not going to shut the door on anyone ( (nor) obstruct 
investment in any sector."  The Ambassador pointed out that 
Nicaragua's weak judicial system and corruption continue to 
negatively influence investor perception of the country, and 
that these areas need attention.  Guevara responded that the 
government is working in this direction, but offered no 
specifics. 
 
Guevara's Bio 
------------- 
 
¶7. (U) Guevara's official curriculum vitae is not yet 
available.  However, we understand that he holds two Masters 
Degrees from the National University of Nicaragua, one in 
Economics and Development and the other in Public Finance. 
At one point during his academic career, he received a 
scholarship from the Interamerican Development Bank to attend 
the Pontifical Catholic University of Chile, where he 
completed a course in macroeconomics.  More recently, Guevara 
worked at the Central Bank, where he concentrated on debt 
sustainability, national income accounting, and statistical 
programs for the management of information systems. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8. (C) We are unsure about Guevara's ability to manage the 
Ministry of Finance, as he appears to lack managerial and 
political experience.  While we are encouraged by his 
openness, we see the meeting in terms of what appears to be a 
dual communications strategy.  By keeping distance and 
criticizing the United States in public, the Ortega 
Administration retains its revolutionary stature at home and 
in the region.  By pursuing a moderate economic policy course 
and programs with international financial institutions, the 
Ortega Administration placates investors and avoids 
alienating donors.  Viewed in this context, Guevara may 
simply have been following orders rather than expressing his 
own views.  Still, promises and expectations of the 
Sandinista faithful, combined with inherent contradictions 
and jitters created by the administration's foreign policy 
alliances, may make it difficult for Guevara to maintain the 
macroeconomic stability and fiscal responsibility he seeks. 
TRIVELLI