07MANAGUA542
CODEL NELSON MEETS WITH VICE PRESIDENT MORALES
Wed Feb 28 00:00:00 +0100 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO0691
PP RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #0542/01 0591741
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 281741Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9280
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS PRIORITY 0979
RUMIAAA/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL PRIORITY
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 MANAGUA 000542 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
WHA/CEN, H FOR MARK SMITH 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/28/2017 
TAGS: PGOV PINR KDEM NU PREL
SUBJECT: CODEL NELSON MEETS WITH VICE PRESIDENT MORALES 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul A. Trivelli.  Reasons 1.4 (B,D). 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary:  In Senator Nelson's meeting with Nicaraguan 
Vice President Jaime Morales, he noted his commitment to 
fostering friendship between the American and Nicaraguan 
peoples and good relations between their two governments. 
Morales sought the Senator's support for TPS renewal for 
Nicaraguans residing in the United States, more 
counter-narcotics assistance, and an expansion of the 
Millennium Challenge Account (MCA) program and funding. 
Morales praised the success of CAFTA thus far and noted that 
Nicaragua will also take advantage of the Venezuelan trade 
agreement ALBA.  While the Vice President understood the 
Senator's view that Nicaragua's MANPADS pose a threat if they 
fall into the wrong hands, Morales asserted that their 
destruction must be considered within the context of a 
regional security balance.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) In Senator Nelson's February 19 meeting with 
Nicaraguan Vice President Jaime Morales, he explained that he 
had come to Nicaragua on a mission of peace to help pave the 
way for good relations and reconciliation between the two 
governments.  Nelson noted that some people in other 
countries want to drive a wedge between the United States and 
Nicaragua, but good bilateral relations will prevent this 
from occurring.  He recounted his success in meeting with 
difficult leaders, referring to his meeting with Venezuelan 
President Chavez a few years ago and a more recent meeting 
with President Asad of Syria.  He also shared his plans to 
meet next with Ecuadorian President Correa and Bolivian 
leader Morales. 

¶3.  (C) Visibly pleased with the Senator's message, Morales 
assured the Senator that the desire for friendship is mutual. 
 Replying to the Senator's query regarding Morales' 
background, the Vice President recounted his own personal 
experience as a former Contra leader and the chief negotiator 
of the peace accord between the Contras and Sandinistas. 
Morales explained that he had learned to forgive and move on 
-- eventually to the point of accepting Ortega's offer to run 
on the FSLN ticket for the good of his country -- even though 
Ortega had confiscated his property and belongings in the 
early 1980s.  He revealed that Ortega had once told him that 
it is hard to ask for forgiveness, but even harder to 
forgive.  Similarly, misunderstandings in the past between 
the United States and Nicaragua had led to difficulties. 
However, now that the relationship is based on mutual respect 
and understanding and both governments share democratic 
principles, Morales was confident that these differences can 
be surmounted.   (Note: Morales has told us that he was duly 
compensated for the loss of his property and belongings. 
Some contacts claim he was compensated twice, once by Ortega 
and once by the Nicaraguan government.) 
 
¶4.  (C) Senator Nelson referred to the black bean packing 
plant he visited earlier in the day as an example of 
productive cooperation between the two countries, adding that 
the Millennium Challenge Account (MCA) program in Nicaragua, 
including its paving of roads and property titling, is 
another success.  Vice President Morales mentioned that he 
had recently spoken with the MCA country director, who told 
him that thanks to the MCA, Nicaragua is already exporting 
yucca to Senator Nelson's home state - Florida.  Morales 
opined that the MCA is a magnificent project and inquired 
whether the MCA program could be expanded to other areas of 
the country, especially in light of the fact that the MCA 
programs in Honduras and El Salvador are more heavily funded. 
 The Senator took note of this interest. 
 
¶5.  (C) Senator Nelson next raised CAFTA, noting his 
understanding that the trade agreement has already started to 
produce some positive results.  Morales replied in the 
affirmative, opining that the benefits outweigh the risks. 
He explained that while Nicaragua was not adequately prepared 
to compete with the United States, training has been made 
available to offset this weakness.  He added that while CAFTA 
opens an important "window," the agreement is not exclusive, 
as the agreement with Venezuela (ALBA) provides an additional 
option.  The Senator replied that he had met for two hours 
with President Chavez.  He remarked that the Iranian 
president appears to have lost domestic popularity as 
evidenced by the loss of his party in the recent municipal 
elections there.  Morales clarified that relations with 
neighboring countries are more important for Nicaragua, while 
Foreign Minister Santos, who also attended the meeting, 
appeared to be surprised by the news that Ahmadinejad's 
popularity was slipping. 

¶6.  (C) Moving on to the subject of Man Portable Air Defense 
Systems (MANDPADS), Senator Nelson commented that the 
Nicaraguan media appeared to be exercised by the subject. 
Nelson explained to the Vice President that he had told the 
press that he did not perceive Nicaragua has a threat that 
would merit keeping these weapons, which are largely of 
benefit to terrorists and whose upkeep is expensive.  Neither 
Costa Rica's three airplanes nor Honduras' antiquated planes 
pose a threat to Nicaragua's sovereignty, opined the Senator. 
 
¶7.  (C) Morales, who suggested that the destruction of 
Nicaragua's MANPADS be discussed in the context of regional 
security, asserted that while in the spirit of the Esquipulas 
peace agreement Nicaragua had already destroyed over one 
thousand MANPADS under the Bolanos administration and reduced 
its troops to 15,000, its neighbors had done nothing to live 
up their commitment to the accord.  He asserted that some 
countries, like Costa Rica, have huge security budgets, $77 
per capita Vs. Nicaragua's $4 per capita, and an army 
"disguised as police."  The Senator, who stated that he had 
met a few weeks ago with President Arias and it was clear 
that Costa Rica's security forces are purely civilian in 
nature, reminded Morales that the bottom line is that if one 
of Nicaragua's MANPADS falls into the wrong hands and is used 
to shoot down an airplane, the repercussions will be serious. 
 
¶8.  (C) Concurring with the Senator's assessment, the Foreign 
Minister noted that the MANPADS are well protected, thanks to 
U.S. assistance, and reiterated the Nicaraguan government's 
interest in discussing them within the context of the 
region's security balance.  Morales remarked that he had 
urged former President Bolanos to seek some form of 
compensation - helicopters, for example, in exchange for 
MANPADS destruction.  The Ambassador explained that our level 
of assistance to the Nicaraguan military is substantial, 
approximately $17 million during the 2006-2007 period, 
including three patrol boats, eight zodiac boats, and 
$750,000 worth of communications equipment. 
 
¶9.  (C) Expanding on the topic of security, Morales commented 
that, in addition to the terrorist threat, narcotics and 
people traffickers are other enemies that Nicaragua is ill 
equipped to confront.  The Ambassador explained we are 
providing assistance to the Nicaraguan police and military 
through DEA and INL.  Morales suggested that additional 
assistance would be helpful, especially in light of the 
increase in drug trafficking along the Pacific coast.  He 
mentioned that while Nicaraguan law allows the government to 
keep the assets seized from traffickers, "bonuses" for 
sizable drug busts would provide additional incentives.  For 
example, if the Nicaraguan police seized 2,000 tons of 
cocaine on route to the United States, contributing boats or 
helicopters to Nicaragua would recognize these efforts and 
improve the country's ability to combat trafficking. 
 
¶10.  (C) Vice President Morales next broached the subject of 
Temporary Protected Status (TPS) renewal for approximately 
4,000 Nicaraguans residing in the United States.  The Senator 
replied that he has a problem with TPS in that it presents a 
double standard because Nicaraguans and Hondurans enjoy TPS 
privileges, while Haitians do not.  Further, reasoned the 
Senator, Hurricane Mitch was years ago and now Nicaragua's 
government is stable and it should welcome back its citizens. 
 Foreign Minister Santos, who had assured the Senator in his 
meeting the previous day (septel) that the new government 
looks forward to the return of its citizens and appeared 
rather unnerved by the Senator's remarks, clarified that it 
is a matter of timing.  Once the new government is on its 
feet, it will be better prepared to welcome home these 
Nicaraguans. 
 
¶11. (U) Moving on to a less controversial topic, the Vice 
President said he was aware that he and the Senator share a 
common passion - the environment.  Morales listed water 
resources and deforestation as Nicaragua's most significant 
environmental challenges and welcomed any help the U.S. could 
provide through the MCA or other sources.  The Senator 
replied that his trip includes a visit to the Peruvian 
Amazon, adding that years ago he had witnessed destruction of 
the Amazon from space.  Given that the Amazon produces 25% of 
the world's fresh water, the situation there is critical, 
explained the Senator.  Morales concurred and predicted that 
in the near future water will become more expensive than 
petroleum.  Thus it is incumbent upon Nicaragua to protect 
its water resources, including 8,000-square kilometer Lake 
Nicaragua. 
 
¶12.  (U) Participants: 
 
Nicaragua: 
Vice President Jaime Morales 
Foreign Minister Samuel Santos 
VP Secretary General Luis Ventura 
 
U.S.: 
Senator Nelson 
Ambassador Paul Trivelli 
DCM Peter Brennan 
Ms. Carolina Tess 
Ms. Sherry Davich 
Captain Gene Moran 
Polcouns/notetaker Victoria Alvarado 
Control Officer Irene Marr 
 
¶13.  (U) This cable was cleared by Codel Nelson 
TRIVELLI