07MANAGUA1043
NEW MOVIMIENTO DIRECTOR: CIVIL SOCIETY AND
Tue Apr 24 00:00:00 +0200 2007
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO5300
PP RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #1043/01 1141538
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 241538Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9929
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS PRIORITY 1070
RUMIAAA/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL PRIORITY
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 MANAGUA 001043 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
WHA/CEN, DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/24/2017 
TAGS: KDEM NU PGOV PHUM PINR PREL
SUBJECT: NEW MOVIMIENTO DIRECTOR: CIVIL SOCIETY AND 
LEGISLATURE LAST BASTIONS OF DEFENSE 
 
REF: MANAGUA 0871 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul A. Trivelli.  Reasons 1.4 (B,D). 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary:  The new Movimiento por Nicaragua (MpN) 
executive director, Violeta Granera, is convinced that the 
Ortega government's apparent disorientation is a ruse to 
divert attention from the Sandinista National Liberation 
Front's (FSLN) clear plan to gain political and economic 
power and Ortega's demagogic desire to impose an autocratic, 
family dynasty under Venezuela's sphere of influence. 
Granera's priorities for the NGO include forming strategic 
alliances with like-minded NGOs and political opposition 
parties; training MpN leaders and other members in 
leadership, communications, advocacy, outreach, and 
development; establishing five centers in Managua and 
expanding operational presence in Nicaragua's remaining 
sixteen departments/autonomous zones; and, gaining long-term 
private sector and foreign donor commitment and support. 
Under her watch, the MpN will conduct a series of "social 
audits" of the Ortega administration and avoid politicizing 
its criticism.   End Summary. 
 
Don't Let Government Disorder Fool You 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  (C) New Movimiento por Nicaragua (MpN) executive director 
Violeta Granera, who met with PolCouns on April 18, is 
convinced that the Ortega government's apparent 
disorientation is a ruse to divert attention from the FSLN's 
clear plan to gain political and economic power and reflects 
Ortega's desire to impose an autocratic, family dynasty under 
Venezuela's sphere of influence.  In Granera's view, the 
Ortega government is all about power and control and 
President Ortega is willing to serve as Venezuelan President 
Hugo Chavez's "lackey" in exchange for off-budget 
petrodollars that can be directed with no legislative 
scrutiny to feed the Chavez-Ortega project in Nicaragua. 
Granera explained that she had recently left her position as 
executive director of CONPES because the Ortega 
administration was uncooperative, warning that Ortega intends 
to turn CONPES into an instrument of the Ortega regime. 
 
¶3.  (C) Criticizing the mediocrity of Ortega's cabinet, 
Granera suggested that Ortega has deliberately appointed 
weak, ineffectual ministers.  They are set up to fail; 
ultimately the government's traditional institutions will 
become mere shells, to be replaced by Ortega's national and 
citizens' councils financed by Chavez's money, she warned. 
Granera was unequivocal that Ortega seeks constitutional and 
other legislative reforms to allow consecutive presidential 
re-election and postpone the 2008 municipal elections. 
Postponing the municipal elections will allow Ortega to 
create his parallel, party-dominated institutions and co-opt 
poor Nicaraguans, mused Granera.  She speculated that Ortega 
will first get his "foot in the door" by making certain 
concessions to the opposition parties.  For example, Ortega 
may support the opposition initiative to raise the threshold 
for a candidate to win the presidential election on the first 
round from 35% to 50% and reduce the number of National 
Assembly lawmakers. 
 
Civil Society and Legislature Last Bastions of Defense 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  - - - - - 
 
¶4.   (C) According to Granera, the two remaining "dikes" 
capable of blocking Ortega's authoritarian onslaught are the 
National Assembly and civil society.  The opposition parties 
must find some way of convincing at least 12 Liberal 
Constitutional Party (PLC) lawmakers to support them in the 
legislature, she said.  Granera offered that only a united 
opposition comprising diverse, left, center, and 
right-leaning democratic parties -- with the endorsement of 
like-minded civil society organizations and private sector 
leaders -- can limit Ortega's advances.  This movement should 
be tolerant and inclusive, inviting disaffected PLC militants 
and Sandinistas, including a growing number of Nicaraguans 
who voted for Ortega and are starting to regret their 
decision and question his intentions. 
 
Priorities: Expansion, Leadership, Communications, Advocacy 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
 
MANAGUA 00001043  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶5.  (C) In sharing her vision of the MpN, Granera listed the 
following priorities: improve internal organization; form 
strategic alliances with like-minded NGOs and political 
opposition parties; train MpN leaders and other supporters in 
leadership, communications, advocacy, outreach, and 
development; educate Nicaraguans on their rights and 
obligations; expand presence, including establishing five 
centers in Managua and expand operational presence in 
Nicaragua's remaining sixteen departments, as well as in 
Miami, Los Angeles, and San Jose, Costa Rica; and, gain 
long-term private sector and foreign donor support.  She also 
mentioned the MpN's plans to conduct a seris of "social 
audits" of the Ortega administration and avoid politicizing 
its criticism.  (Note: The MpN offered a seminar on, and 
issued a full-page ad featuring its assessment of the Ortega 
Administration's first 60 days, as reported in Reftel). 
May Day, May Day 
- - - - - - - - 
 
¶6.  (C) Granera confirmed that the MpN will join a number 
unions and other civil society groups, and opposition parties 
for a May Day rally.  She explained that the planning 
committee includes a diverse assortment of organizations that 
span the political spectrum.  The unions will lead the march, 
followed by civil society, and political parties taking up 
the rear.  Thus far, the Sandinista Renovation Movement 
(MRS), Nicaraguan Liberal Alliance (ALN), and the 
Conservative Party (PC) have signed on to the event.  The 
committee is also planning on issuing a joint communique, and 
is seeking funds to cover the expense, she said. 
 
Disappointment with Private Sector, Gratitude for Foreign 
Donors 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7.  (C) Granera shared her frustration over the reluctance of 
Nicaragua's business elites to contribute to MpN efforts. 
She attributes their demeanor to a combination of fear and 
indifference.  She was receptive to PolCouns' suggestion that 
the MpN approach small and medium businesses for support, 
instead of relying so much on big business.  She noted that 
support from the National Endowment for Democracy, NDI, IRI, 
the U.S. Embassy, and the Open Society Institute, and the 
governments of Japan and Taiwan have been the backbone of the 
MpN's support.  She mentioned the MpN is reaching out to 
Nordic donors and hopes to gain some additional support from 
these countries.  Granera remarked that donors are reluctant 
to fund marches and other public expressions, which are so 
crucial to the movement.  Granera shared her interest in 
visiting NGO leaders and USG government officials in the 
United States, perhaps with a few of the MpN's new board 
members. 
 
Biographical Information 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8.  (C) Bio: Violeta Granera de Sandino was born in Leon, 
Nicaragua in 1951.  During the 1980s Sandinista regime, her 
family left the country, residing in Guatemala and later in 
France, where she studied Sociology.  She returned to 
Nicaragua in 1991 to work as deputy director of the 
Nicaraguan Pro Human Rights Association (ANPDH).  Granera was 
the executive secretary of the National Commission for Social 
and Economic Planning (CONPES) starting in 2005.  Previously, 
she served as a World Bank social development specialist, 
director of the Citizens' Initiative for Peace, and executive 
director of the Foundation for Democracy (FUNDEMOS). 
 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
¶9.  (C) Although still a relatively new organization, the 
Movimiento, as it is commonly called, is now established and 
expanding.  While during last year's electoral year the 
Movimiento was often criticized for holding a political 
agenda in favor of ALN presidential candidate Eduardo 
Montealegre, many of the MpN's members personally backed MRS 
presidential candidate Edmundo Jarquin.  Granera's 
determination to reach out to all democratically-minded 
Nicaraguans, irrespective of their political stripes, is 
encouraging, and vital to her organization's future and its 
role in defending Nicaragua's vulnerable democracy. 
TRIVELLI