07MUNICH81
PUTIN AND GATES DOMINATE MUNICH SECURITY
Mon Feb 12 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Munich
VZCZCXRO5144
PP RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA
RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHMZ #0081/01 0431728
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 121728Z FEB 07
FM AMCONSUL MUNICH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3752
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING PRIORITY 0274
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA PRIORITY 0015
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD PRIORITY 0309
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL PRIORITY 0051
RUEHKV/AMEMBASSY KYIV PRIORITY 0001
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW PRIORITY 0307
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI PRIORITY 0089
RUEHSI/AMEMBASSY TBILISI PRIORITY 0098
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV PRIORITY 0427
RUEHXP/ALL NATO POST COLLECTIVE
RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 09 MUNICH 000081 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: NATO OSCE PARM PREL GM IR AF RS
SUBJECT: PUTIN AND GATES DOMINATE MUNICH SECURITY 
CONFERENCE; AFGHANISTAN AND IRAN ALSO DISCUSSED 
 
REF: 06 MUNICH 838 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED. 
 
NOT FOR INTERNET DISTRIBUTION 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
¶1.  (SBU) The February 9-11 43rd Munich Conference on 
Security Policy (formerly known as "Wehrkunde") on "Global 
Crises - Global Responsibilities" was dominated by 
differing visions of the Transatlantic role in global 
security.  Chancellor Merkel, Secretary Gates, Senators 
McCain and Lieberman, and most other participants focused 
on the Transatlantic partnership as the key factor in 
confronting 21st Century challenges, a vision welcomed 
overwhelmingly by conference participants.  Russian 
President Putin and Iranian National Security Council 
Chairman Larijani presented an alternate view of a world 
made increasingly unstable by "unipolar" action by the 
United States.  Secretary Gates' disarming, pro-active, 
and non-confrontational rebuttal to Putin stressed the 
U.S. desire for effective multilateral responses to 
complex global challenges.  For more information on the 
conference and links to speeches please visit 
http://munich.usconsulate.gov/ 
 
¶2. (SBU) On the margins of the conference, Secretary Gates 
met with Chancellor Merkel, Ukrainian President 
Yushchenko, Italian Defense Minister Parisi, German 
Foreign Minister Steinmeier and Defense Minister Jung, 
Australian Foreign Minister Downer and Indian National 
Security Advisor Narayanan.  The ten-member CODEL 
Lieberman/McCain (SEPTEL) held meetings which included: 
the annual "Transatlantic Breakfast" hosted by German MFA 
State Secretaries Silberberg and Boomgaarden; a meeting 
with SPD Party Chairman and Rheinland-Pfalz Minister- 
President Beck; NATO Secretary General de Hoop Scheffer, 
and Australian Foreign Minister Downer.  Deputy Treasury 
Secretary Kimmitt, Ambassador Timken, USNATO Ambassador 
 
SIPDIS 
Nuland, and EUR PDAS Volker also held conversations with a 
wide range of conference participants.  Throughout many 
sessions and meetings, U.S. participants emphasized the 
importance of success in Afghanistan, and the need for the 
Transatlantic and international community of democracies 
to carry through on their commitments. 
 
End Summary. 
 
ISRAEL TALKS OF THREATS IN THE GREATER MIDDLE EAST 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶3. (U) At Friday evening's welcome dinner, hosted by 
Conference President Horst Teltschik, Israeli FM Tsipi 
Livni ardently described the conflict in the Middle East 
as a "fight between the moderates and the radicals." 
Israel is committed to a two-state solution, provided the 
Palestinians acknowledge Israel's right to exist and 
renounce violence.  She described Iranian ideology as a 
"real threat to the region and the world" and demanded the 
international community demonstrate resolve in dealing 
with this challenge.  "Iran," said Livni, "is a regime 
which mocks the Holocaust while threatening the world with 
a new one."  Finally, Livni urged the international 
community to do more to secure the Lebanese border with 
Syria to prevent the rearmament of Hezbollah. 
 
MERKEL KICKS OFF WITH THEME OF SHARED RESPONSIBILITY 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) German Chancellor Merkel's opening address on 
Saturday morning called for an integrated strategic 
approach to security policy to include civilian and 
military elements.  Merkel lauded the primacy of NATO, but 
added that NATO's role in the 21st century should be 
integrated into a civilian-military network.  Overall 
global areas of concern include issues such as the 
protection of the environment, energy security, and human 
 
MUNICH 00000081  002 OF 009 
 
 
development.  Despite its problems, NATO is still the best 
forum for making decisions, and the Summit in Riga in 
November and the Ministerial in Seville last week 
demonstrate NATO's relevance in promoting freedom, 
security, and responsibility.  The Chancellor then gave a 
rundown of regional conflicts and offered suggestions 
where only international and multilateral cooperation 
could lead to sustainable solutions. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Merkel clearly stated that Iran must abide by 
UNSC and IAEA decisions -- "no ifs, ands or buts about it" 
-- or it will continue isolating itself.  The 
international community remains firmly united behind UNSCR 
1737, but also remains committed to the offer developed by 
the EU3 3 which would "assist the Iranian government to do 
what is right for the Iranian people."  She remained 
cautiously hopeful that the first steps taken in Mecca 
would reduce violence in the Palestinian territories and 
lead eventually to a peaceful resolution of the Israeli- 
Palestinian situation.  The Quartet's efforts will 
continue in this regard and the Chancellor called on the 
new unity government to abide by Quartet principles. 
Merkel also issued a stern warning to Syria's leadership 
not to underestimate the international community's 
commitment to defend Israel and Lebanon. 
 
¶6. (U) Merkel expressed the European Union's readiness to 
take undertake its largest ever civilian ESDP mission in 
Kosovo.  While the Ahtisaari proposal will be difficult 
and will probably take some time, the solution cannot be 
pushed off indefinitely.   The EU remains committed to 
continuing discussions with Serbia to ensure that country 
moves forward.  In the end, however, it is up to Kosovo 
and Serbia to determine which path each will take. 
Regarding Bosnia and Herzegovina, Merkel recommended 
keeping the office of the High Representative a little 
while longer.  As a result of the sustained progress in 
Bosnia, the international military presence can be 
reduced.  However, Merkel spoke of her concern that a 
working constitution remains elusive. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Merkel stressed that "cooperation between NATO, 
the EU and Russia will be important for the future of 
European security."  Referring to the issue of U.S. 
missile defense radar in Poland and the Czech Republic, 
Merkel urged continued conversation with Russia despite 
strongly held and differing positions.  Most importantly, 
Russia must demonstrate that it is a reliable partner in 
energy security. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Merkel described NATO's ISAF operation in 
Afghanistan as a test for the alliance.  While applauding 
visible successes such as the fact that girls are now 
allowed to go to school, Merkel warned that the Taliban 
will put NATO's determination to the test.  For Merkel, 
Afghanistan is a good example for the integrated civilian- 
military approach.  Merkel called for more civilian 
assets, but also urged that all elements need to be 
enhanced. She called on all allies to do everything they 
can to ensure the mission's success.  Merkel concluded by 
urging conference participants not to be pessimistic about 
the future.  She mentioned that Europe is much more stable 
than anybody would have imagined when she was young, and 
rhetorically asked why teenagers in Israeli and Palestine 
cannot hope to live side by side in peace in the future as 
well. 
 
PUTIN DESCRIBES RUSSIA'S WORLD VIEW 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Using surprisingly frank words during his first 
visit to the Security Conference, Russian President 
Vladamir Putin criticized the West and the new "unipolar 
world," leading one conference participant to comment 
later that he hoped we had not seen the opening salvo in a 
second cold war.  Putin criticized U.S. foreign policy, 
NATO and its enlargement, missile defense, and primarily 
the United States. 
 
MUNICH 00000081  003 OF 009 
 
 
 
¶10. (SBU) Speaking calmly, but forcefully, he claimed the 
U.S. had used its uncontested military might to create and 
exploit a unipolar world.  Putin said that under U.S. 
dominance the world has become more destabilized and is 
seeing more wars and regional conflicts.  The "almost 
uncontained hyper-use of force" and a disdain for the 
basic principles of international law drives countries to 
feel vulnerable, thus stimulating an arms race as these 
now-insecure countries turn to weapons, and even weapons 
of mass destruction, for security.  He suggested that the 
only legitimate authority to authorize military force is 
the United Nations, and commented that NATO, the OSCE, and 
the EU, are not the UN, and should not be considered to 
have equivalent authority.  Indeed, he said the OSCE had 
become a "vulgar instrument" of the U.S.  Responding later 
to a question from Senator Jon Kyl, Putin noted that self- 
defense also was a legitimate justification for the use of 
force. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Putin stressed Russian support for renewed 
dialogue on non-proliferation, adding that Russia 
continues to adhere to the NPT and criticized "the 
militarization of outer space" which he said could provoke 
another arms race.  Putin also complained about how 
Russia, "which threatens no one," was continually being 
encircled by the NATO countries and questioned why a 
missile defense system was being suggested for basing in 
Poland, close to Russia's border. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Bringing up the Treaty on Conventional Forces in 
Europe (CFE), Putin noted the adapted treaty had been 
signed seven years before, in 1999, yet only four states, 
including Russia, had ratified so far.  Resurrecting the 
usual argument against complaints that Russia had not met 
its obligations under the Istanbul Commitments, he claimed 
the Russian army is currently in the process of leaving 
Georgia, and while there remain 1,500 soldiers in Moldova, 
they are "carrying out peacekeeping operations and 
protecting warehouses with ammunition."  Putin continued 
that the U.S. stationing of "...so-called flexible 
frontline American bases with up to five thousand men... 
on our borders" represents a much more serious matter.  He 
asked rhetorically why NATO was expanding aggressively 
toward a non-threatening Russia. 
 
¶13. (SBU) In arguing his point that Russia was a threat to 
no one, he claimed Russia's domestic system was open, and 
reported that foreign companies participate in all major 
Russian energy projects (up to 26 percent of oil 
extraction in Russia is done with/by foreign investment). 
He also claimed that inward investment to Russia 
outnumbers outward Russian investment by a factor of 
fifteen to one.  Putin concluded his lecture by 
complaining that Russia is called to play an increasing 
role in the world, yet with a thousand years of history as 
a nation, hardly needed advice on how to act independently 
on the global scene.  In the Q and A session he praised 
Russian freedoms by noting that the political spectrum in 
Russian allowed for both the Communist Party and Vladimir 
Zhirinovsky's LDPR, and claimed there was no basis to 
reports of suppression of NGOs.  He also seemed to back 
off a bit from his earlier harshness by describing 
President Bush as a decent man and someone he could do 
business with.  Putin underscored Russian opposition to 
Iran obtaining nuclear weapons. 
 
EU EXPANSION, EU SKEPTICS 
------------------------- 
 
¶14. (U) During the first panel discussion, which 
questioned whether the EU was indeed a regional model for 
peace, security, and welfare as it nears its 50th 
anniversary, Toomas Ilves, President of Estonia, responded 
with a resounding yes.  Ilves expressed concern, however, 
that expansion fatigue among certain states, including new 
members, could limit opportunities in the middle term to 
admit new members.  He also strongly chastised, in the 
 
MUNICH 00000081  004 OF 009 
 
 
presence of Austrian FM Ursula Plassnik, Austria and 
France's requirement for popular referenda prior to 
admitting new member states. 
 
¶15. (U) Ilves noted that while the States on Europe's 
borders were mainly democratic, the danger of backsliding 
would remain.  The EU perspective remains the only deal in 
town and the Neighborhood Policy is just not enough.  He 
concluded by expressing surprise at Putin's remarks, which 
had suggested the expansion of European democracies to 
Russia's border was considered to be threatening. 
 
¶16. (U) Ukrainian President Viktor Yushchenko warned that 
the EU itself should not become the loudest Euro-skeptic. 
He said Europe was internationally unique, and Ukraine 
wanted to be a part of it.  He reminded the audience how 
Ukraine had shown responsibility by voluntarily giving up 
possession of its nuclear weapons following the collapse 
of the former Soviet Union.  Ukraine remains interested in 
developing partnerships with the EU on energy policy that 
would focus on energy security, transparency, and the 
safeguarding of transit countries' legitimate interests. 
 
¶17. (SBU) Kurt Beck, Chairman of Germany's Social 
Democratic Party (SPD) (the likely challenger to Angela 
Merkel in the next election and a foreign affairs 
neophyte), stated that Europe was a global example of 
stability and economic prosperity.  Beck welcomed Putin's 
openness.  He also suggested Turkey deserves a realistic 
opportunity to join the EU, noting Turkey could act as a 
bridge between Europe and the Muslim world.   Referring to 
the Non-Proliferation Treaty, Beck repeated a common SPD 
theme that nuclear powers should hasten nuclear 
disarmament.  Beck described Iran's behavior on the 
nuclear issue as unacceptable. 
 
¶18. (U) Austria's FM Plassnik praised Europe as an 
outstanding example of "applied multilateralism" and that 
the European model has proven that management of diversity 
was possible.  She reiterated a main theme of Austria's 
recent EU Presidency:  that the Balkan states needed clear 
guidelines for accession.  However, she said, the EU now 
has nearly a half billion "stakeholders" and they need to 
be listened to when looking toward the future of EU 
expansion and internal development. 
 
NATO IN THE AGE OF GLOBAL CHALLENGES 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶19. (U) During the second panel discussion, NATO Secretary 
General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, referring to the conference 
as the Munich Reality Check, sounded a positive note while 
citing key successes that had been achieved by NATO since 
their 50th Anniversary in 1999.  NATO today is a better 
and more effective organization, he said.  He added that 
NATO's greatest challenge remains Afghanistan and more 
development and reconstruction assistance needs to be 
directed there.  He also called on all partners to remove 
caveats on their ISAF contributions. 
 
¶20. (U) The SYG stated that partnership is a force 
multiplier, and while Putin's remarks earlier were, "not 
helpful," Russia was a partner and the NATO-Russia Council 
added value for both NATO and Russia. NATO enlargement has 
brought democracy and the rule of law closer to Russia's 
borders; this is good for Russia as well as NATO.  He 
continued that by NATO's 60th anniversary in 2009 he hoped 
there would be a fully integrated training and equipping 
program for the Afghan army; NATO would have at least one 
more member and Serbia should be on the road to NATO 
membership; there would be closer relationships with 
Ukraine and Georgia; civil efforts would be better 
integrated; and there would be a true strategic 
partnership with the EU.   In concluding, de Hoop Scheffer 
said security isn't cheap, stating "you get what you pay 
for," and urging member countries to do more to reach 
their defense budgetary goals of two percent of GDP. 
 
 
MUNICH 00000081  005 OF 009 
 
 
¶21. (U) German DefMin Jung's speech closely followed the 
themes of Chancellor Merkel's integrated approach to 
security policy although he placed greater emphasis on 
non-NATO forums and fields of Transatlantic cooperation, 
including global warming and energy.  He added that 
organizations and actors should avoid duplication of 
efforts and maintained that those best suited to achieve a 
goal should focus in that area, mentioning NATO, the EU, 
the UN, and other state and non-state actors.  He stressed 
that an integrated civilian/military approach is necessary 
in Afghanistan, adding that NATO did not go there as an 
occupier, but rather as a liberator.  While acknowledging 
differences between the north and west versus the south 
and east in that country, Jung pointed to NATO's combined 
responsibility and Germany's part in this effort, 
including hosting the JCMB meeting in Berlin on January 30 
and 31. 
 
¶22. (SBU) Senator John McCain, continuing to discuss 
Afghanistan, spoke out against national caveats stating 
that "multilateral operations cannot tolerate unilateral 
limits and still be successful."   He called on Germany to 
increase its police training efforts beyond current plans, 
leading to much commentary among German participants, and 
urged the EU to match America's pledge of $10 billion over 
the next two years to support Afghan reconstruction and 
development.  McCain focused on drug eradication, 
eliciting a follow-on commentary from Sergio Jaramillo, 
Deputy Minister of Defense in Colombia, about the need for 
an effective comprehensive strategy to stop the scourge of 
illicit drug production before it gets out of control. 
 
¶23. (SBU) McCain then shifted gears to counter some of 
President Putin's commentary from earlier in the day.  He 
said he hoped Serbia could look forward to Euro-Atlantic 
integration and urged Russia to back the efforts of 
moderates in Serbia.  Senator McCain countered Putin's 
claim that power was too concentrated in the US by 
stressing that power centers exist on every continent, and 
that the US didn't win the Cold War on its own.  McCain 
hopes that Russia will not become more autocratic, as 
recent events would indicate, and said the alliance will 
remain an active, not reactive, force in global affairs. 
 
¶24. (U) Australian Minister of Foreign Affairs Alexander 
Downer highlighted his country's long-standing belief in 
political freedom and democracy and discussed why the 
Global Partnership with NATO makes sense.  He praised 
Japan for its efforts in Afghanistan, eliciting applause 
from conference participants, and urged Turkish 
integration into the EU based on its continuous efforts 
within the NATO alliance, eliciting loud murmurs from 
German parliamentarians and a stark rebuke from French 
Parliamentarian and presidential candidate Pierre 
Lellouche. 
 
DIFFERING VIEWS ON THE WAY FORWARD 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶25. (SBU) The third panel discussion entitled "Peace in 
the Greater Middle East; A New Approach?" began with an 
impassioned speech by Mian Khurshid Mahmud Kasuri, 
Pakistani Minister of Foreign Affairs, who passionately 
defended his country against accusations of a lack of 
commitment in the fight against terrorism.  Kasuri listed 
Pakistani measures taken to support Afghanistan and to 
prevent the infiltration of Taliban fighters, noting that 
1,000 border posts had been established, hundreds of 
Taliban had been apprehended and turned over to 
Afghanistan, and biometric identification and other 
measures were being introduced, as well as socio-economic 
programs added in the border region. 
 
¶26. (U) Kasuri cited UN reports that the Taliban's main 
recruitment sources were located in Afghanistan, and not 
Pakistan, and said the causes for Afghanistan's 
instability were the failures of the Afghan government and 
the coalition forces.  "It is clear" said Kasuri "that 
 
MUNICH 00000081  006 OF 009 
 
 
Pakistan has every reason to wish for a stable neighbor." 
He recommended not just expanding military measures, but 
reconstruction efforts as well, suggesting "some kind of a 
Marshall Plan for Afghanistan," and offered a list of 
specific suggestions for ISAF. 
 
¶27. (U) Zalmai Rassul, National Security Adviser of 
Afghanistan, thanked participants for bringing his country 
into the community of democratic nations.  He said 
progress had been achieved in implementing the principles 
of good governance, and asked for patience, noting that 
for the first time in its history, his country had an 
elected government.  Rassul reported Afghanistan is 
expanding initiatives to counter the activities of the 
insurgents, especially economic and educational programs. 
He specifically called for greater assistance to protect 
schools and eradicate opium production.  Rassul also 
thanked Pakistan for its support but doubted Kasuri's 
earlier statement that Taliban recruitment took place 
mainly within Afghanistan's borders. 
 
¶28. (U) Sir Menzies Campbell, Liberal Democrat leader in 
the British House of Commons, criticized US and coalition 
results in Iraq, saying that four years after the fall of 
Saddam Hussein, Iraq was showing all the symptoms of a 
failed state, with coalition forces now being a focus for 
resentment rather than a force for containing internal 
conflict.  To avoid further escalation of conflict in the 
region, Campbell said the immediate threat of civil wars 
in Iraq, Lebanon and the Palestinian regions needs to be 
averted.  In the medium term, Iran needs to be brought 
back into the international community of nations. 
Finally, the long-term goal of peace in Iraq requires a 
multilateral peace process with the UN in the lead.  He 
suggested four main elements: (1) establishment of an 
international contact group for closer involvement by 
Iraq's neighbors, including Iran; (2) a strategy on 
disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration of the 
militias in Iraq; (3) enhanced measures to train, equip, 
and professionalize the Iraqi security forces; and, (4) a 
time-limited program for phased withdrawal of all 
coalition forces from Iraq. 
 
¶29. (U) Javier Solana, High Representative of the European 
Union, who was originally scheduled to speak first, 
disregarded his prepared text, and merely stated he agreed 
with Chancellor Merkel's remarks from earlier in the day, 
and added that more support should be provided to the 
Lebanese government.  Following his comments, the 
conference day concluded and participants departed for the 
Munich Residenz where Dr. Solana was awarded a medal for 
his efforts to find peace through dialog. 
 
GATES AND STEINMEIER DISCUSS 
TRANSATLATIC RELATIONSHIP IN 21ST CENTURY 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶30. (U) Secretary Gates opened the final day of the 
conference with a speech that elicited applause and 
sympathy from the audience.  He turned aside Putin's 
attacks of the day before, saying "as an old Cold Warrior, 
one of yesterday's speeches almost filled me with 
nostalgia for a less complex time. Almost.  Many of you 
have backgrounds in diplomacy or politics.  I have, like 
your second speaker yesterday, a starkly different 
background - a career in the spy business. And, I guess, 
old spies have a habit of blunt speaking.  However, I have 
been to re-education camp, spending four and half years as 
a university president and dealing with faculty."  He 
later referred to Russia as an important partner in many 
areas, including the conflicts with Iran and the DPRK, and 
noted that he would take up the invitation from Putin and 
Defense Minister Ivanov to visit Russia.  Gates went on to 
describe himself as a realist and to discuss his long- 
standing interest in the security of Europe and opined 
that totalitarianism was defeated as much by ideas as by 
tanks.  That same fight needs to be taken now to combat 
violent fundamental extremists who combine "new 
 
MUNICH 00000081  007 OF 009 
 
 
technologies with old hatreds." The Alliance, therefore, 
must continue the process begun following the end of the 
Cold War to modernize itself and maximize its 
opportunities through expansion and the Global Partnership 
program. 
 
¶31. (U) NATO is not a "paper membership" stressed Gates, 
while chastising those who do not do all they can to 
fulfill our collective commitment.  With 26 democracies in 
NATO, and two million people in uniform, Gates declared it 
was a mark of shame if they could not raise sufficient 
troops to get the job done in Afghanistan.  It is far 
better to incur the costs of challenges, stressed Gates, 
than suffer the alternatives.  When later asked about 
Iraq, Gates replied that if we fail, all Alliance members 
will feel the consequences.  Only by working together can 
we protect our shared values and interests, and our 
cooperation must continue and deepen, wherever the fight 
may take us.  In conclusion, SecDef rallied the Allies 
with a reference to General George Washington who stated 
that "perseverance and spirit have done wonders in all 
ages," to which Gates added his own watchword: unity. 
 
¶32. (SBU) When questioned about U.S. credibility and 
Guantanamo Bay, Gates responded that there is no question 
that Guantanamo and the abuses in Iraq have negatively 
impacted the U.S. reputation.  Mistakes were made, and we 
also need to explain our positions better.  While America 
may occasionally do something wrong, he said we remain a 
force for good in the world. 
 
¶33. (SBU) For Steinmeier, the transatlantic partners have 
a common responsibility for the world's future, not only 
to deal with current challenges, such as terrorism and 
failing states.  Without explicitly referring to the Iran 
nuclear program, Steinmeier said that transatlantic 
partners not only have to rely on military strength, but 
also on credibility, intercultural competence and the 
readiness for a dialogue.  Steinmeier added that these 
virtues make the transatlantic partners more convincing in 
the promotion of interests and values.  The changes of the 
global world order (the rise of China and India, as well 
as the challenges of climate change, energy, and the 
environment) required a renewal of the transatlantic 
partnership.  Steinmeier was skeptical that NATO was the 
right place to discuss issues such as energy and climate 
change; a strengthened U.S. - EU partnership would 
complement efforts at NATO. 
 
¶34. (SBU) Steinmeier stated that Germany had proposed a 
closer transatlantic economic partnership, and this will 
be an important issue at the next U.S.-EU summit.  He 
added that TEP is not intended to weaken the WTO. 
Steinmeier also suggested transatlantic cooperation on 
energy security and climate protection.  Europe and 
America should cooperate on the development of new 
technologies which protect the environment.  Like his 
party chairman Kurt Beck, FM Steinmeier urged the nuclear 
powers to make a new push for further nuclear disarmament 
in an effort to help prevent other states from pursuing 
nuclear weapons. 
 
¶35. (SBU) Rounding out the panel, Czech FM Karel 
Schwarzenberg said Putin had provided the best argument 
yet in favor of NATO enlargement and emphasized several 
times during his speech that there is no alternative to 
NATO.  He also defended cooperation with the US on missile 
defense and described it as a purely bilateral issue 
between the US and his country.  This could provoke some 
reaction from other European partners, as the system has 
ramifications beyond the two countries' borders. 
 
LARIJANI STAYS ON IRANIAN MESSAGE 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶36. (SBU) Following an on-again off-again commitment to 
provide his views on security in Middle East, Iranian 
Secretary of the Supreme National Security Council Ali 
 
SIPDIS 
 
MUNICH 00000081  008 OF 009 
 
 
Larijani stuck mainly to his well-worn script of Iranian 
reasons for ignoring the EU3 3 offer and continuing on its 
path as a nuclear power, including the history of US 
abuses in his country and the region.  He went on to 
express surprise that the "defamatory campaign against the 
Prophet Mohammed" is defended by western governments. 
 
¶37. (U) Switching his focus to Iraq and Afghanistan, 
Larijani described Iranian intentions and actions in those 
countries as beneficial.  According to him, those 
provinces in Iraq which border Iran enjoy stability, 
partially because there are no American troops present. 
Despite the fact that Iran suffered greatly at the hands 
of the then US-supported Saddam regime, Iran was opposed 
to the war from the outset.  In Afghanistan, Larijani 
expressed dismay that Iranian efforts to fight drug 
trafficking was met with American labeling Iran as part of 
the evil axis. 
 
¶38. (U) Larijani concluded that Iran's military programs 
are strictly defensive in nature, that Teheran harbors no 
ill-will toward any of its neighbors, and that 
international double standards have caused instability and 
misunderstanding in the region.   Asserting Iran's nuclear 
program is peaceful, Larijani claimed readiness to 
continue efforts with the IAEA to answer any and all 
questions placed to it.  In response to questions, 
Larijani defended the Iranian form of democracy by stating 
that "democracy cannot be imposed from abroad" and that 
indigenous values, in this case Islamic values, must be 
included. 
 
AN INTEGRATED APPROACH TO FIGHTING INTERNATIONAL TERRORISM 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶39. (U) The final panel of the conference on international 
terrorism and asymmetric warfare was begun by Russian 
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Defense Sergey 
Ivanov, who, in a much more relaxed manner than his 
President the day before, stated that a legal definition 
of terrorism is badly needed and called on the conference 
to hold such a panel on the topic in the future.  He noted 
that his government had made the war or terrorism a focus 
of the 2006 G-8 St. Petersburg Summit.  Ivanov went on to 
discuss how the western war on terror is a struggle not 
against a military threat, but against an asymmetric 
technique.  Armed military force will not be effective 
alone but will require civil involvement.  Ivanov said 
there was only one clear solution - stabilization and 
extradition of terrorists for prosecution.  He repeated 
Putin's call for UN Security Council legitimacy for any 
military action and declined to discuss Chechnya  Ivanov 
used the question and answer session to defend Putin's 
controversial remarks earlier in the conference, noting 
that Russia's relations with the U.S. and Europe were 
mature and the two sides could afford to be candid.  He 
stated that Russia would not accept multilateral decisions 
that are imposed on it that it was not involved in 
formulating. 
 
¶40. (U) Senator Joseph Lieberman echoed said that the war 
on terror was a struggle of ideas, and when ideas clash, 
the results are often unpredictable.  He noted that the 
physical threat itself seemed to be asymmetrically moving 
around us.  Responding traditionally would be misguided 
and self-defeating, Senator Lieberman said.  Success would 
require bold new ideas.  The successful transformation of 
NATO could be a guide for new approaches to global 
security. 
 
¶41. (SBU) Recognizing that the war in Iraq has created 
much disagreement with and within America, Senator 
Lieberman noted the high price that failure would entail. 
Regardless of how the war in Iraq began, failure would 
simply be unacceptable, with profound consequences for our 
interests and those of America's allies and friends.  He 
concluded by noting that while America, like any country, 
or any person, is not perfect, and certainly capable of 
 
MUNICH 00000081  009 OF 009 
 
 
making mistakes, we remained committed to our principles, 
as embodied in our Declaration of Independence, and always 
tried to return to them. 
 
¶42. (SBU) Indian National Security Advisor M. K. Narayanan 
opened his remarks by noting that he -- like both Russian 
President Putin and U.S. Secretary of Defense Gates -- had 
a background as an intelligence officer.  Diverging from 
his prepared remarks, Narayanan then gave his perspectives 
on global terrorism in a noticeably calmer style than that 
of his Pakistani counterpart from the day before. 
Narayanan noted that the importance of international 
cooperation in combating global terrorism is essential. 
Terrorism is now more lethal and widespread with the 
adoption of 'suicide' tactics, the availability of modern 
instruments, and global communications.  He continued that 
the most significant tools the terrorist have are safe 
havens from which to recruit and conduct operations.  He 
them proceeded to offer "evidence" of such a safe 
sanctuary being available for the Taliban in Pakistan 
(unnamed but clearly recognizable).  He concluded by 
discussing how money laundering and the underground 
banking system facilitate terrorism. 
 
¶43. (U) Chinese Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Zhang 
Yesui diverged from the theme of the session and spoke 
briefly of China's role in the international community, 
noting more than 6,000 Chinese soldiers, police, and 
technicians had participated in UN peacekeeping operations 
in Congo, Liberia, Sudan, and Congo.  He said China "can 
and should" be a contributing partner in the global 
community.  He added that China was against the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons and was a strong 
supporter of the Six-Party talks currently ongoing in 
Beijing. 
 
¶44. (U)  Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Robert Kimmitt 
concluded the session and the conference noting that 
finance ministries have become core security ministries. 
He described the importance of using the tools in the 
financial system to disrupt terrorist finance.  Kimmitt 
hailed UNSCR 1718 and 1737 for imposing financial 
sanctions against North Korea and Iran and suggested that 
financial measures could be effective against the Taliban 
as well.  He expressed his hope that terror finance would 
be again taken up as a topic in the future. 
 
¶45. (U) This report was coordinated by Embassy Berlin. 
For additional information, please contact Thomas Kelsey 
or Kenneth Kero. 
 
¶46. (U) Previous reporting from Munich is available on our 
SIPRNET website at www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/munich/. 
NELSON