07NAIROBI103
SOMALIA: JANUARY 5 MEETING OF THE INTERNATIONAL
Mon Jan 08 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO1616
OO RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #0103/01 0080654
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 080654Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6443
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHDS/AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA IMMEDIATE 9052
RUEHDR/AMEMBASSY DAR ES SALAAM IMMEDIATE 5045
RUEHDJ/AMEMBASSY DJIBOUTI IMMEDIATE 4535
RUEHKM/AMEMBASSY KAMPALA IMMEDIATE 1774
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON IMMEDIATE 2122
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS IMMEDIATE 2083
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOA  IMMEDIATE
RHMFIUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 NAIROBI 000103 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
LONDON AND PARIS FOR AFRICA WATCHERS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PTER ASEC MOPS SO ET KE
SUBJECT: SOMALIA: JANUARY 5 MEETING OF THE INTERNATIONAL 
CONTACT GROUP 
 
REF: A. NAIROBI 91 
 
   ` B. 06 NAIROBI 5405 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: The recent meeting of the International 
Contact Group (ICG) on Somalia centered on supporting Somalia 
at this crucial moment, in particular with respect to 
consolidating stability through an inclusive political 
process, security, and humanitarian and development 
assistance.  The delegates urged reconciliation and immediate 
international support for the Transitional Federal 
Institutions (TFIs).  The ICG agreed that effective TFIs 
based on broad-based dialogue are the key to a stable, 
secure, and democratic Somalia, and to that end called for 
the urgent deployment of a stabilization force in Somalia 
based on UNSC resolution 1725 and called on donor partners to 
provide immediate capacity-building assistance.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The ICG met January 5 in Nairobi, co-chaired by 
Assistant Secretary Jendayi Frazer and Kenyan Minister for 
Foreign Affairs Raphael Tuju.  Norway, Sweden, the European 
Union, Italy, Tanzania, the United Kingdom, the African 
Union, IGAD, the United Nations, and the League of Arab 
states attended the meeting.  Reftel includes the text of the 
communiqu of the ICG meeting.  Tanzania agreed to host the 
next meeting of the ICG in Dar es Salaam in one month with 
the precise date to be determined. 
 
"A WINDOW OF OPPORTUNITY" 
------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) In their opening messages, Assistant Secretary 
Frazer and Foreign Minister Tuju highlighted the need for the 
current meeting to identify ways to assist Somalia.  A/S 
Frazer outlined three ways in which the ICG could help 
Somalia move forward: support the government in initiating a 
truly inclusive process for reconciliation, identify concrete 
assistance mechanisms, and encourage the immediate deployment 
of a stabilization force.  FM Tuju welcomed Uganda's decision 
to deploy troops to Somalia on behalf of IGAD and the AU, and 
called for specific commitments of financial assistance to 
help build the capacity of the TFIs.  Responding to A/S 
Frazer's well-received announcement of USD 40 million in new 
assistance to Somalia, Tuju likewise pledged Kenya's 
continued assistance. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) In making an introductory remark to the ICG, 
Somalia President Abdullahi Yusuf continued the theme of the 
current situation in Somalia as an opportunity, telling the 
ICG that his government would employ an inclusive approach to 
create a "new Somalia" based on broad-based governance, 
collective security and stability.  Yusuf highlighted as a 
new beginning the TFIs' recent success in removing the 
Council of Islamic Courts (CIC) and taking control of the 
country.  The President stated that the ICG's assistance in 
deploying troops as provided for in UNSC 1725, supporting 
government institutions, and providing humanitarian aid would 
enable the TFIs to meet their goals. 
 
DIALOGUE AND RECONCILIATION 
--------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Among the ICG delegates, there was general 
agreement with A/S Frazer's statement that the TFIs need to 
pursue a genuine reconciliation process which promotes 
inclusive dialogue between all elements of Somali society. 
However, reconciliation, it was agreed, needs to begin first 
and foremost within the TFIs.  The UNPOS delegate stressed 
the need for the international community to encourage key 
actors, namely the President and the Prime Minister, to 
resume dialogue and work together to maintain the legitimacy 
and credibility of the TFIs.  Sweden suggested that convening 
parliament in Mogadishu is one way to bring the various 
factions within the TFIs together to promote dialogue. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Delegates also stressed the importance of the 
resumption of dialogue and reconciliation between the TFIs 
and other representative groups which are not currently 
represented in the TFIs among civil society, the business 
community, women's groups, and religious leaders.  The 
 
NAIROBI 00000103  002 OF 003 
 
 
delegate for the Arab League emphasized the need to also 
include former elements of the CIC, arguing that to exclude 
them would have negative consequences for the achievement of 
peace and stability in Somalia. 
 
ASSISTANCE 
---------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) ICG delegates concluded that support for the TFIs' 
operational capacity is essential to peace and security in 
Somalia.  Responding to the co-chairs' and Yusuf's appeal for 
financial support, several ICG members called for a donors' 
conference.  Members' ability to help the TFIs show immediate 
improvements on the ground would give a boost to Somali 
confidence in the TFIs.  A/S Frazer asserted that it may be 
early for a donors' conference, but that should not preclude 
coordination of assistance.  The Swedish delegation countered 
that a clear commitment to reconciliation from the TFI 
leadership would make mobilizing donor support an easier 
task.  The UN delegation explained that the TFIs could show 
their strength by honoring a social contract - providing 
necessary services.  A/S Frazer asked the UN to circulate its 
joint needs assessment to help inform donors' deliberations. 
The U.K. delegation reminded the meeting of the urgent needs 
of "genuine" refugees. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) At the meeting's conclusion, Tuju called on members 
to follow the U.S. lead and make concrete pledges.  The Arab 
League committed one million dollars, further to their 
announcement that a shipment of medicine was already en route 
Mogadishu.  The UK delegation stated that its government 
would be making resources available immediately.  Assistant 
Secretary Frazer emphasized the urgent need, encouraging more 
 
SIPDIS 
pledges.  While the UNDP will monitor commitments, she 
continued, the issue of a formal donor mechanism should be on 
the agenda for the next ICG meeting. 
 
SECURITY 
-------- 
¶9.  (SBU) Security, however, is a prerequisite for the 
creation of a secure and stable environment in which the TFIs 
can capitalize on this assistance, the delegates agreed.  The 
delegates also concurred with A/S Frazer that the need for a 
stabilization force is urgent.  The meeting called for 
further discussion of early deployment of peace keeping 
forces, comprised primarily of African states.  Despite 
suggestions from some delegates that resolution 1725 requires 
reformulation to reflect the current situation in Somalia, 
most delegates agreed that the mandate of 1725 is still 
applicable and should merely be adapted to take account of 
the new realities on the ground.  Sweden proposed that 
Mogadishu should be the first priority for any stabilizing 
force, to allow the TFIs to operate effectively from the 
capital.  The AU delegate stated that an AU meeting was 
planned in Addis Ababa for the week of January 8, 2007 to 
develop an exit strategy for Ethiopian forces and the early 
deployment of a stabilizing force.  FM Tuju announced his 
plans for a mission to five African countries to seek 
additional troop contributions. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) In a bilateral meeting with President Yusuf on the 
margins of the ICG meeting, A/S Frazer emphasized that the 
key right now is the political process.  Appreciating Yusuf's 
commitment to inclusivity, she noted the United States' hope 
that Prime Minister Gedi reaches out broadly in making 
appointments in the spirit of reconciliation.  Yusuf stated 
that he has advised PM Gedi to be "tolerant," adding that 
Gedi would initiate dialogue with all groups - politicians, 
religious leaders, and civil society members, but not 
terrorists.  If warlords behave appropriately, they are 
welcome too, Yusuf said, noting that PM Gedi had invited all 
warlords to Mogadishu.  Left with no other choice at this 
time, they have all accepted, he commented.  Yusuf appealed 
to A/S Frazer for continued U.S. support, thanking her for 
the U.S. role thus far. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Following the conclusion of the ICG meeting, 
members of the ICG, including Kenya, Norway, Sweden, the 
European Commission, and the U.S., met privately with the 
 
NAIROBI 00000103  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
Speaker of the Transitional Federal Parliament Shariff Hassan 
Sheikh Adan.  FM Tuju provided Shariff Hassan with a copy of 
the ICG communiqu and summarized the decisions of the 
meeting.  Despite the urging of the ICG members that Shariff 
Hassan and a large group of Somali MPs currently in Nairobi 
return to Somalia and take part in the political process, 
Shariff Hassan categorically refused to return to Baidoa or 
Mogadishu while Ethiopian forces remain inside Somalia. 
While Shariff Hassan noted his willingness to engage with 
President Yusuf and PM Gedi from Nairobi, he argued that his 
return to Somalia at this time would require him to adopt the 
views of Yusuf and Gedi.  Shariff Hassan called for the 
immediate implementation of UNSC resolution 1725, including 
deployment of a regional stabilization force to replace 
Ethiopian forces in Somalia, as the basis for stabilizing 
Somalia.  FM Tuju chastised Shariff Hassan for imposing these 
preconditions and therefore "wasting" the time of the 
international community. 
 
¶12.  (SBU) A/S Frazer noted Shariff Hassan's principled stand 
against the Ethiopian intervention, but emphasized that 
recent events cannot be undone.  What is most important now 
is that Shariff Hassan return to the political process, reach 
out broadly to key elements of Somali society, and get the 
TFIs back onto the transitional process for the remaining 
three years of its mandate.  A/S Frazer said that it seems 
more productive for Shariff Hassan to return to Baidoa and be 
a leader, rather than allow Ethiopia to prevent him from 
participating in the he political process.  A/S Frazer note 
that Ethiopia hopes to withdraw its forces within the next 
couple of weeks, but expressed her concern that the speaker's 
absence even for a couple of weeks could permanently exclude 
him from the process.  (NOTE: President Yusuf told Ambassador 
Ranneberger on December 29 that the Transitional Federal 
parliament may move to impeach the Speaker on the grounds 
that the speaker has been outside of Somalia for over one 
month and his negative rhetoric against the TFIs.  END NOTE.) 
Shariff Hassan responded that the parliament could only 
function in an "environment of peace, not under foreign 
masters" and that he did not see a role for himself until 
1725 was implemented and Ethiopia had withdrawn. 
 
¶13.  (U) Assistant Secretary Frazer has cleared this message. 
RANNEBERGER