07NDJAMENA920
CHAD: FIGHTING CONTINUES, DEFENSE MINISTER FIRED
Sun Dec 02 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ndjamena
VZCZCXRO1339
RR RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHNJ #0920/01 3361251
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 021251Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY NDJAMENA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5928
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHGI/AMEMBASSY BANGUI 1446
RUEHYD/AMEMBASSY YAOUNDE 1628UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NDJAMENA 000920 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
LONDON AND PARIS FOR AFRICA WATCHERS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREF PREL CD SU
SUBJECT: CHAD: FIGHTING CONTINUES, DEFENSE MINISTER FIRED 
 
REF: NDJAMENA 916 
 
NDJAMENA 00000920  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Heaving fighting continues between the 
government and rebel factions in eastern Chad, with 
significant casualties among the President's clan. President 
Deby returned to N'Djamena on December 1 to commemorate 17 
years in power and to fire the Defense Minister (former FUC 
rebel Mahamat Nour) before returning to the front. It remains 
to be seen whether the long-anticipated rupture with Nour 
will result in the migration of FUC troops back to the 
rebellion. End summary. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Fighting between the Chadian national army (french 
acronym ANT) and the rebel groups UFDD and RFC continues in 
the east, with the current locus around the town of Biltine. 
The ANT continues to mobilize and move additional troops to 
the east. (One of two U.S.-trained Pan-Sahel Initiative (PSI) 
battalions has been at the front since the commencement of 
hostilities.)  French planes are ferrying in wounded soldiers 
to N'Djamena.  The military hospitals are overflowing, and 
throngs of family members are camped outside awaiting word on 
the wounded.  The most serious cases have been flown on to 
Dakar, Tripoli and Cairo.  Cameroon has also offered to take 
wounded soldiers for treatment. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The annual commemoration of President Deby's 
accession to power was celebrated as usual with a military 
parade on December 1.  The President returned from the east 
to attend the parade, and then flew back to Abeche. 
President Deby walked and stood at attention, but he did not 
deliver an address (the Al-Wihda website had reported that he 
was injured on November 29, but this has not been confirmed). 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Later that day the Foreign Minister convoked the 
diplomatic corps and the press to deliver a statement on the 
situation.  Foreign Minister Allam-mi said that the rebels 
were solely responsible for violating the peace agreement. 
The GOC had sent a military commission to Khartoum to discuss 
the cantonment/disarmament of the rebels.  This was 
consistent with the terms of the peace agreement signed 
October 25 in Sirte, Libya.  However, the rebels claimed that 
a political level delegation should have been sent instead, 
and used this as a pretext to re-launch the rebellion. 
Foreign Minister Allam-mi noted that the terms of the peace 
agreement originally called for cantonment and disarmament 
over three months; it was RFC leader Timan Erdimi who had 
unilaterally changed the three months to one month. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Foreign Minister Allam-mi informed the group that 
he had called in "his brother" the Sudanese Ambassador to 
state that Chad would not tolerate the fact that Chadian 
rebels continued to use Sudanese territory and receive 
Sudanese support.  However, he softened his comments by 
adding that this was not the first crisis between Sudan and 
Chad, and it was hoped that friendship and "good neighborly" 
relations would resume.  He also called on the international 
community to vigorously condemn - or at least deplore - the 
acts of the rebels who had clearly broken the cease-fire. 
(Comment:  Interestingly, the Sudanese Ambassador was present 
at the Foreign Minister's convocation and greeted colleagues 
with no trace of coldness.  During previous periods of 
tension between the two countries he has always been absent 
from such meetings. End comment) 
 
¶6.  (SBU) In response to a question from a BBC reporter, 
Allam-mi confirmed that Minister of Defense Mahamat Nour had 
been fired and was currently at the Libyan embassy.  Allam-mi 
explained that some FUC elements had joined up with the 
rebels to fight the ANT in Guereda; they had been ordered to 
return to Abeche and had refused.  He expressed confidence 
that the peace agreement with the FUC would still hold 
despite the recent events, and explained that most FUC 
elements were already integrated into the government.  (Note: 
a new Defense Minister has not been named.  End note) 
 
¶7.  (SBU) International and humanitarian organizations in 
eastern Chad are continuing to work without serious 
disruption.  As in previous episodes of ANT/rebel 
confrontation, the humanitarian community does not feel 
directly targeted.  (At the same time they recognize the 
dangers of being caught in the crossfire.) The 
Exxon-Mobil-run oil consortium has not significantly changed 
its security posture. Over the weekend it imposed a 10 p.m. 
curfew for travel in personal vehicles and warned about 
police and military checkpoints.  The Embassy has also 
alerted Americans in Chad to the presence of police and 
military checkpoints and encouraged Americans to avoid 
 
NDJAMENA 00000920  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
traveling at night. 
 
COMMENT: 
 
¶8. (SBU) For the third November in a row, Chad is battling 
rebellion in the east, with this outbreak appearing to be the 
deadliest for both sides.  New factors add to the tension: 
the high number of casualties (especially among the 
President's clan); the President's decision to depart 
N'Djamena and remain at the front, leaving a certain power 
vacuum in the capital, and concerns as to whether the 
long-anticipated rupture with FUC leader Mahamat Nour will 
result in the migration of FUC troops from the ANT back to 
the rebellion. 
 
¶9.  (U) Tripoli minimize considered. 
TAMLYN