07NDJAMENA257
PRESIDENT DEBY ACKNOWLEDGES GUEREDA INSECURITY
Mon Mar 26 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ndjamena
VZCZCXRO5389
RR RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHNJ #0257/01 0851225
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 261225Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY NDJAMENA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5068
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NDJAMENA 000257 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS, SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR AF/C, PRM/AF:MLANG,S/CRS:PNELSON-DOUVELIS/JVANCE/JB EIK 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREF PGOV KCRS CD SU
SUBJECT:  PRESIDENT DEBY ACKNOWLEDGES GUEREDA INSECURITY 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary.  President Deby visited Guereda March 22 to deal 
with ongoing Tama/Zaghawa conflict.  In a meeting in Kounoungou 
Refugee Camp, he acknowledged to refugees, local residents, and the 
humanitarian community that there were indeed security problems, and 
said that he would create a new brigade in the area to improve 
security.  The acknowledgement of the problem was well-received, but 
was followed almost immediately by an attack on the Kounoungou 
market (presumably by FUC forces), which injured nine people.  End 
Summary. 
 
BACKGROUND 
---------- 
 
¶2.   (SBU) President Deby had last visited Guereda in December 2006. 
In his meeting with UN agencies and NGOs, he heard complaints about 
the lack of security in Kounoungou Refugee Camp and Guereda itself. 
Deby summarily responded that there was no problem with security. 
Events since then, including apparent targeting of humanitarian 
operations, have made it clear that the security situation needed 
addressing. 
 
SECURITY OVERVIEW OF GUEREDA 
---------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) According to the UNHCR protection officer in Guereda, the 
Kounoungou Refugee Camp, located 17 kilometers outside of the town 
of Guereda, has serious security problems. This is attributed to the 
fact that several different ethnic groups inhabit Kounoungou, 
including Massariya who recently fled from Jebel Moon.  The Zaghawa 
represent some 46% and Tama some 25% of the camp's population. 
Moreover, a number of Chadian Tama from the area fraudulently 
obtained refugee status at the camp at the beginning of the refugee 
inflow.  Their relatives -- FUC members from the seven Tama villages 
surrounding the camp -- routinely enter the camp to visit, and 
harass the genuine refugees.  (There is a formal Entry Control 
Point, but the camp perimeter is neither fenced off nor patrolled). 
 
 
¶4.  (SBU) In December 2006, following a peace agreement between the 
GoC and United Front for Change (FUC) leader Mahamat Nour, FUC 
soldiers returned to Guereda.  Due to problems integrating the 
former FUC rebels into the Chadian National Army (ANT), the rebels 
had been assigned to replace the ANT in Guereda.  According to UNHCR 
officials, they then started arming the Tamas in the villages 
surrounding Kounoungou, and armed and recruited some Tama 
"refugees."  There had been an estimated 1,200 FUC soldiers prior to 
the peace agreement, but the FUC ranks had now swelled to an 
estimated 3,000-4,000 armed individuals.  Misoffs heard that FUC 
soldiers would routinely get drunk and then go to Kounoungou and 
cause problems.  The FUC soldiers were not disciplined or trained, 
and reportedly included child soldiers.  The Gendarmerie force 
guarding both camps consists of 52 gendarmes with a total of 
eight-twelve weapons. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Waves of insecurity have been occurring for several 
months.  Starting near the end of January, there were shootings in 
Guereda itself.  On 28 February-1 March, fighting erupted nearby in 
Birak between Tamas and Zaghawas.  Misoffs were informed that the 
ANT did not respond, but the FUC did, and reportedly fought both the 
Tamas and the Zaghawas.  Wounded Tamas were treated at the hospital 
in Guereda, but Zaghawas were, and still are, afraid to come to the 
hospital in Guereda (they go instead to Iriba).  The International 
Medical Committee (IMC), which runs the clinics at the refugee 
camps, had at one time mobile clinic which visited local villages 
but this clinic was stopped due to security concerns.  On 5 March, 
due to concern that humanitarians were being targeted, the UN and 
some NGOs reduced their staffing by 17 people. 
 
President Deby's March 2007 Visit 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (U) President Deby arrived in Guereda on 22 March.  At a meeting 
originally called for March 24, but subsequently postponed until 
March 25, he addressed crowd of a few thousand refugees and some 
local villagers, plus humanitarian workers at a Chadian school a 
short distance from the entrance to the Kounoungou Camp.  He told 
the crowd that he was aware of the details of security incidents in 
the camps, and expressed his regrets over the killing of two 
refugees.  He paid homage to the gendarmes guarding camps and also 
told the crowd that they should not bring Sudanese problems into the 
camp, and that recruitment, arms, and Sudanese rebel activity were 
not allowed, and that security would be improved. The sub-prefet, 
rather than the new Prefet (a 29-year old Tama who had worked for 
CARE's refugee program before joining the FUC), introduced the 
president, and a representative of the refugee community also spoke 
briefly.  Deby spoke in French and his remarks were translated into 
Arabic. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) President Deby, accompanied by his wife and the Interior 
Minister, then met privately with the handful of UN and NGO 
officials.  Visiting PRM and S/CRS personnel also attended.  Deby 
 
NDJAMENA 00000257  002 OF 002 
 
 
told them he knew that humanitarians were working under difficult 
circumstances and that he was there to establish an additional 
brigade to insure the security of the area.  It would be based 
outside the Kounoungou Camp but would enter it if necessary to 
support the gendarmes.  He encouraged the UN and NGOs to keep up 
their work there.  (Note.  New vehicles for such a force were 
already in Guereda according to the CNAR representative.  End 
note.) 
 
¶8.  (SBU) The UNHCR representative thanked President Deby for the 
visit, but also pointed out that half the humanitarian workers had 
been withdrawn since November 2006, and that everyone hoped security 
would improve soon. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The Interior Minister attempted to start a discussion 
about UNHCR's projects on behalf of the local population (UNHCR has 
dedicated five percent of its overall budget to projects to benefit 
the local communities), but was cut off by the President.  He 
arranged to meet separately with the UN and NGOs on 26 March to 
discuss that issue (Note:  Most local projects, such as the mobile 
clinics and Food For Work (FFW) programs, have been suspended on 
security grounds.  The five percent UNHCR set aside to benefit the 
local communities is unique to Chad. End Note.) 
 
Presumed FUC Response 
--------------------- 
 
¶10.  (U) Shortly after President Deby left the area near the camp, 
the UN and IMC received reports that some armed elements had 
attacked refugees at the Sunday Kounoungou market place, and 
kidnapped two people, who were later released.  The initial report 
was that six people had received gunshot wounds.  However, the IMC 
clinic at Kounoungou later reported nine victims had been treated, 
but none for gunshot wounds.  Three with head wounds were 
transferred to Guereda Hospital.  All humanitarians presumed that 
the attack was by non-reconciled FUC elements angered by Deby's 
speech and anxious to show that they would not be cowed. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶11.  (SBU) The security situation in the Kounoungou Camp and Guereda 
remains poor.  However, the fact that President Deby now 
acknowledges that fact, and Sudanese and Chadian rebel recruitment 
in the camp, is a positive development.  Deby promised to stay in 
Guereda until the security situation was put on track with the new 
brigade in place.  He was still there on March 26.  Wall