07PARIS147
Reporting Cable:  NINTH OECD WORKING GROUP ON WASTE
Fri Jan 12 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
null
Lucia A Keegan  01/18/2007 07:36:20 PM  From  DB/Inbox:  Lucia A Keegan

Cable 
Text:                                                                      
                                                                           
      
UNCLAS        PARIS 00147

SIPDIS
cxparis:
    ACTION: ECON
    INFO:   ECSO ECNO TRDO AGR FCS ENGO POL UNESCO AMBO SCI
            PAO LABO DCM AMB

DISSEMINATION: ECONIN
CHARGE: PROG

VZCZCFRO865
RR RUEHFR
DE RUEHFR #0147/01 0121515
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 121515Z JAN 07
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4182
RUEAEPA/EPA WASHDC
INFO RUEHFR/OECD COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 000147 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM USOECD PARIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/ERA 
EPA FOR OSW/RPICARDI AND MBOUCHER 
EPA FOR OSWER/FMCALISTER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD OTRA SENV KSCA TPHY FR
SUBJECT: Reporting Cable:  NINTH OECD WORKING GROUP ON WASTE 
PREVENTION AND RECYCLING (WGWPR), 20-22 SEPTEMBER 2006, PARIS 
FRANCE 
 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
The Working Group on Waste Prevention and Recycling (WGWPR) met on 
September 20-22, in Paris. The group is developing a guidance manual 
on the environmentally sound management (ESM) of waste and revising 
a guidance manual for the Council Decision on the transboundary 
movements of waste.  The group elected a new bureau and was briefed 
on ongoing work in sustainable materials management (SMM) as well as 
the development of Environmental Policy Committee's (EPOC) 
environmental outlook. The group approved new terms for the renewal 
of its mandate, agreed to changes to its waste list, adopted a 
proposal for prioritization of work in SMM, and agreed to an 
activities-based approach for the participation of non-Members in 
its activities. End Summary 
 
AGENDA AND SUMMARY 
------------------ 
 
¶1. The draft agenda (ENV/EPOC/WGWPR/A(2006)1) was accepted without 
comment, as was the Summary Record of the Eighth Meeting. 
 
AGENDA ITEM 3: ROUND TABLE DISCUSSION OF RECENT DEVELOPMENTS 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶2. Several countries including the US, gave brief synopses of 
newsworthy national items concerning waste prevention and recycling. 
 The US presented information on the completion of the Cathode Ray 
Tube (CRT) Rule and implications for import/export of end-of-life 
CRTs as well as information on the proposed 'chat' rule which 
addresses the environmentally protective use of chat (a by-product 
of lead and zinc mining) in transportation projects.  Discussion on 
the CRT Rule led to a request of the US by the European Commission 
to provide a summary of activities (Federal and State) that address 
electronics waste.  The US agreed to accommodate this request. 
 
AGENDA ITEM 4:STATEMENT BY THE SECRETARIAT 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  The Secretariat (Tom Jones) summarized events undertaken 
recently or in planning stages within the OECD having relevance for 
the WGWPR. The EPOC agenda for the October meeting in Krakow will 
include discussion on the OECD Environmental Outlook, Non-member 
outreach, and planning for the Ministerial set for 2008. Delegates 
were encouraged to suggest items to be considered for the Ministers 
to address.  EPOC is also likely to review all committees and groups 
in 2008 as a means of considering the overall direction of programs, 
including 'small programs' such as the WGWPR.  Delegates were 
encouraged to consider voluntary contributions as a means of shoring 
up funding in a long-term manner to provide stability to the group's 
staff and programs.  Germany and Switzerland proposed alternative 
approaches to shoring up funds including a formal letter from the 
Secretariat to Member countries as well as consideration of industry 
 
SIPDIS 
funding for certain work program items of interest, which was 
supported by Business and Industry Advisory Committee (BIAC) as a 
potential opportunity. 
 
AGENDA ITEM 5: ELECTION OF THE BUREAU 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. Delegates were invited to vote on a proposal for a new Bureau. 
The US and Korea supported the proposal and the WGWPR subsequently 
agreed. Canada now Chairs the Bureau (formerly Spain) with 
Switzerland, Japan, Spain, and Belgium (replacing Hungary). 
 
AGENDA ITEM 6:  RENEWAL OF THE MANDATE AND TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR 
THE WGWPR 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶5. The Secretariat briefly summarized the amendments made to the 
Terms of Reference of the WGWPR, which largely concern the 
incorporation of a SMM component to the terms and also adjustments 
to extended producer responsibility (EPR) work to address a more 
general approach to product-related waste work instead of an 
approach strictly associated with EPR.  The US and Korea 
specifically supported these improvements.  Germany, Switzerland, 
and the European Commission proposed additional minor modification 
of the terms to include reference to taking into account social and 
economic implications of work in waste reduction.  The Mandate and 
amended Terms of Reference for the WGWPR were subsequently adopted 
with minor modifications including extension of the Mandate to June 
30, 2009. 
 
AGENDA ITEM 7: TRANSBOUNDARY MOVEMENTS OF WASTE 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶6. The Secretariat gave an overview of the proposed revisions to the 
Guidance Manual for the Implementation of Council Decision 
C(2001)107/FINAL which includes updates resulting from Basel 
Convention COP6 and COP7 and changes agreed upon in past WGWPR 
meetings.  The US approved revisions on the condition that two 
specific textual modifications are made: one referring to the 
Environmentally Sound Management of Waste (ESM) in connection with 
approvals for transboundary movements; and the other referring to 
the status of incomplete efforts to consolidate the OECD Council 
Acts. Switzerland raised another point that the manual currently 
does not provide guidance on what to do if a green list waste has 
hazardous properties and must be managed as hazardous waste.  The 
issue was not resolved and will require further consideration for 
appropriate text changes.  The Secretariat will incorporate proposed 
changes, including any changes, which may follow from the Basel 
Convention COP8 (Nairobi, November 06), and will submit the document 
for consideration by Delegates at the next WGWPR meeting.  BIAC gave 
an oral presentation on the proposal for revision of the French 
translation of slag on the OECD lists of wastes. After interventions 
by France, Switzerland, Belgium, Canada, and Spain, delegates agreed 
to the change for immediate implementation rather than wait for a 
similar decision to take place at the Basel Convention COP8. 
Regarding the Interactive Database, the Secretariat gave a brief 
status update on its functionality and Member submissions to date. 
Delegates were invited to submit comments by the end of October on 
how to improve the usability of the database. 
 
AGENDA ITEM 8: ENVIRONMENTALLY SOUND MANAGEMENT OF WASTE 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶7. The Secretariat reported on the status of the Draft Guidance 
Manual for the Implementation of the Council Recommendation on ESM 
and gave an overview of changes made most recently in the Second 
Revision as a result of comments received.  Canada and the US 
asserted the need for flexibility in the Manual and the further 
modification of text where prescriptive language remained.  The US 
further asserted the need for flexibility in approach to best 
available techniques, the viability of self-certification of 
facility environmental management systems (EMSs), the need for 
additional guidance for facilities where implementation of all core 
performance elements (CPEs) is not appropriate or necessary, and 
cautioned against Guidance Manual interpretation going beyond 
Council Recommendation language or implying any legally binding 
obligation to implement or 'comply with' the Council Recommendation. 
 Austria and the European Commission expressed opposing views, which 
required negotiation during the margins of the meeting to achieve 
acceptable draft language.  Agreement was reached on most points. 
The Secretariat committed to incorporating new changes to the Manual 
with the aim of distributing a Third Revision by late October for 
Member country review.  Delegates will be invited to submit comment 
on the Third Revision by January at which point the Secretariat will 
determine whether it is necessary to call the ESM Steering Committee 
to resolve remaining issues. 
 
AGENDA ITEM 9: SUSTAINABLE MATERIALS MANAGEMENT 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶8. The Working Group on Environmental Information and Outlooks 
(WGEIO) Secretariat (Myriam Linster) presented a summary on the 
recent workshop on material flows accounting held in Rome, 16-17 
May, and its potential relevance for SMM work.  Subsequently, 
Belgium gave a status report on their inventory of international 
activities relevant to SMM, for the benefit of both the Flemish 
Public Waste Agency and the WGWPR, noting the estimated cost to be 
40k euros and the target date for completion of January 2007.  The 
EC, Canada, and US expressed support for the existing scope and 
terms of reference for the inventory.  Next, the Secretariat 
summarized the outline of the SMM methodological study for assessing 
environmental impacts.  Member countries, including the US, Canada, 
EC and Belgium debated the merits of the 10 selected methodologies 
for study and agreed to expand the list only by one or two additions 
and to include some review of combinations of methodologies. The 
Secretariat invited written comments until September 30 and will 
 
SIPDIS 
call together the Steering Committee if guidance is necessary. 
Delegates heard presentations from the US, Belgium, Switzerland, 
Israel, Finland, Germany, Spain, and Chinese Taipei (ad hoc observer 
pending application for membership) on country experiences in SMM. 
The Secretariat then presented a proposal for prioritizing WGWPR SMM 
work.  Canada called for the removal of the annex defining natural 
capital appended to the SMM work program on the basis that it had 
not been agreed upon as part of the working definition for SMM.  The 
US disagreed with proposed objectives referring to the development 
of harmonized policies for SMM; Belgium proposed alternative 
language.  Delegates adopted the Secretariat's proposal for 
prioritization of SMM work with changes noted. 
 
AGENDA ITEM 10: SECOND OECD ENVIRONMENT OUTLOOK 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
¶9.  The Secretariat gave an overview of EPOC's efforts to prepare 
the next Environment Outlook for 2007 and presented key points of 
the draft section on waste and material flows.  Belgium, 
Switzerland, Korea, US, Germany, Japan, E.C. Mexico, and Spain 
offered many comments and corrections to guide the development of 
the waste section including pointing out data inconsistencies, 
stressing the importance of municipal solid waste (MSW) management, 
calling for increased emphasis on waste prevention/reduction, and 
noting concern over trends speculation without adequate supporting 
data.  Further, the US disagreed with report statements that there 
are no reliable data for hazardous waste within the OECD since the 
US does have such reliable time-series data available for use and 
which do not support conclusions drawn in the report that hazardous 
waste generation is increasing significantly.  The Secretariat was 
receptive to comments, invited written comments by October 15, and 
will revise the waste and material flows section for Member country 
comment and discussion at the next meeting. 
 
AGENDA ITEM 11:  PROGRAM OF WORK AND BUDGET (PWB) 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶10. The Secretariat gave a brief overview of the funding situation 
of the WGWPR and the work program outlined for 2007-2008.  The US 
supported the PWB as presented and promised a voluntary 
contribution, amount unknown at this time, to be applied toward SMM 
and work on transboundary movements of waste.  Korea, also 
supporting the PWB, pledged funding for SMM and transboundary 
movements, but questioned the value of potential development of 
waste-stream specific guidelines.  European Commission, Canada, 
Japan, Finland, also supported the PWB and pledged funding for SMM. 
Canada noted that there has been no evident support for ESM 
waste-stream specific guidelines over the last three meetings and 
suggested its possible deletion from the PWB due to lack of support, 
but Delegates did not ultimately remove this item from the PWB. 
 
AGENDA ITEM 12:  PARTICIPATION OF NON-MEMBER COUNTRIES IN THE WORK 
OF THE WGWPR 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶11. In a confidential session of the WGWPR (not involving 
observers), the Secretariat gave a brief overview of the application 
for observership submitted by Chinese Taipei for consideration by 
the group. Also, Delegates were invited to consider prioritizing, in 
general, its preferred approach to incorporating the participation 
of non-Members into the work of the WGWPR.  Delegates agreed on the 
following: non-Member involvement will be accepted as an 
'activities-based relationship' only (i.e., participation in 
workshops and other activities, but not participation in meetings) 
until WGWPR chooses to change this approach; applications by 
non-Members will be seen and considered by the WGWPR; the bureau 
will decide the events in which applicants may participate; Chinese 
Taipei will not gain observership to the group but will be invited 
to participate in the SMM workshop to be held in late 2007; WGWPR 
may change its approach or decision with new information. 
 
AGENDA ITEM 13: OTHER BUSINESS 
------------------------------ 
 
¶12. The date of the next WGWPR meeting is April 25-27, 2007, in 
Paris.  Also, December 2007 is tentatively being considered for the 
following meeting of the WGWPR to be held in Brussels in conjunction 
with the second workshop on Sustainable Materials Management. 
MORELLA