07PARIS627
WEEKLY MEDIA WRAP-UP PUTIN IN MUNICH AND THE MIDDLE EAST;
Fri Feb 16 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXRO0398
RR RUEHIK RUEHYG
DE RUEHFR #0627/01 0471520
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 161520Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4991
INFO RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVE
RUEHMRE/AMCONSUL MARSEILLE 1540
RUEHSR/AMCONSUL STRASBOURG 0328UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 000627 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/PPD, EUR/WE, INR, R 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC PREL KPAO FR
SUBJECT:  WEEKLY MEDIA WRAP-UP PUTIN IN MUNICH AND THE MIDDLE EAST; 
NORTH KOREA AND IRAN; FRANCO-AFRICAN SUMMIT; RESULTS OF FRENCH MEDIA 
SURVEY-- FEBRUARY 16, 2007. 
 
PARIS 00000627  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
Sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect accordingly. 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) Although Putin's excoriation of alleged U.S. unilateralism 
at Wehrkunde and in the Middle East might have been expected to fall 
on fertile soil in French media, French editorialists generally 
compared his calculated outbursts unfavorably with Secretary of 
Defense Gates's measured response.  French media reported positively 
on U.S. willingness to compromise to ensure an agreement on nuclear 
weapons with North Korea.  Skepticism persists, however, about the 
"truth" of U.S. intelligence information about Iran's nuclear 
program and its alleged support for anti-American activities in 
Iraq.  President Chirac's Franco-African conference provided an 
opportunity for pundits to take a hard look at the state of France's 
"special relationship" with Africa.  A survey of French media 
identified radio and print as more relied upon and trusted than TV 
news.  End Summary. 
 
----------------------------------- 
PUTIN IN MUNICH AND THE MIDDLE EAST 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU)  Following Russian President Vladimir Putin's charges 
against the U.S. during the security meeting in Munich, the February 
12 edition of right-of-center Le Figaro featured on its front page: 
"Vladimir Putin's indictment against the U.S."  The daily 
characterized the remarks as "Putin's variations on an old Cold War 
melody," adding, "More than one participant in the meeting wondered 
if the second Cold War were being declared in Munich... The tone 
between Russia and the U.S. is getting harsher... and the Russian 
president did not mince words in stigmatizing the U.S. and NATO..." 
For left-wing Liberation on February 12, "Putin is the anti-American 
spokesman."  February 13's left-of-center Le Monde highlighted 
"recollections of the days of the Cold War..."  Laurent Zecchini 
wrote: "A cold wind...blew on Munich Saturday and Sunday...  For his 
first visit to this international meeting, the Russian president 
decided to launch a verbal attack on the U.S., guilty, to his way of 
thinking, of a unilateralist handling of world affairs.  The 
sometimes vindictive tone used took the audience by surprise... But 
the American Defense Secretary Robert Gates opted not to add fuel to 
the fire merely pointing to the fact that 'some Russian policies 
seem to work against international stability...'  The new American 
Defense Secretary took pains to show that he is less provocative 
than his predecessor." 
 
¶3. (SBU) An inside story in the February 12 right-of-center Le 
Figaro entitled "The Kremlin defies Washington in the Gulf" related: 
 "Putin's diplomatic trip yesterday to Saudi Arabia, Qatar and 
Jordan looked like a challenge waged against the U.S. in a region 
that it traditionally considers its own."  The daily's Moscow 
correspondent Fabrice Node-Langlois went on to say that "The Middle 
East is the first area where Russian diplomacy is reaffirming itself 
since 2003.  The Kremlin has been making it a point to stand apart 
from Washington on all of the major regional issues."  The editorial 
by Jean-Christophe Ploquin in Catholic La Croix on February 12 
underscored that Putin "is trying to strengthen Russian influence in 
a region that carries an American stamp...  Russia feels oppressed 
by the advance of NATO... and Washington's decision to set up two 
bases in the Czech Republic and in Poland is seen by Moscow as a 
provocation...  Russia is back on the front of the stage thanks to 
its oil supply... now the question remains how it intends to use its 
new margin for maneuver."  Economic right-of-center daily Les Echos 
noted on February 13 that the "Kremlin is taking very seriously the 
possibility that George W. Bush could strike Iran before the end of 
his term in office... which would have repercussions throughout the 
Middle East.  Putin therefore tried to impress on King Abdullah the 
need to 'calm' Washington down." 
 
-------------------- 
NORTH KOREA AND IRAN 
-------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) On February 13, right-of-center Le Figaro's Beijing 
correspondent Jean-Jacques Mevel wrote that "The talks are 
progressing."  "The Bush Administration," Mevel noted, "is already 
in a tug-of-war with another rising nuclear power, Iran, and it has 
been burned in the past by the slew of broken agreements with North 
Korea between 1994 and 2005...  A compromise, if it is possible, 
would force the North Korean regime to either offer more or ask for 
less."  Also on February 13, Washington-based correspondent for 
privately-run Europe 1 radio, Francois Clemenceau, reported on the 
attempts to reach an agreement, commenting on "Christopher Hill's 
cautiousness... with regard to Kim Jong Il whose favorite trick is 
 
PARIS 00000627  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
to change his mind."  On February 14, right-of-center Le Figaro 
called the agreement "fragile" and noted that "Washington has 
discovered the virtues of compromise."  The editorial by Pierre 
Rousselin entitled "Bush's pragmatism" opined that "Considering how 
North Korea has behaved in the past, this is by no means a done 
deal...  The U.S. can nonetheless praise itself for this diplomatic 
breakthrough...  This is what George W. Bush has been able to 
achieve by mixing his usual tough stance with an uncommon diplomatic 
overture...  Only one year ago, Washington would never have agreed 
to anything but a total dismantling of the North Korean nuclear 
installations...  Today, after the defeat of the Mid-term elections, 
George W. Bush is determined to devote himself to Iraq and Iran and 
therefore needs to appease the tension with North Korea and score 
points in the area of non-proliferation.  The agreement in Beijing 
is the sign that when it has to, the White House is capable of 
exhibiting the pragmatism necessary." 
 
¶5. (SBU) The front page and unsigned editorial in left-of-center Le 
Monde, dated February 14, discussed the provisional agreement and 
the editorial argued that "The five major 'powers' worry that states 
that have been stigmatized as 'rogue' by the Americans will acquire 
nuclear weapons.  For years they have been trying to dissuade North 
Korea and Iran by alternating between the carrot and the stick and 
with uneven success...  Diplomatic pressure and sanctions appear to 
have won over the last Stalinist regime on the planet.  But with 
Teheran the tug-of-war continues...  The Europeans have been 
negotiating with Iran for almost four years and have gotten 
nowhere...  Urged on by the Americans, will Europe agree to toughen 
economic and financial sanctions, thereby running the risk of 
breaking the common front with Russia?   It has little other choice 
if it wants to avoid a nuclear Iran -- which is the party line -- 
and American strikes on Iranian sites with the ensuing 
consequences...  The North Korean precedent brings with it 
ambivalent lessons...  Iran is aspiring to be recognized as a 
regional power -- something the Americans are not prepared to 
grant...  And if tension has lessened in the Korean peninsula, the 
stakes are rising dangerously in the Middle East." 
 
¶6. (SBU) In Catholic La Croix on February 14, the editorial by 
Jean-Christophe Ploquin was entitled, "Now it's Iran's turn." 
Ploquin remarked that "The hermit kingdom may be on the verge of 
emerging from its isolation...  And if this actually comes about, 
several lessons will be able to be drawn to be used with regard to 
Iran...  First of all that it is never too late for negotiation... 
Second, that the U.S. can play the card of multilateral negotiations 
and China can play the facilitator.  The Bush Administration has 
proven that it can take the lead in a complex diplomatic game and it 
is easy to see Condoleezza Rice's influence in this agreement.  Can 
this mechanism for negotiations work with Iran?  There is still 
time...  If international solidarity holds and if Washington sends 
the right signals, the Iranian regime will have to choose between 
two scenarios.  Pursuing its nuclear program will isolate it and 
maybe expose it to air strikes.  Renouncing it would put it back in 
a position to establish a privileged relationship with the U.S." 
 
¶7. (SBU) On February 16, right-of-center Le Figaro reported that the 
pressure is mounting:  "The U.S. and North Korea are preparing 
cross-visits of their two chief negotiators in the not too distant 
future...  Christopher Hill's visit to Pyongyang would be 
unprecedented since 2002 when President Bush included North Korea in 
the 'Axis of Evil...'  The visits could be a prelude to 
normalization of relations... and for the U.S. it would effectively 
end the 'regime change' strategy that has been the leitmotif of the 
Administration for the last five years...  The EU has also said that 
it is considering sending a diplomatic troika including Javier 
Solana." 
 
------------------------------- 
FRANCO-AFRICAN SUMMIT IN CANNES 
------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) The February 14 edition of left-of-center Le Monde devoted 
two pages to "France-Africa:  The End of the Chirac Years."  An 
op-ed by Serge Michailof, professor at Sciences Po, charged that 
with regard to Africa, France is "stingy."  On February 15, 
right-of-center Le Figaro's senior Africa correspondent discussed 
the "six issues that poison the Franco-African relationship."  The 
article listed the peace treaty with Algeria, the Borrel affair in 
Djibouti, the Rwandan genocide, the Brazzaville Beach 
disappearances, the Falcone affair in Angola and the attack on the 
Licorne forces in the Ivory Coast as reflecting the decline of 
French influence in Africa over the course of Chirac's presidency. 
Left-wing Liberation ran a two-page, full-color spread on "Chirac 
the African -- how they see him," with largely negative commentary 
running the gamut from "A suffocating love for the continent," to 
"Twelve catastrophic years."   Left-wing Liberation also carried a 
 
PARIS 00000627  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
piece on new diplomatic and judicial developments in the case of 
Borrel's murder in Djibouti.  Catholic La Croix, for its part, 
devoted its front page to "Chirac, a certain idea about Africa," 
describing Chirac's policy as somewhere between the heritage of 
Franco-Africa and a push for development assistance.  La Croix's 
series of articles included a discussion of China's growing role in 
Africa. 
 
¶9. (SBU) In the February 16 right-of-center Le Figaro, the front 
page noted "Europe's role" in Africa, which according to the daily 
is "taking France's place" on the continent.  Most outlets called 
this summit "Chirac's last goodbye to Africa."  The editorial in 
economic right-of-center Le Echos by Francoise Crouigneau mentioned 
the "Political and emotional bond between Chirac and Africa..."  She 
noted that in terms of economic aid, the influence of France was 
dwindling faced with the "growing interest of Washington and Beijing 
for Africa." 
 
---------------------------------------- 
THE FRENCH PUBLIC AND THE MEDIA - SURVEY 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Catholic daily La Croix on February 14 published a survey 
of the French public's views on the media.  This year's survey (an 
annual exercise for the past twenty years) showed that the French 
public is avid for information but that it trusts the media only 
half-heartedly, despite a slight increase in radio audience and 
press readership as compared to last year (from 54 percent to 57 
percent for radio and from 48 percent to 51 percent for the written 
press).  Sixty percent of those asked say they question the 
editorial independence of journalists with regard to political and 
financial considerations.  As for television, 51 percent of the 
French public stated that it was skeptical regarding objectivity. 
The study also noted that young people and professionals rely on 
radio and written press for information. 
ROSENBLATT