07QUITO382
Ambassador's Meeting with Minister of Culture
Fri Feb 16 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHQT #0382 0471240
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 161240Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY QUITO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6336
RUEHGL/AMCONSUL GUAYAQUIL 1889UNCLAS QUITO 000382 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PINR PGOV EC
SUBJECT:  Ambassador's Meeting with Minister of Culture 
 
¶1.  Summary. The Ambassador met with Minister of Culture Antonio 
Preciado on February 15.  Preciado began the meeting by saying that 
he admires the American people, and sees many points in common 
between the U.S. and Ecuador that he hopes can be highlighted 
through joint programs between the Embassy and his Ministry. He 
noted that the Ministry of Culture was created only one month ago by 
President Correa, and that he is facing the administrative 
challenges of creating a budget and finding a permanent building to 
house Ministry offices. 
 
Joint Programs with the Mission 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  The Ambassador stated that she hopes the Embassy can work 
together with the Ministry of Culture, and outlined a number of the 
Mission's cultural and exchange programs for Preciado, including 
jazz performances and a jazz student exchange program, a Black 
History Month exhibit at the Quito City Museum, an English micro 
scholarship program for disadvantaged youth in Guayaquil, the Youth 
Ambassadors exchange program, and the Fulbright program. 
 
¶3. Preciado responded enthusiastically to each of these programs, 
saying that he intends to open Ministry offices in each of Ecuador's 
provincial capitals so that the people could participate more 
actively in cultural activities, and that he would like the Mission 
to think about taking its programs to the provinces to reach new 
audiences.  The Ambassador responded by explaining that the Youth 
Ambassador program is recruiting candidates from all over Ecuador, 
and that the Mission will consider holding performances of American 
bluegrass and jazz in provincial cities through the Ministry's 
auspices. 
 
¶4. Bio Notes 
--------- 
Preciado is Ecuador's first government minister of Afro-Ecuadorian 
descent and a native of Esmeraldas, home to the country's largest 
concentration of afro descendents.  Before becoming minister he was 
a published poet, university rector and Ecuador's cultural 
ambassador to UNESCO (2003-4).  His poetry brought him to the U.S., 
where he met Maya Angelou, and he said that his poems are taught at 
the Univ. of California, Santa Barbara, Howard University and 
Florida International University, and are being translated into 
English for a soon-to-be-published anthology of Ecuadorian poets. 
 
 
¶5. Comment:  Preciado was genuinely cordial and warm in his meeting 
with the Ambassador, saying that there was much Ecuador could learn 
from the U.S. and that he pledged his ministry to creating a 
fruitful exchange of ideas and people with America.  Through PAS, 
the Mission will work with the Ministry on a number of cultural and 
exchange programs that can increase mutual understanding and further 
our transformational diplomacy and outreach goals. 
 
JEWELL