07QUITO1002
Superintendency of Banks Launches a Transparency
Wed May 02 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Quito
VZCZCXYZ0029
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHQT #1002 1222141
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 022141Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY QUITO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6926
INFO RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 6627
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 2530
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ MAY LIMA 1629
RUEHGL/AMCONSUL GUAYAQUIL 2275UNCLAS QUITO 001002 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/AND AND EB/OMA 
TREASURY FOR STEPHEN GOOCH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN ECON EC
SUBJECT:  Superintendency of Banks Launches a Transparency 
Initiative, Congress May Revive Bank Legislation 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary.  The Superintendent of Bank launched a plan to 
increase transparency in the banking sector.  This could lower 
interest rates, a priority for President Correa.  Separately, 
Congress may move forward with a law to impose additional controls 
over the banking sector; although earlier versions were a cause for 
concern, an initial review by the Banking Association suggests that 
the main provisions of the currently proposed law might be 
acceptable.  End Summary. 
 
Transparency Initiative 
----------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) On May 1, the Superintendency of Banks initiated a new 
transparency initiative by publishing on its website the actual 
lending costs of Ecuadorian banks for a variety of loans: 
commercial, consumption, real estate and automobile.  Many 
Ecuadorian banks charge substantial commissions in addition to 
interest rates, which are capped.  The transparency initiative 
should clarify the real costs of loans, and could serve as a 
catalyst for banks to lower their total lending costs.  Banks' 
interest rates on deposits will also be published by the 
Superintendency. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The impact of this transparency is already being felt; a 
Superintendency official who briefed a USAID officer about this 
proposal noted that as the Superintendency compiled data on lending 
costs, banks returned to the Superintendency several times to lower 
their interest rates and commissions. 
 
Revived Banking Legislation 
--------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) The Ecuadorian Banking Association informed a USAID officer 
that it had learned that the Economic Commission in Congress is 
planning to move forward with a law initially proposed by former 
president Leon Febres Cordero (but also supported by President 
Correa) to impose tighter controls over the banking sector.  The law 
had already been approved in a first reading by the former congress, 
so it could move forward relatively quickly if the current congress 
decides to act.  The second review of this proposed law could take 
place in mid-May. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) In examining the views of the current President of 
Economic Commission, Salvador Quishpe, the Banking Association 
believes that some of the more egregious elements of the draft law 
(such as directed lending) may be eliminated.  The Banking 
Association believes that the law may focus on segmenting loans 
markets and establishing interest rate and commission caps, but do 
so in a way the banking industry could accept.  The Banking 
Association will meet with Quishpe on May 7 to reopen the dialogue. 
The Banking Association is prepared to take a flexible position, 
recognizing that Correa supporters control the Congress with 55 
Deputies, enough to pass the law and/or introduce other reforms in 
this law that might affect the stability of the financial sector. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The Superintendent's transparency initiative strikes us as 
a good first step to respond to President Correa's (not 
unreasonable) demand that banks lower lending rates.  By making 
lending rate data publicly available, the transparency initiative 
should use market force (and maybe a healthy dose of embarrassment) 
to push down exorbitant interest rates and commissions.  More 
worrisome is the effort to revive legislation which initially 
attempted to greatly increase regulatory control over the banking 
sector, without reasonable and appropriate segmentation based on 
loan type and other factors.  Post will remain in touch with the 
Banking Association to determine whether its initial views that 
Quishpe will turn the legislation into something more acceptable are 
well-founded. 
 
Jewell