07QUITO1884
RAISING AWARENESS OF HUMAN TRAFFICKING IN ECUADOR
Fri Aug 17 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHQT #1884 2291138
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 171138Z AUG 07
FM AMEMBASSY QUITO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7579
RUEHGL/AMCONSUL GUAYAQUIL PRIORITY 2673UNCLAS QUITO 001884 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR G/TIP 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM EC
SUBJECT: RAISING AWARENESS OF HUMAN TRAFFICKING IN ECUADOR 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  As part of the American EmbassyQs outreach program, 
five embassy summer interns traveled on July 30, 2007 to a shelter 
for trafficking victims run by La Fundacisn Nuestros Jsvenes in 
Mitad del Mundo, and on August 1 Q 2, 2007 to Casa Condor Community 
Center in Riobamba, to promote awareness of trafficking in persons. 
The trips served to educate the interns and reinforce Embassy ties 
with a shelter for trafficking victims near Quito and with 
indigenous youth in the Chimborazo region.  The events were well 
received by over 70 people, who expressed gratitude for the visit 
and presentation.  End summary. 
 
La Fundacisn Nuestros Jsvenes 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) La Fundacisn Nuestros Jsvenes is an organization which helps 
trafficking victims rehabilitate and eventually integrate into 
society after rescue.  Embassy Quito interns visited this 
organization with a local Peace Corps Volunteer to learn more about 
human trafficking in Ecuador.  The Nuestros Jsvenes shelter included 
spacious living accommodations and an outdoor greenhouse for growing 
vegetables.  The facilities needed improvement, however, and the 
staff expressed a need for funding.  The majority of the shelterQs 
funding comes from community donations, as the Ecuadorian government 
provides no funding.  The shelter currently houses thirteen women, 
in almost all cases victims of sexual exploitation as a result of 
human trafficking.  Of the thirteen women, ten have children that 
also housed in the shelter. 
 
¶3. (U) Throughout the shelterQs history, the large majority of 
occupants have been Ecuadorian, though there have been a few 
Colombians.  They are most likely to reach the shelter with the help 
of National Police in Ecuador, and are brought from places such as 
Santa Domingo de los Colorados and Manabi.  Typically they stay at 
the shelter for the designated time of 3 months.  Officials at 
Nuestros Jsvenes described the difficulties of reintegration, the 
challenges of privacy, and the safety and security issues 
surrounding the victims.  They also noted they have a difficult time 
convincing victims to stay at the shelter. 
 
Riobamba Outreach Q Trafficking in Persons 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶4. (U) On August 2, the interns teamed up with faculty from the 
University of San Francisco, Quito, to deliver a presentation on 
human trafficking to members of five different indigenous 
communities at Casa Condor Community Center in Riobamba.  The group 
included approximately 40 community leaders and youth from the 
Chimborazo plains region of Riobamba.  The interns initiated the 
discussion using an embassy presentation about the social, economic 
and community impact of the problem.  They talked about the 
difference between illegal migration and trafficking in persons, 
along with ways to prevent the victimization of community members. 
The seminar also focused on the specific efforts of the governments 
of Ecuador and the United States in the fight against human 
trafficking. 
 
¶5. (U) The interns then participated in an education health session 
with about 20 indigenous youth to talk briefly about trafficking in 
persons. The presentation and visit were well-received by all 
members of the community and by the University of San Francisco 
officials. 
 
¶6. (U) Comment: The highlight of the trip was the visit to 
indigenous communities in one of the poorest areas of Chimborazo. 
At Casa Condor, the young people and community leaders were very 
receptive to the TIP presentation, but efforts at interaction were 
limited in a large-group setting.  When interns approached community 
members individually after the presentation, it was much easier to 
gain peopleQs confidence.  Two of the community leaders even 
contacted interns a week later to request future TIP presentations 
to larger audiences.  The interns' outreach project helped the 
Mission in its fight against global TIP, developed deeper ties with 
the Chimborazo region, and helped the interns to understand the aims 
of public diplomacy.  End comment.