07SANJOSE1131
COSTA RICAN NOMINATION FOR THE SECRETARY OF STATE'S AWARD
Thu Jun 14 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy San Jose
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSJ #1131/01 1651212
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 141212Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8260
INFO RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SAN JOSE 001131 
 
SIPDIS 
 
EEB/EPPD NSMITH-NISSLEY 
WHA/CEN 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BEXP EINV ETRD ELAB SENV KSEP CS
SUBJECT: COSTA RICAN NOMINATION FOR THE SECRETARY OF STATE'S AWARD 
FOR CORPORATE EXCELLENCE 
 
REF: STATE 047222 
 
¶1.  Embassy San Jose is pleased to nominate Whole Foods Market for 
the Secretary of State's Award for Corporate Excellence (ACE) in the 
Multinational Enterprise (MNE) category (reftel).  From its business 
practices in U.S.-based and non-U.S.-based stores, to its 
investments in its supply chain, Whole Foods Market has demonstrated 
the highest level of corporate responsibility throughout its 
history.  Post nominates Whole Foods Market based on its 
contributions to the economic and social growth of the Limon 
Province of Costa Rica, its leadership in demonstrating responsible 
environmental stewardship and practices, and its contribution to 
local science and technology policies related to organic farming 
practices. 
 
¶2.  Whole Foods Market is widely known for matching its "green" 
philosophy with "green" actions.  From selling organically grown 
foods to purchasing solar and wind generated electricity, Whole 
Foods Market regularly makes news as it implements a business 
philosophy oriented toward sustainability and community citizenship 
(Further details on Whole Foods Market's company philosophy can be 
found at: http://www.wholefoodsmarket.com/company/philo sophy.html ). 
 
¶3.  The company has taken this same approach with its activities in 
Costa Rica.  Whole Foods Market sources organically grown bananas, 
mangos, pineapples, and other products from farms in Costa Rica's 
economically challenged Caribbean lowlands.  The principle partner 
of Whole Foods Market in Costa Rica is EARTH University 
http://www.earth.ac.cr/ing/index.php, located in Limon province. 
EARTH is a unique non-profit school where students from around the 
world learn farming techniques that strike a balance between 
agricultural production and environmental preservation.  Whole Foods 
Market began its partnership with EARTH in February 2005, which has 
led to an increase in local knowledge and application of best 
practices in growing organic produce.  With input from Whole Foods, 
Earth University uses low-impact, environmentally-friendly 
agricultural techniques to grow and harvest world-class organic 
bananas, mangos, and pineapples, and other foods for both domestic 
consumption and export. 
 
¶4. As part of this partnership, Whole Foods Market provides $100,000 
of yearly funding and technical training to assist in EARTH 
University's business development.  Through this assistance, Whole 
Foods Market has developed the various EARTH brand products and 
helped them enter the U.S. market.  Whole Foods Market further 
develops the capacity of students at EARTH through an internship 
program whereby students gain valuable experience and insights into 
the global agricultural community.  In the summer of 2007, Whole 
Foods Market will announce a further development of its relationship 
with EARTH as it begins a program to finance businesses of select 
EARTH graduates with $300,000 per year.  With this program, EARTH 
graduates will be able to put what they have learned at EARTH into 
practice and sell, if their products meet standards, their goods in 
Whole Foods Market stores. 
 
¶5.  Whole Foods Market's actions in Costa Rica also extend to 
improving the social and economic fabric of society as a whole.  In 
April 2006, Whole Foods Market began offering low-interest 
micro-financing to women in the Limon province through its Whole 
Planet Foundation.  Through this effort, Whole Foods Market has 
greatly contributed to the development of the economic and social 
sectors of the Limon province.  Limon is the poorest province in 
Costa Rica, with an average household income of $275, which is $350 
below the rest of the country.  Limon has the highest unemployment 
rate in Costa Rica as well as the highest drop-out rates in both 
primary and secondary grades.  In short, it is a province that has 
long lagged behind the rest of Costa Rica.  Over the last year and a 
half, the Whole Planet Foundation has loaned $452,859 to 1,967 
borrowers in the Limon province under the support of the Grameen 
Trust of Bangladesh.  The recipients, all women, have used this 
money to fund agriculture projects, clothing manufacturing and 
sales, small store operations, and restaurants.  The total amount of 
the three year grant is $1,481,000 to fund its micro-financing 
program.  Whole Foods Market ties this program into its other 
activities with EARTH University by pairing EARTH students with loan 
recipients to both advise and learn from the micro-entrepreneurs. 
 
¶6.  Whole Foods Market has since complemented this micro-loan effort 
by implementing the Whole Trade Guarantee program which provides 
shoppers a guarantee that the international products Whole Foods 
offers from developing countries meet strict criteria to ensure 
exceptional product quality, more money for producers, better wages 
and working conditions for workers, and sound environmental 
production practices that promote biodiversity.  The bananas Whole 
Foods purchases from EARTH University were the first product covered 
by this guarantee.  Under this program, Whole Foods contributes 1% 
of the purchase price of every EARTH banana to the micro-loan 
foundation detailed in paragraph 5. 
 
¶7.  These undertakings are not simple philanthropy, but rather the 
exercise of market-based measures as Whole Foods Markets uses small, 
directed loans at favorable interest rates to provide capitol for 
small business growth.  Through these means, over 1,900 women in the 
Limon province have had the opportunity to exercise their 
entrepreneurial skills.  The fact that, to date, the program enjoys 
a 99.5% loan repayment rate is measurable evidence that the women of 
Limon have not simply received a handout, but rather the means to 
develop their own capacities.  Whole Foods Market made this 
possible. 
 
¶8.  Whole Foods Market's activities in Costa Rica epitomize the very 
best of the values that American citizens cherish.  The 
environmentally and socially conscious company has represented the 
United States well in its actions in Costa Rica.  There is not a 
better example of a U.S. company that has invested in developing the 
capacity of the people of Costa Rica in such a sustainable way. 
Presenting Whole Foods Market with the Award for Corporate 
Excellence for a Multinational Enterprise would recognize the 
importance the USG places on the activities that Whole Foods is 
pursuing in Costa Rica. 
 
WEITZENKORN