07SAOPAULO742
PT FACTIONS AND TENDENCIES - A PRIMER
Tue Sep 04 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Sao Paulo
VZCZCXRO8868
PP RUEHRG
DE RUEHSO #0742/01 2471909
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 041909Z SEP 07
FM AMCONSUL SAO PAULO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7415
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 8529
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES 2849
RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION 3090
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0546
RUEHMN/AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO 2422
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ 3467
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO 2124
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 8295
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 3752
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC 2885
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 SAO PAULO 000742 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/BSC, INR/IAA, INR/R/AA 
STATE PASS USTR FOR KATE DUCKWORTH 
NSC FOR TOMASULO 
TREASURY FOR OASIA, DAS LEE AND JHOEK 
USDOC FOR 4332/ITA/MAC/WH/OLAC 
USDOC ALSO FOR 3134/USFCS/OIO 
DOL FOR ILAB 
SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
USAID FOR LAC/AA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINR ELAB ECON BR
SUBJECT: PT FACTIONS AND TENDENCIES - A PRIMER 
 
REF: (A) BRASILIA 1670;     (B) SAO PAULO 734; 
      (C) SAO PAULO 496;     (D) SAO PAULO 129; 
      (E) 06 SAO PAULO 1264; (F) 06 SAO PAULO 1105; 
      (G) 05 BRASILIA 2951 AND PREVIOUS 
 
SAO PAULO 00000742  001.4 OF 004 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED - PLEASE PROTECT ACCORDINGLY. 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (U) President Lula's Workers' Party (Partido dos Trabalhadores - 
PT), faces a number of challenges as it looks towards a post-Lula 
future.  The centrist, pragmatic "Majority Camp" currently occupies 
the strongest position in the party, but does not dominate.  The CM 
is increasingly challenged by rivals who blame it for the corruption 
scandals that have plagued the party since 2005.  In addition, 
"tendencies" on the far left want the party to return to its more 
leftist roots, as they see many of Lula's economic policies running 
counter to their core philosophies.  These power struggles from 
within the party may well decide not only who runs for President of 
Brazil in 2010, but the very future of the PT.  Septel will address 
highlights of the Third National Congress and will look more deeply 
into the PT's 2010 presidential prospects.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------ 
THE ELEPHANT IN THE ROOM 
------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (U) Founded in 1980 by trade unionists, leftist intellectuals, 
elements of the Catholic Church, and splinter groups unable to find 
a home in the Communist or Socialist parties, the PT has always been 
something of a hodgepodge.  Its base includes big labor - most 
importantly the Unified Workers' Center (CUT) - the Rural Workers' 
Landless Movement (MST), and the National Students' Union (UNE).  A 
number of factions or "tendencies," organized around ideology, 
personality, or ambition, compete for influence.  Twelve different 
groups presented theses to be debated at the National Congress, held 
August 31 through September 2 in Sao Paulo (ref B). 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The strongest is known as the "Majority Camp" (CM), a 
centrist, pragmatic group which claims a number of major figures in 
the party and in the government, including incumbent PT President 
Ricardo Berzoini; former Lula Chief of Staff Jose Dirceu; PT First 
Vice-President and Lula foreign affairs advisor Marco Aurelio 
Garcia; Senator Aloizio Mercadante (Sao Paulo); and 
Secretary-General of the Presidency Luiz Dulci.  President Lula's 
 
SIPDIS 
sympathies are with this group, though he also has close friends in 
other factions.  Despite its name, the CM controls only 40 to 50 
percent of the PT National Directorate (DN).  The CM is diverse, 
with members drawn from the labor movement and academia as well as 
federal and state legislatures.  It has various sub-groups and 
special-interest lobbies and does not necessarily act en bloc.  The 
CM is known by other names, including the name of its thesis, 
"Constructing a New Brazil."  Estimates of its delegate strength at 
the National Congress range from 45 percent to 51 percent.  (Note: 
Many delegates' sympathies or affiliation are unknown, unclear, or 
multiple. End Note.) 
 
-------------- 
THE DISSIDENTS 
-------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The second group calls itself "The PT and the Democratic 
Revolution," but is more commonly known as "Message to the Party" 
after a thesis first published in January (ref D) which has since 
 
SAO PAULO 00000742  002.2 OF 004 
 
 
been elaborated.  Justice Minister Tarso Genro leads the group; the 
Governors of Para and Sergipe, various prominent legislators, and 
several state PT Chairmen are members.  Part of its support stems 
from the rivalry between the Rio Grande do Sul (RS) party and the 
powerful Sao Paulo party machine.  Genro is a former Mayor of Porto 
Alegre whom many expect to run for Governor of Rio Grande do Sul 
(RS) in 2010.  In 2005, at Lula's request, he resigned his position 
as Minister of Education to become acting PT President after three 
party leaders, including then President Jose Genoino, were forced to 
resign in the wake of the "mensalao" vote-buying scandal (ref G). 
The "Message" group includes other well-known "gauchos" like former 
RS Governor Olivio Dutra (see ref F), former Agricultural 
Development Minister Miguel Rosseto, and RS state legislator Raul 
Pont, until recently PT Secretary-General. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The PT of RS, Brazil's southernmost state, considers 
itself ideologically more consistent (i.e., more easily identifiable 
with a leftist agenda) and more immune to corruption than the CM as 
a whole and especially the Sao Paulo PT.  Many in RS and in the PT's 
left wing blame the PT's woes on a clique of Sao Paulo CM members 
who forgot their mission.  Unsurprisingly, several well-known 
leftist thinkers, such as Ricardo Azevedo, head of the Fundacao 
Perseu Abramo, the PT's think tank, and party ideologist Marilena 
Chaui, professor of political philosophy at the University of Sao 
Paulo, adhere to the "Message" group.  Their "message" is that the 
PT needs to recognize the ethical problems that led to the 2005 
corruption scandal and take measures to recover its ruined 
reputation as the party of ethics. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) This is not a message that people such as CM leader Jose 
Dirceu, expelled from Congress, banned from politics, and on trial 
for corruption in the "mensalao" vote-buying  scandal (ref A), are 
prepared to hear.  Many prominent CM members deny the corruption 
charges and see the scandal as an unfortunate but unavoidable result 
of Brazil's political system, in which a president must stitch 
together a coalition with patronage and pork barrel spending. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Indeed, for much of the PT, the scandal was vastly 
overblown by hostile mainstream media in the pay of political and 
economic elites.  "This is something laughable.  The 'mensalao' 
never existed," PT President Berzoini reiterated recently.  Former 
Sao Paulo Mayor and now Tourism Minister Marta Suplicy has been 
heard to say much the same thing.  At the height of the scandal in 
2005, the PT's social movements (CUT, MST, and UNE) published a 
statement decrying "golpismo" - an attempt to overthrow a 
democratically elected government - by media and political 
opponents.  The PT as a whole sees the entire story as irrefutable 
evidence of the critical need for wholesale political reform.  But 
Genro and his supporters also call for a return to the party's 
foundations as the uncorrupted voice of the left and a turn away 
from the "business as usual" approach they see overtaking the party 
since it won control of the federal government.  This faction is 
believed to control about 15 to 20 percent of the delegates to the 
Congress. 
 
--------------------------- 
SMALL BUT NOT TO BE IGNORED 
--------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (U) A third group, the "PT Movement," is led by Federal Deputy 
Maria do Rosario (RS) and counts among its members Arlindo 
Chinaglia, President of the Chamber of Deputies.  This is another 
centrist group which often supports the CM in internal debates and 
provides the votes to give it a majority in the National Directorate 
when needed.  The PT Movement has the support of perhaps 10-12 
percent of the delegates. 
 
SAO PAULO 00000742  003.2 OF 004 
 
 
 
¶9.  (U) The Axis of the Left is the faction of Valter Pomar, PT 
Secretary of International Relations (see refs C and E), one of the 
 
SIPDIS 
PT's more vocal leftists and a frequent critic of the CM and the 
Lula administration, though a staunch defender of the PT against 
outside critics.  The thesis of this group, which commands the 
support of 6-7 percent of the delegates, is called "Hope is Red". 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Two other small factions merit mention because they may 
have influence beyond their size.  "Novo Rumo" or New Course is led 
by Rui Falcao, a state legislator who served as Secretary of 
Municipal Government (Chief of Staff equivalent) to Sao Paulo Mayor 
Marta Suplicy (2001-04) and was her running mate in her unsuccessful 
2004 re-election bid.  New Course is strong only in Sao Paulo and 
Paraiba states and is supported by only about 6 percent of the party 
faithful nationwide, but it is the second-largest faction in Sao 
Paulo state (with about 20 percent) and the largest in the city. 
Ideologically compatible with the CM - Falcao told Poloff he might 
be able to support Berzoini for another term as PT President if he 
made certain concessions and commitments - New Course appears to be 
a vehicle for Marta Suplicy to run for Mayor again in 2008 and for 
higher political office beyond next year. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) The "PT of the Struggles and of the Masses, Socialist and 
in Solidarity" is another small Sao Paulo-based faction, with the 
support of perhaps 13 percent in the state, and led by federal 
deputy Jilmar Tatto, PT Second Vice-President and leader of an 
influential local political family.  While this party espouses a 
leftist ideology, it is also believed to be a Marta Suplicy group, 
as Tatto is well-known as one of her most important political 
organizers.  (Note: Suplicy is officially a member of the CM and is 
believed to be favored by CM leader Jose Dirceu, but this does not 
preclude her having two smaller factions advancing her interests. 
End Note.)  FPA President Azevedo told us it was not inconceivable 
that New Course and "Struggles and Masses" might find sufficient 
common ground to form an alliance, which would become the PT's 
largest faction in Sao Paulo state.  Suplicy's own intentions remain 
unclear: On the one hand, Rui Falcao himself told us it was 
politically necessary for her to disavow any intention to run for 
Mayor in 2008, as she did publicly in August, but that he and others 
in the party continue to work night and day to prepare the way for 
her candidacy.  If she runs for Mayor and wins, she immediately 
moves to the top of the list of possible PT 2010 presidential 
candidates.  But, as Azevedo pointed out, she faces a very tough 
opponent in either former Governor Geraldo Alckmin or incumbent 
Mayor Gilberto Kassab, and if she loses she could easily be 
consigned to political oblivion. 
 
¶12.  (U) Note: It is notable that Sao Paulo and Rio Grande do Sul 
are home to a seemingly disproportionate number of PT national 
leaders and influential politicians, even as many "petistas" - as PT 
members are called - see Sao Paulo  as "enemy territory," a 
stronghold of the opposition Brazilian Social Democracy Party 
(PSDB).  The south and southeast seem to breed PT leaders.  Ballot 
box popularity does not translate into strong leaders.  Lula won 66 
percent of the 2006 second-round vote in the north, and the PT has 
two governors of northern states (Ana Julia Carepa of Para and Binho 
Marques of Acre), but neither is considered a party leader, due in 
part to their small power bases.  Likewise, former Acre Governor 
Jorge Viana is widely respected and has been spoken of as a possible 
dark horse for the PT Presidency, but has virtually no national 
profile because he comes from a small, remote state.  In the 
northeast, where Lula did even better, with 77 percent of the vote, 
and where nearly half the population benefits from the government's 
"Bolsa Familia" program, Governor Marcelo Deda of Sergipe and 
especially Governor Jaques Wagner of Bahia have some influence 
 
SAO PAULO 00000742  004.2 OF 004 
 
 
within the party.  Both are considered close to Lula, but Wagner is 
associated with the CM and Deda with the Message to the Party. 
Petistas are Mayors of several large northeastern cities, but again, 
these are local rather than national powers.  A variety of 
socio-economic and political factors, including the regional 
strength of other leftist parties, a tradition of local political 
strongmen ("coronelismo"), and a paucity of strong labor unions, may 
help explain why the northeast, home to so many PT voters, has 
produced so few national PT leaders.  End Note. 
 
-------- 
THE REST 
-------- 
 
¶13.  (U) Six more groups remain, even smaller and mostly on the 
left, whose theses have such names as "Development, Democracy with 
Citizen Participation and Diversity;" "Dreams For All! Struggles For 
All!"; and "For a Militant and Socialist PT".  The last-named, for 
example, outlines a "National Sovereignty Platform" calling for the 
annulment of the privatization of mega-mining concern Rio Doce 
Valley Company (CVRD), revocation of the Fiscal Responsibility Law, 
withdrawal of Brazilian peacekeepers from Haiti, and an end to the 
"ethanol agreement with Bush".  PT President Berzoini and other CM 
members have pledged to keep the smaller factions from disrupting 
the Congress. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶14.  (SBU) The CM continues to occupy a strong position within the 
PT, but it does not dominate the party as it has in the past.  The 
dissidents and some of the leftist factions will push hard on the 
corruption issue, and the timing of the Supreme Court's decision to 
accept the charges in the "mensalao" case could undermine the CM as 
well.  The dissidents and others on the left will also continue to 
agitate for a return to ideological purity and founding principles. 
This struggle will play out in the months ahead in internal party 
elections and in the controversy over whether the PT will run its 
own presidential candidate in 2010 and begin now to prepare the way, 
or whether it may consider supporting a candidate from another party 
within President Lula's governing coalition.  End Comment. 
 
¶15.  (U) This cable was coordinated with Embassy Brasilia. 
 
WHITE