07SANTIAGO619
MEDIA REACTION - CHAVEZ'S CRITICISM OF CHILEAN SENATE
Tue Apr 17 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Santiago
VZCZCXYZ0017
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSG #0619/01 1071507
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 171507Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1341
INFO RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 1697
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 3584
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES 0220
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 1346
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA 5030
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO 1674UNCLAS SANTIAGO 000619 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR IIP/G/WHA, INR/R/MR, WHA/BSC, WHA/PDA, INR/IAA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO KIPR PGOV PREL VE CI
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION - CHAVEZ'S CRITICISM OF CHILEAN SENATE 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Last week the Senate voted to urge President Bachelet 
to complain at the OAS over Venezuela's decision to cancel the 
concession of an independent TV broadcast station.  President Hugo 
Chavez reacted saying that Chile's Senate was "dominated by the same 
fascists that supported coups and ousted progressive governments in 
Latin America," and on April 13, President Bachelet complained to 
Caracas over Chavez' remarks, demanding respect for Chile's 
democratic institutions.  Chavez responded by noting that his 
remarks were a criticism of the Senate and not the government. 
Santiago dailies ran extensive coverage of the chain of events and 
two major dailies ran editorials in support of Bachelet's decision 
to formally object to Chavez's behavior.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  In conservative, independent "La Tercera" (4/14, circ. 101,000) 
the headline read:  "President Bachelet responded harshly to Hugo 
Chavez's criticism of the Chilean Senate and files a complaint with 
Caracas."  "Chile respects the decisions of other countries, 
especially its powers and institutions and, therefore, expects 
reciprocity," said Bachelet. 
 
¶3.  In conservative, influential, newspaper-of-record "El Mercurio" 
(4/14, circ. 173,049):  President Bachelet reacted harshly to Hugo 
Chavez' offensive remarks about the Chilean Senate.  "Chile is 
extraordinarily respectful of other countries and their institutions 
and powers," said Bachelet, in a clear message to Chavez.  She said 
that relations between both countries must be based on friendship, 
"but cannot be tainted by gestures or words that in our view go in 
the opposite direction."  Chile and Venezuela, she said, must 
continue to work together, but on the basis of "friendship and 
respect." 
 
¶4.  In "El Mercurio" (4/15, circ. 260,108):  President Bachelet said 
that in her visit to Caracas she would personally express to Chavez 
the Chilean government's displeasure with Chavez's criticism of the 
Chilean Senate.  In a brief and clear diplomatic note, the GOC 
demanded respect for Chile's institutions, especially its 
legislative power. 
 
Chavez Reiterates Insults 
------------------------- 
¶5.  "La Tercera" on 4/16 reported:  The Venezuelan President 
apologized to President Bachelet, but intensified his criticism of 
the Chilean Senate.  "It is an imperial, Roman or U.S. Senate," said 
Chavez." 
 
¶6. El Mercurio on 4/16 stated:  The GOC was not pleased with 
President Chavez' criticism of the Senate's decision to file a 
complaint in the OAS over Venezuela's decision to cancel RCTV's 
concession and complained to Venezuela.  President Hugo Chavez 
apologized to Bachelet, saying he regretted it if his comments about 
the Chilean Senate had caused her problems.  However, he reiterated 
that his remarks were directed at the Senate and not the Chilean 
government." 
 
 Critical Editorials of Chavez 
------------------------------ 
¶7.  "El Mercurio" on April 14 published its editorial "Chavez and 
Chile": 
 
"The GOC has reacted with an obvious protest, demanding respect for 
our democratic institutions....  President Bachelet has decided to 
not cancel her state visit to Venezuela, and by doing this has fully 
put on herself the load of having to tell Chavez about the 
consequences of his foolish actions on cooperation and 
friendship...in the continent." 
 
¶8. The 4/14 editorial in "La Tercera" entitled, "Venezuelan 
President:  Untimely Statements," endorsed President Bachelet's 
handling of the diplomatic flap: 
 
"With his statements against the Chilean Senate, President Hugo 
Chavez added new tension to the bilateral relation....  The 
government did well in pointing out promptly its rejection of 
Chavez' remarks, emphasizing that the Senate is a democratic 
institution that must be respected....  Chile has expressed its 
desire to maintain good relations with Venezuela, but this can only 
be achieved if there is mutual respect and non-intervention, and 
President Chavez' remarks do not help accomplish this." 
 
¶9.  Alvaro Vargas Llosa wrote a 4/15 column in "La Tercera" 
entitled, "Memo to the President:  How to visit Hugo Chavez." 
 
"You (President Bachelet) are caught between your intimate desires 
and your obligations as Chief of State.  What I ask is that while 
you are in Caracas you don't forget, not even for one moment, that 
you represent a country that stands for the opposite of what Chavez 
represents:  a country that is serious, trustworthy, and with 
intelligent consensus. 
 
¶10.  I need not remind you that...the Chavista model failed in Latin 
America and that Chile is what it is because it renounced that model 
a long time ago....  It is also important that you keep in mind the 
Latin America context.  The Chavista 'wave' stopped when Mexico and 
Peru closed their doors...and President Lula has kept a cordial 
relationship with Chavez, but has taken distance from him.  This is 
is evident from the strategic alliance that Brazil established with 
Washington on ethanol.... 
 
¶11.  We have seen the problems, even domestic ones, that 
government's that chose to confront Chavez face....  I would 
therefore ask you to keep a clear distance as an independent 
Chilean....  We all lose some degree of freedom and democracy if 
Chavez is legitimized by chiefs of state who represent freedom and 
democracy.  It is also a mistake to believe that one way to assert 
Chile's sovereignty is to cuddle Chavez....  When you are before 
Chavez and feel your defenses start to weaken... think about 
Argentine Norberto Ceresole... an anti-Semitic, fascist... who 
preached taking power in the Southern Cone through the military and 
who was Chavez' first political and ideological influence.... 
Picture Ceresole standing next to both of you and you will surely 
feel some disgust, which will help you maintain defenses against 
Chavez' flattery.  Then everyone in Latin America will have won." 
 
KELLY