07SHENYANG131
Taiwan's Kuomintang Representative Given Warm Reception in
Wed Jul 11 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Shenyang
VZCZCXRO8966
PP RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHSH #0131 1920912
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 110912Z JUL 07
FM AMCONSUL SHENYANG
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8124
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SHENYANG 000131 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON ETRD EINV EFIN PGOV PREL TWCH
SUBJECT: Taiwan's Kuomintang Representative Given Warm Reception in 
Harbin 
 
¶1. Summary: The 18th Harbin International Fair for Trade and 
Economic Cooperation attracted participants from all over the world, 
showing that what was once largely a Sino-Russian event has become 
truly international.  Event organizers claimed two hundred of the 
world's five hundred largest corporations were represented. However, 
corporate representatives took a back seat to Taiwan's Kuomintang 
Representative, Wang Chih-kang, who was an honored guest, placed 
before any business representatives or representatives of state or 
local governments.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. The 18th annual Harbin International Trade Fair, June 15-19, 
attracted large delegations from forty-one different countries, with 
smaller scale representation from an additional thirty-nine 
countries.  The American Chamber of Commerce in Beijing sponsored an 
American presentation followed by one-on-one meetings hosted by 
various American companies.  The largest American groups were John 
Deere, long  a major presence in Heilongjiang (its factory in the 
soybean heartland of Jiamusu converted from joint venture to 
wholly-owned status in 2004 and last year improved its quality to 
earn the right to use the official company logo), and Home Depot, 
which sent a large team from  Hong Kong and the United States.  Home 
Depot's goals were two-fold: seeking suppliers while looking for an 
entry into to the Harbin retail building-supplies market.  Russia, 
which is Heilongjiang's number one trading partner (the United 
States is second), had the largest number of representatives, with 
more than one hundred companies offering a variety of products from 
geo-thermal heat pumps to wood products, processed foods, and 
clothing. 
 
¶3. Harbin's young and dynamic new Mayor, Zhang Xiaolian, hosted a 
dinner for high-level guests of the fair.  As is typical at such 
events, they sat with Zhang at the head table and were introduced in 
precise rank order.  Introduced first were national level 
representatives from Hungary and Czech Republic, immediately 
followed by Wang Chi-kang, "the representative of Taiwan Kuomintang 
(KMT) central committee" (taiwan guomindang zhongyanghui daibiao). 
Wang, formerly Taiwan's Minister of Economic Affairs under Lee 
Teng-hui, brought a delegation of over one hundred Taiwanese 
businessmen, making  it by far the largest one ever sent to the 
event by Taiwan.  The fourth quest of honor was also from Taiwan: 
Chang Han-wen, Chairman of the National Association of Taiwanese 
Businessmen.  Only afterward did the mayor recognize state and local 
government and business representatives. 
 
¶4.  A tour of the various vendor booths revealed a wide variety of 
goods, many of which were of dubious origin.  There were obviously 
fake "Ralph Lauren" goods, along with what appeared to be knock-off 
Mont Blanc pens and a variety of phony designer handbags. One of the 
vendors told Econoff that the goods were made in Fujian Province and 
then shipped to Dalian.  Most of the vendors with counterfeit 
merchandise hailed from Dalian, in Liaoning Province.  Econoff 
pointed out the suspect goods to Fair organizers who promptly 
chastised the vendors and closed their booths. 
 
¶5.  There was also a dizzying array of legitimate merchandise.  John 
Deere had an outdoor display that covered nearly 10,000 square feet, 
featuring a variety of large farm equipment.  Other prominent 
products included log-cabin construction kits, solar geo-thermal and 
wind-power systems, and a large variety of kitchenware and small 
appliances.  Most of the non-clothing items on display were of 
either Chinese or Russian origin.  South Korean manufacturers also 
had a robust presence.  While several East European countries sent 
representatives, their vendors were nowhere to be seen. 
 
 
 
WICKMAN