07SHANGHAI413
EAST CHINA DISPATCHES, JULY 5, 2007
Thu Jul 05 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Shanghai
VZCZCXRO3367
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHGH #0413/01 1860742
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 050742Z JUL 07
FM AMCONSUL SHANGHAI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5993
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 1227
RUEHGZ/AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU 0733
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 0753
RUEHSH/AMCONSUL SHENYANG 0755
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0871
RUEHIN/AIT TAIPEI 0613
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RUEHGH/AMCONSUL SHANGHAI 6426UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SHANGHAI 000413 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/CM AND INR - CLARKE 
NSC FOR WILDER AND TONG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINR CVIS SOCI CH ECON
SUBJECT: EAST CHINA DISPATCHES, JULY 5, 2007 
 
REF: SHANGHAI 283 
 
(U) Sensitive but Unclassified - please protect accordingly. 
Not for dissemination outside USG channels. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  In this Dispatch, we learn that Shanghai 
Party Secretary Xi enjoys the opera, SOE executives have 
unlimited expense accounts for domestic trips, Chinese 
millionaires love conventions, Ferrari training for beginners is 
available at a price, visa applicants are getting younger and 
Shanghai has the most expensive taxis.  This is the second in a 
series of periodic short-subject cables designed to offer more 
anecdotal reflections on life in East China. End Summary. 
 
Party Secretary Xi Jinping Enjoys Night at the Opera 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The Consul General unexpectedly encountered Shanghai's 
new Party Secretary at a weekend performance of a local style of 
Peking Opera.  Xi and his wife, a professional singer of western 
opera, sat in the audience without any entourage -- except for 
the head of the opera troupe -- and were not recognized by other 
patrons until the CG struck up a conversation during the 
intermission. The CG had become aware of Xi's presence because 
of a running conversation Xi was having with the opera troupe 
director.  The CG, who was sitting virtually in front of Xi, 
turned around to see who was responsible for the racket only to 
discover that it was Shanghai's top leader.  After the 
performance, Xi slipped away without any fanfare.  The opera was 
devoted to the love story of a Tang dynasty (618 to 907 C.E.) 
emperor and his favorite concubine Yang Guifei, one of China's 
greatest beauties. 
 
Expat with SOE Surprised at Per Diem and Benefit Arrangements 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
¶3.  (SBU) A western businessman working for one of China's most 
prominent auto makers expressed amusement at his firm's odd per 
diem and benefit system for top executives.  For international 
travel, per diem was capped at $90 a day, regardless of the 
location.  The expat said this was true for all state-owned 
enterprises (SOE).  When he was in China, however, he had an 
unlimited expense account -- at all times, not just when he 
traveled.  The company would reimburse him for anything he 
bought in China.  Since most top executives were out of pocket 
on foreign trips, he said they typically looked for ways to make 
up the difference by padding expenses when in China.  Although 
this particular executive did not seek reimbursement for all his 
in-country expenses, he said his immediate staff was always 
urging him to do so. 
 
Millionaire Fair 
---------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) On June 1-3, Shanghai once again played host to the 
Millionaire Fair.  The fair was begun six years ago by 
Amsterdam-based Gijrath Media Groep BV (GMG) publishing company 
with the purpose of bringing together readers of its 
"Millionaire" magazine and advertisers.  Previous fairs were 
held in the Netherlands, Russia, France, and Belgium.  This was 
the second time the fair was held at the Shanghai Exhibition 
Center which is also used for the Shanghai Municipal Party 
Congress and other governmental meetings.  This year's fair 
attracted 14,000 guests, mostly from Shanghai, Zhejiang 
Province, Hong Kong, and Taiwan.  To keep the riff-raff from 
attending, tickets cost approximately RMB 800 (USD 105) for 
daytime sessions and RMB 1800 (USD 237) for the evening sessions 
when guests were instructed to wear formal attire. 
 
¶5.  (U) After walking the red carpet, guests entered a large 
convention hall filled with booths showcasing luxury goods. What 
were the Chinese millionaires interested in?  There were booths 
advertising the usual luxury goods such as jewelry, whiskey, and 
art.  There were also booths that sold poodles (one sold for RMB 
120,000 or USD 15,789), investment deals in Australia and Great 
Britain, and modern furniture.  This was just the latest fair 
that has targeted China's new millionaires.  According to the 
fair's website, the Chinese are now the world's third-largest 
consumer of high-end fashions, accessories and other luxury 
goods and in ten years China is expected to overtake Japan as 
the world's top market for luxury goods.  Shanghai held a boat 
show in April and will also host a luxury property show and a 
luxury travel fair in the upcoming months. 
 
Anyone Need a Racetrack? 
 
SHANGHAI 00000413  002 OF 003 
 
 
------------------------ 
 
¶6.  (U) During a July 2 discussion, one of our high-flying 
contacts reported that he had just returned from two days of 
private racing instruction at the Formula One Racetrack in 
Anting.  The track had been rented June 28-29 by Ferrari to 
provide training for China's "beginner" level Ferrari owners to 
teach them how to get the most out of their vehicles.  Our 
contact - himself a novice Ferrari owner - said that there were 
a total of 120 Ferraris in China, 30 percent of which were in 
Shanghai.  Eighteen drivers from Shanghai, Zhejiang, Beijing and 
Taiwan attended the exclusive event, each paying an undisclosed 
- and presumably outrageous - fee for the privilege of having 
private lessons with world class racing instructors on China's 
best race track.  Unfortunately, advanced driving training was 
only available in Italy.  And who says consumer spending isn't 
alive and well in China? 
 
Visa Applicants Getting Younger, Visa Officers Feeling Older 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
¶7.  (U) No, the interviewing officers on the visa line aren't 
just imagining it - the students in Shanghai really are getting 
younger.  Consulate's Visa section did a quick run of the 
numbers to determine if the anecdotal evidence was, in fact, 
accurate.  The results: the number of students aged 17 and under 
applying for F1 student visas in Shanghai during the peak summer 
season of April 1 to June 30 has more than tripled over the past 
two years from 75 in 2005 to 262 this year.  This year's gain 
was the biggest yet - a whopping 100 percent increase over last 
year's total of 130 applicants.  Not only had the numbers of 
young students increased, their visa issuance rates had also 
increased to nearly 70 percent this year, a 10 percent gain over 
last year and a 20 percent rise over 2005. 
 
¶8. (U) What amazed the interviewers most about these students 
was the willingness and ability of their parents to finance two 
or three years of private high school tuition in the United 
States--often followed by four more years in a U.S. college--at 
roughly USD 30,000 to 40,000 per year.  In addition to the 
record number of full-time high school and middle school 
applicants, the number of students applying for short-term 
visitor visas had similarly grown.  During this summer's peak 
student season, Shanghai interviewed 2779 B2 visitor visa 
applicants aged 17 and younger, a 72 percent increase over 2005 
and massive 160 percent increase over 2004.  This explosive 
growth continues to be one of the main drivers of the relentless 
increase in overall visa applications.  The dramatic increase in 
the number of young Chinese heading to the United States for 
short-term visits has already yielded one very tangible result: 
a noticeable spike in the number of full-time student applicants 
who have already spent time in the United States. 
 
The Taxi Index 
-------------- 
 
¶9.  (U) Traveling around the country--and especially around the 
consular district--over the last few months got us thinking 
about the significant regional differences in prices of basic 
commodities.  Finding a common standard measure, however, proved 
difficult until we hit upon the basic taxi fare (while riding in 
a basic taxi).  Since it combines many of the key factors 
defining the new Chinese economy--energy, high-value added 
manufacturing and a rapidly expanding service sector--we decided 
to create our own version of the Economist's legendary Big Mac 
index by charting the costs of the initial three kilometer taxi 
fare in several cities around the country. 
 
The results: 
Shanghai: 11 RMB (USD 1.45) 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province: 10 RMB (USD 1.32) 
Suzhou, Jiangsu Province: 10 RMB (USD 1.32) 
Beijing: 10 RMB (USD 1.32) 
Nanjing, Jiangsu Province: 8 RMB (USD 1.05) 
Zhenjiang, Jiangsu Province: 7 RMB (USD .92) 
Guangzhou: 7 RMB (USD .92) 
Hefei, Anhui Province: 6 RMB (USD .79) 
Xian: 6 RMB (USD .79) 
Wuhu, Anhui Province: 5 RMB (USD .66) 
Chengdu: 5 RMB (USD .66) 
 
¶10.  (U) Shanghai's top spot was no major surprise, but the 
second place rankings for Hangzhou and Suzhou indicate the 
 
SHANGHAI 00000413  003 OF 003 
 
 
continuing economic preeminence of East China, even when 
compared to other major cities across the country.  We are not 
sure how accurately our index reflects the true cost of living 
in Shanghai, of course, but we will be sure to include the 
results in Post's next Cost of Living Allowance (COLA) survey. 
 
¶11.  (U) Regards from Shanghai. 
JARRETT