07STATE143810
U.S. STATEMENT TO THE SECURITY COUNCIL ON
Fri Oct 12 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #3810 2852234
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 122219Z OCT 07
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 143810 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL AF
SUBJECT: U.S. STATEMENT TO THE SECURITY COUNCIL ON 
AFGHANISTAN FOR OCTOBER 15, 2007 
 
¶1. This is an action request.  USUN is instructed to make the 
following statement following the briefing of the Special 
Representative of the Secretary General in Afghanistan, Tom 
Koenigs, to the Security Council on October 15. 
 
¶2. Begin Text: 
 
Mr. President, I would like to thank the Special 
Representative of the Secretary-General (SRSG) in 
Afghanistan, Mr. Koenigs, for his comprehensive report and 
for his dedication to the mission during his tenure. (ADD 
PERSONAL STORY OR ANECDOTE ABOUT KOENIGS). 
 
I would also like to extend my thanks on behalf of the United 
States to all the staff of the United Nations Assistance 
Mission in Afghanistan who have worked so hard over the 
course of the UN mandate to help the Afghan people build a 
democratic state that protects fundamental human rights, 
provides security and other services, and offers economic 
opportunity. 
 
As in the case of past reports -- the SRSG has brought us 
up-to-date on the progress that Afghanistan has made with the 
support of the international community and has also kept us 
up-to-date on the significant challenges and threats 
Afghanistan still faces. 
 
This report highlights that the international community must 
continue to stand united in support of the Afghan government 
and of the Afghan people, for success in Afghanistan.  We 
must continue our productive efforts to re-accelerate 
state-building and capacity-building, help create a viable 
agriculture sector that will reduce the incentives to grow 
opium, and strengthen the rule of law, security, and human 
rights. 
 
We must also support the Afghan Government in exerting its 
authority throughout the country.  UNAMA plays a critical 
role in that, whether helping the Afghan government fight the 
threats of corruption and narcotics, coordinating 
humanitarian and reconstruction assistance, or helping to 
build capacity and integrity at local level where the Afghan 
people most often interact with their state. 
 
Afghanistan has made significant progress, but it is going 
through a critically important and difficult transition.   We 
applaud the Secretary-General's and Mr. Koenigs' strong 
leadership and dedication in supporting Afghanistan's 
emergence as a stable, peaceful, prosperous and democratic 
member of the family of nations. 
 
We also take great satisfaction that the SRSG reports that 
six million Afghan children are now in school ) the highest 
number in the country's history ) and over 2 million of them 
are girls; that there has been steady improvement in economic 
conditions with preliminary estimates showing economic growth 
at 8% and a bumper wheat harvest of 4.5 million tons; and 
that there has been additional progress in the areas of 
health, road-building, and rural development. 
 
Nevertheless, security is still an enormous concern and the 
Taliban has recently resorted to vicious measures, 
increasingly relying on suicide bombings and improvised 
explosive devices in an effort to terrorize the population 
and undermine the Afghan government.  As Secretary Rice 
explained in an address to NATO leaders in Brussels earlier 
this year, "The violence we are seeing is not evidence that 
our strategy has failed, nor that the situation will improve 
in our absence; rather it is evidence of how much we are 
needed.  It is evidence that we must do more ) and do it 
better, faster." 
 
Mr. President, it is vitally important that Afghanistan 
succeed.  Afghanistan was the safe haven of today's global 
terrorist threat, and enabling Afghans to eliminate that 
threat within their borders will be a strategic victory for 
Afghans, for the friends of Afghanistan in the international 
community, and for the United Nations. 
 
Afghans are eager to take on a greater role in their own 
security.  As we speak, the Afghan National Army and its 
civilian command structure are taking on increasing 
responsibility in securing their borders and their people. 
The Afghan National Army is a respected institution in 
Afghanistan and it is now more than 35,000 strong, with a 
target size of 70,000.  The SRSG's report points out that, 
&increased training and mentoring has improved the army's 
capacity to plan and conduct joint operations with coalition 
forces and NATO-ISAF8 and that is good news.  But we must 
increase these joint efforts to train, mentor and equip the 
Afghan National Army and Police and we must provide every 
measure of support to the UN-mandated, NATO-led International 
Security Assistance Force.  In particular, we owe it to the 
people of Afghanistan to give commanders the forces and 
flexibility they need to bring stability, reconstruction and 
good governance to all of Afghanistan.  Stability in 
Afghanistan is vital not only to Afghans, but to the security 
and well-being of all free peoples who stand opposed to 
terror and injustice. 
 
The Afghan people have come a long way in recovering from the 
tyranny of the Taliban.  It is essential that we maintain the 
unity and commitment of the international community to help 
the Afghan people complete the transition from tyranny to 
liberty and I am gratified that the SRSG report indicates 
that international support to Afghanistan has intensified. 
 
While the international community's assistance to Afghanistan 
has been great, the needs are greater still.  We must not 
slacken in our resolve to provide the Afghan people with the 
tools to rebuild.  The Afghanistan Compact showed us the way, 
but progress is only possible if the entire international 
community digs deep to provide funds for reconstruction and 
experts to mentor on governance, justice, agriculture, and 
commerce.  And with the need for more assistance, comes the 
need for better coordination.  It is important that we find a 
strong, UN envoy who, in support of the Government of 
Afghanistan, will coordinate international civilian efforts 
in Afghanistan and donor capitals. 
 
With great challenges still ahead of us, we must maintain our 
resolve.  The United States sees long-term assistance to 
Afghanistan as a strategic imperative and we look forward to 
continuing to work together with other members of the 
Security Council as we engage in assisting the government and 
people of Afghanistan. 
 
Thank you. 
 
End Text. 
RICE