07STATE150711
VOTING INSTRUCTIONS: MINURSO MANDATE RENEWAL
Wed Oct 31 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0003
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #0711 3040236
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O R 310218Z OCT 07
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS 0000
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID 0000
RUEHNK/AMEMBASSY NOUAKCHOTT 0000
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT 0000UNCLAS STATE 150711 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV UNSC MO AG WI
SUBJECT: VOTING INSTRUCTIONS: MINURSO MANDATE RENEWAL 
 
 
¶1.  (U) ACTION REQUEST:  USUN is instructed to vote in 
favor of and to co-sponsor the MINURSO mandate renewal 
resolution during UNSC voting on 31 October, 2007.  The 
text of the resolution is listed in paragraph 2.  If there 
are substantive changes to the text, USUN is instructed to 
consult with Washington for additional guidance.  USUN is 
authorized to draw from the talking points in paragraph 3 
as required for an explanation of vote and any press 
statement on MINURSO following voting in the UN Security 
Council. 
 
¶2.  (U) The complete text of the UNSCR is below: 
Begin Text: 
The Security Council, 
 
PP1     Recalling all its previous resolutions on 
Western Sahara, 
 
PP2     Reaffirming its strong support for the efforts 
of the Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy, 
 
PP3     Reaffirming its commitment to assist the 
parties to achieve a just, lasting and mutually acceptable 
political solution, which will provide for the 
self-determination of the people of Western Sahara in the 
context of arrangements consistent with the principles and 
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, and noting 
the role and responsibilities of the parties in this 
respect, 
 
PP4     Reiterating its call upon the parties and 
States of the region to continue to cooperate fully with 
the United Nations and with each other to end the current 
impasse and to achieve progress towards a political 
solution, 
 
PP5     Taking note of the Moroccan proposal presented 
on 11 April 2007 to the Secretary-General and welcoming 
serious and credible Moroccan efforts to move the process 
forward towards resolution; also taking note of the 
Polisario Front proposal presented 10 April 2007 to the 
Secretary-General, 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PP6     Taking note of the two rounds of negotiations 
held under auspices of the Secretary-General; welcoming 
the progress made by the parties to enter into direct 
negotiations with each other, 
 
PP7     Taking note that both sides have agreed to 
continue the process of negotiations through United 
Nations sponsored talks, 
 
PP8     Having considered the report of the 
Secretary-General of 19 October 2007 (S/2007/619), 
 
SIPDIS 
 
OP1     Reaffirms the need for full respect of the 
military agreements reached with MINURSO with regard to 
the ceasefire; 
 
OP 2    Calls upon the parties to continue to show 
political will and work in an atmosphere propitious for 
dialogue in order to engage in substantive negotiations, 
thus ensuring implementation of resolution 1754 and the 
success of negotiations; 
 
OP3     Calls upon the parties to continue negotiations 
under the auspices of the Secretary-General without 
preconditions and in good faith, taking into account the 
efforts made since 2006 and developments of the last 
months, with a view to achieving a just, lasting and 
mutually acceptable political solution, which will provide 
for the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara 
in the context of arrangements consistent with the 
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United 
Nations, and noting the role and responsibilities of the 
parties in this respect; 
 
OP4     Invites Member States to lend appropriate 
assistance to such talks; 
 
OP5     Requests the Secretary-General to provide a 
report by 31 January 2008 on the status and progress of 
these negotiations under his auspices, and expresses its 
intention to meet to receive and discuss this report; 
 
OP6     Requests the Secretary-General to provide a 
report on the situation in Western Sahara well before the 
end of the mandate period; 
 
OP7     Calls on Member States to consider voluntary 
contributions to fund Confidence Building Measures that 
allow for increased contact between separated family 
members, especially family unification visits, as well as 
for other confidence building measures that may be agreed 
between the parties; 
 
OP8     Decides to extend the mandate of the United 
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara 
(MINURSO) until 30 April 2008; 
 
OP9     Requests the Secretary-General to continue to 
take the necessary measures to ensure full compliance in 
MINURSO with the United Nations' zero-tolerance policy on 
sexual exploitation and abuse and to keep the Council 
informed, and urges troop-contributing countries to take 
appropriate preventive action including pre-deployment 
awareness training, and other action to ensure full 
accountability in cases of such conduct involving their 
personnel; 
 
OP10    Decides to remain seized of the matter. 
 
End Text: 
 
¶3.  (U) USUN is instructed to draw from the following 
talking points during the 31 October, 2007 UN Security 
Council vote on MINURSO and press statement. 
 
Begin Talking Points: 
 
-- We are pleased that Morocco and the Polisario have met 
for two rounds of negotiations under the auspices of the 
United Nations.  We welcome this development and urge both 
parties to commit to full discussion of the substantive 
issues during the next round of talks. 
 
-- We believe that meaningful autonomy is a promising and 
realistic way forward.  Morocco's proposal is a serious 
and credible initiative that provides the realistic basis 
for negotiations. 
 
-- We support a renewal of the MINURSO mandate at this 
time; however, the USG wants to see progress towards a 
political solution of this conflict before the next 
renewal. 
 
-- We hope to hear soon that the parties have agreed to a 
date and venue for the third round of talks. 
 
-- The United States remains convinced that the Western 
Sahara conflict continues to impede regional integration 
and development in the Maghreb.  Unresolved, this 
humanitarian crisis leaves the Sahrawi people with a bleak 
future. 
 
End Talking Points: 
 
¶4.  (U) Please contact LTC James Thomas, IO/PSC at 
202-736-7737 for any additional questions or concerns. 
RICE