07STATE35310
GUIDANCE FOR UNIIIC CONSULTATIONS, MARCH 21
Tue Mar 20 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0010
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #5310 0792109
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 202100Z MAR 07
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 6499
INFO RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT IMMEDIATE 5324UNCLAS STATE 035310 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL PGOV LE
SUBJECT: GUIDANCE FOR UNIIIC CONSULTATIONS, MARCH 21 
 
¶1.  (U)  USUN is authorized to draw from the points in para 2 
below during UN Security Council consultations on 
the 7th UNIIIC report, currently scheduled for March 21. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Begin points. 
 
--  We commend the Commission's professional, systematic and 
thorough investigation and tireless work to uncover those 
responsible for the assassination of Rafik Hariri and to 
provide technical assistance to the Lebanese authorities in 
the 16 other cases. 
 
-- We note Commissioner Brammertz, report that the 
Commission has made progress in collecting new evidence, 
enabling it to narrow down possible motives for the 
assassination to those linked with Hariri,s political 
activities. 
 
-- The report notes that, &in the last months of Hariri,s 
life, he was very focused on the forthcoming 2005 
elections,8 including negotiations on the draft electoral 
law.  The report states that 8it is of some note that Hariri 
was killed on the day that Parliament was scheduled to debate 
the electoral law to be applied in the forthcoming 
elections.8 
 
-- We agree that it is critical that the Commission have 
access to those political and diplomatic interlocutors with 
whom Hariri dealt in order to ensure the completeness of the 
investigation into the motive behind the assassination. 
 
-- We commend the cooperation of Lebanese authorities with 
the Commission, particularly the full support of the 
Prosecutor General of Lebanon.  We also welcome the 
assistance that UNIIIC has provided to the Lebanese 
government in its investigation of the assassination of 
Pierre Gemayel, the Ain Alaq bombings, and the other 14 cases. 
 
--  We are pleased to note the Commission held successful 
meetings to address the overdue responses from 10 members 
states to requests for assistance that were cited in the last 
report, and especially pleased that the Commission has 
reported that, as a result of these meetings, almost all 
outstanding matters were resolved and, where appropriate, 
mechanisms introduced to facilitate resolution of pending 
issues. 
 
-- The report notes Syrian cooperation "remains crucial to 
the swift and successful completion of the Commission's 
work"; however, the report notes occasions on which responses 
by Syrian individuals to interview questions can "once 
again...be characterized as variable in quality."  The 
Commission noted that it will continue to request Syria,s 
full cooperation, and we reiterate our call on the Syrian 
government to cooperate fully in this process, including by 
complying with all requests for interviews and information. 
 
-- We urge the UN Secretariat to continue to provide 
operational support to UNIIIC, particularly with regard to 
staffing needs. 
 
-- The report clearly outlines the work that still lies ahead 
for the Commission to complete its investigation and 
concludes that it is unlikely the Commission will complete 
its work before its current mandate expires on June 15. 
 
-- We strongly support the request of the Government of 
Lebanon to extend the mandate of UNIIIC for an additional 
year. 
 
-- We sincerely appreciate the efforts of the Commission to 
pursue this case.  We remain deeply concerned about the 
security environment in Lebanon.  However, we believe that 
the Council's efforts in supporting the investigation and the 
creation of the Tribunal to prosecute those charged with 
these crimes will stand as a deterrent to those who in the 
future might be tempted to engage in similar crimes intended 
to undermine the sovereignty and independence of Lebanon. 
 
-- It is a matter of serious concern that members of the 
Lebanese Parliament have not yet been allowed to convene and 
vote on ratification of an agreement with the U.N. that will 
establish the Special Tribunal for Lebanon.  This is despite 
the fact that a majority of members of Parliament have made 
clear that they want this vote to take place. 
 
End points. 
RICE