07TELAVIV1029
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Fri Apr 06 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0007
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #1029/01 0961000
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 061000Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0405
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUENAAA/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 1941
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 8680
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 1887
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 2745
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 1935
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 9772
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 2676
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 9580
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 0056
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 6662
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 4059
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 8959
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 3154
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 5081
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 6468
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 001029 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
Please note: No Tel Aviv Media Reaction report on Monday, April 9, 
2007, Seventh Day of Passover holiday. 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Iran: Detention and Release of UK Sailors 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Yediot and Israel Radio reported that around two weeks ago IDF Cpl. 
Gilad Shalit's captors passed on to him a pair of glasses sent by 
his father.  The radio said that the Arabic-language Assennara first 
published the information, based on Palestinian members of Hamas. 
Yediot quoted GOI sources as saying that this is Hamas's first 
positive signal. 
 
Maariv reported that, following Israeli pressure, the Pentagon has 
canceled a major arms-sale package that the Bush administration was 
planning to offer Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf states.  Yediot, 
Ha'aretz, and The Jerusalem Post said that the deal had been 
postponed.  Maariv said that the United States' intentions were 
positive -- strengthening those countries versus Iran, but that 
Israel warned the US that the advanced technology should not reach 
the hands of Arab countries, thus jeopardizing Israel's military 
edge. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that Defense Minister Amir Peretz 
announced on Thursday night that in two weeks he will evacuate the 
settlers who on March 19 moved into a new four-story building on the 
road that links the settlement of Kiryat Arba with the Cave of the 
Patriarchs in Hebron.  Israel Radio quoted Israeli defense sources 
as saying that Peretz requested that the building be vacated within 
30 days. 
 
All media quoted Muhammad Kumati, a senior Hizbullah official, as 
saying in an interview with the Arabic-language Assennara that the 
IDF soldiers abducted by the organization  enjoy a "humane" 
treatment, similar to that received by Elchanan Tenenbaum, who was 
released in 2004.  Assennara cited Kumati's belief that USG pressure 
on Israel is responsible for the two soldiers not being released, 
despite pressure by Israeli public opinion to reach achievements. 
Ha'aretz quoted Israeli experts who have been involved in prisoner 
swaps as saying that Britain handled the crisis with Iran "In an 
exemplary manner."  The newspaper quoted that experts as saying 
cautiously that the release of the British servicemen could have a 
positive influence on Israeli concerns.  The sources were quoted as 
saying that much of the possible release of the IDF soldiers 
abducted by Hizbullah depends on how the Israeli leadership acts in 
the next few days.  The Jerusalem Post reported that Israeli 
diplomatic officials derided Syrian President Bashar Assad's offer 
to help with the prisoners' release.  The proposal that Assad 
allegedly made to the ears of House Speaker Nancy Pelosi was 
reported on Thursday in the London-based Al-Hayat. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that on Thursday PA officials expressed 
fear that the UN may formally declare the Gaza Strip a dangerous 
zone -- a move that would result in the evacuation of the remaining 
foreign nationals from the area and drastically hamper international 
humanitarian aid to the Palestinians.  PA security sources told The 
Jerusalem Post that 25 Palestinians were killed in the Gaza Strip 
last month in internal fighting.  The sources added that another 
four were killed in the West Bank.  The newspaper wrote that the UN 
has yet to issue any formal statement about the possible move. 
 
The media cited the IDF as saying that on Thursday evening IDF 
troops shot and killed a Palestinian man while on a patrol in the 
Judean Desert (near Jericho) in a case of apparent misconduct. 
Media reported that the activity of the IDF unit involved in the 
incident was suspended. 
 
The Jerusalem Post published Vice PM Shimon Peres's answers to 
questions posed to him by readers of the newspaper.  He was quoted 
as saying that there would have been no diplomatic process were it 
not for Yasser Arafat. 
 
Citing AP, Ha'aretz reported that on Thursday US Congressman Darrell 
Issa (R-CA) met with Syrian President Bashar Assad, a day after a 
visit by US House Speaker Nancy Pelosi. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that on Thursday British Consul-General 
in Jerusalem Richard Makepeace and BBC officials met in Gaza City 
with Palestinian PM Ismail Haniyeh of Hamas on ways to push for the 
release of Alan Johnston, a BBC journalist kidnapped three weeks 
ago.  The Jerusalem Post quoted senior diplomatic sources in 
Jerusalem as saying that they understood that Makepeace met with 
Haniyeh specifically to deal with Johnston's kidnapping, that Israel 
viewed this as an isolated meeting, and that there was no concern 
that it signified any shift in the British or EU policy of not 
having contact with Hamas ministers.  The sources pointed out that 
the British themselves issued a statement to this effect. 
 
Hatzofe reported that, as part of the settlers' drive to sell West 
Bank property to American Jews, Democratic New York State 
Assemblyman Dov Hikind bought a house in the northern West Bank. 
 
National Security Studies Center Director Dan Schueftan,  the author 
of "Disengagement" -- the 1999 book that The Jerusalem Post says 
became a virtual blueprint for the 2005 withdrawal from Gush Katif 
and northern Samaria (the northernmost part of the West Bank) -- was 
quoted as saying in an interview with The Jerusalem Post that the 
logic that led to the withdrawal from the Gaza Strip still applies 
and that future pullouts are as inevitable as continuing conflict 
with the Palestinians. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that close associates of PM Ehud Olmert have 
advised him over the past few weeks to seek the resignation of 
Finance Minister Abraham Hirchson, who is under suspicion of 
embezzlement and other financial crimes.  The sources were quoting 
as saying that Hirchson's police investigation is damaging Olmert, 
the Kadima party and the image of the Finance Ministry and Israeli 
economy,  Globes said that cited the belief of Hirchson associates 
that he will step down only if Olmert explicitly tells him to do 
so. 
 
Ha'aretz and other media reported that, after a break of seven 
years, American cruise ships returned to Israeli ports this week. 
The resumption of US cruise ship visits became possible after the 
official US travelers warning for Israel was modified, and American 
insurance companies stopped demanding excessive prices for traveling 
to Israel. 
 
Maariv reported that the Bank of Israel is considering raising the 
interest rates or -- for the first time in 10 years -- buying US 
dollars to halt the drop in the American currency's rate on the Tel 
Aviv market.  On Thursday the dollar's representative rate went down 
to 4.129 shekels. 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Senior columnist and chief defense commentator Zeev Schiff wrote in 
the independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "Israel is entering a 
corridor that looks very promising, but also harbors great 
dangers." 
 
Op-Ed Page Editor Ben-Dror Yemini wrote in the popular, pluralist 
Maariv: "At this stage, before anything real happens, this is purely 
a propaganda battle.  Instead of winning it, we are defeating 
ourselves.  Why?" 
 
Senior columnist Dan Margalit wrote in Maariv: "But the current 
government has no moral right to decide which concessions to 
make.... Even in its low moments, Barak's government enjoyed wider 
legitimacy." 
 
Former editor-in-chief Moshe Ishon wrote in the nationalist, 
Orthodox Hatzofe: " A cold wind has started blowing from 
Washington." 
 
Columnist Fayez Abbas wrote in the independent Arabic-language 
weekly Assennara: "Olmert's government and all Israeli governments, 
excluding Rabin's, have not been interested in the peace process." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "Forty Years on the Road" 
 
Senior columnist and chief defense commentator Zeev Schiff wrote in 
the independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (4/6): " Olmert proposed 
negotiations on the Saudi initiative, but without going into detail. 
Israel might make some surprising concessions, he said.  Olmert 
understood that flatly turning down the proposal would be bad for 
Israel's international standing.... The trouble is implementing 
these declarations.  Israel is entering a corridor that looks very 
promising, but also harbors great dangers.  The process is meant to 
begin as the United States withdraws from Iraq, which is sure to be 
labeled a defeat, and Iran continues its race for nuclear arms.  If 
the initiative is to succeed, Israel will need extraordinary 
leadership capable of introducing wise, courageous policies.  To 
date, however, there has been no serious discussion of all the 
relevant factors.  Israel's leaders will have to operate on several 
fronts simultaneously: Saudi Arabia and the moderate Arab countries; 
Syria; the Palestinians, who are swayed by Hamas; and Iran and its 
lackeys.  Last, but not least, is the home front.  On the one hand, 
the leadership of the Arab minority is calling for a change in the 
character of the state and challenging its identity as a democratic 
Jewish entity.  On the other, the settlers are waking up, as 
evidenced by the protest at [the evacuated West Bank settlement of] 
Homesh and the acquisition of a Palestinian house in Hebron." 
 
II.  "Israeli Stupidity" 
 
Op-Ed Page Editor Ben-Dror Yemini wrote in the popular, pluralist 
Maariv (4/6): "Israel is currently making and awful mistake.  If 
there is a sincere [Arab] intent of peace, Israel's negative 
response is destroying the chance of creating a moderate front also 
in order to jointly combat Iran.  But if there is no peace intent 
and just a trap, as claimed by the [Israeli] Right, Israel is 
exactly playing to Hamas's tune.  Israeli refusal is the fastest way 
to release Hamas from the international embargo and to transfer the 
latter to Israel.  Prime Minister Ehud Olmert has made countless 
statements regarding the Saudi initiatives.  He has also found that 
it contains positive sides.  But this is somehow an Israeli PR 
failure, too.  The Israeli response is being interpreted -- not only 
in the Arab world but also in the entire world -- as evasive and 
affected.  The Arab initiative will enter the history books.  After 
Khartoum's three 'no's' [in 1969], it looks like a tangible change. 
At this time it is not important at all whether it is a trap or a 
serious offer.  At this stage, before anything real happens, this is 
purely a propaganda battle.  Instead of winning it, we are defeating 
ourselves.  Why?" 
 
III.  "A Government Unfit For Negotiations" 
 
Senior columnist Dan Margalit wrote in Maariv (4/6): "No Israeli 
government can appear to be a total rejectionist of peace.  'No' to 
negotiations with the Palestinians, whose government refuses to 
recognize Israel and to desist from terror; 'no' to Syrian President 
Bashar Assad's extended hand; and 'no' to the Saudi initiative that 
insists on the 'right of return' to the descendants of the 
Palestinian refugees from 1948.  All those components include a 
significant Israeli concession.  They are about principle stances, 
about the special relationship with the United States.  Israel will 
have to enter a discussion on one of these fronts -- at least in 
order to fulfill its obligations.   But the current government has 
no moral right to decide which concessions to make.... Even in its 
low moments, Barak's government enjoyed wider legitimacy than its 
current heir.  Every government headed by Binyamin Netanyahu or an 
elected [leader] from the Labor Party will want to negotiate with 
the Arabs.  But, in order to enter negotiations, a broad-based 
Israeli determination is required.  The present government has no 
mandate for this." 
 
IV.  "A Cold Wind Blowing From Washington" 
 
Former editor-in-chief Moshe Ishon wrote in the nationalist, 
Orthodox Hatzofe (4/6): "A cold wind has started blowing from 
Washington.... [During the recent visit], this was not the same 
Secretary of State we have know over the past year, who used to 
 
SIPDIS 
bring along virtuousness and understanding for Israel's diplomatic 
and security interests.  This time her ... diplomatic presentation 
was different: It reminded us of the distant past, when secretaries 
of state demonstrated no real sympathy for Israel.  The changes 
recently effected in the United States' Mideast policy are 
influenced by its status in Iraq, among other things.... It can be 
assumed that Condoleezza Rice received President Bush's approval for 
the presentation of [her] plan to Prime Minister Ehud Olmert.... It 
is amazing that Condoleezza Rice brought along a proposal calling 
for Israel's withdrawal to the 1967 borders, which is in fact the 
Saudi proposal.  This makeover ... indicates a significant change in 
Washington's position.  Prime Minister Olmert indeed tried to remove 
it from the agenda, but not unambiguously.  It would be more 
accurate to say that [her] proposal was rejected only temporarily 
and not unmistakably.  This is regrettable." 
 
¶V.  "Syria, Israel and Peace" 
 
Columnist Fayez Abbas wrote in the independent Arabic-language 
weekly Assennara (4/6): "I do not know what exactly the message of 
US House Speaker Nancy Pelosi to Syria included.  However, the big 
question should be whether the Israeli government is serious 
regarding the peace process with Syria and the rest of the Arab 
countries.  The answer to this question is very simple. Olmert's 
government and all Israeli governments, excluding Rabin's, have not 
been interested in the peace process.  Rabin was ready to withdraw 
from the Golan Heights in exchange for peace with Syria, but we all 
know what happened to Rabin, who was assassinated by a Jewish bullet 
because he was very serious about the peace process.  Since the 
assassination, all Israeli governments waved slogans of 'peace for 
peace' and not 'peace for land' -- a concept refused by the Arab 
world.... During one of my visits to Syria and meeting with 
President Assad [the father], he expressed his true intentions for 
peace with Israel, however those intentions weren't welcomed by 
Israel, which claimed that Syria was actually preparing for war.... 
A couple of months after my visit I wrote about the case of Gil, the 
Israeli intelligence agent who was charged over faking reports on 
alleged Syrian war preparations against Israel.... This incident 
proved that Israel had no clue what was happing within the Syrian 
administration and yet believed the fake reports. After the arrest 
of the agent Gil, will Israel believe that Syria is ready for 
complete and just peace or will there be an another 'Gil?' 
 
------------------------------- 
¶2.  Iran: Detention and Release of UK Sailors: 
------------------------------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Senior columnist and longtime dove Yoel Marcus wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "One can only hope that this 
supposedly humanitarian gesture of 'forgiving' Britain will not stop 
Bush and Blair from persisting in their battle to keep Iran, whose 
declared goal is the destruction of Israel, from achieving a nuclear 
capability." 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: "Iran's 
true face is most unmistakably exposed in the case of the three yet 
unreleased Israeli abductees." 
 
Deputy Managing Editor and right-wing columnist Caroline B. Glick 
wrote in The Jerusalem Post: "Iran grows stronger in the face of 
Western weakness and hypocrisy.  But is still isn't all that strong. 
 The fact remains that even at this late date, we alone will 
determine whether we win or lose." 
 
Editor-in-Chief Bassam Jaber wrote in the left-leaning, independent 
Arabic-language weekly Panorama: "The lesson that can be learned 
from the release of the marines is the second lesson after Iraq, for 
both Bush and Blair and for all those who build their policy on 
show-offing or misusing power." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "The Forgiveness Game" 
 
Senior columnist and longtime dove Yoel Marcus wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (4/6): "Even the biggest, 
strongest superpowers have no answer for the primitive form of 
warfare known as kidnapping that Islamic bullies have added to the 
menu in their fight against Western civilization.  With our 
experience of brutal kidnappings, who knows better than we how 
problematic they can be, and how high a price one is forced to pay 
to bring hostages home, alive or in a box.... In this game of 
horror, the kidnappers have the upper hand, because they know that 
in the civilization they are out to destroy, human life is valued 
above all.... A country with values is at a disadvantage when it 
comes to kidnapping.  Yes, Blair raised his voice and threatened to 
take firmer action if a solution wasn't found right away.  So he 
threatened.  So what?  The Iranians countered that the use of force 
would only complicate matters.... One thing is certain: Within a 
couple of days or weeks, we will find out the price Great Britain 
paid for the release of these hostages.  Iranians are known for 
their keen business sense.  There is no such thing as a free 
gift.... One can only hope that this supposedly humanitarian gesture 
of 'forgiving' Britain will not stop Bush and Blair from persisting 
in their battle to keep Iran, whose declared goal is the destruction 
of Israel, from achieving a nuclear capability." 
 
 
II.  "Iran's True Face" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized (4/6): 
"Fifteen British sailors are safely back home, after two weeks in 
Iranian captivity -- a happy ending which in itself should please 
anyone who deplored their unjust detention in the first place and 
all the grist their seizure provided for Tehran's propaganda mill. 
Exasperatingly, however, Iran's President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad and 
his cohorts have managed to come out looking good, despite their 
out-and-out act of piracy, intimidation, and unlawful 
imprisonment.... Given the track record of the ayatollahs' regime, 
things could have been far worse.... Despots, of course, always have 
evinced and continue to evince a penchant for such disingenuous 
pageantry.  Ahmadinejad isn't the first autocrat to force hapless 
hostages to play act and give praise for what is falsely presented 
as kindness.... A wolf is most treacherous in sheep's clothing and a 
ruthless enemy is most misleading when it dons a fallaciously 
pleasant mask.  Iran's true face is most unmistakably exposed in the 
case of the three yet unreleased Israeli abductees.... The free 
world's challenge is not to be hoodwinked by his honeyed 
blandishments, and critically not to let his regime's duplicitous 
magnanimity in resolving its own act of piracy divert attention from 
the Iranian nuclear threat." 
 
III.  "Iran Doesn't Mix Signals" 
 
Deputy Managing Editor and right-wing columnist Caroline B. Glick 
wrote in The Jerusalem Post (4/6): "The footage of the British 
hostages thanking Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad for the 
hospitality and forgiveness, like the footage of Speaker of the US 
House of Representatives Nancy Pelosi covering her head in a scarf 
while on a visit to Damascus, was enough to make you sick.  Must we 
lose this war?.... Iran grows stronger in the face of Western 
weakness and hypocrisy.  But is still isn't all that strong.  The 
fact remains that even at this late date, we alone will determine 
whether we win or lose." 
 
IV.  "Lessons From the Release" 
 
Editor-in-Chief Bassam Jaber wrote in the left-leaning, independent 
Arabic-language weekly Panorama (4/6): "The incident of the captive 
British marines has shown the key role that Syria can play in 
resolving issues between conflicted sides in the region.... Iran has 
proven that there is another language [of communication] that can be 
used to achieve agreements other than the language of threats and 
Security Council resolutions.  The lesson that can be learned from 
the release of the marines is the second lesson after Iraq, for both 
Bush and Blair and for all those who build their policy on 
show-offing or misusing power." 
 
JONES