07TELAVIV3411
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Fri Nov 30 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0014
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #3411/01 3341125
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 301125Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4401
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 3081
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 9752
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 3239
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 3858
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 3105
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 1194
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 3829
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 0691
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 1160
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 7733
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 5192
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 0111
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 4247
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 6186
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 8513
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 003411 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Maariv reported that Syria has been urging Israel, through Russia, 
to hold talks in Moscow.  The newspaper cited The Washington Post as 
saying on Thursday that the U.S. and Russia have agreed to a 
follow-up peace conference in early 2008 that would include Syria on 
the agenda.  The newspaper added that President Bush warned Israel 
not to surprise the U.S.  Maariv reported that Russian President 
Vladimir Putin insists that he is the only person who can influence 
Syrian President Bashar Assad.  For its part, Ha'aretz quoted U.S. 
National Security Advisor Stephen Hadley as saying that it is 
difficult to see how Syria can fit into the renewed peace process. 
Hadley as said that Israel would be the one to decide whether to 
negotiate with Syria, but that Syria must first make fundamental 
changes in policy.    Maariv said that U.S. and Israeli officials 
were satisfied with Syrian Deputy FM Faisal Mekdad's speech at 
Annapolis.  Maariv reported that according to "incontrovertible" 
official Israeli land ownership records, in the 1930s French Baron 
Edmond de Rothschild bought 59,000 dunams (approximately 15,000 
acres) of land in Syria -- 6.000 dunams of which are in the 
Israeli-occupied Golan.  At the time of the establishment of Israel, 
the land was handed over to the Jewish National Fund. 
 
All media reported that on Thursday police recommended that PM Ehud 
Olmert not be tried over his role in the privatization of Bank 
Leumi, citing a lack of evidence. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Attorney Talia Sasson, the author of a highly 
influential government report on illegal outposts in the West Bank, 
has warned the government against approving a new Justice Ministry 
proposal that would allow state funding for outposts.  In her letter 
to the Ministerial Committee on Unauthorized Outposts -- a panel 
which was formed to implement her report on the subject -- Sasson 
says the proposal would constitute a "clear and immediate violation 
of the Prime Minister's prior commitments to the President of the 
U.S."  Ha'aretz added that the measure, which would also allow the 
construction of previously approved projects, is expected to pass 
and be supported by Kadima members on the panel, including FM Livni 
and Vice Premier Ramon.  The newspaper also reported that right-wing 
activists are planning to establish three new outposts over the next 
several days.  They also intend to return to and rebuild previously 
evacuated outposts.  The first activity is scheduled for December 
¶12.  The activists plan to establish outposts near Kochav Hashahar, 
Jerusalem and Beit El. 
 
PM Olmert was quoted as saying in an interview with Yediot that he 
has not agreed yet to any concessions.  He also defended U.S. 
arbitration as defined in the Roadmap.  Israel Radio reported that 
the UN Security Council has endorsed the Annapolis conference in 
principle.  The radio quoted Israel's Ambassador to the UN, Danny 
Gillerman, as saying that it is not certain whether the U.S. 
consulted Israel on this issue, as it usually does.  On another 
matter, The Jerusalem Post reported that on Thursday Gillerman urged 
Hamas to stop "eternalizing the past": Hamas officials have called 
for the UN to rescind the partition plan that was adopted on 
November 29, 1947. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that defense officials are unhappy with 
the appointment of Gen. (ret) James Jones as the new special envoy 
to coordinate security between Israel and the Palestinians.   The 
newspaper quoted a senior defense official involved in talks with 
the Palestinians as saying that Jones was likely to spend most of 
his time pressuring Israel to make concessions.  "Another envoy is 
not what is needed now," the official was quoted as saying:  "Both 
sides know what needs to be done, the problem is that due to 
everything else that is going on - including Hamas's control over 
Gaza and the current coalition in Israel -- things are stuck." 
 
Leading electronic media reported that today the High Court of 
Justice ordered the state to delay its reduction of power supplies 
to the Gaza Strip by at least two weeks, pending a full presentation 
detailing the proposed operation.  Maariv quoted Likud Chairman 
Binyamin Netanyahu as saying on Thursday that PM Olmert will launch 
a military operation in Gaza to escape from the Winograd 
conclusions.  The Jerusalem Post quoted a senior Fatah official in 
Gaza City as saying on Thursday that Fatah will fight alongside 
Hamas if and when the IDF launches a military operation in Gaza. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted Usama bin Ladin as saying in an audiotape 
aired on Al Jazeera-TV on Thursday that Israeli "aggression" against 
Palestinians partially prompted Al-Qaida's 9/11 attacks. 
 
Yediot reported that Hizbullah has the ability to target the entire 
territory of Israel with recently delivered Fateh-220 Iranian-made 
missiles. 
 
The media reported that Netanyahu and former FM Silvan Shalom 
reconciled on Thursday. 
 
Yediot reported that the IAF has decided not to ground its old F15 
planes, despite the fact that the USAF decided to do so for the 
second time this month. 
 
Yediot and The Jerusalem Post reported that recently declassified 
Nixon papers from 1969 reveal that then National Security Advisor 
Henry Kissinger wrote President Nixon that Israel stole 
nuclear-related secrets from the U.S. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that U.S. software giant Microsoft Corp. 
has entered into a cooperative training project with Israel expected 
to provide some 250,000 Israel women, youth, and disabled people 
with a springboard to a career in science and technology-related 
industries. 
 
Maariv reported that oligarch Arkady Gaidamak might build a new 
compound for the Russian Embassy in Tel Aviv.  Maariv said that the 
move is meant to strengthen Gaidamak's status in the Kremlin. 
 
Yediot reported that on Sunday the cabinet will endorse the national 
plan to fight trafficking in persons. 
 
Ha'aretz published the results of a poll conducted by Dialog on 
November 28: 
The Annapolis conference was ... 
A failure: 42%; Neither success, nor failure: 24%; A success: 17%; 
Undecided: 17%. 
Did the summit increase chances for a permanent status agreement 
with the Palestinians by the end of 2008? 
     No: 62%; Yes: 24%; Undecided: 14%. 
If it is possible to arrive at a permanent status agreement on the 
basis of two states for two peoples, which includes all "core 
issues," will you support it? 
     Yes: 53%; Prefer not to: 38%; Undecided: 9%. 
On the assumption that 2008 will be the crucial year concerning 
Iran's nuclear issue, who would you trust to deal with the problem? 
Olmert: 8%; Defense Minister Ehud Barak: 20%; FM Tzipi Livni: 6%; 
Binyamin Netanyahu: 31%; Avigdor Lieberman: 13% Undecided: 22%. 
What should Barak do when the final Winograd Report is published, in 
light of his past commitments? 
Resign from the government and act to bring about early elections: 
40%; Remain in the government, since circumstances have changed: 
24%; Call for replacing Olmert: 17%; Undecided: 19%. 
"Were elections held today, for whom would you vote for?" 
(Results in Knesset seats -- in brackets, 2006 elections results.) 
Likud 30 (12); Labor Party 23 (19); Kadima 15 (29); Yisrael Beiteinu 
11 (11); Shas 9 (12); National Union-National Religious Party 6 (7); 
United Torah Judaism 6 (7); Meretz 4 (6); Arkady Gaidamak's Social 
Justice 4 (0); Arab parties 10 (10). 
 
A Yediot poll sees Kadima gaining seats at Labor's expense. 
 
-------- 
Mideast: 
-------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn and Washington correspondent 
Shmuel Rosner wrote from Annapolis in the independent, left-leaning 
Ha'aretz: "President George W. Bush and Secretary of State 
Condoleezza Rice have chalked up an impressive achievement as their 
terms near an end.... This week's festivities probably strengthened 
[Bush's] idealistic side." 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote in the popular, pluralist 
Maariv: "An overall one-year schedule for a comprehensive solution 
is unfeasible and totally ridiculous.  What will happen if it turns 
out that it is impossible to accomplish this task?" 
 
Op-Ed Page Editor Ben-Dror Yemini wrote in Maariv: "It is worthwhile 
to listen to [the Israeli Right's] fears.... [But] rejecting a 
two-state solution leads to a single-state alternative.  It will be 
neither a binational nor a democratic state.  It will be another 
Arab one." 
 
Ha'aretz editorialized: "Annapolis will not lead Israel to any 
solution with the Palestinians unless Israel stops cheating and 
learns to restrain its expansion eastward." 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: "The 
time to find out whether the Arab world is ready for a state beside 
Israel rather than in its stead is now, not at the end of the 
process." 
 
Former ambassador to Egypt and Sweden, contributor Zvi Mazel wrote 
in the nationalist, Orthodox Makor Rishon-Hatzofe: "[Annapolis] 
undoubtedly was an American success.... The question is whether the 
[joint] declaration is realistic." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "When All Is Said and Done" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn and Washington correspondent 
Shmuel Rosner wrote from Annapolis in the independent, left-leaning 
Ha'aretz (11/30): "President George W. Bush and Secretary of State 
Condoleezza Rice have chalked up an impressive achievement as their 
terms near an end.... The speeches [at Annapolis] were positive and 
expressed hope, without going overboard.  Will this result in a 
final-status agreement?  After all the past disappointments, nobody 
is willing to bet on that..... There is Bush the 'idealist' and Bush 
the 'realist,' as one of his acquaintances put it.  Sometimes one 
prevails, sometimes the other.  Most of the time they simply 
coexist.  Sometimes Bush believes that he will succeed in bringing 
the Palestinians to water and make them drink, too.  At other 
moments he views the Middle East with cruel sobriety and assumes 
that he will leave the Palestinian problem to the next president. 
This week's festivities probably strengthened his idealistic side. 
The Annapolis conference placed Olmert at the center of the 
international stage for the first time.  As he sees it, all the 
attending leaders and foreign ministers came to listen to him and 
Abu Mazen." 
 
II.  "Signs of Oil" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote in the popular, pluralist 
Maariv (11/30):"Olmert was not lying when he delivered his lofty 
speech and talked about painful compromises, the Palestinians' 
suffering, and the need for peace.  When he reached the part where 
he declared that 'now is the time' and 'we are willing,' he was 
ignoring the genuine reality.  The trouble is that this drama is 
dangerous, that it creates illusions, and could crash [Annapolis'] 
participants.  An overall one-year schedule for a comprehensive 
solution is unfeasible and totally ridiculous.  What will happen if 
it turns out that it is impossible to accomplish this task?  In the 
meantime, America will enter the election period, the Palestinians 
will again despair, and the ceiling will fall yet another time? 
What will this do to Abu Mazen, to the two-sate idea, to the axis of 
the moderates, to Israel's status, and to the region?" 
III.  "The Rejectionist Front" 
 
Op-Ed Page Editor Ben-Dror Yemini wrote in Maariv (11/30): "The 
[Israeli] Right fears that the Annapolis show, and especially what 
is expected to follow, will lead to a Palestinian state.  It is 
worthwhile to listen to those fears: A Palestinian state will turn 
into a Hamas one, an extension of Iran and Hizbullah, and lead to a 
permanent threat of shells and Katyusha rockets on Israel's 
population centers and Ben-Gurion Airport.... But it is not the 
Right that created Arab rejection of the Partition plan; the Right 
is not responsible for the three 'noes' at Khartoum in 1967; the 
Right did not cause Arafat to say 'no' to the Clinton outline.  We 
have had too many illusions since Oslo, too many times have we found 
out that our goodwill meets a totally different resolve on the other 
side.  But there is one problem: rejecting a two-state solution 
leads to a single-state alternative.  It will be neither a 
binational nor a democratic state.  It will be another Arab one." 
 
IV.  "A Halt, not a Suspension" 
 
Ha'aretz editorialized (11/30): "When Ehud Olmert warns that the 
world could impose a 'South African solution' on Israel if two 
states are not created, side by side, he is tacitly admitting that 
expansion of the settlements is making Israel look increasingly like 
an apartheid regime.  The agreement to withdraw, or to make 'painful 
concessions,' as it is sanctimoniously called, is therefore less 
painful than any other alternative.  The only question is whether 
another Yitzhak Rabin can be found, who is capable of really 
halting, not just suspending, the construction of settlements, to 
leave the Palestinians some territory in which to establish 
Palestine.... In April 2004 the government promised the Americans 
that there would be no more construction 'beyond the outside line' 
of each settlement.  That outside line has never been set. 
Annapolis will not lead Israel to any solution with the Palestinians 
unless Israel stops cheating and learns to restrain its expansion 
eastward." 
 
¶V.  "Partition at 60" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized (11/30): 
"The juxtaposition of the anniversary of the passage of the UN 
General Assembly's partition plan and this week's Annapolis 
conference is a telling one.  The Arab world marks November 29, 
1947, as a day of 'catastrophe.' Sixty years later, the challenge 
for peacemakers remains what it was then: obtaining Arab acceptance 
for partition.... What the run-up to Annapolis, and the glaring 
omission of the words 'Jewish state' from the joint statement sadly 
underlined, however, is that [the] Arab 'recognition' [of Israel] 
has always come with a huge asterisk attached to it.  The Arab 
position has been, in essence, 'We recognize you, but we have every 
right to make demands that entirely negate that recognition'.... 
Without real mutual recognition, two states will only bring more 
war, not peace.  The time to find out whether the Arab world is 
ready for a state beside Israel rather than in its stead is now, not 
at the end of the process." 
 
VI.  "A Gesture to the United States, No More"" 
 
Former ambassador to Egypt and Sweden, contributor Zvi Mazel wrote 
in the nationalist, Orthodox Makor Rishon-Hatzofe (11/30): 
"[Annapolis] undoubtedly was an American success, which showed that 
despite the grave problems faced by the Bush administration, the 
U.S. is still capable of leading the international community.  It 
looks as if the many participants came mostly because of the U.S. 
invitation.... Some said that the size of the conference was fit for 
the signing of a peace treaty, not for its launching.... The 
question is whether the [joint] declaration is realistic.  We must 
especially ask this given the sorry state of the Palestinian 
Authority, which is not only unable to restrain terrorist 
organizations after losing Gaza but also in which powerful political 
and public forces representing a broad segment of Palestinian 
society are unwilling to negotiate." 
 
JONES