07TELAVIV3281
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Thu Nov 15 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #3281/01 3191123
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 151123Z NOV 07
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4174
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 3004
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 9683
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 3159
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 3788
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 3032
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 1112
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 3756
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 0622
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 1087
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 7664
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 5117
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 0037
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 4178
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 6116
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 8415
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 003281 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Iran 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Ha'aretz and The Jerusalem Post led with Israeli demands to the 
Palestinian Authority that Israel be recognized as a Jewish state. 
The Jerusalem Post reported that opposition from Palestinian leaders 
is intensifying and could threaten the post-Annapolis negotiations. 
Ha'aretz and other media reported that the cabinet is considering 
making this recognition a precondition for any future negotiations. 
Reportedly, Yisrael Beiteinu party leader Avigdor Lieberman is 
behind the initiative.   Ha'aretz adds speculation from political 
analysts that Olmert will work to oppose a government resolution. 
 
Makor Rishon-Hatzofe quoted a source in Kadima as saying that 
tensions within the party have grown following Olmert's decision to 
freeze settlement construction.  On Wednesday Kadima MKs took part 
in a Likud-led gathering to protest the possible division of 
Jerusalem. 
 
Israel Radio reported that Israel is preparing a list of Palestinian 
prisoners to be released ahead of Annapolis. 
 
Maariv reported that Attorney General Menachem Mazuz has approved an 
alternative plan to reduce power supply to Gaza that would leave the 
responsibility of distributing electricity to Hamas. 
 
Ha'aretz quoted the Israeli group Machsom Watch as saying on Tuesday 
that only two of the 24 roadblocks that Israel allegedly removed 
recently were in fact removed.  The organization said following its 
investigation and site visits that most of the roadblocks in fact 
never existed.  They also claimed that several of the roadblocks 
were still in place. 
 
Maariv reported that the IDF is preparing anti-tank defenses in the 
western Golan along protective trenches that were previously used 
during the Yom Kippur War.  The newspaper quoted an Israeli military 
source as saying that the move is part of the preparations to 
counter possible aggression by Syria.  Yediot quoted British 
commentator Patrick Seale, a confidant of Syrian President Bashar 
Assad, as saying that Olmert's reported rapprochement efforts with 
Syria are just Israeli spin, and that Syria does not believe that 
Israel has received a green light from President Bush to hold talks 
with Damascus. 
 
Maariv reported that 20,000 Palestinian security staff are now 
active in West Bank cities (Area B).  The Jerusalem Post quoted US 
Consul-General in Jerusalem Jacob Walles as saying after a tour of 
Nablus on Wednesday that Palestinian forces in the city have made 
"some progress" in restoring order. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted officials in Jerusalem as saying that the 
report on the Iranian nuclear program that EU foreign policy chief 
Javier Solana is due to present in two weeks to the five permanent 
members of the UN Security Council and Germany will be much closer 
to the Israeli position than the separate report being drawn up by 
International Atomic Energy head Mohamed ElBaradei.  Solana met with 
FM Tzipi Livni in Jerusalem on Wednesday. 
 
Major media reported that on Wednesday a French appeals court 
screened footage of the September 2000 TV report on the death of 
12-year-old Palestinian Muhammad al-Dura, in a case of defamation 
brought against France 2-TV and its correspondent in the Middle 
East, Charles Enderlin. 
 
Leading media reported that Deputy FM Majalli Whbee told the Knesset 
on Wednesday that the Walt Disney Company intends to start legal 
proceeding against Hamas, whose TV station portrayed a Mickey 
Mouse-like character to incite hatred towards the Jews. 
 
Various media reported that on Wednesday the Winograd Commission 
told the High Court of Justice that its final report would not 
single out individuals.  Speaking on Israel Radio, Meretz Knesset 
Member Zahava Gal-On said that Olmert had "made the best deal of his 
life" when he appointed the commission.  The media also cited 
criticism of the commission's statement by right-wing politicians 
and human rights groups.  Yediot cited the frustration of Israel's 
National Security Council for not being consulted on the Annapolis 
meeting.  The Winograd Commission had criticized PM Olmert for not 
seeking advice from the council during the Second Lebanon War. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that the planned freeze in settlement construction 
"raises more questions than answers," particularly on the future of 
settlements and the implementation of the freeze. 
 
Yediot reported that the US space program Falcon will be able to 
protect Israel from an Iranian attack. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that on Wednesday Likud Knesset Member Gideon 
Sa'ar and 25 other MKs introduced a bill that would require a 
majority of 80 MKs to amend the Basic Law on Jerusalem. 
 
Leading media reported that on Wednesday an IDF officer was slightly 
wounded from Palestinian gunfire south of the Erez crossing.  Six 
mortar shells were fired against Israel from the northern Gaza 
Strip, causing no injuries or damage. 
 
Maariv, Yediot, and Israel Radio reported that police are checking 
whether Likud activist Shlomi Oz gave money to Olmert when he ran in 
the 1999 Likud primaries.  Maariv cited denial by the Prime 
Minister's Office.  The media noted that Oz has been suspected in 
various criminal affairs over the past few years. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that while Hebrew-language studies in Egypt are 
thriving, Israelis are not welcome there.  The newspaper has been 
running a series on Israeli-Egyptian ties 30 years after the late 
President Anwar Sadat's visit to Jerusalem. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that right-wing Jewish groups have begun to 
purchase property in the Druze town of Peki'in in the Galilee 
leading to increased ethnic tensions.  Peki'in was site of riots 
earlier this month between police and Druze villagers.  In the 
aftermath of the riots, village elders learned that several 
right-wing Jewish groups have been purchasing homes in the city 
center, mainly from Christian residents, for two to five times the 
fair market value. 
 
Leading media reported that on Wednesday the German government 
announced that it is willing to begin negotiations with the GOI on 
changes to the reparations agreement for victims of the Holocaust. 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: "Avoiding a 
debate on the core issues in Annapolis is not an Israeli 
achievement. It is an escape from the main issues, stemming from 
political cowardice." 
 
Meretz Party founder Shulamit Aloni wrote in Ha'aretz: "The 
government of Israel, with all due respect, does not represent the 
Jewish people but rather the citizens of the State of Israel who 
elected it.... In other words, it is a state for all of its 
citizens." 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: "There 
is no way for Israelis to understand the refusal to accept Israel as 
a Jewish state other than as a rejection of the two-state solution 
and the embrace of the 'strategy of stages,' 
 
Veteran journalist Evelyn Gordon wrote in The Jerusalem Post: "If 
there is one thing Rice has proved definitively over the past two 
years, it is that she has no interest whatsoever in Israel's 
security concerns." 
 
Liberal op-ed writer Yael Paz-Melamed commented in the popular, 
pluralist Maariv: "The real threat posed by the Right does not arise 
from declarations by [settler leaders] or Olmert's pilgrimage to the 
rabbis.  It lies in the hills of Samaria [i.e. the northern West 
Bank]." 
 
The nationalist, Orthodox Makor Rishon-Hatzofe editorialized: "The 
Secretary of State had better invest some fresh thought in less 
 
SIPDIS 
comprehensive and pretentious solutions.... The 'two-state solution' 
that President Bush presented in 2002 belongs to another world and 
to other times." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "Who Wants a Jewish State?" 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (11/15): "On 
the eve of the Annapolis conference, Israel has suddenly come up 
with the absurd demand that the Palestinians recognize Israel as a 
Jewish state -- after Israel's own leaders have done everything in 
their power to sabotage it.  It is easy to speak about a Jewish 
state, but difficult to find the political courage required to do 
what it takes: Settlements scattered in the heart of the Palestinian 
population make it impossible to separate between Israel and 
Palestine along a plausible and viable border.  With each passing 
day and each passing year, every settlement expansion, every outpost 
and every road built to reach it disrupt the chance to separate the 
two nations.  Therefore suspending construction in the settlements 
is not a prize for the Palestinians ahead of one agreement or 
another, but a life-saving medicine for Israel.... Avoiding a debate 
on the core issues in Annapolis is not an Israeli achievement. It is 
an escape from the main issues, stemming from political cowardice. 
Every additional round of futile talks is pushing Israel farther 
away from determining its borders and fate." 
 
II.  "Still a Democracy?" 
 
Meretz Party founder Shulamit Aloni wrote in Ha'aretz (11/15): "The 
government of Israel, with all due respect, does not represent the 
Jewish people but rather the citizens of the State of Israel who 
elected it.  Israel is a sovereign state, which is still considered 
to be a democracy.  In other words, it is a state for all of its 
citizens.  Therefore it must not demand of the Palestinians to 
recognize it as a Jewish state, because in that way it would be 
declaring that any citizen whose mother is not Jewish or who did not 
convert with our strict Orthodox rabbis is a second-rate citizen, 
and his rights as a human being and a citizen are not ensured.... 
Therefore it would be better to demand of the Palestinians to 
recognize Israel as a sovereign state, and not to coerce them with 
what the citizens coerce us -- religion and its rabbis.... If it is 
more important to be a Jew than it is to be an Israeli, why do we 
demand of the Jews of the world to come here at a time when they are 
having it good in the democratic countries in which they live as 
Jews?" 
 
III.  "The Recognition Sham" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized (11/15): 
"To Jews and Israelis, it is obvious that if Israel is not a Jewish 
state, meaning (at least) a state with an overwhelming Jewish 
majority, than it would simply become the 22nd Arab state. Israel 
would cease to exist.  The Palestinian refusal to accept Israel as a 
Jewish state suggests that all their solemn and myriad expressions 
of Israel's right to exist did not mean anything.... There is no way 
for Israelis to understand the refusal to accept Israel as a Jewish 
state other than as a rejection of the two-state solution and the 
embrace of the 'strategy of stages,' whereby a Palestinian state is 
not an end of claims against Israel, but a down-payment toward 
Israel's destruction.... Without mutual recognition, there is no 
basis for negotiation. The Palestinians expect Israel to accept 
their existence and rights as a people.  The Jewish people expects 
no less." 
 
IV.  "Ehud Olmert's Misplaced Trust" 
 
Veteran journalist Evelyn Gordon wrote in The Jerusalem Post 
(11/15): "A premature determination that the PA is in fact willing 
and able to take over is a recipe for renewed suicide bombings in 
Israel's heartland.  The crucial question, therefore, is whether the 
U.S. can be trusted to make this determination in Israel's stead.... 
Since [Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice] will be responsible for 
making Israel obey [U.S. security coordinator Lt. Gen. Keith] 
Dayton's decisions, Israel could theoretically appeal to her should 
it consider these decisions flawed.  In practice, however, there is 
no chance of her accepting such an appeal -- because if there is one 
thing Rice has proved definitively over the past two years, it is 
that she has no interest whatsoever in Israel's security concerns. 
If that assessment seems harsh, consider her behavior over the 
Agreement on Movement and Access, which she brokered following the 
August 2005 disengagement.... To his credit, Olmert resisted her on 
this issue.  But now, in his desperation to demonstrate 'progress' 
at Annapolis, he has pledged to dismantle Israel's entire security 
network in the West Bank merely on Dayton's and Rice's say-so.  He 
has thereby created an impossible trap: Either Israel will indeed 
have to dismantle its security measures prematurely, leaving the 
country vulnerable to a new wave of suicide bombings, or it will 
have to mortally insult its closest ally by refusing to accept its 
decisions even after having promised to do so.  If that is the 
measure of Olmert's judgment in the pre-Annapolis talks, none of us 
should be sleeping well at night." 
 
¶V.  "The Campaign against Nothing" 
 
Liberal op-ed writer Yael Paz-Melamed commented in the popular, 
pluralist Maariv (11/15): "The Annapolis conference died before it 
was even born.  But Binyamin Netanyahu won't let the facts confuse 
him.... [Netanyahu told Shas mentor Rabbi Ovadia Yosef:] 'The Olmert 
government is repeating the mistake of Camp David, where Israel gave 
up everything and got suicide bombers in exchange?.'  Israel 
conceded?  When and what?.... More than it was meant to thwart 
Annapolis, which others have already torpedoed, the opposition 
leader's visit to the Rabbi was intended to check the possibility of 
toppling the Olmert government... The real threat posed by the Right 
does not arise from declarations by [settler leaders] or Olmert's 
pilgrimage to the rabbis.  It lies in the hills of Samaria [i.e. the 
northern West Bank]." 
 
VI.  "The Palestinians Need Israeli Patronage" 
 
The nationalist, Orthodox Makor Rishon-Hatzofe editorialized 
(11/15): "The virtual president of a virtual state is posturing as a 
virtual partner in a peace conference.  What is surprising is that 
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice is continuing -- even on 
 
SIPDIS 
Wednesday -- to voice her support for painful concessions and the 
establishment of a Palestinian state..... Doesn't she know that in 
light of the Gaza experience, it is because of 'extremists in the 
region' that an Israeli withdrawal and the establishment of a 
Palestinian state in Gaza and the West Bank constitute a recipe for 
strategic disaster -- not just to Israel and the Palestinians in the 
West Bank, but also to the United States' interests?  The Secretary 
of State had better invest some fresh thought in less comprehensive 
and pretentious solutions.... The 'two-state solution' that 
President Bush presented in 2002 belongs to another world and to 
other times." 
 
--------- 
¶2.  Iran: 
--------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz: "The Americans say to the Israelis something 
like this: 'It is best for you to get used to living with a nuclear 
Iran, which will look less menacing if there is an American embassy 
there.'" 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"Get Used to the Iranian Bomb" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz (11/15): "Israel and the United States are 
generally considered Siamese twins, with a common mouth and 
heart.... [However], the major differences of opinion can be 
summarized as follows: The Americans desire a 'dialogue' with Iran 
and the isolation of Syria, and the Israelis want talks with the 
Syrians and moves against Iran.... The message of the American 
participants in [last week's bilateral strategic] meeting was clear: 
Neither the U.S. nor Israel has a military option against Iran..... 
Whoever comes after Bush, certainly if he is a Democrat, will throw 
these conditions into the trash and will strive for a quick dialogue 
 
with Iran.  In less diplomatic language, the Americans say to the 
Israelis something like this: 'It is best for you to get used to 
living with a nuclear Iran, which will look less menacing if there 
is an American embassy there.'" 
 
JONES