07TELAVIV1201
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Mon Apr 23 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #1201/01 1131102
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 231102Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0698
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUENAAA/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 2009
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 8748
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 1966
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 2815
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 2004
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 9861
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 2746
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 9648
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 0124
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 6730
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 4129
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 9027
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 3223
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 5149
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 6598
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 001201 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
Please note: no Tel Aviv Media Reaction report on Tuesday, April 24, 
2007, Israel's Independence Day holiday. 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Israel's 59th Independence Day 
 
¶2.  Mideast 
 
¶3.  Sudan: Darfur 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Over the weekend all media prominently and extensively covered, and 
commented on, events related to Israel's Memorial Day and 
Independence Day.  Leading media cited data released by the GOI's 
Central Bureau of Statistics, according to which Israel's population 
increased by 121.000, or 1.8 percent, since last Independence Day. 
Israel's 5,415,000 Jews and 310,000 "others" -- mostly non-Jewish 
immigrants from the former Soviet Union or those whose Jewish status 
is undetermined -- make up 76 percent of Israel's population.  The 
Arab and Druze population numbers 1,425,000, or 20 percent of 
Israel's citizens. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that PM Ehud Olmert's associates have asked Kadima 
Knesset members to prepare a media blitz to counter the onslaught 
expected upon publication next week of the interim report of the 
Winograd Commission probing the Second Lebanon War.  Ha'aretz said 
that Olmert's aides want to turn public opinion in his favor in the 
event of an expected chorus of calls from politicians, 
non-government organizations and bereaved parents for his 
resignation.  The campaign team will emphasize the "collective 
responsibility" of the cabinet and Knesset, as well as public 
support for the decision to launch the second Lebanon War.  Ha'aretz 
wrote that Olmert knows he cannot rely on the support of Kadima 
ministers, especially FM Tzipi Livni, Finance Minister Hirchson, and 
Transportation Minister Shaul Mofaz, who was defense minister during 
the years preceding the war.  Ha'aretz said that, despite their 
fears, the PM's associates assume that while the interim report is 
expected to criticize Olmert and his ministers, it will not be 
"fatal," and will leave him with political and public maneuvering 
room.  Yediot reported that members of the Winograd Commission wrote 
in its interim report that that Defense Minister Amir Peretz was 
"captive" to the army.  On Sunday Ha'aretz said that the report will 
criticize the cabinet and IDF's pre-war conduct.  All media quoted 
IDF Chief of Staff Gabi Ashkenazi as saying at last night's official 
ceremony in Jerusalem marking the start of Memorial Day that the IDF 
is doing what it can to rectify the problems it encountered in the 
Second Lebanon War. 
 
Leading media reported on, and Yediot bannered a comment made by 
Hizbullah Deputy Secretary-General Naim Qassem on Sunday that 
serious negotiations are taking place with Israel over the release 
of abducted IDF soldiers Ehud Goldwasser and Eldad Regev.  Qassem 
was quoted as saying that they would be freed only in exchange for 
the release of all Lebanese detained in Israel, including the 
terrorist Samir Kuntar, who murdered a family in Nahariya in 1979. 
 
On Sunday The Jerusalem Post reported that a high-ranking Israeli 
defense official told the newspaper that if hundreds of terrorists 
are released in exchange for abducted IDF Cpl. Gilad Shalit, they 
will pose an immediate threat to Israeli cities and settlements. 
 
On Sunday Ha'aretz wrote that the gist of the Israeli message in its 
recent talks with Defense Secretary Robert Gates is that Syria is 
preparing for a military confrontation with Israel.  Ha'aretz said 
that the US message to Israel on Syria -- Israel should avoid 
diplomatic talks with that country -- in unchanged. 
 
On Sunday The Jerusalem Post reported that Israel has rejected the 
surprise offer by Pakistan's President Gen. Pervez Musharraf to help 
resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. 
 
All media reported on Sunday's first round of French presidential 
elections.  Yediot wrote that an overwhelming majority of French 
expats in Israel -- 83 percent -- voted for conservative candidate 
Nicolas Sarkozy, 9 percent for Socialist Segolene Royal, 5 percent 
for centrist Francois Bayrou, and 1 percent for far-Right Jean-Marie 
Le Pen.  Only 9,000 of 43,000 registered voters took part in the 
ballot. 
 
Maariv reported that Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice might meet 
with Iranian FM Manouchehr Mottaki during next month's Iraq 
conference. 
 
On Sunday Yediot reported that on Sunday, for the first time since 
the Second Lebanon War, the US administration announced a new arms 
deal with Israel.  A request was issued by the Pentagon to the 
Congress asking for approval to sell to Israel 3,500 MK-84 bombs. 
Israel asked for those bombs in addition to spare parts and 
technological assistance.  The deal is valued at USD 65 million for 
the bombs only and USD 78 million with the spare parts and the 
assistance.  Yediot quoted Pentagon sources as saying that it was an 
American interest to have Israel retain its military superiority. 
However, Yediot said that the deal is also likely to have been 
signed in order to allay Israeli concerns after Israel recently 
asked the Americans to cancel an arms deal with Saudi Arabia.  Saudi 
Arabia is supposed to be sold sophisticated weaponry, and officials 
in Jerusalem voiced their concern over such a development.  Yediot 
wrote that the US administration decided to approve the arms deal 
with Saudi Arabia but, in tandem, to settle an arms deal with Israel 
as well. 
 
PM Olmert was quoted as saying in an interview with Israel Radio on 
Sunday that "Iran is far from crossing the nuclear threshold." 
 
Leading media reported that the IDF rescinded its permit for a march 
by right-wingers to the destroyed northern West Bank settlement of 
Homesh. 
 
Leading media reported that Hamas has included the abduction of IDF 
soldiers in its official policy. 
 
Hatzofe reported that on Sunday the Jordanian Royal Court published 
a clarification denying that King Abdullah II called for 
compensating Palestinian refugees instead of returning them to their 
homes, and that he said that Jordan and Israel had "common enemies." 
 Hatzofe said that the refutation followed a report by Ha'aretz on 
Friday, which allegedly cited remarks made by the King during a 
meeting with Knesset Speaker Dalia Itzik in Amman last week. 
 
All media reported that on Sunday Knesset Member Azmi Bishara 
submitted his resignation from the Knesset at Israel's Embassy in 
Cairo yesterday.  He was quoted as saying in an interview with Al 
Jazeera-TV that stated he decided to waive his immunity due to the 
"chorus of incitement" against him.  Bishara vowed to return to 
Israel but he does not know when.  "I am a son of Palestine and a 
son of Greater Syria.  Exile is not an option for me and my return 
is certain," he was quoted as saying.  Maariv quoted Olmert 
associates as saying that it would be preferable if Bishara did not 
return to Israel. 
 
Leading media reported that on Saturday Gazans fired four Qassam 
rockets; one scored a direct hit on a home, sending several people 
into shock, on a day in which security forces killed six 
Palestinians in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. 
 
On Sunday Maariv reported that Knesset Speaker Dalia Itzik decided 
on Saturday to cancel the planned trip to an international 
parliamentarians' conference in Bali next month by Knesset members 
since the Indonesian authorities would not agree to the Shin Bet's 
security conditions. 
 
Over the weekend media reported that on Saturday morning masked 
gunmen blew up large parts of the American International School in 
the Gaza Strip after stealing equipment and furniture. 
 
Over the weekend Yediot and The Jerusalem Post reported that the 
Defense Ministry refuses to build a memorial to fallen soldiers in 
the West Bank. 
 
Ha'aretz presented a declassified secret study conducted by the 
Institute for Defense Analyses in Washington, according to which, 
using the now defunct Strike Command (STRICOM), the US intended to 
attack Egypt or Israel -- depending on which would open hostilities 
-- during the Six-Day War to forestall unwanted developments. 
Ha'aretz wrote that the planning of operations against the IDF 
remains in the defense apparatus as a persistent relic of a declared 
American policy that seeks to achieve a "holy balance" in the 
Israeli-Arab conflict, and that its origins go back to the 1950s. 
 
The media reported that the Knesset's House Committee extended the 
temporary incapacity of Israeli President Moshe Katsav until the end 
of his tenure on May 15. 
 
Leading media reported that on Sunday the police questioned 
Strategic Affairs Minister Avigdor Lieberman over suspicions of 
bribing and money-laundering. 
 
On Sunday Yediot reported that an affair involving the biomedical 
startup Lifewave is becoming more complicated.  In addition to the 
(Israeli) Securities Authority's investigation of allegations of 
driving up share prices, it turns out that two of the interest 
holders in the company, Mordechai Kugel and Shaike Scheinberger, 
were wanted by the FBI after a serious indictment was served against 
them in the United States. This was not mentioned in Lifewave's 
prospectus before its shares were issued on the Tel Aviv Stock 
Exchange in December 2006.  An official of the authority was quoted 
as saying on Saturday that the company was obligated to report such 
a case. 
 
All media reported that on Sunday Finance Minister Abraham Hirchson 
suspended himself for three months so he can fight embezzlement 
allegations.  Similar to other media, Ha'aretz quoted sources close 
to PM Ehud Olmert as saying on Sunday that Olmert intends to serve 
as acting finance minister for a period of at least several weeks. 
Leading media reported that on Sunday Bank of Israel Governor 
Stanley Fischer lowered the basic interest rate by 0.25 percent -- 
to 3.75 percent. 
 
Over the weekend leading news web site Ynet and Channel 2-TV 
prominently mentioned the presence of an American Embassy 
representative at the Raanana funeral of Prof. Liviu Librescu, who 
was killed in the Virginia Tech massacre.  The media also noted that 
Romanian diplomats attended the ceremony. 
 
Hatzofe bannered the results of a survey commissioned by the Emek 
Yizreel College (in northern Israel) and carried out by the 
Teleseker Polling institute, according to which 60 percent are 
totally dissatisfied with Israel's leadership, and another 29 
percent are only slightly happy with it.  The poll found that 26 
percent of the respondents were considering emigrating over the past 
year. 
 
 
----------------------------------- 
¶1.  Israel's 59th Independence Day: 
----------------------------------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: "[Israel must] 
finally [find] a way to live in peace with its neighbors, so that it 
may fulfill its Zionist destiny." 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: "This 
country must not measure itself solely by its leadership. 
Ultimately, it is the strength of the people and what we have 
achieved here that is enduring, and will prevail." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "Fulfilling Our Zionist Destiny" 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (4/23): "An 
atmosphere of disappointment, despondency and anxiety prevails in 
Israel in its 59th year.  There is no point in trying to dull the 
power of these feeling when we mark Memorial Day and Independence 
Day.  A new government, headed by a new political movement that 
undertook to end the occupation, has led -- or more accurately, was 
led -- by an arrogant, rusty army to a painful, frustrating and 
dangerous defeat in a war against Hizbullah.... While Israel, with 
its foolish policy throughout 40 years of occupation, managed to 
crack and split Jewish solidarity, the burning hatred toward the 
country is now increasing the general Jewish solidarity and sense of 
mutual responsibility. This is not blind support for the State of 
Israel and its government.  The days of blind support are long over, 
and just as well.... Most [Israelis], both those living in Israel 
and abroad, are yearning for a day in which the two-state solution 
is implemented.  The Jews' solidarity, support, investments, 
immigration -- and their dependence on us and our dependence on them 
-- merely increase Israelis' historic responsibility to ensure that 
their country finally finds a way to live in peace with its 
neighbors, so that it may fulfill its Zionist destiny." 
 
 
II.  "Israel at 59" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized (4/23): 
"Our leadership crisis is made worse by the fact that it does not 
come at a time of international stability, but of intensifying 
threat.  Hamas, Hizbullah and perhaps even Syria are, according to 
security officials, preparing for the next war, while Iran is racing 
to achieve nuclear weapon capability.  Despite all this, it is 
neither healthy nor warranted to focus only on rot and weakness. 
Much needs to be done, but there is much to build upon. A rational 
observer would not choose the place of our enemies.  The war in 
Lebanon, for starters, did change the status quo ante, and in some 
aspects, so far, for the better.... Meanwhile, the Iranian threat 
looms, but we are not alone in confronting it..... Though Iran is 
betting on Western division and self-doubt, the Iranian regime 
itself is riven itself by growing popular opposition. Its high 
stakes game raises the risks in case of Western failure, but also 
the potential benefits of victory.  In this context, we need to keep 
in mind the resilience the Israeli people exhibited during the war, 
the bravery and commitment of our soldiers, and the value of what we 
have built over the past 59 years.  This country must not measure 
itself solely by its leadership.  Ultimately, it is the strength of 
the people and what we have achieved here that is enduring, and will 
prevail." 
 
------------ 
¶2.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Senior Middle East affairs analyst Zvi Bar'el wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "Perhaps the panic choking the 
Prime Minister's throat stems from the fact that Israel has never 
faced this situation: an Arab initiative, Arab mediators and an Arab 
vision of full and comprehensive peace, of rapprochement not only 
with confrontation states but also with history." 
 
Stephanie Levy, research fellow at the Global Research in 
International Affairs Center at the Interdisciplinary Center 
Herzliya wrote in the conservative, independent Jerusalem Post: 
"[The new French leadership's] challenge to France's historic 
pro-Arab policy could [even] lead to ... cooperating with the United 
States.   When it comes to Middle East policy, there is a chance for 
a real French revolution." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "How Good It Is To Be Weak" 
 
Senior Middle East affairs analyst Zvi Bar'el wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (4/22): "Perhaps the panic 
choking the Prime Minister's throat stems from the fact that Israel 
has never faced this situation: an Arab initiative, Arab mediators 
and an Arab vision of full and comprehensive peace, of rapprochement 
not only with confrontation states but also with history.  These are 
all knocking at Israel's door, but nobody is home.  Israel used to 
demand that Yasser Arafat 'speak Arabic,' the language of his 
public, as proof of the sincerity of his intentions. Now the time 
has come for the Israeli public to demand that Olmert 'speak Hebrew' 
and wholeheartedly declare: 'We call upon the Palestinian government 
and the government of Syria to negotiate with us on the basis of the 
Arab initiative, and we are prepared to pay the price,' and to say 
this himself and not via [Knesset Speaker] Dalia Itzik's handshake 
with Rania, the Queen of Jordan.  But after all, he is a weak 
leader, and how mighty is his weakness and how sure of itself. 
Indeed, a commission of inquiry has never been established to 
investigate missed opportunities for peace." 
 
II.  "Preparing For a French Revolution in Mideast Policy" 
 
Stephanie Levy, research fellow at the Global Research in 
International Affairs Center at the Interdisciplinary Center 
Herzliya wrote in the conservative, independent Jerusalem Post 
(4/23): "Middle East policy has been the most important and 
controversial international issue in the hard-fought French 
presidential election campaign.  And depending on the results, the 
vote could mark the first major change in that policy for three 
decades.  Both Nicolas Sarkozy and Segolene Royal, the candidates of 
the center-right and the Socialists, respectively, have promised 
major shifts in France's stance on the Iranian, Lebanese, and 
Israeli-Palestinian issues if they win.  They are reacting against 
the regime of outgoing President Jacques Chirac, who for 12 years -- 
following in the footsteps of predecessors back to Charles de Gaulle 
-- has allied the country with Arab dictators such as Yasser Arafat 
and Saddam Hussein.  By making France the Arabs' favorite Western 
state, Chirac and other Gaullists have tried to create an alignment 
to counter the great -- and in France, much-despised -- primacy of 
the United States.... This challenge to France's historic pro-Arab 
policy could [even] lead to ... cooperating with the United States. 
 When it comes to Middle East policy, there is a chance for a real 
French revolution." 
 
------------------ 
¶3.  Sudan: Darfur: 
------------------ 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: "Israel, which 
came into being after the Holocaust cannot stand idly by in the face 
of the suffering of Darfur's refugees." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"Israeli Help For Darfur" 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (4/22): "Israel 
should extend immediate assistance, whether funded by 
non-governmental agencies or directly, to refugees and displaced 
persons who have found shelter in Chad.  The absence of diplomatic 
ties between the two countries should not be an obstacle.  Israeli 
assistance to the victims of the tsunami in Indonesia, with which 
Israel also does not yet have full diplomatic ties, is an important 
example in this regard -- despite the differences in the nature of 
relations between the countries.  In the past Israel has shown that 
it can provide much-needed aid to disaster areas throughout the 
world, demonstrating the Jewish values on which its establishment 
was based.  Assistance to Muslim victims can illustrate much better 
than any international public relations campaign that the principles 
by which Israel was established are universal and do not 
discriminate between humans based on religion or race.  Israel, 
which came into being after the Holocaust cannot stand idly by in 
the face of the suffering of Darfur's refugees." 
 
JONES