07TORONTO441
Federal Government Promotes Canada as a Low Tax Country
Mon Nov 05 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Toronto
VZCZCXRO8357
OO RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHON #0441 3091935
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 051935Z NOV 07
FM AMCONSUL TORONTO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2243
INFO RUCNCAN/ALCAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS TORONTO 000441 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EFIN PGOV PINR PREL SENV CA
SUBJECT: Federal Government Promotes Canada as a Low Tax Country 
Open for Investment 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Federal Finance Minister Jim Flaherty made no new 
announcements in a November 5 Toronto speech, instead apparently 
previewing Conservative economic themes for the next campaign by 
focusing mostly on Canada's strong economy and Conservative 
tax-cutting, including the next promised one cent cut in the Goods 
and Services Tax (GST).  Flaherty said that Canada's role at the G20 
talks later this month will give him the opportunity to "brand 
Canada as a low-tax country open for investment."  End Summary. 
 
¶2. In a warmly-received November 5 luncheon speech to the Greater 
Toronto Marketing Association (GTMA), federal Finance Minister Jim 
Flaherty listed the Conservative Government's economic 
accomplishments to a sympathetic audience in a likely preview of 
speeches to come in the next election campaign.  He emphasized 
Canada's strong economy and the current government's effort to 
"leave a legacy of tax cutting," saying "I never met a tax cut I 
didn't like."  Flaherty added that in 21 months in office, the 
Conservatives have put in place tax cuts that cumulatively will 
amount to C$190 billion and will bring back the lowest tax levels in 
Canada since the days of Prime Ministers Diefenbaker and Pearson 
(1957-68).  Canada is on the best fiscal footing of any G7 country, 
with surpluses, falling debt, and a soundly financed public pension 
system, Flaherty said. 
 
¶3. Flaherty first highlighted the government's promise to reduce the 
business tax from 22% to 15% by 2012, and then offered a defense of 
the GST cut, which the opposition and some economists have 
criticized as encouraging consumption rather than investment. 
Cutting the GST will benefit the one third of Canadians who do not 
pay income tax, he said three times, and the 2 cent GST cut will 
mean an additional C$940 million for the people of the City of 
Toronto.  The economists are welcome to continue paying it if they 
wish. 
 
¶4. Flaherty also offered a list of the funding transfers the 
Conservatives have made to Toronto and Ontario to fund projects and 
programs including infrastructure, water, public transit, the 
harbor, cultural institutions, labor training, universal child care, 
and others.  He emphasized the Conservatives' shift to per capita 
transfers, which he said the Government agrees with Ontario Premier 
McGuinty are a fairer system, and which Flaherty said would result 
in C$12.8 billion being transferred to Ontarians. 
 
¶5. Flaherty also responded to a few questions on topics of interest 
to the United States: 
 
-- Canada should reduce inter-provincial trade barriers, which are 
higher than trade barriers among EU countries; 
 
-- Moving to a national securities regulator is the way to go, but 
will take time.  The current system means Canadians are not able to 
access some financial products, and a system of 13 regulators in one 
country is an embarrassment. 
 
-- The income trust decision was a "very difficult decision," but 
was necessary to ensure a "level playing field," and to ensure that 
business decisions are made on a sound basis, and not just for tax 
reasons. 
 
-- Canada will need to find a way to limit carbon emissions, and a 
cap and trade system which relies on market mechanisms is a likely 
option to be considered. 
 
-- The Conservatives were able to negotiate a signed tax agreement 
with the United States within 20 months after entering office, after 
the previous government had promised for 10 years to do it, but 
never did so. 
 
NAY