07UNVIEVIENNA710
IAEA/BOG/IRAN: BOARD STATEMENTS INCREASE PRESSURE
Fri Nov 23 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UNVIE
VZCZCXRO4178
OO RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDIR RUEHKUK
DE RUEHUNV #0710/01 3271914
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 231914Z NOV 07
FM USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7187
INFO RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHII/VIENNA IAEA POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS PRIORITY 0038
RUEHJA/AMEMBASSY JAKARTA PRIORITY 0046
RUEHTRO/AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI PRIORITY 0021
RUEHWL/AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON PRIORITY 0091UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 UNVIE VIENNA 000710 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR IO, ISN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IAEA KNPPIS AORC IR
SUBJECT: IAEA/BOG/IRAN: BOARD STATEMENTS INCREASE PRESSURE 
ON IRAN 
 
REF: A) UNVIE 531 B) STATE 159402 
 
UNVIE VIEN 00000710  001.2 OF 008 
 
 
 ¶1. (SBU) Summary:  While Iran tried to emphasize positive 
progress at the November 22-23 Board of Governor's meeting, 
most members expressed concern over the DG's report and 
called on Iran to rectify the situation.  Even though DG 
ElBaradei's opening statement to the Board was slightly more 
positive than his November 15 report in noting "good 
progress" on the work plan, the vast majority of Board 
members, including Russia and China, and the DG himself, 
called on Iran to implement the Additional Protocol (27 
members) and legally required UNSC confidence building 
measures to include suspension of uranium enrichment (28 
members).  Most of the national statements balanced a greater 
or lesser degree of Iran's progress on P1/P2 issues with the 
need for Iran's proactive cooperation and transparency, and 
most noted concern about the diminishing knowledge of current 
activities.  Russia gave an unhelpful "positive assessment" 
of the progress to date but underlined the lack of any 
economic rationale for indigenous development of the fuel 
cycle, while China urged Iran to demonstrate "flexibility" on 
suspension.  NAM members paid homage to NAM principals, but a 
large number finished the ritual defense of NPT rights with 
"in accordance with legal obligations."  Ghana, Ecuador and 
Iraq were particularly helpful in this regard. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary cont: The NAM statement hewed to the 
September 2006 Summit declaration and welcomed substantive 
progress.  Perhaps reflecting dismay at ElBaradei's September 
walkout, (ref a) the EU statement was notably more positive 
on the IAEA role than previously.  EU, EU-3 and other 
like-minded interventions were in line with the U.S. 
statement, with EU/EU-3, Australia, Canada, and Japan (a 
total of 14 Board members) noting the potential for "further 
appropriate measures" under UNSCR 1747 (i.e. a third 
sanctions resolution).  Ecuador and Chile also gave strong 
statements.  A few countries asked the DG for an update on 
work plan implementation before the March Board, but others, 
notably South Africa, expressed reservations about 
"artificial deadlines."  Argentina and Pakistan gave weak 
statements in the context of the robust calls on Iran to come 
into compliance.  India took a dig at Islamabad, asking for a 
more thorough expose of the proliferation network, but was 
notably weak on Iran.  In all, 32 of 35 Board members either 
spoke or were represented by the EU statement; only Saudi 
Arabia, Ethiopia and Nigeria were silent.  Eight non-Board 
members -- Iran, Egypt, Venezuela, Cuba, Indonesia, Libya and 
New Zealand, Israel -- spoke, with New Zealand supporting the 
US position and Cuba railing against unilateralism and 
hegemony.  Egypt and Libya took the opportunity to bring up 
Israel's non-NPT status, causing Israel to respond.  Iran 
attempted to de-legitimize the UNSCR by citing the IAEA 
statute on referrals.  It blamed its woes on the United 
States and a small number of other countries for politicizing 
the IAEA's technical mission.   End Summary. 
 
ElBaradei More Positive 
----------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) ElBaradei began by noting the IAEA's inability to 
verify important aspects of Iran's nuclear activities, 
including the nature and scope of enrichment activities and 
the alleged studies and other activities that may have 
military applications.  Putting a more positive spin on the 
work plan than in the November 15 report, he assessed that it 
was "proceeding according to schedule" and mentioned 
"progress" three times, including "good progress" on past 
P1/P2 issues, though the Agency would continue to verify the 
completeness of Iran's declarations and investigate remaining 
outstanding issues, particularly uranium contamination and 
alleged studies over the "next several weeks."  He reported 
that the Agency "is continuing to work on arrangements to 
make copies of the alleged studies available to Iran." 
Stepping back from the November 15 report's assessment of 
"reactive" cooperation, the DG noted "an increased level" of 
cooperation by Iran but urged Iran to be "more" proactive. 
As in the report, the DG underlined the Agency's diminishing 
knowledge of current programs and the need for Iran to 
implement "without delay" the AP and transparency measures, 
to provide any credible assurance as to the absence of 
undeclared activities, particularly R&D, procurement, and 
manufacturing of centrifuges.  ElBaradei also repeated his 
urging of Iran to implement UNSC confidence building 
 
UNVIE VIEN 00000710  002.2 OF 008 
 
 
measures, including suspension, to facilitate the return to 
negotiations. 
 
 
Russia and China 
---------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Russia was both unhelpful in observing that the 
Agency's efforts on the work plan deserve a "positive 
assessment" and helpful in underlining the lack of any 
economic rationale for Iran's development of fuel cycle 
technologies.  Governor Berdennikov saw a "positive trend" 
emerging, given Iran's cooperation on the work plan "ahead of 
schedule", and cited (as did many others) the consistency of 
Iran's declarations on past P1/P2 with the Agency's findings; 
and its provision of the U-metal document.  Russia backed the 
DG's call for implementation of the AP and compliance with 
UNSC/Board requirements on suspension.  Berdennikov mentioned 
the Angarsk proposal for assured supply of nuclear fuel and, 
given the lack of an economic rationale for indigenous fuel 
production, urged Iran to examine its options and make a 
"balanced, logical" decision. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The Chinese were also sanguine in assessing "some" 
early progress and cooperation on the work plan.  At the same 
time, China called for implementation of Board and UNSC 
resolutions, and put the onus on Iran to show not only 
proactive cooperation but "flexibility" on suspension to 
create the conditions for negotiations.  Ambassador Tang 
noted that FM Li had visited Tehran to push for such 
cooperation.  China supported the EU-Iran dialogue and called 
for patience, diplomacy and flexibility on the part of all 
parties.  Predictably, neither Russia nor China addressed 
further UNSC actions. 
 
EU and Like-Minded 
------------------ 
 
¶6. (SBU) The French delivered the separate EU-3 statement, 
which iterated four years of EU and IAEA efforts; and noted 
the double freeze proposal and Iran's failure to make any 
headway with Solana.  Ambassador Deniau observed that the DG 
had demanded a full confession but Iran had only given 
reactive cooperation.  While the statement noted some steps 
in the right direction, the "next few weeks" should be a 
deadline to finalize the work plan.  Deniau noted concerns 
with past Libya/AQ Khan network connections and about present 
issues such as next generation centrifuges.  The EU-3 
underlined Iran's violation of unanimous UNSCRs by going from 
0 to 3000 centrifuges since last year, and noted that 3000 
centrifuges are enough to produce enough fissile material for 
a weapon in about a year.  Concerned about diminishing 
knowledge, the EU-3 called for immediate implementation of 
the AP and Code 3.1.  The EU3 supported a negotiated solution 
but would also pursue EU sanctions. 
 
¶7. (SBU) The EU statement included a bow, reportedly at the 
insistence of Italy and Spain, to "welcoming progress" as 
described in the DG's report on the consistency of P1/P2 
findings and the U-metal document.  The statement noted 
concerns about remaining issues with a military dimension and 
otherwise included all the right elements:  Iran's reactive 
cooperation, diminishing knowledge absent the AP, no 
unilateral modification of Code 3.1, non-compliance with UNSC 
requirements for suspension (including on R&D activities), 
"further appropriate measures" under UNSCRs, and support for 
the UNSC  process, and reiteration of the June 2006 offer. 
All EU members, candidates, and affiliated states associated 
themselves with this statement; only Albania gave an 
additional national statement.  Albania's helpful 
intervention noted that building confidence went beyond past 
issues, underlined the AP and suspension per unanimous 
UNSCRs, and called for Iran's "full, unreserved, and 
continued proactive cooperation." 
 
¶8. (SBU) After encouragement by Mission and Embassy Bern to 
be more forthright in their statement, the Swiss toughened up 
their statement. Switzerland noted the need for Iran to 
clarify both past and present activities.  The Swiss welcomed 
the Agency's efforts but noted the failure to close P1/P2, 
and asked the Secretariat to provide deadlines for work plan 
remaining issues.  Concerned about diminishing knowledge, 
Switzerland also called upon Iran to implement the AP as well 
 
UNVIE VIEN 00000710  003.2 OF 008 
 
 
as other required confidence building measures. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Like-minded countries Canada, Australia, Japan and 
New Zealand (under rule 50) made strong statements.  Canada 
highlighted the credibility deficit after two decades of 
undeclared activities and the need for confidence building 
measures well beyond the work plan.   While acknowledging 
some progress on the latter, Canada expressed deep concern 
with Iran's grudging and reactive cooperation and the 
Agency's diminishing knowledge; and was awaiting results on 
issues outstanding for years.  Noting the September P5 1 
statement to move forward with a third resolution, Canada 
urged compliance with UNSCRs and AP implementation.  It asked 
the DG to continue to report on Iran as a special 
verification case. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Australia did not believe Iran had made a strategic 
shift, and recalled Iran's unfulfilled promises of full 
cooperation in 2003.  The Australian statement noted several 
unresolved work plan issues, including P1/P2, highlighted 
serious concerns about military involvement, and concluded 
that Iran had not passed the DG's litmus test.  Noting issues 
to be addressed in the next few weeks, Australia requested 
that the DG inform the Board in the months before the March 
BOG session.  For its part, Japan called for proactive 
cooperation and noted that cooperation on the work plan was 
not sufficient.  Both Australia and Japan called upon Iran to 
implement the AP, Code 3.1 and, urging suspension, condemned 
its violation of Chapter VII UNSCRs.  They both underlined 
"further appropriate measures" called for in UNSCR 1747. 
Non-Board member New Zealand also took the floor expressing 
deep concern about the Agency's diminishing knowledge, Iran's 
failure to implement the AP and to comply with UNSCRs, but 
stopped short of calling for a third resolution. 
 
 
NAM, Fellow Travelers, Latin Americans 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Delivering the NAM statement, Cuba gave a long 
verbatim recitation of the 2006 Havana NAM Summit 
declaration.  The NAM predictably welcomed "substantive 
progress" in the work plan, including the consistency of 
P1-P2 findings, Iran's provision of the U-metal document, 
timely and sufficient access, and other positive aspects of 
the DG's report.  The statement called for proactive 
cooperation by Iran and warned against any undue pressure on 
the IAEA or interference in the verification process.   Cuba 
went further in its national statement under rule 50 noting 
Iran is providing cooperation beyond what is required, and 
that the majority of outstanding issues have been clarified. 
Cuba said the Board should not impose artificial deadlines 
and had approved the work plan's sequential approach.  Cuba 
characterized suspension as a voluntary effort to build 
confidence and should not a precondition, and called for the 
return of the Iran file to the Agency.  Cuba concluded by 
condemning U.S. hegemony, threats of sanctions and 
saber-rattling.  In the same vein, Venezuela expressed 
concern that the UNSC had taken over the IAEA's mandate, 
commended Iran's cooperation and opposed sanctions. 
 
¶12. (SBU) UNSC Members: South Africa gave a more balanced 
assessment while highlighting positive aspects of the report. 
 Governor Minty encouraged intensification of Iranian 
cooperation and noted the need to build confidence in its 
present activities and implement the AP.  South Africa 
supported a double time out and "was aware of" the UNSCRs. 
South Africa saw the following weeks as a last opportunity 
and called upon Iran to resolve outstanding issues without 
delay but opposed the imposition of artificial deadlines. 
Encouraged by progress in the work plan, Indonesia (under 
rule 50) believed Iran should be given the opportunity to 
continue cooperation.  Indonesia called upon Iran to 
undertake additional confidence building measures, including 
the AP, but made no mention of UNSCRs.   While associating 
itself with the NAM, Ghana was encouraged by progress on the 
work plan and gave credence to Iranian negotiator Jalili's 
assurances that the program was peaceful, though it noted the 
Agency's diminishing knowledge.  Ghana affirmed NPT rights 
but called for fulfillment of legal obligations under UNSC 
and Board resolutions to avoid the imposition of punitive 
measures on a fellow NAM country. 
 
 
UNVIE VIEN 00000710  004.2 OF 008 
 
 
¶13. (SBU) Other NAM members also gave mixed assessments.  The 
Philippines and Thailand highlighted some positive 
developments in the work plan but Thailand noted reactive 
cooperation and diminishing knowledge.  Both the Philippines 
and Thailand called for compliance with Board and UNSC 
resolutions. 
 
¶14. (SBU) India and Pakistan were weak.  Pakistan said the DG 
should be allowed to implement the work plan without 
artificial deadlines.  India saw the DG's report as a 
"hopeful account of progress" though it noted that Iran must 
address concerns in key paragraphs of the report. India took 
the opportunity to highlight the report's insights on the 
uninterrupted operations of the AQ Khan network in recent 
years and to call for more scrutiny of this network. 
 
¶15. (SBU) Latin America: Chile, Ecuador and Argentina called 
for compliance with legally binding UNSC and Board 
resolutions.  Ecuador qualified affirmation of NPT rights 
with legal obligations.   Argentina and Ecuador acknowledged 
progress in the work plan while calling for proactive 
cooperation; Ecuador also called for more time.  Argentina's 
statement was relatively tepid while Chile was strongest in 
noting that work plan implementation was insufficient to 
build confidence, expecting more significant progress, and 
expressed concern about diminishing knowledge.  Brazil, 
Mexico and Bolivia gave short statements and made no mention 
of UNSCRs but Mexico referred to the Board's request for 
suspension and the AP. 
 
 
Arab Delegations 
---------------- 
 
¶16. (SBU) Morocco, Algeria, Iraq, Libya, and Egypt all made 
statements calling for additional cooperation by Iran, but 
also praised Iran's cooperation thus far.   Morocco's 
statement was balanced by first emphasizing satisfaction with 
the work plan progress and then encouraging Iran to promote 
the necessary conditions for a peaceful resolution by 
implementing all confidence-building measures called for by 
the UNSC.  Algeria was more forward-leaning in commending 
Iranian cooperation and the work plan, which it said had 
achieved concrete results on a number of issues, and then 
called for Iran to continue this positive trend on the three 
remaining outstanding issues.  Iraq's statement expressed 
full support for the NAM statement, noting positive 
cooperation and the need for more time to make conclusions. 
Iraq acknowledged NPT rights but urged Iran to comply with 
Board and other resolutions of international legitimacy and 
voluntarily implement the Additional Protocol. 
 
¶17. (SBU) Non-board member Libya focused largely on the right 
to the peaceful uses of nuclear technology (mentioning it at 
least five times) and reiterated the IAEA's role as the sole 
competent authority on these issues.  Noting tensions in the 
Middle East, Libya called for the removal of all WMD in the 
region and affirmed that dialogue should replace threats and 
sanctions.  Egypt, also not a board member, welcomed progress 
made by the work plan and noted the dangers of political 
interventions by certain parties.  Egypt called for a nuclear 
weapons free zone in the Middle-East and then condemned 
Israel for its criticism in the press of the DG.  Prompted by 
Egypt's criticism, Israel intervened by first noting Iran's 
many violations of the NPT, its Safeguards Agreement, and 
UNSCRs.  Israel then responded to Egypt's comments by quoting 
a recent GOI statement on the IAEA, which was not 
specifically disparaging of the DG as had been mentioned by 
"certain non-Board members picking up on media headings." 
 
 
Iran's Riposte 
--------------- 
 
¶18. (SBU) Iran took the opportunity to highlight how its 
cooperation with the IAEA, especially with regard to the work 
plan, has gone even beyond its legal obligations.  Iran 
reiterated several times that the outstanding issues of 
plutonium, uranium metal document-emphasizing the provision 
was well in advance of the timeline set out in the work 
plan-and past P1/P2 centrifuge issues are all now "closed." 
It then went on to repeatedly argue how the nuclear issue's 
referral to the UN Security Council and the following 
 
UNVIE VIEN 00000710  005.2 OF 008 
 
 
resolutions, including suspension, had no "legal and 
technical basis," particularly since the original reasons for 
the referral -- source forcontamination at Natanz and past 
P1/P2issues -- had now been closed.  Iran also stressed that 
it is voluntarily dealing with present issues such as the 
Safeguards Approach and Facility Attachment for Natanz, 
despite its original agreement made to deal only with past 
issues.  Irn noted that the "political motivations" of the 
western countries, specifically the US, has created a 
deadlock, and warned, once again, that any development 
outside the framework of the IAEA would have a negative 
impact on the current constructive process. 
 
¶19. (SBU) In addition to its prepared national statement, 
Iran decided to address some of the comments made by other 
member states during the Board.  Iran remarked that on the 
eve of every Board when there has been a "great 
break-trough" between Iran and the IAEA, the US raises 
baseless allegations, and France, the UK and Australia "put 
fuel to increase the flame." Iran described how its agreement 
with the EU3 on suspension had originally only included 
enrichment, but then morphed to include conversion, research 
and development, and manufacturing of centrifuge omponents. 
Iran then realized that there was a hidden agenda -- a UN 
Security Council referral to impose sanctions and punitive 
measures.  So, Iran had no choce but to stop suspension and 
voluntary implementation of the Additional Protocol, which 
was not legally binding anyway.  Iran also pointed out that 
its cooperation with the IAEA has been proactive, as was 
noted by the DG in his opening statement when he called for 
more proactive cooperation.  There had been a 
misunderstanding with the word reactive because the DG cannot 
call for more proactive cooperation if Iran already had not 
been proactive to begin with.  Iran claimed the reason the DG 
used the word "reactive" was that the work plan calls for the 
IAEA to ask questions and Iran to provide answers, thus the 
process is necessarily reactive. Iran ended by wishing 
everyone a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year. 
 
Chair's Summary 
--------------- 
 
¶20. (SBU) The Board noted with appreciation the DG's report 
on Iran and commended the DG and the Secretariat for its 
impartial and professional efforts.  The Chairman noted that 
several members recalled the work plan as a significant step 
forward and noted Iran needs to address all issues in a full 
and timely manner, especially the ones that have yet to be 
resolved that include military applications.  Several members 
noted with satisfaction Iran's implementation of the work 
plan thus far, including the IAEA's findings of Iran's past 
P1/P2 centrifuge issues to be consistent with its 
information, and Iran's provision of access to people and 
documents in a timely manner.  Several members expressed 
regret that Iran's cooperation has been reactive and called 
for Iran's active and full transparency and to provide these 
assurances in the next few weeks.   Several members had 
serious concerns that Iran failed to comply with UNSC 
resolutions, and called on Iran to suspend nuclear-related 
activities, implement the Additional Protocol, and reverse 
its decision to unilaterally suspend Code 3.1.  Several 
members expressed concern that the IAEA's knowledge on 
current activities is diminishing, but welcomed the 
completion of the Facility Attachment for Natanz.  The Chair 
also noted that several members differentiated between Iran's 
voluntary and legal binding measures and stated that the IAEA 
has the sole competent authority for verification and 
rejected undue pressure and interference from third parties. 
The Chair noted the offer presented to Iran in June 2006 by 
the six countries and encouraged a peaceful negotiated 
solution to this issue. 
 
 
U.S. Statement 
-------------- 
 
¶21. (SBU) Begin Text: 
 
Mr. Chairman, 
 
The United States Government once again commends the IAEA 
Secretariat for its thorough and professional efforts to 
 
SIPDIS 
execute the IAEA's safeguards mandate in Iran, to verify 
 
UNVIE VIEN 00000710  006.2 OF 008 
 
 
whether Iran has ended its noncompliance with its Safeguards 
Agreement and Subsidiary Arrangements, to verify whether Iran 
has stopped violating legally-binding resolutions of the 
United Nations Security Council, and to clarify the many 
questions that remain concerning the scope and nature of 
Iran's nuclear program. 
 
Mr. Chairman, 
 
The UN Security Council, acting unanimously, has twice 
adopted resolutions under Chapter VII, Article 41 of the UN 
Charter imposing sanctions intended to persuade Iran to 
comply with its international nuclear obligations, cooperate 
with IAEA verification efforts, and enter into constructive 
negotiations with the EU-3, the United States, Russia and 
China in the context of the June 2006 offer. 
 
At the last meeting of this Board, the Secretariat presented 
us with a plan to address Iran's outstanding verification 
issues, in what appeared to be an attempt to comply with one 
of the Security Council's demands.  I joined many delegations 
at that time in expressing both hope and skepticism.   We 
hoped that this would mark a turning point in Iran's 
relationship with the Agency, and that Iran's leadership 
would make the strategic decision to engage proactively with 
the IAEA in the Agency's execution of its safeguards mandate 
and beyond, as necessary, to verify the exclusively peaceful 
nature of Iran's nuclear program. 
 
We were skeptical because we remember how many times Iran has 
pledged to provide the IAEA with the full, necessary 
transparency and cooperation, pledges that were invariably 
timed to prevent international sanctions, pledges that were 
invariably left unfulfilled.  I will not recount the full 
litany of Iran's disregard for its international legal 
obligations and the concerns of the international community. 
 But I will recall that exactly four years ago, in November 
2003, the Board's resolution acknowledged the stated 
intentions of the President of Iran's Atomic Energy Agency on 
behalf of Iran to "provide a full picture of its nuclear 
activities,"  and his affirmation of Iran's "decision to 
implement a policy of cooperation and full transparency." 
Yet, less than a year later, the Board was faced with a 
report by the Director General indicating Iran's refusal to 
answer all of its questions and fully cooperate with the 
Agency's investigation. 
 
We have seen this before:  Promises of full cooperation under 
international pressure.  Selective cooperation and 
backsliding when the pressure comes off. 
 
Nevertheless, when we last met, we once more expressed hope 
that Iran would provide the IAEA the full transparency 
necessary to bring it into compliance with its safeguards 
obligations and to begin to restore international confidence 
in the exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear program. 
 
Mr. Chairman, 
 
I regret to say that the Board can only be disappointed in 
Iran's incomplete cooperation.   The Director General's 
report of 15 November 2007 notes that while some cooperation 
has been provided and that some clarifications have been 
made, several areas remain unresolved and Iran's overall 
cooperation has been selective.  Specific examples include: 
 
-- Iran's failure to provide access to or information on 
Iran's work with advanced centrifuge designs; 
 
-- The lack of closure of the issues associated with Iran's 
Physics Research Center (PHRC) at Lavizan; 
 
-- The IAEA's inability to confirm Iran's version of events 
with regard to the "1993 offer" of additional assistance with 
its centrifuge pursuits; and, 
 
-- Iran's refusal to acknowledge its continuing obligation to 
provide early declaration of any intent to construct new 
nuclear facilities or modify existing ones, as is required by 
Code 3.1 of the Subsidiary Arrangement to its Safeguards 
Agreement.  This has direct relevance to the concern that 
Iran may seek to develop new facilities without adequate and 
timely declaration to the Agency. 
 
UNVIE VIEN 00000710  007.2 OF 008 
 
 
 
The Director General reports that Iran has failed to suspend 
its proliferation sensitive nuclear activities, as required 
by the Security Council,  and to implement the Additional 
Protocol.  Despite four years of intensive investigation, and 
the launch of this work plan four months ago,  the IAEA 
remains unable to confirm the absence of undeclared nuclear 
activities in Iran.  Most disturbingly, the IAEA secretariat 
has stated that, as a direct result of Iran's failure to 
implement the Additional Protocol, its knowledge of Iran's 
nuclear program is "diminishing." 
 
Mr. Chairman, 
 
We have always stated that Iran should be judged by its 
actions, not by its words.  The Iranian leadership says it 
wants to clear up the outstanding questions and restore 
confidence in its nuclear program.  We note, however, that a 
government determined to clear up questions about its nuclear 
program would be proactive, not reactive, in providing 
information to the inspectors.  It would provide the 
inspectors immediate access to all its files, to all the 
people involved in the program, and to all the facilities 
which have been engaged.  It would not make distinctions 
between past and present activities. 
 
Instead, Iran's approach to explaining the past has been 
reactive, and the Secretariat's understanding of Iran's 
current program continues to diminish.  The DG remains unable 
to resolve questions regarding the intent of Iran's nuclear 
program, including whether or not it is for exclusively 
peaceful purposes.  In particular, the IAEA remains unable to 
draw any conclusions as to the "original underlying nature of 
parts" of Iran's nuclear program, including its centrifuge 
work.  Moreover, fundamentally, the IAEA is not in a position 
to assure the Board that Iran's declarations are correct and 
complete. 
 
Under international pressure, Iran has shed more light on its 
activities in the 1980s and 1990s, but the Agency knows less 
and less about what it is doing today - other than expanding 
its capacity for uranium enrichment in violation of Security 
Council resolutions.  This does not meet the test of full 
disclosure. 
 
In the report, we see again the promise of future 
transparency "in the next few weeks."  While we respect the 
Secretariat's efforts, and hope Iran will use the next few 
 
SIPDIS 
weeks to demonstrate openness and transparency, we fear that 
the next few weeks will not yield much more from Iran than 
we've seen in the last few months or, for that matter, the 
last five years.   I hope I am wrong about this.   Iran's 
consistent policy of selective cooperation and delay tactics 
suggest, however, that Iran means only to distract the world 
from its continued development in violation of UN Security 
Council resolutions of fissile material production 
capabilities -- from uranium enrichment to the production of 
plutonium. 
 
Mr. Chairman, 
 
In its last resolution on Iran, the UN Security Council 
established its intent to adopt additional measures should 
Iran not comply with its demands.  The P5 1 Foreign Ministers 
subsequently delayed those measures pending November reports 
from both the DG and the EU High Representative.  Unless both 
the DG and Javier Solana's report a "positive outcome" of 
their efforts, the P5 1 Foreign Ministers agreed on 28 
September to bring a third sanctions resolution to a vote in 
the Security Council.  Specifically, Iran needed to implement 
the Additional Protocol, resolve all outstanding issues with 
its centrifuge program, and suspend its 
proliferation-sensitive nuclear activities to avoid such 
action. The DG's report clearly states that Iran has failed 
to meet these conditions. 
 
Mr. Chairman, 
 
The Security Council process is designed to persuade Iran to 
negotiate on the basis of the generous six-country offer of 
June 2006.  This package, which promises Iran significant 
technical assistance, economic advantages, and an end to its 
increasing isolation, remains on the table. 
 
UNVIE VIEN 00000710  008.2 OF 008 
 
 
 
Despite our continued disappointments, we hope that Iran's 
leaders will finally decide to make a full disclosure of 
Iran's past and present nuclear activities.   We join the 
members of the Board in urging Iran to heed the Director 
General's call to implement the Additional Protocol and to 
suspend all enrichment-related activities.  We urge Iran's 
government to take advantage of the opportunity to resolve 
all outstanding issues with the IAEA, to build confidence in 
Iran's nuclear program through suspension, and to enter into 
negotiations toward a political settlement.  Only in this way 
can the interests of the Iranian people be satisfied and the 
serious concerns of the international community be fully 
addressed. 
 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
End Text. 
SCHULTE