07WARSAW2129
GET OUT THE VOTE EFFORTS TARGET PRO-PO YOUNG
Fri Oct 19 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Warsaw
VZCZCXYZ0020
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHWR #2129 2921238
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 191238Z OCT 07
FM AMEMBASSY WARSAW
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5367UNCLAS WARSAW 002129 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PL
SUBJECT: GET OUT THE VOTE EFFORTS TARGET PRO-PO YOUNG 
ADULTS AND STUDENTS 
 
 
¶1. (U) With youth vote possibly delivering the election to 
the opposition Civic Platform (PO), turn out of students in 
this weekend's parliamentary elections will be a crucial 
factor.  Students are more energized this year than in 
previous rounds, particularly in 2005 when many opted to sit 
out.  Blogs, SMS messages and MTV Polska have called on 
students to "get off their *** and vote."  Many expect a 
higher turnout this time.  Thus, there was considerable 
attention paid when over 16,000 students in 33 universities 
and 18 cities across Poland participated in a mock 
legislative election Tuesday.  The mock ballot demonstrated 
PO's domination among students: the party received 60% of 
votes, whereas PiS trailed behind in second place with 13%. 
In some universities, such as the University of Warsaw, PO 
received 70% of votes.  LiD and the Women's Party finished 
third and fourth with 11.8% and 4.1% respectively.  4.1% of 
participating students stated that they recognize the 
importance of voting but didn't believe any party was worth 
supporting. 
 
¶2. (U) In public opinion polls, students and young adults say 
they feel largely disillusioned with the current government 
of Jaroslaw Kaczynski.  They believe it has abused its power, 
attempted to control the public media, and violated personal 
rights.  Even those who supported PiS in the 2005 elections 
and agree with the principles of lustration (vetting 
officials for past cooperation with Communist-era security 
services) and eliminating corruption consider that the 
government's methods for achieving these goals are 
unacceptable.  In 2005, many young people had an indifferent 
attitude towards PO and PiS, seeing little difference between 
them.  In 2007, however, students are more mobilized and say 
they are determined to influence political life. 
 
¶3. (U) There are two groups of youth who say they intend to 
vote for PO.  The first are attracted to PO's 
forward-thinking agenda which focuses on providing 
opportunities for Poland's youth and promoting 
entrepreneurship.  To these young Poles, PiS seems stuck in 
the past, focusing on eradicating remnants of the communist 
period that most of them never experienced or only vaguely 
remember.  The second group tends to have more liberal 
beliefs than those of PO but feel that it is the only party 
with the potential to oust PiS and that their votes for other 
parties, such as LiD, would be wasted. 
 
¶4. (U) Efforts have been made to increase the youth voter 
turnout, including campaigns via text messages, the internet, 
and in the media.  Students tend to study in areas other than 
where they are registered to vote, so the University of 
Warsaw has authorized absence from class until 1pm on the 
Monday following Election Day to allow students to return to 
their home cities to cast their ballot.  The press has also 
published guides instructing voters on how to temporarily 
re-register in new cities.  Although stated youth support for 
PO is substantial, young people have proven less reliable 
when it comes to actually getting to the polls and voting. 
An informal SMS campaign jokingly urges young people to 
"Steal your grandmother's ID card" to prevent her from voting 
(presumably for PiS) on Sunday; but if they are to have an 
impact they also need to get to the polls themselves. 
ASHE