08AITTAIPEI244
MEDIA REACTION: KOSOVO INDEPENDENCE AND TAIWAN
Fri Feb 22 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0013
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0244 0530908
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 220908Z FEB 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8176
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 7856
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 9115UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000244 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: KOSOVO INDEPENDENCE AND TAIWAN 
 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage February 22 on a U.S. Navy cruiser which launched a missile 
Wednesday and successfully destroyed a dying U.S. spy satellite 
carrying toxic fuel; on Taiwan's March presidential poll and the UN 
referenda; and on the island-wide celebrations of the lantern 
festival Thursday.  In terms of editorials and commentaries, a 
column in the pro-independence "Liberty Times" compared Taiwan's bid 
to join the UN with Kosovo's recent declaration of independence. 
The article concluded that, unless Taiwan joins the UN, it will be 
difficult for the island to have a foothold in the international 
community.  An editorial in the pro-independence, English-language 
"Taipei Times" also chimed in, saying that the United States' and 
other countries' willingness to recognize Kosovo in the face of 
fierce opposition from Russia and China "must be particularly 
galling for Taiwan's independence supporters."  End summary. 
 
A) "[Is Taiwan] Not Even as Good as Kosovo?" 
 
The "Free Talks" column in the pro-independence "Liberty Times" 
[circulation: 720,000] wrote (2/22 
 
"... Taiwan's qualifications for independence are much better than 
those of most UN member states.  Kosovo has a population which is 
only one tenth of that of Taiwan's, and its national territory is 
only one third of Taiwan's.  Even though it has yet to join the UN, 
Kosovo was immediately acknowledged by the United States and most EU 
nations once it declared independence.  Sooner or later, it will 
become a UN member.  Given Kosovo's case, it will be difficult for 
Taiwan to have a foothold in the international community unless it 
joins the UN.  Although it may be a tough task for Taiwan to become 
a UN member, the move to cast a referendum ballot to show support 
for Taiwan's UN membership will be able to convey the Taiwan 
people's desire [to the international community].  Unless the Blue 
camp has some secretive agenda in mind, how difficult can it be for 
it to support Taiwan's UN referenda?" 
 
B) "One Rule for Kosovo, One for Taiwan" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (2/21): 
 
"... The fact that nations such as the US and the UK are willing to 
recognize Kosovo in the face of fierce opposition from Russia and 
China must be particularly galling for Taiwan's independence 
supporters, but apart from a few obvious parallels that can be 
drawn, the similarities between Kosovo and Taiwan end there.  The 
main difference is that an overwhelming majority of the population 
in Kosovo -- the 90 percent who are ethnic Albanians -- support 
independence, while in Taiwan support for independence remains to 
the side of mainstream public opinion and is even divided among 
ethnic groups. ... 
 
"Rice cited the ethnic cleansing and 'crimes against civilians' that 
took part during the breakup of the former Yugoslavia as proof of 
Kosovo's unique status.  The problem for Taiwan is that it 
experienced a form of ethnic cleansing -- the 228 Incident and White 
Terror ethnic discrimination -- at a time when such events were 
better hidden from the scrutiny of the world press. Add to that the 
geopolitical situation in the region, which meant that any support 
for a nascent independence movement was ignored. ...  The problem is 
that UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon must now decide whether to 
hand complete control of Kosovo over to NATO, a decision that can 
only be made by the UN Security Council -- where China and Russia 
have veto powers.  Until that decision is made, Kosovo remains in 
the hands of UN peacekeepers and at the mercy of China, meaning that 
in all likelihood Taiwan will end up empty-handed and 
independence-minded Taiwanese will once again have to sit on the 
sidelines jealously watching a newly formed nation celebrate its 
freedom." 
 
YOUNG