08AITTAIPEI535
MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS
Thu Apr 17 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0056
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0535 1080843
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 170843Z APR 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8711
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 8173
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 9409UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000535 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS 
 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
April 17 news coverage on recent interaction between the two sides 
of the Taiwan Strait; on the DPP's selection of its new chairman; on 
speculation over possible personnel arrangements for the new Ma 
Ying-jeou administration; and on a recent annual military drill 
involving Taiwan leaders.  Almost all papers on their inside pages 
reported on a Chinese National Judicial Examination Center 
announcement Wednesday that people from Taiwan are now allowed to 
take China's bar exam and to practice law in China.  In terms of 
editorials and commentaries, an editorial in the conservative, 
pro-unification, English-language "China Post" cautioned the 
incoming Ma administration to be cautious in negotiating for peace 
with Beijing.  An editorial in the pro-independence "Taiwan News" 
also warned that the KMT's 'open door' policy to China is both 
dangerous and naive.  End summary. 
 
A) "Toward Greater Cross-Strait Peace" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (4/17): 
 
 "... Despite the seemingly rosy prospects, there are still pitfalls 
and uncertainties.  Although more contacts with the mainland will 
help lower tension in the Taiwan Strait, Beijing's tendency to 
regard the island as a province of the People's Republic of China 
with no sovereignty of its own must be taken into consideration when 
the Ma administration proceeds with its plans to promote peace 
across the Strait. ... 
 
"The ROC on Taiwan is a sovereign state, whose birth came long 
before the founding of the PRC.  Taiwan has never been ruled by the 
Beijing regime.  Until and unless the rulers of the mainland accept 
this fact, it will be extremely hard for the two sides to enter into 
a pact that can safely and effectively serve as the basis for 
exchanges.  The administration that will be formed under Ma must be 
cautious in dealing with the Beijing regime.  Pursuing rapprochement 
is the hope of most Taiwan residents, but the island's interests and 
security must come first in negotiating for peace with the 
mainland." 
 
B) "KMT 'Open Door' Risks Our Future" 
 
The pro-independence "Taiwan News" [circulation: 20,000] 
editorialized (4/27): 
 
"The participation by Kuomintang vice president-elect Vincent Siew 
in last weekend's Boao Forum For Asia, during which he met People's 
Republic of China State Chairman Hu Jintao and other PRC official 
and business heavyweights, is already being touted as a great boost 
to Taiwan's allegedly 'stagnant' economy and stock market. ... 
These expectations, which are now being deliberately fanned to spur 
a speculative 'bubble' market, are likely to fall flat for the most 
of Taiwan's 23 million citizens. 
 
"In immediate terms, it is unrealistic to expect a dramatic boost 
from the Hu - Siew meeting since the PRC state chairman did not 
provide any concrete replies to the 'four expectations' proposed by 
the KMT vice president-elect, including Beijing's approval of direct 
chartered air links, permission for PRC tourists to visit Taiwan and 
the rapid restoration of semi-official talks.  In the longer-run, 
Taiwan's long-term economic health and competitiveness may not be as 
closely related to the alleged deadlock in cross-strait relations as 
KMT leaders and pro-KMT media pundits have led our people to 
believe. ... 
 
"Besides fostering a speculative 'bubble' market, excessive economic 
integration with the PRC will risk the disruption of Taiwan's 
genuine 'wellspring' of economic progress as suppliers of advanced 
technology from United States, Japan and Europe become more worried 
over the possible erosion of protection for intellectual property 
rights and the possible migration of advanced 'dual use' (civilian 
and military) technology to PRC state firms.  Siew's blithe 
assumption that it is possible to 'separate politics from economics' 
is not only dangerously naive but will serve as a cover for the 
restoration of the power of the KMT political elite and their 
associated economic and business vested interests who stand to gain 
through accelerating economic integration with the PRC.  Without a 
strong regulatory framework to protect our core technology and block 
the importation of PRC management methods and labor imports, Taiwan 
will not only lose its political independence and economic autonomy 
but will also lose the internal dynamism that is essential for our 
continued economic progress and prosperity." 
 
YOUNG