08AITTAIPEI430
MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION RESULTS
Tue Mar 25 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0004
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0430/01 0850829
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 250829Z MAR 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8535
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 8069
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 9324UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000430 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION RESULTS 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies continued to 
focus their March 25 news coverage on the aftermath of Taiwan's 
presidential election last Saturday, including the soaring Taiwan 
stock index and NT dollar appreciation Monday, the new cabinet to be 
formed by president-elect Ma Ying-jeou, and the personnel reshuffle 
of the defeated DPP.  All papers also carried reports on AIT Taipei 
Director Stephen Young's courtesy call to Ma Monday, in which Ma 
expressed hope to visit the United States before his inauguration on 
May 20, and Young replied that the decision has to be made by 
Washington. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a column in the 
mass-circulation "Apple Daily" discussed Ma's election and his 
attempt to mend the souring relations between Taiwan and the United 
States.  An editorial in the conservative, pro-unification, 
English-language "China Post" discussed the development of 
cross-Strait relations after Ma's election.  The article said 
"Beijing should take creative approaches to demonstrate that Ma's 
initiative towards the mainland pays off for Taiwan."  An editorial 
in the pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" comforted 
the pro-Green voters that the DPP's defeat in last Saturday's 
presidential election is not the end of the world.  The article said 
the Taiwan people will be watching Ma's performance closely.  An 
editorial in the pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News," 
on the other hand, called on the DPP to return to grassroots by 
"reaffirming its core values of democracy and social justice."   End 
summary. 
 
A) "Sweet Revenge" 
 
Columnist Antonio Chiang wrote in his column in the mass-circulation 
"Apple Daily" [circulation: 520,000] (3/25): 
 
"... When A-bian was elected in 2004, the United States was really 
slow in sending a congratulatory message to him; [Washington] 
subsequently sent out its letter in the name of the press secretary 
of the White House after Taipei had strived to obtain it.  At that 
time the congratulatory letter [from Washington] was almost as 
important as the certification from [Taiwan's Central Election 
Commission] confirming Chen's election victory, so A-bian's anxiety 
in waiting for [Washington's] congratulatory message was quite 
understandable.  Both the minister of foreign affairs and Taiwan's 
representative to the United States resigned in succession at that 
time because of this.  Come to think of it, they must feel indignant 
right now. 
 
"For the United States' allies, a congratulatory statement signed by 
[U.S. President George W.] Bush is normal practice.  But during 
A-bian's rule over the past eight years, Taiwan-U.S. relations have 
suffered great damage.  The normal practice for other countries thus 
came as a surprise for Taiwan.  With Bush's congratulatory statement 
at hand, Ma Ying-jeou emphasized that [Taiwan] will stride toward 
becoming a beacon of democracy, as referred to by Bush.  Ma's 
obvious pleasure made people feel moved and sad at the same time. 
... 
 
"A-bian has abused Bush's trust in Taiwan, putting Taipei-Washington 
relations in a distorted state and consequently turning himself into 
a person of very poor credit.  His failure in [Taiwan's] relations 
toward the United States has resulted in Taiwan's deteriorating 
state of isolation and has done a severe damage to Taiwan's 
interests.  Ma's election is expected to improve the souring 
bilateral relations rapidly, but for the [improvement of] 
cross-Strait relations, it will not be that easy. ..." 
 
B) "Ball Is in Beijing's Court" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (3/25): 
 
"... Ma told visiting foreign reporters that Taiwan wants a 'mutual 
non-denial' agreement with Beijing, vowing to lay the foundations of 
a 'century of peace and prosperity' for the island.  His priorities 
are to maintain the status quo with the mainland and rebuild the 
island's tattered economy.' ...  Beijing should take creative 
approaches to demonstrate that Ma's initiative towards the mainland 
pays off for Taiwan.  Otherwise there isn't going to be the domestic 
political support that is necessary for continuing to move 
forward." 
 
C) "Congratulations -- We'll Be Watching" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (3/25): 
 
"... Not for many years will the voice of the people have been as 
important as it will be when Ma assumes the presidency on May 20. 
Now that the legislative and the executive branches are under KMT 
control, the onus will be on them to deliver on the promises of 
 
accountable leadership they made during the campaign.  The KMT 
victory does not mean, as some have suggested, that the devil 
incarnate will step into office.  In fact, in the past months Ma has 
increasingly sounded like a leader for Taiwanese and his party has 
some good people in it who can be counted on to put the interest of 
the nation first.  These people must be encouraged. 
 
"Simultaneously, as Ma steps onto the international scene, he must 
be brought back into line if he is ever seen to be departing from 
his promises to serve the interests of Taiwan, and every effort must 
be made to ensure that the rotten elements in the KMT -- who are 
easily identifiable -- do not manipulate their victory to serve 
interests other than those of Taiwan.  Saturday's result was not a 
return to the authoritarian era, because democracy is now part of 
the nation's fabric -- and Ma must learn to navigate that 
environment.  But democracy implies work.  Hard work.  And it 
imposes responsibilities that go far beyond showing up at the voting 
station on election day.  Ma won, so let's give him a chance to 
prove himself.  But we'll be watching -- all of us." 
 
D) "DPP Must Return to Grassroots" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (3/25): 
 
"... The March 22 results do not imply a blanket endorsement of the 
KMT, but signifies a 'vote of no confidence' in the DPP government's 
inadequate but also underappreciated performance.  The DPP must now 
revamp its political strategy and leadership for its future role in 
opposition based on an honest reappraisal of its own performance, 
including achievements and shortcomings and avoid falling prey to 
paralyzing internal recriminations.   The new DPP leadership must 
also carry out a full reassessment of the problems faced by Taiwan's 
politics, society, economy and external relations at a time of 
globalization and the rise of a 'neo-authoritarian' camp led by the 
PRC and now joined by KMT-ruled Taiwan. 
 
"The road back for the party of Taiwan's grassroots democratic 
movement will begin back in the grassroots by reaffirming its core 
values for democracy and social justice. ...  The test of whether 
the DPP has learned its lessons will come with the city and county 
mayoral elections in late 2009. Only if the DPP can win back the 
hope of the Taiwan people in these grassroots polls will there be 
hope for the early resumption of democratic and progressive and 
Taiwan-centric governance in 2012." 
 
YOUNG