08AITTAIPEI337
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS, THE UN REFERENDA
Wed Mar 12 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0337/01 0721038
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 121038Z MAR 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8331
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 7918
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 9174UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000337 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS, THE UN REFERENDA 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage March 12 on KMT's expected announcement on how it will 
handle two UN referenda held along with the presidential election; 
on the presidential election campaigns; and on New York Governor 
Eliot Spitzer's sex scandal.  In terms of editorials and 
commentaries, Mark Stokes, a former U.S. Department of Defense 
official, in the pro-independence English-language "Taipei Times" 
shared his reflections on the recently released U.S. Department of 
Defense report on the PRC's military.  Stokes not only reminded 
Taiwan not to divert attention from other security challenges, but 
also provide some prospects on the U.S.-Taiwan bilateral defense 
relationship.  A commentary in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" 
criticized the KMT's attempt to boycott the UN referenda and the 
U.S.'s alleged suppression of Taiwan's participation in the 
international community.  End summary. 
 
¶2. U.S.-Taiwan Relations 
 
"Taiwan Must Review Security Risks" 
 
Mark Stokes, a former official at the U.S. Department of Defense and 
currently the executive director of The Project 2049 Institute and a 
member of the Taiwan Policy Working Group, opined in the 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] (3/12): 
 
"... the growing PRC military threat suggests that further 
adjustments may be necessary to the US-Taiwan defense relationship, 
in accordance with the Taiwan Relations Act. 
 
"Abrogation of the US-Republic of China Mutual Defense Treaty and 
withdrawal of the US military presence on the island were premised 
upon China's commitment to a peaceful approach to resolving 
differences with Taiwan. 
 
"The most visible demonstration of a peaceful commitment is its 
force posture. Therefore, as the threat to the people of Taiwan and 
their democratically elected leadership grows, so should the depth 
and breadth of US defense and security relations with Taiwan. A 
congressionally mandated policy review group should assess and 
recommend a range of new initiatives that could further assist 
Taiwan in its self-defense and enhance the ability of the US 
military, should it be called upon to do so, to operate with 
Taiwan's defense establishment as ad hoc coalition partners. 
 
"In addition, if Taiwan's formal requests for defense articles and 
services are not being given proper attention, resurrecting the 
annual Arms Sales Talks may be justified. 
 
"Finally, in order to remain aware of other important security 
needs, and in accordance with the Taiwan Relations Act, 
congressionally mandated reporting on Taiwan's economic security is 
worth considering." 
 
¶3. The UN Referenda 
 
"Refusing to Collect the Referenda Ballots is Against the Principle 
of Honesty" 
 
Lee Wen-chung, a former DPP legislator, opined in the 
mass-circulation "Apple Daily" [circulation: 520,000] (3/12): 
 
"The controversy over the DPP's UN referendum and the KMT's UN 
referendum has been unceasing.  Many people reckon that the passage 
of the referenda does not help [Taiwan] to enter the United Nations 
and will instead seriously harm U.S.-Taiwan relations and 
cross-Strait relations.  The failure of the referenda will send 
wrong signals to the international community, which will result in 
enormous harm [to Taiwan].  These arguments have their reasons. 
However, when it is unlikely that the referenda and the presidential 
election can be separated, and the controversy with other 
compromised plans cannot be solved because of time constraints and 
legitimate procedures, some people in the Blue camp once again 
advocate refusing to collect the referenda ballots, which we sternly 
oppose. 
 
"First, the Asia-Pacific order which the U.S. predominates is to 
maintain the stability across the Taiwan Strait by keeping the 
status quo of Taiwan' independent sovereignty and suppress our space 
in participating in the international community. 
 
"This is definitely unfair to Taiwan!  It has significant meaning 
when people voice discontent to the international community and 
demand that Taiwan have an appropriate international personality via 
the passage of a referendum.  Second, the purpose of two presidents 
in the past to come up with "a special state-to-state relationship" 
[Lee Teng-hui] and "one state on each side" [Chen Shui-bian] was to 
echo people's voices at a certain level.  These claims obviously do 
not coincide with the U.S. and China's interests.  Pressure is put 
 
on our administration directly.  Once a referendum passes, sympathy 
will arise extensively in the U.S., Japan and Europe.  Beijing will 
have scruples as well.  All this will provide a new leader [in 
Taiwan] with more strategic room to maneuver when striving for 
international status.  Third, Taiwan internally has divergent 
grounds on issues such as unification and independence, ethnicity, 
and cross-Strait relations.  Joining the UN is one rare issue that 
has a high consensus among people.  Therefore, promoting the issue 
has a significant function of integrating internal consensus. 
 
"If the KMT once again advocates refusing to collect the referenda 
ballots, the direct effect will be the failure of the referenda for 
not passing the threshold.  The serious harm to Taiwan is as 
described above. ..." 
 
YOUNG