08AITTAIPIE1698
MEDIA REACTION: OBAMA'S AIT APPOINTEE, THE DALAI LAMA
Mon Dec 08 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0003
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1698/01 3430720
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 080720Z DEC 08  ZDK
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0515
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 8785
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0243UNCLAS AIT TAIPIE 001698 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: OBAMA'S AIT APPOINTEE, THE DALAI LAMA 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused 
December 6-8 news coverage on the legislature passing a bill to 
distribute consumption vouchers; on the local economy; and on the 
call to amend the Assembly and Parade Law. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, an editorial in the 
conservative, pro-unification, English-language daily "China Post" 
called on United States President-elect Barack Obama to carefully 
select a suitable appointee as the top of the American Institute in 
Taiwan (AIT).  The editorial said no matter who is chosen, that 
person should be someone like former AIT Chairman Richard Bush or 
current AIT Chairman Raymond Burghardt who has rich experience and 
knowledge about the Taiwan Strait and the region.  Papers addressed 
the pros and cons of President Ma Ying-jeou's statement about not 
welcoming a Dalai Lama visit to Taiwan in 2009.  An editorial in the 
mass-circulation "Apple Daily" supported Ma's decision while an 
editorial in the pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" 
said Taiwan should welcome the Dalai Lama to visit Taiwan at any 
time.  The "Taiwan News" editorial further alleged that Ma's decline 
of the Dalai Lama's visit must be China's manipulation behind the 
scene, just as Washington instructed Ma how to behave during Ma's 
August transit in the United States.  End summary 
 
¶3. Obama's AIT Appointee 
 
"Obama Must Be Careful on AIT Appointee" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (12/7): 
 
"... However, we would like to respectfully advise the incoming 
leader of the world's most powerful country that he must take care 
to avoid making the same kinds of mistakes his predecessors did. 
... 
 
"Former President Clinton made a major blunder when he decided to 
appoint fellow Arkansas attorney and old friend James C. Wood, who 
had little experience in international affairs and knew next to 
nothing about the situation in the Taiwan Strait. ... 
 
"In 2001, when the Republican George W. Bush took over from Clinton, 
another major blunder was made.  The AIT chairman was replaced by 
Therese Shaheen, a Florida businesswoman whose only known 
achievement was raising lots of campaign funds for the new 
president. ... 
 
"Eventually, President Bush's administration relieved Shaheen of the 
position and she was replaced by Raymond Burghardt, a career 
diplomat who had previously served as chief of AIT's Taipei office 
and possessed extensive knowledge and experience in the region. 
Like his predecessor Richard Bush, the current AIT chairman has 
brought respectability back to AIT and performed well in his post. 
 
"While we understand that AIT is not at the top of the list when it 
comes to the priorities of the new president-elect, we sincerely 
hope that Senator Barack Obama's advisors will take note of the 
blunders made by predecessors in both parties.  While the AIT 
chairman's post does not normally attract much attention in the rest 
of the world, appointing the wrong person to the position can cause 
serious trouble and have major repercussions. 
 
"We do not have any special recommendations as for which specific 
individual should replace Burghardt at the top of AIT.  If Richard 
Bush might be tapped to reprise his former role, such a move would 
definitely be welcomed here.  Persuading Raymond Burghardt to stay 
in his post would be just as wise of an idea. 
 
"However, we do recommend that no matter who gets chosen for the 
post, that person should be someone like Richard Bush or Raymond 
Burghardt who possesses valuable experience with this region and 
knows about recent developments in the Taiwan Strait." 
 
¶4. The Dalai Lama 
 
A) "The Controversy of the Dalai Lama" 
 
The mass-circulation "Apple Daily" [circulation: 520,000] 
editorialized (12/6): 
 
"... Every country regards the Dalai Lama as a political and 
religious leader, more than just a religionist.  He [the Dalai Lama] 
is a symbol of human rights, the freedom of religion, and Tibet 
under oppression, which no one challenges.  However, today the 
Taiwan voters' election of Ma [Ying-jeou] as President means [that 
Taiwan voters] support Ma's policy on cross-Strait reconciliation. 
Ma's turn-down of the Dalai Lama's visit for the moment is 
reasonable in terms of political logic." 
 
B) "Taiwan Should Welcome Dalai Lama's Visit" 
 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (12/8): 
 
"What is most worrying is the possibility that Beijing told the KMT 
government (perhaps through the Chinese Communist Party-KMT forum) 
to take this position and the Ma administration did not dare to 
challenge this edict. 
 
"This possibility cannot be excluded, especially in the wake of Ma's 
last minute nomination of KMT honorary chairman Lien Chan to 
represent the Taiwan leader at last month's Asia-Pacific Economic 
Cooperation forum summit in Lima, Peru instead of former Control 
Yuan president and ex-foreign minister Frederick Chien, reportedly 
at Beijing's behest. 
 
"This succession of events hints that the People's Republic of China 
authorities can already go through underground channels or other 
paths to tell Ma what he is permitted and not permitted to do, just 
as Washington instructed him how to behave during his August transit 
stops through Los Angeles and San Francisco. ... 
 
"In our view, in the current global situation, any time should be 
'appropriate' for either Ma or Taiwan to receive a visit by the 
Dalai Lama and we urge the KMT government not to interfere with the 
DPP's invitation, which is beneficial for the long - term interests 
of Taiwan's people and the maintenance of our freedom and democracy. 
..." 
 
YOUNG