08ANKARA2025
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Nov 21 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6801
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #2025/01 3261637
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 211637Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8088
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9328
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5064
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3419
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6994
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6847
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3421
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 002025 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 21, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Erdogan: "A New Economic Package Is on the Way" 
Milliyet, Sabah, Hurriyet, Posta, Radikal, Cumhuriyet, Zaman, Yeni 
Safak:  Mainstreams Sabah and Milliyet report that PM Erdogan 
announced yesterday that the government was preparing a new economic 
package to reduce the impact of the global crisis on Turkey's real 
sector.  On his way to India, PM Erdogan told journalists that the 
preparations were underway, but the details would be made public 
after he returned from India.  The package aims helping the small 
and medium scale enterprises in getting credit and preventing the 
dismissal of workers.  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports that PM 
Erdogan called on commercial banks to take careful steps at a time 
of global financial crisis.  Erdogan said "Some banks are calling 
their loans back.  You cannot take such actions at such dire times. 
Everyone must shoulder part of the burden." 
 
Iraq-Turkey-U.S. Set Up Coordination Board against PKK 
Media outlets report the newly-formed Turkey-Iraq-U.S. trilateral 
committee released a declaration that called the PKK a "terror 
organization" that "threatens Iraq's security and Turkey's 
territorial integrity." 
 
Iraqi State Minister for National Dialogue Ekrem al-Hakim, who is in 
Ankara to explain the SOFA agreement between Iraq and the U.S., has 
confirmed reports that Turkey was given guarantees regarding 
cross-border operations against the PKK in northern Iraq. 
Mainstream Sabah reports al-Hakim told the press after meeting PM 
Erdogan and Foreign Minister Ali Babacan that the security deal 
"aims at preventing terror."  He added Kurdish groups had agreed to 
declare the PKK a terrorist organization, and that Iraqi Kurdish 
leaders' views were taken at all stages of talks with the Americans 
over SOFA.  Islamist-oriented Zaman, however, reports al-Hakim said 
he "did not know the content of SOFA," and what the agreement says 
regarding Turkey's possible cross border military operations into 
Iraq after January 1.  Al-Hakim stressed terror organizations would 
not be allowed to use Iraqi territories as a launch pad for attacks 
on neighboring countries. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-Iraq Relationship after SOFA 
 
Ferai Tinc wrote in mainstream Hurriyet:  "With the U.S.-Iraq 
security agreement, the U.S. occupation of Iraq will come to an end 
and a new era will start in Turkey as well.  Improving relations 
with Iraq, America's closest ally in the region and strategic 
partner, will be at the top of Turkey's agenda.  During this 
process, it will be a mistake to address the issue with blinders by 
reducing the process down to opposition against Sincari's 
participation in the meetings or concern over whether Turkish jets 
will be allowed to bomb northern Iraq or not.  According to the 
agreement, Iraq will be able to have strategic meetings with U.S. 
whenever there is an internal or outside threat.  This means the 
U.S. will stay in Iraq even after the withdrawal and the Iraqi 
government will need U.S. support for a long time in order to 
resolve its economic problems.  Whether this agreement will be 
approved by the Iraqi parliament or not, the fact is that a new era 
is starting in Iraq at a time when the violence has not ended and 
internal peace has not been established.  Turkey must cooperate with 
Iraq in every field, including security, should be strengthened." 
 
Erol Manisali in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet: "In 2011, the U.S. 
military occupation in Iraq will end but it will be replaced by 
'civilian occupation.'  The Barzani administration in the north and 
the civilian administration in Baghdad will be under the guidance of 
the U.S., Britain and Israel.  Some among the Sunni, Shiite, Kurdish 
and Turkmen groups may ask for help from the West.  However, Ankara, 
Baghdad and Kurdistan's reins will be held by Washington and the 
Pentagon.  Under this model, attempts to separate southeastern 
Anatolia from Turkey will be intensified.  The EU will add Kurdish 
genocide resolutions on to Armenian genocide resolutions.  Is Turkey 
 
ANKARA 00002025  002 OF 004 
 
 
ready to face this reality?" 
 
U.S. Rejects Erdogan's Mediation Offer 
Media outlets report that the U.S. has rejected PM Erdogan's offer, 
first seen in last week's New York Times, to mediate between the 
U.S. and Iran. Liberal Radikal carries the headline, "U.S.: We 
Already Have Contacts with Iran," and reports, "U.S. State 
Department Spokesman Sean McCormack said there is already a P-5+1 
mechanism in place in order to deal with Iran."  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet reports, "The U.S. Responds to Erdogan's Offer," by 
saying, "Stay Out of Our Dealings with Iran."  Islamist-oriented 
Zaman reports, "The U.S. Rejects Erdogan's Offer to Mediate." 
Mainstream Milliyet carries the headline, "A Frosty Response from 
the U.S. to Erdogan's Suggestion." 
 
Paper: AKP Could be Go-Between in U.S. Talks with Taleban 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports some in Washington believe 
negotiations could be held between Taliban leader Mullah Omar and 
former PM Gulbeddin Hikmetyar in the anticipated "process for 
settlement" in Afghanistan.  Cumhuriyet reports that on November 5, 
The Washington Post said the U.S. and Afghan governments could sit 
at the negotiating table with Hikmetyar in an effort to reduce 
violence in the country.  Turkey's ruling AKP's mediation in such 
talks is highly possible since Hikmetyar was given a warm welcome by 
Tayyip Erdogan, when he was with the Islamist Welfare Party (RP), 
during a visit to Istanbul in 1985.  Former Afghan Interior Minister 
Ali Celali, a lecturer at the U.S. National Defense College, said he 
wouldn't be surprised to see Turkey involved in this process. 
Celali said all positive Turkish contributions would be "welcomed in 
Afghanistan." 
 
A New Climate Between Turkey and Armenia 
Liberal Radikal and Islamist-oriented Zaman report Armenia's 
National Security Council Secretary Artur Bagdasaryan underlined the 
importance of normalization of ties with Turkey.  "We cannot remain 
enemies forever," said Bagdasaryan, adding "normal ties" with Turkey 
would help Armenia's economic development and infrastructure 
modernization.  Meanwhile, Foreign Minister Ali Babacan is expected 
to host his Armenian counterpart Edward Nalbantyan in Istanbul on 
November 24.  "We aim are aiming towards full normalization of ties 
with Armenia.  We have a new climate for settlement.  We need mutual 
forward steps, but the sides must hurry up," emphasized Babacan. 
 
The Pirate Dilemma 
Media outlets continue to feature sensational stories related to 
Somali piracy, including debates surrounding possible international 
military action against the pirates and concerns that piracy is 
already too much a part of Somali society, no matter how unstable of 
a country it is.  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports in "A Pirate 
Confession," that U.S. Pentagon Spokesperson Geoff Morrell said, 
"There is no military solution - stability in Somalia will 
contribute to solving the problem of piracy," and the paper also 
noted, "Russia wants to join NATO and other forces that are making 
plans to use force against the pirates."  Leftist Taraf says "The 
Pentagon is not hopeful that a solution can be found to the pirate 
problem."  In "Russia Wants Land Operations against the Pirates," 
leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports, "Russia is prepared for 
joint military actions" against the pirates, but the Pentagon 
"responded to Russia's suggestion by saying, 'A military solution is 
not going to solve this problem.'"  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, 
"Yesterday in Cairo there was an emergency meeting among Arab 
countries regarding the threat of piracy in the Red Sea," and plans 
were discussed, "to establish an observation center in Cairo that 
could act as an early warning system to warn ships of approaching 
pirates." 
 
Meanwhile, mainstream Sabah reports in "With the Spoils Comes A 
Luxurious Life," that "the town of Eyl benefits from the money the 
pirates make from ransom payments," and one pirate named Yusuf 
explained, "the first thing we do with our money is pay off debts, 
 
ANKARA 00002025  003 OF 004 
 
 
then we purchase imports, and then we invest our money in banks in 
Dubai, Nairobi, and Djibouti." 
 
Editorial Commentary on AFRICOM 
 
Mehmet Yilmaz wrote in Islamist-oriented Zaman:  The new U.S. 
strategy in Africa is AFRICOM.  The U.S. and the EU are leading the 
countries investing in Africa, with other countries like China, 
Russia, Japan, and India just behind them.  China, in particular, 
has made a series of investments in Africa over the last ten years. 
U.S. Assistant Secretary of Defense Eric Edelman recently warned the 
Senate Foreign Relations Committee that China was beginning to pose 
a threat to U.S. interests in Africa.  While the U.S. military 
established AFRICOM in order to 'provide security, promote peace, 
and encourage development,' the Chinese have been using their 'soft 
power' through economic investments in Africa.  However, it appears 
AFRICOM seeks to secure sources of oil in the region and fight 
against terror.  For example, the U.S. last year increased its oil 
imports from the Gulf of Guinea by 20%.  In the last seven years the 
U.S. has used its power in order to fight terrorism, but in the case 
of Africa, they are focusing on diplomacy.  Barack Obama is just the 
right person to carve a new strategy similar to this, but maybe the 
pirate situation is creating new opportunities in the region... 
 
Editorial Commentary on Domestic Politics; Kurdish Problem; Erdogan 
Visits India 
 
Mustafa Unal in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "Many circles see Deniz 
Baykal allowing women in veils into the CHP as a political maneuver 
on the eve of the forthcoming municipal elections.  Why should it be 
disturbing if a party surrenders its rigid ideological stance and 
begins reaching out to the women who wear headscarves and veils? 
The CHP's acceptance of the headscarf is a small step for Turkey, 
but a huge step for the CHP.  You can see this clearly from the 
uneasiness of the ideologues in the CHP.  Baykal should continue to 
move forward and not backpedal." 
 
Cengiz Candar wrote in liberal Radikal:  In order for Turkey to 
tackle the Kurdish problem, it is important for KRG President 
Massoud Barzani to be positive, but more importantly, the Kurds 
themselves need to be willing to seek a solution. 
 
Sami Kohen wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "PM Erdogan's visit to 
India is important because this is the first visit by a Turkish PM 
to India since 2000. A large number of businessmen accompanied PM 
Erdogan to India.  The two countries are willing to realize new 
projects in the fields of energy, technology, and trade.  This visit 
is important from the political angle as well.  This is a new 
approach that falls within the framework of a multi-dimensional 
foreign policy.  India plays an increasingly effective role in world 
politics and the global economy.  Also, India will be an important 
partner for Turkey in its efforts to diversify its foreign 
relations." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- Gendarme private Fevzi Gungor, who was killed in a clash with PKK 
militants in Diyarbakir, was laid to rest yesterday in his hometown 
Bitlis.  It was reported that Fevzi's brother Ferdi joined the PKK 
last year. 
 
- Ahmet Ertak, the pro-Kurdish DTP mayor of Sirnak, was issued a 
15-month prison sentence for 'making PKK propaganda' during an 
interview with the French television station France-24. 
 
- On Friday, Turkey's state-owned TRT television will launch 
webpages in 30 different languages.  Kurdish is not included among 
the languages in TRT's new web service. 
 
ANKARA 00002025  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
World 
 
- Greek Cypriot President of the House of Representatives Marios 
Karoyian said "It is time for the international community to step up 
pressure on Turkey regarding the Cyprus issue." 
 
- EU Commissioner Olli Rehn said Turkish workers might not be 
granted the right of free movement in Europe if Turkey becomes a 
member of the EU. 
 
SILLIMAN