08ANKARA1512
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Aug 21 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO5805
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1512/01 2341422
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 211422Z AUG 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7219
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9104
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4634
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3169
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6806
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6647
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3217
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001512 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, AUGUST 21, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Turkey and U.S. Agree on the Passage of Aid Ships to Georgia 
All media outlets report that the U.S. and Turkey have reached an 
agreement to allow ships meeting the guidelines of the Montreux 
Convention through the Turkish straits.  Mainstream Hurriyet reports 
"The U.S. has stepped back and agreed to abide by the Montreux 
Agreement." Mainstream Vatan notes Foreign Ministry Spokesman Burak 
Ozugergin told the press, "The U.S. did not ask Turkey for 
permission to send the Mercy or the Comfort through the Bosporus." 
In "Passage to the Aid Ships," leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
reports "Turkey approves the passage of two U.S. ships stationed in 
Greece."  Meanwhile, the paper expresses skepticism about real U.S. 
intentions, warning that the U.S. "may manipulate Bulgaria and 
Romania to reassess the Montreux Agreement" in order to "increase 
U.S. and NATO presence in the Black Sea."  Liberal Radikal reports, 
"The U.S. and Turkey have agreed," that, "the USS McFaul and the 
USCGC Dallas will pass through the Turkish straits within a week." 
Mainstream Aksam columnist Sedat Sertoglu writes, "In 2001, Turkey 
negotiated a deal with the Chinese on the passage of a former 
Russian aircraft carrier which the Chinese bought from Ukraine to 
turn into a casino.  This vessel was 300 meters long with a tonnage 
of 67,000 and Ankara allowed its passage," thus, "There should be a 
solution that can be found to this problem so Turkey is not a 
country that blocks humanitarian aid to Georgia." 
 
Editorial Commentary on U.S. Aid Vessels Passing through the 
Straits 
 
Ali Sirmen in the leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet: "We must see that 
the U.S. offer to send giant humanitarian aid vessels to Georgia 
would actually be a show of force.  We must not forget that the U.S. 
may try to manipulate Romania and Bulgaria to change the Montreux 
Treaty in order to increase U.S. and/or NATO presence in the Black 
Sea." 
 
Russia May Recognize South Ossetia, Abkhazia over U.S.-Poland 
Missile Deal 
All media outlets express anxiety that the missile defense deal 
between the U.S. and Poland will be answered by Russia with a 
missile defense deal between Moscow and Minsk, as well as Russian 
plans to officially recognize Abkhazia and South Ossetia.  In "A 
Birthday for Abkhazia," Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports, "The 
waters are not calming in Georgia," as "Russia plans to recognize 
the independence of Abkhazia."  Leftist Taraf reports in "Missile 
Conqueror Rice Seals the Deal With the Poles," as "Warsaw requests 
Patriot Missiles to strengthen their defense system," against 
"Russian retaliation" via a missile defense pact between Russia and 
Belarus.  Mainstream Vatan characterizes the U.S. agreement with 
Poland as "The Signature That Enraged Russia."  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet carries the headline, "Russia Prepares for Recognition," 
of Abkhazia and South Ossetia as parliament is preparing for an 
emergency session on August 25th.  In "Another Shield Is Necessary 
for This Shield," liberal Radikal writes, "Russia and Minsk are 
developing a missile defense program in response to the U.S. missile 
defense agreement with Poland." Columnist Ismet Berkan for Radikal 
notes, "If Russia recognizes the independence of Abhkazia and South 
Ossetia, things will become much more complicated," as "Russia will 
not negotiate regarding its own backyard." Rusen Cakir of mainstream 
Vatan writes, "Despite Turkey's recent new ties with Russia, Turkey 
is unlikely to abandon its alliance with the U.S," but, "Turkey 
wants to take a neutral position in this new Cold War in order to 
mediate between the U.S. and Russia."  Taraf writes in "Russian 
Wrath against the NATO-Georgia Commission," that, "NATO will provide 
Georgia with military assistance," which prompted Russian Deputy 
Military Chief Nogovitsin to call the assistance, "a Blitzkrieg 
provocation." 
 
Editorial Commentary on the Crisis in the Caucasus 
 
 
ANKARA 00001512  002 OF 003 
 
 
Erdal Safak wrote in mainstream Sabah (8/21):  "40 years ago Prague 
woke up to the sound of Russian tanks.  At that time, the entire 
Western world urged the international community to stand next to 
Czechoslovakia and isolate Russia.  Today, the U.S. is urging the 
international community to isolate Russia because of their actions 
in Georgia.  Within this new Cold War climate, PM Erdogan went to 
Baku to get support for the "Caucasus Stability and Cooperation 
Platform."  There is no doubt that Azerbaijan will support such an 
initiative, along with Russia and Georgia.   This platform should 
bring the regional countries together to achieve joint.  If 
stability and prosperity are brought to the Caucasus, these 
countries will support each other.  Of course, for all these, Turkey 
is the only country that can spearhead these efforts." 
 
Fikret Bila commented in mainstream Milliyet (8/21):  "In order to 
overcome recent problems, people in the Caucasus should focus on 
using their natural resources to increase their level of prosperity. 
 The people of the Caucasus region should not lean on a powerful 
country but should put aside ethnic problems and learn to live 
together in peace and prosperity.  Just like the countries in the 
Middle East, none of the countries in Caucasus would benefit from a 
war." 
 
Rusen Cakir in mainstream Vatan believes that Turkey is in a 
difficult position in this new Cold War because of many reasons. 
Even though ties between Turkey and Russia have improved recently, 
Turkey will not give up its traditional alliance with the U.S. in 
order to support Russia.  In addition, Washington has not approached 
Turkey's Caucasus Platform initiative very warmly; thus, in the 
future, pro-U.S. Azerbaijan and pro-U.S. Georgia will eventually 
pull away from this initiative. It will be difficult for Turkey to 
please Russia and the U.S. at the same time. Armenia should be 
included in this initiative but this may not be very easy because of 
the existing problems.  Finally, there is no certainty about this 
platform.  Turkey's image may suffer in the end.  I don't think 
Turkey has many trump cards in its hand that would allow it to pass 
this difficult period without suffering any injuries." 
 
Ismet Berkan wrote in liberal Radikal: "Turkey is exerting efforts 
to create a Caucasus platform, but if we can manage to bring Russia, 
Georgia, Azerbaijan and Armenia to talk with each other, that in and 
of itself would be a success.  Turkey would benefit from this as 
well.  Yet at the same time, realistically speaking, I don't think 
we can even achieve that much.  Russia will not negotiate with 
anyone anymore about the places which it considers as its backyard. 
Things will get even more complicated if Moscow recognizes the 
independence of Abkhazia and Ossetia.  The developments in the 
region should be very closely watched." 
 
PKK Link in Istanbul and Mersin Bombings 
Mainstreams Sabah and Milliyet report the same kind of strengthened 
TNT explosives used in the Istanbul-Gungoren bombings was used in 
this week's Mersin bombings.  Sabah reports these explosives were 
brought in to Turkey by the PKK.  Milliyet quotes Mersin Governor 
Huseyin Aksoy saying "we expect that the suicide bomber in Mersin 
was a PKK member." 
 
Osman Hayal Detained in Hrant Dink Murder Case 
Hurriyet, Sabah, Radikal, Taraf, Cumhuriyet, Zaman report Osman 
Hayal, older brother of the Hrant Dink murder suspect Yasin Hayal, 
was detained by police in the Black Sea city of Trabzon and sent to 
Istanbul.  Osman's mobile phone records show he was in Istanbul on 
the day Dink was murdered.  Eyewitnesses to the Dink murder told the 
police hitman Ogun Samast was accompanied by someone during the 
assassination.  Papers say it was a "scandal" that Osman Hayal was 
interrogated 11 months after the Dink murder.  Osman Hayal's 
detention raised hopes for resolving the mystery behind the murder, 
say papers. 
 
Madrid Plane Crash 
 
ANKARA 00001512  003 OF 003 
 
 
All papers report that MD-82 type jetliner bound for the Canary 
Islands crashed during takeoff.  It was the worst air disaster in 
Spain nearly 25 years in which 153 of a total of 172 passengers and 
crew died.   A Turkish citizen, named Mehmet Erdil, is on the 
Spainair passenger list, but his status has yet to be confirmed. 
Due to the bodies burned in the fire, the identification process 
will take some time, papers noted.  Vatan adds that the MD-80 series 
do not have a good reputation because accidents involving the planes 
have cost the lives of more than 1000 passengers in 58 accidents 
since they were launched for commercial use in 1980.  Mainstream 
papers, Hurriyet, Milliyet, Vatan and Sabah highlight that a Turkish 
Airlines plane was taxiing to take off right after the Spanish jet. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Radar Deployment in Israel, Pakistan's 
Musharraf 
 
Fikret Ertan in the Islamist-oriented Zaman: "According to the 
latest news, the U.S. wants to deploy X-band radars to Israel and 
the Czech Republic.  The U.S. and Israel have agreed to deploy the 
radar in the Negev Desert in Israel.  The system, to be activated 
early 2009, will be connected to the American early warning system, 
expanding the warning range to 2,000 km.  It will give Israel 
precious time during a possible Iranian missile attack.  This 
development concerns Iran the most.  Turkey has intentions to set up 
its own shield, and must follow these developments closely." 
 
Oktay Eksi wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "There is nothing unusual 
about the resignation of Pakistan's President Musharraf, 
particularly given the country's history of military coups. 
Military interventions, religious exploitation in politics, and 
corruption are indispensable features of Pakistani politics.  There 
is a common reality for those whose politics are based on personal 
animosity instead of principle and value.  One wonders why Pakistani 
intellectuals do not look closely to their next door neighbor, 
India.  While Pakistan struggles with military coups and corruption, 
India emerges as one of the most rapidly growing economies in the 
world.  The main and most important difference between the two 
countries is the value of secularism.  The Indian system does not 
allow the exploitation of religion for political aims, while 
politicians in Pakistan race each other to see who can give more 
concessions to religious fundamentalists." 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- The testing of the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan oil pipeline in the 
Erzincan province has begun. 
 
- On Thursday, the National Security Council (MGK) will hold a 
meeting in Istanbul. The outgoing chief of the military General 
Staff Yasar Buyukanit will bid farewell to MGK members before his 
retirement. 
 
- The Privatization Administration said the Council of State 
decision to suspend the privatization of nine motorways and two 
Bosporus bridges would not affect the privatization process. 
 
International News 
 
- 56.5 percent of the Turkish Cypriots favor the implementation of a 
"two-state model" on the divided island of Cyprus. 
 
- The deputy chief of Iran's atomic energy organization, Mohammad 
Saeedi, said talks on Tehran's nuclear drive with the IAEA were 
"positive" and would continue. 
 
SILLIMAN