08ANKARA708
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Apr 15 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO7985
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0708/01 1061445
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 151445Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5911
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8823
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4124
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2858
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6538
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6379
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2954
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000708 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, APRIL 15, 2008 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
ATC Conference in Washington 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, and Yeni Safak cover the 27th meeting of the 
American-Turkish Council (ATC) held Monday in Washington.  General 
Hilmi Akin Zorlu, the head of the military General Staff's (TGS) 
Planning Department, said during his address, "Some of Turkey's 
allies provide support for the PKK."  However, Zorlu warned, "Those 
backing the PKK may also be hit by terror one day."  Defense 
Minister Vecdi Gonul and the Prime Ministry Undersecretary Efkan Ala 
also joined the meeting.  Mainstream Hurriyet's webpage reports Lt. 
General John Sattler, U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff Director for 
Strategic Plans and Policy, urged Turkey "to seek a comprehensive 
settlement" to the PKK question, including the need for new steps 
for the Kurdish population.  He said there was no need to declare a 
general amnesty, but added that Turkey could offer an option to PKK 
militants who want to leave the terrorist organization and who have 
not been involved in terror attacks.  "The U.S. encourages the 
Turkish and Iraqi governments to work together in combating the 
PKK," Sattler emphasized. 
 
Toptan and Erdogan Disagree on Article 301 Changes 
All papers report a bill for amending article 301 of the penal code 
was sent to the parliament's justice committee for discussions 
yesterday.  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet writes under the 
headline, "Article 301 Divides the AKP," that "the notorious 
provision has already caused a rift among the leaders of the ruling 
party." This proposed bill requires permission from the president 
before charges can be filed against an individual who violates the 
law.  In a news conference Monday, Parliamentary Spokesman Toptan 
noted that this arrangement could create serious troubles for the 
president, and that the Justice Ministry should authorize such 
lawsuits.  Prime Minister Erdogan, who spoke to journalists during 
an official visit to Qatar, disagreed with Toptan.  "If he's given 
the authority, the Justice Minister will be accused of making 
political decisions.  The president is above political parties, and 
his decisions will be more trustworthy," Erdogan said. 
 
Opposition CHP group Chief Hakki Suha Okay said, "The CHP will not 
allow for the legitimization of insulting Turkishness." Opposition 
far right MHP is preparing to launch a campaign against article 301, 
and has printed five million leaflets and made two short films 
titled, "Wake Up Turkey, Now's the Time for Unity." 
 
 
Today's cartoon in mainstream Sabah: "Article 301 Gains Importance: 
A man asks PM Erdogan, "Where are you going?"  Erdogan replies, "The 
say freedom for our party passes through this way [301]." 
 
Babacan Holds Press Conference with Miliband in London 
All papers report visiting Turkish Foreign Minister Ali Babacan 
participated in a joint press conference with the British Foreign 
Secretary David Miliband in London on Monday.  Babacan warned, "A 
 
SIPDIS 
possible ban on the AKP would have a serious impact on Turkey's ties 
with the EU."  Babacan said, "Turkey's international influence has 
increased."  He also noted, "A new period has commenced in northern 
Iraq," adding, "Iraq's territorial integrity and political unity 
have vital importance for Turkey." 
 
Babacan told the Islamist-oriented Zaman, "The U.S. was concerned 
that the Turkish ground offensive in northern Iraq would endanger 
Iraq's internal balances.  Also at that time, U.S. priorities there 
included the passage of the hydrocarbon and federation laws; in 
addition, two agreements were on the table to enable American troops 
to stay in Iraq without needing UN approval."  On Kirkuk, Babacan 
said, "We believe there should be no referendum."   Concerning 
Afghanistan, Babacan said, "Turkey has not yet responded to the NATO 
demand for sending additional troops.  We think sending troops alone 
won't resolve the problem." 
 
 
ANKARA 00000708  002 OF 003 
 
 
Slain Artist's Remains Are Repatriated to Italy 
All papers report the remains of an Italian artist who was raped and 
murdered in Turkey were sent to her hometown of Milan on Monday. 
Giuseppina Pasqualino di Marineo, also known as "Pippa Bacca," was 
found dead this past weekend in Gebze near Istanbul.  In a call for 
peace, Pippa was hitchhiking to the Palestinian territories in a 
wedding dress.  Pippa's sister Antoinetta told the press in 
Istanbul, "I would like to thank the Turkish nation their affection. 
 I also want to thank Prime Minister Erdogan for his condolence 
messages regarding my sister's murder."  Representatives from the 
Freedom and Solidarity Party (ODP), CHP, and the pro-Kurdish DTP, 
and some women's associations bade farewell to Pippa as her remains 
departed from Ataturk International Airport in Istanbul.  Ufuk Uras, 
leader of the ODP, said, "Dear Pippa, you were killed by a man who 
spoke our language.  Our sorrow will be eased a bit if we promise to 
work to eradicate violence inflicted against women in this country." 
 
 
Editorial Commentary on the Global Food Crisis 
 
Gungor Mengi wrote in mainstream Vatan (4/15): "The recent 
developments around the world make one wonder if we are on the verge 
of a global famine.  Famine is the most dishonorable disaster that 
human beings can face.  Yesterday, the president of the World Bank 
urged for an immediate action plan; he emphasized that a plan 
devised during the upcoming G-8 summit would be too late.  None of 
this should come as a surprise.  This is not a terrible surprise 
from Mother Nature; this crisis is the result of human mismanagement 
of natural resources.  In the end, the weak and illiterate poor will 
die of hunger.  Those who are strong and rich will become even 
stronger by turning this crisis into an economic opportunity.  This 
is the oldest imperialistic method in the book.  Developed nations 
widen their hegemonic aims by using their production as a political 
weapon.  Turkey has to wake up and reorganize itself based on the 
new realities.  Turkey's rulers unfortunately have a fixation on 
breeding more instead of producing more.  Let's hope that this 
famine alarm will result in a call for common sense." 
 
Erdal Safak wrote in mainstream Sabah (4/15): "The deepening 
international gap between agricultural supply and demand is not a 
temporary issue.  The world's population increases by 70 million 
every year.  Because of this, agriculturally cultivated areas are 
increasingly replaced with expanding human settlements.  Moreover 
during the last 20 years, liberal agricultural policies imposed by 
the U.S., the IMF and the World Bank caused the disappearance of 
farmers in low-income countries.  The recent bio fuel hype has taken 
this crisis to a tragic level because corn is being used to create 
fuel instead.  Instead, this corn could be used to feed millions of 
people.  Those from Western Developed countries enjoy driving their 
4x4 cars with bio-diesel but do not realize the impact this has on 
causing famine.  The right to live is the fundamental human right. 
It is a crime against humanity to leave millions of people to die of 
hunger.   This is an alarming signal.  History tells us that 
tragedies like this lead to war." 
 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Daily Cumhuriyet chief editor Ilhan Selcuk is in critical 
condition after heart bypass surgery on Monday. 
 
- The AKP has prepared its defense in the case for the closure of 
the party.  The defense is based on the objection that the suit was 
politically motivated. 
 
- Cuma Ozdemir, one of the suspects involved in the murder of three 
Christian Bible publishers in Malatya, said the killings were 
 
ANKARA 00000708  003 OF 003 
 
 
instigated by suspect Emre Gunaydin.  According to Ozdemir, Gunaydin 
said, "The Christians wanted to eliminate Islam in Turkey and were 
linked to the PKK." 
 
International News 
 
- Greek Cypriot leader Demetris Christofias said the road for a 
solution on the divided island will not open unless Turkey changes 
its policy concerning military presence on Cyprus. 
 
- The Independent reported Monday the U.S. and Iran have been 
conducting secret back-channel discussions on Tehran's nuclear 
program. 
 
- The Beijing city government announced a plan to stop construction 
and heavy industry in an effort to improve air quality ahead of the 
Olympics. 
 
DEBLAUW