08ANKARA100
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Jan 17 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3141
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0100/01 0171508
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 171508Z JAN 08 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4971
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8618
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3763
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2624
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6362
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6187
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2771
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000100 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, JANUARY 17, 2008 
 
 
ANKARA 00000100  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
President Gul on Turkey-EU Relations 
All papers report President Abdullah Gul told Turkish journalists 
Wednesday that 2007 was a year of domestic debates in Turkey.  Gul 
said Turkey wasted precious time because of the presidential 
elections, the general elections, and budget debates.  Furthermore, 
he emphasized there is no reason to delay EU reforms in 2008.  "2008 
must be the year of the European Union in Turkey.  We have a 
roadmap.  The positions of those opposed to Turkey's accession will 
be weakened," Gul said.  In addition, Gul pointed out that the ninth 
EU harmonization package would be passed by parliament soon. 
 
Erdogan: Constitutional Change Is Not Necessary to Lift Headscarf 
Ban 
All papers report Prime Minister Erdogan said there is no need to 
wait for constitutional reforms to resolve the headscarf debate. 
Erdogan told the press on his return from Spain that the issue could 
be resolved with the support of opposition party MHP.  "We want to 
settle the matter through solidarity, not by escalating tensions," 
Erdogan emphasized.  On whether the headscarf was a political 
symbol, Erdogan said, "It would be a political symbol if it was worn 
only by AKP members.  There are, however, women wearing the 
headdress in other political parties in Turkey.  We can work out a 
solution with the MHP; they have announced they were ready to 
contribute to a solution," said Erdogan. 
 
Opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal said the turban is a political 
symbol.  "Turban has nothing to do with the traditional headwear in 
Anatolia.  If it's put into the constitution, it means Turkey has 
become a male-dominant society which pushes its women to cover their 
heads," stressed Baykal. 
 
Prior to his return home, Erdogan participated in a business forum 
in Madrid.  Responding to a question on whether Turkey's Kurds would 
be given a 'special status' or would be subjected to 'minority' 
regulations, Erdogan said Turkey's Kurds have no wish to be 
classified as an ethnic minority, and asserted that they have the 
same rights as other citizens of Turkey.  When asked about EU-Turkey 
relations, Erdogan said Turkey's membership to the EU will benefit 
both Turkey and the EU.  The PM also said the EU has responsibility 
for Cyprus because it is a member of the EU, despite the fact that 
Nicosia rejected the UN Secretary General Kofi Anan's Plan for 
reunification. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turban Ban in Turkey 
Okay Gonensin commented in mainstream Vatan (1/17):  "PM Erdogan 
recently admitted that the turban can be a political symbol.  This 
argument is exactly the reason for not allowing the turban at 
universities.  It may seem innocent to argue that anyone should be 
free to wear the turban, whether for religious or political reasons. 
 However, this argument entirely contradicts the fundamental basis 
of secularism because this argument accepts that religion can be a 
basis for politics.  Banning turban in public places aims at 
protecting those who do not want to wear the turban.  Once it is set 
free, the social pressure system will work perfectly and the issue 
will eventually go from the turban-wearing debate to the good Muslim 
and bad Muslim debate.  The ruling AKP insists on the turban issue 
and justifies it with freedoms.  Yet it is a sheer contradiction 
that the same government does nothing to change article 301 to pave 
the way for full freedom of expression.  There is an act of 
insincerity here, and AKP's sole focus is bringing the turban back. 
This will harm the process of the constitutional debate and the 
possibility for social consensus on the most problematic issues." 
 
New Bill to Return Assets of Non-Muslim Foundations 
Sabah, Radikal, and Cumhuriyet report the Turkish Parliament's 
justice commission approved a draft law to return assets seized by 
the state which belonged to non-Muslim minority foundations.  Nine 
provisions of the bill were vetoed by former President Ahmet Necdet 
 
ANKARA 00000100  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
Sezer.  In 1974, 28 immovable assets of minority foundations were 
seized by the General Directorate for Foundations, and 114 others 
were seized by the Treasury.  The new bill envisages an 18-month 
period for the return of the properties; if that is not possible, 
minority foundations will be paid compensation. 
 
Karamanlis to Visit Turkey in Late January 
Mainstream Milliyet reports an unidentified high-ranking Greek 
official told AFP news agency that Greek Prime Minister Costas 
Karamanlis will visit Turkey this month.  Karamanlis' uncle, 
Constantin, was the last Greek PM to visit Turkey in an official 
capacity in May 1959.  Karamanlis is to meet Erdogan, his Turkish 
counterpart, in Ankara on January 23.  "The goal is to improve 
Greek-Turkish relations.  The climate has improved, especially on 
economic issues, but progress is still needed on political matters," 
the Greek official said.  In addition, the official said continental 
shelf and airspace disputes in the Aegean Sea will also be discussed 
during the visit. 
 
Decision Day for New F-16s 
Liberal Radikal reports that the General Staff, Air Forces Command 
and Defense Industry Secretariat will decide whether to install 
Turkish-made or foreign-made software in 30 new F-16s.  Their 
decision will be submitted to the Defense Industry executive board, 
which is comprised of PM Erdogan, Chief of General Staff General 
Buyukanit, Defense Minister Vecdi Gonul and Defense Undersecretary 
Murad Bayar. 
 
US Market Fears Hits Turkish Stock Market 
Sabah, Milliyet, Hurriyet, Radikal, Vatan, Yeni Safak and others: 
Due to fears of recession in the US, Turkey's main shares index, 
Istanbul Stock Exchange (IMKB) made a sharp decline in the opening 
session on Wednesday.  This was the second drastic fall in two days 
in a row.  Mainstream Sabah reports that the increase in inflation 
in the US was at its highest for the last 17 years. 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak writes in "Fear of Collapse on Wall 
Street" that "some countries are mobilizing forces within US finance 
establishments in order to stop the blood loss," as fears of "a 
second great depression grow."  Mainstream Vatan, in "Turkey Will 
Also Be Pulled Under the Global Wave," notes that "Turkish firms 
lost twenty-five billion dollars in the past two weeks due to the 
Dow Jones dropping." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Sarkozy in the Middle East 
Sami Kohen commented in mainstream Milliyet (1/17):  "President 
Bush's tour of the Middle East almost coincided with the French 
President's visit to the region.  It is clear that French leader 
Sarkozy gained more diplomatic and economic ground from visiting the 
region than President Bush.  Because of Sarkozy's visit, France is 
now able to establish a military base in Abu Dhabi.  This means 
France now has the capability to demonstrate its military and 
diplomatic presence in the Gulf.  Additionally, Sarkozy made some 
very profitable deals with Arabs.  President Bush's plans were more 
ambitious than Sarkozy's but Bush's trip did not end on a high note. 
  President Bush appeared like a "demander" as he made a lot of 
demands to the leaders he visited.  Meanwhile, President Sarkozy 
appeared the "provider" because leaders he saw requested nuclear 
technology, weapons and profitable contracts from him.  This proves 
Arab leaders are more sympathetic toward the French president than 
the US president." 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Turkish security forces have launched land and air operations 
against the PKK in the Cudi Mountains. 
 
- Constitutional Court President Hasim Kilic said it would better to 
 
ANKARA 00000100  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
reform some of the provisions of the constitution instead of 
adopting a new constitution. 
 
- Alparslan Arslan, the key suspect in prison for the murder of a 
prominent judge in the Council of State attack, cannot meet with 
visitors until June 18 because he violated discipline rules in the 
court. 
 
- In February, the Defense Industry Undersecretariat will hold a 
meeting with local defense companies to discuss production of 
Turkish warships. 
 
International News 
 
- The Greek Parliament has approved a bill authorizing Turkish 
foundations in Western Thrace to elect their own administrators. 
 
- The Atlantic Monthly has on its cover a map which shows Kurdistan 
stretching from northern Iraq to Turkey's eastern Black Sea areas. 
 
 
- President Bush wrapped up his Middle East tour with a visit to 
Sharm al-Sheikh to meet with President Hosni Mubarak. 
 
- Russia declares 2008 as 'Turkish Cultural Year.' Festivities will 
be kicked off April 8 in Moscow and will be followed by other events 
in St Petersburg, Kazan, and Sochi. 
WILSON