08ANKARA1121
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Jun 18 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1934
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1121/01 1700657
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 180657Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6594
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8960
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4357
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3016
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6669
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6499
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3080
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001121 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, JUNE 17, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
AKP Submits Its Defense to the Constitutional Court 
All news outlets report the AKP submitted its defense to the 
Constitutional Court in connection with the closure case against 
Turkey's ruling party on Monday.  "The closure case was based on 
Google search results, not on law," comments the leftist Taraf while 
citing arguments from the AKP defense that the prosecutor used 
Google to gather evidence against the party on the Internet.  The 
AKP defense says the case was "politically motivated," stressing the 
efforts of the prosecutor to link the party to violence were 
"ridiculous."  In addition, the defense contends, "This case is a 
result of the chief prosecutor's democratic secularism allergy, 
scientism and reservations about Turkey's EU entry."  The defense 
also blames the prosecutor for "dictating a militant understanding 
of secularism as a way of life."  It notes, "The six-year 
performance of our party proves it is the guarantor of the 
democratic, secular and social rule of law."  The defense points to 
the "psychological manipulation" efforts over the Constitutional 
Court through comments made by Prime Minister Erdogan years before 
the foundation of the AKP.  The AKP is not a continuation of any 
political party, and it does not have any hidden agenda, the defense 
emphasized.  It also underlined President Abdullah Gul was elected 
president and had cut ties with the ruling party before the closure 
case was filed.  Papers report Gul believes efforts to link him to 
the closure case are "unconstitutional." 
 
Government spokesman Cemil Cicek told the press yesterday the case 
should be finalized without delay because "uncertainty harms 
Turkey."  Mainstreams Hurriyet and Milliyet as well as liberal 
Radikal and Islamist-oriented Zaman carry the same headline, "The 
AKP Responds: This is a Google Case."  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet reports "The AKP Attacks Prosecutor in its Defense." 
 
In his indictment, the chief prosecutor has also demanded 71 AKP 
members, including President Abdullah Gul who was formerly foreign 
minister, former Parliament Speaker Bulent Arinc, and Prime Minister 
Erdogan, to be banned from politics for five years. 
 
Israel-Syria Meet in Second Round of Indirect Talks 
Hurriyet, Sabah, Radikal, Taraf, Cumhuriyet, Zaman and others report 
Syria and Israel completed the second round of their indirect peace 
talks, and are now preparing for the third round of talks.  Turkish 
Foreign Ministry (MFA) said in a press release Monday the parties 
reiterated their determination to continue talks on a regular basis. 
 MFA noted the next round of the Israeli-Syrian talks was also 
scheduled, but did not mention a specific date.  Papers cite 
Ha'aretz quoting an unidentified Israeli official as saying the 
sides agreed to two more rounds with Turkish intermediation, but no 
dates have been set.  Other Israeli officials said French President 
Nicolas Sarkozy is attempting to set up a three-way meeting with 
Olmert and Assad.  "The Israelis are working with French President 
Sarkozy to coordinate a meeting between Sarkozy, Olmert, and Esad 
during the Mediterranean Summit in Paris July 13th," writes liberal 
Radikal and the Islamist-oriented Zaman. 
 
Gendarme Request Authorization for Filing Personal Information 
Hurriyet, Sabah, Radikal, Cumhuriyet, Zaman and others report 
Gendarme General Command requested changes in some articles of the 
draft law on Protection of Personal Data.  The draft says, "Personal 
information including race, political views, religion and private 
life cannot be revealed."  During the works of the subcommittee that 
operates under the parliamentary Justice Committee on the draft law, 
Gendarme General Command sent a letter asking to store personal data 
records of suspects to investigate and prevent crime.  In its 
letter, the gendarme objected to the selection of the seven-member 
Personal Data Protection Council by the Council of Ministers which, 
according to gendarme, might damage the autonomy of the council as 
well cause nepotism and favoritism. 
 
 
ANKARA 00001121  002 OF 004 
 
 
"Iran Like A Bird" 
Columnist Enis Berberoglu wrote today in mainstream Hurriyet 
referring to a conversation between Ambassador Wilson and Energy 
Minister Guler.  "It was a friendly talk until they began to discuss 
Iran.  The Ambassador suggested the Minister give up on Iranian 
natural gas imports.  When Guler asked how Turkey would compensate, 
the Ambassador referred to Iraqi gas.  When the Minister argued that 
Iraq did not have it, the Ambassador claimed that Iraq could develop 
it.  Guler reminded the Ambassador of his earlier reference to one 
bird in hand being better than two birds on a branch.  Ambassador 
Wilson responded, 'But the bird might burn along with the branch 
soon.'  Some people in Ankara misinterpreted this comment as an 
early signal of a US operation against Iran.  US Embassy officials 
confirmed the Ambassador only wanted to point out the risks of 
making business with a country that was under UN sanctions.  Ankara 
reacted to the Ambassador's comments since an operation on Iran 
could further weaken the hand of the AKP as they fight against their 
party's closure.  A possible US operation against Iran would lead to 
rapprochement between the Turkish and American militaries, and 
weaken the AKP's credibility as well.  Also, the AKP government 
might be politically stuck between the US and Muslim Iran.  That's 
how the US Ambassador's words were exaggerated from ears to ears." 
 
 
Turkey's Institutions Disagree on Kyoto Protocol 
Hurriyet, Sabah, Radikal, Cumhuriyet, Zaman and others report 
Turkey's Environment Ministry, the Foreign Ministry (MFA,) the 
General Secretariat for EU Affairs all support signing the Kyoto 
Protocol.  The Transport Ministry says it is not prepared to meet 
the Kyoto Protocol requirements.  The Industry Ministry says 
Turkey's energy consumption was below the world average, adding 
Turkey should fix carefully its positions in the Kyoto process. 
Mainstream Milliyet reports the State Planning Organization (DPT) as 
well as ministries and business representatives warn the 
implementation of the protocol in Turkey would be costlier than in 
Europe.  Turkish Union of Chambers (TOBB) says Turkey should 
complete all preparations for meeting Kyoto Protocol requirements 
before signing it, and warns that hasty steps could harm the Turkish 
economy.  The Turkish Employers' Union (TISK) says being a party to 
the protocol would harm Turkey's competition potential.  In a 
statement released Monday, Turkish Industrialists' and Businessmen's 
Association (TUSIAD) welcomed the Turkish government's decision to 
join the Kyoto Protocol, saying Turkey would have a voice in shaping 
the new global order in the post-2012 era. 
 
Bugun: PKK Makes Money from Philip Morris' Tobacco Smuggling into 
Iraq 
Conservative-nationalist Bugun reports a conference to be held by 
the U.S. Ankara Embassy had to be cancelled when Turkish police, 
gendarme and organized crime department of police declined to send 
representatives to the gathering after Turkish Foreign Ministry 
(MFA) warned them on the "ties" between the PKK and American tobacco 
producers.  The MFA letter written by Security Affairs 
Director-General Ambassador Hayati Guven recalled the EU Commission 
had initiated a lawsuit against some U.S. tobacco producers for 
money laundering via tobacco smuggling into Iraq.  The PKK also 
makes profits from such activities of the U.S. companies.  The U.S. 
counsel firm serving the Turkish Embassy in Washington is evaluating 
Turkey's chances for launching a court case against American tobacco 
companies within the frame of their alleged ties with the PKK, says 
the letter.  Bugun says the Philip Morris International (PMI) was 
cited among the participants in the conference invitation sent out 
in February by the U.S. Ankara Embassy, and that the EU Commission 
had also filed a court case against PMI. 
 
Poll: Turks Trust Erdogan 
Islamist-oriented Zaman carries the U.S.-based 
WorldPublicOpinion.Org poll of 19,751 people in nations composing 60 
percent of the world's population, including Egypt, Pakistan, the 
Palestinian Territories, Iran, Jordan, and Turkey.  The poll found 
 
ANKARA 00001121  003 OF 004 
 
 
55% of Turks trust Prime Minister Erdogan.  After Erdogan, Turks 
trust Iranian President Ahmadinejad by 16 percent and the Pakistani 
President Musharraf by 15 percent.  French President Sarkozy is 
trusted the least, by 4 percent.  6% of Turks trust Iraqi PM 
al-Maliki and 7 percent trust U.S. President Bush.  Among regional 
leaders, Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki had the lowest marks in 
all the Arab countries polled.  Majorities in all three of Arab 
countries polled, Egypt, Jordan, the Palestinian Territories, and 62 
percent of the Turks say they had "no" or "not much" confidence in 
Ahmadinejad. 
 
The poll was conducted from January 10-May 6. 
 
Editorial Commentary on SOFA; Irish Referendum 
 
"The Security Agreement between Iraq and America" 
Fikret Bila wrote in Islamist leaning Zaman (6/17): "The United 
States is working very hard to ensure its status and presence in 
Iraq before the UN Resolution expires in December of this year. 
There are important meetings going on and tough bargains are being 
made behind closed doors for a comprehensive security agreement 
between Iraq and the U.S.  Even though the Bush administration hoped 
to finalize this before the end of July, it seems unlikely. 
According to statements from Iraqi Prime Minister Maliki as well as 
from other officials, the two sides have not yet reached consensus 
on any of the details, while Americans are voicing optimism.  David 
Satterfield, the State Department's top advisor on Iraq, has 
recently expressed similar optimism for concluding an agreement with 
Iraq despite ongoing opposition from Iraqi politicians.   At this 
point, it is hard to understand the agreement since no further 
details are available.  We still do not know if the United States is 
seeking 58 permanent bases in Iraq, as Iraqi politicians claimed. 
There is also speculation the Americans will transfer custody of 
detained Iraqi nationals to Iraqi local authorities.  It will be 
very interesting to follow the outcome of this process and see the 
nature of the agreement.  This is so very important for everyone, 
including Iran and Turkey." 
 
"Can the EU Still Be A Union?" 
Sami Kohen wrote in mainstream Milliyet (6/16):  "The Irish 
referendum indicated the value of even a small member country's 
influence upon the Union's future.  The rate of Irish no votes is 
only 0.02 percent compared to the total population of EU member 
countries.  However due to the unanimity rule, Ireland's votes to 
reject the Lisbon Treaty are enough to prevent the treaty's 
implementation in 2009.  It appears structural reforms within the EU 
are often regarded negatively by the public.  For example, France 
and the Netherlands rejected the EU Constitution in 2005; the Lisbon 
Treaty was, in fact, a diluted version of the 2005 constitution. 
European voters either have no information about the changes or they 
are against the changes because they believe in sovereignty.  Unlike 
their leaders and governments, the people of EU nations are not keen 
on political and security unification.  Ireland's referendum shows 
the EU's 'European identity' has not yet reached the level of the 
man on the street." 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Tuzla shipyard workers went on strike yesterday to draw attention 
to work safety problems. 
 
- 21 Turkish universities will elect their new rectors on June 
18-19. 
 
- The overall unemployment figure in Turkey rose to 10.7 percent, 
marking 2.5 million unemployed people. 
 
 
ANKARA 00001121  004 OF 004 
 
 
International News 
 
- EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said Ireland's rejection of 
the European Union's reform treaty does not diminish the bloc's 
commitment to admitting Turkey into the bloc. 
 
- The EU adopts amendments to the Green Line Regulation concerning 
goods, services and persons crossing the line between north and 
south Cyprus. 
 
- Iraqi Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari said his country still needs 
American troops to secure progress achieved as a result of a 
successful US surge strategy. 
 
WILSON