08ANKARA1424
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Aug 11 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO7870
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1424/01 2241300
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 111300Z AUG 08 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7088
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9081
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4587
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3144
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6784
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6613
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3193
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001424 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Conflict in the Caucasus 
All news outlets report Tbilisi's military action against Georgia's 
breakaway region of South Ossetia last week triggered a military 
clash with Russia.  Monday papers report the dispute threatens to 
spiral into a major conflict because Russian strikes continued 
despite a Georgian withdrawal of South Ossetia.  Papers quote White 
House Deputy National Security Advisor James Jeffrey's warning that 
Russia's continued "disproportionate and dangerous escalation" could 
well result in a "significant long term impact on the U.S.-Russian 
relations." 
 
On Sunday, the Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA) said in a statement 
Foreign Minister Ali Babacan spoke on the telephone with the 
Georgian and Russian foreign ministers.  Babacan invited Russia to 
calm during his talk with Sergei Lavrov, and stressed the importance 
of preserving Georgia's territorial integrity.  The statement noted 
Babacan spoke on the telephone with Secretary Rice as well. 
Mainstream Sabah writes, "The press in Russia also hold Turkey 
responsible for the war in Ossetia, as Putin did not return Ankara's 
call," and, "Prime Minister Erdogan called Georgian leader 
Saakashvili and Russian PM Putin on Friday in order to make a call 
for a peaceful solution," but while "Saakashvili spoke with Erdogan, 
Putin did not return Erdogan's phone call." 
 
Liberal Radikal said on Sunday Turkey was concerned that it might 
face a large wave of incoming refugees and increased risks for the 
Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan (BTC) oil pipeline.  Mainstream Vatan reported 
Sunday Russian warplanes fired on the BTC pipeline but missed it. 
Monday's leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet says in a news commentary 
that Turkey was afraid the conflict in South Ossetia might harm the 
projects carried out in cooperation with Georgia, which include the 
Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan (BTC) oil pipeline, the Baku-Tbilisi-Erzurum 
natural gas pipeline, the Baku-Tbilisi-Kars railroad project, and 
the Black Sea Highway Project.  Cumhuriyet calls Russia's actions in 
South Ossetia, "Russia's Kosovo Re-Match," meaning Russia was 
defeated over world recognition of Kosovo's independence, so 
"Ossetia is Russia's return game in response to this defeat."  Vatan 
writes, "Russia responds to Georgia's call for an unconditional 
ceasefire by telling Georgia 'End the war and withdraw your 
troops.'" Mainstream Milliyet carries photos of Russian tanks and 
other military vehicles in Georgia under the headline, "Georgia Is 
under Siege," and notes, "while Georgia wants a ceasefire," the 
Russians, "continue to increase their attacks."  Mainstream Hurriyet 
writes, "They gave up when the Russians were 65 kilometers from 
Tbilisi," as the Georgians "make a call for a ceasefire," while the 
Russians say, "We are ready to talk," and the Americans accuse 
Russia of "using disproportionate force."  In addition, mainstream 
Sabah notes, "The Russian press accuses the U.S. and Turkey of 
supplying military assistance to Georgia."  Liberal Radikal writes 
in "This Time the Kosovo and Genocide Card is in Putin's Hand," as, 
"Putin answered the recognition of Kosovo's recently declared 
independence by accusing Georgia of genocide in South Ossetia." 
Islamist-oriented Zaman writes, "Turkish Journalists Are Targeted," 
as, "a Kanalturk TV correspondent, an NTV correspondent, and an NTV 
cameraman were injured when their vehicle was attacked with 
gunfire."  Leftist Taraf writes, "Despite the Ceasefire, The War 
Continues," as the Russians form "a blockade in the Black Sea," and 
"reject Georgia's calls for a cease fire." 
 
A commentary in mainstream Sabah says, "As a result of the Southeast 
European Stability Pact, today the Balkans are much more stable both 
politically and economically. Why can't this magic formula that 
brought democracy, stability and welfare to the Balkans, be used in 
the Caucasus as well?" 
 
Editorial Commentary on Georgia 
 
"The Lessons from Georgia" 
 
ANKARA 00001424  002 OF 003 
 
 
Murat Yetkin wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal (8/11): 
"Saakashvili made a serious tactical error regarding Ossetia.  In 
order to gain Ossetia, he aggravated Russia to the point of attack 
and failed to win the U.S. support he hoped for. In the end, it 
seems Saakasvili is going to lose both his leadership position and 
Abkhazia at the same time.  Given the current situation, Turkey has 
to take a lesson out of these developments and recalculate its 
policy on energy and security in the region.  Otherwise we may end 
up with another natural gas supply crisis this winter." 
 
"Who Pushed Saakashvili?" 
Ferai Tinc wrote in mainstream Hurriyet (8/11):  "Out of nowhere, 
Saakasvili stirred up the Ossetia tensions, even though the problem 
lay dormant for 13 years.  It looks like he was provoked to attack 
with the hope of claiming Southern Ossetia for Georgia.  Before 
this, things were going really well for Georgia.  Their NATO 
membership bid was proceeding and possible EU membership was not a 
distant dream.  It is obvious that he was being encouraged by some 
foreign powers to go ahead with the South Ossetia plan; otherwise he 
would not have enough power to act alone.  There are speculations 
that the U.S. made a secret deal with Russia swapping Russian 
support for sanctions against Iran in exchange for U.S. neutrality 
regarding South Ossetia.  Time will show what really happened, but 
the sad fact is that the people will continue to pay for the 
consequences." 
 
"The End of Chauvinism" 
Hakan Albayrak wrote in Islamist leaning Yeni Safak (8/11): "Both 
Turkey and the United States provide military support to Georgia. 
This support is part of a common goal to prevent Russian expansion 
in the region.  That said, it does not mean Ankara and Washington 
have a joint policy on Georgia.  Ankara considers Georgia a security 
buffer against Russia.  However in the eyes of Washington, Georgia 
is an instrument to get a greater share of the Caucasus pie. 
Saakashvili made a big mistake and invaded South Ossetia.  He is 
acting like a missionary imposing a Christian Georgian identity upon 
the entire region.  The reaction in South Ossetia, as well as the 
lack of American support, has wound up making him beg for mercy. 
Under the current circumstances, this is the very time to call 
Saakashvili to act with common sense regarding both Abkhazia and 
South Ossetia." 
 
PM Erdogan Fined for not Enforcing Court Ruling 
Mainstream Milliyet's weekend edition reported that the Supreme 
Court of Appeals (Yargitay) ruled that PM Erdogan, along with some 
of his administrators, must pay a fine for allowing the U.S.-owned 
Cargill starch factory in Bursa to continue construction despite a 
previous court decision to the contrary.  Despite the court order, 
PM Erdogan personally instructed that work continue on the 
construction of the factory. 
 
Turkey's Missile Shield Program 
Vatan, Milliyet, Sabah, Turkiye and others: Milliyet reports that 
Defense Industry Undersecretary Murat Bayar said that Turkey aims to 
establish a missile defense shield by implementing a Long Range 
Regional Defense and Missile Defense System Project.  Bayar added 
that within the scope of this project, initially four missile 
batteries will be purchased for the Air Force command and a total of 
8 anti-missile systems will be established.  Turkey is considering 
the purchase of missile defense systems from four countries - the 
U.S., Russia, China and Israel.  Conservative-nationalist Turkiye 
reports that two out of eight missiles will be deployed in Ankara 
and Istanbul. 
 
Thousands Join Funeral of Soldier Killed by the PKK 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Sabah, Cumhuriyet, Zaman and others report on 
Sunday, around 10,000 people joined the funeral ceremony of a 
private killed in a PKK attack on a gendarme outpost in the eastern 
province of Elazig.  The martyred gendarme Private Cem Havale was 
scheduled to be discharged from army in 10 days. 
 
ANKARA 00001424  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- The ruling AKP government has launched a program for tackling 
poverty, unemployment and migration in the Southeastern Anatolia 
Project (GAP) region. 
 
- The state-owned broadcaster TRT will launch Kurdish language 
broadcasts in 2009. 
 
- Energy Minister Hilmi Guler said daylight savings time 
implementation in Turkey will be scrapped in two years. 
 
International News 
 
- Russian media accuses Turkey of instigating war in the Caucasus by 
extending military support to Georgia. 
 
- Around half of Georgia's 2,000-strong contingent in Iraq returns 
home to redeploy in the conflict in its province of South Ossetia. 
 
 
- U.S. and Iraqi negotiators reportedly are "very close" to reaching 
a long-term security pact that will decide the fate of American 
troops in Iraq. 
 
SILLIMAN