08ANKARA1857
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Oct 24 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3419
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1857/01 2981334
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 241334Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7788
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9255
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4879
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3324
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6933
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6777
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3352
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001857 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, OCTOBER 24, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Constitutional Court Releases Decision on the AKP Closure Case 
All papers:  The Constitutional Court released its written decision 
in the AKP closure case yesterday.  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
reports that the Court determined that the AKP proved itself to be 
the focal point of anti-secular acts through 30 different actions. 
Mainstream Hurriyet notes that when PM Erdogan's commented, "let's 
suppose the headscarf is a political symbol" such quotes were used 
as proof of anti-secular sentiments.  Among the reasons for the AKP 
being described as the focal point of anti-secular acts were 
"efforts to lower the age of students who may attend Quran courses, 
anti-secular statements made by PM Erdogan and former Parliament 
speaker Bulent Arinc, and the activities of education Minister 
Huseyin Celik."  The Constitutional Court decided not to close the 
AKP for various reasons including efforts exerted for EU membership, 
laws improving the status of non-Muslim minorities, the abolishment 
of the death penalty and reforms for democratization including 
positive steps for women's rights. 
 
Meanwhile, today's papers report that PM Erdogan reacted to the 
Constitutional Court's ruling on the headscarf and said "the Court 
ignored the powers of the Parliament.  The Constitutional Court is 
not above the Constitution.  We recognize no power above the 
national will." 
 
Editorial Commentary on the Constitutional Court Decisions 
 
Taha Akyol wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "The Constitutional 
Court's logical decision on the AKP closure case followed the 
Court's logical verdict on the Headscarf ban.  In every democracy, 
either all or the majority of the Constitutional Court members are 
elected by the parliament from the judiciary, administration or from 
the universities.  In Turkey, staffing sources for the 
Constitutional Court are rather limited.  If the court composition 
is enriched in a country, then, the constitutional judiciary will 
distance itself from the oligarchic structure and its democratic 
lawfulness will be strengthened.  It should be like this in Turkey 
as well but, not now!  I am calling on Mr. Prime Minister and Mr. 
Bahceli: Turkey's priority for now is terror and the economy. Taking 
valuable time to limit the Constitutional Court's authority at a 
time like this will cause serious problems and eliminate all the 
peace left in this country." 
 
Nazli Ilicak wrote in mainstream Sabah: "Following the 
Constitutional Court decision on the headscarf ban, at least for the 
time being, the government has become unable to take any further 
steps on the issue.  The solution is to create new constitution, but 
the AKP government will not exert any efforts on this issue now. 
People will understand in time that banning parties will not bring 
any solution.  I hope when elections come again, the Turkish public 
will remember the role of the CHP in all of these banning cases. 
Because of the CHP's efforts, the headscarf issue has remained 
unsolved.  Moreover, the reputation of the parliament was damaged 
and the Constitutional Court declared its guardianship over the 
Turkish Parliament." 
 
Oktay Eksi wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "PM Erdogan continued his 
criticisms against the Constitutional Court yesterday.  Isn't there 
anyone close to the PM with some judicial background?  PM Erdogan 
should be advised on judicial issues and should be reminded that the 
first rule for a democratic state is to respect the judiciary.  Led 
by the PM, the AKP continues their fight with Constitutional 
principles.  Here is a friendly piece of advice for the AKP - you 
are just wasting your time are criticizing the judiciary.  Don't 
forget that the judiciary's slap is always very hard." 
 
Next Ergenekon Hearing to be Held on October 27 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Zaman, Sabah, Radikal, Cumhuriyet and others: 
The second session of the Ergenekon trial took place yesterday under 
 
ANKARA 00001857  002 OF 003 
 
 
tight security.  Lawyers, journalists and the audience were allowed 
in from separate entrances.  Mainstream Hurriyet reports that some 
of the lawyers complained that they were the targets of wire 
tapping, and the judge responded by saying his phone might be tapped 
as well.  The Court denied some of the defendants' requests to be 
released at Thursday's hearing and postponed the hearing to October 
¶27. 
 
Economic Crisis 
Sabah, Milliyet, Radikal, Vatan and others:  Mainstream Sabah 
reports that during a press conference, PM Erdogan said that Turkey 
could turn global crisis into an opportunity and might overcome the 
crisis with the least damage.  Erdogan added that stance of banks 
against real sector was not proper that banks were asking 
manufacturers to pay high interest rates or were pressing their 
clients to pay back their depts. Ahead of schedule.  These are 
immoral attitudes.  Sabah notes that the economy administration 
revealed emergency measures for coping with the crisis.  Finance 
Minister Unakitan said that the government will make arrangements to 
offer convenient payment terms to the people with tax debts. 
Unakitan stressed that individuals will be able to pay their taxes 
in 18 month periods. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Global Financial Crisis 
Ibrahim Karagul of Yeni Safak writes: What happened to economic 
globalization?  What happened to neoliberalism?  This financial 
system is collapsing.  Now the economy is so bad that the only 
choice for the U.S. and Europe is to throw trillions of dollars at 
the markets.  The national deficit is so bad in the U.S. that the 
share for each American has risen to $17,000.  This means the Bush 
Doctrine is completely finished.  The Anglo-American imperial spirit 
has resulted in a nightmare.  There are three important developments 
to note - strategic investment is an issue of national security, 
there are expectations for hyper inflation in the U.S. in 2009, and 
the establishment of an international guardianship mechanism will 
prevent the U.S. economy from doing more damage to the world 
economy. 
 
Obama Promises to Repair Damage to Relations with Turkey 
All media outlets report on their front pages that Barack Obama's 
campaign website has outlined its new policy on Turkey.  Mainstream 
Sabah writes, "Obama gives warm messages for Turkey on his website." 
 Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet carries the headline, "Bush Pushed 
Turkey Away from the West," and reports "U.S. Democratic 
Presidential candidate Barack Obama wants to repair the strategic 
partnership between the U.S. and Turkey."  Islamist-oriented Yeni 
Safak carries the front-page banner headline "Bush Revived the PKK," 
and reports Obama's website says, "The Bush Administration's failed 
policies in Iraq further strengthened the PKK."  Islamist-oriented 
Zaman reports, "If Obama is elected, he will repair relations with 
Turkey."  In "We Will Win Turkey Back," mainstream Milliyet reports 
Obama promises, "Good and close relations with Turkey are in our 
nation's interests."  Liberal Radikal reports, "Obama also called on 
the Iraqi Kurds to give a guarantee to Turkey against the PKK." 
Leftist Taraf notes, "this time he did not call Turkey an 'invader' 
in Cyprus, but rather defended efforts that seek the unification of 
Cyprus." 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- PM Erdogan sues MHP leader Devlet Bahceli for insulting the PM 
during a speech in parliament. 
 
- The AKP sets up a special commission to evaluate the Court's 
detailed ruling regarding the AKP closure case. 
 
- Parliament's commission for human rights conducts inspections in 
 
ANKARA 00001857  003 OF 003 
 
 
Metris prison to probe allegations of torture that led to the death 
of inmate Engin Ceber. 
 
 
International News 
 
- Democratic Presidential Candidate Barack Obama expanded his 
national lead over Republican John McCain in the U.S presidential 
race to 12 points. 
 
- Russian FM Lavrov criticizes the EU monitors for failing to pay 
attention to the Georgian troop movements. 
 
- The Armenian foreign minister said he was optimistic about future 
ties with Turkey. WILSON