08ANKARA2063
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Nov 28 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1567
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #2063/01 3331239
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 281239Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8152
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9341
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5090
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3434
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7007
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6860
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3435
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002063 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 28, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
EU Draft Report on Turkey 
Media outlets report a draft report on Turkey, penned by European 
Parliament rapporteur Ria Oomen-Ruijten, criticizes the Turkish 
government over the "continuous slowdown" of the reform process, 
"despite the ruling government's strong mandate."  It highlights 
with concern the ongoing polarization within the society and the 
main political parties, which "negatively affects political 
institutions and the reforms process."  The draft calls on the 
government to work on a "new, civilian constitution" in a process in 
which political parties, civil society, and ethnic and religious 
minorities will be involved.  The draft urges the pro-Kurdish DTP to 
distance itself clearly from the PKK, while calling on the Turkish 
government to launch a political initiative for the settlement of 
the Kurdish question, and improve the Kurds' cultural rights.  The 
draft applauds the "communication and cooperation developed over the 
last year between Turkey and the Kurdish Regional Government," and 
encourages both sides to further intensify cooperation.  It also 
calls on the Turkish government to improve the rights and freedoms 
of Alevis.  The European Parliament will begin the debate of the 
draft report on Tuesday. 
 
Meanwhile, papers report Hannes Swoboda, acting president of the 
European Parliament's foreign affairs committee, told the press 
yesterday the Turkish government must "move forward on the Kurdish 
issue and on giving Alevis more room to maneuver."  Swoboda 
criticized the government's failure to act on these two topics even 
though it "often sees and speaks about the problem."  He also warned 
that a closure of the DTP would be a "disaster" for Turkey's image 
in Europe, and instead called for criminal prosecution of party 
members if they have ties with the PKK.  He also called on the DTP 
to "cut its ties" with the PKK.  "You cannot be in the mountains and 
in the parliament at the same time," Swoboda said, "You have to 
decide one way or another."  Swoboda also voiced hope regarding 
opposition CHP's recent registration of women wearing the headscarf 
or chador.  "It's important that out from spectacular action of Mr 
Baykal a reorientation of the CHP comes; I can't imagine CHP will be 
successful if it maintains its rigid stance on issues such as the 
headscarf," emphasized Swoboda. 
 
Terrorists Hit India's Financial Capital 
All media outlets give extensive coverage to the deadly terrorist 
attacks on at least ten targets in India's financial capital of 
Mumbai killing more than 125 people.  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
reports in "India's 9/11," that "the attackers targeted tourists, 
primarily Westerners including American, British citizens and 
Jewish."  The paper also focuses on the increased tension with 
neighboring Pakistan, "the attacks in Mumbai raised tensions between 
the two neighbors; Islamabad and New Delhi," adding "Indian PM 
Manmohan Singh criticized Pakistan and said the soil of neighbor 
states shouldn't be used for attacks against India."  Meanwhile, 
leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports "Pakistan warned India not to 
make accusations without evidence."  Liberal Radikal carries the 
front page banner headline, "The Day of Terror" as, "Armed 
terrorists hit luxurious hotels, hospitals, restaurants and movie 
theaters in India's Mumbai."  Mainstream Milliyet writes in the 
banner headline "They Released Us When We Said 'We're Muslim'," 
saying "Turkish tourists survived the terror attack in Mumbai when 
attackers learned they were Turks."  Mainstream Sabah writes in 
"Mumbai Massacre," that "more than 300 people were wounded in the 
attacks while Indian military tries to free people trapped by Indian 
militants."  The paper notes, "The militants knew who they intended 
to take hostage, and asked if there were any British or Americans." 
Mainstream Hurriyet writes in "They Hit Mercilessly," that "a group 
called Deccan Mujahideen said they carried out the attacks." 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak carried the headline, "Dead Visa for 
Their Passports," and reports, "The militants killed people after 
examining their passports and all hostages were Westerners." 
 
 
ANKARA 00002063  002 OF 003 
 
 
Editorial Commentary on Mumbai Terrorist Attacks 
 
Sami Kohen wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "As India's trade, 
finance, industry, film and tourism center, Mumbai is the window of 
developing India.  It is not a coincidence that the terrorists 
picked Mumbai for their attack.  Their aim was to damage this image 
and threaten other countries who have close relationships with 
India.  Although, the "Dekkan Mucahidin" terrorist group claimed the 
attack, no one ever heard of this group, including Indian 
intelligence.  The terror experts believe that this group has close 
connections with a more powerful, bigger group or with an outside 
terrorist group.  Indian PM Manmohan Singh also indicated a foreign 
connection at his speech of yesterday.  Whether foreign or local, 
the fact is that the ideologies and the strategic aims of this group 
are obvious:  These people are against the political, economic and 
social order of the country.  Moreover, this attack proves that 
after Afghanistan and Pakistan, India has also become a suitable 
place for tensions and instability." 
 
PKK Attack Kills two Policemen 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Sabah, Vatan, Posta, Cumhuriyet, Zaman and 
others:  Mainstream Milliyet reports that three PKK terrorists came 
from the Amanos mountains (in Hatay province) to Iskenderun's 
"Bitisik" village at around 11.30 yesterday morning.  Carrying 
Kalashnikov guns, the terrorists attacked the Municipal Garage at 
Denizciler town.  They cut the telephone lines, taken a garage guard 
hostage, moved to a high point, aimed at police manning a highway 
checkpoint and fired.  One policeman died and three civilians, 
including a one year old baby, were injured in their nearby houses 
by stray gunfire from the battle.  Meanwhile, a patrolling "Special 
Forces" team reached the area and followed the terrorists as they 
fled in cars.  After a two km chase, the terrorists left their 
hostage behind and fled on foot on a mountain path.  During the 
clashes between the terrorists and the special forces team, another 
policeman was killed.  Special forces and commandoes are continuing 
operations in the area in order to catch the terrorists. 
 
Iraqi Parliament Ratifies SOFA Agreement 
Media outlets feature straightforward, low-key coverage of the Iraqi 
parliament's approval of the military agreement that will see all US 
troops withdraw by the end of 2011.  Liberal Radikal carries the 
headline, "And Iraq Reaches SOFA," and writes, "after long 
negotiations, the agreement was approved by 149 members of the 198 
who attended the session."  The paper also notes, "Turkish Foreign 
Ministry stated that Turkey is pleased with the passing of the 
agreement."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports, "PM Nouri 
al-Maliki's Shiite-led government succeeded in gathering a majority 
to support the historic agreement."  The paper also notes the US' 
favorable opinion of the passage, "US Ambassador to Iraq, Ryan 
Crocker and US Forces Commander Gen Ray Odierno hailed the passing 
of SOFA." 
 
PM Erdogan Widens Media Ban 
Mainstream Milliyet reports that the Prime Ministry's spokesman Akif 
Beki, after declining to renew seven press accreditations recently, 
has now started intervening with media covering the AKP as well. 
Yesterday, Milliyet's AKP correspondent Abdullah Karakus and Vatan's 
correspondent Veli Toprak were prevented from covering an event 
organized by the AKP Women's Branches at the party headquarters. 
 
Editorial Commentary on US-Russia Relations 
 
Mustafa Balbay in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet: "The US will 
continue its interest in Russia's 'backyard,' the Central Asian 
countries, even under the Obama Administration.  The world is being 
rebuilt, and both the US and Russia are determined to strengthen 
their presence and increase their global influence.  For example, 
Russia is changing its constitution for Putin.  The Russian 
Parliament, the Duma, approved in a 144-1 vote a constitutional 
change which extends the term of president from four to six years. 
 
ANKARA 00002063  003 OF 003 
 
 
This approval opens the way for Putin's reelection." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- Prime Minister Erdogan and leading AKP officials will meet in 
Kizilcahamam near Ankara over the weekend. 
 
- An Alevi delegation will meet Friday with Parliament Speaker 
Koksal Toptan to discuss the problems of Alevis. 
 
- Prime Minister Erdogan said Turkey has not yet reached a deal with 
the IMF. 
 
World 
 
- Turkish and Greek Cypriot leaders Mehmet Ali Talat and Demetris 
Christofias will meet December 2 to discuss federal public 
administration and foreign relations. 
 
- The upper house of the Czech Parliament backs US plans to install 
part of a missile defense shield on Czech soil. 
 
- Pope Benedict XVI is reportedly considering a visit to Israel and 
Palestine next year. 
 
SILLIMAN