08ANKARA1383
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Aug 04 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO2425
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1383/01 2170825
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 040825Z AUG 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7021
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9063
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4554
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3122
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6764
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6595
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3176
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001383 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, JULY 31, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Turkish Leaders on Court Decision on AKP 
All news outlets continue giving extensive coverage to the 
consequences of the Constitutional Court ruling in the AKP closure 
case announced Wednesday.  In his monthly address to the nation, 
Prime Minister Erdogan called for "unity."  "The AKP has never been 
a focal point of anti-secular activities, and will continue to 
protect the values of our republic," said Erdogan.  President 
Abdullah Gul said in a written statement released yesterday that in 
the coming period everyone must focus on the priority issues of the 
country such as the fight against terrorism and EU membership." 
Parliament Speaker Koksal Toptan called on politicians to "assess 
well the reason for the decision, and take lessons."  Opposition CHP 
lawmaker Onur Oymen told Italy's La Repubblica the Constitutional 
Court ruling was a "victory of the secularists."  "This is a 
judicial decision and everybody should respect it," said far right 
MHP acting group chairman Oktay Vural. 
 
Several papers report following the announcement of the 
Constitutional Court decision, PM Erdogan told high-level party and 
Cabinet officiales that he cannot accept the claim that AKP has 
become a center for anti-secular activities.  AKP Vice Chairman 
Dengir Firat said his party has always defended the basic principles 
of the Republic, and would continue doing so. 
 
Mainstream Hurriyet comments that the Court's decision has put in 
place "red lines" for the ruling party.  If the AKP attempts new 
moves on controversial issues such as the headscarf or Islamic 
theology high schools (Imam-Hatip,) the prosecutor could ask for the 
closure of the party again.  Mainstreams Sabah, Hurriyet and Aksam 
say the PM might consider a cabinet reshuffle in September. 
Mainstream Milliyet says Erdogan discussed with President Abdullah 
Gul on Sunday the possibility of changing five or six ministers in 
the cabinet.  Hurriyet expects Education Minister Huseyin Celik to 
be moved to the party board, and Energy Minister Hilmi Guler, Health 
Minister Recep Akdag, and party deputy chairman Dengir Mir Mehmet to 
replaced.  Papers also speculate the AKP might seek a compromise 
with the opposition on possible constitutional changes once things 
settle down in October. 
 
International Reaction to Court Decision on AKP 
Papers report Iraqi President Jalal Talabani phoned PM Erdogan to 
congratulate him over the favorable outcome.  German Chancelor 
Merkel, Georgian President Shaakashvili, Italian PM Berlusconi and 
Iraqi PM Maliki called Erdogan and expressed their pleasure.  Joost 
Lagendijk, the co-chairman of Turkey-EU Joint Parliament Committee, 
said in a statement that a court decision to close the AKP would 
have been anti-democratic and incompatible with European values. 
Lagendijk also asked the AKP to take the right lessons from the 
court verdict, and to continue reforms that would lead towards the 
EU.  British Foreign Secretary David Miliband said, "The fact that 
the court chose not to close the party means Turkey can follow a 
more democratic and European path," and added Turkey's priority now 
should be reforms.  The EU term president France said the EU "took 
note of the Constitutional Court decision," and that it would 
continue to watch Turkey, particularly its democratic institutions. 
Mainstream Milliyet reports EU ambassadors in Ankara see the 
Constitutional Court ruling as a "yellow card" for the AKP. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Court Decision on AKP 
 
Okay Gonensin wrote in mainstream Vatan (8/1): "The Prime Minister 
spent an entire year creating suspicion and making statements that 
fed worry.  Therefore, it should now be his priority to eliminate 
those fears and worries in society.  He has every resource he needs 
to do that: a parliament majority, popular support and a weak 
opposition.  The European Union project is the most effective 
resource.  It's been nice to hear government figures speaking about 
 
ANKARA 00001383  002 OF 003 
 
 
a 'new style' in the aftermath of the court decision.  Let's hope 
these figures move beyond lip service to a new style to actual deeds 
that put it into effect." 
 
Yasemin Congar wrote in leftist Taraf (8/1):  "Let's hope that the 
AKP uses the Court decision as a chance for rebirth by moving 
forward with reforms and taking strong steps on difficult foreign 
issues.  There is also a chance for AKP to fight with a strengthened 
political will against Ergenekon to its bitter end.  The ruling 
party can be more reformist, pro-EU integration and decisive in 
foreign policy issues such as Armenia, northern Iraq and Cyprus.  It 
can take the initiative towards a civilian constitution and form 
social consensus with a more democratic approach.  If and when AKP 
chooses this path for the future, we can all take a deep breath of 
relief in the name of democracy." 
 
Mainstream Milliyet carried this op-ed (8/1):  "The Court decision 
represented a sensitive balance between democratic stability and the 
protection of secular values.  The decision is like a guide to all 
sides of the dispute as well as to the public about the boundaries 
of this sensitive balance.  The decision is a chance to decrease 
polarization within society and to establish a strong base for 
reconciliation.  The current crisis is a result of the AKP's loss of 
aspiration for EU integration.  Being inspired by the EU project is 
important for opening a new horizon for Turkey.  The European Union 
also must show an effort to regain the hearths and minds in 
Turkey." 
 
Ihsan Dagi wrote in Islamist-leaning Zaman (8/1):  "The Court 
decision aims to create a hold over the AKP.  The Court's message to 
the ruling party is 'You are guilty, but pardoned.'  The AKP must 
either live with this restraint or reform the political structure. 
The future of AKP is through full democracy which calls for freedom, 
supremacy of law for everybody and equality.  But this is not  in 
reconciliation with the current system which is based on supremacy 
of the appointed ones over the elected ones.  If AKP compromises 
with this bureaucratic ruling, it will lose its power." 
 
The Supreme Military Council (YAS) Convenes 
Hurriyet, Sabah, Milliyet, Posta, Bugun, Vatan, Cumhuriyet, and 
others:  Papers report that the Supreme Military Council (YAS) will 
convene under PM Erdogan today.  111 colonels and generals' 
retirement and promotion will be determined at the YAS and . 
decisions will be announced to the public following President Gul's 
approval on Monday August 4.  Mainstream Sabah says Land Forces 
Commander General Basbug is expected to be assigned as the Chief of 
General Staff, Gendarmerie commander General Isik Kosaner will be 
the Land Forces Commander and deputy Chief of TGS General Saygun 
will be the 1st Army Commander.  Air Force Commander General Aydogan 
Babaoglu and Navy Commander Admiral Metin Atac will remain at their 
posts for one more year. 
 
Tensions High in Kirkuk 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Sabah, Radikal, Cumhuriyet, Zaman and others 
report on rising tensions surrounding the Kirkuk Provincial 
Council's decision to join the Kurdish Regional Administration. 
Liberal Radikal writes "Kirkuk Annexed to Kurdish Region," saying 
"while Kurds are protesting the provincial elections law which 
provides equal rights to Turkmens and Arabs, the Provincial Council 
decided yesterday the city should be annexed to the Kurdish region." 
 In "Tensions at the Top in Kirkuk," mainstream Milliyet writes 
"while tensions rise with the attacks targeting Turkmens in Kirkuk, 
the Provincial Council has decided in a special meeting to join the 
Kurdish Administration."  The paper carries the Turkish Foreign 
Ministry's statement on the issue which expresses its concern about 
the rising tensions in Kirkuk.  The statement notes "there's no 
change in Turkey's Kirkuk policy and Turkey invites all parties in 
Kirkuk and Iraq to compromise and pursue dialogue."  Mainstream 
Hurriyet reports in "Turkmen's Cry for Help," that "Turkmen's are 
worried about the rising pressure of Kurds." 
 
ANKARA 00001383  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
Karadzic Appears at War Crimes Court 
All papers report the former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic 
appeared before the UN war crimes tribunal at The Hague yesterday to 
face genocide charges.  Mainstream Milliyet writes "Time to Pay the 
Bill," noting "Karadzic's bushy beard and the guru-like hair that 
helped him stay hidden nearly 13 years on the run, was gone." 
Mainstream Sabah writes in "Serbian Butcher Claims the U.S. Sold 
Him" that "Karadzic shockingly claimed that former Secretary of 
State Richard Holbrooke attempted to arrange for the indictment to 
be withdrawn in exchange for a deal with Karadzic that he disappear 
from public life."  Liberal Radikal writes "Karadzic: U.S. 
Guaranteed," and reports "Ambassador Holbrooke denied all of 
Karadzic's claims, however, adds that Holbrooke further explained 
that Karadzic had to quit politics, and he did that." 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet carries the headline, "I Have 
Holbrooke's Word," saying "Karadzic made his shocking appearance on 
the very first day." 
 
One Sergeant Martyred at PKK Attack in Sivas 
Sabah, Milliyet, Hurriyet, Cumhuriyet, Zaman, Radikal and others: 
Today's papers report that PKK terrorists opened fire on a military 
vehicle near Cukuroba village in Sivas.  One sergeant was killed and 
two soldiers and a technician were injured during the attack. 
 
Meanwhile, Islamist-oriented Zaman reports that big personnel losses 
by the PKK in recent military operations, the terrorist group is 
exerting efforts to recruit new members.  With little recruitment 
success in Turkey, the PKK is training Iranian youth at Kandil 
Zaman also carries a PKK corruption story in which two 
administrators of a German PKK-affiliated association ran away with 
500.000 Euro.  Reportedly, the PKK gave the execution orders for 
these two fugitives. 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Breaking News: On Friday, a three story girls dormitory collapsed 
in the central Anatolian city of Konya, killing more than 10 
students.  Many children are still buried in the rubble.  The 
dormitory was reportedly used for religious education for girls. 
 
- Merrill Lynch sees Turkish markets as "stable" following the 
Constitutional Court ruling in the AKP closure case. 
 
- The Turkish Parliament's honorary award for 2008 goes to world 
famous Turkish historian, Professor Halil Inalcik. 
 
International News 
 
- The Italian Parliament ratified the Lisbon Treaty one week after 
the Senate and lower house approved the accord. 
 
- President Bush declares progress in the Iraq war, saying 
terrorists "are on the run" and that further troop reductions should 
be coming. 
 
- Seventy-one terror attacks were reported in Turkey in the second 
quarter of 2008. 
WILSON