08ANKARA2177
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Dec 29 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO5960
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #2177/01 3641257
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 291257Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8316
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9371
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5154
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3472
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7030
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6886
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3465
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 002177 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, DECEMBER 29, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
The World Stands Up Against Israel (Sabah) 
Media outlets, from the left to the right, from secularists to 
Islamists, uniformly condemn the Israeli air strikes against Gaza. 
Media reflect the opinions of President Gul, who called Israel's 
actions "irresponsible," and Prime Minister Erdogan, who called the 
air strikes, "a serious crime against humanity."  Some media take 
the condemnations several steps further.  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
carries the headline, "Turkey Stands Up against the Israeli 
Massacre," and reports the Israeli newspaper Haaretz says "Israel 
began planning this assault six months ago while they sat at the 
table to discuss a ceasefire," with Hamas.  The website for 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak carries the headline, "We Are All 
Palestinians," while the front page of today's paper reports the 
attacks are "Like Hitler."  Extreme Islamist Vakit writes, "Turkey 
is sending aid to the Palestinians before Israel's actions result in 
genocide," and the paper calls Israel, "a terrorist state." 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet carries the headline, "Israel 
Continues Its Merciless Attacks," as "Israel Even Strikes Children 
Who Were Returning Home from School."  Mainstream Hurriyet reports, 
"Turkey is in shock" after the Israeli attacks.  Mainstream Vatan 
carries the headline, "Israel Won't Stop."  Liberal Radikal's 
headline reads, "Gaza Is Covered in Corpses," as the U.S. "calls 
Hamas 'bandits' and defends Israel." Leftist Taraf reports on its 
front page, "This Cannot Be The Will of God," as "Israel violates 
one of the Ten Commandments - Thou Shall Not Kill - after the Jewish 
Sabbath and Hanukkah."  Mainstream Aksam reports, "Israel Launches 
Gaza Strikes on the Eve of Elections." 
 
 
Editorial Commentary on Israeli Attacks on Gaza 
 
Semih Idiz wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "The U.S. and Russia 
stopped short of condemning Israel's attack against Gaza due to a 
rise in Islamaphobia in the West.  Also, the West sees Hamas as 
terrorists, not as freedom fighters.  Because of this, Prime 
Minister Erdogan's harsh criticisms against Israel will be seen by 
the West as an expression of Islamist solidarity, which could spell 
trouble for Turkey's foreign policy." 
 
Ferai Tinc of mainstream Hurriyet wrote:  "Clearly, this assault 
against Gaza was planned by Israel by the time Israeli Prime 
Minister Olmert visited Ankara last week and Ankara failed to 
prevent this catastrophe.  Nevertheless, maybe Turkey can help 
mediate between Israel and Hamas." 
 
Oral Calislar wrote in liberal Radikal: "The dominant ideology in 
Israel addresses the Palestine problem only through the lens of 
terrorism.  Meanwhile, Israelis who want to address the social and 
political aspects of the Israeli/Palestinian tensions are in 
trouble.  The recent Israeli attack is a result of the dominant 
approach, which will not bring any solution at all.  Israeli hawks 
are taking steps toward escalating violence in Palestine.  All of 
this provides a very good lesson to us (regarding Turkey's strikes 
against the PKK) as well." 
 
Mehmet Y. Yilmaz blamed the PM for ignoring the UN structure in 
mainstream Hurriyet: "Prime Minister Erdogan made strong and angry 
remarks against Israel's attack and called on the United Nations to 
intervene.  Someone must explain to Erdogan how the UN functions. 
As a member of the UN Security Council, Turkey is capable of making 
direct contact with the other members and can even prepare a draft 
resolution calling for the cessation of operations.  However, as a 
member of the UNSC, one cannot simply call on the UN in a public 
speech.  It seems neither the prime minister nor foreign minister 
understand how the international system works." 
 
Ceyda Karan wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "It is too 
simplistic to look at this situation and only blame Israel. Since 
 
ANKARA 00002177  002 OF 004 
 
 
Hamas won elections in 2006, they have failed to embrace 
reconciliation.  In addition, Arabs have not tried at all to 
encourage Hamas to become less radical." 
 
In Islamist oriented Yeni Safak, Hakan Albayrak made a call to 
Islamic world: "Israel will continue its crimes against humanity 
until Israel's hands are tied by the international community.  This 
calls for a united approach from the Islamic world against Israel. 
Turkish parliamentarians who are members of the Turkey-Israeli 
Friendship caucus group should feel ashamed.  In addition, bilateral 
defense agreements between Turkey and Israel must be terminated. 
Turkey and other Islamic countries must support Hamas, Islamic Jihad 
and Hizbullah as well as others who are working against Israel." 
 
Mehmet Yilmaz wrote in Islamist oriented Zaman: "Israel is targeting 
Gaza, which is under Hamas's control.  However, the West Bank, which 
is under Al Fatah, is not targeted.  Therefore, it appears the 
Israeli government wants to prevent Hamas from being a political 
actor.  Meanwhile, Israel hopes to gain a strong hand for itself 
vis-`-vis President-elect Barack Obama, who is expected to initiate 
a new peace initiative right after the inauguration." 
 
Markar Esayan wrote in leftist Taraf: "Neither the U.S. nor Israel 
has worked for the democratic will of the Palestinian people. 
Instead, their policies and illegitimate approaches have made Hamas 
more extreme, while those who seek reconciliation are left 
invisible." 
 
High Courts Clash over Small Town Municipalities 
Media outlets reported over the weekend and today that the High 
Election Board (YSK) opened the way for small municipalities with 
populations below 2000 to enter the forthcoming municipal elections 
in March, despite an earlier law sponsored by the ruling AKP in 
Parliament to exclude the small communities.  Almost all of the 862 
municipalities that were to be excluded due to their population 
criteria filed lawsuits seeking to participate in the local 
elections.  The Council of State (Danistay) recently ruled that the 
862 municipalities were to be reclassified as towns in the Turkish 
Statistics Institute (TurkStat) so they may take part in the local 
elections in order to elect a mayor, provided that they reach a 
population of more than 2,000 and file a lawsuit against TurkStat 
before March, 6, 2009. 
 
The Council of State ruling, however, sparked a heated debate over 
allegations that the court had exceeded its authority, as the 
Constitutional Court had previously announced that these 
municipalities could not appeal to the judiciary to nullify the bill 
in question.  Constitutional Court President Hasim Kilic, in a 
statement released on Wednesday, lashed out at the Council of State 
and the YSK, saying these two verdicts would lead to a violation of 
the Constitution.  Constitutional Court Deputy Chairman Osman 
Paksut, however, said Kilic's statement doesn't reflect the opinion 
of all the top court justices.  "The statement is not a joint 
decision of the Constitutional Court.  It's the personal conviction 
of Kilic.  He said ruling against the top court's verdict is a 
violation of the Constitution," Paksut explained. 
 
Following Paksut's remarks, Kilic told reporters that the statement 
was released with the support of six of the Constitutional Court's 
11 judges.  However, eight members of the top court released another 
statement yesterday in which they said they do not share Kilic's 
statement.  Opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal called the debate 
"chaos in the judiciary" and accused Prime Minister Erdogan of being 
the source of the discord.  CHP leader Deniz Baykal says his party 
was waging legal struggle against the disbanding of 1400 
municipalities.  On Friday, AKP group leader, Bekir Bozdag, accused 
the Council of State of breaching the constitution.  "Nobody wants 
to see politics involved in the judiciary.  Judges should reflect 
their political orientation at the ballots, not in their verdicts, 
Bozdag said. 
 
ANKARA 00002177  003 OF 004 
 
 
 
AKP's Mayoral Candidate for Ankara Not Clear 
Media outlets report Prime Minister Erdogan said yesterday they will 
announce the mayoral contenders for metropolitan municipalities, 
including Ankara, this week. 
 
Among 46 provinces where the ruling AKP holds the mayoral office, 
the AKP decided to proceed with the existing mayors in 18 provinces 
in the upcoming period.  Erdogan said the decision about the Ankara 
candidate would be made at a meeting of AKP administration tomorrow. 
 Papers see the delay as a negative omen for Ankara mayor Melih 
Gokcek.  So far, the AKP has announced the mayoral contenders for 
the metropolitan municipalities of Istanbul, Izmit, Antalya, Konya 
and Kayseri. 
 
New Anti-Terror Approach 
Mainstream Hurriyet reported on Sunday that Turkey will establish "a 
new unit for the struggle against terrorism consisting of contracted 
officials dedicated solely to this mission."  Deputy Prime Minister 
Cemil Cicek, who chairs the Higher Board of Counter-Terrorism, said 
there was "a lack of coordination among the current institutions 
struggling against terrorism" and added, "a new team of contractors 
from various professional groups like retired prosecutors, retired 
police officers and professors would fill this shortage."  Also, he 
said, "The struggle against terrorism will be fully implemented. 
Those who take part in this struggle against terrorism will be 
dedicated to the task 24 hours a day.  This will be an uninterrupted 
struggle."  He also said that intelligence was very important to the 
struggle against terrorism and that gathering the collected 
information at one center and sharing it with the relevant agencies 
was an important part of this struggle. 
 
Armenian Genocide Claims in 2009 Make Turks Nervous 
CNN Turk reports Foreign Minister Ali Babacan told reporters he is 
afraid that Armenian genocide claims "could lead to a car wreck in 
relations with the U.S."  Cengiz Candar says in mainstream Sabah, 
"While the incoming Obama administration will open a new page in 
relations with Turkey by withdrawing its forces from Iraq," problems 
may arise because, "Obama could officially recognize Armenian 
genocide claims in 2009." 
 
TRT to Launch Radio, TV in Armenian 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports today that Turkey's state-owned 
broadcaster TRT has signed a cooperation agreement with Armenia's 
state television, according to which TRT will launch radio 
broadcasts in Armenian in February.  TRT will also launch a website 
as well as a television channel in Armenian over the course of next 
year, says Hurriyet. 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Turkish oil company TPAO will meet with the U.S. oil company 
Chevron in January to search for oil and natural gas in Black Sea. 
TPAO earlier signed a cooperation agreement with the U.S. 
Exxon-Mobile Company. 
 
- The pro-Kurdish DTP leader Ahmet Turk said Prime Minister Erdogan 
has turned the upcoming local elections into "a fight with the 
Kurds," adding that Kurdish-language broadcasts on state-owned TRT 
were "election-oriented investment." 
 
- Turkey's 2009 budget of 259.1 billion YTL (USD 169 billion) was 
approved by parliament. 
 
International News 
 
- Iraqi President Talabani has approved a parliamentary resolution 
 
ANKARA 00002177  004 OF 004 
 
 
allowing the presence of non-U.S. foreign troops in the country 
after the expiry of a UN mandate at the end of the month. 
 
- A 5.2 magnitude earthquake shakes central Greece.  There are no 
reports for injuries or serious damage. 
 
- The first U.S. ambassador to Libya in three decades has arrived in 
Tripoli. 
 
JEFFREY