08ANKARA206
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Feb 05 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3203
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0206/01 0361357
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 051357Z FEB 08 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5127
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8659
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3836
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2668
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6397
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6223
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2804
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000206 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 5, 2008 
 
ANKARA 00000206  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
High Justice Warns AKP and MHP against Headscarf Reforms 
All papers report the Court of Appeals' Acting Chairman Osman Sirin 
said the AKP and MHP should heed the warnings from the judiciary 
regarding headscarf reforms.  "It's impossible for the judiciary to 
not declare its views when the parliament attempts to change the 
constitution.  We don't aim to intervene in the legislative process, 
but the authority of the parliament does not include touching on the 
principle of secularism, whether it be directly or indirectly," 
Sirin emphasized.  Mainstream papers see Sirin's warning as the 
strongest warning from the judiciary so far.  Papers report the AKP 
government responded swiftly, with Justice Minister Mehmet Ali Sahin 
saying "the government is sensitive to protecting secularism." 
 
Erdogan and Bahceli Are Determined on Headscarf Freedom 
All papers report Prime Minister Erdogan rejected suggestions from 
the opposition Democratic Left Party (DSP) that headscarf reform be 
postponed.  DSP leader 
Sezer said, "I got the impression that Erdogan is seeking a 
solution.  He seems to be committed to the matter, but he also said 
article 17 of the Higher Education Law can be discussed again." 
Article 17 describes how the headscarf should be tied.  In a meeting 
with Sezer later in the day, opposition MHP leader Devlet Bahceli 
said the headscarf regulation should not be suspended.  "Bahceli 
stressed he does not want to see a military coup in Turkey.  He 
thinks once the headscarf issue is resolved, many concerns would 
drop significantly." 
 
Liberal Radikal says after the headscarf debate is over, the issue 
of 'Imam Hatip' high schools will return to the spotlight.  Imam 
Hatip schools train Muslim clergy in Turkey.  During a meeting on 
Thursday, the High Education Board (YOK) is expected to adopt 
changes to university entrance exams which, Radikal argues, will 
benefit Imam Hatip students. 
 
Meanwhile, papers report President Abdullah Gul stated he would not 
seek a referendum on the government plan to lift the headscarf ban 
in universities.  "I've never found it right to hold referendums on 
basic rights and freedoms," Gul said in a meeting with prominent 
Turkish literary figures on Monday. 
 
Turkish Warplanes Strike PKK in Northern Iraq, DTP Protest Attacks 
All papers report Turkish warplanes bombed PKK targets in the 
northern Iraqi villages of Avasin, Baysan, and Hakurk on Monday. 
The Turkish General Staff (TGS) released a statement saying nearly 
70 terror targets in northern Iraq were destroyed during the air 
strikes.  According to the TGS statement, "utmost care was shown to 
ensure that the civilian population in the region is not affected by 
the operation." 
 
Meanwhile, papers report that on Thursday, 900 pro-Kurdish DTP 
members arrived in Sirnak province, on the border with Iraq, to call 
for an end to Turkish cross border operations against the PKK.  The 
DTP members plan to set up tents on Kupeli Mountain in order to form 
a chain of human shields to protest Turkish strikes.  Approximately 
6,000 more DTP supporters are expected to arrive in the area today. 
 
 
Shays: 'US Shares Satellite Photos and Coordinates of PKK Camps' 
Milliyet, Zaman and Yeni Safak report Congressman Chris Shays, 
member of the Intelligence Sharing and Risk Evaluation 
Sub-Committee, told the Voice of America Radio the US has provided 
Turkey with satellite photographs of PKK camps and activities in 
northern Iraq.  "We also made it clear to the Iraqi government that 
the US would not allow the PKK to use northern Iraq as a base, and 
warned the Kurdish regional administration that they should face the 
PKK problem," emphasized Shays.  He also called on Europe to "fully 
understand the fact that the PKK is a terror organization," papers 
report. 
 
ANKARA 00000206  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
 
Nine Turks Killed in Fire in Germany 
All papers report a fire in Ludwigshafen, Germany killed nine Turks, 
including five children.  Eight of the victims were killed by the 
flames, and one woman died when she jumped from the window. 
Mainstream Vatan claims the firefighters arrived late to the burning 
building.  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak recalls an earlier arson 
attack by German racists targeting Turks in Solingen in 1993, and 
questions whether the fire in Ludwigshafen was another 
racially-motivated attack. 
 
Papers report on Monday, Prime Minister Erdogan asked visiting 
German Interior Minister Wolfgang Schauble to "seriously 
investigate" the fire.  The Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA) released 
a statement saying, "German authorities should conduct a 
comprehensive investigation into the fire by taking into 
consideration every possibility.  If it was intentional, those 
responsible must be captured as soon as possible." 
 
Gul Appoints Names to Fill YOK Board Posts 
Milliyet, Sabah, Radikal, Cumhuriyet, Zaman, Yeni Safak and others 
report President Abdullah Gul made four new appointments on Monday 
to fill the vacant posts in the High Education Board (YOK).  A press 
release by the Presidency said Gul appointed Turkish Board of 
Statistics (TUIK) President Omer Demir, Istanbul University Economy 
Department member Professor Berrak Kurtulus, Zonguldak University 
fellow Professor Durmus Gunay, and Professor Necmi Yuzbasilioglu to 
YOK seats. 
 
Mainstream papers say Professor Gunay was an advocate of turban 
freedom in universities, and that he was also an AKP candidate who 
ran for parliament in Isparta in the July 22 general elections. 
Demir was appointed by the AKP to head TUIK and he initiated 
assessments of 'faith statistics' in Turkey, according to papers. 
 
Editorial Commentary: Kosovo, Ecumenical Status of Greek Orthodox 
Patriarchate 
Sami Kohen commented in mainstream Milliyet (2/5):  "By electing the 
pro-Western candidate Tadic as president at the elections, Serbia 
showed that its tendency is toward the EU rather than Russia.  While 
delivering his first speech, the newly-elected President talked 
about his European vision and emphasized the new direction he 
planned for his country.  Naturally, the West is very pleased with 
these results.  Despite all these pro-Western plans, the 
developments in Kosovo will determine the route Belgrade is going to 
follow from now on.  There are two well known facts in Serbia: 1. No 
matter who is elected as President in Serbia, Kosovo is determined 
to declare independence; 2. Tadic, also, just like pro-Russian 
Nikolic, is against Kosovo's independence.  There is only a little 
difference on their style regarding Kosovo; Tadic supports a 
solution through negotiations and concession.  It is obvious that in 
the upcoming days, there will be intensive diplomatic activities in 
the international platform.  Kosovo is determined to declare 
independence in the near future and the support they receive from 
the EU and the US has encouraged them more.  If President Tadic 
ignores US and EU support and boycotts an independent Kosovo, then, 
he will come up against the EU, and Tadic will put a distance 
between the West and Serbia.  Only Russia will benefit from such a 
situation.   In short, if events progress in this direction, 
political balances of Balkans will be faced with unknown results." 
 
Oktay Eksi observed in mainstream Hurriyet (2/5):  "Deeply involved 
in turban tensions, no one paid attention to the results of the 
Greek PM's visit to Turkey.   PM Erdogan gave signals that his 
government had made and will continue to make changes in Turkish 
policies.  According to PM Erdogan, the ecumenical status of the 
Fener Patriarchate was an issue of concern only tothe Greek Orthodox 
Church.  Foreign Minister Ali Babacan also commented on the issue 
and said "we should not regard the re-opening of Halki Seminary and 
the ecumenical issue as taboos.  Let me clarify one thing: the 
 
ANKARA 00000206  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
ecumenical status of the Patriarchate is an issue concerning Turkey 
because it is an institution of the Turkish Republic and subject to 
Turkish law.  This was a condition for the Patriarchate to stay in 
Turkey.  By accepting the ecumenical status of the Patriarchate, 
Turkey will not be able to apply Turkish laws to its clerics. 
Moreover, by recognizing the ecumenical status, Turkey will not be 
able to object to a possible Patriarchate decision to re-open Halki 
Seminary.  Because of all of this, the ecumenical status of the 
Patriarch is not something that should be left solely to the 
Orthodox Church." 
 
TV News: 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- On Monday, the Prime Ministry said Prime Minister Erdogan will pay 
a state visit to Germany February 7-10.  Erdogan will meet 
Chancellor Angela Merkel and attend the 44th Munich Conference on 
Security Policy. 
 
- The Council of Europe is launching a new two-year technical 
cooperation project, "Ethics for the Prevention of Corruption in 
Turkey" (TYEC). 
 
- On Monday, President Abdullah Gul hosted a luncheon for leading 
Turkish literary figures.  The invitees included Dogan Hizlan, Selim 
Ileri, Adalet Agaoglu, Elif Safak, Rasim Ozdenoren, and Hilmi Yavuz. 
 
 
International News 
 
- Leading US presidential contenders make their final preparations 
for today's 'Super Tuesday' primaries and caucuses. 
 
- A suicide bomber on Monday blew himself up in Dimona, the southern 
town that houses Israel's secretive nuclear reactor, killing at 
least one Israeli and wounding six. 
 
- Israel's Environment Ministry stopped a Turkish ship at the Ashdod 
port after an oil spill was discovered around the vessel.  WILSON