08ANKARA1255
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Jul 11 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO4915
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1255/01 1931244
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 111244Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6822
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9019
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4467
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3073
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6722
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6555
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3134
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001255 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, JULY 11, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
The Aftermath of the Attack against the US Consulate in Istanbul 
All papers:  An official funeral ceremony for three Turkish police 
officers who died in a terrorist attack on US Consulate in Istanbul 
was held in front of the Istanbul police department yesterday. 
There was wide participation at the funeral by high-level state and 
military officials.  US Istanbul Consul General Sharon Wiener also 
attended the ceremony.  Liberal Radikal's and tabloid Posta's 
headlines read "Farewell to Heroes." 
 
Mainstream Milliyet reports that the fourth suspect of the attack, 
an unregistered taxi driver Cebrail Kosanarslan, surrendered 
yesterday.  The terrorists were linked to Islamist groups; in 
addition, the father of murdered terrorist Raif Topcil was captured 
in 1996 as a suspected member of Hezbollah.  Interior Minister Besir 
Atalay said after assessing the evidence, the general belief is that 
the attack was a suicide attack. 
 
Mainstream Sabah quotes an unnamed high-level Justice Ministry 
official who blamed Ergenekon for being behind the bloody attack. 
"This was an attempt to take the attention away from the Ergenekon 
case," said the official. 
 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports that a separate commemoration ceremony 
was held in the garden of the US Consulate General yesterday.  The 
US flag flew half-staff and Consul General Sharon Wiener paid a 
condolence visit to the policemen on duty in front of the Consulate 
General building. 
 
Hurriyet quotes Bahcesehir University Strategic Research Center 
Director and terrorist expert Ercan Citlioglu saying "US security 
acted appropriately.  According to the Vienna Conventions, 
diplomatic missions are protected by the host country.  The mission 
security cannot engage in clashes outside of the grounds of its 
mission.  American officers did not have the authority to use 
firearms on Turkish soil." 
 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports, "Terror experts agree the 
attack on the Consulate carried out by Al-Qaeda," and "The goal of 
the attack was to send a warning to the US and to Turkey regarding 
US policies in the Middle East." 
 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak and Star say that the Consulate was 
chosen in order to draw more international reaction.  Yeni Safak 
contends, "The terrorists' main target was the visa section of the 
Consulate and they would have carried out a massacre if they had 
entered the compound." 
 
U.S. Flag flies at Half Staff at Consulate 
Several outlets carry positive coverage of yesterday's ceremony at 
the U.S. Consulate at which the U.S. flag was flown at half staff in 
honor of the policemen who died during the attack on Wednesday. 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak and leftist Taraf carry photos of the 
flag at half staff while mainstream Milliyet carries the headline, 
"She Said, 'I Wish Them Well,' in Turkish," and notes U.S. Consul 
General Sharon Wiener thanked the police for protecting the 
Consulate.  Vahap Munyar of mainstream Hurriyet writes, "Sharon 
Wiener loves Turkey and she knows Turkey well," and he notes Wiener 
called the day of the attacks, "The worst day." 
 
Criticism against the Consulate for not helping the Police 
The front page of today's mainstream Vatan features a picture of 
U.S. Marine security guards alongside the headline, "The Johnnys 
Just Watched." The story continued, "U.S. officials receive harsh 
criticism for not helping the police against the terrorists and not 
opening their door to injured police."  In addition, the paper 
notes, "the injured policeman who is still in the hospital refused 
to see Consul General Sharon Wiener because he says the Consulate 
failed to help him when he was injured," and, "he would not accept 
 
ANKARA 00001255  002 OF 003 
 
 
her flowers."  Far Right Ortadogu reports in "The Americans Didn't 
Open the Door," that injured policeman Osman Dagli told reporters, 
"We died and they didn't open the door."  Hikmet Bila in 
leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet writes, "These people (meaning the 
Americans) turn into hawks when it comes to their own interests. 
But they shut themselves down automatically when any kind of 
sacrifice is expected from them.  They continue to live in their 
castle in peace by shutting their automatic doors without worrying 
about the bloody incidents outside their walls."  Hakan Celik of 
mainstream tabloid Posta writes, "The U.S. Embassy spokesperson 
reminded yesterday that the American security personnel are 
responsible only for the security of the Embassy and Consulate 
staff.  Of course, this is a normal procedure; however, after all. 
Those policemen were there to protect the people inside the 
building! It deeply hurt the Turkish public to see the Americans 
abandoning the Turkish police out there.  The U.S. popularity in 
Turkey might be very low.  However, the people of this country never 
left the U.S. alone in the fight against terrorism." 
 
 
Editorial Commentary: 
"The Martyred Policemen" 
Derya Sazak writes in mainstream Milliyet (7/11):  "It has been 
reported that, during the attack on the U.S. Consulate in Istanbul, 
Consulate staff went inside the building, leaving the Turkish 
policemen alone with the assailants.  Americans must not have done 
so with the aim of leaving Turkish security members to stand alone 
against al-Qaeda attackers.  They must have done what they were 
required them to do.  Years ago, I joined a night patrol with the 
Cleveland, Ohio police.  Unlike the courageous 'sheriffs' we see in 
the movies, I noticed that when American policemen get to the scene 
of a crime, they don't move an inch before first securing 
themselves.  Our young policemen lost their lives in the clash with 
assailants on the street while their nearby bulletproof cabins 
withstood the attack.  A traffic cop who began working only 15 days 
ago lost his life together with two of his colleagues.  The Istanbul 
Administration, which loves to use proportionate force, could have 
provided 'proportionate' security outside the Consulate." 
 
"The Target was not the U.S., but Turkey" 
Yusuf Kaplan writes in the Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak (7/11): 
"The target of the attack on the U.S. Consulate in Istanbul was not 
the Americans but the police, thus the target was Turkey.  It is 
significant to note that this attack took place while the 
'Ergenekon' investigation against a nationalist/fascist gang 
continues.  The U.S. Ambassador immediately announced the attack had 
targeted the U.S. and was conducted by al-Qaeda, and the secularist 
media immediately accepted this explanation.  However, news reports 
that the attack was by al-Qaeda and targeted the U.S. Consulate aims 
to divert from the true target.  The actual target was the Turkish 
security, thus Turkey run by the AKP." 
 
Ergenekon Indictment 
Hurriyet reports that the indictment of Ergenekon investigation 
written by three public prosecutors might be submitted to Chief 
Public Prosecutor Aykut Cengiz Engin today.  Engin said "I am 
expecting the indictment to be submitted to me today.  When it is 
submitted, I will announce it to the public in front of the TV 
cameras."  The indictment has been prepared by the Public 
prosecutors Zekeriya Oz, Mehmet Ali Pekguzel and Nihat Taskin, adds 
Hurriyet. 
 
NTV 12 o'clock news just announced that deputy chief prosecutor told 
the journalists that the indictment will be announced on Monday at 
¶11. 
 
Prime Minister Visits Iraq 
All paper:  Prime Minister Erdogan went to Iraq yesterday on a one 
day visit.  He met with President Talabani, PM Maliki, Parliament 
Speaker Meshadani, Vice Presidents Abdulmehdi and Hasimi. 
 
ANKARA 00001255  003 OF 003 
 
 
Cumhuriyet says the "Strategic Relations High Council Agreement" was 
signed with Iraq during the visit.  Under the agreement, the prime 
ministers of Turkey and Iraq will meet once a year, and relevant 
ministers of both countries will meet three times a year.  At the 
Press Conference after the meeting with Iraqi PM Maliki, PM Erdogan 
said that they discussed several issues including water, Kirkuk, 
fight against terrorism and thanked the Iraqi central government and 
the regional administration in northern Iraq for their support in 
the fight against the PKK. 
 
Media outlets report on the positive outcomes of Prime Minister 
Erdogan's official visit to Baghdad.  Mainstream dailies Sabah and 
Milliyet report, "The main goal of the two countries is to end the 
PKK."  Mainstream Hurriyet carries the headline, "A Thank You to 
northern Iraq," and notes, "Erdogan was welcomed by Iraqi ministers 
who rolled out the red carpet for him at the airport," and later, 
"Erdogan thanked northern Iraq for its cooperation in the fight 
against terror."  Islamist Zaman reports Erdogan, "Sent important 
messages of regional peace and support for Iraq's stability." 
Liberal Radikal points out, "The Strategic Agreement does not 
outline concrete plans, but rather establishes a mechanism to 
facilitate future projects such as officer and teacher trainings." 
Economic daily Referans writes, "Cooperation between Turkey and Iraq 
will improve the outlook of the region." 
 
President Gul Meets Retired General Ozkok 
Sabah, Milliyet, Radikal, Turkiye and others:  President Gul 
received former Chief of General Staff General Hilmi Ozkok at the 
Presidential Palace yesterday.  The meeting lasted for two and a 
half hours.  After the meeting, Ozkok told reporters that he had 
explained his views about the current situation of the country. 
Ozkok said that in an interview with Milliyet's Fikret Bila he had 
listed his proposals and that he had elaborated on them at the 
meeting with the President. 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- A 4.9 Magnitude quake is reported in Balikesir. 
 
- NTV, CNN Turk, and Kanal D all report that the Gendarme of the 
Agri region 
have closed off Mr. Ararat and launched operations on Mt. Ararat in 
order to rescue the German mountaineers from the PKK.  In addition, 
CNN Turk notes, "Ankara rejects speculations that the German 
government was in touch with the PKK who kidnapped the Germans." 
 
- Eight soldiers and a village guard were wounded when the PKK 
detonated a remote control mine in Semdinli town of Hakkari 
 
- A Turkish driver was killed in attack on a Turkish convoy in 
Mosul. 
 
International News 
 
- Armenia formally invites Turkish President Gul to watch a soccer 
match in Yerevan. 
 
- Disarmament talks with North Korea resume in Beijing after a 
nine-month pause due to the isolated regime's refusal to provide a 
complete list of its nuclear facilities 
WILSON