08ANKARA1760
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Oct 09 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO2301
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1760/01 2831431
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 091431Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7633
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9214
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4814
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3277
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6898
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6742
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3314
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 ANKARA 001760 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 8, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Erdogan, Baykal, Bahceli on PKK Terror 
Media outlets report Prime Minister Erdogan told his 
ruling AKP lawmakers in the parliament that Turkish military could 
launch cross-border operations into 
the north of Iraq if necessary.  The PM's remarks 
came after the PKK attack on a gendarme outpost in 
Hakkari province that killed 17 Turkish soldiers 
over the weekend.  Erdogan urged the Kurdish 
administration in the north of Iraq to cooperate 
with Turkey in combating terrorism.  "Remarks or 
statements alone are not enough; if they are not 
carried into action, we will have to move on our 
own," stressed Erdogan.  In "'Yes' to Effective 
Fight against Terror, 'No' to Backpedaling on 
Democracy," Islamist-oriented Zaman reports Erdogan 
also vowed to not take a single back step concerning individual 
rights and freedoms. Liberal Radikal says 
the PM makes pledges for democracy, but declines to 
give concrete guarantees for protecting democracy, 
human rights and freedoms. 
 
Addressing his lawmakers yesterday, opposition CHP 
leader Deniz Baykal said northern Iraq should cease 
being a shelter for terrorists.  "This task should 
be shouldered by Iraq and the U.S.  The Iraqi 
government, fighting against the al-Qaeda terror, 
should also fight against the PKK terror," said 
Baykal.  He added the U.S. should also be told that 
terror attacks on Turkey from the territories under American 
occupation would not be tolerated. 
 
Opposition far right MHP leader Devlet Bahceli 
proposed a "buffer zone" set up on the Iraqi side 
of the border in order to prevent terrorist 
infiltrations from the neighboring country. 
Bahceli also slammed the AKP government for 
leaving the whole responsibility in the fight 
against terror to the military.  Government 
Spokesman Cemil Cicek said his government would 
"evaluate" the security zone proposal. 
 
President, Justice Minister on Anti-Terror Measures 
Media outlets report President Abdullah Gul responded 
to reporters' questions yesterday before departing 
for Finland on a state visit.  On a question, Gul 
said terror attacks take place in a period of "great improvement" in 
Turkey-Iraq ties, apparently by some 
who do not want the relations to be developed further. 
Gul expressed belief that democracy would isolate 
terror.  On the controversial issue of expanding the authority of 
the military and police against terror, 
Gul stressed the debates, "a requirement of open 
society," would enhance democracy.  Gul noted the military's demands 
for combating terror would be 
evaluated by the government and parliament. 
 
Meanwhile, Justice Minister Mehmet Ali Sahin said 
the government evaluated the five demands of the 
military for combating terror, and added two of 
them were supported.  Sahin noted the government 
continued working on the matter, and stressed that 
neither freedoms nor security would be sacrificed 
while tackling the terror issue.  Liberal Radikal 
sees a contradiction, saying while the PM was giving messages for 
upholding democracy in the parliament, 
the Justice Minister announced the government accepted 
two of the five proposals of the military to facilitate 
the fight against terror.  "The AKP government had 
 
ANKARA 00001760  002 OF 005 
 
 
earlier turned down such proposals within the framework 
of the EU harmonization," says Radikal. 
 
CBO Debate 
All papers report upcoming debate at the parliament to extend 
mandate for cross border operation for one more year.  Prime 
Minister Erdogan talked supportive in his party group meeting; 
"Cross border operation mandate is 
a strong deterrence factor and I expect all of the AKP members to be 
present at the parliament and show strong support for the motion." 
Papers also carry statements 
from other three parties represented in the parliament.  Main 
opposition CHP leader Baykal urged government "to realize the 
long-term strategic political plan against Turkey when fight with 
PKK is planned" and he added: 
"Iraq must be a terrorism-free place.  The 
responsibility for this belongs to Iraq as well as 
the United States."  The MHP leader Bahceli urged for 
a comprehensive cross border operation both in land 
and by air "until PKK is completely eliminated." 
Meanwhile DTP opposed cross-border operations.  Leader 
of DTP, Ahmet Turk suggested more reforms to solve the problem, 
saying that instead of cross border operation mandate, the 
parliament should implement reforms to 
ease tension. 
 
TGS Chief Meets Academics, Analysts on Terror 
All papers report on Wednesday, the military General 
Staff (TGS) chief General Ilker Basbug had a six-hour brainstorming 
meeting with academics and terror 
analysts, including Ercan Citlioglu from Bahcesehir University, 
Ihsan Bal from international strategic 
research institution USAK, and Nihat Ali Ozcan from 
economic-political research foundation TEPAV. 
Mainstream Vatan reports on its front page the TGS 
meeting discussed civilian solutions to the problems 
in the mainly Kurdish southeast Turkey.  Mainstream Milliyet 
comments yesterday's meeting with academics 
and analysts indicate Basbug will give emphasis to 
the social, economic and psychological aspects of the 
fight against terror as well. 
 
Editorial Commentary on PKK Terror 
 
Hasan Cemal wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "Turkey's 
Kurdish problem, or whatever you may want to call 
it, cannot be resolved unless it is taken away from 
the military's hands.  Over the years, the military 
itself has become part of the problem instead of part 
of a solution.  Both the government and the parliament 
must be vocal and active.  Otherwise, neither peace 
nor democracy can be established." 
 
Hadi Uluengin wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "There is 
no military solution to the Kurdish problem.  The 
military should realize this and act accordingly by changing its 
misguided political strategy on this 
issue." 
 
Mustafa Unal wrote in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "In 
the past, Turkey has tried to contain terror by 
imposing lengthy states of emergency.  If tough 
measures were an effective remedy to the problem, separatist terror 
would be history by now.  The 
government has made it clear that it will not 
support efforts to re-establish emergency rule. 
Instead, the fight against terror will be waged 
with democratic methods." 
 
Ali Bulac wrote in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "The 
 
ANKARA 00001760  003 OF 005 
 
 
Aktutun military outpost attack has brought the 
security aspect of the Kurdish problem back to the 
top of the agenda.  Still, we should not see the 
military as the sole authority in resolving the 
Kurdish problem.  The military wants to tackle 
other issues as well.  In this regard, what is the 
position of civic politicians, the government, and 
the governing party?  Leaving the issue to the 
military will only stoke the fires of the problem.  Civilians and 
the parliament are the ones who will 
find a solution." 
 
Immigrants' Tragic End off Aegean Coast 
Hurriyet, Sabah, Radikal, Posta, Star report that at 
least 10 bodies were found at Gulf of Saros in 
Canakkale, Turkey and appears to be drowned illegal migrants who 
were trying to flee Greece.  Star daily 
fronts "Human Drama at the Shores" referring to 
the 10 bodies found by local fishermen.  Adnan 
Calkiroglu, the district governor of Gelibolu, was 
quoted as identifying bodies eight males, one female 
and one child as one of them was Turkish.  He said 
five of the bodies had Iraqi passports on them, but 
the others had no documents revealing their identity 
or origin. The district governor said Iraqi authorities were 
notified of the incident, and the bodies were 
sent to Istanbul for autopsy.  Governor of Canakkale 
Orhan Kirli said Turkish coast guard ships are 
searching the area to check if there are more 
bodies, "which seems very likely" he added. 
 
Global Economy Continues to Plummet 
Media outlets note today that international markets continue to lose 
steam and focus on the global economic structure as the possible 
ultimate victim.  Mainstream Vatan carries the banner headline, 
"It's Not the Banks, It's Countries That Are Being Sunk," by the 
global 
crisis.  Vatan notes, "Iceland ranked at the highest 
levels of the U.N.'s human development index, but 
Iceland has come to the point of collapse because of 
the financial crisis," and "The public has started to 
stock up on pasta."  Liberal Radikal reports, "Iceland 
has come to the brink of bankruptcy and depends on hopes 
of Russian assistance."  Mainstream Aksam reports, "The World is in 
a State of Panic," as "Iceland is on the 
Brink of Financial Collapse."  Economic daily Referans carries the 
headline, "The Crisis in the U.S. Creates Madness and Suicides Like 
1929." Conservative Bugun 
reports in "Crisis Madness," that "A U.S. man who lost 
his job killed his wife, children, mother-in-law, and himself 
because of his financial problems." Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
reports, "Turkey is Hit by the Crisis," as "Consumer confidence 
drops along with the lira."  In addition, Cumhuriyet reports, 
"Markets fail 
to recover despite Europe's measures to save the 
banks, including raising the minimum guaranteed for bank deposits." 
Yasar Sungu wrote in Islamist-leaning Yeni Safak, "The most recent 
financial crisis signals the 
demise of brutal capitalism, which will pave the way 
for a better and fairer economic system.  The current events do not 
represent the collapse of the United 
States, it is in fact the collapse of an unfair 
economic order." 
 
In related stories, media criticize American CEOs for 
their lavish lifestyles.  Mainstream Sabah carries the banner 
headline, "Lehman Brothers CEO Receives a $350 Million Bonus after 
he Ruins the Whole World."  Conservative-nationalist Turkiye 
reports, "Lehman 
Brothers CEO Receives $23 Million Days before the 
 
ANKARA 00001760  004 OF 005 
 
 
Company Collapsed."  Leftist Taraf reports, "Despite 
the Collapse of the Company, a Lehman Brothers CEO 
Gets a Bonus." 
 
Plane Forced Down in Iran 
An initially erroneous news bulletin from an Iranian 
news agency yesterday, one that claimed an American military 
aircraft had been forced down in Iran, 
stirred interest, confusion and criticism in Turkish 
papers this morning.  Mainstream Hurriyet reports in 
"Was it a Hungarian Mistake," or "Iranian Bullsh*t" 
that Iranian Fars news agency claimed that "Iran 
forced down a Hungarian plane with U.S. passengers," 
but later clarified the plane contained Hungarians. Mainstream Aksam 
reports, "The world is alarmed by 
reports an American aircraft was forced to land by 
Iranian fighter jets."  Liberal Radikal reports, "News 
that an American plane had violated Iranian airspace created 
excitement in the media yesterday," but notes, "Iranian state news 
agency El-Alem later confirmed the plane was Hungarian and had no 
American passengers on board."  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports in 
"Iran 
Brings down a Plane Carrying U.S. Generals," that "it 
was later confirmed that the plane was not a military plane, but was 
carrying Hungarians who were on their 
way to Afghanistan for humanitarian missions." 
Mainstream Sabah reports in "A Forced Landing Crisis," 
that "The plane took off from Turkey and entered 
Iranian airspace without permission," and noted, "the 
Fars news agency created tension by reporting that Iran 
had forced down an American plane." 
 
CNN Report Called "PKK Propaganda" 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports in, "According 
to CNN, the PKK is a Feminist Organization," that CNN correspondent 
Arwa Damon is depicted in a video on 
CNN's website in a report from the Qandil Mountains.  Cumhuriyet 
writes, "Some of the opinions related to 
the story (that are posted on the website's blog) 
show sympathy for the PKK terrorists." 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports in "PKK Propaganda 
from CNN," that "CNN recognized the PKK as an 
organization that is fighting for women's rights." 
 
Here is a link to the CNN video: 
http://www.cnn.com/video/#/video/world/2008/1 0/06/ 
damon.lok.pkk.camps.cnn?iref=videosearch 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- On Thursday, several cabinet ministers and military 
and security officials will gather at the Counter 
Terrorism High Board meeting under the chairmanship 
of Prime Minister Erdogan. 
 
- On Wednesday, TGS chief General Ilker Basbug will 
pay a courtesy visit to opposition CHP leader Deniz 
Baykal. 
 
- 311 parliamentarians use their mobile phones to 
make donations to various associations. 
Parliamentarians' mobile phone bills, however, are 
paid by the state. 
 
International News 
 
- Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said Turkey 
 
ANKARA 00001760  005 OF 005 
 
 
might help Yerevan in restoring Armenia's blocked 
relations with the external world. 
 
- Kurdish regional administration leader Massoud 
Barzani said the death of 17 Turkish soldiers in 
Aktutun would not help the efforts for the 
resolution of the Kurdish question. 
 
- UNSYG special envoy for Cyprus Alexander Downer 
will meet Turkish and Greek Cypriot leaders Talat 
and Christofias in the divided island on Friday. 
 
WILSON