08ANKARA1850
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Oct 23 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO2477
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1850/01 2971412
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 231412Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7772
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9252
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4872
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3321
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6930
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6774
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3348
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001850 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 23, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Constitutional Court Releases Opinion Regarding Headscarf Verdict 
All papers:  The Constitutional Court publicly issued its written 
opinion in the decision to annul a constitutional amendment allowing 
female students to wear headscarves in universities.  Mainstream 
Hurriyet reports that the Court's decision said, "The amendment was 
an attempt to use religion as a tool for political motives and it is 
against the principle of secularism."  Hurriyet notes that the 
Court's decision also said, "Wearing a religious symbol could become 
a tool used to pressure people with different political or religious 
views."  Mainstream Sabah reports that the Constitutional Court 
president Hasim Kilic and member Sacit Adali criticized the verdict 
and said "this is judicial guardianship."  A professor on 
Constitutional Law, Prof.Ergun Ozbudun, said "the verdict oversteps 
judicial authority."  Liberal Radikal's headline reads "Parliament's 
Legislative Authority is Restricted" and reports that a law 
professor from the AKP, Burhan Kuzu, said "the verdict curbed 
parliament of its functions."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak quotes 
Hasim Kilic, the president of the Constitutional Court as saying 
"setting rules on clothing in universities contradicts academic 
freedoms.  Universities are not military barracks.  The Court has 
gone far beyond its limits as stated by the Constitution." 
Mainstream Milliyet quotes PM Erdogan saying at his party meeting 
that "the Constitutional Court overstepped its authority." 
 
Editorial Commentary: Constitutional Court Decision on the Turban 
issue 
 
Ergun Babahan wrote in mainstream Sabah:  "This country has 
continuously denied two issues for years - Kurdish rights and 
headscarf freedom.  Turkey has ignored the Kurds' presence and has 
banned them from using their mother tongue.  Moreover, torture was 
used against the Kurds during the September 12th process, which 
paved the way to an increase in PKK activities.  Now, Turkey is 
ignoring the headscarf issue.  The administrators of this country 
should realize that it will not be possible to establish peace in 
this country if Kurdish broadcasting is not allowed, if the Kurds' 
right to use their mother tongue is ignored, or if girls are banned 
from school because they are wearing headscarves and thus girls are 
deprived of their basic rights to education." 
 
Taha Akyol wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "The Constitutional Court 
decision regarding the headscarf ban in the universities is a 
political one.  The high court seized on the parliament's decision 
to lift the ban and reached a decision based on the high court 
members' political beliefs.  But, there is nothing anyone can do 
about this.  There is no higher court to which an appeal can be 
made... All we can do is to criticize the decision and defend 
contemporary liberal beliefs.  But while doing this, we should never 
disrespect the Court's decision." 
 
Mehmet Tezkan wrote in mainstream Vatan:  "The AKP is responsible 
for turning the use of headscarves into a political symbol.  PM 
Erdogan's deepened the crisis when he said, "The headscarf is not a 
political symbol, but even if it is, so what?" The Constitutional 
Court's decision is trying to say "regardless of the percentage of 
votes a party receives, no one can damage the principle of 
secularism embedded in the Constitution." 
 
Ergun Ozbudun wrote in Islamist oriented Zaman:  "The recent Court 
decision regarding the headscarf issue reminded us of the 
seriousness of the constitution problems facing Turkey's democracy. 
Only a new constitution can solve Turkey's problems.  This 
constitution must reflect global and democratic values regarding 
freedom.  Otherwise, Turkey will remain partially democratic and 
partially free, as Turkey has been described on the international 
polling companies' lists." 
 
 
 
ANKARA 00001850  002 OF 003 
 
 
A  New Structure against Terrorism 
Sabah, Milliyet, Hurriyet, Vatan, Zaman, Yeni Safak and others: 
Today's papers report that a new era is beginning in the fight 
against terrorism.  Mainstream Sabah says that a new structure will 
be established within the Interior ministry to fight terror, called 
the Homeland Security Undersecreteriat.  The Interior Minister will 
now carry the title "Deputy Prime Minister."  Islamist-oriented 
Zaman reports that a homeland security board and a homeland security 
secretariat general will be established, and will have offices in 
the Middle East and in Europe. 
 
The Dollar Flies in Turkey. (Milliyet) 
All media outlets note that although the Turkish economy has not 
experienced the same ill effects as other economies in the recent 
global financial crisis, the U.S. dollar has suddenly risen sharply 
against the Turkish lira in recent days.  Mainstream Milliyet 
reports in "Foreigners Flee and the Dollar Flies," that "Investors 
are fleeing from developing nations and hedge fund sales are on the 
rise," as "the dollar climbs and all eyes are on the Central Bank," 
in order to strengthen the Turkish currency.  Mainstream Vatan 
reports, "Turkey will offer limitless guarantees on two-year bank 
deposits in order to attract deposits from foreign markets back into 
Turkey's banking system."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports, 
"Foreign investors are frightened," so "the dollar surges against 
the lira."  Economic daily Referans reports in "Here Are the Reasons 
for the 2-Day Surge in the Dollar," that "$15 Billion in foreign 
investment has left the Turkish economy." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Russia-Armenia relationship 
Fikret Ertan wrote in Islamist-oriented Zaman:  "Russian President 
Medvedev paid an official visit to Yerevan earlier this week.  This 
is one of the four times that Sarkisyan and Medvedev have met during 
¶2008.  According to a source close to the highest levels of the 
Kremlin, the talks during this summit aimed at strengthening the 
alliance and the political dialogue between Russia and Armenia. 
This source said that face to face meetings between Medvedev and 
Sarkisyan are expected to continue, but it's not known yet if any 
decisions or agreements will come out of the meetings.  Since 1991, 
Russia has made close to $2 billion in investments in Armenia, with 
$428 million of these investments made only in this year alone. 
From this perspective, the recent summit between Russia and Armenia 
shows the bilateral partnership is strengthening.  We must be 
informed of these developments.  Of course that's what we're trying 
for." 
 
TV News: 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- FM Babacan met with Shiite leader of Iraq Al-Hekim yesterday and 
asked for active cooperation against PKK. 
 
- 5,000 people attended the funeral of Ahmet Ozkan, who was shot 
dead during an illegal protest in Dogubeyazit.  The funeral turned 
into a pro-PKK demonstration. 
 
- Diyarbakir's Chief Prosecutor's Office has launched an 
investigation into DTP leader Ahmet Turk for his recent remarks in 
Diyarbakir. 
 
- The parliament approves a bill that grants amnesty to students 
dismissed from university after June 7, 1995. 
 
- The court rejects a request from the Ergenekon suspects for the 
appointment of a new judge to hear their case. 
 
International News 
 
- British Prime Minister Gordon Brown says the British economy is 
 
ANKARA 00001850  003 OF 003 
 
 
likely to fall into a recession for the first time in 16 years. 
 
- Iraqi Kurdish Regional Government President Massoud Barzani pays a 
visit to Iran. 
 
- The United States signs an accord allowing more than 80 personnel 
to take part in a vast European Union justice mission in Kosovo. 
WILSON