08ANKARA2077
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Dec 03 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO7408
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #2077/01 3381314
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 031314Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8172
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9347
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5098
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3441
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7013
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6866
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3442
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002077 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, DECEMBER 2, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Economic Indicators Raise Cause for Concern 
All papers report sharp changes in the latest import and 
unemployment figures.  Since November 2007, exports have dropped 22 
percent; in addition, the Turkish Employment Agency announced that 
the number of people applying for jobs nation-wide increased 134 
percent in October over the previous month. Liberal Radikal carries 
a front-page story with the headline, "The Prime Minister Does Not 
Like To Hear Pessimistic News, But Here Is the Reality," and the 
article reports the auto industry, which is a cornerstone of the 
Turkish economy, reported a 38 percent drop in auto exports. 
Radikal notes "The decrease in exports has dealt a blow to the 
farming sector," while, "The prime minister is warning the media 
against pessimistic reports, but the facts speak for themselves." 
 
Finance Minister Unakitan told press he was optimistic, however, 
when he talked to reporters at an economic affairs seminar and said, 
"Turkey is not going to suffer much from the global financial 
crisis, thanks to the current fiscal discipline." 
 
Parcel Bomb Explodes in AKP Building in Istanbul 
All papers report that at least ten people were injured on Monday 
after a bomb exploded at the entrance of the ruling AKP's Istanbul 
headquarters.  Papers report that security officers were x-raying a 
cargo parcel when it exploded.  Medical teams rushed to the scene 
and transported the injured to nearby hospitals. Following the 
attack, Istanbul Police Chief Cerrah, Istanbul Governor Guler and 
Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality Mayor Topbas visited the site and 
received a briefing about the explosion.  Mayor Guler told 
journalists that four out of ten wounded four are policemen. 
 
War Alarms Are Ringing In India, Pakistan (Sabah) 
Media draw attention to the increasing tensions between India and 
Pakistan after last week's terror attacks in Mumbai. 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "India officially sent a letter of 
protest to Pakistan that criticized Pakistan for not doing enough to 
combat terrorism on its own soil."  Liberal Radikal reports, "Alarm 
bells are ringing as India sends a protest note to Pakistan," while 
U.S. Secretary of State Condoleeza Rice "travels to New Delhi in an 
effort to calm the tensions."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
reports, "As India summoned the Pakistani Ambassador to the Foreign 
Ministry, it was learned that a militant revealed the plans (for the 
Mumbai attack) when he was detained in February, but the information 
was not taken seriously."  Mainstream Sabah reports in "War Alarms," 
that Pakistani Prime Minister Yusuf Riza Gilani "called an emergency 
session of the National Security Council," and Pakistani troops "are 
to be deployed to the border with India" in case "relations sour 
into clashes with India forces."  Meanwhile, Sabah reports 
Condoleeza Rice "is on her way to the massacre region," in order to, 
"show solidarity with the Indian people."  In a related story, CNN 
Turk reports in "American Intelligence Warned India," that, "twice, 
American intelligence sent warnings to India concerning a possible 
attack on Mumbai from the sea. 
 
Report Highlights Two Scenarios for Turkey 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports the Western European Union and the 
Europe Security and Defense Assembly released a report on terrorist 
activities on the border between Turkey and Iraq.  The report, 
prepared by British lawmaker Robert Walter, will be ratified 
Wednesday during the Assembly's meeting in Paris.  According to the 
report, the PKK actively opposes social and political reforms in 
east and southeast Turkey.  The report also claims that the ruling 
AKP's victory in mostly Kurdish areas during the July 2007 elections 
proves that the majority of Kurds do not want to split from Turkey. 
The report also claims that Turkey's main pro-Kurdish party DTP is 
under the PKK's influence.  The report calls on EU countries to 
support Turkey and the Iraqi Kurdish Regional Government (KRG) in 
northern Iraq in fighting against the PKK.  The report also states 
Turkey must be urged to not use disproportional force while 
 
ANKARA 00002077  002 OF 003 
 
 
combating PKK terror. 
 
The report predicts two "scenarios" for Turkey.  In the "optimistic" 
scenario, the ruling AKP will enact reforms in Turkey that include 
giving cultural rights for Kurds, which is expected to weaken the 
PKK.  In the "pessimistic" scenario, the negative approach of major 
EU countries toward Turkey's EU membership strengthens 
"neo-nationalist" trends in the country, which will lead Kurdish 
voters to lose trust in the AKP and vote for candidates who are 
close to the PKK in the forthcoming municipality elections in March. 
 In this scenario, the PKK will be able to step up their attacks in 
major cities, prompting a declaration of emergency rule.  The report 
says the EU and the U.S. can prevent the pessimistic scenario by 
supporting Turkey. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkish Political Debates & Local Elections 
 
Fehmi Koru wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "Hope for change 
is still the ruling AKP's most compelling strategy.  Turkey must 
settle its domestic issues and the government should be capable of 
implementing a policy of change so Turkey can settle its domestic 
issues.  This is very important because Turkey has become a more 
important regional player, particularly in the light of Obama's 
victory, the withdrawal agreement between the U.S. and Iraq, and new 
economic balances after the global crisis." 
 
Ergun Babahan wrote in mainstream Sabah: "Candidates for the 
upcoming local elections must have vision. Turkey is about to 
undergo local elections, and candidates are slowly being identified. 
 Those candidates who genuinely seek to perform public service are 
separated from the other candidates.  I think it's sufficed to say 
that it is necessary for candidates to behave with sensitivity to 
the tensions that are going on in our country.  It is possible that 
quality leadership in the local municipalities can spread to the 
national leadership level." 
 
Ihsan Dagi wrote in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "If the AKP adopts a 
'conservative democrat' approach, they can resolve the Kurdish 
question, but only by recognizing Kurdish identity instead of 
playing the 'Islam card.'  In Turkey, Kurdish language and history 
must be recognized; Kurdish culture research centers must be 
established; and private Kurdish television broadcasts must be 
allowed.  There is no difference between homogenizing 'Islamist 
politics' and homogenizing 'national politics' -- both approaches 
reject 'Kurdish identity.'  We cannot resolve the Kurdish problem 
via the rhetoric of 'the Islamic brotherhood.'  Afghanistan is an 
interesting example of this.  When the Taliban tried to melt the 
Pashtuns, Tajiks, Uzbeks and Hazaras into a common Muslim nation, 
the result was a primitive and totalitarian Taliban regime." 
 
 
President-elect Obama's New Cabinet 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "Obama Announces Gates Will Stay at 
the Pentagon and Clinton is entrusted with Foreign Policy."  Liberal 
Radikal reports, "Obama's Clintonian VIP Team Is Complete." 
Columnist Murat Yetkin of Radikal writes, "Despite the polarized 
election atmosphere, the core of Barack Obama's cabinet is 
remarkably above partisan tendencies," and "The key figures are very 
familiar with Turkey and that includes the new American Ambassador 
to Turkey."  Mainstream Sabah focuses on the gender balance is the 
cabinet in, "Three Women are appointed to the New Cabinet." 
 
Editorial Commentary on the Obama Cabinet 
 
Murat Yetkin wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "Despite the 
polarized election atmosphere, the core of Barack Obama's cabinet is 
remarkably above partisan tendencies.  This indicates that 
Washington is still in a state of war.  However the composition of 
Obama's cabinet also shows that there will be a change in rhetoric. 
From Turkey's perspective, Obama's cabinet looks much better than 
 
ANKARA 00002077  003 OF 003 
 
 
the Bush administration.  The key figures are all very familiar with 
Turkey, and that includes the new American Ambassador in Ankara as 
well." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Relations Between Turkey and Armenia 
 
Cuneyt Arcayurek wrote in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet: "In his 
meetings with Foreign Minister Ali Babacan, Armenian Foreign 
Minister Edward Nalbandyan said Armenia would recognize the 
independence of Nagorno Karabakh.  However, international law, as 
outlined in both UN and OSCE resolutions, declare that Nagorno 
Karabakh is Azerbaijani territory.  Babacan has not remarked on this 
issue, and we haven't seen anything in the media either.  President 
Abdullah Gul's football diplomacy efforts are seen as a diplomatic 
success in the Western world.  Armenia, however, has not taken a 
single step toward resolving issues that are important for Turkey." 
 
 
Higher Education Board Decree for Non-Muslims 
 
Papers report the Higher Education Board (YOK) issued a decree to 
all university rectors which calls on rectors to show respect for 
Jewish and Christian religious holidays.  The decree asked that both 
academic staff and students be granted leave during their respective 
religious holidays. 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Adana Mayor Aytac Durak resigned from AKP, saying it was 
"insulting" that AKP party delegates would determine nominees for 
the upcoming municipality elections.  Rumors indicate that Prime 
Minister Erdogan was reluctant to support Durak's candidacy in Adana 
in the upcoming elections. 
 
- In Kocaeli, three people were killed and five were injured in an 
explosion at the municipality building during repair work on the 
building's natural gas system.  The explosion occurred when 
bulldozers accidentally hit a natural gas pipe. 
 
- A prosecutor demands up to 31 years in jail for six children who 
threw stones at the police during illegal protests in Adana on 
October 19. 
 
International News 
 
- Iran test-fires a newly-designed air-to-air heat-seeking missile 
with a range of 40 km. 
 
- The Muslim religious holiday of Feast of Sacrifice is declared 
official holiday in Spain. 
 
- The UN's drug and crime agency in Afghanistan says half of the 
prisoners in the country have not faced trial. 
 
JEFFREY