08ANKARA416
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Mar 03 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3399
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0416/01 0631454
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 031454Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5446
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8721
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3952
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2741
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6448
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6281
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2861
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000416 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, MARCH 3, 2008 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
President Gul and PM Erdogan Respond to the Allegations Regarding 
Troop Withdrawal from Iraq 
Sabah, Milliyet, Vatan, Radikal, Zaman, Cumhuriyet and others: 
Speaking at the AKP Ankara Youth Branch meeting on Sunday, Prime 
Minister Erdogan strongly reacted against allegations that Turkish 
troops withdrew from northern Iraq upon the order of the United 
States.  He said that the AKP government never takes instructions 
from anyone.  Prior to his departure to Romania, President Gul said 
he knew the ending date of the operation, and any US influence on 
that decision was out of the question. The operation was conducted 
in the way it was planned.  Mainstream Vatan says the General Staff 
responded to criticisms on why troops returned from the operation 
earlier than expected.  All papers carry photographs from the 
operation which portray challenging geographical conditions.  In an 
interview with mainstream Hurriyet, TGS Chief General Buyukanit said 
"I can tell you with all my sincerity that the US has no influence 
whatsoever on our withdrawal.  One third of our troops were already 
pulled back by the time we were meeting with Secretary Gates."  Most 
weekend papers reported General Buyukanit's remarks regarding 
withdrawal, "Withdrawal from an operation is a more sensitive issue 
than the start of an operation; we never openly announce the 
withdrawal time for security reasons."  Meanwhile, 
leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet, mainstream Hurriyet, Milliyet, Sabah 
and others report that main opposition party CHP leader Deniz Baykal 
said about the ending of the cross border operation "the surgery is 
over but a body part has remained inside the body.  The results are 
pleasing but targets that would provide a lasting solution could not 
be reached in eight days.  There is no problem with the military 
dimension of the operation however, the political dimension remained 
insufficient." 
 
Editorial Opinion on CBO and Afterwards 
"From A War to A Solution" 
Hasan Bulent Kahraman, a prominent art critic and free-lance 
columnist wrote in mainstream Sabah (3/3): 
"The army made the right decision to pull out and they did so 
successfully.  Staying in northern Iraq for a long time could have 
created tension, especially with the US.  Now is the time to talk 
about the post-military operation process.  What will be the outcome 
of this military success?  During the recent elections, the 
government emphasized the importance of resolving the Kurdish 
problem, which garnered significant electoral support in the 
southeast.  But since the elections, the government appears to be 
back-pedaling.  It is yet unclear whether the Kurdish problem 
remains a priority for the AKP government.  Democratization is the 
solution to all of our problems.  Turkey can sort this out without 
even introducing a comprehensive package.  As we work through the EU 
reform process, we will reach a solution.  The EU harmonization 
requires a series of legislative changes.  Once Turkey sticks with 
that process, every fundamental issue will be addressed, including 
the Kurdish problem.  Otherwise, Turkey will be drawn into its own 
vicious cycle.  The choice is now up to the government.  If the 
government defines itself by conservatism, we shall not see a 
solution to our problems.  But if it defines itself as democrat, 
then we can hope for solution." 
 
"The Battlefront is Okay, But Now is the Time for Politics" 
Mainstream Milliyet carried this op-ed (3/3): 
"There was a communication problem regarding the announcement of 
last week's withdrawal from northern Iraq.  There are still some 
question marks in public opinion as to whether the Turkish army 
pulled out due to US pressure.   It would be best to conduct a 
better way of communicating with public opinion regarding the phases 
of cross border operations.  Nevertheless, it is natural to see such 
debates in open societies.  However, those debates should not dilute 
the success of military operation.  Yet, there is another question: 
will there be another operation in the future?  We should break this 
vicious cycle of violence.  The Turkish army achieved the impossible 
 
ANKARA 00000416  002 OF 003 
 
 
with this operation, and now is the time to create a new opportunity 
out of this military success.  The government must start making 
political, social and cultural efforts to break the vicious cycle of 
terrorism and military intervention.  Now is the time to build 
peace." 
 
"Let's Call It By Its Correct Name" 
Oktay Eksi is senior columnist for Hurriyet and Chairman of Turkey's 
Press Council.  He wrote in mainstream Hurriyet (3/2): 
"I am sure that our Foreign Ministry, prime minister, and our 
president -who each entertained Gates lavishly-- asked the US 
secretary about the meaning of his remarks prior to his arrival in 
 
SIPDIS 
Ankara.  In particular, he referred to Turkey as the 'regional 
Turkish government' in Canberra.  Once Gates was in India, he 
referred to the PKK as 'Kurdish PKK fighters.' He also said, 'the 
PKK is a Kurdish nationalist armed group that is active in northern 
Iraq.'  This information was not reported in our press.  But when we 
combine this information, we may conclude that Chief of the General 
Staff Buyukanit was a little too hasty when he said two days ago 
that he is becoming 'more confident about the sincerity of the 
United States' in view of its 'cooperation against the PKK.' 
Indeed, Secretary Gates stepped up the pitch of his warnings from 
the relatively soft tone in Canberra to his demand that the 
'operation end in one or two weeks.'  When Secretary Gates were 
asked whether the Turks got his message, he rudely said, 'I told 
them four times. I am sure they got it.'  After comments such as 
these, Turkey withdrew our soldiers. It is up to you if you still do 
not want to call this a disgrace." 
 
Demonstrations Against the Military Operations 
Milliyet, Sabah, Radikal and others:  Papers report that hundreds of 
DTP members staged a protest rally in Istanbul against the operation 
into northern Iraq.  DTP deputy Sirri Sakik spoke at the rally and 
said that the withdrawal is a pleasing development.  He also noted 
that problems cannot be resolved through killing.  The protesters 
clashed with police after protestors shouted pro-PKK slogans; 26 of 
the protestors were detained.  There was also a DTP rally in the 
southeast province Batman, where 7000 people marched and chanted 
pro-PKK slogans.  During the Batman rally, DTP Batman deputy Ayla 
Akat Ata said "the PKK is a fact in Turkey, even if 40,000 more 
people die." 
 
Meanwhile, liberal Radikal on Sunday began a series detailing 
suggestions for the composition of a 'political solution' package to 
the Kurdish issue.  Kurdish politicians and intellectuals commented 
on what they defined as a 'political solution.'  Their priorities 
include free Kurdish broadcasting, Kurdish language education and an 
amnesty program for the militants. 
 
Troop Deployment at the Border Causes Expectations of New Military 
Operations 
Mainstream Milliyet reports that Turkish troops have been dispatched 
to the border areas near PKK camps in Haftanin and Hakurk.  Noticing 
the troop activity at the border, the residents of northern Iraq 
were concerned that the Turkish military would renew its operation. 
Sunday's Vatan quoted Justice Minister Mehmet Ali Sahin as saying 
that "Turkish troops can go to northern Iraq once again if 
necessary." 
 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
President of the Turkish Bar Association Ozdemir Ozok said the 
turban problem has pulled Turkey into chaos.  He said that the 
turban has become a symbol of division in Turkey. 
 
More than 100 intellectuals called on the government to undertake 
 
ANKARA 00000416  003 OF 003 
 
 
decisive steps for EU harmonization. 
 
The Turkish General Staff has released 23 new photos of the 
cross-border operations in northern Iraq. 
 
 
International News 
 
Israel intensifies its offensive in Gaza as the death toll rises to 
over 100. 
 
Iran and Iraq issue messages of friendship during Iranian President 
Ahmedinejad's visit to Baghdad. 
 
Clashes between opposition and security forces in Yerevan kills 9 
and leaves many injured. 
 
Greek-Cypriot President Christofias said he is more than ready for a 
solution in Cyprus, if Turkey is ready for this. 
 
Turkish Cypriot President Mehmet Ali Talat says the elements of 
Annan plan should be used to work out a solution in Cyprus. 
 
WILSON