08ANKARA1187
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Jun 30 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6486
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1187/01 1821420
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 301420Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6697
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8989
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4403
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3044
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6695
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6525
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3106
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001187 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, JUNE 30, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Malaysia's Ibrahim Seeks Refuge in Turkish Embassy 
All papers report Malaysia's opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim, who 
was released from prison in 2004 over charges of corruption and 
sexual assault, has sought refuge in the Turkish embassy in Kuala 
Lumpur.  Ibrahim's blog states he went to the Turkish embassy 
because of fears for his personal safety.  Ibrahim also claimed he 
had information from credible sources within the government and 
military that there were plots to harm his family and supporters.  A 
supporter told the press Ibrahim was "not seeking political asylum, 
but needs to be in a safe place where he can think of what to do 
next."  Monday morning television reports noted Ibrahim emphasized 
he did not apply for political asylum and he would leave the Turkish 
Embassy soon. 
 
CHP Will Not Participate in the Socialist International Meetings in 
Athens 
All papers report Turkey's main opposition CHP will not participate 
in the meeting of Socialist International (SI) in Athens.  CHP 
deputy chairman Onur Oymen said his party did not have any problem 
with SI and its principles.  "We, however, differ with several SI 
member countries and politicians regarding the independence of the 
judiciary and the supremacy of law in Turkey," Oymen said. 
Islamist-oriented Zaman writes party leader Deniz Baykal, "will not 
attend the Athens meetings because there were no guarantees that SI 
chairman Yorgos Papandreou would not warn or expel the CHP from the 
organization." 
 
Hersh: A Secret Partnership between the U.S. and PJAK 
Today's major international story focuses on Seymour Hersh's claims 
that the U.S. and PJAK are working together in secret operations 
against the regime in Iran.  Coverage is largely straightforward, 
but more emphasis is on Hersh's claims of a partnership between PJAK 
and the U.S. than emphasis on U.S. attempts to topple the Iranian 
regime. In, "Many Secrets Are in Iran," mainstream Hurriyet writes, 
"In an effort seeking regime change in Iran, President Bush asked 
the U.S. Congress for $400 million dollars to initiate a secret 
operation," and, "both Democrats and Republicans approved the 
measure."  Mainstream Vatan writes, "America and PJAK are Dealing a 
Daunting Strike against Iran," but notes, "according to a Gallup 
poll, 73% of Americans are opposed to a strike against Iran, while 
only 18% support such a strike."  In addition, the paper notes, 
"PJAK terrorists have increased attacks against the Iranian 
military," which has "created tensions between the government of 
Turkey and the government of the United States."  Mainstream Sabah 
writes in, "Washington Will Attack Iran with PJAK," that Hersh is, 
"the winner of the prestigious Pulitzer Prize and the man who 
uncovered the Abu Ghraib torture scandal."  Islamist-oriented Yeni 
Safak writes, "The U.S.' Puppet Invasion of Iran Is Found in Secret 
Documents."  Islamist-oriented Zaman carries the headline, "The U.S. 
Speeds up Its Secret Operations against the Iranian Administration." 
 Leftist Taraf writes, "The US Even Enters Iran."  Far right 
Ortadogu reports, "The Iranian administration is taking necessary 
measures to defend itself," against such an operation.  Mainstream 
Milliyet writes, "PJAK is working in Iran in the name of the U.S." 
and the paper accuses the U.S. of "lying in previous statements 
regarding relations between the U.S. and PJAK." 
 
General Staff Statement on Allegations against Turkish Armed Forces 
Weekend papers:  The Turkish General Staff (TGS) posted a statement 
on its web site Saturday that denied allegations of a plan to 
manipulate public opinion and allegations that no measures were 
taken after an intelligence warning regarding an impending attack in 
Daglica last year, in which eight Turkish soldiers were taken 
hostage by the PKK. 
 
The statement said "A report was published in the June 20 edition of 
a daily newspaper in which it was claimed that there existed an 
Information Support plan prepared by the office of the Chief of the 
 
ANKARA 00001187  002 OF 004 
 
 
General Staff.  There is no such plan in the Turkish Armed Forces. 
The same paper, in its June 25 edition, published a message, 
classified "SECRET", from a command organization regarding possible 
actions of the PKK/Kongra-Gel terrorist organization, and claimed 
that, despite the attack that was to be made against Daglica having 
been reported in this message, no measures were taken.  The message 
published was a genuine document and carried the intent of warning 
all units at risk.  To assess rumors received and turn them into 
intelligence, and to distribute these as warnings of possible 
actions, is a standard practice utilized by the Turkish Armed 
Forces.  Indeed, in accord with the warning in question, security 
precautions in units in the region were stepped up, and our elements 
deployed at Daglica, by displaying the proper response, prevented 
the treacherous attack from attaining its real goal.  As the 
judicial process involving the matter continues, the display of 
provocative approaches of this type is cause for concern.  The 
leaking of military documents bearing the "SECRET" classification, 
and their publication by means of the press, is a wholly illegal 
act, and the matter has been placed in the hands of the judiciary. 
It has been determined by an investigation conducted within the 
institution from where and by whom the message was conveyed to the 
outside, and the necessary legal procedures have been instituted 
against those responsible.  The Turkish Armed Forces are aware that 
they are facing an abhorrent attack conducted by certain circles 
within an organized framework.  The Turkish Armed Forces will take 
measures to defend themselves against these attacks, which are 
destined to remain unsuccessful.  The Turkish Armed Forces' most 
important security against attacks of this sort are the legal organs 
and the infallible justice of the Turkish judiciary.  As always, the 
limitless affection and confidence felt towards the Turkish Armed 
Forces by our beloved nation are our greatest support." 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: The Military, the Press, and Politics 
 
"A Bridge from Daglica to Karabuk" 
Ferai Tinc wrote in mainstream Hurriyet (6/30): "The AKP mayor of 
Karabuk, a town on the Black Sea, rushed to insult Turkey's 
prominent writer Latife Tekin when she criticized the government's 
nuclear energy policy.  If instead Tekin praised nuclear power 
plants, I am sure she would be deemed a great novelist.  This is 
where modernity draws its limit in Turkey.  Compliments and positive 
remarks are always welcomed, but there is no tolerance for 
criticism.   Because Turkey lacks a culture of democracy, criticism 
is interpreted in a special way.  For instance, the Turkish General 
Staff (TGS) issued a statement on recent stories in newspapers 
regarding a plan to manipulate public opinion and an intelligence 
report that warned of a PKK attack against the Daglica station last 
year.  The language in the TGS statement is interesting because it 
charges the media with "deliberate efforts that seek to harm 
military."  Unfortunately this statement does not address the 
concerns at hand.  In a democracy, institutions answer to the public 
and the public is likely to ask questions.  When someone is 
criticized in Turkey, the media is accused of making mistakes or 
making deliberate plans.  This weekend, the TGS asked the media to 
verify documents and sources before printing.  Nevertheless, the 
question remains: Do certain journalists have easy access to Turkish 
military sources?  Has the military established a working 
relationship with all members of the media?  Before accusing the 
media's approach as a deliberate effort to discredit the military, 
the military should establish a non-discriminatory communication 
mechanism with the press." 
 
"Thoughts about the TGS Statement" 
Samil Tayyar wrote in mainstream Star (6/30): "Following the reports 
regarding the military's alleged plan to manipulate public opinion, 
TGS denied the high command had any information about such a plan. 
This weekend, the military issued a strongly-worded statement to 
deny the existence of 'an action plan to manipulate public opinion.' 
  However, this statement does not clear up the confusion in public 
opinion.  Because the military instituted a plan to manipulate 
 
ANKARA 00001187  003 OF 004 
 
 
public opinion by using writers, politicians and academics during 
the February 28 process, I am afraid such denials from the military 
have little credibility." 
 
State Minister Kursad Tuzmen in Baghdad 
Sunday's Hurriyet reports that State Minister Kursad Tuzmen went to 
Baghdad to make preparations for PM Erdogan's upcoming visit there. 
Today's Sabah reports that Tuzmen met with Iraqi Oil and Trade 
Ministers and signaled that Turkey could make investments in the 
Kurdish region of Iraq.  Anadolu Agency reports that Tuzmen spoke to 
the inauguration of the Turkish-Iraqi Business Forum in Baghdad and 
said, "I believe that we can create a joint economic zone at the 
Turkish-Iraqi border.  Such a zone would be a good role model to 
other countries.  We are making plans for the free movement of goods 
and services between Turkey and Iraq.  Within this framework, we may 
be able to sign a free trade agreement with Iraq."  Sabah reports 
that around 40 Turkish businessmen accompanied Tuzmen to Iraq. 
 
Tourism Diplomacy between Yerevan-Ankara 
Saturday's Hurriyet reported that "diplomacy through tourism" 
between Yerevan and Ankara has improved recently.  Turkey is 
expected to have 50,000 Armenian tourists this year.  Today's 
liberal Radikal reports that Yerevan-Antalya flights have started, 
in addition to twice weekly Istanbul-Yerevan flights.  Despite 
obstacles from initiatives by Armenian lobbies in the US, Turkey is 
trying to improve humanitarian relations with Armenia.  Within this 
framework, the Turkish labor ministry is stretching its rules and 
regulations regarding illegal Armenian workers in Turkey.  Radikal 
reports that there are around 70,000 Armenians living and working in 
Turkey. 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- The Turkish Constitutional Court will listen to the verbal 
statements of Chief Prosecutor of the Supreme Court of Appeals 
Abdurrahman Yalcnkaya on July 1st, 2008 in the closure case filed 
against ruling Justice & Development (AK) Party.  The top court will 
also listen to the verbal defense of AK Party executives on July 
3rd.  Following this process, the Constitutional Court rapporteur 
will prepare a report on the merits of the case.  In this phase, the 
chief prosecutor can submit further evidence and AK Party can submit 
additional material to the rapporteur. Then, the report will be 
distributed to court members for consideration.  At a later stage, 
Constitutional Court chief justice Hasim Kilic will set a date and 
the court will examine the case on its merits.  According to the 
Constitution, at least 7 of the 11 members of the court have to vote 
for closure in order to shut down a political party. 
 
- Former Deputy Prime Minister Abdullatif Sener said Turkey's 
economic indicators were deteriorating, warning the administration 
needs to mobilize all its powers for stability. 
 
- Some 2,500 people went to the hospitals in the central Anatolian 
province of Kayseri with diarrhea complaints over the last two days. 
 
 
International News 
 
- Israel's cabinet approves a deal with Hezbollah for the release of 
Lebanese and Palestinian prisoners in exchange for the return of two 
Israeli soldiers. 
 
- Spain's equality minister, Bibiana Aido, angers Muslims by 
alleging the Islamic headscarf undermines women's rights. 
 
- Pope Benedict XVI joins Orthodox leader Bartolomew I to launch a 
year dedicated to St. Paul. 
 
ANKARA 00001187  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
WILSON