08ANKARA264
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Feb 12 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO5999
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0264/01 0431511
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 121511Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5207
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8678
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3867
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2688
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6412
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6240
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2823
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 000264 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 12, 2008 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Confusion Continues over Headscarf Reform in Turkey 
All papers report that Monday, some universities allowed students 
wearing the headscarf to enter campus, whereas other universities 
made women remove their headscarves at the gate as usual. 
University rectors say that, to prevent chaos at universities, 
article 17 of the higher education law (YOK law) should be passed by 
parliament without delay.  The constitutional changes will be 
submitted to President Gul for approval on Tuesday.  Gul said 
yesterday he would take into account the sensitivities of all parts 
of society when he reviews the constitutional amendment, adding he 
would consider the anxieties about headscarf reform.  Gul noted he 
hasn't made a final decision on the issue. 
 
Government Spokesman Cemil Cicek said "Turkey has been debating the 
headscarf issue for 40 years," and that "the government is open to 
suggestions on how to implement the change."  Cicek added "changes 
to article 17 of the YOK law will be made after President Gul 
approves the constitutional changes."  Opposition CHP deputy group 
Chief Suha Okay warned university rectors would be 'misusing their 
authority' if they immediately allow students with headscarf in 
universities. 
 
Under the front page headline, "Turban is in Universities," the 
leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet says, "The Islamists couldn't even 
wait for President Gul's approval to go to classes with their heads 
covered."  Liberal Radikal says "if the changes in the constitution 
are deemed enough for ending the headscarf restrictions at 
universities, then veil, chador or burqa, which are not openly 
banned by laws, would also be free." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turban Debate 
Rusen Cakir observed in mainstream Vatan (2/12):  "There are immense 
transformations taking place in Turkey. Leftists are moving toward 
the right and conservatives are moving closer to universal 
principles.  However, these transformations have not been accepted 
by the public.  Professor Senatalar said 'public consensus can be 
reached only by approaching a wider audience,' and I fully agree 
with this observation.  Unfortunately, there are no signs of such an 
approach from the AKP government or from President Gul.  The chaos 
that started in the universities yesterday over the turban issue 
will gradually increase.  This chaos will not bring us to 'public 
consensus.'  On the contrary, it will increase divisions in public. 
And, once again, the girls wearing the headscarf will be affected 
negatively." 
 
Ludwigshafen Fire Victims Buried in Gaziantep 
All papers report the remains of nine Turkish nationals, including 
five children, who were killed in a fire in the German city of 
Ludwigshafen, have been flown to Turkey for burial in the 
southeastern province of Gaziantep.  Germany's Ambassador to Turkey 
Eckart Cuntz joined the funeral and made a brief speech in Turkish. 
Papers report a new eye witness has come forward, and this 
development strengthens allegations that the fire was a deliberate 
arson attack.  The cause of the fire which swept through the old 
apartment building on February 3 has yet to be determined, though 
arson has not been ruled out.  Meanwhile, mainstream Vatan says 
while Germany was mourning the Turks killed in the fire, Prime 
Minister Erdogan angered the German media with the nationalistic 
messages he delivered during his address to Turks in Cologne over 
the weekend. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turks Killed in Fire in Germany 
Mehmet Yilmaz wrote in mainstream Hurriyet (2/12):  "Even though 
there is no concrete evidence as to whether the tragic fire in 
Germany was a racist attack or not, funeral participants felt racist 
groups were responsible for the fire.  That is why, they say, German 
officials attended the funeral.  At the funerals, Christian, Jewish 
and Muslim Religious Officials prayed for the lost lives.  Prime 
 
ANKARA 00000264  002 OF 002 
 
 
Minister Erdogan and many Turkish politicians attended the funeral. 
Moreover, PM Erdogan addressed 20,000 people in Cologne.  Now, just 
stop here for a second and glance to the recent past:  Catholic 
Priest Santoro was murdered in Trabzon in a racist-fundamentalist 
attack, but no high-level Turkish officials attended his funeral. 
Hrant Dink was killed in a similar type of attack.  The PM went to 
his house after the funeral to convey condolences to his wife.  You 
are free to guess why he didn't attend the funeral and why he 
conveyed his condolence message behind closed doors.  Turkish and 
German Christians in Malatya were killed by a fundamentalist-racist 
attack as well.  No government officials attended their funerals 
either.  Just remember the picture in Germany and compare it with 
the atmosphere in Turkey after these three brutal incidents.  Some 
tried to protect the Malatya attackers by saying 'those who were 
murdered were missionaries,' some took family photos with the 
murderers, and many made intentional mistakes during the 
investigation.  Just remember, all these murders took place in a 
country where the word "tolerance" is used all the time!" 
 
Hrant Dink Murder Trial 
All papers report the trial of the gunman who killed Turkish 
Armenian Hrant Dink and 18 other suspects continued in Istanbul. 
Friends and supporters of Dink demanded justice at the third hearing 
yesterday, waving banners that read "Justice for Hrant."  "We 
consider it a minimal requirement to bring about a ruling that 
reaches all the people and organizations that are behind this case," 
they said in a statement.  Last month, in a separate case named 
"Ergenekon," police arrested extreme nationalists suspected of plots 
to sow chaos in Turkey, and thus provoke a military takeover in 
¶2009.  Turkish papers believe the "Ergenekon" gang was also probably 
behind Dink's murder.  Joost Lagendijk, co-chairman of the EU-Turkey 
Joint Parliamentary Assembly, said it was important that those who 
masterminded Dink's killing should also be brought to justice.  The 
court is adjourned to February 25. 
 
TV News: 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- The DTP has lodged its preliminary arguments with the 
Constitutional Court in the closure case against the pro-Kurdish 
party.  In 30 days, the Constitutional Court will send the chief 
prosecutor's views to the DTP for the party to prepare its final 
arguments.  Over the course of the four months that will follow, the 
Court will make a ruling. 
 
- Turkish Statistics Institute says one quarter of recent male 
university graduates and half of female graduates are unemployed. 
 
- More than 15 million Turkish school students headed back to the 
classrooms Monday at the end of their two week school recess. 
 
International News 
 
- Tom Lantos, chairman of the US House Foreign Affairs Committee, 
died of cancer at the age of 80.  Lantos supported the Armenian 
genocide resolutions submitted to US Congress in 2005 and 2007. 
 
- Turkish Cypriot 'Foreign Minister' Turgay Avci said ferry services 
between Syria and Turkish Cyprus have been resumed. 
 
- On Monday, tens of thousands of Iranians celebrated the 29th 
anniversary of the Islamic revolution in Iran.  Celebrations were 
marked by anti-US and anti-Israel demonstrations. 
 
WILSON