08ANKARA508
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Mar 14 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO5315
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0508/01 0741447
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 141447Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5598
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8748
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3996
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2777
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6474
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6311
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2888
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000508 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 14, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
PM Erdogan Rejects Meeting with DTP 
Radikal, Cumhuriyet, Yeni Safak, Sabah, Milliyet and others:  Prime 
Minister Erdogan told reporters yesterday, "DTP deputies asked me 
for an appointment, but as long as the Democratic Society Party 
(DTP) does not refer to the PKK as terrorist organization, I will 
not meet with them."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet quotes PM 
Erdogan as saying "I tasked an AKP deputy group chairman and the 
deputy prime minister to meet with the DTP delegation.  As long as 
the DTP, which exists under the roof of the parliament, does not 
declare the PKK a terrorist organization, I will not meet with them 
as the prime minister of the Republic of Turkey.  EU countries and 
the US declare the PKK as a terrorist organization, but I cannot 
accept a political party who does not declare it as terrorist 
organization."  In response to Erdogan's remarks, DTP Group Chairman 
Ahmet Turk said "it is not correct for the PM to make statements 
which will strain society.  Is the prime minister trying to send a 
message to the judiciary?  The DTP is exerting serious efforts to 
overcome this painful period through democratic civilian methods. 
We believe that the duty of the prime minister is to achieve social 
compromise." 
 
Labor Unions Protest Social Security Law 
Cumhuriyet, Radikal, Milliyet, Sabah and others:  Emek Platform, a 
gathering of Turkish workers' unions, will suspend work for two 
hours today to protest the social security and health insurance bill 
passed by the Parliamentary Budget & Planning committee on March 6. 
The bill raises the retirement age to 65 and the numbers of days 
they have to work in order to retire to 9.000.  Mainstream Milliyet 
reports that the protest will affect transportation, cleaning, 
education and healthcare.  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet's headline 
reads "Workers' Strike Rehearsal" and reports that the unions' 
platform held rallies throughout Turkey yesterday and released a 
joint statement saying the workers will not accept the social 
security bill. 
 
Gul: Democratic Openings can Isolate Terror in Southeast Turkey 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports President Abdullah Gul talked to 
reporters aboard his plane while en route to Dakar, Senegal for the 
Organization of Islamic Conference (OIC) summit talks.  Gul said, 
"The recent ground offensive in northern Iraq showed that nobody can 
force Turkey to do anything at gunpoint."  In addition, he 
emphasized, "Turkey has shown its determination to fight against 
separatist terrorism.  Under no condition will Turkey allow an 
internal armed struggle.  This was the real message of the Turkish 
offensive in northern Iraq." He also said he felt Massoud Barzani 
"got the message."  Gul underscored that the PKK was a threat to 
Iraqi Kurds and the recent meeting with the Iraqi President Jalal 
Talabani was "very important."  Gul noted he wants to visit Baghdad, 
but emphasized military measures alone cannot resolve the Kurdish 
question.  He suggested that a democratic opening could help isolate 
terror in the region.  Gul stated that compulsory religious 
education must cover a spectrum of religions and not focus solely on 
Islam.  "Nobody is happy with the existing situation," said Gul. 
 
Erdogan's 'Kurdish Package' gets Mixed Play in Papers 
Islamist-oriented Zaman says the Southeastern Anatolia Project (GAP) 
represents the backbone of the "southeast package" explained by 
Prime Minister Erdogan in an interview with The New York Times.  Ten 
hydroelectric power plants, twelve dams, twelve organized industrial 
zones, new roads, new health centers, and new educational 
institutions will be constructed in the southeast over the next five 
years.  $13 billion in investments will create new job opportunities 
for 3.8 million people, writes Zaman. 
 
An analysis in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet is doubtful that 
Erdogan's "package" for southeast Turkey will become a reality. 
"The GAP lies at the core of the package, but the ruling AKP hasn't 
invested a single penny in the project over the last six years," 
 
ANKARA 00000508  002 OF 003 
 
 
says Cumhuriyet.  The article points to the huge number of villagers 
with no land, tens of thousands of children who cannot attend 
school, and some 30,000 children working on the streets in 
Diyarbakir.  "Such factors stoke not only political terror but 
societal terror as well.  The PKK, Hizbullah, and al-Qaeda all feed 
on this swamp; Erdogan's Kurdish package must beat this cancer," 
comments Cumhuriyet. 
 
A column in mainstream Hurriyet says this was the 18th economic 
package announced for southeast Turkey.  However not one of these 
packages has been implemented. 
 
Editorial Commentary on the 'Kurdish Package' 
 
"Is There Anything New on the Settlement of the Kurdish Issue?" 
Cengiz Candar wrote in the business daily Referans (3/14):  "PM 
Erdogan once again talked about investment plans and promises on the 
settlement of the Kurdish issue.  Even if the promises are kept and 
investment plans are implemented, such measures may not be good 
enough to settle the issue.  Economic and social development does 
not address the identity issue.  To what extent will the AKP 
government be able to distance itself from the traditional approach 
on this issue?  The traditional approach treats the Kurdish problem 
as a security and a socio-economic issue.  The AKP government seems 
to be going back and forth between the traditional approach and ways 
to address the Kurdish identity problem.  There is also a connection 
between the pending article 301 and the Kurdish issue.  Without 
clarifying all the problems over freedom of expression, there is no 
way to gain momentum on the Kurdish issue." 
 
Paper: PKK and al-Qaeda to Join Forces in Iraq 
Islamist-oriented Zaman cites the Qatar-based al-Arab daily as 
reporting al-Qaeda and the PKK held talks for "military coordination 
and cooperation."  According to the paper's interview with al-Qaeda 
leader Sheikh Abu Halil Bahadili, al-Qaeda will provide intelligence 
support to the PKK, which, in return, will provide weapons and 
shelter to al-Qaeda militants in Diyala, Mosul, and Kirkuk. 
Bahadili also pointed to Monday's suicide attack in Suleymaniye in 
northern Iraq as a result of the cooperation with the PKK. 
 
Editorial Commentary on the PKK/al-Qaeda Alliance 
 
"A PKK and Al-Qaeda Alliance?" 
Ibrahim Karagul wrote in Islamist-leaning Yeni Safak (3/14):  "If 
the PKK and al-Qaeda are creating an alliance, it seems the effort 
has one clear goal.  If the PKK is dissolving, this alliance creates 
another source of fear for Turkey.  If the PKK dissolves, there are 
two possible results and both are equally frightening.  A radical 
Islamist Kurdish movement could emerge, and could even wind up 
forming a Kurdish Hamas.  In reality, PKK and al-Qaeda have 
absolutely no connection regarding their ideology, goals, tactics 
and organizational structure.  Also, there is no known connection 
between Hamas and Kurds.  Moreover, drawing a parallel between the 
Palestine issue and the Kurdish issue is not constructive or 
accurate.  Nevertheless, if we can assume the PKK-al-Qaeda alliance 
is true, it really means the demise of the PKK." 
 
Higher Education Board (YOK) Council Convenes 
Sabah, Yeni Safak, Vatan, Milliyet, Radikal and others: 
Mainstream Sabah reports that YOK General Council convened yesterday 
under the YOK Chairman Yusuf Ziya Ozcan for eight hours.  During the 
meeting, the turban issue was not discussed.  Turkish Statistics 
Institute President Associated Professor Omer Demir was appointed as 
acting president.  The YOK Council decided to make a decision on 
turban after the Constitutional Court resolution. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkish Democracy Debate/Islamization 
 
"The Gradual Islamization of Our Daily Lives" 
Columnist and popular anchorman Mehmet Ali Birand observed in 
 
ANKARA 00000508  003 OF 003 
 
 
mainstream tabloid Posta (3/13): 
"The AKP government is changing our society.  I observe a 
fast-spreading change in the attitudes of top government officials, 
cabinet ministers, and their appointees.  This social transformation 
is slowly spreading across other sectors of society. A different 
approach and a new way of life are emerging from the ghosts of the 
past. This is not happening through orders and directives from the 
top, but from social reverberations stemming from the general 
behavior and the attitude adopted by AKP officials.  These officials 
range from the prime minister down to the simplest district head. 
There are changes in verbal and body language.  There is change in 
eating and drinking; alcohol is gradually leaving the table.  There 
is constant change in women's clothing and also a change in daily 
life, where the separation of men and women is more noticeable. 
Moreover there is change in the media.  There is a considerable 
increase in the number of newspapers and television channels that 
promote religious values, Islam and the Islamic world.  And there is 
a change in capital. There are more religious corporations founded 
each day than ever before. People who did not even rate a nod 
yesterday now take part in huge tenders and make enormous amounts of 
money. This trend does not necessarily happen through open or secret 
directives of the AKP.  A different lifestyle is automatically 
spreading from top to bottom. There are those who feel this 
lifestyle originates from the ruling party. Another group is made up 
of those who now dare to do what they could not before. And finally, 
there are those who join the ride to fill their pockets and to 
protect their own interests." 
 
TV News: 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- The Prime Ministry said the measures announced by Prime Minister 
Erdogan in an interview with The New York Times were announced 
earlier by the PM. 
 
- The mayor of the mainly Kurdish city of Diyarbakir, Osman 
Baydemir, faces trial for printing and distributing a book of 
Turkish and Kurdish short stories.  The prosecutor demands up to 3.5 
years in prison for Baydemir.  This was the 24th lawsuit filed 
against Baydemir over the last four years. 
 
- A bill for removing landmines from the fields along the 
Turkey-Syria border was submitted to the parliament for approval. 
 
- A court in Ankara has decided to block access to YouTube because 
of 'insulting footage' against Turkey's founder, Mustafa Kemal 
Ataturk.  Access to the site has been blocked both in terms of the 
Internet provider and the domain name. 
 
International News 
 
- In an interview with Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, Prime 
Minister Erdogan says the government has taken unprecedented 
measures to resolve the problems in southeast Turkey. 
 
- The Serbian president dissolves the parliament and called for 
early elections following his rift with nationalists over Kosovo's 
independence and Serbia's EU integration. 
 
- China responds to a US report critical of its human rights record 
by releasing its own review attacking America's rights record as 
"tattered and shocking." 
 
WILSON