08ANKARA620
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Apr 02 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1253
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0620/01 0931416
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 021416Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5776
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8796
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4074
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2826
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6514
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6355
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2930
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000620 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 2, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
PM Erdogan Urges AKP Members for Restraint Regarding Closure Case 
Sabah, Milliyet, Radikal, Hurriyet, Cumhuriyet, Zaman and others: 
Speaking at an AKP Parliamentary group meeting, PM Erdogan said, 
"This closure case could strengthen the Turkish judicial system's 
power.  However, we will continue to work toward a constitutional 
amendment that will make party closures more difficult.  The closure 
case opened against the AKP aims to weaken the role political 
representation.  Such actions will not only harm the people but will 
hurt the state."  PM Erdogan urged his party members to remain calm. 
 Meanwhile, the AKP Central Executive Board convened yesterday and 
tasked Deputy PM Cemil Cicek to prepare the AKP's defense. 
 
EU Response to AKP Closure Case 
As expected, nationalist media outlets are unconcerned with EU 
warnings surrounding the closure case, while mainstream, liberal, 
and Islamist pro-government papers are increasingly concerned by the 
EU criticisms.  Islamist-oriented Zaman writes in, "If the AKP is 
Closed, Accession Talks Must Be Propped Up," that "EU members told 
Zaman they view the closure case as an attack on democracy." 
Mainstream Hurriyet writes, "European Commission President Jose 
Manuel Durao Barros and EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn will 
visit Turkey from April 10-12 in order to meet the president, prime 
minister, opposition leaders, and non-governmental organizations." 
Hurriyet expects Barroso and Rehn will "support the reform process 
and call for advancing Turkey's bid to the EU."  Zaman calls the 
visit "a critical summit," and notes the visit is very timely. 
Mainstream Milliyet reports the Turkey-EU Joint parliamentary 
commission Chairman Joost Lagendijk express concern that, "Turkey 
may waste another year in its bid for the EU," and that "Europe may 
abandon Turkey unless the AKP passes new reforms," but that "the 
suit against the AKP is no surprise."  However, Milliyet notes he 
pointed out, "The AKP closure case will please those who oppose 
Turkey's EU bid."  Mainstream Sabah carries Foreign Minister Ali 
Babacan comments, "Turkey has passed tests of its democracy in the 
past, and will continue efforts towards EU negotiations." 
Meanwhile, Sabah also carries the comments of EU Parliament's 
reporter Oomen Ruijten that, "Turkey must reform its judiciary to be 
in line with EU standards."  Meanwhile, leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet writes, "the EU is in love with the AKP," and "EU 
accession has become hopeless."  However, the unsigned column points 
out, "the Republic of Turkey was founded despite plans by Europe to 
divide up Anatolia," and "we must get over this EU mentality." 
 
Editorial Commentary on AKP Closure Case 
 
In mainstream Vatan, Zulfu Livaneli wrote (4/2): "The key to 
unlocking the current impasse must include a process of becoming 
fully secularist and fully democratic.  The secularists have a major 
test in front of them.  The pioneers of secularist groups could 
deepen the crisis by advocating for isolationist, and possibly even 
racist, nationalist rhetoric.  Or, they can save Turkey from its 
impending crisis by fully embracing democracy, freedoms and reforms. 
 Any secularist with common sense should think of carrying Turkey to 
a level that reflects fully democratic and global values, especially 
at a time when Turkey has 744 open cases related to freedom of 
expression (i.e. Article 301 investigations) and the middle class is 
fading away due to the ailing economy.  The remedy to this crisis 
also includes a cessation to calling religious groups 'reformist' 
and secularist groups 'nationalist.'" 
 
Mainstream Milliyet carried an op-ed piece by its editorial board 
(4/2): "The common sense that will end this crisis is a broader 
consensus between the ruling AKP and the main opposition parties, 
CHP and MHP.  The decision-makers should be able to reach a 
compromise on finding a rational framework in order to avoid the 
highly risky consequences of uncertainties.  In that regard, there 
is general consensus in every level of society that political party 
closures are wrong.  This consensus can be used as a key to reach a 
 
ANKARA 00000620  002 OF 003 
 
 
solution.  At the same time, the ruling party should take steps 
toward eliminating worries about secularism.  That will be one of 
the major steps toward a broader consensus.  The Turkish political 
system must demonstrate maturity and overcome this crisis within a 
democratic framework." 
 
Nationalist-leftist Cumhuriyet carried an op-ed piece by its 
editorial board (4/2): "The statements from EU officials on the AKP 
closure case present a pathetic picture.  The EU seems to be 
ignorant of history and geography; they make irresponsible 
statements based on their own personal political interests.  It is 
odd to see such an approach from Europe as the West, including both 
the US and Europe, consider taking measures against the rise of 
Islamic movements.  The Republic of Turkey was founded despite plans 
by Europe to divide up Anatolia.  It must be kept in mind that the 
Republic of Turkey was founded based on contemporary values after 
defeating such mentality.  We must get over this EU mentality." 
 
Al-Qaeda Operations in Istanbul 
Sabah, Milliyet, Hurriyet, Cumhuriyet:  In simultaneous operations 
in five different districts of Istanbul yesterday, around 300 
policemen raided several houses and arrested 45 suspected Al-Qaeda 
members, including Al-Qaeda's Turkey leader Halis Bayanci.  Security 
officials said that the terrorist organization was preparing 
assassinations and revenge attacks for the Gaziantep raid against 
Al-Qaeda earlier this year. 
 
Spring Operations Continue Against the PKK 
Mainstream Sabah reports that security operations continue in 
Bestler-Dereler, Cudi and Gabar regions with the participation of 
around 5,000 Turkish troops.  During the clashes yesterday, nine PKK 
members were killed.  Meanwhile, Turkish General Staff announced on 
its web site that 393 terrorists were rendered ineffective, i.e. 
killed, during the last three months. 
 
Turkey Changes Lobbyists in the U.S. 
Sabah, Hurriyet, Yeni Safak:  Papers report that Turkey cancelled 
its lobbying contract with Republican Bob Livingstone.  Instead, 
Turkey signed a new contract with the "DLA Piper" group.  Republican 
Dick Armey and Democrat Richard Gephart are the advisors of this 
group.  Sabah reports that Turkey spends $2,000,000 annually on 
lobbying issues in the US. 
 
Satterfield Interview by Star TV 
On April 2, liberal Radikal carried excerpts from Star TV primetime 
news interview under the headline, "The U.S. Awaits Social Steps 
against the PKK."  Radikal notes Satterfield said the U.S., "wants 
to see social and economic steps taken against the PKK." 
Satterfield also said, "The timing of Turkey's cross border 
operation, including the decisions to begin and to end it, were 
decisions taken by the Turkish military and the Turkish government. 
I would like to clarify that we were not informed about operation at 
any point.  We support Turkey's right for self defense.  The Turkish 
and American governments agree on the need for comprehensive 
approach in order to end PKK terror.  The Turkish government, the 
military, and TGS have announced the need for a comprehensive 
solution.   And we would like to see more social and economic steps 
in addition to military steps.  These steps are necessary to take if 
there is a desire to resolve the problem." 
 
On April 1, under the headline "A Call for Talks with the Kurds," 
leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reported the U.S. special Iraq envoy 
Ambassador David Satterfield briefed Turkish journalists on Monday 
after his meetings in Baghdad and Ankara.  According to Cumhuriyet, 
Satterfield said, "Turkey and the U.S. have a common goal of a 
secure and stable Iraq.  Iran's expansionist goals, Sunni Islamist 
terror and Al-Qaeda threaten the Middle East."  The U.S. envoy noted 
the PKK threat was also directed toward the Kurds and non-Kurds in 
Iraq.  Satterfield said he and his Turkish counterpart Murat Ozcelik 
have exchanged views on the elimination of the threat on Iraq.  "We 
 
ANKARA 00000620  003 OF 003 
 
 
want to work together with the Iraqi and Turkish governments as well 
as with the Kurdish regional administration," stated Satterfield. 
He reiterated the U.S. sees the PKK as a terror organization, and 
stressed that the necessary steps should be taken for militants to 
defect from the organization.  "We appreciate the steps taken by the 
Kurdish administration, but they need to do more.  Turkey has to 
establish contact with the Kurdish administration; we believe direct 
contacts are important.  The Kurdish administration, of course, must 
state that the PKK is a terror organization," he emphasized. 
 
TV News: 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Ramazan Dal, a demonstrator injured during March 22 Nevruz 
celebrations in the eastern city of Van, has died from his injuries. 
 
 
- Labor unions, NGOs and vocational organizations protested the AKP 
government's new social security bill in several cities across 
Turkey including Istanbul, Ankara, Izmir, and Adana yesterday. 
 
- The Italian Embassy in Turkey hailed the victory of Milan in the 
bid for hosting Expo 2015, but at the same has expressed its respect 
for Milan's "prestigious rival" Izmir. 
 
International News 
 
- Outgoing Russian President Vladimir Putin may move to the prime 
minister's office on May 8, the day his successor Dmitry Medvedev 
assumes his post as president. 
 
- At the request of Secretary Rice, Israel will transfer control of 
the border crossings between the Gaza Strip and Israel to 
Palestinian representatives. 
 
- U.S. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said, "President Bush should 
consider boycotting the opening ceremony of the Beijing Olympics 
Games in order to protest China's human rights record." 
 
WILSON