08ANKARA156
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Jan 25 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3165
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0156/01 0251535
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 251535Z JAN 08 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5048
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8635
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3797
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2641
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6377
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6203
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2786
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000156 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, JANUARY 25, 2008 
 
ANKARA 00000156  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Four Al-Qaeda Terrorists Killed in Fighting with Police in Gaziantep 
 
All papers report that on Thursday, security forces raided 18 
al-Qaeda 'cell houses' in the southeastern provinces of Gaziantep 
and Kahramanmaras.  Four terrorists were killed in the operations, 
which lasted 13 hours.  Papers say Mehmet Polat, who was killed 
during yesterday's clash, trained in Afghanistan and was the newly 
designated leader of al-Qaeda in Turkey.  Police seized explosives 
that were similar to those used in al-Qaeda attacks against the 
British Consulate and HSBC bank in Istanbul in November 2003. 
Suleyman Kamci, the governor of Gaziantep, said police seized seven 
guns, 2 AK-47 rifles, ammunition, 75 kg of ammonium nitrate, 40 kg 
of sulfur, and 10 kg of fertilizers.  Governor Kamci noted the 
al-Qaeda cell was planning attacks within Turkey.  Mainstream 
Milliyet claims they were preparing to attack US and Israeli 
diplomatic targets in Turkey. 
 
AKP and MHP Agree to Remove the Headscarf Ban in Universities 
All papers report the ruling AKP and opposition MHP have agreed to 
remove headscarf restrictions at universities.  The AKP wants to add 
a clause to article 42 of the constitution that says "no one can be 
deprived of his right to higher education because of his clothing." 
Article 10 guarantees equality before the law regardless of 
language, race, sex, or religion. The MHP wants to add to article 
10, "There shall be no headscarf discrimination with regard to the 
use of public services."  Article 42 guarantees that no one be 
deprived of their right to education, conducted under state 
supervision in line with the principles of Ataturk.  Under the 
formula agreed on by the two parties, students would be allowed to 
wear the headscarf, but it would still be banned for teachers.  MHP 
deputy chairman Cihan Pacaci said the package would be finalized in 
one or two days.  Papers expect the changes to be submitted to the 
parliament for approval next week.  Papers report the rectors of 
four major Turkish universities released a statement warning the new 
regulation would lead to divisions in universities. 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports a senior EU official said the 
new regulations would put pressure on students who choose not to 
wear the headscarf.  "The EU defends religious freedom, but this 
does not mean the EU will approve radical moves," said the source, 
stressing that harming secularism would reduce Turkey's EU accession 
chances.  Mainstream papers and columnists express concern the 
AKP-MHP move could increase political tensions in Turkey, and that 
financial markets are closely watching the headscarf debate. 
 
Investigations into the 'Ergenekon' Gang Continue 
All papers report investigations were launched into the activities 
of the leaders of the nationalist group 'Ergenekon.'  Four of the 35 
Ergenekon suspects detained earlier this week have been released. 
Papers carry extensive claims suggesting the nationalists may have 
been behind a number of past bomb attacks and assassinations. 
Ergenekon, headed by retired brigadier-general Veli Kucuk, was also 
planning a series of spectacular bomb attacks and assassinations 
aimed at destabilizing the country in order to topple the ruling AKP 
government in 2009.  In addition, the gang was plotting to kill 
Nobel Prize winning novelist Orhan Pamuk, and was seeking some USD 2 
million and a Glock gun for the assassination.  Police have 
monitored Ergenekon for several years and have compiled several 
thousand pages of reports on the group and its activities, according 
to papers. 
 
Karamanlis Pushes for a Solution on Cyprus Issue 
Sabah, Milliyet, Zaman, Vatan, Hurriyet, Aksam, Cumhuriyet and 
others:  Greek PM Karamanlis visited Ataturk's Mausoleum before he 
delivered a speech at Bilkent University yesterday.  In his speech, 
Karamanlis extended support to Turkey's EU membership and said "A 
European Turkey will benefit the people of Turkey, the region and 
the continent as a whole.  Turkey and Greece should leave behind all 
enmities.  The time has come for a solution in Cyprus."  Karamanlis 
 
ANKARA 00000156  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
was received by President Gul and met with CHP leader Baykal before 
he left Ankara for Istanbul, where he visited Patriarch 
Bartholomeos. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Reopening of Halki Seminary 
Yasemin Congar wrote in leftist Taraf (1/25): "Greek PM Karamanlis 
expressed hope for the reopening of the Greek Patriarchate's 
seminary, along with respect for the rights of Turkey's Greek 
minority.  Everyone in Turkey who believes in religious freedom 
supports these issues.  PM Erdogan did not use precise language in 
response to these requests; instead, he said the government 'was 
working on it.'  If the ruling AKP manages to turn its goodwill into 
good deeds, the seminary will be reopened.  Such an action will be 
revolutionary; the seminary has been closed since 1971.   Karamanlis 
was correct when he called the Patriarchate Turkey's 'passport to 
Europe.'" 
 
Turkey - US Nuclear Cooperation 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Yeni Safak, Zaman:   Most media outlets report 
US President Bush submitted the US/Turkey Nuclear Cooperation 
agreement (the "123" agreement) to Congress for approval. 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports in "Turkey-US Nuclear 
Cooperation" that the two countries "are preparing a new cooperation 
after their intelligence-sharing cooperation against the PKK."  This 
cooperation provides for the "peaceful creation of nuclear 
technology," with the "goal of producing electricity."  In "Bush 
Presents a US-Turkey Nuclear Cooperation Agreement to Congress," 
Islamist-oriented Zaman writes that "Ankara's peaceful production of 
nuclear energy will strengthen the political struggle against the 
proliferation nuclear weapons."  In "The First Step in a Nuclear 
Cooperation between the US and Turkey," Mainstream Hurriyet writes 
that "the US will transfer nuclear technology to Turkey for the 
peaceful production of nuclear energy."  Liberal Radikal writes "the 
agreement was drafted in 2000, but was suspended due to concerns 
Turkish agents could pass nuclear secrets to countries like 
Pakistan, but those concerns have now been resolved." 
 
Israel Angered by Erdogan's Comments. 
Sabah, Milliyet, Hurriyet, Cumhuriyet, Zaman and others:  All news 
outlets are reporting on the aftermath of Prime Minister Erdogan's 
criticism of the Israeli Blockade.  Nationalist-oriented Cumhuriyet 
writes in "Erdogan Disappoints Israel," Israeli Foreign Ministry 
officials expressed their disappointment to Israeli newspapers, "in 
light of the friendly relations between Turkey and Israel, Israel 
expects a different reaction from a state that is itself fighting 
terror."  On Tuesday, Erdogan stated to an AKP meeting "It is not 
understandable to punish two million people because some of them are 
doing wrong things."  Mainstream Sabah reports "Turkish Ambassador 
Namik Tan was summoned to the Israeli Foreign Ministry to discuss 
Erdogan's remarks."  Islamist-oriented Zaman writes that unnamed 
Turkish Foreign ministry officials said "Israel did not protest 
Erdogan's comments; they only conveyed the sensitivity of the 
issue."  In "Erdogan's Remarks Strain Relations," Mainstream 
Milliyet opines Erdogan's remarks "opened the road for tensions 
between Turkey and Israel."  Mainstream Hurriyet argues that 
"Erdogan angered Israel" by his "sharp criticism" which was answered 
by a "sharp response" from Israel that Erdogan's criticism caused 
"dreams to be broken" in Israel. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Erdogan's Remarks on the West 
Ergun Babahan warned in mainstream Sabah (1/25):  "If Turkey wants 
to be a member of the European Union, Turkey has to adopt Western 
regulations and values.  When we mention "the West" we are not 
talking about a super market where you can choose items based on 
your taste.  There is a series of values at the foundation of a 
market economy and a social state; these moral values include the 
supremacy of law.  Therefore, Prime Minister Erdogan's criticisms of 
the West is hugely unfortunate.  Erdogan recently said "Instead of 
studying Western science and arts, we have adopted moral indecency 
from the West, which conflicts with our values."  Turkey will have 
 
ANKARA 00000156  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
to accept Western values if it is going to be a member of the EU. 
Otherwise, Erdogan's statement can be interpreted to mean the EU is 
an indecent institution and Turkey is just pretending to 
integrate." 
 
Editorial Commentary on US Backing Israel in the Middle East 
Samir Salha commented in Islamist-leaning Zaman (1/25):  "The 
aftermath of President Bush's recent trip to Middle East deserves 
close analysis.  The visit indicated that, once again, the US favors 
Israel regardless of its actions.  Even Secretary Rice warned 
President Bush about his over-flattering remarks to Israeli Prime 
Minister Olmert.  In the midst of Bush's Middle East visit, Israel 
launched another attack on Gaza.  This illustrates Israel's 
perception that it has unconditional support from the US.  Once 
again, it is clear there will be no solution to the region's 
problems as long as Washington continues to view the issues through 
Israeli lenses.  Moreover, there was one more dark result of this 
visit. The Bush administration has laid the groundwork for an attack 
on Iran.  We are about to see accusations against Iran similar to 
those against Saddam Hussein before the US invaded Iraq." 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV, 7.00 A.M. 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Turkey's influential business grouping TUSIAD chairperson Arzuhan 
Yalcindag said Turkish women struggle with much more serious 
problems than the headscarf issue. 
 
- The court proceedings against the pro-Kurdish DTP deputy Aysel 
Tugluk, who is accused of spreading PKK propaganda, have been 
suspended due to her parliamentary immunity. 
 
- Deputy Prime Minister Nazim Ekren said "Turkey is a safe haven for 
investors amid the international economic turmoil." 
 
- Economy Minister Mehmet Simsek said in a press interview at the 
World Economic Forum in Davos that "Turkey is better equipped to 
weather the current global market turmoil than it has been in the 
past." 
 
International News 
 
- Greek media says Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis failed to make 
any visible progress in bilateral ties during his visit to Turkey. 
 
 
- The British Foreign Ministry has ensured the London-based 
Anti-Terror Turkish Platform will monitor PKK activities in Britain. 
 
 
- Iranian President Ahmadinejad has accepted an invitation from 
Iraqi President Talabani to visit Baghdad. 
 
- "Kosovo's declaration of independence is a matter of days away," 
the Serbian province's Prime Minister Hashim Thaci said Thursday. 
 
WILSON