08ANKARA1559
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Aug 28 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO0754
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1559/01 2411434
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 281434Z AUG 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7289
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9122
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4663
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3186
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6822
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6663
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3233
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001559 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, AUGUST 28, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
The Caucasus Crisis Polarizes the World 
"The World is polarized," and "Turkey is caught in the middle" 
writes mainstream Milliyet.  Turkish media outlets emphasize anxiety 
regarding an escalation of tensions in the Black Sea between NATO 
and Russia, with Turkey "caught in the middle." Mainstream Hurriyet 
reports Russian Deputy Chief of Staff Nogovitsin warned Turkey, "If 
U.S. and NATO warships violate the Montreaux Treaty by remaining in 
the Black Sea for more than twenty-one days, the primary 
responsibility for the violation of the treaty will rest with 
Turkey."  Mainstream Vatan reports, "The Black Sea is Boiling," 
claiming "This conflict is the world's new September 11th," because 
"the Russian decision to recognize the independence of South Ossetia 
and Abkhazia will have a similar ripple effect to September 11th," 
referring to a dramatic change in the dynamics of international 
politics.  In "An Iron Curtain in the Caucasus," leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet writes, "from now on the region is divided into two, with 
NATO on one side and Russia on the other."  Islamist-oriented Yeni 
Safak carries the headline, "Russians Play Roulette in the Black 
Sea," and notes, "NATO is tense, while Russia seeks support from 
China, India, and Iran at the Shanghai Summit in Dushanbe." 
Mainstream Sabah's front-page reads, "NATO Defies Russian Roulette 
in the Black Sea."  Sabah carries an article on the inside pages 
that reports, "An anonymous high-level U.S. official spoke to Sabah 
in Denver," and said, "If Turkey wants relations with NATO, then 
Turkey needs to act like it.  It's important for Turkey to act like 
a real NATO ally."  Meanwhile, mainstream Milliyet reports, "Turkey 
seeks a low profile position in this conflict," because of 
"implications regarding Cyprus."  Milliyet quotes an anonymous 
Turkish diplomatic source who said, "If Turkey joins other NATO 
countries in harshly criticizing Russia for recognizing South 
Ossetia and Abkhazia," then, "Russia is likely to draw attention to 
Turkey's support for the independence of Kosovo and northern 
Cyprus."  Another diplomatic source told Milliyet, "While Turkey was 
a committed NATO defender during the first Cold War," now Turkey is 
so dependent on Russia for energy resources that, "in the new 
international order, Turkish interests may not be parallel to NATO 
interests," and "Moscow is pleased that Turkey is feeling so much 
pressure." 
 
Editorial Opinion on Caucasus 
Hadi Uluengin wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "Moscow has returned to 
its historic roots of expansionism and does not care about starting 
a new Cold War.  From a short term perspective, this is a gain for 
Moscow.  The U.S. is preoccupied with Iran, Iraq, Afghanistan and 
U.S. presidential elections, so the U.S. is unable to react strongly 
at this time.  But in the long term, Russia is doomed to suffer 
because of its policy decisions.  After all, Russia is still an 
underdeveloped country and the flow of Western technology and 
capital into Russia is vitally important.  Once the Western world 
applies strict measures against Russia, the rulers of the Kremlin 
will suffer.  Also in the long term, members of the 'Commonwealth of 
Independent States' will likely seek alliances with the Western 
community in order to counter Russia's expansionist spirit.  All of 
these developments will move Turkey even closer to the EU." 
 
Nejat Eslen wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "Developments in 
Iraq and Afghanistan have not provided the political results the 
United States hoped to achieve.  Meanwhile, the U.S.-led revolutions 
in Ukraine and Georgia did not quite gel, while Russia and China 
continue to enjoy their strength.  The current power struggle in 
Asian geopolitics has a multilateral character, and the consequences 
remain to be seen because history is being rewritten.   Turkey will 
find itself trapped between Russia and the Western world unless 
Turkey quickly re-shapes its strategic relations." 
 
Davut Dursun wrote in Islamist leaning Yeni Safak: "Territorial 
integrity used to be the most prominent factor guiding peaceful 
international relations, but this principle has been undermined by 
 
ANKARA 00001559  002 OF 004 
 
 
recent events.  Certainly, the consequences of this will be very 
serious.  The Russian Federation may face a boomerang effect because 
the current developments are enough to scare the CIS member 
countries into taking steps to protect their ethnic and cultural 
diversity." 
 
Ergun Babahan wrote in mainstream Sabah:  "It is a common belief 
that Turkey cannot be governed with the current constitution because 
it was written with an authoritarian perspective during a military 
coup.  The current crisis with Russia will bring Turkey to a very 
important place in front of the U.S. and the EU.  Despite its 
problems, this position offers many opportunities for Turkey.  At 
this time, Turkey should hold on tightly to the EU process.  It 
might be difficult to change the constitution at the moment, but it 
won't be that difficult to implement EU reforms one after another 
and strengthen Turkey's democracy.  Turkey is entering a new era of 
opportunity and it is necessary that Turkey not miss this 
opportunity." 
 
Hasan Cemal wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "Turkey should never turn 
its back on the EU, ever.  Of course, while Turkey is gaining speed 
on the path to EU accession, it should at the same time consider 
Russia, China, the Gulf, and the Middle East.  If Turkey strengthens 
itself in the EU, it will become stronger in the East also.  And a 
strong Turkey in the East will strengthen Turkey's hand in the EU 
and the U.S. as well." 
 
Hakan Celik wrote in mainstream tabloid Posta:  "Russia is hoping 
for support from Asia during Russia's crisis with the West. 
Medvedev is trying to garner support from the members of the 
Shanghai Cooperation. Meanwhile, tensions are escalating in the 
Black Sea between the Russian and the U.S. fleets.  Just a little 
spark can cause a big fire in the Black Sea.  Turkey has managed to 
remain impartial so far.  However, this may not be so easy if the 
Montreux convention is violated.  Meanwhile, PM Erdogan's Caucasus 
Platform initiative has not been received warmly by the U.S. and the 
EU.  As a matter of fact, the U.S. is disturbed by this initiative 
and Senator Lugar openly acknowledged this during his recent visit 
to Ankara.  Despite all these negative developments, Turkey should 
be able to have an open line of communication with Russia.  Russian 
FM Lavrov will come to Turkey on Monday.  This visit is important in 
illustrating Turkey's significance in the region." 
 
Turkish Military Farewell Ceremonies Emphasize Secularism, Unity 
Milliyet, Vatan, Hurriyet, Sabah, Cumhuriyet, Radikal and others: 
Today's papers draw attention to the messages issued by the 
Commanders during baton passing ceremonies yesterday.  Mainstream 
Vatan reports that the incoming Chief of General Staff General Ilker 
Basbug handed over the Land Forces Command to General Isik Kosaner 
yesterday.  During his speech General Kosaner said "preserving the 
basic principles of the republic cannot be considered as 
intervention in domestic politics.  The Turkish Armed Forces will 
keep preserving the unified nation and the secular state." 
Mainstream Sabah noted that General Kosaner criticized the EU by 
saying "The Turkish Armed Forces don't need foreign supervision." 
All papers note that General Kosaner highlighted the importance of 
international support and cooperation in fight against terrorism. 
Outgoing Land Forces Commander General Basbug, on his part, listed 
the achievements of the Turkish military in the fight against 
terrorism and highlighted the importance of international 
coordination in the fight against terrorism.  Mainstream Milliyet 
reports out-going TGS Chief General Buyukanit told reporters, "The 
Montreux Convention provisions were not violated in the Black Sea. 
The Black Sea is a very important region for Turkey and Turkey will 
do its best not to endanger the stability in the Black Sea." 
 
Gul's First Year as the President 
Sabah, Zaman, Turkiye:  Papers report on President Gul's interview 
with NTV yesterday, during which Islamist-leaning Zaman says 
"President Gul assessed his first year as president."  Gul said 
 
ANKARA 00001559  003 OF 004 
 
 
"Turkey should not miss opportunities in regard to the EU.  The EU 
is a process that enhances Turkey and boosts the standards of the 
country.  That is why I attach great importance to EU reforms."  Gul 
also noted, "The fight against terrorism is the most important issue 
on Turkey's agenda.  We saw important developments last year 
regarding the fight against terrorism and I want to pay a visit to 
Baghdad soon."  Sabah reports that President Gul said, "I have never 
discriminated against any citizens since I took over.  The 
principles in the presidential oath, including impartiality, are 
important ideals and I believe I remained loyal to those elements." 
 
Armenian President Invites Turkish President to Turkey-Armenia 
Soccer Match 
Liberal-intellectual Radikal carried an exclusive interview with 
President of Armenia Serzh Sargsyan during which Sargsyan repeated 
his invitation to Gul to watch the soccer match between the Turkish 
and Armenian national football teams on September 6.  Sargsyan sees 
this even as an opportunity to strengthen ties between Ankara and 
Yerevan.  Sargsyan emphasized, "Once Turkey and Armenia establish 
diplomatic ties, it will be possible to discuss even the difficult 
issues and set up commissions to deal with all of them."  Regarding 
Turkey's initiative for a Caucasus Platform, Sargsyan noted it 
seemed like a positive effort and said that Yerevan will shape a 
stance on it as soon as receives the initiative and work on its 
details.  Regarding the events of 1915, Armenian President said, 
"There is no single Armenian citizen in the world who believes that 
the genocide did not happen.  However, we certainly do not consider 
the recognition of genocide as a precondition to develop relations 
with Turkey.  That is the very reason why we seek to establish 
diplomatic ties with Turkey without any precondition." 
 
Back to TL: Turkey drops 'new' from currency 
All papers report the Turkish Central Bank Governor has launched a 
campaign for a new currency by dropping "new" from the currency's 
current name, "New Turkish Lira (YTL)," and reverting back to the 
"Turkish Lira." Governor Durmus Yilmaz said: "The new currency will 
start circulating as of January 1, 2009, under the name 'Turkish 
Lira.'  The term "New Turkish Lira" was only a tool for transition." 
In addition, Yilmaz said a brand new note for 200 Turkish Lira will 
begin to circulate.  He said the new notes will be different sizes 
as a measure against counterfeiting and will carry features for the 
visually impaired. The depiction of the country's founder, Ataturk, 
will remain on the front face of all bank notes.  He said the 
"Turkish Lira" will be in circulation together with the "New Turkish 
Lira" until the end of 2009.  As of January 1, 2010, only Turkish 
Ziraat Bank and the Central Bank will change YTL notes with the new 
TL notes.  Turkey started the YTL regime in 2005 after deleting six 
zeroes from Turkish Lira bank notes.  In a related story, Yilmaz 
emphasized, "The Central Bank's monetary policies have played an 
important role in boosting Turkish exports." 
 
 
TV News: 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
 
Ferda Paksut said the prosecutor is interrogating her in connection 
with Ergenekon investigation in order to pressure her husband Osman 
Paksut to resign as Vice President of the Constitutional Court. 
 
Suspects detained in connection with the recent Izmir bombing 
allegedly were preparing an attack during this weekend's Victory Day 
celebrations. 
 
 
 
International News 
 
 
ANKARA 00001559  004 OF 004 
 
 
British Foreign Secretary Miliband warns Russia not to start a new 
Cold War. 
 
Georgia downgrades diplomatic relations with Russia and pulls out 
all but two diplomats from Moscow. 
 
In a BBC interview, Russian President Medvedev accused the U.S. of 
delivering weapons to Georgia under the disguise of humanitarian 
aid. 
 
A 6.3 magnitude earthquake hit the southern part of Russia's Lake 
Baikal, causing no casualties or material damage. 
 
WILSON