08ANKARA2038
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Mon Nov 24 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO8061
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #2038/01 3291416
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 241416Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8104
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9332
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5070
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3423
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6998
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6851
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3425
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 002038 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
MONDAY, NOVEMBER 24, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Armenian-Turkish Talks Today 
Mainstream Sabah reports Foreign Minister Ali Babacan will host 
talks with Armenian Foreign Minister Edward Nalbandyan today at the 
Ciragan Palace in Istanbul.  Mainstream Hurriyet notes Nalbandyan 
said, "Armenia is ready to normalize relations with Turkey without 
precondition and we are expecting the same from Turkey." 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "Diplomatic traffic between Turkey 
and Armenia is increasing," as "The Turkish side is prepared to 
suggest the establishment of an historical commission in order to 
examine the genocide claims."  In addition, Zaman reports, "The 
talks will also cover the security situation in Nagorno-Karabakh and 
Turkey's Caucasus Stability Platform proposal."  In "An Historical 
Meeting in Istanbul Today," leftist Taraf reports, "the two 
ministers will discuss a possible future visit by Armenian President 
Sargsyan. Liberal Radikal notes "the two leaders' meeting 
piggy-backs off of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Meeting in 
Istanbul." 
 
In a related story, Zaman also reports, "Turkish airlines will begin 
unscheduled charter flights between Turkey and Armenia." 
 
"Iraqi Kurds Are Arming Themselves" (Radikal) 
Media outlets report on a November 23rd Washington Post story that 
claims officials from northern Iraq received a shipment of arms from 
Bulgaria in September.  Coverage reflects fears the arms will be 
used in order to establish an independent Kurdistan.  Turkish media 
often doubt the true intentions of Kurdish Regional President 
Massoud Barzani, so headlines today allude to the possibility that 
Barzani may be planning to break with Baghdad.  CNN Turk reports, 
"The Washington Post reports Kurdish officials imported three C-130 
planeloads of weapons from Bulgaria." Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak 
carries the headline, "(Kurdish Regional Government President) 
Barzani's 'Independent' Recklessness."  Mainstream Milliyet reports 
in "Weapons to Northern Iraq from Bulgaria," that, "Baghdad was out 
of the loop regarding the shipment."  Mainstream Sabah carries the 
headline, "Three Planes Full of Arms to the Peshmerge." 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports "Barzani Secretly Buys 
Weapons," as "three planes full of weapons and ammunition are 
brought from Bulgaria to northern Iraq." 
 
More Inmates Will Be Sent to Imrali Prison, Ending Ocalan's 
Isolation 
Saturday's papers covered Justice Minister Mehmet Ali Sahin's 
remarks regarding the government's arrangements to transfer more 
inmates to Imrali prison, where the PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan is 
serving his prison sentence.  Saturday's Milliyet reports that The 
European Committee for The Prevention of Torture stated that 
Ocalan's isolation at the island prison since 1999 has affected his 
mental health.  Saturday's Radikal reports that Justice Minister 
Sahin said, "We are building new offices for security personnel at 
Imrali prison because their current accommodations are not suitable. 
 At the same time, we are planning additional construction in order 
to house up to 5 or 6 more prisoners."  Justice Minister Sahin 
responded to criticism from  opposition parties regarding the prison 
plans by saying, "If we decide to send 5 or 6 more prisoners to 
Imrali, they are not going to stay in the same cell with Ocalan but 
they will have separate cells.  There are thousands of officials at 
Imrali prison and only one prisoner!  Why should all these expenses 
be made for a single prisoner?" 
 
Erdogan Visits India 
Media outlets reported over the weekend and today Prime Minister 
Erdogan paid a "productive" state visit to India, quoting officials 
from both sides as saying they were "pleased" with the progress 
marked in bilateral relations.  The two countries reached agreements 
on the transfer of oil from the Ceyhan pipeline to India and on 
nuclear cooperation.  Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and Erdogan also 
agreed to begin negotiations on a Free Trade Agreement in order to 
 
ANKARA 00002038  002 OF 003 
 
 
encourage investment.  Erdogan's announced that Turkey's goal is to 
increase Turkish-Indian trade volume to USD 6 billion by 2010. 
 
Meanwhile, in a meeting with Turkish businessmen in India, Prime 
Minister Erdogan vowed to "quit the AKP chairmanship" if his party 
comes in second in the forthcoming municipality elections, report 
papers. 
 
NIC's "Global Trends 2025" Report 
Media outlets reported over the weekend the U.S. National 
Intelligence Council's (NIC) report, "Global Trends 2025: A 
Transformed World," envisages a "less secular and a less democratic 
Turkey" which will adopt "a more nationalistic and conservative 
character in 2025."  While the report predicts Turkey's EU accession 
will have a positive impact on the political stability around 
Europe, the report also warns of growing suspicions that Islamist 
and nationalist tendencies are likely to strengthen if Turkey's EU 
bid fails. 
 
Editorial Commentary on U.S. NIC Report "Global Trends 2025" 
 
Semih Idiz wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "According to the U.S. 
National Intelligence Council's (NIC) "Global Tendencies 2025" 
report, over the next 15-20 years, Turkey will emerge as a model for 
the Islamic world, not only because of the effects of Islamic and 
national dynamics but also because of its inclination for modernity. 
However, in this report, Turkey's sociological dynamics are not 
taken into consideration.  While the report mentions the rise of the 
middle class, it does not mention that the rise of the middle class 
could increase secularism and democracy, as was the case for Europe. 
 In 2025, Turkey could be a country like any Western country where 
all different religious and ethnic groups enjoy democratic rights." 
 
"Clinton Anxiety in the Arab World" (Sabah) 
Mainstream Sabah reports, "The Arab world is hopeful regarding 
Obama's foreign policy vision, but Hillary Clinton's preparation to 
become U.S. Secretary of State is making Arabs nervous," because, 
"because Hillary Clinton's foreign policy vision regarding the Arab 
world is different than that of Barack Obama."  Sabah notes, 
"Clinton was a supporter of Bush's war in Iraq," and "Clinton said 
she would 'obliterate' Iran."  Liberal Radikal reports in "Obama's 
Clintonization," that, "The real winner of the election is Clinton," 
as "Obama's cabinet is almost completely comprised of people from 
the Clinton administration." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-U.S. Relationship, 
Russia-Georgia-Afghanistan 
 
Omer Taspinar wrote in mainstream Sabah:  "Barack Obama will face 
many unresolved issues when he takes charge of the presidency in 
January.  The first four months of his presidency will be focused on 
issues of the highest priority.  Approximately four months after he 
takes charge, on April 24, 2009, Obama will have to make a sensitive 
decision regarding Armenian genocide claims.  This sensitive issue 
will test the bilateral relationship between Turkey and the U.S. 
early in Obama's presidency.  If Ankara doesn't want any problems 
with Obama on April 24, Ankara should take immediate steps to get on 
Obama's agenda." 
 
Mehmet Yilmaz in Islamist-oriented Zaman: "Russian President 
Medvedev recently approved a 'strategic' decision in which Germany 
will send weapons and military equipment to German forces in 
Afghanistan via Russian railroads.  Dispatching one ton of equipment 
by airplanes to Afghanistan from Europe costs $14,000 whereas 
sending it by railroad through Russia costs $500.  Moscow, by this 
effort, is trying to repair Russia-NATO ties, which were seriously 
damaged by the war in Georgia.  Moscow also wants to show its good 
intentions by helping the U.S., which Russia fought against from 
1979-89 in Afghanistan.  Moscow will allow the use its railroads, 
and in return, Russia will urge the West to not take Georgia and 
 
ANKARA 00002038  003 OF 003 
 
 
Ukraine into NATO." 
 
Editorial Commentary on AKP-PKK-Southeast Turkey 
 
Serdar Akinan in tabloid Aksam: "The ruling AKP, in agreement with 
the military, is expected to take measures to prevent new recruits 
from joining the PKK in the mountains.  The AKP will probably allow 
minor cultural openings before the municipality elections, and 
further measures against the PKK will drain resources designated for 
PKK recruitment.  We expect serious investments in the mainly 
Kurdish southeast, through which the AKP will seek integration into 
the Gulf region.  If Turkey plays its cards right, it will become a 
peaceful country with the most effective economy in the region." 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- The Ergenekon trial continues Monday in the Silivri prison complex 
in Istanbul. 
 
- The main opposition CHP continued over the weekend to transfer new 
party members who wear Islamic-style headscarves. 
 
- Prime Minister Erdogan warned that state-owned banks might 
intervene to stabilize markets if the Turkish banking sector does 
not take measures to ease borrowers' financial strains.  Erdogan 
earlier criticized the banking sector for not helping the real 
sector in the global financial crisis. 
 
International News 
 
- The Iraqi parliament will vote Wednesday on a pact on the 
withdrawal of American troops from Iraq over the course of the next 
three years. 
 
- Hamas slams Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas' declaration that 
he would call for early elections early next year if the dialogue 
between rival movements fails. 
 
- Afghan President Hamid Karzai's office said President-elect Barack 
Obama has promised to increase U.S. assistance to Afghanistan. 
 
SILLIMAN