08ANKARA1519
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Aug 22 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6722
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1519/01 2351437
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 221437Z AUG 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7229
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9107
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4637
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3172
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6809
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6650
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3220
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001519 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Black Sea Tensions Rising 
All news outlets today pay particular attention to anxieties that 
the U.S., NATO, and Russia are stepping up their game in the war of 
words and symbols.  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak writes in, "Unrest 
in the Black Sea," that "some experts claim the U.S. aid shipments 
into the Black Sea not only contain humanitarian aid, but weapons 
for the Georgians."  In addition, the paper notes, "Two NATO ships 
passed through the straits yesterday" which Yeni Safak says, "begins 
the effects on Turkey from the war between Georgia and Russia in the 
Caucasus."  But mainstream Hurriyet reports NATO issued a statement 
indicating the two ships "were being used for routine joint 
exercises in the Black Sea within the NATO Task Force Operations." 
Mainstream Milliyet reports, "It is not clear if the U.S. ships 
carrying humanitarian aid to Georgia will participate in the NATO 
exercises. (Note: A NATO mission did pass through the straights 
yesterday on a routine mission to Bulgaria and Romania.  It is not 
part of the Georgian aid mission.)  Mainstream Aksam's front page 
headline reads, "Turkey is caught in the Middle between the U.S. and 
Russia's in the New Cold War."  Aksam's article comments, "Tensions 
are rising after the war between Russia and Georgia," as, "U.S. 
plans to send giant hospital ships were foiled by the Montreux 
Convention." Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet's headline reads, "The 
U.S. Gets the Chance to Make a Show of Force in the Black Sea," as, 
"their use of war ships in the Black Sea sends a message to the 
Russians." 
 
Russia Stirs Up Regional Politics 
Media outlets noted Russia's decision to cut ties with NATO, 
Russia's detention in Gori of the French Ambassador, and Russian 
efforts to garner support in the region.  Cumhuriyet comments on 
Russia's decision to cut ties with NATO with the headline, "The 
Missile Shield Severs Relations."  Zaman also reports, "Russia Halts 
Relations with NATO."  Mainstream Sabah carries the headline, 
"Russian Troops Detain the French Ambassador for Three Hours," when 
he traveled to Gori, "a city outside of the boundaries of South 
Ossetia but still occupied by Russian troops."  Sabah reports, "The 
French government spat fire in response."  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
notes, "The Russians Send a Detention Message to Russia," as France 
called the ambassador's detention "unacceptable." 
 
In a related story, Zaman reports, "Syrian President Assad met with 
Russian President Medvedev," and Syria, "pledged support for 
Russia's response to Georgian provocation and for the establishment 
of a naval base," so that "Syria and Russia could work together in 
order to form a strategic partnership that seeks stability in the 
region."  Zaman notes, "Russia responded to the U.S. missile defense 
agreement in Poland by setting up the same arrangement with Belarus 
and by extending Russian dialogue in order to strengthen ties to the 
Middle East."  Liberal Radikal reports, "Eyes are on the Kremlin," 
as "Abkhazia and South Ossetia officially request from Russia its 
recognition of their independence."  CNN Turk reports, "Turkish 
Foreign Minister Ali Babacan will speak with Russian FM Lavrov 
regarding the implementation of the Caucasus Platform," and liberal 
Radikal notes, "Turkey and Russia will work together in order to 
include Armenia in the platform." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Regional Diplomatic Developments 
 
Yasin Dogan wrote in Yeni Safak: "Turkish diplomacy is very busy due 
to Turkey's multi-lateral efforts.  It is important to evaluate the 
US reaction to the Caucasus Platform.  Yet at the same time, Turkey 
cannot ignore its relations with Russia.  Turkey cannot afford to be 
aloof to its neighbors in the Balkans, the Caucasus and the Middle 
East.  Turkish foreign policy should be active and crafted with a 
multi-lateral vision.  It is important to maintain balance, which is 
good for Turkey's national interest." 
 
Orhan Birgit in Cumhuriyet: "US Representative Mark Kirk's statement 
 
ANKARA 00001519  002 OF 003 
 
 
that Turkey is like a 'satellite' of Russia is nonsense and rude. 
Kirk must explain the reason why he supports the efforts of the 
French president but opposes Turkey's initiatives in the Caucasus. 
Turkey's friends and allies should be happy that Turkey is pursuing 
a policy which shows the Montreux Treaty is vital not only for the 
region but for world peace as well.  It's good that the US dropped 
the idea of sending giant hospital ships to Georgia, and instead 
will send vessels from the American fleet in the Aegean, which meet 
the regulations stated in the Montreux Treaty.  The US should thank 
Turkey for providing reasonable guidance." 
 
Mumtazer Turkone in Zaman: "Today, the US needs Russia as an enemy. 
Russia is more than eager to play such a role, since polarization 
with the US would allow Moscow the opportunity to return to its old 
behavior during Russia's imperial days.  The missile shield system 
deployed in Poland does not actually protect the US from Russian 
missiles, but renders the American state more powerful against other 
opponents around the world.  Thus, world politics are returning to 
the old days of the Cold War.  Within this framework, Turkey is an 
energy route and the battlefield of micro-nationalisms." 
 
Rice Negotiating Agreement with Iraq 
Mainstream Sabah reports, "after signing a missile defense shield 
agreement with Poland, Rice made a surprise visit to Iraq," where, 
"a timetable for withdrawal is set for June 2009."  Leftist Taraf 
carries the headline, "Rice Pursues a Signature with Iraq," and 
notes, "Iraq Foreign Minister Zebari emphasized the need to include 
a date for the withdrawal of U.S. troops from Iraq."  Liberal 
Radikal reports, "Rice Bargains with Baghdad on the Status of Forces 
Agreement." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey/Sudan, Turkish Democracy Debates 
 
Mehmet Yilmaz wrote in Hurriyet: "At his press conference, the 
President of Sudan not only made comments about the genocide case 
but also described Turkey as his accomplice.  Interestingly enough, 
the Turkish MFA did not make any statement to contradict al-Bashir's 
view of Turkey as his crime partner.  Apparently the AKP government 
has no objection to this attitude, which will have a very negative 
impact on Turkey's candidacy for the UNSC.  While the government has 
a modern vision for membership to the UN Security Council, the 
government's Islamic roots undermine such a target." 
 
Ismet Berkan wrote in Radikal: "As soon as the parliament convenes, 
the ruling AKP will exert most of its energy on local elections. 
Most of them believe that a vast majority of votes in local 
elections will indicate an acquittal for the AKP vis-`-vis the 
people [in the aftermath of the Constitutional Court decision]. 
However this is not going to be good enough for Turkish democracy 
since we still do not have a modern democracy.  A legitimate checks 
and balances system is all we need.  Unless we have that we will end 
up in a new political crisis.  This is the very time to repair our 
democratic system." 
 
Explosion from Car Bomb Wounds 16 in Izmir 
All news outlets report that early Thursday in the Aegean port city 
of Izmir, five policemen, three soldiers, including a colonel, and 
five civilians were wounded when a bomb-laden parked car exploded as 
a minivan carrying police officers passed by.  Izmir Governor Cahit 
Kirac told reporters the bomb was detonated by remote control.  The 
car was reportedly stolen in Istanbul a year ago.  Liberal Radikal 
claims the PKK to be behind the attack, which, according to the 
paper, was an "al-Qaeda type" act.  Radikal says yesterday's 
incident in Izmir was similar to a PKK bomb attack in Diyarbakir in 
October, which claimed six lives.  Police are seeking two other cars 
that might be used in attacks in major cities.  Papers recall eight 
bomb attacks were carried out around the country over the last eight 
months. 
 
Editorial Commentary on the Recent PKK Attacks 
 
ANKARA 00001519  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
Guneri Civaoglu writes in mainstream Milliyet: "The PKK has now 
shifted its actions to major cities, of which the bombings in Mersin 
and Izmir are the latest examples.  The car bomb attacks in these 
cities indicate the PKK is cornered on both sides of the Iraqi 
border.  The upcoming municipal elections could be another reason 
behind the latest attacks.  The pro-Kurdish DTP is uncomfortable 
with the increasing popularity of the ruling AKP in southeast 
Turkey.  The PKK hopes the attacks in Turkish cities will stoke 
polarization, which will help increase the support for the DTP." 
 
Turkey's NSC Discusses the Caucasus, Cyprus, Iran 
All papers carry a statement issued after the National Security 
Council which notes the council discussed the fight against PKK and 
developments in the Caucasus, Cyprus and Iraq.  "The NSC expressed 
determination on the fight against terrorism and discussed measures 
to ensure peace and stability in the Caucasus.  Regarding Cyprus, 
the NSC members expressed solidarity with the Turkish Republic of 
Northern Cyprus, and also discussed the fundamentals for a 
comprehensive solution in light of upcoming Cyprus talks on 
September 3.  On Iraq, the NSC discussed ongoing projects to realize 
a high level cooperation scheme between Turkey and Iraq as well as 
emphasized the importance of more bilateral contacts with Iraq" the 
statement detailed.  Radikal mentioned that NSC statement went 
beyond usual practices for the first time by adding a non-political 
line that included good wishes to General Buyukanit upon his 
retirement. 
 
Turkey Blocks Access to 853 Websites 
Mainstream Milliyet reports on its front page that access to YouTube 
has been restricted in Turkey for over three months.  In addition, 
the paper notes that as of August 18, Turkey's Telecommunication 
Department has restricted access to 853 websites.  Turkey has now 
joined the list of countries enforcing tight Internet restrictions 
such as China, Iran, Armenia, Tunisia, Indonesia, Syria, the United 
Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia, says Milliyet. 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- A court in Malatya accepted the prosecutor's demand to include the 
'Ergenekon' indictment in the case concerning the murder of three 
Christian Bible publishers in 2007. 
 
- The second round of collective bargaining talks between the 
government and civil servants' unions ended Thursday without an 
agreement. 
 
- A survey by Turkey's Central Bank shows the year-end inflation to 
stand at 11.04 percent. 
 
International News 
 
- UN High Commissioner for Refugees says 118,000 people have fled 
their homes because of the conflict between Georgia and Russia. 
 
- Secretary Rice and Iraqi Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari said the 
two countries have agreed on setting timetables for the withdrawal 
of US troops from Iraq. 
 
- Afghan officials said at least 10 civilians have been killed in an 
air attack by the US-led forces in Afghanistan's Laghman province. 
 
 
SILLIMAN