08ANKARA1504
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Aug 20 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO4820
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1504/01 2331357
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 201357Z AUG 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7206
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9100
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4629
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3165
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6802
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6643
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3213
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001504 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Debate over U.S. Aid Shipments to Georgia via Black Sea Sparks 
Controversy 
All media outlets report about the negotiations between the U.S. and 
Turkey regarding the transport of aid to Georgia via the Bosporus 
and Dardanelles.  Islamist-oriented Zaman carries the front-page 
headline, "The U.S. Wants Passage through the Bosporus, Ankara Wants 
to Find a Formula for an Agreement," as, "Russia is against the 
deployment of U.S. ships in the Black Sea."  Mainstream Aksam 
reports, "Ankara is afraid that one violation of the Montreux Treaty 
could open up debates concerning the entire convention," and calls 
the negotiations with the U.S. "a fresh crisis."  Mainstream Vatan 
notes, "Turkey is caught between the U.S. and Russia.  If Turkey 
does not allow the U.S. ships through the straits, a new crisis with 
the U.S. will emerge.  If Turkey does allow the U.S. ships through 
the straits, Russia will see this as a violation of the Montreux 
Treaty and a new crisis with Russia will emerge."  Mainstream 
Hurriyet notes, "Turkey warned NATO that a violation of the Montreux 
Treaty could provide Russia with a powerful trump card in the 
region."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet carries the comments of 
Ariel Cohen of the Heritage Foundation, who compared Turkey's 
refusal to allow U.S. warships into the Black Sea to the March 1, 
2003 crisis in which Turkey declined permission to the U.S. to open 
a northern front in the Iraq war via Turkey. 
 
The U.S. Will Abide By the Montreux Treaty 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Vatan, Radikal, Cumhuriyet, Zaman and others 
report Deputy Assistant Secretary for European and Eurasian Affairs 
Matt Bryza spoke at the Foreign Press Center yesterday.  Today's 
coverage of his comments is straightforward and appears to calm the 
frenzy surrounding the Montreux controversy.  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet carries the banner headline, "The U.S. Will Abide By the 
Montreux Treaty," and notes, "while the Pentagon insists on sending 
naval hospital ships to the Black Sea, the State Department 
announced there is no crisis with Turkey and the U.S. will abide by 
the provisions of the Montreux Treaty."  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
writes, "Bryza said the U.S. has not made a formal request for the 
passage of U.S. Navy hospital ships."  NTV reports Bryza said, "The 
U.S. can send cargo ships that abide by the guidelines set by the 
Montreux Treaty."  Mainstream Milliyet, however, focuses on Bryza's 
take on Turkish efforts to create a Caucasus Stability Pact, "I was 
surprised by this effort," because, "I was not informed of these 
efforts despite the close partnership that exists between Turkey and 
the U.S." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Aid to Georgia through the Straits 
 
Semih Idiz wrote in mainstream Milliyet (8/20):  "Despite the 
Pentagon spokesman Bryan Whitman's statements regarding negotiations 
with Turkey about the passage of U.S. naval vessels through the 
Turkish straits, the Turkish Foreign Ministry stressed the U.S. has 
made no official request yet.  The U.S. Embassy in Ankara also 
confirmed that there is no official request for vessel passage. 
According to the Montreux Treaty, there are strict regulations for 
warships passing through the straits.  A well-known law professor, 
Huseyin Pazarci, told me 'Turkey should be careful in applying the 
rules of the Montreux Treaty.  Otherwise, stability in the Black Sea 
could be damaged and Turkey will suffer the most."  Circles within 
the Foreign Ministry agree.  Moreover, the Foreign Ministry 
reiterated that they will assist the U.S. in every possible 
regarding humanitarian aid to Georgia via air passage and there are 
no limitations there." 
 
Papers Continue to Criticize Turkey for Receiving Sudan's Al-Bashir 
All papers report President Abdullah Gul met with Sudanese President 
Omar Al-Bashir on Tuesday at the Turkey-Africa Summit in Istanbul. 
Gul told Al-Bashir that Turkey was willing to make new investments 
and be involved in oil exploration in Sudan; he also reportedly 
urged Al-Bashir to work to bring an end to the humanitarian crisis 
 
ANKARA 00001504  002 OF 004 
 
 
in Darfur. 
 
Meanwhile, papers report opposition CHP lawmaker Ahmet Ersin 
submitted a motion in Parliament calling on Prime Minister Erdogan 
to explain the frequent invitations extended to Al-Bashir.  Ersin 
noted the potential damage such invitations can have on Turkey's 
image, especially after criticism from leading international human 
rights organizations. 
 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet carries the headline, "Official 
Reception to the Perpetrator of Genocide," and criticizes President 
Gul for meeting with the figure accused of atrocities in Darfur. 
Liberal Radikal strikes a similar tone, criticizing the fact that 
Al-Bashir was given high level receptions in Turkey.  "Gul Shakes 
That Man's Hand Again," says leftist Taraf, slamming President Gul 
for meeting with Al-Bashir and not touching on the Sudanese 
president's responsibility in Darfur killings. 
 
A joint declaration released at the end of the summit announced 
Turkey's 'strategic partnership' with the African Union and Turkey's 
new initiatives in Africa.  Papers comment the real aim of the 
summit was to garner support from African countries for Turkey's bid 
for a seat at the UN Security Council during 2009-2010.  Turkey will 
compete against Iceland and Austria when the voting is held in 
October. Turkey must secure the support of 128 UN members. 
Ethiopia's Prime Minister Meles Zenawi was reported as saying he 
believed "almost all African countries would support Turkey's 
candidacy for a nonpermanent seat at the UN Security Council." 
 
 
Editorial Commentary on Sudan President's Turkey Visit 
 
Tufan Turenc criticized Al-Bashir's visit to Turkey in mainstream 
Hurriyet : "The democratic world hates Al-Bashir for his criminal 
role in the Darfur genocide.  While he is not allowed into 108 
countries, Turkey opens its doors and rolls out the red carpet each 
time he comes to Turkey.  Al-Bashir flaunts the support Turkey and 
the Turkish government openly bestow upon him.  What happened to AKP 
policies and efforts that sought to rid this country of criminals?" 
 
Hikmet Cetinkaya in Cumhuriyet: "Sudan's Al-Bashir has visited 
Turkey for a second time; his first call was in January.  Those who 
had breakfast with the Butcher of Darfur could have asked him why 
hundreds of thousands of people were killed in Darfur; but they 
don't have the guts to do that.  The Sudanese president, known for 
his responsibility in the genocide in Darfur, held a private meeting 
with Abdullah Gul in Istanbul.  What can we say?  This is such a 
disgrace for Turkey." 
 
Paper: Rice and Babacan Give Each Other the Cold Shoulder 
In several papers, photos of Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and 
Turkish Foreign Minister Ali Babacan dominate the international 
pages.  Mainstream Vatan carries the caption, "Rice and Babacan give 
each other the cold shoulder," at the North Atlantic Council Meeting 
in Brussels yesterday.   Meanwhile, mainstream Milliyet's caption to 
this photo reads, "Babacan and Rice are side by side in Brussels." 
 
 
This photo of Rice and Babacan at the NAC is carried in all papers 
today. 
 
President Gul Pardons Erbakan 
Vatan, Milliyet, Hurriyet, Cumhuriyet, Zaman, Posta, Bugun, Turkiye, 
Cumhuriyet, Radikal:  President Gul pardoned former leader of the 
banned Welfare Party (RP) Necmettin Erbakan, who was under house 
arrest after being found guilty on corruption charges, publicly 
known as the "lost trillion" case.  Erbakan was accused of fraud of 
falsifying party records.  Mainstream Vatan's headline reads "Is 
this right, Mr. President?"  Vatan reports that President Gul was 
among those implicated in this 'lost trillion' case.  Mainstream 
 
ANKARA 00001504  003 OF 004 
 
 
Sabah and leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet report that the main 
opposition party CHP deputy Atilla Kart said "President Gul 
exercised the power given to him by the Constitution, however the 
decision should be questioned ethically because Gul himself is a 
suspect in the same case and cannot not be tried because of his 
political immunity." 
 
Suicide Bomber Detonates his Car in Mersin, Injures 13 Policemen 
Sabah, Milliyet, Zaman, Yeni Safak, and others:  Mainstream Milliyet 
reports that Mersin police followed a tip about a car loaded with 
explosives and tried to stop the car at a check-point.  While the 
suicide bomber managed to escape the first check-point, he detonated 
the bomb strapped to him at the second check-point when he realized 
that he would be captured.  13 police officers were injured in the 
blast.  The explosive is believed to be 30kg of C-4 and it was 
revealed that the target of the bomber was the police department in 
Mersin. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Pakistan, Political Islam vs. U.S. 
 
Hikmet Bila in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet: "Pakistan, struggling 
in an environment of blood and death, might be assigned a new task 
concerning Iran.  Could Pakistan accomplish this new assignment 
without Musharraf?  Or are we going to see new Musharrafs or Ziya 
ul-Haks in Pakistan?  Pakistan, which has recently been debating 
secularism and moderate Islam, is now discussing whether it should 
choose secular Islam or radical Islam.  It's for the Pakistanis who 
celebrate Musharraf's departure to pick among these options." 
 
Mehmet Barlas observed in mainstream Sabah (8/20):  "Some describe 
the situation in Georgia as 'the beginning of a new Cold War.'  In 
this new war the hostile parties are not the communists or the 
capitalists.  The ideological angle against the U.S. in this new 
cold war is political Islam.  This political Islam could be carried 
out by Khomeini, Al-Qaeda, Hamas, Hizbullah or the Taliban.  Now 
that Musharraf has resigned, Pakistanis are concerned that political 
Islam could fill the power vacuum.  In this new Cold War era, 
countries' internal stability is very important.  Turkey is aware 
that the path to security is the path to the EU. Therefore, every 
attempt by the government to carry out EU reforms should be 
supported fully." 
 
TV News: 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Opposition CHP will not back the AKP-proposed constitutional 
reforms, while MHP will support the reforms mentioned in Turkey's 
National Program for EU harmonization. 
 
- The Council of State (Danistay) suspended the privatization of 
nine motorways and two Bosphorus bridges. 
 
- Bulgaria opens a consulate in the city of Bursa. 
 
International News 
 
- U.S. presidential nominee Senator John McCain warns if Russia 
captured the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline, it could exert increased 
influence in the energy market. 
 
- Turkish Cypriot presidential spokesman Hasan Ercakica blamed Greek 
Cypriot leader Christofias for trying to seize the cities of 
Guzelyurt, Karpaz and Maras before the start of the talks on the 
divided island. 
 
- Ahmad Fayyazbaksh, the head of an Iranian state-owned nuclear 
energy production company, says Iran is preparing to build more 
nuclear power plants. 
 
ANKARA 00001504  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
SILLIMAN