08ANKARA552
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Mar 21 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1465
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0552/01 0811417
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 211417Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5666
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8766
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4031
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2797
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6489
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6326
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2904
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000552 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, MARCH 21, 2008 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
AKP Plans for Averting Closure Case 
All papers report the ruling AKP is working on constitutional 
changes in an effort to make party closures difficult.  According to 
the new regulations planned by the AKP, a party involved in 
"unconstitutional activities" will be warned by the prosecutor.  If 
the warning is ignored, a closure suit could be filed.  Party 
officials will be held responsible individually for "activities 
against secularism and the republic," which will relieve parties 
from punishment for such acts.  Parties will face charges only if 
they refuse to expel members involved in illegal activities.  The 
parliament's approval will be needed for the chief prosecutor to 
file a suit for the disbanding of a party.  Mainstream Vatan says 
AKP has dropped plans to change the structure of the Constitutional 
Court. 
 
AKP has submitted to MHP its proposal for legal reforms.  If the MHP 
declines to support the reforms, AKP will submit the issue to the 
parliament next week and will pass the reforms in the first half of 
April.  Papers don't expect the MHP to support the proposal since 
the changes will relieve not only the AKP but also the pro-Kurdish 
DTP, which also faces a closure case.  Liberal Radikal believes the 
reforms might not help block the suit for the closure of AKP since 
the legal process has already started. 
 
 
Opposition CHP plans to apply to the Constitutional Court for the 
annulment of constitutional reforms related to the banning of 
political parties.  CHP leader Deniz Baykal said, "The AKP is 
creating its own justice; it will turn the constitution into a dress 
that will fit its own body."  Baykal warned against political 
attempts for altering the main pillars of the system and the 
constitutional order to their own ends.  "The AKP is accused of 
violating the constitution.  The situation in Turkey is different 
than Europe.  Religious exploitation would turn everything upside 
down in politics.  This sensitivity was reflected in the 
constitution when the Republic was founded," said Baykal. 
 
Law Faculties, High Court Chief Support Prosecutor Yalcinkaya 
All papers report the deans of 26 law faculties have released a 
joint statement saying prosecutors were not parties in the lawsuits 
they file, and that prosecutors couldn't be criticized for 
fulfilling their responsibilities.  The deans stressed "the 
judiciary should be protected in order to protect the state." 
 
Court of Appeals chairman Hasan Gerceker has also extended support 
to chief prosecutor Abdurrahman Yalcinkaya.  Gerceker warned the AKP 
to consider the effect of their statements, and to think before they 
speak up.  "Instead of politicizing law, politicians should abide by 
laws.  There is no democracy if there is no law," stressed Gerceker, 
who called on all to act with common sense. 
 
 
VP Cheney Urged NATO for more Troops to Afghanistan 
Sabah, Hurriyet, Cumhuriyet, Zaman, Aksam and others:  Tabloid 
Aksam's headline reads "Cheney Looked for a Suitable Place for 
Turkish Troops in Afghanistan," and the article reports Vice 
President Cheney included Afghanistan in his program at the last 
minute.  The Turkish press predicts that Cheney will insist on 
additional Turkish combat troops to Afghanistan to fight against the 
Taliban.  Mainstream Hurriyet reports that Cheney is expected to ask 
Ankara to send additional troops to Afghanistan during his visit to 
Ankara on Monday.  The issue raises the question of whether or not 
parliamentary authorization will be required if the government 
responds this request positively.  MFA sources said that the 2001 
motion would be sufficient, but added that the last word would be 
with the Turkish General Staff.  Mainstream Sabah reports that the 
U.S. security officials arriving in Ankara prior to the visit of the 
Vice President insisted on placing snipers on the rooftops, but 
 
ANKARA 00000552  002 OF 003 
 
 
Turkish security rejected the proposal by saying the Turkish 
National Police will provide security.  The paper adds that the 
Chief of General Staff, General Buyukanit delayed his plans to visit 
northern Cyprus in order to meet with VP Cheney.  Mainstream 
Hurriyet writes, "America will want NATO allies to give more 
powerful support for Afghanistan," and, "Cheney has begun to lobby 
NATO allies to send more combat troops as the upcoming NATO summit 
in Bucharest approaches."  Islamist-oriented Zaman writes in "We 
Will Pressure NATO for More Soldiers in Afghanistan," that VP 
Cheney, "made a surprise visit to Afghanistan as he wanted to make a 
joint demand, with Afghan President Karzai, for more NATO support in 
Afghanistan."  Liberal Radikal columnist Murat Yetkin notes, "Cheney 
never visits a country empty-handed.  What does he have up his 
sleeve? Missile defense against Russia?  An energy agreement between 
Turkey and Iraq?  PKK?  Demands for combat troops in Afghanistan?" 
 
Shocking Developments in Hrant Dink Murder Case 
All papers:  Mainstream Hurriyet, Sabah and Milliyet report Okan 
Simsek and Veysel Sahin, two gendarmerie officers accused of 
negligence in the murder of Hrant Dink, denied their earlier 
testimony and said "we testified like that because our superiors 
ordered us to do so.  The fact is, we received a tip-off about the 
assassination and passed the information to our superiors, however, 
they did not respond to the threat."  The Court decided to invite 
the relevant officers to the court to testify and postponed the case 
to June 19, Hurriyet adds. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Iraq 
 
"Fifth Anniversary of Occupation" 
Ferai Tinc wrote in mainstream Hurriyet (3/21): "Even though this 
year marks the fifth anniversary of the U.S. invasion of Iraq, let's 
not forget the U.S. has been involved in Iraq since 1990.  This is 
part of America's ongoing struggle to reshape the Middle East in the 
aftermath of Soviet Union's demise.  The U.S., as the only world 
superpower, wields too much strength.  Prior to the Iraq war, for 
instance, there were many who believed the U.S. was capable of 
finishing the job in Iraq promptly.  However, all such predictions 
were proven wrong.  In fact, the situation in Iraq is so bad that it 
needs no interpretation.  The U.S. occupation paved the way for 
radical religious movements and terrorist organizations to take 
control in Iraq.  Of all Iraqis, only the Kurds are grateful for the 
U.S.  One of the main purposes of VP Cheney's visit to Erbil was to 
ask the Regional Administration's support for oil sharing, because 
the U.S. cannot ensure Iraqi oil sharing.  According to Bush, 
American forces achieved an undeniable success in Iraq and the war 
will end with victory.  I wonder if there is anyone who buys this 
rhetoric." 
 
"The Demolishing of Iraq" 
Derya Sazak wrote in mainstream Milliyet (3/21): "The Bush 
administration planned the Iraq invasion after 9/11.  Their lies 
concerning weapons of mass destruction were part of this planning. 
Even U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell told lies about weapons of 
mass destruction. As if this was not enough, another lie was told 
when the Bush administration linked Saddam's regime to al-Qaeda. 
Once all of these lies were proven false, the new rhetoric morphed 
into "protecting the safety of energy routes."  The price of oil per 
barrel was below $30 before the Iraq war; since then, the price has 
climbed to an astounding price of $110 dollars per barrel. While 
President Bush estimates the cost of the war at $500 Billion, other 
projections say the war has taken a $3 trillion toll on the U.S. 
economy.  Moreover, Iraq is experiencing another tragedy.  Before 
the war, a secular regime was in place in Iraq.  Now, thanks to the 
'democracy and freedoms' provided by the U.S., Islamic 
Fundamentalists are taking over." 
 
TV News: 
NTV 
 
 
ANKARA 00000552  003 OF 003 
 
 
Domestic News 
 
- The parliament has rejected the opposition CHP's proposal for 
holding general debates on the recent Turkish cross-border 
operations into northern Iraq. 
 
- Pro-Kurdish DTP leader Nurettin Demirtas, former lawmaker Selim 
Sadak and Dicle Mayor Abdullah Akengin face trial for making terror 
propaganda. 
 
- A survey by Turkey's Central Bank expects the year-end inflation 
to stand at 7.27 percent. 
 
International News 
 
- U.S. Vice President Dick Cheney met Afghanistan's President Hamid 
Karzai during an unannounced visit to the country. 
 
- Armenian authorities plan to lift the state of emergency in 
Yerevan. 
 
- Russia is preparing to host a Middle East peace conference this 
year that will try to re-launch talks between Israel and Syria about 
the occupied Golan Heights. 
 
WILSON