08ANKARA378
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Feb 27 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO8521
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0378/01 0581232
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 271232Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5381
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8709
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3928
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2730
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6438
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6271
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2850
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000378 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 27, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Iraqi Parliament and Iraqi Kurds Condemn Turkish Offensive in 
Northern Iraq 
All papers report Turkey's military General Staff (TGS) said on 
Tuesday two more Turkish soldiers were killed during a ground 
offensive against the PKK in northern Iraq.  This raises the Turkish 
military death toll to 19.  TGS said the total PKK death toll is at 
¶153.  TGS also said heavy snowfall was hampering the troops' advance 
toward PKK camps in the mountainous region.  Mainstream Hurriyet 
reports the PKK were heard during radio exchanges saying they were 
"stuck" in the area as Turkish troops close in on their bases. 
 
Government Spokesman Cemil Cicek told reporters yesterday there were 
no civilians in the area affected by the Turkish military's 
operation.  Cicek said Turkey has taken economic, social and 
cultural measures to improve development in the mostly Kurdish 
southeastern region over the last five years.  Prime Minister 
Erdogan told his ruling AKP group meeting yesterday the ground 
offensive does not target the north of Iraq, but the terrorist 
organization PKK itself.  "We appreciate the stance of the Iraqi 
government in cooperating with us," said Erdogan.  "We appreciate 
the intelligence information about the terrorists in northern Iraq 
provided to us by our strategic partner the United States." 
 
The main opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal told his party group 
yesterday the Turkish military should carry on operations until the 
targets are achieved.  "The greatest problem that might arise in the 
future would be probable international interventions aiming to stop 
the Turkish military," Baykal emphasized.  Devlet Bahceli, chairman 
of the opposition MHP, said Turkey should prevent the Peshmerge from 
helping the escaping PKK terrorists seeking shelter.  "Turkish 
troops should stay in northern Iraq, and the government must impose 
economic and political sanctions on the region," Bahceli said, 
stressing the Iraqi government should ensure the security for the 
Turkmen in the region. 
 
The Iraqi government spokesman Ali al-Dabbagh said in a statement, 
"The cabinet expresses its condemnation for the Turkish military 
interference, which is considered a violation of Iraq's 
sovereignty."  Dabbagh also noted a Turkish envoy would meet Iraqi 
President Talabani and senior government leaders including Foreign 
Minister Hoshyar Zebari in Baghdad on Wednesday.  Papers report that 
on Tuesday, the regional Kurdish Parliament held a meeting to 
discuss the Turkish operation.  A report prepared by a Peshmerge 
commission urged the Turkish government to pay compensations for the 
material losses sustained as a result of the incursion.  The report 
also suggested Iraq shut down the Turkish bases in northern Iraq. 
 
US Officials on Turkish Operations in Northern Iraq 
Hurriyet, Sabah, Radikal, Taraf, Cumhuriyet, Zaman and others report 
US Joint Chiefs of Staff Operations Director, General Carter Ham, 
said Turkey did not need permission from the US for the cross border 
operations.  Meanwhile, US Defense Secretary Robert Gates is 
expected "to ask Turkey to withdraw at least some of its troops from 
northern Iraq."  Addressing the Council on Foreign Relations (CFR,) 
State Department Undersecretary for Political Affairs Nicholas Burns 
"warned Kurdish leaders to take responsibility against the PKK," say 
papers.  Defense Secretary Robert Gates, who is due in Ankara on 
Thursday, warned the Turks to make this operation as short as 
possible, "a week or two," and to be mindful of Iraqi sovereignty. 
 
 
Turkish Delegation Travels to Baghdad 
Turkish televisions report a Turkish special delegation traveled to 
Baghdad Wednesday morning to hold talks with "the Iraqi president, 
his two aides, and the foreign minister to boost bilateral ties 
under the decisions taken at a recent Turkish National Security 
Council (MGK) meeting."  A statement released by the Turkish Foreign 
Ministry (MFA) says the delegation includes deputy Turkish envoy to 
 
ANKARA 00000378  002 OF 004 
 
 
Iraq Murat Ozcelik, PM Erdogan's foreign policy advisor Ahmet 
Davutoglu, and Prime Ministry Deputy Undersecretary Hakan Fidan. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkish Land Offensive in Northern Iraq 
 
"Success for Operation Sun and Its Prime Target" 
Fikret Bila is a senior figure in Ankara's journalistic core and the 
author of books on the Iraq war as well as Turkish-American 
relations. He often relies on his high-level military sources when 
commenting on current issues. 
He wrote in mainstream Milliyet (2/27): 
"This operation comes as a surprise given the severe weather 
conditions.  The surprising nature of this timing undoubtedly dealt 
a serious blow to the PKK.  There were around 400 PKK living in the 
mountain camps that are currently surrounded by Turkish military. 
Half of them were killed and the rest are on the run.  Operation Sun 
also succeeded in eliminating the PKK's communications and 
logistical nerve center.  However, the Turkish military's intentions 
are clear; the military has no intention of maintaining a permanent 
presence in northern Iraq.  In addition, the military has no 
ambitions regarding Kirkuk or Mosul.  The PKK is the only target of 
this mission.  This goal was conveyed very clearly to both American 
and Iraqi officials.  In sum, Operation Sun hopes to prove the 
Turkish military's capability to operate, regardless of climate 
conditions, and to achieve the goal of rendering the PKK 
ineffective." 
 
"Three Dangers" 
Erdal Safak is a senior columnist for mainstream Sabah.  He is a 
liberal, and often treats US foreign policy in a broader context 
free from prejudice. 
He wrote in mainstream Sabah (2/27): 
"Turkey clearly stated its full respect for Iraqi territorial 
integrity during this operation.  In addition, Turkey has promised 
an immediate withdrawal once the job is done.  This approach has 
garnered understanding and support from the international community. 
 It is also very important that Turkish authorities clearly separate 
the fight against the PKK from the need to develop the largely 
Kurdish southeastern region of Turkey.  However, there are three 
potential threats to this road map.  First, some circles in Turkey 
have called for a buffer zone between northern Iraq and Turkey, but 
Turkey should not even consider this.  Such an effort will be 
interpreted as invasion of Iraq or, at the minimum, a violation of 
Iraq's territorial integrity.  The second danger is to use the fight 
against the PKK as an excuse to defer the reform process.  Several 
Turkish officials have expressed reluctance to pursue reforms and 
this is very wrong.  The third danger is the most challenging one. 
This operation may create a negative impact on our Kurdish citizens 
and they may feel alienated.  This week's protests against the 
operations are disturbing, as are the alarming attitudes 
communicated by politicians of Kurdish origin.  They are talking 
about 'resistance' and 'new approaches.'  We have to take immediate 
action to enhance brotherly ties with Kurds, and this action should 
be honest and courageous." 
 
Headscarf Controversy Continues in Universities 
All papers report confusion continues in Turkey's universities after 
the decision to lift a ban on students wearing the headscarf on 
campus.  Opposition MHP Leader Devlet Bahceli, whose party voted 
with the AKP on the headscarf amendments under the condition the 
Higher Education (YOK) Law was changed, reminded the AKP that their 
agreement was made "in honor" and criticized the AKP for recent 
comments that the constitutional changes are enough and the higher 
education law does not need to be changed.  Many academics and 
rectors also say the government must amend the Higher Education 
Board (YOK) Law while others say the current reform is sufficient. 
Following the presidential approval of the reforms, YOK President 
Yusuf Ziya Ozcan distributed a written order to university rectors 
to allow students wearing headscarves to enter classes.  Ozcan said 
he will seek disciplinary action against the rectors barring 
 
ANKARA 00000378  003 OF 004 
 
 
students wearing the headscarf from universities.  On Thursday, the 
inter-university board of rectors will hold an extraordinary meeting 
to discuss the headscarf controversy.  The head of the board, 
Mustafa Akaydin, blames the YOK president for the troubles in 
universities and has asked him to apologize for "infringing upon 
secularism." 
 
On Tuesday, some universities allowed students with headscarves 
while others did not.  The Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak sees the 
situation in universities as "calm," noting "girls wearing 
headscarves and those who don't walk hand-in-hand in the 
universities that have removed the unlawful ban." 
 
On Wednesday, opposition CHP will apply to the Constitutional Court 
to demand the annulment of constitutional reforms relating to the 
headscarf ban in universities. 
 
DTP Rally in Van; DTP Group Chairman Ahmet Turk Comments on the CBO 
Sabah, Milliyet, Radikal, Hurriyet, Yeni Safak and others: 
Following the pro-Kurdish DTP rally in Diyarbakir, around 200 people 
gathered in front of the DTP building in Van yesterday to protest 
the land operation to northern Iraq.  While chanting slogans against 
the AKP and PM Erdogan, the group clashed with police.  Four 
policemen and several protestors were injured.  Liberal Radikal 
reports that nine protestors were detained. 
 
Meanwhile, at the DTP parliamentary group meeting, deputies carried 
banners saying "no to war".  In his speech, DTP group chairman Ahmet 
Turk criticized the operation of the Turkish Military.  He termed 
the operation as a "war" and claimed that the target of the 
operation is not the PKK but the oil in Mosul and Kirkuk. 
 
Britain Deports PKK Financial Manager 
Sabah, Yeni Safak, Cumhuriyet, Hurriyet, and others:  Papers report 
that British Intelligence agency M15 deported Selman Bozkur, the PKK 
member in charge of the financial activities of the organization in 
Europe.  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak says Bozkur, whose property 
was seized, is thought to have gone to France. 
 
Nevsehir University to Open Armenian Language Department 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports that Nevsehir University Faculty of 
Science and Literature dean Prof. Metin Hulagu said that they had 
applied to Higher Education Board (YOK) for permission to open 
departments of Armenian, Greek and Jewish and noted that they can 
invite academicians from Armenia. 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Six new suspects including a professor, a journalist and a writer 
have been arrested as part of a widening investigation into the 
far-right "Ergenekon" gang.  The gang is believed to have been 
plotting a series of bombings and assassinations in an attempt to 
force a military coup in Turkey. 
 
- President Abdullah Gul has approved the Foundations Law enacted by 
parliament last week, which allows foreigners to set up new 
foundations in Turkey.  The reform is criticized for being too 
restrictive because it does not allow the return of properties 
confiscated by the Turkish state and then sold on to third parties. 
 
 
- Culture Minister Ertugrul Gunay said cross-border military 
operations into northern Iraq would not have a negative impact on 
Turkish tourism. 
 
International News 
 
 
ANKARA 00000378  004 OF 004 
 
 
- Several political figures and government officials who declared 
their support for former President Levon Ter-Petrosian have been 
arrested in Armenia. 
 
- Turkish Cyprus leader Mehmet Ali Talat said Cyprus peace talks 
might resume in April.  UN Special Representative in Cyprus Michael 
Moller is to meet Talat on February 28. 
 
- On Tuesday, some 10,000 Bosnian Serb rioters tried to storm the US 
consulate in Banja Luka after protests against Kosovo's 
independence. 
WILSON