08ANKARA1081
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Wed Jun 11 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6630
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1081/01 1631347
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 111347Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6537
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8949
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4332
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3002
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6660
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6490
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3069
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001081 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
WEDNESDAY, JUNE 11, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Constitutional Court Decision Creates Rifts in Parliament 
All papers report Prime Minister Erdogan criticized the 
Constitutional Court's ruling on turban reforms, saying the court 
"overstepped its authority."  Erdogan was speaking to his party 
group meeting yesterday when he called on the Constitutional Court 
to release their justification for their decision to annul the 
headscarf reforms.  "The judiciary is watching the mistakes of the 
legislature and the executive branches, but who will watch the 
mistakes of the judiciary," asked Erdogan.  Erdogan also slammed the 
CHP for cultivating tensions between the legislative and the 
judiciary; he warned that such an approach harms Turkey's interests. 
 Erdogan announced the parliament would not go into summer recess 
before the Constitutional Court announces its verdict in the closure 
case against the AKP.  A column in mainstream Vatan sees this as an 
indication that Erdogan will propose early elections if the AKP is 
closed.  According to the columnist, a bi-chamber parliament or 
restrictions on the powers of the Constitutional Court cannot help 
resolve these problems; Turkey needs a comprehensive program that 
addresses freedoms. 
 
The main opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal told his party group 
that "furious reactions" to the headscarf ruling resulted from "the 
judiciary's ability to block attempts to infringe the principle of 
secularism."  In "Baykal Urges Erdogan to Accept the Situation," 
leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports Baykal warned Erdogan he 
should not attempt to propose new constitutional changes.  "Don't 
try to establish justice that is fit only for you.  Politics is a 
long term process.  Don't attempt to take over the judiciary, the 
parliament or the Constitutional Court.  Know the place and limits 
assigned to you in the constitution," stated Baykal.  Baykal said, 
"The AKP did not attempt to change Turkey's secularist principles, 
but they made changes that by-passed those principles and rendered 
them ineffective," which the Constitutional Court did not allow. 
 
Addressing his party group, opposition MHP leader Devlet Bahceli 
slammed the Constitutional Court, saying it was acting as 
"parliament's guardian."  Specifically, Bahceli noted, "The 
annulment of the headscarf reforms did not end the debate. Turban is 
a sociological fact in Turkish society.  The bleeding wound has 
worsened into gangrene." Nevertheless, Bahceli noted that all should 
respect the decisions to come out of courts.  Bahceli said the 
"mismanaged political crisis" could escalate further and develop 
into a "regime crisis jeopardizing the future of the democracy."  In 
addition, he stressed, "No political ideology or agenda is more 
important than saving our democratic regime.  The greatest 
responsibility here falls on PM Erdogan and his party, the addressee 
of the closure case," said Bahceli.  Bahceli said his party was 
ready to consider any proposal from Prime Minister Erdogan in order 
to save the political regime from crisis and contribute to the 
normalization of politics. 
 
"Erdogan blames the CHP, Baykal blames the AKP; Bahceli blames both 
the AKP and CHP," says liberal Radikal on its front page, 
criticizing the leaders that none of them were talking about 
structural changes.  Under the headline "Parliament Tells Court to 
Stay in Its Place," leftist Taraf writes on page one both Erdogan 
and Bahceli warned the parliament wouldn't accept "judicial 
tutelage," and that only the elected parliaments could use the 
legislative authority. 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  The Aftermath of the Constitutional Court 
Decision 
 
"Protecting Checks and Balances" 
Mehmet Yilmaz wrote in mainstream Hurriyet (6/11): "When the 
government spokesperson emphasized the need to clarify the checks 
and balances system in Turkey, he was right.  Nevertheless, this 
observation should have been noted before the Constitutional Court 
 
ANKARA 00001081  002 OF 003 
 
 
decision regarding the headscarf ban.  This message goes out not 
only to the ruling AKP, but to the CHP, MHP and all others.  We 
would not be in our current predicament if someone had acted earlier 
to resolve the problems in Turkey's checks and balances system. 
Today's system mandates power-sharing between three powers, namely 
the executive branch, the legislative branch, and the judicial 
branch.  Currently, the debate revolves around accusations the 
judiciary overrode the legislative branch's mandate.  However, it 
also is important to note the lack of checks and balances that 
currently exists between the legislative branch and the executive 
branch.   In reality, both of them function under one leader's 
authority, which right now is Prime Minister Erdogan.  Turkey's 
current Political Parties Law allows the legislative and executive 
branches to become one.  This system helps a party leader garner 
power over two out of three branches, which paves the way for a 
party leader to create his own puppets in the parliament.  This is 
the very reason for the current deadlock in the Turkish system, and 
it covers all parties." 
 
"Getting Ready for Closure" 
Gungor Mengi wrote in mainstream Vatan (6/11):  "During his speech 
to his party group yesterday, Prime Minister Erdogan did not attempt 
to lead his party towards a solution to the current political 
crisis. Instead, he tried to boost his party's morale in the lead up 
to the potential closure of the AKP.  Turkey's political problems 
stem from the fact that the system of checks and balances is not 
functioning.  Two of the three branches of the system, the executive 
and legislative branches, do not work.  Meanwhile, the executive is 
also trying to control the judiciary's power.  Had the system 
functioned properly, the Constitutional amendments regarding the 
headscarf would have been turned down either by Parliament or by the 
President because they clearly contradicted the unchangeable 
foundations of the Turkish Constitution." 
 
 
Cartoons in June 11 Sabah: 
 
CHP leader Deniz Baykal is dancing aboard a sinking ship named 
"Politics," and singing "The AKP is sinking, sinking" while PM 
Erdogan and others look on.  The ship is sinking because it was 
attacked by the ship in the rear named "Constitutional Court," and 
the ship has a smoking gun. 
 
 
CHP Leader Baykal is depicted as tattling on Erdogan to a justice. 
 
 
Iraq: PM Erdogan to Visit Iraq Soon 
Liberal Radikal reports the Iraqi Prime Minister's Office said 
Tuesday Turkey's Special Iraq Envoy Ambassador Murat Ozcelik said 
Turkish Prime Minister Erdogan's intends to visit Iraq soon.  The 
statement also noted, "Turkey has decided to send the country's 
leading companies to contribute to the rebuilding and development of 
Iraq." In addition, a Turkish trade delegation is scheduled to visit 
Iraq soon to assess their needs and priorities. 
 
Babacan Meets with Foreign Policy Teams of US Presidential 
Candidates 
Milliyet, Cumhuriyet, Yeni Safak:  Mainstream Milliyet reports that 
during his visit to the US, Foreign Minister Babacan met with the 
foreign policy teams of the Presidential candidates.  During his 
meeting with former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, Babacan 
complained that the definition of secularism is not clear in the 
Turkish Constitution.  Responding to Albright's question regarding 
the AKP closure case, Babacan said "We don't know when and what kind 
of decision will be taken."  Milliyet also reports that the Council 
of Europe Parliamentary Assembly (PACE) decided to include the topic 
of "functioning of democratic institutions in Turkey" as an urgent 
agenda item at its general assembly sessions at the end of June. 
PACE invited FM Babacan to join the meeting as a presenter. 
 
ANKARA 00001081  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports in "Babacan Makes A 
Confession to Rice: The EU Won't Take Us," that FM Babacan asked 
Secretary Rice for US support against France's stance on Turkey's EU 
membership. 
 
President Bush Supports Turkey's EU Bid 
All media outlets report President Bush rallied behind Turkey's EU 
Bid during the US-EU Summit yesterday.  Coverage is straightforward, 
and positive.  NTV reports, "Bush joined the 27 nation summit and 
declared, 'I believe Turkey's full membership to the EU is 
necessary.'" CNN Turk notes Bush also "expressed appreciate for 
Turkey's EU reforms."  Leftist Taraf carries the headline, "Bush 
Sends a Nice Gesture to Turkey."  In a rare occasion, 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak and leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
carry the same headline, "Bush Tells EU They Must Accept Turkey's 
Full Membership."  In addition, Cumhuriyet's front page headline 
notes, "Foreign Minister Ali Babacan Confesses to Secretary Rice: 
The EU Will Not Take Us." Islamist-oriented Zaman writes, "Bush 
Supports Turkey's Full Membership to the EU."  Liberal Radikal call 
says, "Bush Supports Turkey."  Mainstream Sabah's front page carries 
the headline, "Bush Tells the EU to Take Turkey." Mainstream 
Hurriyet carries the headline, "Bush's Farewell Message to the EU: 
Turkey Must Become One of Your Members." 
 
TV News: 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- The pro-Kurdish DTP's acting chairwoman Emine Ayna said Turkey has 
"structural problems," and that the 86-year old Turkish republic 
"lacks democracy." 
 
- Six al-Qaeda suspects were captured in the eastern province of 
Bingol. 
 
- Prime Minister Erdogan will address the 3rd Turkey-Arab Economic 
Forum in Istanbul. Nearly 400 investors from Arab and Gulf countries 
will attend the forum. 
 
International News 
 
- Greek Cypriot leader Demetris Christofias said statements made by 
Turkish military officials harm efforts that seek a settlement on 
the divided island. 
 
- Greek Ambassador to Baghdad Panagiotis Makris visited northern 
Iraq to meet the Kurdish Regional Government President Massoud 
Barzani. 
 
- A German language test for foreigners willing to obtain German 
citizenship will be compulsory as of September 1. 
 
WILSON