08ASUNCION62
THREE PLUS ONE READOUT
Tue Jan 29 00:00:00 +0100 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Asuncion
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAC #0062/01 0291716
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 291716Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY ASUNCION
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6559
INFO RUCNMER/MERCOSUR COLLECTIVEC O N F I D E N T I A L ASUNCION 000062 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
WHA/FO CMCMULLEN, S/CT VPALMER, ASIERRA, WHA/BSC MDRUCKER, 
BFRIEDMAN, CCROFT, DOJ/OPDAT KO'CONNER, TREASURY, DHS/ICE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/17/2028 
TAGS: PTER KCRM PGOV GTIP SNAR PA BR AR
SUBJECT: THREE PLUS ONE READOUT 
 
Classified By: Ambassador James C. Cason; reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
-------- 
SUMMARY 
-------- 
 
¶1. (C) The January 10-11 Three-Plus-One Security Dialogue 
with Brazil, Argentina, Paraguay and the United States in 
Asuncion played out as expected, with fruitful coordination 
on the margins of the meeting, but plenary interventions from 
the three focused primarily on crime fighting and preserving 
the reputation of the Tri-Border Area (TBA).  U.S. 
presentations noted that the United States, as host of the 
next meeting, planned to broaden discussions to include arms 
and drug trafficking, money laundering and copyright piracy, 
the focus of past Three-Plus-One sessions. The Argentine 
delegation noted for the first time at a "3 Plus 1" plenary 
that AMIA bombing conspirators had worked through the TBA. 
Progress on the Brazilian-sponsored Regional Intelligence 
Center in Foz do Iguazu remains slow, but the three will meet 
in February to confirm staffing arrangements.  Paraguay noted 
that illicit financing often leads to terrorist financing, 
but stressed that there was no evidence of operational 
terrorist cells in the region.  The final communiqu included 
a loosely worded commitment to work on a joint illicit 
finance study (threat assessment) before the next plenary 
which we hope will facilitate discussion of multilateral 
cooperation (including on cash couriers) and technical 
assistance.  In addition to offers of cash courier and 
document fraud training for countries in the region, the 
United States should host meetings of experts from the group 
(e.g. Financial Intelligence Units) to create positive 
momentum for cooperation.  END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------------- 
U.S. OPENING INTERVENTION 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) S/CT Deputy Coordinator Virginia Palmer and WHA DAS 
Chris McMullen jointly led an interagency delegation to the 
6th annual plenary session of the Three-Plus-One Security 
Group, January 10-11 in Asuncion. Their opening statements 
emphasized the value of continued counter-terrorism (CT) 
cooperation and the need for broader engagement within the 
region on security concerns. Palmer outlined global terrorist 
trends, including links between transnational crime and 
terrorism; an increase in homegrown (or guerrilla vice 
expeditionary) terrorist groups loosely affiliated with al 
Qaida; and the aggregation of regional terrorist groups and 
continued terrorist interest in acquiring weapons of mass 
destruction.  She highlighted successes in international 
cooperation to bring terrorists to justice and noted the 
importance of addressing the conditions that terrorists 
exploit.  Palmer noted the U.S. Congressional endorsement of 
the Three-Plus-One mechanism in HR 435. 
 
¶3. (U)  WHA DAS Chris McMullen reiterated the need for 
expanded engagement among the partners. He commended the 
progress made by the three countries in improving passport 
controls, investigating suspicious activities, increasing 
custom controls, and conducting joint patrols of land and sea 
borders. DAS McMullen also noted the need to address common 
crimes and transnational threats.  In a subsequent 
intervention he suggested expanding the discussion to include 
broader security issues and the plans to address trafficking 
in arms, drugs, and persons, money laundering, and document 
fraud at next year,s plenary.  McMullen expressed USG 
willingness to provide capacity building through training in 
bulk cash smuggling; bioterrorism and food defense; waterways 
management; and detection of arms and munitions trafficking. 
 
------ 
FIU'S 
------ 
 
¶4. (U)  During the session devoted to the efficient exchange 
of information, Palmer noted the usefulness of the FIUs, 
intercessional activities.  In response to Brazilian concerns 
regarding delays in FinCen's response times to requests for 
case information, FinCen,s Mauricio Pastora held sidebars 
and orchestrated a joint meeting of FIU representatives on 
the margins of the meeting to discuss collaboration and 
enhanced financial information sharing, including: timely 
information exchanges, voluntary and spontaneous disclosures, 
and bilateral cooperation between each of the South American 
countries, FIUs and FinCen. All four FIU representatives 
committed to continued collaboration on both money laundering 
and terrorist finance, a review of pending cases and regular 
telephone follow up. 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
TTU'S -- EXPANDING REGIONAL INFORMATION SHARING 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶5. (U)  U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS/ICE) 
delegates Carlos Maza and Guillermo Cancio commended the work 
of the Tri-Border countries' Trade Transparency Units (TTUs) 
which utilize import and export data to identify suspicious 
trading patterns indicative of criminal activity.  The three 
TTUs currently share data bilaterally with only the USG. 
The DHS/ICE delegates urged regional trade data sharing and 
suggested using the Foz de Iguazu Regional Intelligence 
Center as a host for trade-related data. 
 
------------------------- 
BIOTERRORISM COOPERATION 
------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (U) Andrea Lauritzen of State,s Office of Environment 
and Science briefed on integrated efforts on bioterrorism and 
agroterrorism and provided the Argentine and Brazilian 
delegations with sample training materials on strengthening 
food defense.  Brazilian assertions (backed up by the 
Argentine delegation) that food defense issues were not 
relevant in the TBA effectively shut down the Three-Plus-One 
mechanism as a forum for discussion of bioterrorism issues, 
however. 
 
¶7. (U) COMMENT: The Brazilian delegation was not persuaded 
that matters not strictly related to the TBA were relevant to 
Three-Plus-One discussions.  GOB argued that bio or 
agroterrorism attacks were not likely to come from the TBA, 
but in any event were subjects more appropriately discussed 
in another forum.  Nonetheless, during side conversations, 
Argentine and Paraguayan officials expressed interest in 
collaborating bilaterally on efforts to counter bioterrorism 
and agroterrorism as well as strengthen food defense.  As a 
condition of mentioning bioterrorism in the meeting's final 
communiqu, GOB insisted on including a statement that it did 
not believe that Three-Plus-One was the appropriate venue for 
these discussions.  END COMMENT. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
DOCUMENT FRAUD AND CASH COURIER TRAINING 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶8. (U) All delegations welcomed efforts to improve document 
security.  The United States offered to provide training 
similar to successful programs provided Paraguay and 
Argentina to Brazil. (Note: Dates for the Document Fraud 
Training were forwarded to the GOB on January 21. End Note.) 
Palmer briefed on worldwide efforts to combat bulk cash 
smuggling and terrorist use of cash couriers, stressing that 
the OAS' CICTE efforts were part of this effort and would not 
focus on the TBA. 
 
¶9. (U)  U.S. Department of Treasury officials Charles Ott and 
Rachel Fedewa introduced the concept of threat assessment as 
a tool for identifying gaps and possible initiatives in 
combating money laundering and terrorist financing.  They 
suggested that the four countries work together to produce a 
joint threat assessment of the TBA prior to the next plenary 
session.  Communiqu language (informal translation) states: 
"The participants of the Mechanism consider it very important 
to identify between now and the next meeting of the Group 
affairs that may constitute specific problems related to 
illegal financing and other affairs referring to the security 
of the tri-border area.  The participants have estimated that 
thus they will be in a better position to direct the problems 
identified in the framework of the Three-Plus-One, in 
addition to the endeavors already carried out by national 
authorities in the three countries." 
 
¶10. (U) During the discussion of United Nations Security 
Council Resolution (UNSCR) 1373, the U.S. delegation detailed 
its progress in meeting its obligations.  The USG assessment 
of its compliance with UNSCR 1373 is available on the 
internet. 
 
------------------------ 
ARGENTINE INTERVENTIONS 
------------------------ 
 
¶11. (U) In his opening remarks, the head of Argentina's 
delegation, Amb. Orlando Rebagliati, extolled the cooperation 
of the Three-Plus-One in the TBA and the political will to 
work on "border security issues."  He recalled the early 
recognition by Argentina, Brazil and Paraguay of the 
sensitive areas of vulnerability pertaining to the TBA, which 
led to a meeting in 1996 of security forces from the three 
countries, resulting in a Tripartite Command.  Rebagliati 
said the TBA needs preventive measures, and the GOA hoped 
that dialogue and cooperation among the Three-Plus-One would 
help define priorities and improve coordination.  Echoing the 
opening remarks made by his Brazilian and Paraguayan 
counterparts, Rebagliati said the 3 1 needed to address the 
damage that had been done to the TBA, whose reputation as a 
hotbed for terrorist activity had been greatly "exaggerated 
and distorted."  Rebagliati said the TBA, like many frontier 
zones around the world, was difficult to control, but the 
three countries maintained a "strong presence" there, and the 
preponderance of the region's inhabitants were law-abiding 
citizens who had been unfairly maligned. 
 
¶12. (U) In subsequent interventions, Rebagliati emphasized 
the need for real-time sharing of intelligence.  However, he 
also said that, while there is room to improve on exchange of 
information among the Three-Plus-One, they should not 
duplicate exchanges underway in FATF (GAFID), GAFISUD, CICTE, 
or elsewhere.  He said the Three-Plus-One should not attempt 
to take up aspects of each other's global counter-terrorism 
efforts that were not directly related to the TBA.  The 
Three-Plus-One forum should remain focused on the TBA and 
avoid inadvertently encroaching on the jurisdiction of other 
agencies, domestic or international.  In discussing a U.S. 
proposal to have experts from the Three-Plus-One work 
inter-sessionally to develop TBA threat assessments, the 
Argentine delegation said it would need to refer to its 
capital for instructions before agreeing to any 
"institutional deviation" from the above. 
 
¶13. (U) In the presentation of contributions to security in 
the TBA, the Argentine delegation highlighted the enactment 
in June of legislation criminalizing terrorism as well as the 
financing of terrorist activity, bringing Argentina into 
compliance with FATF standards. The Argentines noted they 
were already acting on their new legal authority to 
investigate conspiracies to commit terrorist acts, regardless 
of whether the acts took place.  The Argentine delegation 
noted that the Argentine prosecutors investigating the deadly 
July 1994 bombing of the AMIA center had traced the bomber to 
the TBA. 
 
¶14. (U) The delegation noted that the GOA had designated SIDE 
and PF liaisons for the Regional Intelligence Center in Foz 
do Iguacu.  It also pointed out the GOA's Coast Guard 
(Prefectura), Gendarmerie, Federal Police, Airport Police, 
and Intelligence Secretariat (SIDE) were participating in the 
Tripartite Command.  The Coast Guard (Prefectura) was engaged 
in joint patrols with Paraguay along the Misiones and 
Corrientes borders to enhance its interdiction of narcotics 
trafficking and arms trafficking.  The Federal Police's (PF) 
Anti-Terrorist Unit (created after the 1994 AMIA bombing) had 
deployed to the PF's station in Puerto Iguazu, where there is 
actually a low crime rate other than contraband.  Argentine 
Customs had begun deploying mobile cargo scanners as well as 
a canine unit, and Migration Police were strengthening their 
border controls, and the Gendarmerie were working with their 
Brazilian and Paraguayan counterparts on cross-border 
kidnapping cases. 
 
---------------------- 
BRAZIL'S INTERVENTION 
---------------------- 
 
¶15. (U) Brazil's opening statement noted its concern with the 
threat from organized crime in border areas and its common 
interest in combating terrorism with its neighbors.  The 
Brazilian delegation expressed concern that focus on the TBA 
could "denigrate" the image of a culturally diverse region, 
where Brazilian agencies have found no evidence of terrorist 
activity.  Brazil further objected to the use of the 
Three-Plus-One as a forum for information sharing, arguing 
that this was better done bilaterally. 
 
¶16. (U) Brazil took a similar position on other issues.  Both 
TTU and food defense could be of interest to Brazil, but only 
outside the Three-Plus-One.  Brazil would prefer to address 
these issues bilaterally and outside the TBA context.  The 
Brazilians also believed that this was not the proper forum 
for discussion of UN resolution 1373 but noted that Brazil 
has several counter terrorism projects underway.  The 
Brazilian delegation also briefed on steps taken to improve 
border security, including increased bilateral cooperation 
and annual growth in seizures of merchandise at border 
crossings.  The Brazilian delegation responded negatively to 
Treasury's proposal for a threat assessment, noting that 
existing information exchanges would present a clear picture 
of possible threats. 
¶17. (U) COMMENT: Throughout, the Brazilian delegation sought 
to deflect issues of substance from the Three-Plus-One, 
preferring bilateral approaches with its neighbors. Brazil 
was also defensive regarding the TBA, complaining that the 
GOB did not want "to have to defend the TBA in yet another 
forum."  However, this sensitivity did not prevent Brazil 
from refusing to discuss health-related issues that were not 
unique to the TBA. END COMMENT. 
 
------------------------ 
PARAGUAY'S INTERVENTION 
------------------------ 
 
¶18. (U) In his opening statement, Paraguayan Vice-Minister 
Antonio Rivas lamented the terrorist attack that killed 
Pakistani opposition leader Benazir Bhutto and called for a 
renewed commitment from the international community to 
confront terrorist threats.  Rivas said the GOP 
"energetically rejects" any and all terrorist acts.  Rivas 
asserted Paraguay,s interest in combating transnational 
organized crime and ensuring regional security, but also 
noted the absence of any evidence of operational terrorism in 
the region.  He contended there is no causal, automatic link 
between crime and terrorist financing, and urged the other 
delegations not to "satanize" the Tri-Border Region (TBA). 
 
¶19. (U) Paraguay,s chief of delegation, Victor Hugo Pena, 
gave a comprehensive presentation on his country,s efforts 
to counter terrorism and transnational crime.  He reported 
increases in marijuana and cocaine seizures in 2007, noting 
that 90 percent of drugs passing through Paraguay are 
destined for Brazil.  He also cited successful operations to 
seize pirated goods and arms and GOP efforts to counter 
trafficking in persons.  In 2007, the public ministry created 
a new counter narcotics prosecutorial unit and revised 
Paraguay,s penal code (which became law on January 16). 
Pena applauded the efforts of SEPRELAD, Paraguay,s 
anti-money laundering secretariat, to prosecute unlicensed 
exchange houses, and also noted Paraguay,s participation in 
US funded OAS/CICTE training courses on document fraud 
prevention, critical infrastructure protection, and 
cyberterrorism.  Pea said construction of the public 
ministry,s forensic lab is ongoing and announced plans to 
install radar to cover Paraguayan air space. (COMMENT: The 
GOP has long lacked radar coverage, but remains far from 
fulfilling this goal in the foreseeable future. END COMMENT). 
 He said within the next week, an executive decree would 
expand SEPRELAD,s jurisdiction beyond money laundering to 
cover terrorist finance. Finally, the GOP attempted to allay 
concerns regarding Paraguay,s failure to pass anti-terrorist 
legislation by assuring delegates that the GOP would 
prosecute terrorists under its penal code. (NOTE: President 
Duarte signed Paraguay's new penal code into law on January 
¶16. END NOTE.) 
 
¶20. (U) Paraguayan delegates asserted that socio-economic 
development is critical to preventing crime.  They thanked 
the US delegation for a wide range of assistance, but asked 
that the United States share a "higher quality" of 
information when informing Paraguay of U.S. terrorist 
designations to facilitate local investigations.  Ciudad del 
Este Prosecutor Eber Ovelar thanked the U.S. delegation for 
its offer to share TTU data, noting that false invoices are a 
common customs problem.   Pea requested information 
regarding the Bank of America case, prosecuted by the New 
York District Attorney,s office, regarding money moved 
illegally through Paraguay.  The GOP also requested 
training/assistance on bulk cash smuggling. 
 
-------------- 
FINAL COMMENT 
-------------- 
 
¶21. (C) Paraguay and Argentina interventions were more 
helpful than they were last year, when discussions were 
soured by the U.S. designation of nine individuals and 
entities in the Triborder Area.  Paraguay's intervention 
demonstrated its willingness to expand the meeting's agenda 
to broader law enforcement issues per the United States' 
request, but neither Paraguay nor Argentina was willing to 
challenge Brazil directly.  Palmer,s recommendation, 
inspired by comments of Paraguay,s Ambassador in Washington, 
that the group do more publicly to highlight the cooperation 
in the Three-Plus-One mechanism was rejected bluntly by the 
Brazilian delegation, clearly interested in giving the 
mechanism as little weight or public attention as possible. 
END COMMENT. 
 
¶21. (U) Participants: 
Paraguay Delegation 
------------------- 
Antonio Rivas Palacios, Vice Minister of Foreign Relations, 
Ministry of Foreign Relations 
Victor Hugo Pea Bareiro, Director General, Special Affairs, 
Ministry of Foreign Relations 
Elisa Aguayo Rolon, Chief, International Desk II, Ministry of 
Foreign Relations 
Javier Benitez, Ministry of Foreign Relations 
Desiree Montero, Ministry of Foreign Relations 
Lucio Aguilera, Ministry of Foreign Relations 
Fabian Duarte, Ministry of Foreign Relations 
Luis Carlos Escobar, Ministry of Foreign Relations 
Nelly Delgado, Ministry of Foreign Relations 
Maria Mercedes Dominguez, Ministry of Foreign Relations 
Carlos Alberto Zelaya, Vice Minister of Home Security, 
Ministry of the Interior 
Blanca Lopez, Director of International Cooperation, Ministry 
of the Interior 
Fidel Alejandro Isasa, Commandant General, National Police 
Carlos Ramon Altemburger Santander, Director, Secretariat for 
Terrorism Prevention and Investigation 
Carlos Humberto Benitez Gonzalez, Sub commissioner, 
Secretariat for Terrorism Prevention and Investigation 
 
SIPDIS 
Armando Ruben Barboza Aguilera, Director, INTERPOL 
Pablo marcial Cespedes Carrillo, Chief, Department of Police 
Intelligence 
Ruben Zaracho, Subcommissioner Foz de Iguazu, Department of 
Police Intelligence 
Guillermo Pastor Gomez Mareco, Chief, Department of Police 
Planning 
Ivan Mauricio Ojeda Aguilera, Director General, General 
Directorate of Migration 
Domingo Quinonez, Secretary General, General Directorate of 
Migration 
Angel Caballero Sostoa, Director of Foreign Admissions, 
General Office of Migration 
Cesar Aguilera, Vice Minister of Defense, Ministry of 
National Defense 
Benito Silvera, Director of Strategic Policy, Ministry of 
National Defense 
Eligio Vera y Aragon, National Coordinator, National Civil 
Aviation Directorate 
Juan Mendez Trebastoni, Chief of Arms Registry, Armaments 
Directorate 
Gedeon Escobar, Chief of Imports and Acquisitions, Armaments 
Directorate 
Venancio Roman,Legal Advisor, Armaments Directorate 
Hernan Morinigo, International Affairs Officer, Armaments 
Directorate 
Americo Ibarra Collar, Chief of Maritime Affairs, National 
Naval Command 
Carlos Alberto Aguero Miranda, Second Commander of the Ciudad 
del Este Area, National Naval Command 
Carlos Arce Obregon, Vice Minister of Justice, Ministry of 
Justice and Labor 
Gladys Santa Cruz, Director of the National Employment 
Service, Ministry of Justice and Labor 
Felix Cruz, Specialized Technical Unit Coordinator, Ministry 
of Industry and Commerce 
Gustavo Ivaldi, Specialized Technical Unit 
Carlos Saucedo Aquino, Specialized Technical Unit 
Miguel Maria Gonzalez Avila, Specialized Technical Unit 
Silvio Amarilla, Intelligence Director, National 
Anti-Narcotics Secretariat 
Juan Carlos Jacquet, Director of Financial Crimes, National 
Anti-Narcotics Secretariat 
Edgar Almada, Special Agent, National Anti-Narcotics 
Secretariat 
 
SIPDIS 
Angel Gabriel Gonzalez Caceres, Director, Anti-Money 
Laundering Secretariat 
Elizabeth Portillo, Analysis Coordinator, Anti-Money 
Laundering Secretariat 
Crismilda Maricel Espinosa, Judicial Affairs Officer, 
Anti-Money Laundering Secretariat 
Rosa Otazu, Director of International Affairs, National 
Secretariat for Children and Youth 
 
SIPDIS 
Carlos Laguardia, Vice Director, National Customs Directorate 
Carlos Martini, National Customs Directorate 
Oscar Boidanich Ferreira, Intendent Bank Supervision, Central 
Bank of Paraguay 
Luis Maria Benitez Riera, Supreme Court 
Eber Ovelar,Deputy Attorney General, Ciudad del Este, Public 
Ministry 
Rocio Vallejo,Deputy Attorney General, Public Ministry 
Marco Alcaraz,Deputy Attorney General, Public Ministry 
Juan Emilio Oviedo, Director of International Affairs, Public 
Ministry 
 
Argentina Delegation: 
----------------------- 
Orlando Ruben Rebagliati, Ambassador, Argentine Embassy in 
Paraguay 
Jose Ignacio Tobella, Minister, Argentine Embassy in Paraguay 
Gustavo M. Terrera, Counselor, Argentine Embassy in Paraguay 
Rosa Falduto, President, Financial Information Unit 
Graciela Insaurralde, Financial Information Unit 
Graciela Misuraca, Customs General Directorate 
Oscar Alfredo Iribarne, Chief, Antiterrorist Operational 
Division 
Maria Laura Pose, Airport Security 
Victoria Giovenco, National Directorate of Immigration 
Nestor Campora, National Directorate of Immigration 
Rodolfo Barrandeguy, Commandant, Argentine Border Patrol 
Guillermo Raul Rodriguez, Prefect, Argentine Naval Prefecture 
Carlos Gesto, Intelligence Secretariat 
Marcelo Horacio Martin, Principal Officer, Argentine Federal 
Police 
 
Brazil Delegation 
----------------- 
Virginia Toniatti, Minister, General Coordinator, General 
Coordination of Transnational Illicit Acts 
Paulo Marcio Neves Rodrigues, Executive Secretary, Financial 
Activities Control Council 
Jorge Luiz Vieira Tavares, General Coordination of 
Conservation Units 
Clarissa Forecchi Gloria, General Coordination of 
Transnational Illicit Acts 
Jose Luiz Machado e Costa, Brazil Embassy in Paraguay 
Aloysio Mares Dias Gomide Fihlo, Brazil Embassy in Paraguay 
Camile Nemitz Filippozzi, Brazil Embassy in Paraguay 
Aparecido De Franca, Customs and Taxes Attache, Brazil 
Embassy in Paraguay 
Carlos Cuenca, Brazil Embassy in Argentina 
Roberto Doring Pinho da Silva, Brazil Embassy in Washington 
Jose Carlos Chalmers Calazane, Chief, Federal Police Foz de 
Iguazu 
Marcus Vinicius Da Silva Dantas, Deputy Chief, Division to 
Combat Illicit Arms Traffic 
Fernando Queiroz Segovia Oliveira 
Paulo Tarso Resende Paniagua, Deputy General Coordinator, 
Intelligence of Transnational Illicit Acts 
Paulo Antonio Sousa, Federal Police 
Nelson Rodrigues de Oliveira, Department of Illicit Financing 
Acts, Central Bank 
Jose Ricardo Petardo Botelho, Advisor, Presidential 
Institutional Security Office 
Fernardo Augusto Cunha de Holanda, Ministry of Defense 
 
United States Delegation 
--------------------------- 
Virginia Palmer, Deputy Assistant Secretary and Deputy 
Coordinator for Regional and Trans-Regional Issues,Office of 
the Coordinator for Counter-Terrorism 
Chris McMullen, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Western 
Hemisphere Affairs 
James Cason, Ambassador, U.S. Embassy in Asuncion 
Arnold Sierra, Counter-Terrorism 
Andrea Lauritzen, Office of International Health and 
Biodefense 
Jennifer Showell, International Narcotics and Law Enforcement 
Affairs 
Caroline Croft, Office of Brazilian and Southern Cone Affairs 
Bruce Kleiner, Deputy Chief of Mission, U.S. Embassy in 
Asuncion 
Joan Shaker, Political and Economic Chief, U.S. Embassy in 
Asuncion 
Kevin Sundwall, Regional Legal Advisor, U.S. Embassy in 
Asuncion 
Luis Hernandez, Economic Officer, U.S. Embassy in Asuncion 
Alex Featherstone, U.S. Embassy in Buenos Aires 
Javier Gonzalez, U.S. Embassy in Brazil 
Charles Ott, Department of Treasury 
Mauricio Pastora, Department of Treasury 
Clyde Rhoades, Department of Treasury 
Nicole Bontrager, Department of Defense 
David Brassanini, Department of Justice 
Sharon Halstead, Department of Justice 
Carlos Maza, Department of Homeland Security 
Guillermo Cancio, Department of Homeland Security 
Douglas Freeman 
Carlos Savignon 
Karrin Morano Taxman 
Ricardo Grave de Peralta 
Rachel Fedewa 
 
Cleared by WHA/FO McMullen and S/CT Palmer. 
 
Please visit us at     http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/wha/asuncion 
 
CASON