08ATHENS665
AMBASSADOR'S TRIP TO RHODES DURING USS TRUMAN
Thu May 15 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Athens
VZCZCXRO5154
OO RUEHIK
DE RUEHTH #0665/01 1360650
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 150650Z MAY 08 ZDK CTG RUEHJCB 6961 1361129
FM AMEMBASSY ATHENS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1800
INFO RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 5154
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW PRIORITY 1010
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 1460
RUEHSQ/AMEMBASSY SKOPJE PRIORITY 1179
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL PRIORITY 2020
RUEHIK/AMCONSUL THESSALONIKI PRIORITY 1877
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/NAVEURLOGCOORD CENTER NAPLES IT PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ATHENS 000665 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT ALSO FOR EUR/SE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL TU GR PARM NATO
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR'S TRIP TO RHODES DURING USS TRUMAN 
VISIT FORGES FRIENDSHIPS 
 
ATHENS 00000665  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED -- PROTECT ACCORDINGLY 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (U) Ambassador Speckhard visited Rhodes May 7-9 in 
conjunction with the visit of the USS Truman, a U.S. Navy 
nuclear-powered aircraft carrier transiting the Mediterranean 
on its return to Norfolk from nearly seven months in the 
Persian Gulf.  The visit afforded the Ambassador the 
opportunity to meet with the island's local officials and 
forge lasting relationships.  The event was well-received in 
the media with extensive and positive national and local 
coverage.   Moreover, the ship's 5000-strong crew were warmly 
welcomed by the inhabitants of Rhodes who were thrilled to 
benefit from the ship's cash injection to the economy at the 
outset of the tourist season.  In addition to participating 
in courtesy calls with the ship's Rear Admiral and Captain, 
the Ambassador and the Rear Admiral co-hosted a ship-board 
reception with dignitaries and a large reception with a 
variety of local and national figures.  Other meetings were 
with New Democracy Member of Parliament, Aritotelis Pavlidis, 
the Bishop of Rhodes, and a joint dinner with the Mayor, the 
Nomarch, and the Chairman of the City Council.  He also 
attended a ship-sponsored community outreach program where 
crew volunteered to clean the island's historic Rodini Park 
as well as a May 9 wreath laying ceremony at the Tomb of the 
Unknown Soldier.  These events are detailed on the Embassy 
website: http//:athens.usembassy.gov. 
 
------------------------------------- 
COURTESY CALLS: MESSAGE OF FRIENDSHIP 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Ambassador Speckhard, Rear Admiral Mark Fox, and 
Captain Herm Shelanski met with the Nomarch of Dodecanese, 
Mr. Ioannis Mahairidis; the Mayor of Rhodes, Chatzis 
Chatziefthimiou; Bishop Kyrillos of Rhodes; Chief of Police 
COL Ioannis Mesodiakakis; and local Coast Guard and National 
Guard officials.  The Ambassador, Rear Admiral, and Captain 
consistently reiterated the message of our two countries' 
long and enduring friendship that is based on mutual respect, 
underscoring the importance of our bilateral relations and 
relaying sentiments of gratitude and honor to have the 
opportunity to be so warmly received in such a beautiful 
locale. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) With the Mayor and Normarch, Ambassador Speckhard 
highlighted the economic incentives associated with the visit 
of the 5000 American crew.  The Admiral and Captain added 
that Rhodes was the sailors' first choice for a port call, 
and they were prepared to come ashore and comport themselves 
as goodwill ambassadors.  With tourism on the island 
experiencing a slight downturn in part due to a declining 
dollar, both officials were pleased to continue the tradition 
of hosting U.S. military vessels that started in the 1960s. 
During meetings with the police, harbor master, and the 
National Guard Battalion, all extended sincere appreciation 
for the close cooperation and tireless efforts the local 
authorities expended to deliver the highest-level security 
standards required during U.S. military vessel visits.  The 
Bishop, who wields significant influence throughout the 
island, noted that the ship visits are valuable.  He hoped 
the crew would learn about the Dodecanese islands and forge 
lasting relationships with Greeks. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
SHIP RECEPTION: ATTENDANCE GOOD FOR POST-EASTER WEEKEND 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶4.  (U) Despite the fact that the USS Truman arrived in 
Rhodes just after Orthodox Easter, turnout for the ship's 
evening reception was relatively high.  In addition to VIP 
guests at the reception including New Democracy Member of 
Parliament (MP) Aritotelis Pavlidis and PASOK MP Nikos 
Zoides, Deputy Minister of the Merchant Marines Panos 
Kammenos, the Nomarch, the Mayor, and the Commander of the 
Naval Aegean Command, the ship's hanger deck was also filled 
with influential members of the Greek Orthodox Church, Greek 
military, business, and shipping communities for the main 
reception.  Speeches echoed a theme of friendship and 
 
ATHENS 00000665  002 OF 004 
 
 
respect.  Selected members of the Greek press corps were 
escorted by Embassy IO, having toured the ship and held a 
press conference with the Ambassador, Admiral and the Captain 
earlier. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
DINNER WITH MP PAVLIDIS: FRANCE-GREECE-RUSSIA 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  Ambassador and his wife joined Pavlidis, the 
British Consul, and others for dinner where the Ambassador 
steered conversation toward Greek-Russian and Greek-French 
relations.  Regarding the former, Pavlidis said his country 
is creating a "three-legged stool" balancing act between 
Russian and U.S. interests in Greece, saying that Greece has 
an important role to play in the region throughenergy.  On 
Greece and France, Pavlidis informlly confirmed a June 
Sarkozy visit to Athens. (Note: Sarkozy is now reportedly set 
to visit Athens on June 6. End note.), He also alluded to the 
fact that Sarkozy may join the ranks of a handful of world 
leaders (Eisenhower, DeGaulle, George H.W. Bush) to be 
permitted to address the Greek Parliament.    When asked why 
Sarkozy would receive this honor, the MP struggled with a 
response that included the important role France plays in 
business circles in Greece and Sarkozy's support for Greece's 
veto of Macedonia's entrance into NATO at the April summit in 
Bucharest.  The topic of Greece's role in the Middle East was 
briefly addressed, with Pavlidis explaining that Greece is 
uniquely placed to serve a key role in Middle East peace 
negotiations given its proximity to the region, its trusted 
position as a neutral party, and a keen understanding of the 
issues.  He noted that Greece will sponsor a group of Eastern 
Mediterranean MPs June 11-12 to discuss the Middle East. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
BISHOP KYRILLOS: ECUMENICAL PATRIARCH AND HALKI 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Bishop Kyrillos of Rhodes is a significant 
community religious leader who wields considerable influence 
throughout the island.  The Bishop explained that his 
position has an administrative emphasis as well as social 
responsibilities, with duties that include large-scale 
building renovations, public relations obligations, and 
servicing the needs of communities that include the elderly, 
orphans, the poor, addressing problems Rhodes and the 
Dodecanese have from illegal immigrant children that come 
over from Turkey, and other needy members of society.  He is 
pleased with the direction taken by the new Archbishop of 
Athens and all Greece, Ieronymos, and feels his approach to 
concentrate on spiritual activities and less on politics will 
be less divisive.  He also explained that the Church of the 
Dodecanese falls under the supervision of the Ecumenical 
Patriarch's Synod in Istanbul and not the Archbishop of 
Athens. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Bishop Kyrillos characterized Greece as a 
traditionally religious society with the largest active 
congregation in Europe and no visible influences to distract 
them from their spiritual commitment at this time.  While 
there is a surplus of priests in Crete, Northern Greece is 
experiencing a dearth of clergy, a situation which is 
exacerbated by the fact that Greece must supply priests to 
its international congregations as well (such as Australia, 
Jerusalem, and Egypt).  According to Kyrillos, only the U.S. 
produces Greek-American priests internally and does not 
depend upon Greece.  The Bishop described the seat of the 
Ecumenical Patriarch, however, as a more pressing problem. 
Given that Turkey only permits clergy of Turkish origin to 
serve in Istanbul, with a declining number of Greeks of 
Turkish origin residing in Istanbul, it becomes increasingly 
difficult to replace the Ecumenical Patriarch.  Moreover, 
there is no religious school in Turkey to educate its members 
because of the ongoing difficulties surrounding the Halki 
Seminary.  The Bishop highlighted this ongoing political 
issue as one of his Church's major concerns.  He added that 
the Turks would benefit from the opening of Halki from an 
economic standpoint.  A functioning Seminary would produce 
more priests, and more priests would contribute to a more 
robust Patriarchate which in turn would boost Greek tourism 
to Turkey, according to the Bishop. 
 
 
ATHENS 00000665  003 OF 004 
 
 
¶8.  (U) On a more positive note, the Bishop added that 
locally, his Church is working on a project to build 200 
rooms in the form of small houses to accommodate people in 
need, regardless of creed.  Noting the island's economic and 
social disparities, Bishop Kyrillos also explained that 
single mothers, battered wives, and women left destitute 
behind on the island constitute the majority of needy in 
Rhodes.  The new houses would go far to assist this strata of 
Rhodes society, to be added to the Church's role in 
maintaining an island orphanage for abandoned children. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
LOCAL OFFICIALS: PARTNERSHIPS, ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶9.  (U) The festive dinner on the evening following the USS 
Truman reception was a great success, with officials breaking 
into serenades at the meal's completion.  Relationships 
between the Ambassador and the local officials were 
solidified, with much talk regarding the beauty of the 
island, the gracious and hospitable inhabitants, the vast 
history and culture, and return visits.  Greek officials 
reiterated the pleasure of hosting the U.S. military and the 
great benefits the visits bring to the island. 
 
¶10.  (U) The Mayor expressed his desire to expand further a 
U.S.-Greek connection on Rhodes by instituting t to 
Qfort that might be 
of interest to American students.  The Aegean University on 
Rhodes and the Municipality of Rhodes are hosting the first 
annual meeting to discuss projects for cooperation between 
the university and municipality on May 16, and the topic of 
international university partnerships will be a major focus. 
According to the Mayor, the Minister of Culture is scheduled 
to attend, in addition to U.S. and UK academics. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) The Nomarch broached the subjects of the Macedonia 
name issue and illegal immigration throughout the Dodecanese 
islands.  He reiterated well-known Greek positions regarding 
Macedonia and elucidated on the mounting numbers of illegal 
child migrants of various nationalities reaching the islands 
through transiting Turkey.  According to the Nomarch, these 
children are often dispersed to special camps throughout the 
Dodecanese and then sent to Athens upon adulthood, where they 
are united with their ethnic groups residing in Athens.  To 
further complicate matters, the Nomarch said that child 
smugglers manning the boats that transport children to the 
Dodecanese from Turkey are often juveniles themselves (aged 
between fifteen and eighteen), which means they cannot stand 
trial and complicates deportation efforts. 
 
------------------------------------- 
PRESS: WIDE-SPREAD, POSITIVE COVERAGE 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  (U) The USS Truman visit to Rhodes and the Ambassador's 
presence on the island were well-received in the media, with 
extensive, positive local coverage as well as national 
exposure.  Press was on hand throughout the initial courtesy 
calls between U.S. officials and local authorities in order 
to record the interviews and film gift exchanges, with 
widespread, positive local coverage.  The reception press 
conference held in the ship's Flag Bridge was cordial. 
Hellenic Public TV (ET) filmed a live morning report from the 
flight deck of the USS Truman on May 8, and had live 
Saturday, May 9, talk show coverage by national ALPHA TV. 
Press and media coverage was provided at the ship's community 
outreach program whereby volunteer crew cleaned up the 
historic Rodini Park in an effort for the ship to "give back 
to the community" and also at the WWII wreath laying 
presentation that the Ambassador attended on May 9 to 
commemorate the end of WWII in Rhodes.  Like the Rhodes 
inhabitants themselves, press and media appeared pleased to 
welcome the ship and its crew to the island and to have the 
opportunity to meet and speak with the Ambassador and 
military.  See also http://athens.usembassy.gov for a 
 
ATHENS 00000665  004 OF 004 
 
 
description and photo gallery. 
 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶13.  (SBU) Ambassador Speckhard's trip to Rhodes during the 
visit of the USS Truman aircraft carrier was a resounding 
success.  Not only did the visit receive extensive, positive 
media coverage, the Ambassador was able to forge lasting 
friendships with local officials that will surely prove 
useful throughout the duration of his Ambassadorship in 
Greece.  The message of friendship and mutual respect 
resonated well with his interlocutors, and the local 
officials were left with the impression that Rhodes is a 
prime destination for U.S. military vessels. 
COUNTRYMAN