08BAGHDAD3498
IRAQI TRADE MINISTER DISCUSSES GRAIN IMPORT
Tue Nov 04 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #3498/01 3091321
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 041321Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0213
INFO RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHDC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDCUNCLAS BAGHDAD 003498 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA-I ECON 
USDA/FAS/OCRA FOR LSHATZ, AALLEN, CMCKINNEL 
USDA/FAS/OGA FOR MSHEAN, MHOUSE 
USDA/FAS/OFSO FOR RVERDONK 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR ECON ETRD IZ
SUBJECT: IRAQI TRADE MINISTER DISCUSSES GRAIN IMPORT 
SITUATION 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) FAS and FCS Attaches met October 27 with Minister of 
Trade Dr. Abdul-Falah Hassan Al-Sudani and other MoT 
officials to discuss the Iraqi grain import situation, 
planned GOI renovations at the port of Umm Qasr, and the 
Public Distribution System (PDS), the GOI's subsidized food 
distribution program.  Given substantial declines in 
commodity prices and freight rates, MoT was encouraged to 
tender for their intermediate import needs now.  The MoT 
expects to issue tenders in November provided funding is 
available.  With renovations slated for Umm Qasr to begin in 
thirty to forty five days, the next tenders will likely 
include freight specifications for on-board discharge 
capability for break bulk grain shipments.  MoT notes it is 
prepared to assist in any Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) 
tendering, discharging and transportation for feed barley 
imports, provided the MoA comes up with the cash to do so. 
End Summary. 
 
Wheat Import Situation Stable 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Minister Al-Sudani and Director General of Grain 
Board of Iraq (GBI) Mr. Muthanna Jabar described for us on 
October 27 a variety of ongoing MoT market activities.  The 
GBI's current strategy with respect to wheat is to import 
lower-priced Romanian and Russian grain and blend it with 
higher quality U.S., Canadian, and Australian product to 
produce flour with the desired protein (gluten) 
characteristics needed for Iraqi bread products.  This 
approach is likely to continue, as the MoT seeks ways to 
control costs for Iraq's leading agricultural import, 
estimated at 3.7 million tons in 2008/09 (July-June basis). 
 
Cash on the Barrelhead for Barley and MoT Seed Stocks 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) The Ministry of Trade and the GBI noted that they 
are prepared to provide assistance for the MoA's plan to 
import 200,000 tons of feed barley, provided that MoA pays. 
This assistance would likely include the 
tendering/discharging/local transportation of the grain, 
again dependent on MoA funding. (Note: MOA has reported 
separately that they lack funding as of yet for doing this. 
End note.) 
 
¶4. (SBU) As for distribution of wheat seed from MOT stores of 
milling wheat, again MoA will have to pay for the product. 
In addition, the MoT stocks are described by the Minister as 
not the best product for a seed distribution program, because 
the milling wheat has not been properly cleaned for seed use. 
 Similar to the case for planned barley importation, MoA 
reportedly has been slow to transfer funds to MoT to purchase 
the wheat seed.  Distribution of MoT-owned barley for seed 
use faces the same situation as wheat seed.  The Minister 
questioned whether the GoI should be distributing barley from 
MOT stocks at all, since it's not really seed quality.  The 
Minister did confirm that wheat bran from GOI-owned flour 
mills is supposed to be sold at subsidized prices to 
livestock producers for feed, but didn't provide any details 
regarding price levels. 
 
PDS and The Web of Subsidies 
---------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Minister Al-Sudani also discussed subsidies, 
including the MoT-operated PDS monthly food distribution 
scheme. The Minister said that the GOI has to "get out of the 
business of subsidizing everything."  The challenge, 
according to the Minister, is to pursue PDS modification 
while avoiding the political backlash that could result. 
During a separate meeting with EMIN, Al-Sudani said that the 
ministry had made some progress in moving toward PDS reform 
due in part to the improving security situation, and that 
they were exploring different ways of effecting further 
reform, to include -- over the long term -- monetization of 
benefits.  The different options posed different challenges, 
he said, stating that monetization, for example, would 
require significant enhancements in the banking system.  He 
opined that Iraq will take its "first step" toward indirect 
support in "early or mid-2009."  (Comment:  This would appear 
to be a highly ambitious timeline.  End comment.) 
 
Grain Handling at Umm Qasr Slated for Renovation 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶6. (SBU) According to GBI and the Minister, Umm Qasr's grain 
discharge facilities, specifically the "vaccuvator" system 
used to pull grain from bulk holds, will be renovated in the 
near future.  The refit is expected to begin in 30-45 days, 
and will take an estimated 3 months to complete.  During that 
time, discharge rates will decline by 50 percent at the one 
berth where the upgrade will occur, necessitating the 
inclusion in shipping contracts for self-discharge capability 
(shipboard cranes with grabs) for grain vessels destined for 
Umm Qasr.  According to the GBI, the renovation will increase 
daily discharge rates to 8,000 to 10,000 metric tons at the 
improved berth.  Current actual rates for break bulk grain 
appear to average in the 3,800 metric ton range per berth, 
with frequent notes in vessel discharge reports of work 
stoppages due to equipment breakdown.  We have scheduled 
follow-up meetings with GBI to further discuss the renovation 
and its impact on shipping and the local market in the near 
term. 
CROCKER