08BAGHDAD398
Chalabi's Provision of Services Committee - February 5
Mon Feb 11 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO4441
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #0398 0420736
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 110736Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5673
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS BAGHDAD 000398 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREL IZ REL UK
SUBJECT: Chalabi's Provision of Services Committee - February 5 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: ITAO Director and CFO met with Dr. Chalabi in advance of 
the Provision of Services Committee meeting to provide an overview 
of USG reconstruction funding. Immediately afterwards, the committee 
meeting commenced and members discussed water in Ghazaliya and 
Nahrawan, the Karkh water treatment plant and the Amanat's Cleaning 
Day. GRD and ITAO presented an update on the Husseiniya treatment 
plant and the JPC Chairman discussed recent changes to the JPC. END 
SUMMARY. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
ITAO Provides an Overview of Reconstruction Funding 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2. ITAO Director and CFO met with Dr. Chalabi in a private session 
to provide an overview of US reconstruction funding. They discussed 
Iraq Relief and Reconstruction Funds (IRRF), Economic Support Funds 
(ESF) and the Commanders Emergency Response Program (CERP). Dr. 
Chalabi was most interested in remaining funds. He discussed the 
need for a housing initiative, the rehabilitation of an electric 
station in Youssifiyah, improved irrigation channels and increased 
computer access for Baghdad University students. ITAO Director 
mentioned that there is a current program in place that has created 
an on-line library for university students. Dr. Chalabi thanked them 
for their time and expertise. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
The Committee Discusses Water 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3. Concerns over potable water and irrigation water shortages were 
expressed as well as inadequate sewerage treatment capabilities. 
Ghaziliya was used as an example of an obsolete sewerage network. 
According to the Deputy Mayor, the Amanat is having difficulties 
recruiting contractors to address these sewerage issues due to 
security concerns. FAQ spokesperson noted that the area was 
predominantly Sunni and therefore a Sunni contractor ought to be 
considered. The committee dismissed his comments. Chalabi wrapped up 
this issue - requesting the Deputy Mayor to submit a memo detailing 
needed equipment. He also tasked the JPC with drafting a memo to 
expedite trenching in Ghaziliya to address irrigation issues. 
 
¶4. Water issues in Nahrawan were revisited. The Amanat offered to 
provide untreated water to the eastern qada, but insisted that any 
treatment would have to be done locally. MND-B offered to provide 
reverse osmosis capabilities.  Some committee members criticized the 
reverse osmosis machines, noting that they were complicated to use 
and expensive to maintain. The Iraqi Red Crescent volunteered to 
assist with maintenance. 
 
¶5. The Amanat complained about power outages at the Karkh water 
treatment plant. A technical conversation ensued about generator 
ventilation. The Amanat offered to fix the generators with their 
expert repair team, the General Directorate of Generators. However, 
they noted that power problems will persist because of an outdated 
control system at the reservoir. 
 
¶6. A representative from GRD and ITAO Senior Consultant to Water 
briefed the committee on the USG involvement in the Husseiniya 
sewerage treatment plant. Due to other funding priorities, the USG 
developed preliminary plans for a water collection and treatment 
plant in Husseiniya. The Amanat dismissed the plans because they 
were based on a lower population count than current residents. The 
USG retorted that they based the designs on the reality at the time. 
Current plans could be scaled up as necessary if in fact more 
residents live in the area. The Deputy Mayor maintains that he could 
fund the project, along with the Ministry of Public Works. The 
committee will send a memo to the Amanat to request that the 
Husseiniya project be started immediately. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
Other Topics, Briefly 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7. Dr. Chalabi excused himself towards the end of the meeting and 
Sr. Deputy Minister of Electricity chaired the remaining few minutes 
of the meeting. The JPC Chairman gave a status update on the JPC, 
noting that they were seeking an official link to the Government of 
Iraq in the form of an executive order. He also noted that the 
Provincial Council Chairman would likely chair future JPC meetings. 
 
 
¶8. The Ministry of Defense commented that a letter had been sent 
from them and the Ministry of Interior to the Baghdad Operations 
Command (BOC) to request the BOC to implement changes that will 
prevent vehicles from parking illegally. Both the MoI and the MoD 
noted that illegal parking is a security risk as well as a traffic 
barrier. 
 
Crocker