08BAGHDAD290
Chalabi's Provision of Services Committee - January 29
Thu Jan 31 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO6720
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #0290/01 0311549
ZNR UUUUU ZZH ZDK
P 311549Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5511
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BAGHDAD 000290 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREL IZ REL UK
SUBJECT: Chalabi's Provision of Services Committee - January 29 
 
BAGHDAD 00000290  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: At this week's regularly held Provision of Services 
Committee meeting, the committee met for 2.5 hours to discuss issues 
ranging from trash collection privatization and re-opening 
previously closed streets to electrical supply for pumping stations 
and service problems in specific qadas. The meeting followed its 
typically "ombudsmen" format. For the first time, the Mayor and 
Deputy Mayor attended. Other first time attendees included the 
Bagdhad Municipality Director and the DG of Baghdad Water Resources. 
The Ministries of Oil, Trade, Electricity, Defense and Health 
attended. The Baghdad Operations Command, National Security Advisor, 
Iraqi Red Crescent and the Joint Planning Commission also sent 
representatives. END SUMMARY. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - 
Meeting Highlights 
- - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2. The Committee, despite some reservations, decided to write a 
letter to the Prime Minister and/or the General Secretariat to 
suspend the bond/mortgage requirement now imposed upon prospective 
garbage truck drivers. There is a shortage of drivers due to this 
requirement. Advocates say that it prevents trucks from being stolen 
or used as VBIEDs and that it ensures that the drivers are Iraqi and 
not foreigners living illegally in Iraq. However, the Amanat argues 
that this requirement has resulted in garbage accumulation. 
 
¶3. Deputy Mayor Naiem displayed a map of Baghdad, highlighting 
streets that should be re-opened because of improved security. He 
also thought this would spur economic activities and lessen traffic 
congestion. The Baghdad Operations Command (BOC) maintained that 
these security measures are in fact what have improved the situation 
and removing them prematurely could expose Iraqis to violence again. 
 MND-B Deputy Commanding General, Brigadier General Milano, agreed 
on the need to strike the right balance and offered to work with the 
BOC and Mayor to open strategic streets, balancing security with 
measures to improve the quality of life for Baghdadis. 
 
¶4. Senior Deputy Minister of Electricity, Mr. Ra'ad, discussed for a 
second time the threat that the ministry's employees face. He 
complained that despite extra efforts to improve electricity to the 
suburb of Sabi' Al Bor, the continued threats to engineers at Taji 
detrimentally impact electricity to Sabi' Al Bor. The MoE again pled 
for the BOC's assistance with this matter and Dr. Chalabi suggested 
that a specific, written request be addressed to the BOC. Also in 
terms of electricity, Dr. Chalabi discussed his recent visit to 
Doura and noted that several transformers were inoperable. Chalabi 
tasked the MoE to write a letter to Major General Hammond, the 
Commanding General of MND-B, to detail the electricity problems in 
the Doura area and ask him to repair transformers in muhallas 822 
and 840. (Note: BG Milano, representing MND-B, did not offer to 
repair the transformers. He commented that it was the Government of 
Iraq's responsibility. End Note) 
 
¶5. The committee discussed the condition of the irrigation canals, 
noting that the city is currently witnessing significant amounts of 
standing water because many of the canals are clogged. The DG of 
Baghdad Water Resources said a plan is underway to clear these 
obstructed channels, but work will be slow due to equipment 
shortages. Chalabi requested that a letter be sent to the Ministry 
of Water Resources detailing the problem and possible solutions. 
 
¶6. Dr. Khamis, the Ministry of Health (MoH) representative discussed 
his recent visit to Abu Ghraib's hospital. He noted staff and 
supplies shortages, decrepit building conditions and unacceptable 
treatment of the doctors by the Muthanna Brigade. Dr. Chalabi 
requested a formal report be sent to the committee as well as the 
MoH. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Husseiniya Tops the Agenda 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7. Deputy ITAO Director General Snyder delivered a report on the 
Husseiniya sewerage system. He shared the details of the United 
States Government (USG) involvement in the project over the past two 
years, having developed a plan to treat and collect water. The USG 
estimates that the project would cost $210 million and take 18-24 
months to complete. The US can not construct the project due to 
funding priorities. Deputy Mayor Naiem suggested that a project, 
based upon Iraqi engineers' designs from 1990, be implemented. The 
Baghdad Municipality Director said that several studies were 
launched in 2006 and 2007, some of which are still ongoing to 
address sewerage in Husseiniya. He said it will cost approximately 
17 billion dinars to address sewerage issues in the area. Chalabi 
then suggested that the Baghdad Sewerage Director be invited to next 
week's meeting for further discussion. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
The Amanat is Up Next 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8. A follow-on to last week's meeting regarding privatization of 
trash collection in Baghdad happened next. Previous attempts to 
 
BAGHDAD 00000290  002 OF 003 
 
 
privatize trash collection repeatedly were unsuccessful because 
there are few qualified Iraqi contractors with this area of 
expertise. The Amanat has since encouraged Iraqis to become 
affiliated with international companies in order to contract out 
this local task. The Mayor noted that a $180 million joint 
private/public recycling venture was ongoing. Another recycling 
plant is expected to come on-line at the end of 2008. The Mayor also 
reported that the city has contracted to build a factory that would 
convert recyclables into plastic bags. The shortage of garbage truck 
drivers was also discussed and the committee decided to write a 
letter to the Prime Minister asking him to waive the mortgage/bond 
requirement. 
 
¶9. Deputy Mayor Naiem then used a large map to discuss the 
possibility of re-opening streets throughout the city of Baghdad. He 
specifically mentioned Abu Niwas Street, the Passport office area 
and Adimiyah. The BOC noted that the security measures currently in 
place are to be credited for security improvements in those areas. 
Any changes should be carefully considered so as to not compromise 
safety. MND-B, the BOC and the Amanat are to further discuss this 
issue. 
 
¶10. The DG of Baghdad Water Resources discussed the current blockage 
in the irrigation canals. He said they are currently creating a plan 
to clear the canals, but any progress on work would be slow because 
they only have about 50% of needed equipment. The Amanat offered 
some additional drills in the short-term, but Chalabi emphasized 
that this problem also needed a long-term solution, particularly 
given its impact on agribusiness and employment. Therefore the DG is 
to send a letter to the Ministry of Water Resources. 
 
- - - - - - 
Electricity 
- - - - - - 
 
¶11. The MoE and the DG of Baghdad Water discussed the electricity 
needs for 52 main pumping stations. In addition to secure lines to 
the pumping stations, fuel for the back-up generators is needed. The 
Senior Deputy Minister to MoE suggested that the Amanat develop 
contingency plans and the MoE will provide contingency power, but 
will not be responsible for the costs. He also stated that the 
locality should be responsible for interdictions and other related 
violations. 
 
¶12. A brief report was delivered on the 10 amp meter project; the 
smart meter bid is out. There are 900,000 electricity customers in 
Bagdhad, but only 60,000 are using the 10 amp meters. According to 
the MoE, Sadr City has rejected using the meters. (Note: The purpose 
of the meter is to limit household use to 10 amps. The trade off 
would be more reliable electricity in return for accepting the cap 
on usage. End Note) 
 
¶13. Then Mr. Ra'ad discussed threats and intimidation on MoE staff 
which prohibits load shed compliance. (Note: The committee discussed 
this issue previously and a recommendation was made to involve the 
BOC. The BOC said they would protect the power stations, but needed 
a list of authorized personnel for those stations. End Note) He 
cited Sabi' Al Bor as a victim of this, noting that continued 
threats to MoE personnel in Taji prevents Sabi' Al Bor from getting 
its "fair" share. Dr. Chalabi suggested that a formal letter be sent 
to the BOC regarding this issue. 
 
¶14. Finally, Dr. Chalabi discussed downed transformers in Doura, in 
muhallas 822 and 840. Those stations, according to the MoE, will be 
operable again if and when the industrial Doura power station comes 
on-line. This is expected to happen in approximately one month. 
Nonetheless, Chalabi will seek further assistance from MND-B. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Service Needs in Mada'in and Abu Ghraib 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶15. Representatives from Mada'in mentioned security concerns in this 
eastern qada, stating that the area had been an insurgent safe 
haven. The Baghdad Municipality Director said that the area has not 
been safe enough for him to visit. Complaints were made against the 
BOC's supposed lack of coordination with the Wasit police. The BOC 
stated that the "Ministry of Interior (MoI) had nothing to do with 
it." Representatives from Mada'in then asked for increased military 
presence and possibly even an operation to root out insurgents. 
Chalabi reminded the committee that its charge does not include 
security, only the provision of services. 
 
¶16. Dr. Khamis, the MoH representative detailed his recent visit to 
the Abu Ghraib hospital. He said conditions were deplorable. The 
roofs in the surgery rooms were leaking, doctors and other staff 
were scare as was medical supplies and equipment. The staff that was 
there had not received any training in decades. Also compounding 
problem for the doctors was the Muthanna Brigade's treatment of 
them. According to Dr. Khamis, the brigade is harassing the doctors. 
Committee members noted other complaints about the brigade's 
behavior. The MoD is expected to address the concerns with the 
brigade. 
 
BAGHDAD 00000290  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
- - - - - - - 
Other Topics 
- - - - - - - 
 
¶17. As the meeting was coming to an end, several concerns were 
raised regarding the return of formerly displaced persons. Houriyah 
and Sabi' Al Bor were discussed. Chalabi stated that over 1,700 
people have returned to Sabi' Al Bor from Houriyah, but others have 
since re-settled illegally in Houriyah. According to Dr. Chalabi, he 
had a recent meeting with General Abhoud who stated that 
neighborhoods need to be prioritized in terms of resettling 
displaced Iraqis. He said that the Ministry of Displacement and 
Migration is not capable of handling all the issues associated with 
returning families alone. They need more resources, including staff, 
money and expertise. 
 
¶18. NSA representative, Mr. Sayid, reported on Project Clean 
Delivery; kerosene rations were delivered to Hindi in the test run 
and were to start in 2 muhallahs each in Amariyah, Gaziliayah and 
Khark. The Iraqi Red Crescent offered their assistance in whatever 
was needed and the meeting concluded following the Monsour Municipal 
Officer's claim that municipal crews were being mistreated by 1st 
and 2nd lieutenants in the Iraqi Army. Chalabi told the Municipal 
Officer to give a detailed report and memo to the BOC. 
 
Butenis