08BAGHDAD1206
IESC MEETING APRIL 11
Thu Apr 17 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO0957
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #1206 1081803
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 171803Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6904
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS BAGHDAD 001206 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SBU 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PGOV PINR PINS IZ
SUBJECT: IESC MEETING APRIL 11 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  National Security Advisor (NSA) Muwafak 
al-Rubaie chaired the Iraq Executive Steering Committee 
(IESC) in support of Operation Fardh al-Qanoon (FAQ) April 
¶11.  Discussion focused on services and humanitarian 
assistance to Sadr City.  Ministry officials reported ongoing 
problems traveling through the city and transporting supplies 
to needy areas, hampering their efforts.  An expected report 
on swimming pools did not occur due to the absence of a 
representative for the Ministry of Youth and Sports.  The 
Mayor of Baghdad asked that illegal habitation on government 
properties, something he views as a critical issue for the 
GOI to tackle, make next week's agenda.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) NSA Rubaie chaired the meeting in Prime Minister 
Maliki's absence.  He reviewed the agenda items for the 
meeting and said that the PM had made several recommendations 
regarding the ongoing situation in Sadr City.  The PM 
recommended that the government create a consolidated list of 
Iraq's "most wanted" in order to publicize the fact that the 
GOI was not specifically targeting JAM.  A rewards program 
for Sadr City residents who turn in information about these 
wanted militants, along with a heavy weapons turn-in program, 
would be part of a unified media message from the GOI 
confirming their stance against all outlaw militias. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The General Manager of Food Distribution represented 
the Ministry of Trade (MoT) and reported on the difficulties 
faced in testing food being offloaded from ships in Basra. 
(Note: The quality of the products issued by the MoT in the 
monthly food ration is a recurrent issue that generates great 
passion at IESC meetings. End Note.)  Attendees engaged in a 
lengthy back-and-forth about whether the residents of Sadr 
City would receive "double rations" for the month of April, 
or would merely receive their May ration early.  The MoT 
stood firm on its plan to deliver this 'advance' ration, 
despite previous comments from the PM directing them to 
deliver "double rations." 
 
¶4. (SBU) Ahmed Chalabi provided a read-out of his Services 
Committee's activities and said that his findings indicated 
that Sadr City is not currently facing a fuel crisis.  The 
Minister of Oil agreed with this assessment. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The Baghdad Provincial Council Chairman reported 
that the presence of ISF and Coalition forces in some GOI 
facilities is preventing their operation; he noted some 
Ministry of Education facilities.  General Abud and MNFI DCG 
LtGen Cooper said that any such problems could be worked out 
through proper coordination. 
 
¶6. (SBU) The Ministry of Health was not represented at the 
meeting, but Chalabi gave them kudos for the hard work they 
have been performing in such difficult circumstances.  He 
said that ambulances are still having a hard time getting 
through checkpoints, and urged that a letter from the PM to 
the BOC directing better coordination be re-sent. 
 
¶7. (SBU) As the meeting was about the adjourn, the Mayor of 
Baghdad City asked that the IESC take a look at the issue 
that he believes is "ruining" Baghdad ) the extensive amount 
of illegal habitation on government lots and in government 
properties.  This issue cuts across a number of ministries, 
and impacts directly on the quality of services provided to 
residents, making it an essential topic to address at the 
IESC forum.  Mayor Saber said that illegal squatters are 
costing the GOI "billions of dollars" because they tap into, 
corrupt and destroy key pieces of infrastructure in the city. 
 The problem is compounded by the fact that corrupt and 
militia-affiliated officials are forging false deeds and 
other documents permitting this illegal habitation in on 
government land. 
 
CROCKER