08BAGHDAD3731
USAID IRAQ MISSION WAIVERS AND EXCEPTIONS
Tue Nov 25 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGB #3731/01 3301752
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 251752Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0559
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS BAGHDAD 003731 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/IP, DS/IP/NEA, DS/PSP/PSD, DS/C/PSD; 
AID FOR SEC BLACKSHAW, M/OMS NAGLE, MANE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC AMGT ABLD EAID
SUBJECT: USAID IRAQ MISSION WAIVERS AND EXCEPTIONS 
REQUEST 
 
REFS:  (A) 12 FAH-6 H-114.4; (B) 12 FAH-5 H-200; (C) 
THE FOREIGN RELATIONS AUTHORIZATION ACT, FY 2000 AND 
2001 (AS ENACTED IN PUBLIC LAW 106-113) 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  SUMMARY:  USAID/Iraq requests waivers to 
collocation and setback requirements required by the 
Secure Embassy Construction and Counter-Terrorism Act 
(SECCA) of 1999.  Additionally, USAID/Iraq requests 
exceptions to the following OSPB standards:  12 FAH-5 
H-433.1-1 paragraph (c), clear zone. 
 
A New Embassy Compound (NEC) has been completed in 
Baghdad and will be fully occupied by the end of the 
first quarter of FY 2009.  Between the design of the 
new embassy and the build-out, both Embassy and USAID 
staffing have increased considerably and the need to 
accommodate personnel from the Multi-National Force - 
Iraq (MNF-I) has arisen.  There is now insufficient 
office and residential space available to accommodate 
all personnel.  In consultation with the Deputy Chief 
of Mission and Regional Security Officer, a decision 
was made to allow USAID to remain at its current 
location, a separate compound approximately three 
miles from the NEC.  USAID personnel will relocate to 
the embassy compound when sufficient COM/MNF-I 
staffing decreases permit provision of both office and 
residential accommodation.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Since 2004, USAID/Iraq has occupied the 
current compound in the International Zone of Baghdad 
under a Temporary Property Use License (TPUL) first 
granted by Multi-National Force - Iraq (MNF-I) in July 
2003 and subject to renewal every six months.  The 
current agreement was to expire in December 2008.  A 
Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) has been negotiated 
among USAID, Department of State (DOS), and MNF-I 
which replaces the TPUL and provides for USAID's use 
of the current compound for a period of five years, 
with continued occupancy and use subject to discussion 
and recertification annually thereafter. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  The USAID compound currently provides 
office and work space for 143 USAID employees Qd 20 
life-support contractor personnel and residential 
space for up to 135 people.  Until recently, the USAID 
compound had 31 double-occupancy trailers.  These are 
in the process of being replaced by more secure 
housing.  Seventeen trailers have been removed and the 
remaining fourteen will be removed when the new 
housing construction is complete.  Once construction 
is complete, USAID will have 73 hardened single- 
occupant residences, 11 double-occupant residences and 
40 duplex studio units.  Currently, in addition to the 
93 USAID personnel who are housed on the compound, 
accommodations are provided for 10 life-support 
contractor personnel, two security site leads, 6 
Foreign Service National (FSN) employees of various 
sections of the Embassy, plus approximately 20 TDY 
personnel. 
 
¶4.  Overall, post staffing has increased significantly 
since the NEC plans were finalized and construction 
begun.  Requirements for provision of office space to 
additional segments of the military were not 
anticipated when plans were finalized and have added 
to the severe space constraints which, even without 
USAID personnel, require double-occupancy of cubicle 
and living spaces designed for single-occupant use. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
Security Survey 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  The Baghdad RSO and DS/PSD/PCB desk officer 
conducted an updated comprehensive security survey on 
September 21, 2008 and found the current USAID 
compound location meets the physical security 
Qcompound location meets the physical security 
standards for office and residential use with the 
exception of setback and clear zone standards for 
critical threat posts as follows:  the USAID compound 
does not meet the 100-foot critical threat setback or 
clear zone standards on one side of the compound, the 
southeast side of the building which abuts Chute Road 
and the MNSTC-I construction compound.  Note:  At the 
time of submission of this cable, the MNSTC-I barracks 
construction project next to the USAID compound has 
been terminated and USAID has requested the return of 
 
the property which was originally part of the USAID 
compound.  This will mean that the USAID compound will 
abut the Japanese Embassy Compound.  The Japanese 
Embassy will, subject to conclusion of a Memorandum of 
Agreement, take control of the Chute Road.  End note. 
 
¶6.  A comprehensive project is underway to improve the 
security of all exterior walls.  See paras 13 and 19a 
below for blast mitigation security upgrades currently 
being conducted or contracted for. 
 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  In accordance with 12 FAH-6 H-114, the 
following information is provided:  the USAID 
compound, which is an unclassified facility, is 
located on the northeast portion of the International 
Zone, adjacent to the Tigris River (U.S. Military Grid 
Reference System: 38S MB 4489 8675.)  The USAID 
compound is situated on 16 acres with a perimeter wall 
that varies from 11' high T-walls to 9' high Alaska 
barriers.  There is a main administration building 
(Hammurabi), 84 residences, one security site lead 
house, 14 trailers, dining hall, laundromat, two 
warehouses, gym, VIP meeting room, and a computer 
training facility, with additional residential units 
under construction.  Construction of this compound 
commenced circa April 2003 and is ongoing.  To the 
north of the compound is the United Nations (UN) 
Compound.  A U.S. Military compound that is comprised 
of the Multi-National Security Transition Command-Iraq 
(MNSTC-I) is located west of USAID; south, there is a 
Department Of State MWR facility known as "Liberty 
Pool."  The former U.S. Chancery is located southeast 
of USAID; however, in June 2008, this property was 
transferred to the Japanese Embassy and is currently 
being renovated.  A former section of the USAID 
compound that was referred to as the GSO warehouse 
area directly borders the southeast portion of the 
USAID compound.  This property had been acquired by 
MNSTC-I which was constructing a barracks compound 
that would have consisted of five structures with the 
capacity to house upwards of 1,200 personnel (see 
note, end para five.)  Further southeast is the GoI 
compound known as "Little Venice."  This location is 
controlled entirely by Iraqi personnel.  The primary 
access road for the USAID compound runs along the 
western boundary and is known as "Bob Johnson Road." 
This connects to a somewhat narrower road that runs 
along the northern boundary between USAID and the UN 
Compound.  In turn, this road connects to the "River 
Road" which runs along the banks of the Tigris.  At 
the northeast corner of the USAID compound, the River 
Road is blocked by the USAID Service Compound Access 
Control (CAC) and at the southeast corner, next to the 
MNF-I barracks property, it is blocked by a locked 
chain link gate with concertina wire atop.  The River 
Road continues past the MNF-I barracks and the 
Japanese Embassy (where there is also a CAC) to the 
area known as "Little Venice." 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
USAID Hammurabi Office Building 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  This single story cast in place reinforced 
concrete administration building was completed circa 
May 2005 and exceeds blast requirements as set forth 
by DOS/DS Foreign Affairs Handbooks 5 and 6; DS 
provided the threat level (critical) and blast 
standards to contractor Baker Engineering and risk 
consultants who built to those standards.  The 
building has a working area of approximately 12,000 
square feet.  It was made of reinforced concrete, the 
roof was constructed with a twin layer to mitigate IDF 
Qroof was constructed with a twin layer to mitigate IDF 
vulnerability, and there is a full Public Access 
Control (PAC) with two Forced Entry/Ballistic 
Resistant (FE/BR), entrance/exit, and exterior doors 
leading to two additional internal ballistic resistant 
doors.  With the exception to an FE/BR-provided window 
at the primary building entrance/exit there are no 
other windows in this building.  Fifteen 15 Min FE/BR 
interior walls were provided at the primary egress and 
60 Min interior walls were provided along the interior 
safe haven room.  Inside, there are approximately 114 
cubicles, 22 offices and a 20 feet by 40 feet 
"hardened" conference room (which serves as the safe 
haven.)  There are emergency exits FE/BR doors that 
 
are alarmed, located in each corner of the building 
(totaling four.)  There is an emergency exit door in 
the safe haven conference room.  The 12-feet high 
ceilings have a drop ceiling and are equipped with 
fluorescent lights with metal reflectors.  The 
building is equipped with a fire suppression system 
consisting of sprinklers and smoke detectors. 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  Security is provided by DOS-contracted 
guards.  These guard positions operate 24 hours a day, 
7 days a week.  The guards provide security and screen 
visitors/workers for proper badges.  There is a guard 
booth inside the building that is manned by two Triple 
Canopy (TC) guards and a supervisor.  There are five 
closed-circuit television (CCTV) monitors in the guard 
booth that control 38 cameras that are distributed 
throughout the USAID compound.  The CCTV room also 
contains first aid supplies, emergency and 
communication equipment.  A complete 
renovation/replacement of the CCTV system has been 
planned and will be implemented starting in December 
2008 with completion scheduled for February 2009. 
 
¶10.  (SBU)  There are 84 residences on the compound. 
Eleven have been divided to accommodate two 
individuals.  The remaining 73 units house one 
individual each.  Each is approximately 550 square 
feet and composed of concrete, brick and steel.  A 
center hallway area and the bathroom provide limited 
safe havening in the residences.  Each residence has 
seven windows that are covered with Mylar on both 
sides.  Each residence has a hard-line telephone 
through which duck and cover and other emergency 
notifications are transmitted.  Each residence is 
equipped with a fire extinguisher and smoke detectors. 
The residences have a continuous occupancy rate of 
approximately 99%. 
 
¶11.  (SBU)  There are 14 trailers on this location. 
Ten have one bedroom measuring approximately 190 
square feet, and four trailers have two bedrooms 
measuring approximately 280 square feet.  Each trailer 
is surrounded by a 4 1/2 inch high, 6-inch wide, 
concrete wall to absorb shrapnel in the event of an 
Indirect Fire (IDF) attack.  Each trailer has two 
windows that have two layers of Mylar.  The trailers 
have a hard-line telephone that has "Selectone" 
capability.  They also have a fire extinguisher and a 
smoke detector.  The trailers currently have an 
occupancy rate of approximately 90%. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
USAID Palm Tree Cafe, Gym, Laundry, and VIP Meeting 
Room 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶12.  (SBU)  The Palm Tree Cafe, laundry, and the 
gym/VIP meeting room are separate buildings on the 
compound.  These buildings are composed of concrete. 
All of the windows have a double layer of Mylar.  The 
gym has a speaker mounted on the wall to enhance the 
"Selectone" system.  All buildings have telephones 
with "Selectone" capability.  Each building has the 
appropriate number of fire extinguishers and smoke 
detectors.  There are seven duck and cover bunkers 
that surround the buildings or are situated in very 
close proximity. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Perimeter 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶13.  (SBU)  The northern and western perimeters of the 
USAID compound, along the Bob Johnson Road and the UN 
Compound Road are both composed of a double line of 
11-foot T-walls.  The area between the T-walls is 
backfilled with soil to the top to provide an 
effective barrier between 6 and 8 feet thick.  The 
barrier wall is topped by multiple strands of 
Qbarrier wall is topped by multiple strands of 
concertina wire.  All of the T-walls are linked by a 
double-length 3/4 inch steel cable to provide 
additional stability.  This barrier system replaces a 
system of single-thickness T-walls and will be 
completed by the end of November 2008.  Each T-wall is 
11 feet high, 6 1/2 feet wide, with a base equal to 
the width of the wall plus 2 1/2 feet to allow the 
wall sections to stand independent of each other.  The 
 
southern perimeter is lined with a single line of T- 
walls along its entire length.  One approximate 
hundred foot segment of this wall also a permanent 
brick wall approximately ten feet tall.  The USAID 
compound is currently separated from the MNSTC-I 
barracks property by T-walls.  If this property is 
returned to USAID, those T-walls will be moved to line 
the perimeter along the Japanese Embassy Compound. 
The northern perimeter of the compound, along the 
River Road, is lined with T-walls on the river side of 
the road and another line of T-walls on the compound 
side of the road.  The T-walls along the river are 
topped with concertina wire.  There are CCTVs that are 
distributed all along the perimeter of the USAID 
compound.  As noted earlier, a project is underway to 
renovate the CCTV system, which currently has 38 
cameras monitored 24 hours per day, seven days per 
week by security guards in the CCTV room. 
 
¶14.  (SBU)  The vehicle and pedestrian entrance and 
control points are available through two CACs.  The 
CACs are used to gain access to the USAID compound. 
Both CACs were built to DS-approved standards. 
 
¶15.  (SBU)  Perimeter lighting consists of halogen 
sodium, 1000-watt lights.  The lights are on a timer 
and the majority are situated on the east side of the 
compound.  There are additional perimeter lights in 
front of the Hammurabi Building and in the southeast 
corner of the Palm Tree Cafe.  Outside lighting is 
supplied by halogen 400-watts (for the five large 
Cummins generators), while 250-watts and e-40 radium 
240-watts are used to illuminate other locations and 
structures throughout the compound.  Types of lighting 
include fluorescent and normal 60-watt light bulbs 
inside the structures.  Emergency lighting and back-up 
power generators are used on this compound in the 
event power is lost. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Communications 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶16.  (SBU)  Communications are managed from the 
communications center, which houses the Very Small 
Aperture Terminal (VSAT) USAID network, voice and data 
and microwave link to the palace (currently U.S. 
Embassy property) and the NEC. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Generators 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶17.  (SBU)  There are five Cummins generators, 
totaling 5.5 megawatts, located on the east side of 
the USAID compound; they are protected by two 
concrete, overhead slabs that are spaced approximately 
one meter apart.  Two Cummins generators, 0.85 
megawatts each, are located east of the Palm Tree Cafe 
and have the same overhead concrete covering as the 
five larger generators.  The Tata generator is located 
at the base of the radio tower, south of the Hammurabi 
Building.  This generator has no protection. 
 
¶18.  (SBU)  Six, 50,000-liter diesel fuel tanks 
located beside and north of the five Cummins 
generators provide 300,000 liters in total fuel 
storage capacity.  The tanks are approximately 10 feet 
below the surface, in a concrete encasement, further 
protected with evenly spaced, overhead concrete slabs. 
Two additional 250-liter diesel fuel tanks located 
adjacent to the two Cummins generators provide an 
additional 5,000 liters of capacity and are protected 
with the same overhead concrete protection as the rest 
of the generators.  The generators are tested at least 
weekly. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Continued Construction/Physical Security Upgrades 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Q-------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶19.  (SBU)  The USAID compound currently does not meet 
all the setback and clear zone physical security 
standards.  There are 14 double-occupancy trailers 
which were identified by USAID as not having 
sufficient blast protection.  Quotations were received 
for overhead cover for the existing trailer units (at 
 
a cost of approximately $6 million USD) and for 
construction of replacement housing that would meet 
physical security standards (approximately $3 million 
USD). These trailers will be removed as soon as 
residential construction is completed, estimated now 
on or before May 2009. 
 
USAID has contracted and is proceeding with 
construction of replacement housing to eliminate the 
trailer accommodations.  The balance of the existing 
housing on the USAID compound was designed and 
contracted to meet the specifications and security 
requirements at the time they were built, including a 
double layer roof and a secure safe-haven area (the 
bathroom) area.  As part of USAID's ongoing 
maintenance program, each residence is being checked 
by structural engineers and, funds permitting, steps 
may be taken to strengthen security for the existing 
units, including fortifying doors and overhead cover 
(roofing.)  Work on these existing housing units 
should be completed before the end of FY 2009. 
 
¶A.  Perimeter Wall Standard:  On all but the river 
side area of the compound, T-walls have been or are 
being doubled up and sand is being used to fill these 
walls in for blast mitigation.  All walls are, or will 
be, cabled together with at least 3/4 inch cable.  The 
tops of all Alaska-type walls will be squared off 
using concrete forms.  Outriggers will be produced for 
the tops of the perimeter wall where needed and new 
double-strand concertina wire will be installed. 
 
¶B.  Compound Access Control Standard:  Both CACs are 
DS-approved and built to standard. 
 
¶C.  Setback Standard:  Setback is met on all sides 
with the exception of the area directly across from 
the Multi National Security Transition Command-Iraq's 
new construction zone. If this property is 
incorporated into the USAID compound as anticipated, 
this side will also meet setback standards. 
 
¶D.  Clear Zone Standard:  All foliage, both inside and 
outside the compound, has been trimmed back to afford 
visibility.  Due to the shrinking footprint of the 
compound, clear zone can not be met on a number of 
sides near the perimeter wall, most especially the 
area along the Chute Road. 
 
¶E.  Parking Standard:  Standard has been met. 
 
¶F.  Lighting Standard:  Lighting has been inspected 
and found to be below standards.  This is being 
rectified and lighting will meet or exceed standards 
before the end of the second quarter of FY 2009. 
 
¶G.  Closed-circuit Television (CCTV):  The CCTV system 
has been inspected and USAID/SEC has scheduled 
technicians to be assigned to upgrade and augment that 
system.  The system will be completely replaced and 
this work will be completed on or before the end of 
February 2009. 
 
¶H.  IDF/Blast Mitigation:  Angle iron structures have 
been manufactured onsite and have been placed in front 
of all windows of the compound building which are all 
covered by Shatter Resistant Window Film (SRWF). 
These structures are stacked with sandbags and provide 
a defense against shrapnel splash. 
 
¶I.  Mantraps:  Mantraps for both CACs have been 
designed and will soon be contracted for; plans for 
the construction of these mantraps were furnished to 
USAID by DS. 
 
¶J.  Pedestrian Egress:  T-walls were placed in front 
of the pedestrian exit/turnstile in order to shield 
this area in case of IDF attacks and to prevent the 
ability of civilians to look straight into the 
compound. 
 
 
¶K.  Guard Towers:  Five all-weather, elevated, blast- 
resistant guard towers have been identified on COM 
property and have been assigned to USAID.  The scope 
Qproperty and have been assigned to USAID.  The scope 
of work for moving and reinstalling the towers has 
been completed and is currently being evaluated. 
 
Subject to funds availability and RSO approval, this 
work will be completed before the end of the second 
quarter of FY 2009. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Setback/Access Concerns 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶20.  (SBU)  MNSTC-I:  This DOD unit was building a 
compound adjacent to the USAID compound.  This project 
has now been cancelled and construction terminated. 
The Chute Road, which provides access from Bob Johnson 
Road to the barracks site, will be transferred to the 
Japanese Embassy to serve as the primary access route 
for their embassy compound upon completion of a 
Memorandum of Agreement under which the Japanese 
Embassy would agree to ensure that access control for 
the chute road meets DS access point security 
standards.  The U.S. Embassy and USAID have agreed to 
provide support and assistance to the Japanese Embassy 
to ensure that DS standards are met.  The Chute Road 
was originally a Baghdad city street, but it was 
blocked when USAID occupied the compound.  MNSTC-I 
reopened the road in conjunction with the now- 
cancelled construction project. 
 
¶21.  (SBU)  The Japanese Embassy is next to the USAID 
compound.  Discussions have been held with the 
Japanese Embassy regarding joint security measures and 
the USAID RSO and the security contractor for the 
Japanese Embassy meet regularly to coordinate security 
and address mutual security concerns. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Supporting Documentation 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶22.  (U)  Additional supporting documentation with 
site maps, diagrams, and digital photos will be 
submitted under separate cover. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
DCM and RSO Statements 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶23.  (SBU)  Deputy Chief of Mission Patricia A. 
Butenis and Embassy Regional Security Officer Mark 
Hipp recommend and endorse this request to waive the 
collocation and setback standards.  USAID, with DS/RSO 
assistance and AID/SEC support, has taken all possible 
steps to maximize the degree of protection afforded 
the USAID compound and the RSO agrees that current and 
projected security measures are appropriate and 
sufficient to protect COM personnel.  It is USAID's 
intent, supported by the Embassy, to move to the New 
Embassy Compound when office and residential space 
sufficient to accommodate all USAID personnel in 
Baghdad are available.  USAID has submitted details 
justifying this waiver deeming it to be in the best 
interests of the United States Government. 
 
¶24.  (U)  Post appreciates the continuing support of 
the Department Of State Diplomatic Security Bureau and 
looks forward to an expeditious resolution of this 
request. 
 
CROCKER