08BAGHDAD763
Chalabi's Provision of Services Committee - March 11
Fri Mar 14 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO4948
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #0763/01 0741057
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 141057Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6232
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 000763 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREL IZ REL UK
SUBJECT: Chalabi's Provision of Services Committee - March 11 
 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: Despite the Chairman's absence, the Provision of 
Services Committee met this week, hosted by the Deputy Minister of 
Electricity (DMoE). The meeting was well attended - the Baghdad 
Governor and a representative from the National Reconciliation 
Committee attended for the first time. The Ministry of Oil (MoO) 
briefed a report on oil smuggling and described a broken pipeline. 
The Ministry of Trade (MoT) pled for the committee to take action to 
remove MNF-I from Sha'ab Market. The water discussion from the 
previous week continued and the committee briefly reviewed several 
previous health, education and electricity recommendations. END 
SUMMARY. 
 
- - - - - - 
Oil Report 
- - - - - - 
 
¶2. The Deputy Minister of Oil (DMoO) discussed a pipeline that was 
trespassed only three hours after becoming functional. (Note: The 
DMoO described the location as Taji, but later said the specific 
violation or trespass occurred 30 kilometers southwest of Taji, 
closer to Abu Ghraib, but in an area known as I'aesha. End Note) The 
DMoE asked for grid coordinates and more specifics in the form of a 
memo that will later be sent to the Baghdad Operations Command 
(BOC). The memo will also ask BOC to conduct a survey in 
coordination with the MoO in order to repair the pipeline. The 
Deputy Minister of Defense (DMoD) questioned why the MoO did not 
address this issue directly with the BOC. He noted that the MoO 
Operations Room is supposed to report directly to the BOC. The DMoO 
responded - "the MoO Operations Room did notify the BOC." 
 
¶3. The DMoO also criticized the Provision of Services Committee for 
inaction on two memos that his ministry sent forward. A February 20 
memo to the Provision of Services Committee provided a list of names 
of supposed oil smugglers. An earlier memo, dated January 31, 
detailed concerns of missing liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) bottles, 
and particularly accused MNF-I of raiding the facilities where the 
LPG bottles were stored and then taking them. (Note: Some committee 
members acknowledged that MNF-I was not taking the LPG for their own 
consumption, but rather local distribution. The MNF-I representative 
did not have any information on the matter, but will follow-up at 
next week's meeting. End Note) 
 
¶4. Finally, the DMoO discussed LPG and kerosene distribution in 
Sabi' al Bor. Approximately 25% of this allotment goes missing 
according to the DMoO. No resolution was offered, but it appeared as 
though the committee was satisfied with the results. Additionally, 
the DMoO said that SOMO needs more security assets. (Note: The US 
Embassy has received a copy of the oil report. It is currently being 
translated. End Note) 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Water Discussions Continue 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5. Adding to last week's discussion on potable water, the Baghdad 
Water Authority (BWA) brought maps and charts reflecting trespassing 
locations. (Note: Last week's discussion involved a lengthy debate 
on water trespassing. End Note) The BWA announced that they will 
launch a campaign against the violations, but also an educational 
campaign to discourage potable water usage for irrigation purposes. 
The DMoE asked BWA for a list of specific violations. He noted that 
main network violations were the responsibility of the police. 
 
¶6. The BWA also conducted a survey over the course of the past week 
in conjunction with the municipal offices to determine water needs 
for the approaching summer months. The BWA representative provided a 
list of neighborhoods that would need potable water brought in by 
tankers. Former Deputy Mayor Naeim, now advisor to the Amanat, said 
that the municipal offices have a cumulative total of 250 tankers. 
He disliked the idea of renting additional trucks, stating that they 
would not be useful, despite the committee's previous recommendation 
to do so. (Note: Naeim was not in attendance at the March 4 meeting 
when this was discussed. End Note) DMoE pressed the Amanat and BWA 
about funding sources. The Governor said that the governorate will 
pay for the tankers. 
 
¶7. A representative from the National Security Advisor's office 
(NSA) discussed the Ministry of Environment's (MoEnv) report on 
water quality that was delivered at the February 29 I-ESC. At that 
time, the MoEnv stated that 90% of water in Baghdad did not meet 
acceptable water quality standards. (Note: The ITAO Senior 
Consultant to Water disagreed with this report and said that of the 
water quality standards that truly matter, those that affect public 
health, Baghdad's water supply is 90% in compliance. Only 10% is not 
in compliance with those given standards. End Note) The BWA also 
said that only 10% was not in compliance or did not meet certain 
standards. He said that the Ministry of Health (MoH), MoEnv and BWA 
did not have standardized testing spots and methods, therefore test 
results were varied. 
 
- - - - - - - 
Other Issues 
- - - - - - - 
 
BAGHDAD 00000763  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶8. The Ministry of Trade requested that MNF-I move a forwarding 
operating base (fob) from Sha'ab market in order for the Ministry to 
proceed with their economic development and re-start the market. The 
MNF-I representative had not heard of this issue previously. It is 
expected to be on the agenda at next week's meeting. 
 
¶9. The committee reviewed the previous health recommendation to pay 
doctors overtime for on-call services. This initiative has still not 
been financed. The DMoE instructed the Provision of Services 
Committee staff members to initiate a memo to the Cabinet on this 
issue. 
 
¶10. The BOC reviewed the list of power stations that were in need of 
additional protection, provided by the MoE. According to the BOC, 
only one station needs assistance. The DMoE said that those results 
were not surprising: station employees are too intimidated to 
express their needs. He suggested that nearby units conduct regular 
surveillance of the electricity stations. 
 
¶11. Baghdad Clean-Up day was discussed again this week. The Amanat 
defended their participation in the Clean-Up days, claiming that the 
local municipal offices were active in the monthly event. After a 
debate about their level of participation, the DMoE suggested that 
representatives from the Ministries of Trade, Housing and 
Reconstruction and Industries and Minerals attend the next meeting 
to discuss their grievances with the Amanat. In addition, the DMoE 
postponed the March 15 Clean-Up day until these issues are resolved. 
The Governor did offer up 30 trucks and 10 trash vehicles for future 
Clean-Up days. 
 
¶12. The Ministry of Education (MoEd) will meet later this week with 
the Ministry of Planning, Development and Cooperation (MoPDC) to 
lobby the Investment Commission to reallocate money to pay for 
school refurbishment. The meeting outcome will be briefed at next 
week's Provision of Services Committee meeting. 
 
 
Crocker