08BAGHDAD3623
KARBALA VIEWS ON OBAMA ELECTION
Sun Nov 16 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO2096
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #3623 3210331
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 160331Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0402
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS BAGHDAD 003623 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR IZ
SUBJECT: KARBALA VIEWS ON OBAMA ELECTION 
 
 This message is Sensitive but Unclassified; handle 
accordingly.  Not for Internet distribution 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  With the assistance of one of our Locally 
Employed Staff (LES), PRT Karbala conducted an informal 
survey of Karbala residents to get a sense of local views 
concerning the election of Barack Obama as the next President 
of the United States.  Although not a scientific sampling, 
the opinions expressed aptly illustrate the range of public 
sentiment here.  End Summary. 
 
Meet the New Boss 
----------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) On November 8, a well-connected LES member of the 
PRT surveyed a variety of contacts in Karbala to get a sense 
of local views concerning the election of Barack Obama as the 
next President of the United States.  Opinions expressed in 
this non-scientific survey ranged from cynicism and fear to 
inspiration and hope.  Following are comments from the 
persons surveyed: 
 
-- A high-school history teacher:  "There will not be that 
big a difference between this administration and the coming 
one.  Yes, there will be new names and new faces, but nothing 
more than that." 
 
-- The owner of a real-estate agency:  "I'm very optimistic 
about Obama, as I have heard and read in the news that his 
grandfathers were Muslims from Kenya and his relatives and 
family are still there.  At least we know Obama is not a war 
maniac like Bush." 
 
-- A former Sadrist:  "Obama will have no power over the 
political situation in America, he is just an official 
employee.  The Jewish lobby controls everything in America." 
 
-- A police official:  "I think American policy toward Iraq 
will not change.  It is not something related to the 
Democrats or to the Republicans, but rather to U.S. national 
security.  All the Americans believe they have to keep enough 
troops in Iraq and in Afghanistan to protect the Americans 
and to surround al-Qa'ida members in those two countries so 
as to prevent them from entering the United States.  This is 
the whole story and I believe that Obama will not take the 
chance to withdraw U.S. troops within 16 months as he 
announced in his presidential campaign.  He will keep the 
troops here for at least a couple of years." 
 
-- A civil engineer:  "Obama will make a big change.  He 
knows Americans lost patience with the Bush Administration 
and he does not want to keep U.S. forces in Iraq forever, so 
-- in order to demonstrate his credibility -- he must 
implement his promise to withdraw from Iraq very soon." 
 
-- A barber:  "Obama will not be good for us as Shias.  His 
grandfathers are Sunni Muslims and so is his tribe in Kenya, 
so I think the Iraqi Sunnis will benefit from his election." 
 
-- An Arabic literature scholar:  "I think that our political 
blocs and our politicians need to learn and take lessons from 
Barack Obama.  This victory is a victory for minorities all 
over the world, especially in the Middle East.  It shows how 
Americans communicate, live and treat each other with 
respect." 
 
-- A retired army officer:  "Obama may keep talking about 
withdrawing U.S. troops, but if he does this very soon it 
will be a big mistake.  The Iraqi forces are still immature 
and not qualified to protect the new Iraq.  The Ba'athists 
are still hiding and active in the provinces, and if the 
Americans withdraw as soon as Obama has said it will be a 
disaster." 
CROCKER