08BEIJING4280
NOVEMBER 20 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: FOOD SAFETY, SED, TAIWAN,
Thu Nov 20 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO6133
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #4280/01 3252325
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 202325Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0976
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA 0532
RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI 0335UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 004280 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ECON PHUM TW CH RS PE
 
SUBJECT: NOVEMBER 20 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: FOOD SAFETY, SED, TAIWAN, 
PIRATES, DALAI LAMA 
 
¶1. Key points at the November 20 afternoon MFA press briefing were: 
 
-- China has "already established" a "full export inspection 
system," and products found to be below standard will not be 
exported. 
 
-- China hopes that the two sides will continue to "show mutual 
respect, accommodate each other's concerns and deal with each other" 
during the Strategic Economic Dialogue. 
 
-- "According to usual practice and the APEC memorandum," Taiwan 
does not officially participate in APEC meetings. 
 
-- China is "conducting rescue work" to save the crew of a Chinese 
fishing vessel captured by pirates. 
 
-- France should "take into account" China's concerns regarding the 
Dalai Lama. 
 
Food Safety 
----------- 
 
¶2. China has "already established" a "full export inspection 
system," and products found to be below standard will not be 
exported, said Spokesperson Qin Gang at the November 20 regularly 
scheduled MFA press conference when asked to comment on the new food 
import regulations in the United States.  Qin said that China's 
Administration for Quality, Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine 
(AQSIQ) has ensured that Chinese exporters have "advanced systems" 
that can meet U.S. requirements.  China "hopes the United States can 
recognize AQSIQ standards" to facilitate trade between the two 
countries, said Qin. 
 
Strategic Economic Dialogue 
--------------------------- 
 
¶3. China and the United States are discussing the details of the 
upcoming Strategic Economic Dialogue (SED) and will release the date 
when it is confirmed, said Qin.  China hopes that the two sides will 
continue to "show mutual respect, accommodate each other's concerns 
and deal with each other" during the discussion.  Qin confirmed that 
Vice Premier Wang Qishan will represent China and Treasury Secretary 
Henry Paulson will represent the United States. 
 
Taiwan and International Space 
------------------------------ 
 
¶4. Asked why the Taiwan Foreign Minister or other highly ranked 
Taiwan official did not attend the APEC summit held in Peru, Qin 
said that "according to usual practice and the APEC memorandum," 
Taiwan does not officially participate in APEC meetings.  Qin noted 
that "all sovereign members of APEC" recognize the "One-China 
Policy."  Pressed on why China does not take into account improving 
cross-Strait relations, Qin responded that "no matter when, no 
matter what changes, the fact that there is only one China will 
remain unchanged."  Regarding Taiwan's ability to participate in 
international fora, Qin said that the Mainland "understands the 
Taiwan compatriots' desire to take part in international 
organizations."  The people on both sides of the Strait "are 
Chinese," and the People's Republic of China is working "for all 
Chinese people around the world."  China will make joint efforts 
with Taiwan to "solve issues" but will "firmly oppose attempts to 
make two Chinas."  The spokesman did not have any information on 
whether President Hu Jintao will meet with KMT Chairman Lien Chan at 
APEC. 
 
Somali Piracy 
------------- 
 
¶5. Asked about the recent seizure of a Chinese fishing vessel by 
pirates off the Somali coast, Qin said that China is "conducting 
rescue work" and "we should all pray for the safety of all Chinese 
crews and their property."  Maritime security and the security of 
fishing boats "must be protected," said Qin.  China has taken note 
of "rampant piracy" in the seas off Somalia.  China will counter the 
piracy in accordance with relevant China-Somalia agreements, UN 
resolutions and international law. 
 
Dalai Lama and France 
--------------------- 
 
¶6. France should "take into account" China's concerns regarding the 
Dalai Lama, said Qin when asked about a meeting between French 
President Nicolas Sarkozy and the Dalai Lama.  Doing so will help 
create "good condtions for sound and stable relations" between 
China and France as well as China and the rest of Europe.  China 
opposes the Dalai Lama's meeting with foreign leaders, a position 
which is "consistent," said Qin. 
 
 
BEIJING 00004280  002 OF 002 
 
 
China-Japan Economic High-Level Dialogue 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. China and Japan are discussing a date for the next round of the 
China-Japan Economic High-Level Dialogue, said Qin.  The dialogue is 
an "important platform to strengthen bilateral trade," and China 
expects to see a "successful result" when the meeting is held. 
 
Reform and Opening Anniversary 
------------------------------ 
 
¶8. The exact date China considers to be the anniversary of the 
Reform and Opening policy is "beyond my knowledge" admitted the 
spokesperson.  However, he assured the journalists that the 
"important thing" is China will "continue to carry out the policy" 
and not the specific date. 
 
Russian Foreign Minister in China 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶9. The spokesperson did not have any information about potential 
meetings between Chinese leaders and Russian Foreign Minister 
Lavrov. 
 
RANDT