08BERLIN945
EU's Solana Welcomes US Participation in
Thu Jul 17 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Berlin
VZCZCXRO9684
RR RUEHAG RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDF RUEHDIR RUEHIK RUEHKUK RUEHLZ RUEHROV
DE RUEHRL #0945/01 1991154
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 171154Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1672
INFO RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 1943
RUEHDIR/IRAN RPO DUBAIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BERLIN 000945 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KNNP PARM PREL MNUC IR GM
 
SUBJECT: EU's Solana Welcomes US Participation in 
Meeting with Iranians 
 
BERLIN 00000945  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
SUMMARY 
----------- 
¶1. (SBU)  On July 15-16, EU Foreign Policy Chief 
Javier Solana joined a number of high-ranking 
former and current foreign policy officials in 
Berlin at a conference entitled "Managing Global 
Insecurity (MGI)".  During the course of the 
conference, Solana offered generalized comments 
about the multilateral system and first thoughts 
on the upcoming meeting in Geneva with Iranian 
Nuclear Negotiator Saeed Jalili.  Solana warmly 
welcomed US participation, but lamented a 
previous missed opportunity for engagement in 
¶2005.  He cautioned that Iranian response timing 
could be a difficulty in what he called the 
"second phase" of the interactions.  Solana, in a 
discussion with IAEA Director General El-Baradei, 
said that "an Iranian-US bilateral [meeting] is 
fundamental," and commented that the U.S.'s 
physical presence in Geneva is a "very 
constructive" step beyond a "signature on a 
letter."  At the same conference, former Russian 
Foreign Minister Ivanov described the existing 
process as "exhausted", recommending a fresh 
effort at negotiations and a direct dialogue with 
the US.  In separate comments, Ivanov and IAEA 
DirGen El-Baradei appeared to defend Iranian 
enrichment activities as being driven by security 
concerns.  End Summary. 
 
 
Solana Welcomes US participation; 2005 a missed 
opportunity 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2. During a session on revitalizing the 
multilateral security system with Brookings 
President, Strobe Talbott, a participant asked 
Solana about his view of the prospects of 
constructively engaging Iran.  Briefly pausing, 
Solana told the group that, "In the history of 
negotiations since 2005, I saw a moment when 
things could have been done.  But there was 
inadequate engagement in the international 
community."  He continued, "Today is much 
different.  For the first time, we will have the 
United States with us.  If we had the US in 2005, 
the situation could have been very different." 
Referring to former Russian Foreign Minister Igor 
Ivanov, also in attendance, he added, "Ivanov 
knows this."  (Comment: During lunch on 16 July, 
Ivanov had extended private side conversations in 
Spanish with Solana, next to whom he sat.  End 
Comment.) Solana said, "Bad relations are better 
than no relations.  We must talk to everyone", a 
point which was echoed by several subsequent 
speakers. 
 
 
Iranians Informed, but response timing could be 
an issue 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶3. He confirmed to the group that he had formally 
informed the Iranians that the U.S. would be 
present at the July 19 P5+1 meeting in Geneva. 
He expressed concern that the issue of timing 
could pose some difficulty.  In a brief offline 
exchange with Emboff, Solana added that while 
this meeting is not a negotiation, "we're 
entering a second phase of the meeting."   While 
cautious about putting a time limit for an 
Iranian response on the second phase, he noted 
the possibility that Iran may delay its answer 
beyond the "customary six weeks or so." 
 
 
Former Russian FM: "We have exhausted the 
existing process" 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶4. Ivanov described the Iran situation, as 
"everything is complicated".  He said, "I have to 
admit with regret that the current process has 
not brought the expected results.  In practical 
terms, I believe we have exhausted the existing 
 
BERLIN 00000945  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
process."  Ivanov said that new centrifuge 
construction continues and that there is an 
"urgent need for fresh proposals."  He 
recommended starting negotiations without 
preconditions and involving Iran in regional 
security discussions, adding that there needs to 
be the beginning of a direct Iranian-US dialogue. 
(Comment: In his remarks, Ivanov acknowledged to 
the group that he and Solana disagreed that the 
existing process was exhausted.  End Comment.) 
 
¶5. Drawing a distinction in the multilateral 
processes used in North Korea and Iran, Ivanov 
said, "With North Korea, we started [by 
addressing] their security.  With Iran, we have 
started with their nuclear process, not with 
either their security or the security of their 
neighbors." 
 
 
IAEA Director General:  Security concerns driving 
Iran's atomic ambitions 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶6. In his remarks, Director General Mohammed El- 
Baradei stated that security is the primary 
driver for Iran's ambitions.  He said, "Unless 
Iran feels secure, they won't give up their 
nuclear ambitions," adding, "The Iranian 
enrichment program is a symptom of their 
insecurity."  ElBaradei also asked the group five 
rhetorical questions on nuclear non-proliferation 
and disarmament: 1) How can we preach non- 
proliferation to non-nuclear states while nuclear 
states continue to refine and improve their own 
nuclear weapons capabilities? 2) How can we 
ensure that the situation will not get worse?  3) 
How can we ensure that nuclear material does not 
fall into extremists' hands?  4) How can we 
ensure that we have a proper global verification 
regime in place?  and 5) How can we create an 
effective international compliance regime? 
During the following question and answer period, 
Solana commented on El-Baradei's questions, 
saying "The most important issue is establishing 
trust.  There is a latent nuclear distrust that 
cannot continue."  Solana added "An Iranian-US 
bilateral is fundamental" observing that the US' 
physical presence is a "very constructive" step 
beyond a "signature on a letter." 
 
 
Meeting Background 
-------------------------- 
 
¶7. The MGI event was a Bertelsmann/ Brookings/ 
NYU/ Stanford-sponsored project with the goal of 
providing "...recommendations and generate 
political momentum for the next American 
president, the United Nations, and key 
international partners to launch a strategic 
effort to revitalize the multilateral security 
system in 2009."  Opened by UN Secretary General 
Ban Ki-moon and German Foreign Minister Frank- 
Walter Steinmeier, the opening dinner was 
keynoted by Nobel laureate and Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change Chairman, Dr. Rajendra 
Pachauri and attended by a diverse mix of former 
and current foreign affairs notables, including 
Former Canadian Prime Minister Paul Martin, 
Brookings President Strobe Talbott, Former World 
Bank President James Wolfensohn, and numerous 
others. 
 
TIMKEN JR.