08BEIJING2964
JULY 31 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: Bush Visit, Bush Meeting with
Thu Jul 31 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO0338
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2964/01 2131124
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 311124Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8888
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 4378
RUEHPG/AMEMBASSY PRAGUE 0824
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 9048
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 2042
RUEHSF/AMEMBASSY SOFIA 0782
RUEHUP/AMEMBASSY BUDAPEST 0060UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 002964 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM KOLY OVIP FR EZ RS KN KS BU HU JA
CH 
SUBJECT: JULY 31 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: Bush Visit, Bush Meeting with 
Dissidents, Internet Restrictions, Human Rights 
 
¶1. Key points at the July 31 MFA Press Briefing: 
 
-- President Bush will meet with Premier Wen Jiabao, President Hu 
Jintao, and Vice-President Xi Jinping during the Olympics to hold 
discussions to develop bilateral ties, Liu said.  They will discuss 
"many different issues" of mutual interest. 
 
-- President Bush's meeting with five Chinese dissidents was gross 
interference in China's internal affairs. 
 
-- China is determined to "implement regulations effectively" on 
Internet censorship during the Olympics. 
 
-- U.S. Senator Brownback's statement that Chinese hotels are being 
forced to monitor guests' activities is an "unfair accusation." 
 
-- Both sides need to reflect on a recent conflict between Chinese 
police and Hong Kong journalists attempting to report on scuffles in 
an Olympics ticket line.  "If China needs to adjust, we will," the 
Spokesman said. 
 
-- China's constitution guarantees citizens freedom of speech and 
China is a country with the rule of law. 
 
-- China "would be happy" to meet with French President Sarkozy 
before the Olympics Opening Ceremony, but the specifics are still 
being discussed. 
 
-- China welcomes foreign leaders to the Olympics but hopes they 
will follow the Olympic Charter and not take actions to damage 
bilateral relations. 
 
-- The spokesperson had not heard reports of the confiscation of 
Russian tourists' passports in Hainan, but doubted the reports were 
true. 
 
-- VISITS: One hundred middle and primary school students from 
earthquake-stricken Wenchuan, Sichuan will visit Hungary and 
Bulgaria August 24-25 "to convalesce."  U.S. North Korea expert Sung 
Kim will arrive in China July 31 to meet Chinese leaders to exchange 
views on the Six-Party Talks. 
 
Bush Visit 
---------- 
 
¶2. President Bush will meet with Premier Wen Jiabao, President Hu 
Jintao, and Vice-President Xi Jinping during the Olympics to hold 
discussions to develop bilateral ties, MFA spokesman Liu Jianchao 
said at the regular biweekly MFA press conference July 31.  Bush and 
Hu will discuss "many different issues" of mutual interest.  Over 
the eight years of the Bush presidency there have been many advances 
in bilateral relations, including solid progress in politics, 
economics, trade, social and cultural exchanges, counterterrorism, 
the environment and law enforcement cooperation. 
 
Bush Meeting with Dissidents 
---------------------------- 
 
¶3. President Bush's meeting with five Chinese dissidents was a gross 
interference in China's internal affairs and provided encouragement 
to anti-China forces, Liu said.  The people with whom Bush met are 
anti-China splittists seeking to undermine national security under 
the guise of human rights and religion, and China is strongly 
opposed to Bush's meeting with them, he added. 
 
Internet Censorship 
------------------- 
 
¶4. China is "determined to implement regulations effectively" on 
Internet censorship, Liu said in response to questions on Internet 
access for journalists at the Olympic Press Center. Liu refused to 
answer any follow up questions on the subject and referred several 
questioners to the IOC. 
 
Brownback Comments on Hotel Surveillance 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. U.S. Senator Brownback's statement that hotels in China are being 
forced to monitor their guests is an "unfair accusation," Liu said. 
China respects and guarantees privacy and has taken no special 
arrangements for the Olympics "beyond normal international security 
regulations." 
 
Constitutional Guarantees of Freedom of Speech 
 
BEIJING 00002964  002 OF 003 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶6. Asked a question about Chinese citizens not being allowed to meet 
with foreign media during the Olympics, Liu said that China's 
constitution guarantees its citizens freedom of speech, and that he 
had not heard any reports of Chinese citizens being denied this 
right. 
 
Conflicts with Journalists 
-------------------------- 
 
¶7. Asked about a conflict between Chinese police and Hong Kong 
journalists who attempted to report on scuffles that took place 
during Olympic ticket sales, Liu said that "the incident has its 
causes," and that both sides should reflect on the relevant issues. 
"If China needs to adjust, we will," he said.  Liu added that 
foreign journalists must follow the instructions of the police in 
China.  Asked about South Korean journalists who evaded security to 
film the rehearsal of the Opening Ceremonies, Liu said that China 
has taken appropriate measures for security.  "A successful Olympic 
Games must be secure," he said, and expressed hope that all parties 
would support this principle. 
 
Ni Yulan Trial 
-------------- 
 
¶8. Liu said he had not heard of the trial of Ni Yulan, a Chinese 
lawyer who had assisted people who had been evicted.  He noted that 
China is a country with the rule of law, and said that the trial 
will take place in accordance with the law.  He noted that the 
separation of sports and politics is in accord with the spirit of 
the Olympic Games. 
 
Sarkozy Meeting 
--------------- 
 
¶9. Asked whether President Hu Jintao will meet French President 
Nicolas Sarkozy before the Olympic Opening Ceremony, Liu responded 
that China "would be happy to meet with him," but that the specifics 
are still under discussion. 
 
Foreign Leaders at Olympics 
--------------------------- 
 
¶10. Asked to comment on reports of an "unnamed leader" who had worn 
a Tibetan flag pin (whom the journalist assumed was the President of 
the Czech Republic), Liu said China follows this information 
closely.  China welcomes world leaders to come to the Olympics, but 
hopes that leaders will follow the Olympic charter and not take any 
actions to damage bilateral relations.    Asked how many leaders are 
coming to the Olympics, Liu said the number is changing but between 
80 and 90 are expected. 
 
New U.S. Embassy 
---------------- 
 
¶11. China congratulates the United States on the construction of its 
new Embassy, Liu said.  He noted that China just completed its own 
new Embassy in Washington, DC.  The new buildings symbolize the 
expansion of bilateral relations. 
 
Russian Passport Confiscation? 
------------------------------ 
 
¶12. Asked a question about Russian tourists having their passports 
confiscated on Hainan Island to prevent them from traveling around 
China because of Olympics security, Liu said that he had not heard 
the reports, but doubted the information was true.  He added that 
China welcomes foreign tourists, including Russians, and that the 
Provincial Government of Hainan facilitates many tourists. 
 
No Comment on New Zealand PM Remarks on Death Penalty 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶13. The spokesperson did not respond to a question about reports of 
a New Zealand Prime Minister Helen Clark's statement that she 
"doesn't want any executions anywhere," and her signing of an 
Amnesty International petition calling for human rights in China. 
 
Hu to Meet Journalists 
---------------------- 
 
¶14. President Hu is scheduled to meet with journalists August 1 in 
advance of the Olympics, Liu said. 
 
BEIJING 00002964  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
Visit: Earthquake Children; Sung Kim 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶15. VISITS: One hundred middle and primary school students from the 
earthquake-stricken city of Wenchuan, Sichuan will visit Hungary and 
Bulgaria August 24-25 "to convalesce."  Hungary and Bulgaria were 
among the first nations to establish diplomatic relations with China 
and this activity shows the friendship that exists between them and 
China, Liu said.  Separately, Liu announced that U.S. "expert" Sung 
Kim will arrive in China today to exchange views with Chinese 
officials on the Six Party Talks. 
 
RANDT