08BEIJING1355
April 10 MFA Press Briefing: Dalai Lama, Olympic Torch,
Thu Apr 10 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO8564
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1355/01 1011158
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 101158Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6403
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001355 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM PTER CH AS FR IR TW IN
SUBJECT: April 10 MFA Press Briefing: Dalai Lama, Olympic Torch, 
North Korea Nuclear Talks, Australian Prime Minister 
 
 
1 Key points at the April 10 MFA Press Briefing were: 
 
-- China has dealt with the Dalai Lama wth patience and restraint, 
but the Dalai Lamas actions have undermined the basis for talk. 
 
-- Recent protests by monks in Gansu Province are an indication that 
the monks do have freedom of speech. 
 
-- An investigation is needed into attacks on Chinese diplomatic 
missions abroad. 
 
-- The Olympic torch was welcomed in San Francisco by locals and 
patriotic overseas Chinese. 
 
-- The torch relay will go on and not be stopped by any forces. 
 
-- On the North Korea nuclear issue, some progress has been made on 
declaration-related issues and conditions are getting "more mature" 
for talks between the chief negotiators. 
 
Dalai Lama Condemned, Situation in Tibetan Regions 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶2. At the April 10, 2008 regular MFA press briefing, MFA 
spokesperson Jiang Yu said China hopes all countries with friendly 
relations with China will not support the Dalai Lama's separatism. 
Jiang emphasized that China has exercised "patience and restraint," 
regarding the Dalai Lama, but his recent actions have "undermined 
the basis for talks."  Jiang reiterated that China is willing to 
speak with the Dalai Lama if he gives up separatism and criminal 
violence and stops undermining the Olympics.  Regarding the Dalai 
Lama's statements on peace, Jiang said that it is "not important 
what he says -- his rhetoric of peace is just a lie to deceive the 
world."  The issues with the Dalai Lama are not religious or ethnic 
in nature, but related to sovereignty, said Jiang. 
 
¶3. Jiang said recent Tibet incidents were handled with restraint and 
that 130 governments have announced their support for the Chinese 
Government's actions.  The recent protests during a tour by 
journalists of Labrang Monastery in Xiahe demonstrated that there is 
freedom of expression in China, said Jiang.  The monks all have 
legally guaranteed rights to "survival, religious beliefs and 
development."  The handful of monks who spoke out represent a small 
portion of the 1000 monks who inhabit that monastery.  Trips for 
journalists and diplomats were organized to satisfy the demand for 
information about Tibet, and China hopes the situation can return to 
normal soon, said Jiang. 
 
¶4. Regarding calls for an independent investigation, Jiang said that 
violent acts and riots occur frequently in other countries but there 
are not independent investigations.  The investigation that is 
needed is into the many attacks on China's diplomatic missions. 
Jiang said she would respond officially later to the U.S. House of 
Representatives resolution criticizing China's handling of the Tibet 
issue. 
 
¶5. As to whether or not foreigners will be allowed into Tibet 
starting on May 1 as previously suggested, Jiang told reporters to 
check with the local government in Tibet.  Asked whether foreign 
reporters are currently allowed in Yunnan, Qinghai or Gansu, Jiang 
said some of the regions in these provinces may be closed because of 
violence, but journalists should contact local governments for more 
specific information. 
 
Olympic Boycotts, Torch Relay Protests 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶6. Jiang said that she had not seen reports that Nicolas Sarkozy 
would not attend the Beijing Olympic opening ceremony unless China 
began a dialogue with the Dalai Lama.  In response to a question 
about Gordon Brown's attendance, Jiang said Brown will attend the 
closing ceremony and that Xinhua's report that he would attend the 
opening ceremony is purely an error by Xinhua, not the Chinese 
Government.  The Beijing Olympic Organizing Committee will warmly 
welcome all invited guests.  Whether foreign politicians attend or 
not is between that politician and his local Olympic committee. 
 
¶7. The torch relay in San Francisco was welcomed by patriotic 
overseas Chinese and San Francisco locals, said Jiang.  The relay 
will "spread the Olympic spirit" around the world and will not be 
stopped by "any forces."  Regarding the Chinese flame escorts, Jiang 
said they are not law enforcement officials and their presence was 
requested by the Olympic Committees of the countries involved. 
China is satisfied with the security preparations in Australia and 
India for the torch relay there. 
 
¶8. Jiang had not heard remarks from International Olympic Committee 
Chairman Jacques Rogge regarding China's need for "moral engagement" 
but suggested that these comments were possibly exaggerated or 
distorted. 
 
A/S Hill Meetings in Beijing 
 
BEIJING 00001355  002 OF 002 
 
 
---------------------------- 
 
¶9. The spokesperson said that Vice Foreign Minister Wu Dawei met 
yesterday with relevant officials from the DPRK and the United 
States about their bilateral meetings in Singapore.  Jiang said the 
United States and North Korea made some progress on 
declaration-related issues.  All parties agreed the results were 
positive and conducive to pressing ahead with the Six-Party Talks. 
China believes the conditions for a meeting of the chief negotiators 
is becoming "more mature." 
 
Australian Prime Minister Meets Wen Jiabao 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶10. During Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd's conversations with 
Premier Wen Jiabao, Rudd expressed understanding over Tibet, his 
willingness to be a long-term partner of China and his support for 
the one China policy and the Beijing Olympics.  Wen expanded on 
China's policy towards Taiwan and briefed Rudd on the development of 
Tibet.  China and Australia released a joint statement on Climate 
change which reaffirmed their commitment to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Kyoto Protocol, said 
Jiang. 
 
Iran Nuclear Issue, Iraq Invasion Anniversary, Visits 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶11. P-5 plus 1 representatives will meet to discuss the Iran nuclear 
issue in Shanghai.  Asked about the fifth anniversary of the 
invasion of Iraq, Jiang said China believes the issue should be 
resolved under the relevant United Nations resolutions.  China hopes 
the country returns to stability soon.  Jiang announced that Foreign 
Minister Yang Jiechi will visit Japan April 12-20 and Thai Foreign 
Minister Noppadon Pattama will visit China April 14-15. 
 
RANDT