08BERLIN407
WIREC - GERMAN PLEDGES AND REACTIONS
Tue Apr 01 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Berlin
VZCZCXRO0047
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHLZ
DE RUEHRL #0407/01 0921252
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 011252Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0801
INFO RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BERLIN 000407 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR G, OES, AND EUR 
STATE - PLEASE PASS CEQ 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV ENRG TRGY KGHG KPAO KSCA GM
SUBJECT: WIREC - GERMAN PLEDGES AND REACTIONS 
 
REF: A. STATE 26870 
 
     ¶B. 07 BERLIN 2077 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Many of Germany's pledges included in the 
Washington International Action Program (WIAP) from the Washington 
International Renewable Energy Conference (WIREC) were similar to 
climate and energy measures already agreed to by the German Cabinet 
in August 2007.  Additional commitments included financial support 
for renewable energy and energy efficiency projects in developing 
countries, as well as the promotion of experience exchanges between 
countries that use a Feed-In-System.  Members of the German 
delegation, while pleased with the scope and overall organization of 
the conference, expressed concern that WIREC was too heavily focused 
on nuclear energy and on the U.S. domestic market.  They also noted 
that WIREC did not send a "political signal," and could have 
included more direct participation by developing countries and NGOs. 
 END SUMMARY. 
 
GERMANY'S PLEDGES 
----------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Three of Germany's pledges to the WIAP corresponded with 
energy and climate measures that were agreed on by the German 
Government at the August 2007 Meseberg cabinet retreat and 
subsequently presented to the German Federal Parliament in December 
¶2007.  These included a commitment to feed biogas into the natural 
gas network, along with measures subsequently outlined in the 
Renewable Energies Heat Act and Renewable Energy Sources Act (see 
ref B).  For example, Germany will expand its use of wind energy to 
15 percent of electricity consumption and provide additional funding 
for renewable energy technology research. 
 
¶3. (U) Pledges not included in the August 2007 Government agreement 
came primarily from the German Development Ministry (BMZ) as they 
dealt with foreign, rather than domestic issues.  Specifically, BMZ 
will increase its funding for new renewable energy and energy 
efficiency projects that help developing countries meet their 
Millenium Development Goals (550 million euro). In addition, it will 
allocate 200 million euro for soft loan financing to promote 
renewable energy projects that cannot qualify for corporate 
financing.  Finally, BMZ committed to promote experience exchanges 
between countries that are using a Feed-In-System (which feeds 
biogas into the natural gas network). 
 
GERMAN FEEDBACK AND REACTIONS 
----------------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Select members of the German delegation to WIREC, mostly at 
the working- and head of section level, have provided post with 
feedback on the conference.  Participants by and large reported that 
they were impressed with the scope and organization of WIREC, 
including the Ministerial, business conference, and trade show. 
Participants commented that U.S. views on renewable energies have 
evolved over the past year and pointed favorably to new steps taken 
by the Administration to promote renewable energy.  Participants 
also noted that the diversity of countries in attendance indicates 
that discussion of renewables has risen to a new level of 
prominence.  Although impressed by the number of high-ranking U.S. 
officials in attendance, some delegation members expressed concern 
that the U.S. presence dominated the conference, which often made 
WIREC's focus seem more domestic than international. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Most German participants expressed concern about the 
emphasis placed on nuclear energy as an alternative to fossil fuels, 
noting that nuclear is not a viable solution for many of the 
countries in attendance.  (NOTE:  These comments are not surprising 
given strong feelings in Germany about nuclear energy.  END NOTE.) 
German delegation members said they would have preferred more focus 
on wind, solar, hydro, geothermal, and biomass alternatives. 
Participants also noted that most discussions were, for the most 
part, U.S.-focused (e.g., potential revenue opportunities in the 
renewable energy market).  That said, many expressed strong interest 
in learning more about the development of the U.S. renewable energy 
market. 
 
¶6. (SBU) German participants also expressed concern that, unlike 
past conferences, such as those held in Bonn and Beijing, this 
conference was an experts meeting.  Because there were no political 
opinions or resolutions, they insisted, WIREC did not send a 
"political signal."  As a result, many interlocutors insisted, WIREC 
generated little enthusiasm and received almost no media coverage in 
Germany. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Members of the German delegation also expressed 
disappointment that African countries, with which Germany maintains 
very close relations in terms of developmental policy, were not 
sufficiently represented.  Participants noted that growth in 
renewable energies will occur primarily in developing countries and 
said engaging developing countries in dialogue about the challenge 
 
BERLIN 00000407  002 OF 002 
 
 
those countries face is essential to the promotion of renewable 
energy.  German participants viewed India's offer to host the next 
global renewable energy conference in 2010 as a key outcome. 
 
¶8. (SBU) German participants also expressed concern about the lack 
of NGO participation in WIREC, pointing out that no German NGO 
attended WIREC, ostensibly because of the high conference fee.  Some 
interlocutors asserted that, contrary to the prior two conferences 
in Bonn and Beijing, NGOs were not invited to participate in the 
planning process for WIREC. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) All of our German interlocutors characterized WIREC as a 
net positive, primarily because they perceive the United States as 
more engaged than before in promoting renewable energy. 
Nonetheless, many within the German government are reluctant to 
accept the U.S. as an important player in this field, in part 
because they are wary of surrendering "ownership" of the issue (and 
perhaps in part because of the resonance that climate change has in 
domestic politics).  Indeed, recent public comments by some 
government officials indicate a concern to continue to portray 
Germany as a leader on renewables and to promote a centralized, 
top-down approach to promote the uptake of renewable energy.  The 
German proposal to establish an International Renewable Energy 
Agency (IRENA) is the key example here.  This may also help to 
explain the German critique of WIREC, with its focus on promoting 
decentralized, local solutions. 
 
TIMKEN JR.