08BEIJING2393
CHINESE PROTEST AT JAPANESE EMBASSY OVER EAST CHINA SEA
Wed Jun 18 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO2725
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2393/01 1702226
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 182226Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8049
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 002393 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV SOCI CH JP
SUBJECT: CHINESE PROTEST AT JAPANESE EMBASSY OVER EAST CHINA SEA 
ISSUES 
 
Ref:  A) Beijing 2247 
 B) Beijing 2372 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: A small group of Chinese demonstrators chanted and 
waved flags in front of the Japanese Embassy in Beijing in protest 
against a Sino-Japan joint gas exploration deal on June 18. 
Security was tight at the government-sanctioned protest, with an 
estimated 150 municipal police and People's Armed Police deployed. 
Foreign and Chinese journalists were allowed to watch the tightly 
choreographed protest from a designated area across the street from 
the Japanese Embassy.  A small group of self-described patriots 
tried to show their support for the protests but were removed to 
behind police barricades.  The protest itself lasted approximately 
25 minutes and included 15 people chanting and waving flags. End 
summary. 
 
Response to the Diaoyu Islands Controversy 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (SBU) The June 18 protest was organized by the China Civil 
Association for the Protection of the Diaoyu Islands (zhongguo 
minjian baodiao xiehui) in response to the expected joint gas deal 
and the June 10 collision between a Japanese Coast Guard vessel and 
a Taiwan fishing boat.  Protesters consider the actions of the 
Japanese Coast Guard to be a violation of Taiwan's-and by extension, 
China's-territorial integrity.  Note: The Chinese Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs spokesperson twice referred to the Japanese Coast 
Guard actions as "illegal" and expressed its "grave dissatisfaction" 
over the issue (Refs A and B). 
 
¶3. (SBU) According to a report in the Hong Kong paper Takungpao, the 
protest was aimed at three specific goals: 
--Support the Taiwan people in their effort to protect the Diaoyu 
Islands and protest the Japanese seizure of Chinese territory; 
--Question the result of the secret negotiations between China and 
Japan over the opening up of the East China Sea and question whether 
China has compromised during the negotiations; and 
--Call on Chinese people worldwide and Diaoyu Island protection 
groups to unite. 
 
Tight Security 
-------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Three hours before the start of the protest, a large 
contingent of Beijing municipal police and People's Armed Police 
(PAP) was dispatched to the Japanese Embassy.  Poloff counted 15 
police cars and vans in addition to two buses full of PAP parked on 
a side street.  Security was coordinated by a PAP officer in a black 
Audi.  Police set up a media section across the street from the 
Japanese Embassy where approximately 35 journalists and 
photographers were allowed to wait.  A journalist told Poloff that 
he had been alerted to the protest by a text message from a group 
called the Patriot Network (Aiguozhe Tongmeng Wang).  Approximately 
five minutes before the protest was to begin, police closed the 
street to all pedestrians and vehicles, with each intersection 
guarded by at least 20 police officers armed with two fire 
extinguishers.  During the protest, municipal police were the main 
force visible in front of the Embassy, while at least 50 PAP 
squatted in formation on a side street.  All police officers 
approached by Polloff claimed to have no knowledge of the event as 
it was taking place. 
 
Supporters Removed 
------------------ 
 
¶5. (SBU) Before the protest officially commenced, a group of 12 
Beijing residents gathered in front of the Japanese Embassy to "show 
support for the protest."  One vocal supporter eplained to Poloff 
that "common people" were no allowed to participate in the protest, 
but they wanted to demonstrate that "China cannot yield even a small 
piece of its territory."  Most of these supporters said that they 
had heard of the protest online and decided to attend of their own 
volition.  If there had been real outreach, they said, there would 
be far more Chinese taking part.  Municipal police officers politely 
moved the group of supporters and Poloff behind police barricades 
approximately 200 yards away from the Embassy gate five minutes 
before the protest began.  The supporters reacted to requests to 
move with anger saying that they were patriots and supporters of the 
protests but did not resist physically.  Police allowed them to 
leave a box of bottled water for the protesters. 
 
Protest Uneventful 
------------------ 
 
¶6. (SBU) At 2:30 p.m., 15 protesters marched onto the street 
carrying a large Chinese flag and banners, one of which was visible 
to Poloff and read "China Civil Association for the Protection of 
the Diaoyu Islands."  They first chanted out of earshot of Poloff 
for approximately 10 minutes in front of the media section with 
their backs to the Japanese Embassy.  They then turned and chanted 
in the direction of the Embassy for approximately 10 minutes.  One 
 
BEIJING 00002393  002 OF 002 
 
 
protester was allowed to approach the gates to deliver a letter of 
protest.  At 2:55 p.m., the protesters marched off the street and 
quickly departed in a minivan.  The street was then reopened.  The 
Japanese Ambassador returned to the Embassy at approximately 3:05 
p.m. without incident.