08BEIJING4006
October 21 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: TERRORIST LIST, NUCLEAR
Tue Oct 21 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO0847
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #4006/01 2952309
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 212309Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0558
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 6764
RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0234UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 004006 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PBTS PHUM PTER PK IN SU XG
SUBJECT: October 21 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: TERRORIST LIST, NUCLEAR 
COOPERATION WITH PAKISTAN, GUANTANAMO UIGHURS, FINANCIAL CRISIS, 
PAKISTAN-INDIA RELATIONS, PRODUCT SAFETY 
 
¶1.  Key points at the October 21 afternoon MFA press briefing were: 
 
 
-- China hopes that "relevant countries will work with China to 
bring eight terrorists to justice." 
 
-- China's cooperation with Pakistan on civilian nuclear energy is 
"subject to International Atomic Energy Association (IAEA) 
supervision" and is for peaceful purposes consistent with the two 
countries' international obligations. 
 
-- The United States should "not adopt double standards" and should 
repatriate 17 Uighurs to China. 
 
-- The international community should "strengthen cooperation and 
jointly handle the financial crisis" but interests of developing 
countries should also be safeguarded. 
 
-- China hopes that Pakistan and India will "work hard and 
strengthen cooperation to improve relations." 
 
-- China attaches great importance to protecting product quality 
"especially for items used by children." 
 
-- The ASEM is the "perfect platform" for leaders to exchange views 
on issues of common interest. 
 
-- China is "conducting rescue work" aimed at freeing the Chinese 
citizens kidnapped in Sudan. 
 
Terrorist List 
-------------- 
 
¶2. The list of eight terrorists released today by the Ministry of 
Public Security demonstrates China's willingness to work with the 
international community to combat terrorism, said MFA spokesperson 
Qin Gang at the October 21 regular MFA press briefing.  China "calls 
for international cooperation" to combat terrorism said Qin, noting 
that the eight terrorists are still at large.  "Every criminal will 
be brought to justice" said Qin.  China hopes that "relevant 
countries will have a commitment to anti-terrorism and be willing to 
work with China to bring the terrorists to justice." Qin noted that 
all countries "have reached a consensus" on the issue of terrorism 
and have agreed to combat "terrorism, extremism and separatism." 
Combating these three forces is "conducive to regional peace and 
stability."  The MFA will post on its website a list of those 
countries which need to strengthen their security for the benefit of 
Chinese citizens working and living overseas. 
 
Pakistan Nuclear Deal 
--------------------- 
 
¶3. China and Pakistan have "good cooperation in the field of civil 
nuclear energy," said Qin in response to a question about recently 
announced agreements between the two countries. China would like to 
"continue the cooperation on the basis of equality and mutual 
benefit."  The cooperation is "subject to International Atomic 
Energy Association (IAEA) supervision" and is for "peaceful 
purposes" which are "consistent with the two countries' 
international obligations." 
 
 
Release of Uighurs 
------------------ 
 
¶4.  Qin referred reporters to U.S. Government court documents in 
response to a question regarding 17 Uighurs held at Guantanamo Bay. 
Qin said that the U.S. Government has said that the Uighurs "could 
be potentially dangerous if released in the United States."  The 
United States "should not adopt double standards" said Qin.  Qin 
added that China "has consistently required the United States to 
repatriate the terrorists to China to be brought to justice." 
 
Financial Crisis 
---------------- 
 
¶5. The international community should "strengthen cooperation and 
jointly handle the financial crisis" said Qin.  Recently many world 
leaders have made important remarks on the financial crisis which 
"deserve China's attention."  China hopes the measures will help the 
"stability of international financial markets," but the "interests 
and concerns of developing countries should be fully respected and 
safeguarded" as well. 
 
Kashmir 
------- 
 
¶6. Qin said that he was "happy to hear" that India and Pakistan have 
resumed trade across the Kashmir border.  China hopes that the two 
 
BEIJING 00004006  002 OF 002 
 
 
countries will "work hard and strengthen cooperation to improve 
relations."  The improvement of relations will be "good for the two 
countries as well as stability in the South Asia region."  China is 
a friend and neighbor of both countries, said Qin. 
 
Defective Cribs 
--------------- 
 
¶7. Qin had not heard of reports that defective cribs manufactured in 
China are being recalled in the United States.  China attaches great 
importance to protecting product quality "especially for items used 
by children." If a problem occurs, China hopes foreign countries and 
companies will bring it to the atention of the Chinese government. 
Qin said that he was "upset" to learn of the problem cribs. 
 
Asia Europe Meeting 
------------------- 
 
¶8. Leaders from 45 countries plan to meet at the upcoming Asia 
Europe Meeting (ASEM) in Beijing, but Qin was unsure of how many 
heads of state would attend.  The ASEM is the "perfect platform" for 
leaders to exchange views on issues of common interest, said Qin. 
 
Sudan Kidnappings of Chinese Citizens 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. China is "conducting rescue work" aimed at freeing the Chinese 
citizens kidnapped in Sudan, said Qin.  China is committed to 
working with the international community to promote peace and 
reconciliation in Sudan and Darfur. China also hopes that the 
dual-track strategy will be maintained.  China's trade with Sudan is 
based on "mutual benefit" and is "supported by the majority of the 
Sudanese people." 
 
Visits 
------ 
 
¶10. Prime Minister Wen Jiabao will visit Russia and Kazakhstan from 
October 21-31.  Wen will visit Kazakhstan to attend the 7th Shanghai 
Cooperation Organization Prime Ministerial meeting during.  Vice 
Premier Wang Qishan will visit Russia from October 25-28 to discuss 
energy issues.  State Councilor Liu Yandong will visit Russia from 
October 25-30. 
 
RANDT