08BEIJING3853
CHINA/AFRICA: A PROVINCIAL PERSPECTIVE FROM HENAN
Wed Oct 08 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO1035
PP RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3853/01 2820837
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 080837Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0336
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 003853 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR OASIA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ECON EINV EFIN ETRD AX CH
SUBJECT: CHINA/AFRICA: A PROVINCIAL PERSPECTIVE FROM HENAN 
 
Refs: A) Beijing 10969; B) "China's Outward Foreign 
Direct Investment", OECD Secretariat Draft Report, 
22FEB2008 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: China's efforts to expand trade and 
investment ties with Africa were prominently on 
display at the 5th China Henan International Investment 
and Trade Fair held in Zhengzhou, Henan Province 
August 26-28, although little concrete business 
materialized.  A day-long "Go Global" investment 
seminar and an evening reception with participants 
from approximately 30 African as well as Latin 
American and Pacific countries showed that the push to 
promote China's outward investment to Africa and other 
developing countries is evident even at the provincial 
level and continues two years after the November 2006 
Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC) was held in 
Beijing. End Summary. 
 
The Normal Rhetoric 
------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Econoff attended the August 26-28 5th China 
Henan International Investment and Trade Fair held in 
Zhengzhou, Henan Province.  The Vanuatu Ambassador to 
China Lo Chi Wai was the ranking diplomat at the 
opening ceremonies on August 26 but representatives 
from Africa constituted the largest block of foreign 
diplomats and commercial attaches.  The Ethiopian 
Ambassador to China Hailekiros Gessesse made keynote 
remarks at a banquet hosted by Henan Vice Governor Xu 
Jichao for the visiting diplomats.  In his remarks 
Vice Governor Xu focused on Africa, noted China's 
commitment to Africa since FOCAC in 2006, and said 
that Henan was promoting local companies' efforts to 
increase exports and invest in Africa and other 
foreign countries in order to promote mutual 
development.  The Ethiopian Ambassador highlighted 
strong south-south ties, strong economic growth in 
Ethiopia and Africa in recent years, and the role that 
China has played in helping Africa achieve these high 
growth rates. (Note: African diplomats generally 
outranked representatives from other Embassies, with 
Nigeria and Uganda also represented by their Deputy 
Chiefs of Mission.  Henan trade and investment fair 
organizers offer to pay for the hotel and living costs 
for all diplomats, not just those from Africa. End 
Note.) 
 
Backed By Little Substance 
-------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Ambassador Lo and other embassy 
representatives from Africa, Latin America, and the 
Pacific gave presentations at an August 27 all-day "Go 
Global" investment forum.  Approximately 100 Chinese 
business representatives participated in the event, 
but Econoff spoke with a few Chinese participants that 
clearly had neither the capacity nor intention to 
invest in Africa.  Wei Zhiyong, Director of the Henan 
Development and Reform Commission Foreign Economy 
Department told Econoff that Henan-based companies 
have some trade ties with Africa but have not invested 
significantly on the continent.  Outward investment in 
Asia and other more familiar markets was somewhat more 
common. (Note: Between 2000 and 2006 China's overall 
outward FDI grew at an average annual growth rate of 
116 percent, which is among the fastest in the world. 
By the end of 2006, 64% of China's outward FDI stock 
was in Asia, compared to only 3.4% in Africa (Ref B). 
We do not have provincial-level figures for Henan. 
End Note.) 
 
¶4. (SBU) Embassy representatives from Sierra Leone, 
Kenya, Zimbabwe, Nigeria, and Uganda mentioned some 
existing investment projects and ongoing trade ties 
with their respective countries but did not appear 
enthusiastic about new business resulting from the 
fair.  Sam Savou, Representative for the Pacific 
Islands Forum Trade Office said he was not aware of 
any significant trade or investment agreements signed, 
but that many of the African, Latin American and 
Pacific Island representatives saw this event as a 
networking opportunity that would hopefully produce 
business in the future. 
 
But a Reflection on China's Commitment to Ties with 
 
BEIJING 00003853  002 OF 002 
 
 
Africa Nonetheless -- Comment and Background 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) African countries participated in a similar 
fashion in the 2006 Henan Trade Fair (Ref A) and Henan 
designated 2007 as "China-Africa Cooperation Year." 
Similarly, we have observed African and other 
developing countries taking advantage of other trade 
and investment fairs in China as well, including the 
September 2008 China International Trade and 
Investment Fair in Xiamen.  Henan's event is therefore 
not a new phenomenon.  It is also not a good indicator 
of actual trade and investment flows.  But the Henan 
Provincial government's consistent focus on at least 
making the public effort to promote these trade and 
investment ties indicates that China's efforts to 
promote outward investment and increase ties with 
Africa and other developing countries are serious 
enough that they extend to a province that is among 
the least likely to play a prominent role in this area. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Henan Province lags behind coastal provinces 
both in attracting foreign direct investment and 
shifting to export-oriented manufacturing (Ref A), as 
well as in outward investment.  Henan's economy is 
still largely dominated by agriculture, not the 
industrial or energy-focused companies that dominate 
China's outward investment in Africa (Ref B). 
 
¶7. (SBU) Trade between China and Africa accelerated 
between 2000 and 2006 at an average rate of 33 percent 
per annum and Beijing expects trade with Africa to hit 
USD 100 billion by 2010, according to the OECD and 
press reports.  China's exports to Africa grew from 
USD 4.2 million in 2000 to USD 22.9 billion in 2006 
(Ref B). 
 
PICCUTA