08BEIRUT510
LEBANON: FRANK DISCUSSION AT MARCH 14 POLICY WORKSHOP
Mon Apr 14 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beirut
VZCZCXRO6973
PP RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHKUK RUEHROV
DE RUEHLB #0510 1051230
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 141230Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIRUT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1520
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS BEIRUT 000510 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS TO EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL LE
SUBJECT: LEBANON: FRANK DISCUSSION AT MARCH 14 POLICY WORKSHOP 
 
REF:  Beirut 392 
 
¶1.  (U) On April 13, the anniversary of the beginning of Lebanon's 
1975-90 civil war, the pro-government March 14 coaltion kicked off 
its first workshop, one month after its convention.  The workshop 
included two sessions:  Reactions to the March 14 political document 
(reftel), and the Taif Agreement and Building a Modern State.  More 
than 70 civil society representatives attended the workshop.  In 
addition, representatives from the various March 14 political 
parties attended, including  March 14 SYG Fares Souaid, MP Samir 
Franjieh, Future MP Moustapha Allouch, Lebanese Forces member Eddy 
Abi Lamah and representatives of senior March 14 leaders Mohammad 
Safadi, Amine Gemayel, and Nassib Lahoud and of Mohammad Hussein 
Shamseddine, an independent Shia think tank representative. 
 
¶2.  (U) In his opening remarks, Souaid indicated there were numerous 
reactions to the March 14 political document (reftel), including 
international and local ones.  He noted that the document was open 
for debate to enrich it.  He disclosed that a committee will be 
formed to develop it further within certain political circles as 
well as with the Lebanese diaspora.  However, he stressed that the 
basic elements of the document, such as Lebanon's independence, 
sovereignty, and democratic political regime, will not be altered. 
Antoine Haddad, the coordinator of all of the March 14 workshops, 
said this workshop continue for three months, after which a final 
political document will be released. 
 
¶3.  (U) Independent Shia think tank representative, Shamseddine 
noted that the Lebanese state surrendered to the resistance's plan 
under the era of Syrian tutelage.  He said that Hizballah should 
have surrendered its weapons to the state following the 2000 Israeli 
withdrawal from Lebanon that was carried out in accordance with 
UNSCR 425.  "Unfortunately, the state of resistance was built in the 
non-civilian state, and the resistance, i.e. Hizballah, became a 
regional resistance hence making the Shia community a regional 
confession," Shamseddine said.  He expressed wonder at how the 
Lebanese could find a social contract among themselves under this 
definition of resistance. 
 
¶4.  (U) Other participants were critical of the March 14 document, 
notably the section addressing the "culture of death and violence." 
Youssef Bazzi, a Shia from the southern village of Bint Jbeil, said 
March 14 should find a rhetoric that has resonance among the Shia, 
and added that the classification of the Shia community as a culture 
of violence is the incorrect approach to strip Hizballah from its 
supporters.  Yehia Jaber, another Shia attendee, said this document 
reflects a culture of racism among March 14 and blamed March 14 
members for failing to protect individuals who are at odds within 
their own confession.  George Koussaifi, another attendee, blamed 
March 14 for not developing a political discourse that could attract 
independent Shia toward March 14. 
 
¶5.  (U) Amal Makarem, a Druze academic attending the workshop, 
indicated that all leaders should take responsibility for their own 
mistakes rather than blaming others.  She questioned if March 14 
still wants to build a state that incorporates everyone, including 
the Shia community.  Nabil Khalifeh, a Lebanese University History 
professor, asked what was the common denominator that brought March 
14 leaders together, specifically that they were staunch rivals 
during the civil war. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Comment:  This is the first in a series of workshops March 
14 plans to launch as part of its public outreach campaign. 
Although comments made by attendees were critical, the atmosphere 
was candid, frank, and constructive.  The March 14 Secretariat will 
take the comments into account and build upon them before releasing 
its final political document in three months time.  Rumor has it 
that MP Saad Hariri allocated USD 1.5 million for the secretariat to 
carry out its mission.  End comment. 
 
SISON