08BEIJING4332
COMBATING LAND DEGRADATION IN CHINA: A LOOK AT THE PRC-GEF
Wed Nov 26 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO9730
PP RUEHAST RUEHHM RUEHLN RUEHMA RUEHPB RUEHPOD RUEHTM
DE RUEHBJ #4332/01 3310023
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 260023Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1075
RUEAEPA/HQ EPA WASHDC
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 9544
RUEHGZ/AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU 0019
RUEHGH/AMCONSUL SHANGHAI 9528
RUEHSH/AMCONSUL SHENYANG 9203
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0735
RUEHUM/AMEMBASSY ULAANBAATAR 3640
RUEHEK/AMEMBASSY BISHKEK 1343
RUEHZN/ENVIRONMENT SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COLLECTIVE
RUEHIN/AIT TAIPEI 7126UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 004332 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV ENGRD EAID CH
 
SUBJECT: COMBATING LAND DEGRADATION IN CHINA: A LOOK AT THE PRC-GEF 
DRYLANDS PARTNERSHIP 
 
BEIJING 00004332  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:   An International Workshop on "Integrated 
Ecosystems Management (IEM): Approaches and Applications" was held 
in Beijing (Nov. 6-7) under the auspices of China's Ministry of 
Finance, the State Forestry Administration of China, the Asian 
Development Bank, and the Global Environment Facility (GEF).  The 
purpose of the workshop was to review progress made during the first 
four-year phase (2004-2008) of the PRC-GEF Partnership on Land 
Degradation in Dryland Ecosystems Project, share experiences and 
"best practices" in land degradation control, and strengthen 
technical coordination, cooperation and capacity building efforts. 
Progress made in combating land degradation, as evidenced in 
workshop presentations and discussion, will likely encourage the 
establishment of additional land management partnerships based on 
IEM approaches and applications.  END SUMMARY. 
 
---------- 
BACKGROUND 
---------- 
 
¶2. (U) Much of China's land area lies in arid or semi-arid zones and 
is highly vulnerable to drought and desertification.  Land 
degradation affects the livelihood, agricultural production, and 
environmental quality of nearly a quarter of China's population, 
especially in the western part of China.  According to the GEF and 
the Asia Development Bank, climate change, unsustainable 
agricultural practices, deforestation, and mismanagement of water 
resources has caused more than 2.6 million square kilometers (km2) 
-- around 27 percent of the country -- to suffer from land 
degradation.  Dry areas in western China cover roughly 40 percent of 
the country's total land area, and degraded land there is expanding 
at an annual rate of about 3,500 km2.  In addition, land degradation 
in western China causes dust and sandstorms, and reduced water 
quality due to silting, affecting the lives of several hundred 
million people. 
 
¶3. (U) The PRC-GEF Partnership on Combating Land Degradation in 
Dryland Ecosystems -- the first partnership between the Chinese 
government and the GEF -- was initiated in 2002 to support 
integrated ecosystem management approaches to combat land 
degradation, reduce poverty, and restore dry land ecosystems in 
China's western region. IEM combines ecological, economic, and 
societal objectives to alleviate poverty, combat land degradation, 
and conserve biodiversity.  The PRC-GEF Partnership operates through 
a country programming framework (CPF) approved by the GEF Council in 
¶2002.  The CPF covers a 10-year period (2003-2012) and is aimed at 
building institutional capacity for IEM models with the eventual 
goal of widespread dissemination and replication.  Four projects are 
currently being implemented in China under the CFP: 1) the Capacity 
Building to Combat Land Degradation Project; 2) the  Xinjiang/Gansu 
Pastoral Development Project; 3) the Helan Shan IEM Project in 
Ningxia; and 4) the Conservation and Rehabilitation of Dryland 
Ecosystems Project. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
PROMOTING GEF PARTNERSHIPS AND CAPACITY BUILDING 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶4. (U) Under the general themes of partnership building, information 
sharing, and collaboration, workshop presentations focused on 
progress made in sustainable land management projects utilizing IEM 
approaches.  Specific presentations included progress on land 
degradation control in western China, sustainable land and water 
management in Zambia, initiatives on sustainable land management in 
Caribbean Small Island Developing States (SIDS), and land 
degradation control in Central Asia (Kyrgyz Republic).  There was 
general agreement that IEM approaches, as exemplified by the PRC-GEF 
Partnership, have been valuable in combating land degradation and 
that partnerships should be more widely adopted. 
 
¶5. (U) Countries and project managers addressed how lessons learned 
in China from the PRC-GEF Partnership could best help Caribbean, 
African, and Central Asian countries meet their particular land 
degradation demands and challenges. For the Caribbean, increased 
capacity building related to their region and partnerships that will 
help adapt land management applications to their needs.  For Africa, 
partnerships for sharing sustainable land management expertise are 
needed most, as well as financial support and the need to mobilize 
human resources.  For Central Asia, the key issue is funding. 
 
BEIJING 00004332  002.8 OF 003 
 
 
Kyrgyzstan has only $4 million over the next 10 years to address 
land degradation, but new demands are expected.  For all, 
sustainable land conservation depends on finances, subsidies, and 
funding, and the key challenge will be obtaining much-needed 
financial resources to help fund sustainable land management efforts 
in the most at-risk countries. 
 
¶6.  (U) Mr. LI Sandan, Director General of the Qinghai Forestry 
Bureau, emphasized the need for capacity building and reviewed the 
lessons learned form applying IEM concepts and methods to combat 
wetlands shrinkage, grasslands degradation, and decreasing 
biodiversity in Qinghai Province.  According to Li, IEM methods in 
Qinghai province have strengthened coordination between different 
government departments charged with ecosystem protection, 
established a multi-sector coordination mechanism and have led to 
improved ecological protection, helping to increase incomes for 
farmers from 600 RMB to 1,500 RMB per month.  Other presentations 
focused on strategies and action plans for combating land 
degradation in northwest China northwest and in Xinjiang, building 
information sharing networks, and strengthening community capacity 
building.  Several presenters highlighted that China's Eleventh 
Five-Year Plan calls for continual effort toward combating land 
degradation and promoting ecosystem development. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
CLIMATE CHANGE, LAND DEGRADATION, AND CONSERVATION AGRICULTURE 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶7. (U) Forests and conservation agriculture -- sustainable and 
profitable agriculture also aimed at improving livelihoods of 
farmers through minimal soil disturbance (no till), maintaining 
permanent organic cover over soil, and practicing crop rotations -- 
are expected to play an important role in China's efforts to 
mitigate the expected effects of climate change.  Ms. GAO Yun, 
Director of the Division on Climate Change at China's Meteorological 
Administration, said that increasing frequency and intensity of 
tropical storms and dry land forest fires are hampering China's 
sustainable land management efforts.  Gao outlined China's 
strategies for mitigating the effects of climate change on land 
areas, including relying on scientific and technological advances, 
improving China's abilities to adapt to climate change, 
strengthening institutional mechanisms to respond to climate change, 
and enhancing public outreach and education efforts. 
 
¶8. (U) Professor Ian Swingland, Deputy Chairman of the UK's Ultra 
Green Group (Singapore), said that the IEM approach to land 
conservation, combined with sustainable forestry management, can 
help China build its carbon sequestration and emissions reduction 
capabilities.  Swingland also noted that "avoided deforestation" 
projects (i.e. obtaining carbon credits or actual cash payments from 
not cutting down trees) will be able to help curb deforestation and 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions, when and if projects are 
implemented (According to United Nations data, deforestation 
releases about two billion tons of carbon per year.)  Mr. LIU 
Shirong of the Chinese Academy of Forestry also sees forests as 
important sources for carbon sinks for China.  In Liu's view, China 
must also do more to protect grasslands, forests, and shrubs through 
sustainable land and forest management to meet the challenges 
associated with climate change.  Mr. Des McGarry, a land management 
consultant from Australia, discussed mitigating climate change in 
China, and better ensuring agricultural adaptation for impending 
climate change, through the application of conservation agriculture. 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) COMMENT: Through the PRC-GEF Drylands Partnership, China 
has made some progress combating land degradation, but significant 
challenges remain.  Large variations within China's 
environment-related legal processes exist across the six provinces 
where these processes have been applied, and existing land 
management and ecology protection regulatory systems will need to be 
strengthened if progress in combating land degradation is to 
continue.  Chinese environmental officials insist that over the last 
four years integrated ecosystem management approaches have helped 
improve grasslands management, soil conservation, and reforestation 
efforts, but recognize that combating land degradation and 
desertification will be a long term endeavor and that linking 
efforts to combat land degradation to social and economic 
development will be critical for the success of current and future 
 
BEIJING 00004332  003.8 OF 003 
 
 
projects. Especially challenging for the Chinese government will be 
educating farmers and local officials on the need to shift from 
existing farming and livestock practices to ecologically-friendly 
farming and grazing techniques, something many communities so far 
have been reluctant to do out of fear of reducing already meager 
livelihoods. END COMMENT 
 
RANDT