08BEIJING2753
JULY 15 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SUDAN AND INTERNATIONAL
Tue Jul 15 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7716
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2753/01 1972255
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 152255Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8604
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 002753 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KOLY PHUM KS KN JP RS SU
SUBJECT: JULY 15 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SUDAN AND INTERNATIONAL 
CRIMINAL COURT, XINJIANG AND TIBET, OLYMIC SECURITY, MEDIA FREEDOM 
 
¶1.  Key points at the July 15 afternoon MFA press briefing were: 
 
-- China is "gravely concerned" over the charges filed in the 
International Criminal Court (ICC) against Sudan's president Omar 
al-Bashir. 
 
-- China is in consultations with other nations regarding a 
potential U.N. resolution protesting the ICC's actions. 
 
-- Asked to comment on President Bush's recent comments on Tibet and 
Xinjiang, the spokesman said that "relevant countries" should stop 
interfering in China's internal affairs. 
 
-- The spokesman did not have statistics on how many world leaders 
would be attending the Beijing Olympics. 
 
-- The spokesman said that he "fully understood" the difficulties 
foreign journalists were facing in reporting from Beijing and would 
forward complaints on to relevant authorities. 
 
-- China repatriates North Korean refugees in accordance with 
domestic and international law as well as the spirit of 
humanitarianism. 
 
Charges against Sudan President 
------------------------------- 
 
¶2. At the July 15 regular press conference, spokesman Liu Jianchao 
expressed China's "grave concern" over the filing of criminal 
charges against Sudan's president Omar al-Bashir in the 
International Criminal Court (ICC).  The ICC should be a force for 
"stability" in the region, said Liu.  Asked whether China would 
protest the charges at the United Nations, Liu responded that China 
was in consultation with other countries and it is too early to 
speculate as to the outcome of those discussions.  Liu said reports 
indicating the Sudanese government could no longer guarantee the 
safety of peacekeepers should be further confirmed, pointing to the 
multiple occasions when Sudan has said it will do its utmost to 
protect peacekeepers.  The final contingent of Chinese military 
engineers will depart from Zhengzhou for Sudan on July 16. China 
will maintain normal relations with Sudan, but Liu did not know 
whether or not Omar al-Bashir will attend the Beijing Olympics. 
When asked, Liu said that a BBC report that China is breaking the 
arms embargo on Sudan is "incorrect."  Liu said that the BBC likely 
has ulterior motives and China has never broken a resolution of the 
Security Council. 
 
Xinjiang and Tibet 
------------------ 
 
¶3. China will not brook any threats to its security, said Liu in 
response to a question regarding President Bush's comments regarding 
the Dalai Lama and the Xinjiang region.  China hopes that "relevant 
countries" will stop using "relevant issues" to interfere in China's 
internal affairs.  China is a country of law which protects its 
citizens' freedoms including religious freedom, said Liu.  Liu had 
no information on reports that two Uighurs were put to death in 
China. 
 
Olympics Security 
----------------- 
 
¶4. The security threat to the Olympics is coming from many different 
sources, but China is doing its best to ensure the safety of Olympic 
spectators and athletes, said Liu.  Liu did not have the statistics 
on how many foreign leaders would attend the Olympics but suggested 
that it was in the dozens.  Regarding reports that Beijing tourism 
is suffering due to increased visa restrictions, Liu said that he 
was not a tourism official, but connecting China's visa policy with 
the level of tourism was "not correct." 
 
Freedom of Speech in Beijing 
---------------------------- 
 
¶5. Asked whether China would create a "free speech corner" for 
citizens to air their complaints, Liu said that China has laws 
governing demonstrations and that they should be abided by.  In 
response to a complaint from an Al-Jazeera journalist regarding 
"very rude" security personnel and the difficulty reporting in 
Beijing due to tight security, Liu said that he "fully understood" 
the concerns and would forward them on to the relevant authorities. 
 
North Korea Refugee Repatriation 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶6. Asked about criticism of China's policy of repatriating North 
Korean refugees, Liu said that China is a "victim" of illegal border 
crossing from North Korea and that China follows domestic and 
international laws as well as the spirit of humanitarianism in its 
repatriation of North Koreans. 
 
ASEAN Regional Forum 
 
BEIJING 00002753  002 OF 002 
 
 
-------------------- 
 
¶7. Liu was unsure whether VFM Wu Dawei would attend the ASEAN 
Regional Forum (ARF) to be held this month in Singapore.  China 
attaches great importance to the ARF and will send a senior 
official.  As to whether a Six-Party Talks head of delegation 
meeting would take place at the ARF, Liu said that the previous 
round of Six-Party Talks had reached a consensus on holding a 
ministerial conference, but the date and place are yet to be 
determined. Liu said that the ARF should not be used as a platform 
to discuss domestic issues such as China's Tibet and Xinjiang 
regions. 
 
Ma Ying-jeou International Visits 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶8. China objects to the United States conducting exchanges with 
Taiwan officials, said Liu in response to a question about a 
possible trip by Taiwan President Ma Ying-jeou to the United States. 
 The One China Policy should not change, added Liu. 
 
China-Japan Human Rights Dialogue 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶9. The China-Japan Human Rights Dialogue will be conducted on the 
basis of equality and mutual respect, said Liu.  In response to the 
same question, Liu said that China does not restrict the movements 
of victims of leprosy or their relations. China does not, however, 
allow foreigners suffering from leprosy to enter China. 
 
Taiwan Citizens Missing in Madagascar 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. The Chinese Embassies in Madagascar and Mauritius both actively 
assisted in the search for missing Mainland and Taiwan citizens 
after a July 11 fishing accident.  Liu said that accusations by some 
Taiwan politicians that the China was using the incident for 
propaganda were "unfair" and due to "political motives." 
 
Russian Foreign Minister China Visit 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶11. Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov will visit China from 
July 21 - 22.  Lavrov will meet with Hu Jintao, Wen Jiabao and Yang 
Jiechi and will exchange views on the Russia-China border and issues 
of mutual concern, said Liu. 
 
RANDT