08BEIJING3911
October 14 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: President Zadari's Visit,
Tue Oct 14 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO5101
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3911/01 2881057
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 141057Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0421
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 6757
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 9137
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO 0364
RUEHSJ/AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE 0107UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 003911 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PBTS PHUM PINR CH KN KS EC CS PK HK MC
 
SUBJECT: October 14 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: President Zadari's Visit, 
Heixiazi, North Korean Verification, Regulations for Foreign 
Journalists, Chinese Hackers, Chinese Tear Gas in Thailand 
 
¶1.  Key points at the October 14 afternoon MFA press briefing were: 
 
 
-- China welcomes Pakistani President Zadari and looks forward to 
"in-depth discussions" and the signing of several "deals." 
 
-- China regains control of half of Heixiazi Island from Russia. 
 
-- China will "communicate and coordinate" with the parties to the 
Six-Party Talks process on verification of North Korea's nuclear 
disarmament. 
 
-- China expects criminal acts in Tibet to be "brought to justice" 
by the "competent authorities" and "according to law." 
 
-- China's policy of "openness and reform" with regard to 
regulations for foreign journalists will continue, although it is 
not clear whether or not regulations implemented during the Olympics 
will expire on October 17. 
 
-- China "cannot accept" the accusation that Chinese hackers were 
involved in stealing state secrets from the Republic of Korea. 
 
-- China cannot confirm reports that unusually powerful tear gas 
manufactured in China was used by Thai police against protesters in 
Thailand. 
 
Visit of Pakistani President Zadari 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2. At the October 14 regular MFA press briefing, spokesperson Qin 
Gang said that Pakistani President Zadari arrived in China today for 
an official visit and that this is another "important event" for the 
two countries.  He added that China and Pakistan will conduct 
"in-depth discussions" in "major areas" of cooperation and plan to 
sign several "deals."  When asked about nuclear cooperation, the 
spokesperson said that there is "some cooperation" on nuclear issues 
and this cooperation is in line with the principles of "equality and 
mutual benefit," respects all relevant international agreements, and 
meets the requirements for International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) 
supervision. 
 
Return of Heixiazi Island 
------------------------- 
 
¶3. Qin confirmed that China regained control of half of Heixiazi 
Island from Russia today in an official ceremony attended by 
Ambassador Zhao Xidi.  Qin noted that the smooth transition of 
control was an example of how negotiation was "an effective approach 
to settling complicated issues."   When asked to compare the return 
of Heixiazi to the return of Hong Kong and Macau to China, Qin said 
that "from the perspective of politics and law" the various 
situations were different and therefore could not be compared. 
 
North Korea - Verification and Economic Assistance 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶4. When asked what role China would play in the verification of 
North Korea's nuclear disarmament, Qin responded that as far as the 
Six-Party Talks process was concerned, China will continue to assert 
"constructive efforts" and is "ready to work with other parties to 
"maintain cooperation" and continue to "play a constructive role." 
As for the verification issue, Qin added that China will 
"communicate and coordinate" with other parties. 
 
¶5. Responding to a question about a recent report indicating China 
would increase economic cooperation with North Korea, Qin said that 
he was not aware of the report, but that China and the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) enjoy "normal trade relations" and 
that China will "provide assistance" to the DPRK within its 
"capability." 
 
Dalai Lama involved in Tibetan attacks? 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. When pressed about whether or not China suspected the Dalai Lama 
to be behind an attack for which eight monks in Tibet were recently 
convicted, Qin stated that China administers the country "according 
to law" and that criminal acts must be "brought to justice" by the 
"competent authorities" who will then "handle the case according to 
law." 
 
New Regulations for Foreign Journalists 
--------------------------------------- 
 
 
BEIJING 00003911  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶7. When commenting on new regulations for foreign journalists, Qin 
pointed out that questions on this issue had been "repeatedly 
answered" and that China will "continue its policy of openness and 
reform."  He added that China will also continue to "facilitate" the 
work of foreign journalists in China and that this policy will "stay 
unchanged."  When pressed about whether or not the specific 
regulations for foreign journalists implemented during the Olympics 
would expire on October 17, Qin told the reporter to "look at your 
watch and see today's date." 
 
Hackers from China? 
------------------- 
 
¶8. Responding to a reporter's claim that the Prime Minister of the 
Republic of Korea (ROK) had accused North Korean and Chinese hackers 
of stealing state secrets, and that close to 130,000 pieces of 
information had been stolen over the past four years, Qin emphasized 
that China opposes all forms of cyber crime and that China was also 
a "victim" of hackers.  He stressed that China therefore "cannot 
accept this accusation" and that if the ROK were to make such a 
claim it would have to provide "evidence." 
 
Tear gas in Thailand 
------------------- 
 
¶9. Qin was unable to confirm reports that Thai police had used 
unusually powerful tear gas manufactured in China to quell recent 
riots in Thailand, but pointed out that he was not aware of any 
international convention prohibiting countries from using tear gas 
in such a situation. 
 
Ecuadorian Defense Minister 
--------------------------- 
 
¶10. When asked about the visit of the Ecuadorian Defense Minister to 
China, Qin said that China considered Ecuador a "friendly country" 
and that it "attached importance to communication and exchange" with 
Ecuador.  He indicated that specific questions about the visit 
should be directed to the Ministry of Defense. 
 
Hu to Visit Costa Rica 
---------------------- 
 
¶11. Qin announced that at the invitation of President Arias of Costa 
Rica, President Hu Jintao will visit Costa Rica in conjunction with 
his trip to Peru to attend the upcoming Asia-Pacific Economic 
Cooperation (APEC) meeting in mid-November. 
 
PICCUTA