08BOGOTA2291
UPDATE ON JIGUAMIANDO AND CURVARADO LAND DISPUTE
Tue Jun 24 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Bogota
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBO #2291/01 1762149
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 242149Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY BOGOTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3323
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA PRIORITY 8259
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS PRIORITY 0605
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ JUN 9517
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA PRIORITY 6293
RUEHZP/AMEMBASSY PANAMA PRIORITY 1910
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO PRIORITY 6959
RUEHGL/AMCONSUL GUAYAQUIL PRIORITY 4469C O N F I D E N T I A L BOGOTA 002291 

SIPDIS 

E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/20/2028 
TAGS: PTER PGOV PREL ECON SOCI CO
SUBJECT: UPDATE ON JIGUAMIANDO AND CURVARADO LAND DISPUTE 

REF: A. BOGOTA 239 
     ¶B. BOGOTA 3855 

Classified By: Political Counselor John S. Creamer.
Reasons: 1.4 (b) and (d). 


SUMMARY 
------- 
¶1. (U) Legal, bureaucratic, and security issues--exacerbated 
by resistance from local palm oil interests and divisions 
within the displaced communities--continue to delay the 
return of the displaced Jiguamiando and Curvarado communities 
to their land.  Interior and Justice Vice Minister Isabel 
Nieto Jaramillo told us three steps need to be completed 
before the displaced communities can return to their land: 1) 
the Superintendent of Notarization and Registration must 
complete three resolutions revoking the titles of palm oil 
companies; 2) the Ministry of Interior and Justice (MOIJ) 
must obtain an extraordinary legal order (Restitution Action) 
authorizing the security forces to remove the illegal 
occupiers and, 3) the GOC needs to complete a census to 
determine who are the rightful members of the communities. 
End Summary. 

WHAT HAPPENED? 
---------- 
¶2.  (U) Legal, bureaucratic, and security 
obstacles--exacerbated by resistance from local economic 
interests and divisions within displaced 
communities--continue to delay the return of the displaced 
Jiguamiando and Curvarado communities to their land, which 
remains illegally occupied by palm oil companies.  Special 
Advisor in the Ministry of Agriculture Lorena Garnica told us 
that after years of legal battles with the palm oil 
companies, MinAg delineated the land that belonged to the 
communities in resolutions 2159 and 2424 which were issued in 
September 2007.  She said even though the MinAg resolutions 
provide the legal basis for the communities to return to the 
land, the process to void the illegal occupiers' titles, as 
well as the legal process to remove the current occupiers, 
still need to be addressed. 

SORTING OUT LAND TITLES 
----------------------- 
¶3.  (U) The Superintendent of Notarization and Registration 
completed two of the five resolutions that revoke the 
illegally obtained land titles from the occupiers.  Two of 
the three remaining resolutions are only pending notification 
of the parties; the third may be delayed due to an appeal. 
Vice Minister Nieto told us the Ministry will proceed with 
the land restitution in the areas where the resolutions are 
complete.  She expected all but one titling resolution to be 
resolved by the end of June 2008. 

KICKING OUT THE ILLEGAL OCCUPIERS 
-------------------------------- 
¶4.  (U)  Garnica said to legally remove the illegal occupiers 
from the land one of two processes were needed--either the 
local courts in Jiguamiando and Curvarado could resolve the 
issue (which would take about 8-10 years), or the Police 
Inspectors' office in Carmen del Darien (IPCD) could require 
the occupiers to leave.  The GOC ruled out the former option 
due to the lengthy timeline, as well as concerns that local 
palm oil farmers would pressure the courts.   The second 
option was derailed when the IPCD rejected a request by the 
Inter-ecclesiastic Commission for Justice and Peace to remove 
the occupiers for "restitution due to occupation."  This type 
of legal request must be made by the legal owners within one 
year of the illegal occupation.  In this case, over eleven 
years have passed since the palm oil firms occupied the land. 

¶5.  (C)  With the local avenues for resolution of the dispute 
eliminated, Nieto told us the MOIJ will seek a extraordinary 
legal order (Restitution Action) before the end of June that 
would allow the security forces to remove the illegal 
occupiers.  She told us if this did not work, the MIOJ would 
move forward through criminal law.  Nieto acknowledged that 
if they followed the normal legal procedure to remove the 
illegal occupiers, they would have to wait for the local 
courts which could take up to 10 more years.  She also noted 
that in many regions, strong economic interests manipulate 
local institutions to delay resolution of land claims for 
years. 

WHO IS REALLY PART OF THE COMMUNITY? 
----------------------------------- 
¶6.  (U) MIOJ field advisor Camilo Lopez told us divisions 
among the displaced over who belongs to the communities 
further complicate the return effort.  The region has seen 
various displacements over the last twenty years, leading to 
competing claims.  Lopez claims Justice and Peace's attempt 
to impose an ideological agenda on the communities has 
deepened these divisions.  On June 5 2008, Nieto agreed with 
officials from the Presidential Human Rights Office, MinAg, 
MinEnvi, MOD, CNP, Accion Social, and the Governors' Offices 
of Choco and Antioquia to conduct a census to determine who 
are the true members of the communities.  They plan to 
consult with the communities starting June 23 on how to 
conduct the census.  They envision using self-identification 
together with a peer-verification process.  Nieto said the 
census will take three months, but claimed the delay will 
resolve conflicts before the land is returned. The census 
will also give the GOC data on who qualifies for development, 
health and educational assistance. 

TRANSITION PERIOD CREATES CONFLICT 
------------------------------- 
¶7.  (C) Three representatives from the Inter-ecclesiastic 
Commission for Justice and Peace and five Curvarado and 
Jiguamiando community members reviewed their concerns about 
the land restitution process with us on May 17.  Several 
members participated in an altercation with police on May 17 
inCurvarado.  They claimed the local police were working 
with the palm oil firms and the "paramilitaries," and used 
excessive force to remove them from contested lands.  The 
police told us they responded to a complaint from a cattle 
owner who said community members had penned in his cattle 
without food or water. When the police arrived, they verified 
the owner's complaints and freed the cattle.  The community 
members claimed that in "self defense," one protester injured 
a police officer with a machete.  They say the cattle were 
eating their crops.  The police temporarily detained two 
Justice and Peace members, together with the community member 
who injured the police officer. 

¶8.  (C) The altercation shows how the failure to resolve land 
disputes in a timely manner and through legal means can lead 
to violence.  Justice and Peace has provided legal 
representation to the communities, but one member of Justice 
and Peace told us that if the GOC did not return the land 
soon, they would be, "left with no choice but to support the 
communities' desire to take the lands back by whatever means 
necessary".  MOIJ Lopez told us other community members 
accused Justice and Peace of bringing in "outsiders" to take 
back lands that never belonged to them, noting that many were 
not Afro-Colombian.  Nieto and Garnica confirmed these 
complaints, which led them to support the census.  They 
asserted that the primary fissure within the communities is 
between Justice and Peace-supporters and their opponents. 

¶9.  (C) Colombian National Police (CNP) International Office 
Director Colonel Buitrago tells us the CNP will continue to 
augment the number of police in the area to address the 
conflict, and noted the police will be the lead security 
organization in this effort.  Currently, police presence is 
limited; the nearest police station is located fifteen miles 
to the north in Bajira and transportation is difficult. 
Buitrago says the CNP's "hands are tied" until the final 
legal issues are resolved.  Ministry of Defense Human Rights 
Director Colonel Juan Carlos Gomez Ramirez tells us the 
military are ready to "support the police" as needed. 

WHAT WILL HAPPEN TO THE PALM OIL PLANTATIONS? 
------------------------------------------ 
¶10. (U) MinAg Advisor Jose Leonidas Tobon will lead the 
agricultural development projects in the Curvarado and 
Jiguamiando areas.  He claimed that about 80% of the 
community members he has met with were interested in 
continuing the cultivation of palm oil after the companies 
leave.  Leonidas fears that over 50% of the palm oil trees 
are already diseased, and that if they are left unattended 
for much longer, the communities will lose an important 
source of future earnings.  In contrast, Justice and Peace 
tells us the majority of the community members refuse to 
continue the production of palm oil.  Other community members 
lament that they would have to sell their product to the same 
companies that usurped their land and used violence against 
their families.   Leonidas tells us they will provide 
technical assistance to any community interested in palm oil 
production. 
BROWNFIELD 

=======================CABLE ENDS============================