08BRASILIA1264
BRAZIL: SECRETARY CHERTOFF'S VISIT HIGHLIGHTS NEW
Mon Sep 22 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO8715
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #1264/01 2662043
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 222043Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEAHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHDC
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2494
INFO RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION 7066
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES 5807
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 4243
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ 6587
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA 3950
RUEHMN/AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO 7518
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO 2593
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO 0582
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 8478
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 6631
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 2772C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 06 BRASILIA 001264 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/22/2018 
TAGS: SOCI ECIN ECON EIND EINV ELTN EMIN ENRG ETRD
EWWT, PINS, PTER, PGOV, PREL, BR 
SUBJECT: BRAZIL: SECRETARY CHERTOFF'S VISIT HIGHLIGHTS NEW 
AREAS FOR COOPERATION 
 
REF: BRASILIA 000440 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Clifford M. Sobel. Reasons: 1.4 (B) & (D) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary and Comment: Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS) Secretary Chertoff's July 19-22 visit to Rio de Janeiro 
and Brasilia, Brazil identified new areas of cooperation 
between the United States and Brazil.  They included improved 
security of passenger travel and travel document fraud 
detection through an Immigration Advisory Program pilot, 
cooperation on cyber-security and cyber-crimes, joint work to 
improve martime security through the Maritime Domain 
Awareness program, increased cooperation on infrastructure 
protection, particularly, the security of port and nuclear 
installations, and enhanced cooperation on supply chain 
security.  The Secretary and his interlocutors in the 
Brazilian government also agreed on the next steps to advance 
cooperation in these new areas, to include a bilateral 
exchange of notes pinpointing the issues both countries will 
work on and allowing technical teams of experts of both 
countries to build on this agreed framework.  Secretary 
Chertoff's visit revealed substantial interest among 
Brazilian federal and state agencies in cooperating with the 
United States on security-related matters.  DHS immediately 
scheduled a follow-on visit led by Undersecretary Robert D. 
Jamison to Brazil, which took place the week of August. End 
Summary and Comment. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Critical Infrastructure Protection 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (U) Secretary Chertoff's first stop on his visit was in 
Rio de Janeiro,  Brazil's second largest city, home to six 
million people, a booming oil and gas industry, and 
significant mining, entertainment, and telecommunications 
interests.  With some two million people living in slums 
("favelas") that are often the scene of gun battles between 
government forces and organized criminal elements, 
infrastructure and security are critical issues for Rio de 
Janeiro,s development, especially as it prepares to host the 
2014 World Cup Finals and bids to host the 2016 Olympics. 
 
¶3.  (U) Colonel Marco Antonio Amaro, Rio de Janeiro Mayor 
Cesar Maia,s Security Advisor, provided Secretary Chertoff 
with an assessment of the city,s public security situation 
and an overview of its critical infrastructure installations. 
According to Colonel Amaro, the local government,s strategy 
of spending more money on weapons and cars has not been 
successful in improving Rio,s security situation.  He 
acknowledged police corruption and advocated a new approach 
focused on improving social and professional conditions such 
as increased salaries, training, and education. 
 
¶4.  (C) In a meeting with Rio de Janeiro Governor Sergio 
Cabral, Secretary Chertoff stressed the importance of 
critical infrastructure protection as an element of national 
security.  Highlighting the debilitating impact that 
incapacitation or destruction of such infrastructure would 
have on Brazil,s economy, he urged Governor Cabral to work 
with both the federal government and the private sector to 
improve Brazil,s national capability to protect the 
interrelated aspect of its infrastructure from criminal or 
natural destructive occurrences.  Their conversation centered 
around possible cooperation on security preparations for 
upcoming major sports events such as the 2011 World Military 
Games, the 2014 Soccer World Cup, and possibly the 2016 
Summer Olympics (Rio de Janeiro is a finalist city in the 
current bid process). Governor Cabral was pleased by the 
offer, and the Secretary highlighted this planned cooperation 
during the post-meeting press 
availability. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Public-Private Cooperation on Homeland Security 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶5.  (U) Though the Port of Rio de Janeiro is not part of the 
 
BRASILIA 00001264  002 OF 006 
 
 
U.S. Container Security Initiative (CSI), it is a significant 
port in the context of Brazil,s national and international 
commerce.  (Note: The Port of Santos, in the neighboring 
state of Sao Paulo, is the first CSI port in South America 
and the 39th operational CSI port in the world to target and 
pre-screen maritime cargo containers destined for U.S.)  In 
2007, almost 9 million tons of general cargo passed through 
the Port of Rio de Janeiro.  Port improvements such as 
expanded rail and maritime access are underway, funded in 
large part by President Lula,s 
Growth Acceleration Program (PAC). 
 
¶6.  (U) Secretary Chertoff met with representatives from the 
Port Authority, state government, and private sector to 
promote a strong government-private sector partnership for 
DHS security initiatives such as the Secure Freight 
Initiative (SFI) and the Customs Trade Partnership Against 
Terrorism (CTPAT).  They discussed port security in Brazil, 
and how the Brazilians and the United States could work 
together to improve port and container security.  The 
Brazilians offered to host a regional seminar, which would 
include representatives from the public and private sector in 
various Latin American countries and the United States, to 
discuss port-related issues and set up a regional dialogue on 
the issue of port and container security. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
Discussing Immigration Advisory Program with Ministry of 
Justice 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
¶7. (C) In Brasilia, Secretary Chertoff met with Minister of 
Justice Tarso Genro, who highlighted the excellent 
relationship that exists between each country's law 
enforcement agencies and his interest in deepening such 
cooperation by finding new areas in which to work together. 
Secretary Chertoff noted security of travel, security of 
commerce, and security of infrastructure, as three areas on 
which the two could work together, adding that with large 
international events such as the World Cup, the World 
Military Games, and possibly the Olympic Games, which require 
 complex plans to secure, that DHS would be a willing partner 
in helping Brazil prepare itself for these events. 
 
¶8. (C) Minister Genro welcomed Secretary Chertoff's offer and 
keyed-in on the issue of security of travel, noting that it 
was an extremely important and sensitive one for Brazil, 
particularly in light of the recent diplomatic "crisis" with 
Spain.  During that unfortunate episode, he added, Brazil 
felt that Brazilian travelers to Spain -- whom Spain was 
scrutinizing on suspicion of illegal travel -- were getting 
unduly harsh treatment.  That was eventually resolved, he 
noted, when both countries exchanged teams of police 
officials who assisted each other in improving in their 
immigration and border entry systems. 
 
¶9. (C) Secretary Chertoff noted that DHS,s Immigration 
Advisory Program (IAP), under which immigration advisors work 
with airlines at overseas airports to prevent the travel of 
"high-risk" persons who are likely to encounter entry 
problems upon arrival in the United States, should similarly 
help the United States and Brazil.  Identifying high-risk 
travelers at the point of embarkation is not only 
economically sensible for the airlines, who are responsible 
for the return ticket, but, more important, can help enhance 
security for all, explained the Secretary. 
 
¶10. (C) Minister Genro responded that he was interested in 
establishing such a program, but that it touched on several 
sensitive points.  First is the issue of allowing foreign law 
enforcement agents to operate within Brazilian airports, 
which raises, what for Brazil are traditional, concerns over 
infringement on Brazil's sovereignty.  Also, according to 
Genro, Brazil's Federal Police is quite capable and such 
could create the impression that Brazil does not appreciate 
their work.  But at the same time, he added, Brazil would 
like to assist the United States in addressing the problem of 
potentially dangerous individuals transiting Brazil en route 
 
BRASILIA 00001264  003 OF 006 
 
 
to the United States. 
 
¶11. (C) A program such as the IAP, Genro stressed, would have 
to be carefully structured so as to create a dynamic that is 
favorable to its continuation.  Minister Genro also added 
that other countries have inquired about having such a 
program, such as the United Kingdom, France, Portugal and 
Spain and that they want to be careful about setting a 
precedent and that is why the details are important. Ideally, 
Genro noted, the United States would send officers for a 
short period of time, perhaps 30-45 days, they would work 
side-by-side with their Federal Police counterparts, both 
would learn from each other in identifying false or 
fraudulent travel documents, and then both countries could 
look at the results and see what worked and what improvements 
could be made in future iterations.  Secretary Chertoff 
countered with a six-month pilot.  Minister Genro agreed in 
principle with the concept of an IAP pilot, and that their 
respective technical experts should engage each other in the 
details.   (Note: The Ministry of External Relations 
(Itamaraty) has in the past objected to the IAP.  Their 
buy-in will have to be gained in order for an IAP pilot to 
move forward. End note.) 
 
¶12. (C) Genro also added that his Ministry would be 
interested in assistance on cyber-crimes, port security, and 
infrastructure protection.  He recommended that the next step 
would be for both countries to exchange diplomatic notes 
proposing possible areas of cooperation, including public 
security, intelligence, technical assistant, and exchange 
points of contact. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
Cyber Security and Counterterrorism, Priorities for Brazilian 
Intelligence 
--------------------------------------------- --------------- 
 
¶13. (C) Secretary Chertoff and Brazilian National 
Intelligence Agency (ABIN) Director Paulo Lacerda discussed 
intelligence reform and cyber-security.  Lacerda noted the 
complete re-structuring of ABIN.  As a result of the new 
structure, a counter-terrorism department within ABIN was 
created which will translate into an increased 
counterterrorism (CT) focus.  Lacerda briefed the concept of 
the Department for the Integration of the Brazilian 
Intelligence System (DISBIN) to his U.S. interlocutors. 
DISBIN is similar to the concept of the U.S. National 
Counterterrorism Center (NCTC) except broader in scope, in 
that it is focused on all aspects of intelligence (see 
reftel). Lacerda mentioned the difficulties in uniting 
different cultures, integrating systems, and noted that the 
concept of DISBIN has been met with much resistance. 
Secretary Chertoff offered to assist in the establishment of 
this integrated system, noting that the United States had 
many of the same struggles with its CT initiatives. 
 
¶14. (C) Continuing on the topic of CT, and specifically how 
it relates to the protection of Brazil's critical 
infrastructure, the Secretary, as in the other meetings, 
noted that events such as the World Cup could make Brazil a 
target of opportunity for terrorists.  In addition, Secretary 
Chertoff expressed his concern that Brazil could easily be 
used as a staging point for entering the United States, via 
Central America, by people of ill-intent. 
 
¶15. (C) Lacerda noted his concern with the protection of 
Brazil's offshore oil platforms, to which Ambassador Sobel 
offered to cooperate as part of the Maritime Awareness 
Program.  Lastly, both sides agreed that the United States 
could provide valuable and needed assistance and training on 
cyber security, a concern that was of particular concern for 
Lacerda.  (Note: On September 1, Lacerda was suspended from 
his duties pending an investigation into ABIN's role in the 
illegal wiretapping of phones of Supreme Court President 
Gilmar Mendes and other senior-level officials from all three 
branches of government.  End note.) 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
BRASILIA 00001264  004 OF 006 
 
 
Discussing Maritime Security with Minister of Defense 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶16. (C) Secretary Chertoff had separate meetings with 
Minister of Defense Nelson Jobim on July 21 and Brazilian 
Navy Commander, Admiral Moura Neto, on July 22 to discuss 
airport security, maritime security and infrastructure 
protection, particularly of Brazil's offshore oil platforms. 
 
¶17. (C) Jobim noted his interest in enhancing airport 
security and implementing adequate safeguards in order 
minimize the risk of terrorists entering the United States. 
Secretary Chertoff informed Minister Jobim that he had met 
with the Minister of Justice earlier that day and discussed 
the possibility of establishing an IAP pilot that could 
assist Brazil in the detection of false or fraudulent travel 
documents at airports.  Minister Jobim indicated he supported 
the effort, adding that the Ministry of Defense is interested 
in general security issues because the Ministry's security 
responsibilities overlap with those of the Ministry of 
Justice; and even though specific security related issues, 
such as customs and immigration in airports belongs to the 
Ministry of Justice, Jobim added, the Ministry of Defense 
provides the "spaces" -- i.e. buildings and facilities -- 
where these entities perform their mission. 
 
¶18. (C) Secretary Chertoff also highlighted the changes in 
roles and mission in the U.S. Coast Guard after the September 
11 attacks. He explained the concept of the Maritime Domain 
Awareness as one which provided for an advance notion of who 
is arriving in the country and for the monitoring and 
tracking of vessels over 300 gross tons and suggested that a 
visit by a Ministry of Defense delegation to Coast Guard 
Sector 7 in Miami could help Brazil get a better feel for how 
the U.S. Coast Guard performs its mission. Minister Jobim 
responded that the Coast Guard responsibility is part of the 
Brazilian Navy,s mission, and the Ministry would be 
interested in the opportunity to tour the Coast Guard 
facility in Miami and get a better feel for how it performs 
its mission.  Jobim added that the Navy's intent is to build 
vessels which will perform a Coast Guard mission to cover its 
3,500 square kilometer coastline. Minister Jobim stated that 
the Navy will use its organic funds as well as subsidized 
funds from Petrobras, the state owned petroleum company, in 
order to establish the Coast Guard capability, which, as part 
of its mission, will protect Petrobras oil platforms at sea. 
 
¶19. (C) During Secretary Chertoff's meeting with Commander of 
the Brazilian Navy Admiral Moura Neto, the Secretary brought 
up his conversation with Minister Jobim about the changes in 
the mission of the Coast Guard following the September 11 
attacks, noting that it also increased protection of critical 
infrastructures and offshore facilities.  The Secretary also 
discussed Maritime Domain Awareness Program and how it 
improves the visibility of all ships arriving into ports and 
invited the Navy to visit Coast Guard and tour the newly 
commissioned National Security Cutter (418 feet) and proposed 
the idea of initiating a possible cadet exchange program. 
 
¶20. (C) Admiral Moura Neto noted that the Brazilian Navy is 
developing a Coast Guard function with a dedicated approach 
to international maritime security including piracy and drug 
smuggling and emphasized he wanted to do it "just right". 
Admiral Moura Neto touched on the importance of information 
sharing between our two countries.  Moura Neto also expressed 
an interest in participating in joint exercises with the 
United States and expressed a strong interest in learning 
more about Maritime Domain Awareness. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
Discussing Cyber-Security, Border protection with GSI 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶21. (C) Minister of Institutional Security (GSI) Jorge 
Armando Felix highlighted for Secretary Chertoff common 
problems in the areas of border security and cyber security 
and agreed that cooperation in these areas is necessary. 
Minister Felix noted that Brazil considers itself less 
 
BRASILIA 00001264  005 OF 006 
 
 
threatened in terms of its critical infrastructure than the 
United States, highlighting that Brazil does not suffer from 
the natural disasters.  That said, Felix noted, Brazil is 
concerned with threats within its territory that have the 
potential to affect the friends of Brazil and does not want 
to become a safe haven for nefarious individuals. 
 
¶22. (C) Secretary Chertoff expressed his concern about the 
use of friendly countries in the region, such as Brazil, by 
ill-intentioned individuals or groups from South Africa, East 
Africa, South Asia, and Pakistan who transit South and 
Central America in order to reach the United States.   In 
response, Felix noted that getting a better grip on who is 
coming in and out of the country is an ongoing concern for 
Brazil, since it shares borders with 10 countries; Brazil, he 
noted, is currently in the process of improving their 
passports, a process which will be complete in about three to 
four years, which coincides with the expiration of most 
passports.  Felix stressed that while Brazil is confident of 
the Brazilian border process internally, they depend on 
information provided by other countries, which is where the 
role of intelligence comes into play.  Secretary Chertoff 
noted that the US performs network traffic analysis in order 
to determine links among groups and individuals and that this 
could be one area where the two countries could cooperate. 
 
¶23. (C) Secretary Chertoff and Minister Felix agreed that 
cyber-security was a growing concern for both countries, with 
both being subject to invasions and reconnaissance missions 
on their respective networks coming from Eastern Europe and 
Asia, and that these reconnaissance probes often leave behind 
devices on the system.  Felix noted that they only have a 
small group of individuals looking at this issue and are in 
contact with international experts to learn more about how 
Brazil could protect itself. Secretary Chertoff offered 
training assistance from DHS on this matter. 
 
¶24. (C) Secretary Chertoff and Felix also discussed Maritime 
Domain Awareness Program, information sharing agreements, and 
protection of nuclear facilities.  On the latter, Felix noted 
that nuclear security portfolio is being moved from the 
Ministry of Science and Technology to his office.  Felix 
added that Brazil's approach to nuclear protection was 
threefold: protection of the designs, prevention, and 
consequence management.  The meeting closed with the 
agreement to hold a meeting to move forward on the above 
mentioned areas of cooperation.  Minister Felix noted that 
Brazil suffers from vast bureaucracy, and stated that any 
invitation for substantive matter exchange should be 
initiated by the United States. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
Discussing Supply Chain Security, Secure Freight 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶25. (C) In his meeting with the Secretary of Receita Federal 
(Brazilian Tax and Customs Authority), Dr. Jorge Rachid, 
Secretary Chertoff praised the excellent relationship that 
exists in areas such as drug trafficking, money laundering 
and commercial fraud. Moreover, the Secretary added, the 
relationship and partnership that has been forged with 
Receita Federal through the Container Security Initiative 
(CSI) in Santos is an excellent example of a partnership and 
a means to assess risk. The Secretary noted that the United 
States has implemented a fully automated and sophisticated 
targeting system that targets cargo and passengers to 
determine what poses the highest level of risk to Customs and 
Border Protection (CBP) and to further our successful 
partnership, this may be an area where the United States 
could share its best practices and experiences with Brazil. 
(Note: Shortly after his meeting with Secretary Chertoff, 
Rachid left Receita Federal and Ana Lina Vieira took over as 
director.  End note.) 
 
¶26.  (C) Secretary Chertoff noted that another area for 
cooperation could be in supply-chain security.  The Secretary 
noted that DHS would welcome Brazilian involvement through 
the Megaports Initiative to improve the ability to screen 
 
BRASILIA 00001264  006 OF 006 
 
 
cargo for radiation passing through their ports. 
 
¶27.  (C) Secretary Rachid praised the level of cooperation 
with DHS agencies and noted his appreciation for the training 
CBP has provided, assisted by the CSI, on integrity awareness 
and air and marine interdiction procedures.  Furthermore, 
Rashid described Brazil's ongoing 3-year modernization 
program whose objective is to align security processes with 
global standards.  He noted that developing an advanced risk 
management approach is a key goal and they welcome Secretary 
Chertoff's offer of support in this area and would like to 
have a meeting dedicated to targeting issues.  Rashid also 
noted that his agency recognizes the need for radiation 
scanners and expect to complete a requirements assessment by 
the end of 2008 and acquire the technology in 2009--a process 
Secretary Chertoff agreed to support in consultation with the 
¶U. S. Department of Energy. 
 
¶28.  (C) Secretary Chertoff informed Rachid of his 
discussions in Rio de Janeiro with the private sector on 
establishing a customs-business partnership to improve 
end-to-end supply-chain security, noting that strong private 
sector engagement is required to develop an effective 
program, as was the case in the United States.  Brazilian 
private sector executives expressed a strong desire to help 
the Brazilian government establish a partnership with the 
trade community for improved supply chain security and 
believe it can help the government avoid mistakes on 
technology procurement in this area.  Secretary Chertoff 
noted that CBP wants to exchange more information in this 
area with Brazil and assist in the development of their 
program, adding that the United States has mutual recognition 
of supply chain security programs with three countries and 
would welcome the same with Brazil, but first Brazil would 
have to implement a fully operational program. 
 
¶29.  (C) Rachid responded that Brazil is expanding their 
Linha Azul (Blue Line) program, which is now focused on 
revenue collection, to include security and the incorporation 
of strict standards for supply chain security.  Rashid added 
that they expect to complete a strategy document for this 
program this year and implement it next year.  According to 
Rachid, Brazil is also exploring mutual recognition with 
Argentina, South Africa, and India. 
 
¶30.  (C) Rachid expressed serious concern about the problem 
of undervaluation of shipments by importers attempting to 
avoid taxes as well as difficulty obtaining information on 
U.S. exports to verify value declarations by their importers. 
 Secretary Chertoff explained that U.S. export data is 
protected under the Trade Secrets Act and is controlled by 
the Census Bureau in the Department of Commerce.  Further, 
while providing blanket data on exports is not possible, CBP 
can provide information under the Customs Mutual Assistance 
Agreement for investigations into specific cases of suspected 
fraud, adding that the ICE Trade Transparency Unit at the 
Embassy is the point of contact for this kind of information 
sharing.  Secretary Chertoff noted that ICE maintains an 
automated system for providing relevant information and 
training to foreign law enforcement officials and offered to 
share this information when possible through DHS personnel in 
country. 
 
¶31. (U) This message was cleared/coordinated with Embassy 
Brasilia and the Department of Homeland Security. 
 
KUBISKE