08BUENOSAIRES226
ARGENTINE FM TAIANA MEETS WITH CODEL ENGEL
Mon Feb 25 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Buenos Aires
VZCZCXYZ0013
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBU #0226/01 0561513
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 251513Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0298
INFO RUCNMER/MERCOSUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO 1052
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 1237
RUEHPS/USOFFICE PRISTINA SRUNCLAS BUENOS AIRES 000226 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL OREP EFIN KDEM PHUM PBTS KV IR VZ BL AR
SUBJECT: ARGENTINE FM TAIANA MEETS WITH CODEL ENGEL 
 
REF: BUENOS AIRES 0225 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary and introduction:  Codel Engel enjoyed a 
warm meeting with Argentine FM Taiana on February 21. 
Meeting participants discussed Argentina's economic recovery 
and political progress, the bilateral relationship, and 
regional and world issues.  The codel conveyed concern about 
Iranian activities in neighboring Bolivia, and Taiana thanked 
the USG for its support in thwarting Iranian efforts to block 
Interpol capture notices for suspects in the 1994 AMIA 
bombing.  Rep. Engel urged the GOA to recognize Kosovo's 
independence, and Taiana explained the GOA's reluctance to do 
so.  Taiana explained Argentina's support for Bolivian 
President Morales, and Rep. Weller thanked Argentina for its 
assistance in rebuilding Haiti.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Argentine FM Taiana met in his office on February 21 
with Rep. Eliot Engel, Chairman of the House Subcommittee on 
the Western Hemisphere, Rep. Jerry Weller, Rep. Gene Green, 
Rep. Maurice Hinchey, and Rep. Virginia Foxx.  The Ambassador 
escorted the delegation.  FM Taiana was accompanied by Hector 
Timerman, the newly appointed Argentine Ambassador to the 
United States, and members of his staff. 
 
Shared Values and Other Similarities 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (SBU) FM Taiana welcomed the codel, noting the value he 
places on parliamentary participation in foreign policy and 
inter-parliamentary contact.  He extolled the values shared 
by Argentina and the United States, particularly our 
commitment to democracy and human rights.  Engel noted this 
was not his first visit to Argentina, and that he considered 
Argentina one of the most important countries in his area of 
responsibility as Chairman of the Subcommittee on the Western 
Hemisphere.  He said he was pleased to lead a bipartisan 
delegation. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Rep. Hinchey said he was looking to see bilateral 
relations become more amicable and cooperative, and solicited 
FM Taiana's suggestions for what the U.S. Congress could do 
to build on the strengths of the relationship and areas of 
mutual interest. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Rep. Green said he was struck by similarities in the 
histories of Argentina and the United States as immigrant 
nations and melting pots.  He said he was pleased to learn of 
successful business ties and productive areas of cooperation 
in law enforcement.  Due to the importance of the energy 
sector to his district in Texas, he said he was particularly 
interested in this area. 
 
¶6. (SBU) FM Taiana agreed that Argentina and the United 
States are similar in many ways, including Argentina's 
federal system of government, with a constitution modeled on 
the U.S. constitution.  He pointed out that Argentina's 
development since 1930 had been frustrated by protracted 
periods of instability, political violence, turmoil, and 
economic decline.  Today, however, after 25 years of 
uninterrupted democracy -- the longest such period in 
Argentine history -- the country was enjoying sustained 
economic growth and political stability and would continue to 
do so.  He attributed the recent progress to the non-orthodox 
policies which the Kirchners had pursued and said their 
success in fostering greater social progress was key to their 
strong political support. 
 
Iranian Inroads in the Region 
----------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Rep. Weller noted his longstanding interest in 
regional affairs as head of the Republican caucus on Latin 
America.  He welcomed news of the impending transfer to 
Washington of newly-appointed Ambassador Hector Timerman 
(present at this meeting).  Weller noted that the codel had 
just visited Ecuador and Bolivia, and in the latter country 
there was concern about increased Iranaian activity, 
including plas to launch an Iranian-sponsored television 
station. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Taiana said he was not aware that the Iranian 
television station was so close to beginning operations.  He 
stated the GOA had "almost no relations with Iran," stemming 
in large part from their dispute over Iran's lack of 
cooperation in investigating the 1994 bombing of the AMIA 
Jewish community center in Buenos Aires that killed 85 
persons.  Taiana said the GOA remained committed to pursuing 
investigation (and prosecution of) Iran's role in this 
incident and the 1992 bombing of the Israeli Embassy that 
killed 29 persons.  He praised the interest and support of 
recently deceased Rep. Tom Lantos in bringing the 
perpetrators to justice, and he thanked the USG for its 
discreet assistance in getting the Interpol General Assembly 
to approve the issuance of capture notices for several 
suspects indicted by the Argentine courts. 
 
Sea Change in Latin America 
--------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Rep. Foxx thanked FM Taiana for receiving the codel 
and offering his insights.  She said she greatly appreciated 
the trip as a learning experience about South America, and 
she emphasized her desire for stronger, more productive 
relations.  Taiana took this opportunity to observe that 
Argentina's progress should be viewed in the context of 
"groundbreaking shifts" in the region, including integration 
efforts and confidence-building measures that had yielded 
unprecedented levels of peace and security throughout Latin 
America.  He added that countries in the region still needed 
to foster greater social inclusion internally to give greater 
legitimacy to their democratic institutions. 
 
Overcoming Tyranny 
------------------ 
 
¶10. (SBU) Rep. Engel noted that he felt at home in Buenos 
Aires, which reminded him of New York City in many ways, and 
that he enjoyed reading Argentine history.  He said many of 
those serving today in the GOA were "heroes" for having stood 
up to the tyranny of the 1976-83 military dictatorship, 
citing Ambassador Timerman's exile as an example.  He said 
Americans appreciate the valiant struggle for freedom 
undertaken by so many Argentines.  Engel noted the United 
States would soon have a new president, but in any case, he 
planned to ensure that the U.S. Congress would make a 
priority of U.S.-Argentine relations.  Taiana thanked the 
chairman and acknowledged that as a society, Argentina 
learned the importance of democracy, human rights, and 
respect for civil liberties -- particularly the importance of 
tolerating different points of view in a civilized manner. 
 
Venezuela 
--------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Rep. Engel offered that USG differences with Hugo 
Chavez should not determine Argentina's ability to maintain a 
relationship with the BRV.  Argentina should not consider 
good relations with Caracas and Washington as mutually 
exclusive, as an "either/or proposition."  Engel said nations 
were multi-faceted, with different issues, needs, and 
problems. 
 
Kosovo 
------ 
 
¶12. (SBU) Rep. Engel urged the GOA to consider early 
recognition of Kosovo, which was in a unique situation.  Due 
to its special circumstances, Kosovar independence should not 
be considered precedent-setting.  Taiana said the Ambassador 
had already raised the issue with him.  He recalled that 
Argentina was on the UN Security Council when it approved 
Resolution 1244, and for the GOA the two key elements of 
UNSCR 1244 were its insistence on territorial integrity and 
its call on the two parties to reach an agreement.  Kosovo 
was not easy for Argentina.  Taiana agreed that we should not 
compare situations which are very different, but he insisted 
that Argentina had "certain sensitivities" about 
self-determination and therefore needed to tread very 
carefully, because Argentina's claim on the 
Malvinas/Falklands was based on "territorial integrity" and a 
UN call for a negotiated settlement between Argentina and the 
UK. 
 
Debt Repayment 
-------------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) Rep. Green praised Argentina's remarkable economic 
recovery and asked whether, under such favorable conditions, 
the GOA had a plan yet for debt repayment.  Taiana 
acknowledged that Argentina's debt-to-GDP ratio had fallen 
greatly, that the GOA had paid off the IMF and met all other 
IFI obligations.  He said the GOA had stated its interest in 
normalizing relations with the Paris Club.  He noted the 
codel would be meeting later that day with Economy Minister 
Lousteau, and deferred to him on the details of Argentine 
debt strategy. 
 
Haiti and Bolivia 
----------------- 
 
¶14. (SBU) Rep. Weller thanked Argentina for its assistance in 
rebuilding Haiti, and Taiana noted that Argentina's 
contribution was part of a regional commitment shared with 
eight other Latin American partners.  The Haiti PKO was the 
only UN mandate in the region, and it was impressive to see 
how the region was assuming responsibility for building 
"Haiti's institutions, state, economy, and peace." 
 
¶15. (SBU) Taiana turned to Bolivia and urged support to keep 
its first indigenous government from failure.  He called for 
goodwill and patience in keeping this experiment from going 
under, noting that the Morales government marked an important 
historical phase for democratic consolidation in Bolivia. 
Failure in Bolivia would be a catastrophe for the region, he 
warned.  Engel noted the delegation had met with Bolivian 
opposition leaders in Santa Cruz, who had voiced much concern 
about Evo's attempts to suppress all dissent.  Taiana 
acknowledged the complexity of the situation, but argued that 
the indigenous had a "compelling argument" when they pointed 
out that after five centuries of racist, discriminatory 
mistreatment, they deserved a turn in office.  Taiana said he 
had spoken extensively about Bolivia with A/S Shannon, who 
"understands the situation there and the need for goodwill, 
patience, and understanding."  Argentina, for its part, would 
continue to monitor the situation closely. 
 
¶16. (U) Codel Engel cleared this message. 
 
WAYNE