08CAIRO121
EGYPT: POST SUBMISSION FOR SECTION 1377 TELECOM
Thu Jan 24 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0015
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #0121/01 0241503
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 241503Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7965
INFO RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDCUNCLAS CAIRO 000121 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/ELA AND EB/CIP/BA 
COMMERCE FOR OBERG 
USTR FOR HINCKLEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS ECON ETRD USTR EG
SUBJECT: EGYPT: POST SUBMISSION FOR SECTION 1377 TELECOM 
TRADE AGREEMENTS 2008 REVIEW 
 
REF SECSTATE 3689 
 
¶1. We provide the below responses from the Government of 
Egypt to reftel concerns for the Section 1377 Telecom 
Trade Agreements 2008 Review. 
 
Satellite Services 
------------------ 
 
¶2. For all questions on licenses for satellite services, 
National Telecommunications and Regulatory Authority 
(NTRA) Executive President Dr. Amr Badawi refered us to 
information on the NTRA web site.  The regulations for 
Inmarsat licenses are at http://www.tra.gov.eg/english/ 
DPages_DPagesDetails.asp?ID=257&Menu=1 and for VSAT 
licenses are at http://www.tra.gov.eg/english/ 
DPages_DPagesDetails.asp?ID=258&Menu=1.  The procedures, 
conditions, and rules for general telecommunications 
services licensing are at http://www.tra.gov.eg/english/ 
DPages_DPagesDetails.asp?ID=241&Menu=1. 
 
¶3. NTRA Economic and Regulatory Affairs Sector Head 
Mahmoud El Gowini provided the following answers to 
reftel specific questions on satellite licensing: 
 
Q: What are the rules under which an Egyptian telecom 
licensee can have access to and/or contract directly with 
a foreign satellite operator?  If these are public, could 
you provide a copy to us or provide us with a web-site 
link?  Must other users (e.g. banks, broadcasters) have a 
telecom license to operate a satellite dish? 
 
A: Egyptian Telecom Licensees can have access to and/or 
contract directly with foreign satellite operators. Since 
they are already licensed they need not come back to the 
NTRA.  Broadcasting according to the current rules is the 
prerogative of the Radio and Television Union. Satellite 
News Gathering (SNG) services are given timely permits to 
operate and those permits are renewable upon request. 
 
Q: What is the process for a foreign satellite operator 
to petition to have its satellite capacity "approved" by 
the National Telecommunication Regulatory Authority 
(NTRA)?  If this process is embodied in a regulation or 
rule, can you provide us with a copy? 
 
A: Satellite operators submit a request to the NTRA to 
receive a license. The request must show all technical 
specs, coverage, bandwidth and applications. The NTRA 
will study the request, obtain clearance on the operator, 
confirm availability of required frequencies, a license 
is then granted. In the very near future the process will 
be shown with elaboration on our web site. 
 
Time For License Application Processing 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶4. Regarding the question on the normal time required to 
process an application, the NTRA did not have a 
substantive response. 
 
Voice over Internet Protocol 
---------------------------- 
 
¶5. NTRA Vice President for Policies and International 
Cooperation Olfat Abd El Monsef provided the following 
answers to reftel specific questions on Voice over 
Internet Protocol (VoIP) licensing: 
 
Q: What rules, if any, govern the provision of VoIP 
services in Egypt?  Are these publicly available and may 
we have a copy or can you give us the link to a web-site 
where they are available? 
 
A: Licenses and regulations in Egypt are based on 
technology-neutral principles.  VoIP is considered as a 
technology and therefore any licensed operator in Egypt 
is allowed to use VoIP to provide the licensed services. 
As for the general rules governing VoIP services 
provision, VoIP usage for private use (PC to PC) is 
allowed without any license or registration.  Licensed 
Class A and Class B data service providers are licensed 
to provide domestic VPN services to their customers using 
VoIP. 
 
Q: Does the incumbent operator offer VOIP?  Do any other 
companies, including foreign companies? 
 
A: Currently the incumbent operator is offering voice 
services using VoIP technology - along with other 
technologies ? to provide international voice services as 
it is licensed to provide these services.  Mobile 
operators are allowed to use VoIP technology as well for 
the provision of international voice services if they 
acquire the required international gateway license (one 
of the mobile operators has already been granted this 
license). 
 
Q: If publicly available, please provide us with copies 
of any authorizations or licenses which have been granted 
for VoIP services. 
 
A: NTRA is opening the competition in fixed networks; 
this license will include international voice services 
(international gateway) where VoIP is allowed. An RFP for 
the fixed voice services will be announced within the 
first quarter of 2008.  National and foreign companies 
and consortiums are welcome to apply. 
 
Ricciardone