08CAPETOWN235
CAPE TOWN TO LAUNCH ITS CARNIVAL IN 2010
Tue Nov 25 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Cape Town
R 250728Z NOV 08
FM AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2886
AMEMBASSY PRETORIA 
INFO AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 
AMCONSUL DURBANUNCLAS CAPE TOWN 000235 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV ECON SF
SUBJECT: CAPE TOWN TO LAUNCH ITS CARNIVAL IN 2010 
 
¶1. (U) While some are asking the question will South Africa be ready 
to host the 2010 FIFA Soccer World Cup; the Best Mayor in the World 
is displaying a "bring 'em on" attitude.  On a windy, chilly 
evening, Cape Town Mayor Helen Zille, leader of the newly 
re-launched Democratic Alliance, hosted a "community event" with 
full diplomatic corps presence.  She used the thinly disguised 
street fest as an opportunity to announce to the representatives of 
the world "CAPE TOWN CARNIVAL 2010." 
 
¶2.  (U) The atmosphere was already carnival like with feathers, 
boas, colorful dress, and music and dancing of all types.  The 
newest 2010 invitation to Cape Town will be set between two already 
popular, big draw events.  Set for March 12-14, 2010, Carnival Cape 
Town will be a week-end long party between the Argus Cycle Tour and 
the Two Oceans Marathon, and just months prior to the beginning of 
the World Cup.  Three purposes of the development of Carnival Cape 
Town are: continued branding of Cape Town as a world-class 
destination; an avenue to display Cape Town's wealth of talent and 
cultural diversity; and the creation of additional jobs and economic 
growth.  Upon the announcement of the creation of more jobs, the 
crowd cheered the loudest. 
 
¶3.  (U) At that point, Mayor Zille used the microphone to admonish 
the city's youth to use this new opportunity to stay out of trouble, 
to stay in school and to resist the drug trade and environment. 
After Zille's speech, more cheers were heard from the audience. 
Mayor Zille is known for her anti-drug advocacy in a city that has 
been dubbed in a recent news article as the "epicentre of two 
significant public health epidemics - methamphetamine abuse and 
increasing HIV incidence." 
 
¶4. (U) As the Mayor continued to detail the sponsorship, operation, 
and contest-like nature of the Cape Town Carnival, most people 
returned to the food, drinks and to talking amongst themselves.  As 
with most events, the topic of the discussion changed quickly to 
politics.  The Consul General continued to receive congratulatory 
remarks for the successful, incident-free, U.S. Presidential 
election.  That comment was followed by the equally familiar, "what 
does this mean for (South) Africa" question. 
 
¶5. (U) Many, if not all, of the 210 City Councilors were present 
along side the diplomatic corps members.  The CG and the Consulate's 
Management Officer used the occasion to engage several of the City 
Council members.  In a discussion with the Majority Whip (Democratic 
Alliance) and the Councilor in charge of Safety and Security (United 
Democratic Front), the question of the success of a coalition 
government was raised.  Both Councilors agreed that Cape Town has 
been successful governing from a coalition base.  They both felt 
this model could be applied to the South African national 
government.  Asked if the same approach would be used with the new 
ANC break-away party (COPE), both gleefully said it would probably 
not happen in the 2009 election.  However, they still insisted that 
the Western Cape example could be the standard for the rest of the 
nation. 
 
¶6. (U) Comment.  Cape Town seems poised to lead the nation's efforts 
for a successful FIFA World Cup in 2010.  The Mayor is courting even 
more visitors to Cape Town during or shortly before the World Cup 
event, that some believe will see at least 3 million additional 
people inundating South Africa.  The gutsy move will highlight 
regional talent, use many of the rooms that are being developed for 
the FIFA mega event, and create more jobs.  Cape Town and the 
Western Cape Province also seem poised to lead the way to a more 
QWestern Cape Province also seem poised to lead the way to a more 
participatory democracy in South Africa.  End comment.