08CHENGDU293
SOUTHWEST CHINA: QUAKE RECONSTRUCTION AND ECONOMIC STIMULUS
Thu Dec 18 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO9374
RR RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0293/01 3530916
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 180916Z DEC 08
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3045
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 3708UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CHENGDU 000293 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/CM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EFIN CH
SUBJECT: SOUTHWEST CHINA: QUAKE RECONSTRUCTION AND ECONOMIC STIMULUS 
PLAN 
 
CHENGDU 00000293  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (U) This cable contains sensitive but unclassified 
information - not for distribution on the internet. 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) SUMMARY: According to two prominent researchers in 
Chengdu, the national-level economic stimulus plan will bolster 
Sichuan Province's economy during the two to three year window 
set by the central government for the completion of earthquake 
reconstruction.  Sichuan may have difficulty mobilizing the 
resources required to absorb stimulus funding over such a short 
period of time, howeQ  The longer term prospects for 9 - 10 
percent economic growth in the province are also unclear.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
 
 
Earthquake Relief for Provincial Economy 
 
----------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) The Director the Macro-Economic Research Institution at 
the Sichuan Academy of Social Sciences, Sheng Yi, told us this 
month that China would allocate nine percent of the recently 
announced four trillion Renminbi (RMB) economic stimulus package 
to rebuild quake-affected areas, which are nearly all in Sichuan 
Province.  He said additional stiQs money may come to 
undertake approved, but previously unfunded projects included in 
the 11th Five-Year Plan.  All of this funding would supplement 
existing commitments by provincial and municipal governments 
outside the province to partner with quake-affected Sichuan 
counties to provide earthquake reconstruction assistance. 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Sheng expressed optimism that government-directed funds 
flowing into Sichuan would buoy the province's economy.  Wang 
Xiaogang, the Director of Sichuan's Economic and Development 
Research Institute, shared Sheng's view that earthquake 
rebuilding funds would enable Sichuan to continue relatively 
rapid economic growth for the next 2-3 years.  At the same time, 
however, Wang disagreed with Sheng as to how much stimulus money 
Beijing would allocate for earthquake rebuilding.  Wang said 
that Beijing had not established a fixed percent of stimulus 
funding for use in Sichuan, but he did concede that Sichuan 
would need to rely on central government assistance for 
rebuilding.  He implied that most of the 3 trillion RMB (about 
USD 437 million) that Sichuan plans to spend - some of which 
will be used for rebuilding - would actually come from the 
central government. 
 
 
 
Can Sichuan Spend the Money Fast Enough? 
 
----------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Despite this optimism, the challenge for Sichuan's 
economy may be the ability of cities and townships in the 
quake-affected areas to convert money from Beijing into 
effective rebuilding projects.  Congenoffs recently visited 
Dujiangyan, a city northwest of Chengdu, where roughly 80 
percent or more of the structures in certain neighborhoods 
suffered significant structural damage.  In the areas we 
visited, however, demolition of most damaged structures had yet 
to begin.  We saw a school that had been razed, but we saw no 
signs of school reconstruction; only a small crew of roughly 6-8 
workers was building a brick irrigation ditch. 
 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) A consulate contact working in Mianzhu, a city north of 
Chengdu, told Congenoff recently that only a small percentage of 
the city had been rebuilt as of mid-December.  He said that 
Mianzhu's rebuilt schools and hospital were likely among the 
nicest in China, but he was skeptical that local governments in 
Sichuan could mobilize enough construction workers and heavy 
equipment to complete reconstruction over the next two years. 
 
 
 
Mixed Views on Longer Term Outlook 
 
 
CHENGDU 00000293  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
----------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) Sheng is optimistic that the economic momentum from 
earthquake rebuilding will dovetail with government plans for 
longer term economic recovery in Sichuan.  He says that projects 
under the "10 National Measures" (Guo Shi Tiao) will help 
stimulate spending in rural areas.  One initiative promoted by 
Sichuan's government that Sheng believes holds particular 
promise is a plan to make household electrical appliances 
available to rural villagers at low prices.  Some other efforts 
to boost consumption are already underway.  Local press reports 
that the city government of Chengdu (population 10 million) is 
issuing about USD 5.5 million worth of 100 RMB (about USD 15) 
coupons to roughly 380, 000 poor and disabled residents.  The 
coupons expire at the end of January 2009, and must be used at 
local grocery and convenience stores. 
 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) Sheng also has confidence that rural residents will 
purchase houses in Sichuan's major cities and resuscitate the 
market. He reasons that rural residents in their 20s - 30s will 
receive financial support from their parents to buy houses in 
urban areas.  These consumers, according to Sheng, might decide 
to buy into a declining market because they recognize the 
long-term value of having a house in the city. 
 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) Wang is more pessimistic. He argues that consumer 
spending has limited capability to spur economic recovery in 
Sichuan, where consumption accounts for only 30 percent of GDP. 
He says that private sector investment is the key to sustained 
economic growth beyond the earthquake rebuilding projects. 
Investment currently accounts for about 50-60 percent of GDP 
growth.  Private sector investors are becoming more cautious, 
however, and the provincial government increasingly relies on 
funding from Beijing to make local investments.  Investment in 
Sichuan from China's coastal provinces is also shrinking amidst 
the economic downturn. 
 
 
 
¶10. (SBU) Comment: We find the divergence of opinions between 
two researchers who hold director-level positions in Sichuan's 
government research institutions to be noteworthy.  We have 
heard similar views from other local contacts.  An underlying 
factor that appears to drive the divergent economic outlooks is 
the prospects for economic recovery in coastal provinces.  Post 
will continue to seek the views of researchers, government 
officials, and other knowledgeable interlocutors who can provide 
additional details on this topic. 
BOUGHNER