08DAMASCUS432
ERICKA OVETTE AND PAUL PIEPER DAZZLE SYRIANS WITH AMERICAN
Tue Jun 17 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0018
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0432/01 1691442
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 171442Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5088
INFO RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 7333
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4934UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000432 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/ELA, NEA/PPD, ECA/FO, ECA/PE/C/CU, R 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO SY XF OEXC SCUL
SUBJECT: ERICKA OVETTE AND PAUL PIEPER DAZZLE SYRIANS WITH AMERICAN 
JAZZ 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  Against a backdrop of bilateral tension and violence 
in Lebanon, Ericka Ovette and Paul Pieper's visit to Syria brought 
American music back to Damascus and proved that we can promote 
American culture even as the SARG sabotages other Embassy events. 
Ovette and Pieper reached an impressive number of Syrians from a 
wide variety of backgrounds.  The duo restarted musical cooperation 
with the Higher Institute of Music and connected with local talent 
and audiences thirsting for contact with authentic American 
musicians.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  After a nearly four-year hiatus, an ECA Performing Arts 
Initiative grant reinvigorated our musical programming in Damascus 
overnight. Unlike previous years, the Syria government (SARG) 
presented no obstacles to the program.  Even with the outbreak of 
violence in Lebanon and U.S. condemnation of the Syrian role, 
contacts at the Ministry of Culture remained receptive to more 
cultural programming in Syria. 
 
¶3.  Ericka Ovette and Paul Pieper descended on Damascus for a 
six-day visit that received extensive coverage in both private and 
government media and reopened doors for the Embassy to Syria's large 
community of musicians and music lovers.  Reaching audiences in 
diverse venues, the performers prompted a unified response: We have 
missed American cultural programs and we want more of them.  This 
sentiment was affirmed when Ovette and Pieper's two-hour public 
concert filled a local theater to standing-room-only capacity, 
reaching an audience of 800 people. 
 
--------------- 
Reopening Doors 
--------------- 
 
¶4.  Ovette and Pieper conducted a series of master classes at 
Syria's Higher Institute of Music.  In a sign of institutional 
approval, the Director participated in the first hour of their 
program with vocalists and guitarists.  Local media covered the 
classes, revelling not only in the intimate musical give-and-take 
between Ovette, Pieper and their Syrian pupils, but also drawn by 
the opportunity to interview American jazz musicians on their 
musical philosophies and expertise.  Students enthusiastically 
responded when Ovette and Pieper swapped seats and became the 
students for a tutorial in oriental singing and oriental musical 
tradecraft.  This heart-felt exchange played well here, as Syrians 
responded not only to the jazz duet's talent but also their sincere 
interest in expanding musical horizons.  Upon conclusion of their 
last master class, the Director of the Higher Institute of Music 
asked Ovette and Pieper to write up their impressions and comments 
on their experience at the Institute. 
 
------------ 
Media Blitz 
------------ 
 
¶5.  Sensing media willingness to extend coverage of cultural issues, 
Embassy Damascus crafted an aggressive press outreach campaign to 
publicize our first public concert in nearly four years.  (We 
specifically avoided  highlighting the Embassy's role in bringing 
the duo, however.)  Both state-run media and private stations 
clammored for the opportunity to speak with Ovette and Pieper. 
Coverage of the master classes, as well as the main concert, focused 
on the uniquely American attributes of jazz, as well as on Ovette 
and Pieper's own personal musical philosophies. 
 
¶6.  The media placements gave Ovette and Pieper a forum to discuss 
the importance of jazz as an American institution and to provide 
journalists with a mini-tutorial on the historical significance of 
the five African-American jazz vocalists to whom they pay tribute 
during their show.  Themes like freedom, peace, and civil rights 
were woven into Ovette and Pieper's comments and were reported 
verbatim in the local press.  Ovette and Pieper expressed directly 
to Syrians their appreciation for their hospitality, warmth and 
friendliness. 
 
¶7.  Syrians warmly received Ovette and Pieper, reflecting the 
general desire for a better relationship with the U.S. and more 
cultural engagement.  The local correspondent of the widely-read 
tabloid "Baladna" commented to Emboff that his interview with Ericka 
and Paul had received the most hits on the Baladna website on the 
day after their main concert on Sunday, May 11.  He attributed this 
achievement to Syrians' hunger for American musicians and culture. 
 
¶8.  Private TV station al-Dunya recorded an hour long interview with 
Pieper and Ovette then recorded the entire public concert.  They 
began airing the whole package as soon as the live event ended. 
 
¶9.  COMMENT:  Ovette and Pieper's visit to Damascus was the highest 
profile cultural programming we have done in recent years and 
highlighted a continuing hunger in the Syrian public for more. 
Tensions between Washington and Damascus remain, but the absence of 
 
 
official SARG intervention suggests that there may now be more 
willingness to permit American cultural activities.  We will 
continue to exploit this opening for as long as it continues.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
CORBIN