08DUBLIN310
THE "YEAS" MAKE BUMPY PROGRESS IN THE LISBON
Fri May 30 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXRO7362
PP RUEHAG RUEHROV
DE RUEHDL #0310/01 1511536
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 301536Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9214
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 DUBLIN 000310 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/30/2018 
TAGS: PGOV PREL EI
SUBJECT: THE "YEAS" MAKE BUMPY PROGRESS IN THE LISBON 
TREATY REFERENDUM CAMPAIGN 
 
REF: DUBLIN 282 
 
Classified By: DCM Robert J. Faucher; Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D). 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (C) Political leaders and the political parties are 
working hard to ensure a 'Yes' vote in the June 12 Lisbon 
Treaty referendum and are making visible progress, though 
their efforts could be undermined by a decision by either 
SIPTU, one of Ireland's largest trade unions, or the farmers' 
powerful IFA union to recommend a 'No' vote.  With two weeks 
to go, the 'Yes' supporters appear confident and well on 
track, but nowhere near ready to declare victory.  End 
summary. 
 
----------------------------- 
In-Fighting Among the "Yeas?" 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) At the beginning of the week, Prime Minister 
(Taoiseach) Brian Cowen challenged Fine Gael and Labour to 
intensify their campaigns for a 'Yes' vote.  Cowen said he 
wanted to see the same level of support for the Treaty in 
rival parties who have "the same vocation to the European 
idea as (Fianna Fail)."  Fine Gael reacted angrily to the 
comments, referring to a cowardly strategy of blaming the 
main Opposition party in the event of a referendum defeat. 
 
¶3.  (U) Cowen,s comments followed a poll on the Treaty by 
the Sunday Business Post (reported on May 25), which showed 
the 'Yes' vote at 41 percent, up three points, the 'No' vote 
at 33, up five points, and the "don't knows" down eight 
points at 26 percent.  However, when broken down by party, 
the poll showed that a large majority of Fianna Fail 
supporters intend to vote 'Yes,' while Fine Gael voters are 
almost evenly divided between the 'Yes' and 'No' sides.  The 
reason for the low level of support among Fine Gael voters is 
said to be that many of them see the referendum as an 
opportunity to embarrass the Government.  Fine Gael has urged 
its supporters to hold their political firepower until next 
year's local and European elections. 
 
¶4.  (U) Cowen denied that his comments were aimed at Fine 
Gael and said what he had been doing was giving words of 
encouragement and mutual support to all the parties 
campaigning for a 'Yes' vote.  Political commentators have 
come out strongly to say that it is in the interests of both 
Fianna Fail and Fine Gael to tone down the inter-party 
rhetoric if they wish to achieve their mutual objective of 
passing the Lisbon Treaty.  By the end of the week, the 
headline article in The Irish Times proclaimed that Fianna 
Fail and the opposition parties were uniting to push for a 
'Yes' vote -- replete with a photo of Fianna Fail leader 
Prime Minister Brian Cowen cozily taking tea with Labour 
Party Leader Eamon Gilmore and a Fianna Fail Member of 
Parliament during campaigning at a suburban Dublin shopping 
center. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Ireland's "Vital National Interest" 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (U) On May 22, Cowen said a 'Yes' vote in the Lisbon 
Treaty referendum was in Ireland's "vital national interest." 
 In an address to the Forum on Europe in Dublin, Cowen said, 
&I believe in a European Union that believes in Irelands, 
future.  I see the respect the EU shows to Ireland and other 
smaller countries and how this has been core to the Treaty.8 
 Countering allegations made by Treaty opponents, Cowen said 
taxation would remain subject to unanimity in the EU and that 
Ireland would continue to have a veto.  He also said defense 
would remain a sovereign matter and that Ireland's neutrality 
would be &rock solid8 under the Treaty.  Fine Gael and 
Labour leaders later echoed his views, while Sinn Fein's Mary 
Lou McDonald described the Treaty as a very poor deal, saying 
Ireland would lose "very many sensitive vetoes" if the Lisbon 
Treaty was passed. 
 
------------------------------ 
Farmers and the WTO Doha Round 
------------------------------ 
 
¶6.  (U) The Government is coming under increasing pressure to 
use its veto in the WTO talks, if the WTO deal does not 
satisfactorily protect Irish interests in the agriculture 
sector.  The country's leading farmers organization, the 
Irish Farmers Association (IFA), is still threatening to 
recommend that its members vote 'No' on the Treaty if it is 
not satisfied with the WTO talks and the position of European 
 
DUBLIN 00000310  002 OF 002 
 
 
Commissioner for Trade Peter Mandelson.  Cowen said publicly 
this week that he felt it was foolish for the IFA to link the 
Treaty referendum to the WTO negotiations. 
 
¶7.  (C) Meanwhile during several high-level meetings in 
recent days, top political leaders privately expressed 
confidence that the referendum will pass, though they 
hastened to add that they could not be seen publicly to be 
expressing such assurances because complacency is their 
greatest foe and powerful interests have yet to weigh in. 
Such views were expressed by Prime Minister Brian Cowen to 
Senator Patrick Leahy, and both Minister for Finance Brian 
Lenihan and Minister for Defence Willie O'Dea to the 
Ambassador. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8.  (C) Political leaders and the political parties are 
working hard to ensure a 'Yes' vote and are making visible 
progress, though their efforts could be undermined by a 
decision by either SIPTU, one of Ireland's largest trade 
unions, or the farmers' powerful IFA to recommend 'No.'  With 
two weeks to go, the 'Yes' supporters appear confident and 
well on track, but nowhere near ready to declare victory. 
FOLEY