08DUSSELDORF37
IMPRESSIVE SHOW OF SOLIDARITY WITH MUSLIMS IN COLOGNE; RALLY
Wed Sep 24 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Dusseldorf
VZCZCXRO0640
RR RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHLN RUEHLZ
RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHDF #0037/01 2681457
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 241457Z SEP 08
FM AMCONSUL DUSSELDORF
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0165
RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVE
RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
INFO RUEHDF/AMCONSUL DUSSELDORF 0181UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DUSSELDORF 000037 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KISL PHUM GM
SUBJECT: IMPRESSIVE SHOW OF SOLIDARITY WITH MUSLIMS IN COLOGNE; RALLY 
BANNED 
 
REF: DUESSELDORF 36 
 
DUSSELDORF 00000037  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: The September 19-20 so-called 
"Anti-Islamization" Congress held by the local right-wing, 
anti-immigrant group "Pro Koeln" fizzled, after an impressive 
show of opposition by civil society groups and relatively few 
clashes.  Local and regional politicians claimed "victory 
against intolerance," while Coordinating Council of Muslims 
(KRM) Spokesman Ali Kizilkaya told us of his appreciation for 
this largest show of solidarity with Muslims by German society 
ever.  Fewer right-wing extremists from EU states showed up than 
predicted.  The decision by the Cologne police to withdraw its 
permit for a "Pro Koeln" rally on September 20 led to commentary 
in the national media about a restriction on freedom of 
association, as the group has not been banned.  "Pro Koeln" 
announced legal steps and pledged to hold a similar Congress at 
a later date.  End Summary. 
 
Broad Popular Rejection 
------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Following a lengthy campaign by trade unions, churches 
and other groups, as well as politicians across party lines, 
perhaps 15,000 people turned out to demonstrate solidarity with 
Muslims in one form or another during the two-day "Pro Koeln" 
event (reftel).  The largely peaceful counter-demonstrations 
included several rallies, an open-air concert, as well as human 
chains featuring prominent politicians at the site of the future 
Cologne mosque and at a square where the group's concluding 
rally was planned.  Many taxis refused to take passengers, while 
some hotels denied accomodation and pubs declined to serve "Pro 
Koeln" customers.  A September 19 press conference had to be 
held on a boat on the Rhine, after organizers failed to receive 
permission to use several buildings.  There followed a cat and 
mouse game in which demonstrators blocked landings, forcing the 
boat to pull ashore, far from its point of origin.  After many 
reports that prominent right-wing extremists from several EU 
states would participate, in the end only Harald Vilimsky (FPO 
Secretary General), Filip Dewinter (Vlaams Belang floor leader), 
and Henry Nitzsche, independent Bundestag deputy from Saxony 
attended.  Vilimsky called himself a "national liberal Cultural 
German," while Dewinter talked about an "Islamic invasion" and 
warned against a "civil war with immigrants."  Nitzsche was 
introduced as the "only national-(thinking) Bundestag deputy." 
 
¶3.  (U) On September 20, some 10,000 demonstrators gathered in 
central Cologne, but only about 50 "Pro Koeln" followers managed 
to reach the site of the planned rally (under heavy police 
protection).  Shortly before the event was to begin, the Cologne 
Police Chief revoked the permit, arguing that violence from 
leftist and anarchist groups made it "completely unreasonable" 
to use force by the police to ensure the event can go forward 
without "exposing bystanders and peaceful (counter)demonstrators 
to incalculable risks."  About 500 violent 
counter-demonstrators, who damaged S-Bahn lines leaving some 150 
"Pro-Koeln" sympathizers at the airport, were taken into police 
custody and 15 arrest warrants were issued on charges of 
possession of illegal weapons and related charges.  Six police 
officers were injured in the clashes. 
 
Ban of Rally Spells Relief and... 
------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) While condemning the violent incidents, Cologne Lord 
Mayor Fritz Schramma (CDU) and other politicians expressed 
relief that it had been possible to prevent the "Pro Koeln" 
event.  Schramma called it a "victory against intolerance by 
democratic forces in our city" and North Rhine Westphalia (NRW) 
Minister-President Juergen Ruettgers praised the "determination 
of the Cologne citizens to stand up for their (democratic and 
anti-racist) convictions."  NRW Interior Minister Ingo Wolf 
(FDP) said the overwhelmingly peaceful demonstrations by a broad 
alliance against the Congress demonstrated that "racism and 
xenophobia have no place in our society." 
 
 
.Criticism as a Restriction of Freedom of Association 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶5.  (U) Some commentators criticized the decision by the Cologne 
police to withdraw its rally permit for "Pro Koeln," calling it 
an "overreaction that left a bad aftertaste."  Renowned Bonn 
University law professor emeritus Josef Isensee called the ban a 
"disgrace" for a democratic state based on the rule of law and a 
"violation of the right to free speech and free assembly." 
Meanwhile, a "Pro Koeln" spokesman announced the group would sue 
against the rally ban before the Cologne Administrative Court 
and made clear its intention to hold its planned Anti-Islam 
Congress at a later date. 
 
Mosque Critic Distances Himself from "Pro Koeln" 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
DUSSELDORF 00000037  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶6.  (U) The congress also prompted Ralph Giordano, a holocaust 
survivor, former communist, celebrated author, and an outspoken 
critic of the Cologne mosque project to distance himself clearly 
from "Pro Koeln" and the event.  Aware that his criticism was 
being misused by "Pro Koeln" and its supporters, in a September 
21 op-ed piece in Welt am Sonntag, he called participants 
"Euro-fascists" attempting to "exploit justified concerns within 
the population about Islam for their racist, rightist-populist 
ideology."  At the same time he reiterated his criticism of the 
mosque project and his concerns about the compatibility of Islam 
and democracy. 
 
Comment 
---------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The popular opposition to the "Pro Koeln" Congress was 
the largest popular demonstration of solidarity with Muslims in 
Germany in memory, and quite possibly ever.  KRM Spokesman Ali 
Kizilkaya and NRW Integration Minister Armin Laschet both told 
us they are convinced this is the case.  The number of 
participants in both camps was significantly lower than 
predicted.  Most of the violence originated among the far left 
counter-demonstrators, which prompted the (over)reaction by the 
police to deny the rally.  "Pro Koeln" is not banned, although 
it remains under observation by the NRW Office of the Protection 
of the Constitution. 
 
¶8.  (U) This cable has been coordinated with Embassy Berlin. 
BOYSE