08DURBAN33
UPDATE ON CIVILIAN DISPLACEMENT FROM XENOPHOBIC VIOLENCE IN
Thu Jun 26 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Durban
R 261526Z JUN 08
FM AMCONSUL DURBAN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 1304
INFO AMEMBASSY PRETORIA 
AMEMBASSY BUJUMBURA 
AMEMBASSY DAR ES SALAAM 
SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
AMEMBASSY KIGALI 
AMEMBASSY KINSHASA 
CIA WASHINGTON DC
NSC WASHINGTON DC
DIA WASHINGTON DC
AMCONSUL DURBANUNCLAS DURBAN 000033 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SF PGOV PHUM PREF CG BY RW ABLD
SUBJECT: UPDATE ON CIVILIAN DISPLACEMENT FROM XENOPHOBIC VIOLENCE IN 
DURBAN, SOUTH AFRICA 
 
REF: (A) DURBAN 26; (B) STATE 61855 
 
This cable is not/not for internet distribution. 
 
SUMMARY: 
 
¶1.  (U) On 20 June, Pol/Econoff visited sites throughout the 
greater Durban area hosting displaced persons from last month's 
wave of xenophobic violence to assess the current levels of 
displacement and identify any immediate humanitarian needs. 
Hundreds of the original 1750 displaced persons in recent weeks 
have returned to Durban area townships or their countries of 
origin, while others remain sheltered in churches because of the 
threat of violence against foreigners in townships and the cost 
of renting new homes. The churches hosting the displaced had 
sufficient food, water and sanitation, but were grappling with 
longer-term housingQanninQf the displaced don't return 
before the end of the month.  Utilizing PRM funding (ref b), we 
have provided clothing and gas cylinders for cooking for the 
displaced around Durban.  End Summary. 
 
MORE THAN HALF OF THE DISPLACED HAVE RETURNED: 
 
¶2.  (U) On 20 June, Pol/Econoff met with the Diakonia Council of 
Churches, a local faith based organization that coordinated much 
of Durban's relief response to the wake of the May/June 
xenophobic violence, and visited churches and police stations 
that once hosted a combined 1750 displaced persons. Initial 
estimates of 5,000 displaced (ref a) may have been overstated or 
indicate that a number of people returned to their home 
countries or back to their neighborhoods early on in during the 
crisis.  Since the height of the displacement in early June, 
more than half of the people, primarily male economic migrants 
from Malawi, Mozambique, Zimbabwe, and Tanzania, have returned 
to their countries of origin or Durban townships. According to 
the Diakonia Council and several local church pastors, hundreds 
of male economic migrants were fearful of another wave of 
xenophobic attacks and took advantage of free transportation to 
repatriate to their countries of origin. Others chose to stay in 
the Durban area to reclaim their property and resume employment. 
 
¶3.  (U) Several hundred displaced persons, primarily refugees 
and economic migrants from Congo-Kinshasa, remain sheltered in 
Durban area churches because of the threat of renewed xenophobic 
violence. According to a local church pastor, many of the 
Congolese are too afraid to return to Durban townships. Last 
week, a Congolese man was attacked and hospitalized after trying 
to reclaim his property. A displaced Congolese woman also 
claimed a mob had threatened to kill her if she attempted to 
return home. Other displaced persons are deterred from returning 
to townships because of the cost of renting new property. Many 
of the displaced persons lost their homes and personal 
possessions during the violence and lack the income to rent a 
new home for their families. At all displacement sites visited, 
almost all of the men were away at their jobs or seeking new 
employment. 
 
RELIEF SUPPLIES SUFFICIENT; PRM FUNDING UTILIZED: 
 
¶4.  (U) Humanitarian commodities such as food, water, and 
blankets were not immediately needed at the sites visited. The 
Diakonia Council and local church pastors stated they had 
received plenty of commodities from local residents and NGOs. 
Durban's municipal relief agency also provided portable toilets 
and showers to bolster sanitation facilities. The biggest 
challenge was finding longer-term shelter for those unwilling to 
return. Local churches claimed they could not keep their current 
caseloads for much longer because many of their other programs 
needed the space and resources currently occupied by the 
displaced. Many of the churches were trying to work with the 
municipal relief agency to find other institutions that could 
provide temporary shelter. 
 
¶5.  (U) Utilizing a PRM contribution (ref b) to support the 
immediate humanitarian assistance for the victims of xenophobic 
violence in South Africa, the US Consulate General in Durban has 
provided clothing for displaced Tanzanians who lost their 
personal possessions during the wave of attacks/threats. The 
Consulate has also delivered gas cylinders used for cooking to 
the local Salvation Army sheltering displaced persons. 
 
COMMENT: 
 
¶6.  (U) The current Qplacement situation highlights that 
xenophobic violence remains a perceived threat in Durban that 
could potentially inhibit some affected populations from 
returning to their neighborhoods for some time to come. The 
situation also highlights the strength of Durban's civil 
society. Local churches and organizations quickly mobilized to 
provide sufficient food and protection for some 1750 people 
without much assistance from the local or national government. 
 
YOUNG