08HARARE1076
Proposed Zimbabwe Travel Alert - Cholera
Fri Dec 05 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
VZCZCXRO9088
OO RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSB #1076/01 3400700
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 050700Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY HARARE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3781
INFO RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
RUEHPH/CDC ATLANTA GAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HARARE 001076 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR CA/OCS/ACS/AF T. Mason AND AF/S B. WALCH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CASC ASEC AMED ZI
SUBJECT: Proposed Zimbabwe Travel Alert - Cholera 
 
REF: HARARE 001054 
 
THIS IS AN ACTION REQUEST.  SEE PROPOSED TEXT BELOW. 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  Post recommends a Travel Alert be issued for Zimbabwe, warning 
American citizens of cholera, inadequate potable water, and a 
collapsed medical infrastructure.  The latest outbreak of cholera, 
which started in August 2008, has overwhelmed medical resources in 
country, exposed a critical potable water shortage, and threatens to 
infect more than 60,000 persons in the next six months.  Below is 
our proposed text.  END SUMMARY. 
 
-------------------------- 
Proposed Travel Alert Text 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2.  The Department of State warns U.S. citizens of a cholera 
outbreak in Zimbabwe and advises U.S. citizens visiting Zimbabwe to 
use appropriate precautions.  Cholera is a potentially fatal 
bacterial infection of the intestine that causes severe diarrhea and 
dehydration.  The disease is spread through untreated sewage and 
contaminated drinking water.  The latest outbreak in Zimbabwe has 
exposed a shortage of potable water throughout the country and 
overwhelmed medical resources.  Travelers to Zimbabwe should drink 
boiled or bottled water, use boiled or bottled water in food 
preparation, and regularly wash their hands with a sanitizer.  This 
Travel Alert expires April 30, 2009. 
 
¶3.  Cholera outbreaks initially erupted in two Harare-area 
locations, but quickly spread to Beitbridge, the border post with 
South Africa.  The United Nations Office for the Coordination of 
Humanitarian Affairs (http://ochaonline.un.org) now reports of 
cholera outbreaks in all provinces of Zimbabwe, with over 11,000 
cases and 500 deaths.  Health officials predict up to 60,000 people 
are in danger of infection within the next six months. 
 
¶4.  Although the humanitarian community is responding with water, 
sanitation, and hygiene initiatives in outbreak areas, the outbreak 
has exposed a critical shortage of potable water and medical 
resources, leading to uncommonly high case-fatality rates.  Harare's 
steep decline in water and sewage infrastructure has fueled the 
spread of the disease.  Due to corroded water and sewage lines, many 
sections of the city are without running water or sewage disposal. 
Health officials have declared the city's water supply to be unsafe 
and warn of conditions worsening during the coming rainy season, 
typically mid-November through the end of March.  Rains generally 
increase the incidence of diarrheal disease and threaten to 
contaminate wells with sewage runoff. 
 
¶5.  Hampering control efforts is the collapse of the Zimbabwe health 
system.  Harare's three public hospitals have virtually shut down. 
Private clinics, while operational, are often lacking in staff, 
electricity, water, and medical supplies.  As a result, there is no 
guarantee that adequate emergency medical treatment will be 
obtainable for travelers who become ill. 
 
¶6.  For additional information on cholera, American citizens may 
refer to the CDC's website at http:// 
www.cdc.gov/nczved/dfbmd/disease listing/cholera gi.html.  American 
citizens experiencing symptoms associated with cholera, such as 
severe diarrhea, should seek immediate medical attention. 
 
¶7.  For the latest security information, Americans traveling abroad 
should regularly monitor the Department's Internet web site at 
http://travel.state.gov where the current Worldwide Caution, Travel 
Warnings, and Travel Alerts can be found.  Up-to-date information on 
security can also be obtained by calling 1-888-407-4747 toll free in 
the United States and Canada or, for callers outside the United 
States and Canada, a regular toll line at 1-202-501-4444.  These 
numbers are available from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Eastern Time, 
Monday through Friday (except U.S. federal holidays).  Americans are 
also encouraged to read the Country Specific Information for 
Zimbabwe, available on the Embassy's website at 
http://harare.usembassy.gov, and also at http://travel.state.gov. 
 
¶8.  U.S. citizens living or traveling abroad are encouraged to 
register with the nearest U.S. Embassy or Consulate through the 
State Department's travel registration web site at 
https://travelregistration.state.gov/ibrs/ui/ so that they can 
obtain updated information on travel and security.  Americans 
without internet access may register directly with the nearest U.S. 
Embassy or Consulate.  By registering, American citizens make it 
easier for the Embassy or Consulate to contact them in case of 
emergency.  For additional information, please refer to "A Safe Trip 
Abroad" found at http://travel.state.gov. 
 
 
HARARE 00001076  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶9.  U.S. citizens may contact the American Citizens Services Unit of 
the U.S. Embassy in Harare for further information.  The Embassy is 
located on 172 Herbert Chitepo Avenue, Harare.  Telephone 
263-4-250-593/4/5, e-mail consularharare@state.gov.  The Embassy's 
Internet home page address is http://harare.usembassy.gov. 
 
MCGEE