08HONGKONG1909
Tsang Policy Address Warns of Tough Times Ahead, Hang Seng
Wed Oct 15 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXRO6077
RR RUEHCHI RUEHCN RUEHDT RUEHGH RUEHHM RUEHNH RUEHVC
DE RUEHHK #1909 2891058
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 151058Z OCT 08
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6024
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDCUNCLAS HONG KONG 001909 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM AND EEB/OMA, TREASURY FOR OASIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EFIN EINV ETRD HK CH
SUBJECT: Tsang Policy Address Warns of Tough Times Ahead, Hang Seng 
Falls 5 percent 
 
REFS: A) HONG KONG 1886, B) HONG KONG 1875 
 
¶1.  Summary:  After a strong rebound on Monday and Tuesday, the Hang 
Seng Index slipped on Wednesday to close at 15988.30, down 834 
points or 4.96 percent on the day.  HIBOR fell slightly, but 
remained high.  The British government's announcement that it would 
inject capital into the banking sector appeared to improve market 
sentiment earlier in the week, but a similar announcement by the 
U.S. does not appear to have been enough to sustain the gains of 
recent days.  In his annual Policy Address to the Legislative 
Council (LegCo) today, Hong Kong Chief Executive Donald Tsang warned 
of tough times ahead, but promised increased fiscal measures to help 
Hong Kong see its way through the financial turbulence.  Financial 
Secretary John Tsang continued to warn of impending economic turmoil 
and an economic recession in 2009.  Financial Secretary Tsang and 
HKMA Chief Executive Joseph Yam jointly announced late Tuesday that 
the Hong Kong government would immediately guarantee all bank 
deposits and provide supplementary capital to banks as necessary. 
These two new measures would be effective until the end of 2010. 
End Summary. 
 
CE Tsang's Policy Address Promises New Task Forces 
---------- ------ ------- -------- --- ---- ------ 
 
¶2.  Hong Kong Chief Executive Donald Tsang's annual Policy Address 
to the Legislative Council focused on steps the government would 
take to protect the economy from the worst effects of the global 
financial crisis.  Tsang said he would chair a new task force to 
monitor and assess the impacts of the financial "tsunami" on local 
and global markets.  Members will include top government officials, 
financial experts, economists and representatives of major 
industries in Hong Kong.  Tsang told the LegCo that the destructive 
force of the current financial crisis is greater than the 1997 Asian 
Financial Crisis.  In the wake of fears that AIG subsidiary AIA 
might come under pressure, Tsang also proposed the establishment an 
independent Insurance Authority to improve supervision of the 
insurance industry.  Hong Kong is one of the only economies in the 
region that does not currently have an independent insurance 
regulator. 
 
¶3.  Tsang also promised government action on the Competition Bill 
and Minimum Wage proposals during the coming legislative session. 
He announced that his Labor and Welfare Bureau will establish a 
minimum wage commission to study the appropriate minimum wage level 
that could apply across all industries.  Tsang called on the Hong 
Kong people to stay calm in spite of global financial volatility. 
He promised that the government would intervene if the market fails, 
taking remedial measures when the market is unable to resolve 
disputes between "big business and ordinary citizens."  Observers 
took his remarks to mean the government would continue to pressure 
banks to resolve claims surrounding Lehman minibonds. 
 
Hang Seng Not Impressed 
---- ---- --- --------- 
 
¶4.  Investors were not encouraged by Tsang's address.  The Hang Seng 
Index lost 4.96 percent or 834.58 points on Wednesday, closing at 
15998.30 with a daily trade of HKD 49 billion.  The market had 
rebounded strongly on Monday and Tuesday after British Prime 
Minister Gordon Brown announced plans for the UK government to 
purchase stakes in British banks.   The Hang Seng gained 10 percent 
on Monday and 3 percent on Tuesday, when markets heard that the U.S. 
would unveil a similar plan to recapitalize banks.  HIBOR quoted by 
Hang Seng Bank at 5:13 pm was 2 percent for overnight, 3.0 percent 
for 1W, 3.5 percent for 2W, 4.5 percent for 1M, 4.35 percent for 3M 
and 4.05 percent for 6M. 
 
Hong Kong Follows UK Lead, Guarantees Deposits 
---- ---- ------- -- ----- ---------- -------- 
 
¶5.  Late on Tuesday, HKMA Chief Executive Joseph Yam and Financial 
Secretary John Tsang announced that the Hong Kong Government would 
use the HKMA Exchange Fund to immediately guarantee all deposits in 
the banking system and would provide capital to banks as needed, 
through 2010.   Hong Kong previously had a deposit insurance scheme 
capped at HKD 100,000 (apx. US$12,800); LegCo members have recently 
called for that limit to be increased.  Hong Kong banks hold HKD 6 
trillion (US$ 770 billion) in deposits, well over the Exchange Fund 
assets of HKD 1.6 trillion (US$ 200 billion).  HKMA's Yam told the 
press that the HKMA was following the lead of other governments not 
because of concerns about banking system health, but to avoid 
putting Hong Kong at a competitive disadvantage vis-`-vis other 
economies that have provided similar guarantees.  Yam reaffirmed 
that Hong Kong banks are healthy and well capitalized and predicted 
that the Exchange Fund resources would not be tapped. 
Marut