08ISTANBUL51
UMRANIYE ROUND-UP TARGETS DEEP STATE
Wed Jan 30 00:00:00 +0100 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Consulate Istanbul
VZCZCXRO4779
OO RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHIT #0051/01 0300720
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 300720Z JAN 08 ZDS
FM AMCONSUL ISTANBUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7825
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 ISTANBUL 000051 
 
SIPDIS 
 
C O R R E C T E D COPY - CORRECTING PARAGRAPH NUMBERS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/28/2028 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM TU
SUBJECT: UMRANIYE ROUND-UP TARGETS DEEP STATE 
 
REF: A. 06 ANKARA 1442 
     ¶B. 06 ANKARA 3772 
 
ISTANBUL 00000051  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
Classified By: Consul General Sharon A. Wiener 
for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary.  The January 22 police round-up of scores of 
people in Istanbul and other cities, related to the discovery 
of a weapons cache in Istanbul's Umraniye district last June, 
may be a battle in the war to fight the "deep state" in 
Turkey.  The "deep state" is a vague, ill-defined network of 
like-minded people (including former military personnel and 
government officials) with ties to Turkey's 
ultra-nationalists that purports to provide an "alternative" 
to state power.  Allegedly, this extra-legal grouping works 
to influence and deliver public support behind actions by 
real state actors, often the military.  Some, such as former 
Prime Minister and President Suleyman Demirel, voice support 
for this power center.  Current PM Erdogan apparently opposes 
it and is looking for ways to subvert if not destroy it. 
There is speculation the contemporary deep state has overlap 
affiliation with popularly termed Operation Gladio, a Cold 
War "stay behind" network organized to resist possible Soviet 
occupation. Successful prosecution of a deep state network 
would strike a blow against nationalist impunity and 
demonstrate a strong commitment to rule of law.  Despite 
apparent support for this investigation at the highest levels 
of the political leadership, prosecution can only be 
successful with the cooperation of Turkey's arch-nationalist 
judiciary.  End summary. 
 
UMRANIYE RAIDS 
-------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) In pre-dawn raids on the morning of Tuesday, January 
22, police in Istanbul and at least four other cities took 
suspects into custody under suspicion of belonging to what 
Istanbul prosecutor Zekeriya Oz labeled a terrorist 
organization.  Press report police monitored Ergenekon 
(ultra-nationalist club) members, actions and telephone 
conversations for 8 months as part of an investigation of a 
stockpile of explosives and ammunition found June 12, 2007, 
in Umraniye, a middle class district on the Asian side of 
Istanbul.  Istanbul-based TESEV Foreign Policy Director 
Mensur Akgun believes there is an Ergenekon link to 
clandestine "stay behind" networks (popularly referred to as 
Operation Gladio after the Italian version) set up in NATO 
countries to resist potential Soviet occupation.  Akgun says 
Ergenekon is part of the "Deep State" apparatus in Turkey and 
believes Prime Minister Erdogan forced the military to 
acquiesce to police exposure and prosecution of the group. 
 
¶3.  (U) According to police, the Istanbul raids were part of 
an organized counterterrorism effort carried out in Istanbul, 
Adana, Izmir, Duzce, and Malatya.  Thus far, 60 suspects have 
been detained from nationalist groups called Ergenekon, 
Atabeyler, Sauna, and Umraniye.  During initial raids in 
June/July 2007, police discovered a hit list including 
pro-Kurdish Democratic Society Party (DTP) deputies Ahmet 
Turk and Sebahat Tuncel, Diyarbakir mayor Osman Baydemir, 
former MP Leyla Zana, Nobel Laureate Orhan Pamuk, and Zaman 
daily journalist Fehmi Koru.  DTP politicians on the list 
reportedly refused a 24-hour police guard offered them.  Also 
uncovered in the raid were diagrams and action plans said to 
lay out the foundations for a coup planned for 2009.  Press 
speculation implicates Ergenekon in virtually every killing 
with political significance over the past several years, 
including the Hrant Dink murder, the 2006 Council of State 
(Danistay) shooting which killed one judge, the bombing of 
the Cumhuriyet newspaper building in Istanbul, and the 2006 
murder of an Italian priest, among others.  Prior to the 
raids on January 22, 15 people had been arrested in 
connection with the Umraniye weapons cache.  They were 
charged with establishing and running an armed terrorist 
organization, conspiring to encourage military members to 
disobey orders, acquiring information on state security, and 
being in possession of explosives. 
 
A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF A COMPLICATED SUBJECT 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) Referring to the antecedents of Ergenekon, Mensur 
Akgun says nationalist elements, traceable to Ottoman days, 
were responsible for incidents including the Istanbul riots 
of September 6-7, 1955, targeting the Greek minority. 
Then-PM Bulent Ecevit complained in 1974 of a "counter 
guerrilla" force operating outside the Turkish military chain 
of command.  Akgun also claimed former PM Tansu Ciller and 
former President Suleyman Demirel requested and received NSC 
 
ISTANBUL 00000051  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
approval for a "deep state" mechanism in the 1990s.  Forces 
established in the 1950s as sleeper agents, once directed by 
the intelligence community, have come to feel immune from 
prosecution and are no longer controllable, Akgun claimed. 
Ergenekon has overlap with this group.  Akgun also professed 
that deep state elements have taken part in efforts to 
eliminate the PKK, citing the Semdinli incident.  The 
November 9, 2005, bombing of a bookstore in Semdinli killed 
one and injured several in Turkey's southeastern province of 
Hakkari. Two suspects were found to 
be members of the security forces.  Efforts by Prosecutor 
Ferhat Sarikaya to pinpoint ultimate responsibility for the 
attack resulted in his being fired by the High Council of 
Judges and Prosecutors (Ref A). 
 
¶5.  (C) Akgun posits arrests on January 22 were facilitated 
by followers of Fethullah Gulen (once a deep state target) 
who have established themselves in the regular police and 
police intelligence cadres.  Akgun cited the Prime Minister's 
comment, "the state is working," as evidence he had forced 
agreement with Turkey's military to make the Umraniye 
investigations public. Those found guilty would be 
prosecuted, said Akun.  Mindful of truncated investigations 
into Sedinli, Susurluk (Ref B) and other scandals, Akgun 
made an appeal for the USG to reveal any informaton it has 
that would corroborate evidence of wrongdoing by the 
suspects. 
 
¶6.  (C) The judiciary, Akgun said, could prove a stumbling 
block to justice.  He lamented that though not necessarily 
corrupt, Turkey's judiciary had large numbers of "illiberal" 
judges, more focused on protecting the state from the 
individual than in promoting individual rights, and who 
firmly believe any means should be used to protect the state. 
Insofar as the deep state's purported intentions are to 
protect the state (as that group defines it), they may be 
able to find common cause with some in the legal system who 
could shield them from the full brunt of prosecution.  Akgun 
expects the accused would mount a strong defense but added 
that there are now many factors at work to thwart the 
extra-legal group.  Akgun -- and many respected media 
commentators -- said success would have far-reaching, 
positive implications for the rule of law and democracy in 
Turkey. 
 
A ROGUE'S GALLERY FRAMES THE PLOT 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (U)  Central to the cast of characters detained in the 
Umraniye raids is retired Major General Veli Kuck, reputed 
to be a leader in the Ergenekon organzation.  Following the 
1996 Susurluk incident, the Office of the Chief of the 
General Staff reportedly blocked charges from being filed 
against Kucuk (then active duty) and he refused to give a 
deposition to the parliamentary investigation.  Kucuk sued 
Erdal Dogan (attorney for the Dink family) after Dogan told 
prosecutors that Kucuk could be involved in Dink,s murder. 
Kucuk attended hearings for Dink,s Article 301 case, filed 
by ultra-nationalist lawyer Kemal Kerencsiz who was also 
detained on January 22.  Kerencsiz filed 301 cases against 
Orhan Pamuk and Elif Shafak as well. 
 
¶8.  (U) Also among the detained is Oktay Yildirim, a retired 
noncommissioned officer reputed to have made threatening 
phone calls to Prosecutor Zekeriya Oz.  Two people arrested 
during the June 2007 raid on the house in Umraniye indicated 
Yildirim provided the weapons.  Yildirim claims he found the 
weapons at a dump behind a military barracks in Hasdal on 
Istanbul's European side. 
 
DEMIREL ON THE DEEP STATE 
------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (U) Interviewed on CNN-Turk on April 17, 2005, former 
President Demirel said, "The deep state is the state itself. 
It is the military.  The military that established the state 
always fears the collapse of the state.  The people sometimes 
misuse the rights provided....  The deep state is not active 
as long as the state is not brought to the verge of collapse. 
They are not a separate state, but when they intervene in 
the administration of the state, they become the deep state." 
 
¶10.  (C) Comment.  The deep state is shady, vague and 
ill-defined.  Events like the 1955 Istanbul riots, Susurluk 
and Semdinli, the Dink 301 trial and subsequent 
assassinations have long haunted public life.  Weak rule of 
law and the impunity with which privileged operators have 
long been able to subvert Turkey's legal system have created 
an environment in which rumors of the deep state's existence 
 
ISTANBUL 00000051  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
have been enough to give the concept a life of its own.  Fear 
of the deep state's omnipotence combined with an unshakable 
belief that it exists, imparts much of its power.  If Akgun's 
take is correct, PM Erdogan has the evidence he needs to 
expose and close down or seriously damage a widely rumored 
"deep state" apparatus that works outside the rule of law, 
often in the service of ultra-nationalist causes.  However, 
prosecution will only be successful with the cooperation of 
Turkey's deeply conservative judiciary.  That will be the 
test; passing it will have positive implications for 
strengthening and extending democracy and rule of law in 
Turkey.  End comment. 
WIENER