08JAKARTA2186
FUNDING THE OKEANOS EXPLORER
Mon Dec 01 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXRO8594
RR RUEHWEB
DE RUEHJA #2186/01 3361032
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 011032Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0850
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JAKARTA 002186 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR U/S FORE, U/S DOBRIANSKY, U/S GLASSMAN, A/S MCMURRAY 
AND SCIENCE ADVISER FEDEROFF 
STATE ALSO FOR EAP/MTS AND OES 
COMMERCE FOR NOAA 
 
E.O. 12598: N/A 
TAGS: SENV TBIO EAID ECON PREL ID
 
SUBJECT: FUNDING THE OKEANOS EXPLORER 
 
FROM AMBASSADOR CAMERON HUME 
 
¶1. (U) Summary.  We have an extraordinary opportunity to advance our 
environmental, scientific and diplomatic agendas in Indonesia and 
beyond but we need $1 million in State funding to make it happen. 
The Indonesian government has invited NOAA to send the Okeanos 
Explorer, the world's most advanced research and exploration vessel, 
to Indonesia for the May 2009 World Oceans Conference hosted by 
President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono.  The voyage would end a 
forty-year refusal by the Indonesians to allow U.S. research vessels 
to explore their waters. End summary. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Advancing Science and Environmental Policy 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (U) When it is fully outfitted next year, NOAA's new Okeanos 
Explorer will be the most advanced marine exploration and research 
vessel in the world.  Remote-controlled vehicles will be able to 
plunge to the depth of six kilometers.  The ship's "telepresence" 
technology allows scientists in remote command centers around the 
world to share in and guide the exploration in real time.  This will 
shatter the current marine research paradigm which requires 
scientists to be on board.  The ship will collect critical 
scientific information to evaluate the impact of oceans on climate 
change and to look specifically at the role of the Coral Triangle in 
preserving the world's marine biodiversity. 
 
¶3. (U) The opportunity to send the ship to Indonesian waters is a 
historic first in marine science but has a short shelf life. 
Indonesia has never allowed a government scientific research vessel 
to conduct joint research in its waters.  We have received 
assurances from the Indonesian military that they will approve the 
necessary voyage permits, largely because the conference is a 
priority of President Yudhoyono's.  If we cannot time the voyage for 
the World Oceans Conference, the offer may expire.  The Indonesian 
scientific ministries are anxious to partner and have already set 
aside ship time for their own research vessel, the Baruna Jaya, to 
accompany the Okeanos on a joint research program.  The Indonesians 
see this collaboration as the first step in what they hope will 
become multi-year scientific collaboration with the U.S. and will 
help serve as a model of open global collaboration to advance the 
world's scientific agenda. 
 
-------------------- 
Benefits of a Voyage 
-------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) An Okeanos voyage to Indonesia would provide multiple 
benefits.  It would: 
 
--Signal the strong support of the United States government saving 
one of the most geologically active and biologically diverse regions 
of the world; 
--Advance scientific exploration of this area; 
--Showcase NOAA technology to the rest of the world; 
--Establish a new paradigm in marine research through the Okeanos' 
telepresence capabilities; 
--Provide a wealth of information on the role of oceans in climate 
change to understand the marine ecosystem and climate change 
impacts; and 
--Encourage Indonesia to be more open to international scientific 
collaboration. 
 
¶5. (U) There is also an important public diplomacy element.  The 
Okeanos Explorer's advanced image-capture, sampling, and 
communications systems will enable researchers and the public to 
view flora, fauna, and physical undersea features that would be 
otherwise inaccessible.  These images could be beamed to the World 
Oceans Conference and CTI Summit to provide real-time exploration 
imagery of areas never before seen by man.  News Corporation has 
virtually assured us that they would air coverage of the voyage on 
Fox News and we are working with the National Geographic Channel on 
a possible documentary.  We believe this story will be picked up 
around the world.  Here in Indonesia, we would be seen as working 
cooperatively with Indonesians on a topic of great importance to 
them. 
 
---------------- 
Making it Happen 
---------------- 
 
¶6. (U) Getting the world's best exploration and research vessel to 
make its maiden voyage to the World Oceans Conference while 
conducting vital research in the most diverse marine area is too 
good an opportunity to pass up.  But we need funding.  NOAA will 
soon make an internal decision on whether to send the Okeanos, but 
 
JAKARTA 00002186  002 OF 002 
 
 
will stop planning efforts unless some funding has been located. 
NOAA has no international budget for this unexpected opportunity, 
which would cost $4.7 million.  We believe that the benefits of the 
mission far outweigh the costs and believe that funding can be 
provided by State Department, NOAA and private donations.  USAID has 
notionally committed $500,000 in parallel financing for affiliated 
marine research collaboration with the Government of Indonesia.  In 
order to meet NOAA's ship planning deadlines, we need a signal of $1 
million in State funding by mid-December. 
 
HUME