08JAKARTA278
Indonesian Input for New Required Energy Report
Mon Feb 11 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHJA #0278 0420930
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 110930Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7958
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHDCUNCLAS JAKARTA 000278 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/MTS AND EEB/ESC/IEC--B. Glenn Griffin 
DOE FOR CUTLER/PI-32 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG SENV APER ABUD ID
SUBJECT: Indonesian Input for New Required Energy Report 
 
REF: STATE 10743 (New Energy Reporting Requirement) 
 
Further to Department's request for information on post energy 
reporting, we provide the following responses keyed to reftel: 
 
-- A. The economic section leads the embassy country team on energy 
issues as defined in paragraph 3 of reftel.  Foreign Agricultural 
Service representatives also provide expertise and analysis in the 
biofuels sector capitalizing on their deep knowledge of biofuels 
feedstocks.  The economic section has a dedicated energy and mineral 
resources officer as well as an energy and mineral resources FSN 
staff member.  The FAS section has two officers and an FSN, who 
covers the biofuels sector. 
 
-- B.  The energy and mineral resources officer and FSN assistant in 
the economic section both devote 75 percent of their time to energy 
issues.  A second FSN in the ESTH section spends five percent of her 
time covering civilian nuclear energy issue.  The economic counselor 
devotes 10 percent of his time to energy issues.  The two FAS 
officers each devote five percent of their time to energy issues. 
The FAS FSN devotes 25 percent of his time to energy issues 
involving biofuels and palm oil. 
 
-- C. The FS-2 Energy and Mineral Resources Officer, who is a 
generalist with no technical, engineering, or scientific background, 
has the following energy-related responsibilities: 
o Promotes U.S. trade and investment in Indonesia in close 
cooperation with all relevant elements of the Country Team.  Serves 
on the Oil and Gas, Mining, and Power Generation Committees of the 
American Chamber of Commerce in Indonesia. 
o Counsels U.S. firms on market opportunities and policy issues 
affecting Indonesia's energy sectors, as well as reporting on the 
security of U.S. energy companies in Indonesia. 
o Analyzes and reports on the exploration, development, production, 
marketing and environmental impact of oil, gas, alternative energy 
resources in Indonesia;  also evaluates Indonesia's efforts in power 
sector deregulation, power generation, and development of renewable 
energy resources. 
o Evaluates Indonesian energy projects for USG lending and insurance 
institutions. 
 
--The FSN Assistant, who also has no technical, engineering, or 
scientific training related to energy, has the following 
responsibilities: 
o Gathers and analyzes data on the oil, gas, and electric power 
sectors from a wide variety of government and private sources and 
maintains databases of relevant statistics in those three sectors. 
o Maintains the statistical database for the embassy's biannual 
Petroleum Report and other long-term reports as needed.  Drafts the 
monthly energy highlights cables.  Drafts spot reports on energy 
developments as needed. 
o Develops and maintains good working contacts within relevant 
Indonesian ministries, regulatory agencies, and the private sector 
in the petroleum, mining and electric power sectors. 
 
-- D. State Budget: 
--- personnel: 
FS-2/3 Econ Officer salary (75% energy/25% minerals) 
 
Total FSN-8/1 FSN Assistant = $13,823 
FSN cost related to energy (75%) = $10,367 
 
--- programs 
 
FS-2 Econ Officer energy travel funds: $1200 
FS-2 Econ Officer energy rep funds: $375