08KAMPALA735
NORTHERN UGANDA NOTES (MAY 3-30, 2008)
Thu Jun 05 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kampala
VZCZCXRO1988 
RR RUEHGI RUEHRN RUEHROV 
DE RUEHKM #0735/01 1571146 
ZNR UUUUU ZZH 
R 051146Z JUN 08 
FM AMEMBASSY KAMPALA 
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0378 
INFO RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0720 
RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE 
RUEHXR/RWANDA COLLECTIVE 
RUEHGI/AMEMBASSY BANGUI 0016 
RUEHTO/AMEMBASSY MAPUTO 0490 
RUEHSA/AMEMBASSY PRETORIA 3461 
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KAMPALA 000735 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PASS TO USAID AND OFDA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREF ASEC EAID UG SU CG
 
SUBJECT: NORTHERN UGANDA NOTES (MAY 3-30, 2008) 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: The following Northern Uganda Notes provide 
information on the situation on the ground and USG activities aimed 
at meeting Mission's objectives in northern Uganda. These 
objectives include promoting regional stability through peace and 
security, good governance, access to social services, economic 
growth, and humanitarian assistance. Post appreciates feedback from 
consumers on the utility of this product and any gaps in information 
that need to be filled. End Summary. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
PEACE AND RECONCILIATION PROCESSES 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2. (U) LRA leader Joseph Kony failed to appear for a meeting at 
Rikwangba, southern Sudan with northern elders and legal experts on 
May 10. In a statement on May 13, Northern elders condemned the 
diaspora who they claim were working against the peace. Kony 
allegedly wrote a letter dated May 19 removing hopes for a 
negotiation. The message, written in Luo was delivered to Martin 
Aliker, a Senior Presidential Advisor through a trusted 
intermediary. Kony said he was not ready to sign the agreement 
because he feared he would be hanged by a court in Europe or in 
Uganda. In the letter, Kony vowed to continue fighting rather than 
to surrender and get killed. A member of the GOU peace delegation 
said they have not received Kony's communication and that the final 
agreement remained available for him to sign. Post has not been 
able to authenticate the letter. 
 
¶3. (U) On May 6 and 7, legal experts explained the provisions for 
justice and accountability to northern leaders who were to meet Kony 
on May 10. The major issues discussed included the traditional 
justice system (mato oput) and the Special Division of the High 
Court to be set up to try the rebels for war crimes and crimes 
against humanity. The GOU has not renewed the Cessation of 
Hostilities Agreement, which expired on April 10. On May 22, 
Principal Judge Justice James Ogoola appointed Dan Akiiki Kizza to 
head the War Crimes Court, which would handle a trial of top LRA 
commanders implicated in crimes against humanity. Two other judges 
were appointed on the war court including Justice Eldad Mwangusya 
and Justice Ibanda Nahamanya. Justice Ogoola said a team from the 
High Court was working out the appropriate structures, personnel, 
and tools that would be required. 
 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE AND ECONOMIC RECOVERY 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4. (U) IDP returns continue at a slow pace across the Acholi 
sub-region. The latest UN population movement statistics from March 
2008 show 12 per cent of IDPs have returned home, 36 percent of the 
IDPs have moved to sites closer to their homes in order to better 
access land, and 52 percent of the population remains in the camps. 
IDPs have voiced apprehension over Kony's refusal to sign a final 
peace agreement, but it does not appear to be adversely affecting 
the return process. Local leaders continue to support de-linking the 
peace process from return and recovery. 
 
¶5. (U) UNHCR reports increasing incidents of forced eviction by 
landlord's who have been hosting the IDPs. Landlords are levying 
rent on IDPs remaining in camps in greater numbers, and pushing IDPs 
out who refuse to pay. It is important to note that levying rent in 
camps is not a new trend; many IDPs have been paying some low level 
of rent. However, there had always been a great deal of leniency. 
There is concern that more vulnerable households will be pushed to 
more marginal areas. Currently, good statistics on the magnitude of 
forced eviction are not available. Thuggery and theft are also 
reported on the increase in both return areas and camps. 
 
¶6. (U) WFP and FAO continue to report that over 80 percent of the 
population has access to up to four acres of land, and the trend 
towards improved household food security continues. Direct 
distribution of agricultural inputs such as seeds and tools were 
required in only a few targeted area. The focus of food security 
interventions was shifting to farmer-based seed selection and 
storage for future seasons; strengthening local seed systems (versus 
direct distributions); and strengthening animal health care 
capacity. 
 
¶7. (U) On May 20, Gulu District Disaster Management Chairman 
Charles Uma announced there would be no more emergency relief 
supplies for the IDPs. He explained that the security situation had 
improved and that many people were returning to their homes. He 
encouraged the communities to plan to be self sustaining. 
 
¶8. (U) UNOCHA reports the Humanitarian Consolidated Appeal (CAP) 
for 2008 is 31 percent funded, and aid agencies and government 
officials report that emerging humanitarian activities in the north 
are being curtailed because of the decline in funding and rising 
food costs. Some of the decline might also be attributed to 
increases in recovery and development assistance that are not well 
tracked through CAP. In May, UNOCHA piloted an Integrated Assessment 
Tool to aid the community and local government's decisions on camp 
phase out. The tool covers health, education, water and sanitation, 
livelihoods, shelter, agriculture and food security and security 
(risk of mines and presence of civilian police). The first 
assessment was completed in Lalogi sub-county, Gulu District and 
will soon be rolled out in other areas. 
 
--------------- 
USG Activities: 
--------------- 
 
¶9. (U) Extension of basic services such as education, healthcare 
and access to safe water, to return areas remained a concern. 
Humanitarian agencies and the GOU continue to report high numbers of 
children remaining in camps to access schools. Districts in the 
Acholi sub-region have prioritized the "return" of primary schools; 
however, the teacher:student ratio remains critically low. USAID, 
in conjunction with the Ministry of Education (MOE), supports 
in-service training, a recruitment incentive for hardship areas, and 
is looking at ways to help communities build teacher housing. 
USAID/OFDA is rehabilitating and constructing latrines at schools in 
return areas, and increasing hygiene education. This promotes girls 
participation in education as well as the return process. 
 
¶10. (U) Hepatitis E continues to spread in Kitgum District. WHO 
reports 1991 cases to date. USAID/OFDA partners are increasing 
latrine coverage and hygiene promotion in the affected areas, 
promotion in the affected areas, and CDC deployed a team May 30. On 
Friday May 30, USAID/OFDA traveled to Hepatitis E affected areas in 
Kitgum district. Mortality rates are below emergency levels. 
However, due to low latrine coverage and poor sanitation the disease 
continues to spread. WHO reports a total of 1991 cases since the 
outbreak began in October 2007. USAID/OFDA partners IRC and AVIS 
are increasing water and sanitation activities in affected areas. 
USAID/OFDA recommends further support of these activities. On June 
1, a CDC team arrived in Kitgum district to provide support to the 
MOHR. 
 
- - - - - - - - 
SECURITY UPDATE 
- - - - - - - - 
 
¶11. (U) Human Rights Watch (HRW) reported on May 19 that the LRA 
had carried out more than 100 abductions in the Central African 
Republic (CAR), Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and South Sudan 
since February. HRW said the captured boys are made to act as 
porters or are subjected to military training. The girls are 
allegedly used as sex slaves. HRW appealed to the international 
community to end the spree of new LRA abductions and sexual 
violence, and to execute arrest warrants issued by the International 
Criminal Court (ICC) for the group's leaders. 
 
¶12. (U) On May 20, armed LRA rebels reportedly invaded Kapili 
village, 75 kilometers northwest of Dungu, eastern DRC and displaced 
the entire population. An unspecified number of people were 
abducted. According to the Justice and Peace Commission of the 
Dungu Diocese, the rebels looted property and occupied houses that 
were left behind by fleeing Congolese villagers. Meanwhile, on May 
25, the ICC said it was investigating the alleged abductions and 
attacks. 
 
¶13. (U) A May report released by the Civil Society Organizations 
for Peace in Northern Uganda recommended that all former LRA rebels 
and persons holding illegal guns should be disarmed in order to 
achieve total peace in the region. The coalition of 77 local and 
international NGOs cautioned that the recovered weapons should be 
well documented, stored or destroyed. 
 
¶14. (U) There were reports that the risk of unexploded devices was 
slowing down the return of IDPs to their homes. Seven children were 
killed in an explosion in the north mid-May. The army said the 
explosion was caused by a cluster bomb. Meanwhile, the killing of 
Local Council Chairman of Okede village, in Adilang Sub County, by 
Karamojong warriors, prompted IDPs, who had returned to their 
villages on the border with Karamoja region, to threaten to return 
to the camps, if the army did not deploy to protect them. 
 
-- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
FROM THE MEDIA AND THE WEB 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶15. (U) In a press statement released on May 26, the ICC appealed to 
the international community to put a stop to aid supplies to the 
LRA, in order to put a squeeze on its leader Joseph Kony. Media 
reports said the ICC was encouraging efforts to capture Kony. The 
ICC Registrar, Sivan Arbia was reportedly in Uganda to discuss the 
indictments and prosecution of Kony. 
 
 
¶16. (U) On May 6 the leader of the LRA delegation, James Obita 
refuted media reports that Kony had been injured during clashes with 
his troops. He also dismissed talk that Kony had killed his current 
Deputy, ICC-indictee Okot Odhiambo. 
 
BROWNING