08KHARTOUM265
GoSS ASKS FOR HELP WITH ROADS
Sun Feb 24 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO5624
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #0265 0550637
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 240637Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0019
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVEUNCLAS KHARTOUM 000265 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON ELNT EAID PREL PGOV SU
SUBJECT: GoSS ASKS FOR HELP WITH ROADS 
 
¶1.  (U) This is an action request - see para. 8. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Summary:  On February 22, GoSS Minister of Roads and 
Transport David Deng Athorbei paid a call on the Congen to request 
assistance with the purchase of road building equipment that he said 
is urgently needed to open up a new road connecting Southern Sudan 
to Ethiopia and Djibouti.  The GoSS, he said, is increasingly 
worried about instability in Kenya and the reliability of Mombassa 
as a port for the shipment of critically needed supplies to the 
South.  Already Southern Sudan is suffering sharply rising prices 
for such commodities as fuel and bread because of the difficulties 
in Kenya, and the GoSS feels it needs to have alternative 
transportation options to protect itself from future problems.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The Minister presented the Congen with a letter and an 
attachment outlining a request for $4.3 million worth of road 
building equipment.  The equipment is urgently needed to complete 
construction of a new highway to the Ethiopian border.  The 
Ethiopians, in order to encourage trade with Southern Sudan, are in 
the process of completing a new road into the South, and the 
Minister indicated that when it was completed inside Ethiopia they 
had agreed to build another 50 kilometers of it on the Sudanese side 
of the border if the GoSS would supply them with the petrol needed 
to perform the work.  However, that still left about 45 kilometers 
of new road that the GoSS will have to build on its own to complete 
the project. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Minister said that recent unrest in Kenya had awakened 
the GoSS to the urgent need to expand its transportation 
infrastructure so that the South was not totally dependent on Kenya 
for nearly all of its critically needed imports.  Already, the South 
has been seriously affected by the problems in Kenya and is now 
paying much higher prices for such commodities as fuel and even 
bread.  The GoSS has to develop, he said, alternative transportation 
routes so as not to leave itself vulnerable to the instability of 
its neighbors.  The GoSS, he also indicated, was very pessimistic 
about the future stability of Kenya. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The Congen also remarked that he had heard that some SPLA 
military supplies had been seized by the GoK, and wondered if that 
was not also a motivating factor in seeking an alternate port to 
Mombassa.  The Minister admitted that it was, and the feeling in the 
South was that the Ethiopians would be more helpful in this regard. 
 
¶6. (SBU) The Congen commented that it sm 
Mind needed 
intensive maintenance?  The Minister responded that the GoSS 
understood that and had started programs to train the mechanics 
needed, and had set aside a half million dollars with which to buy 
spare parts when the equipment was purchased. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Asked why the GoSS simply did not hire the work done, the 
Minister complained that their past contracts with foreign road 
building companies had not been satisfactory.  The GoSS considered 
that it had been taken advantage of, and felt it urgently needed to 
develop its own capacity to build road infrastructure. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Comment and Action Request: It is understandable why the 
GoSS wants to create a wider based, more reliable transportation 
infrastructure that does not hold it hostage to developments in any 
one of its neighbors.  They are highly vulnerable to the current 
unrest in Kenya, which has had a major negative impact on their 
economy.  The request for assistance was delivered by the Congen to 
USAID, but he was told it was highly unlikely USAID would be able to 
honor it.  However, a transportation route into Ethiopia is a 
critical economic and security requirement for the GoSS.  If any ESF 
funds could be used for this purpose, Post suggests that serious 
consideration be given to providing the assistance.  Reducing the 
isolation of the South and building its economy both helps it to 
deal from a position of strength with the NCP, which uses just these 
kinds of vulnerabilities to its advantage, and it will reduce the 
effects of regional instability on the Southern Sudan. 
 
 
FERNANDEZ