08KHARTOUM168
GOSS LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY
Mon Feb 04 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO8389
RR RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #0168 0350552
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 040552Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9871
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVEUNCLAS KHARTOUM 000168 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM EAID SU
SUBJECT: GOSS LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 
 
¶1. (SBU) On February 1 the Consul General and the visiting DCM 
hosted a lunch for four members of the South Sudan Legislative 
Assembly (SSLA), including Peter Deshir, Chair of the Information 
and Culture Committee, Agnes Lasuba, Chair of the Peace and 
Reconciliation Committee, Prof Barry Wanja, Chair of the Economic 
Committee, and Martin Tako on the Gender, Social Welfare Committee. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The mood of the legislators concerning the CPA was 
generally pessimistic.  Distrust of the NCP's intentions runs deep 
in the South, and they expressed little confidence that the 
elections scheduled for 2009 would come off as planned.  In their 
view, there was little incentive on the part of the NCP to follow 
through on a path that would probably lead to their loss of power. 
On one point they were firm, however: that the 2011 referendum on 
southern independence must take place and on time.  Anything the NCP 
did to delay or cancel that event would almost certainly lead to a 
resumption of armed conflict.  In their view, separation would be 
the inevitable result of the referendum.  There was simply too much 
bitterness and distrust between the North and the South, aggravated 
by what they saw as a continued lack of commitment by Khartoum to 
adhere to the CPA.  International pressure was what forced the NCP 
to sign the peace agreement, and only continued international 
pressure had any hope of forcing its continued implementation. 
 
¶3. (SBU) CG asked how likely it was that we would see the kind of 
ethnic conflict in an independent southern Sudan that we are 
witnessing in Kenya and that so often erupts in Africa.  The 
legislators agreed that the potential exists, but felt that the SPLM 
as a political movement, at least for the next several years, was 
strong enough in the South to unite the people whatever their ethnic 
affiliation.  The danger was from unscrupulous politicians who in 
the future might stir up ethnic conflict as a means of personal 
advancement at the expense of the national welfare.  They praised 
President Kiir for his careful attention to maintaining a balanced 
ethnic representation in his government.  The decision to hold the 
recent CPA anniversary celebrations in the city of Wau instead of in 
Juba was also cited as part of a continuing effort to make all of 
southern Sudan feel part of a united whole, an effort they were 
confident would continue. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) CG then asked the legislators about Assembly relations 
with the executive branch of government, noting that Kiir had 
recently promulgated several key new laws by executive decree, 
bypassing the Legislative Assembly.  The CG had seen this kind of 
thing in other countries, and it almost always led to the weakening, 
and eventual marginalization, of the legislative branch of 
government, breaking down any check on executive power.  The 
legislators agreed that did often happen, but felt it was not a 
problem for them because under the system they have in place all 
executive decrees must be ratified by the South Sudan Legislative 
Assembly when it next met.  Therefore unacceptable decrees had only 
an interim effect and could be voted down by the Assembly. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The legislators said their biggest problem is lack of 
experience and resources.  In particular, they have little research 
capacity - which would be of enormous help in drafting laws and 
learning how to conduct their affairs.  They have a library, but no 
books and only a few computers.  They appealed to the USG to help 
them in this regard, and the CG promised to see what could be done. 
 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Comment: Strengthening the capacity of the South Sudan 
Legislative Assembly is a wise investment in the future of 
democratic development in the south.  Without an effective 
legislative branch of government, the tendency for the executive to 
assert supreme control over the government is a real temptation.  We 
will explore ways to assist the assembly. 
 
FERNANDEZ