08LISBON886
LISBON-MADRID JOINT COUNTRY TEAM
Fri Apr 11 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Lisbon
VZCZCXRO0196
PP RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHIK RUEHLZ RUEHROV
DE RUEHLI #0886/01 1021732
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 111732Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY LISBON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6758
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES PRIORITY
RUEHLA/AMCONSUL BARCELONA PRIORITY 0317
RUEHPD/AMCONSUL PONTA DELGADA PRIORITY 0452UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 LISBON 000886 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EUR/WE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT BMGT SP PO
SUBJECT: LISBON-MADRID JOINT COUNTRY TEAM 
 
LISBON 00000886  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  This is a joint message from Embassies Lisbon and Madrid. 
 
¶2. SUMMARY: On March 25, the Country Teams of Embassies 
Lisbon and Madrid met to discuss law enforcement issues, 
counter-terrorism, common multilateral challenges, military 
cooperation strategy, and cost savings measures, as well as 
commercial and public diplomacy practices.  The meeting 
established areas where we can work together and share best 
practices already being used successfully in the neighboring 
country.  In particular, participants used the opportunity to 
identify immigration patterns and to discuss the impact on 
counter-terrorism and counter-narcotics efforts worldwide. 
Embassy Madrid also offered an overview on radicalization 
trends in Spain, which have not yet affected Portugal but 
could potentially become a problem in coming years. 
Ambassadors Aguirre and Stephenson praised the event and 
suggested a second joint meeting in two to three years.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
¶3.  As part of our continuing efforts to put in place "best 
practices" in Embassy management, Embassies Madrid and Lisbon 
initiated a joint Country Team to coordinate Mission 
Strategic Plans, share tactics and learn each other's 
approaches to mutual challenges.  We offer an outline of the 
program and a summary of the resulting initiatives and/or 
action items to spark similar programs at other Missions.  As 
a result of the day of intensive coordination between the two 
missions, we expect to realize significant 
cost-savings and enhanced effectiveness in our operations. 
 
¶4.  The agenda was based on MSP mission statements. Embassy 
Lisbon's country team traveled to Madrid for an all day 
session courtesy of Ambassador Stephenson's offer of air 
transportation for his staff.  Madrid is one hour ahead of 
Lisbon, so sessions ran from 1000 to 1830, including thematic 
breakout sessions during working lunches.  Topics included 
regional security coordination, Amcit outreach, 
multi-lateral issue coordination, energy, planning for the 
new Barcelona Law Enforcement Hub, counter-narcotics and drug 
interdiction, counter-terrorism, U.S. product export in the 
Iberian market, military training coordination, public 
diplomacy initiatives, energy conservation, and cost-saving 
measures. 
 
¶5.  Section chiefs from each country team served as "lead 
discussants" to frame issues for each agenda item and 
facilitate discussion, then tracked action items formulated 
during the joint sessions.  Some of the initiatives under 
consideration include: 
 
SECURITY: 
 
-- Joint Emergency Action Plan Exercise is tentatively 
scheduled for June 2008; 
 
-- RSOs will notify counterparts when convening an EAC and 
share EAC meeting results with counterparts; 
 
LAW ENFORCEMENT: 
 
--  More frequent visits by DEA & ICE to supplement ongoing 
ORA & LEGATT visits, along with additional coordination to 
ensure potential value added is exploited and overlapping 
activities avoided; 
 
--  Another "Operation All Inclusive" to promote 
international cooperation among law enforcement agencies 
working on counter-narcotics issues as a follow-up to the 
2007 operation; 
 
--  ICE Madrid proposed expansion of its current pilot "Bulk 
Cash" detection program to detect unreported cash courier 
operations departing Madrid en route to the United States via 
Portuguese airports; 
 
--  Embassy Lisbon to participate in Embassy Madrid,s weekly 
Law Enforcement and Counter-Terrorism Working Group meetings 
via DVC; 
 
OUTREACH: 
 
--  Explore whether there are opportunities for collaboration 
on volunteer projects linked to public 
diplomacy and citizen outreach, e.g. Lisbon's Habitat for 
Humanity volunteer project; 
 
--  Coordinate with agencies with regional responsibilities, 
e.g. ICE, DEA, on press outreach to schedule backgrounders 
and interviews with Lisbon press; 
 
LISBON 00000886  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
 
--  Cross train in public diplomacy and send Lisbon's 
Cultural specialist to Madrid for consultations with Madrid's 
Cultural Attache; 
 
--  Consider diplomatic exchange program for Embassy Madrid 
to have diplomats work in the Foreign Ministry (already 
operational in Lisbon through the Bilateral Commission); 
 
DEFENSE: 
 
-- Coordinate military training components (internal USG, 
bilateral and multilateral), particularly for interdiction 
activities and AFRICOM; 
 
COST-SAVING AND EFFICIENCY: 
 
--  Explore bulk pricing and combined orders for Embassy 
purchases, e.g. compact fluorescent light bulbs for Green 
Embassy initiative; 
 
--  If residential furniture leasing program is approved by 
Department and Madrid's pilot program achieves expected cost 
savings, consider extending contract to Embassy Lisbon, an 
unfurnished post; 
 
--  League of Green Embassies: both posts to continue to 
share energy efficiency and recycling strategies; 
 
--  Request EUR support to encourage OBO funding for "green" 
initiatives that require upfront investment for long-term 
savings; 
 
ENERGY: 
 
--  Explore addition of a Madrid stop in the Fall 2008 
Renewable Energy Trade Mission under development by USCS 
Portugal, as well as tie-in with Madrid AmCham September 
29-30 energy event; 
 
COMMERCIAL: 
 
--  Work with select U.S. Export Assistance Centers to 
organize a multi-city U.S. visit for the Senior Commercial 
Officers to promote Iberian market opportunities to U.S. 
exporters (Winter 2008); 
 
--  Coordinate preparation of Iberian market research reports 
with focus on Energy, ICT, Medical Equipment, Pollution 
Control Equipment and Travel/Tourism Infrastructure; 
 
--  Joint advocacy for biotech initiatives in the EU since 
Spain and Portugal are two of only seven EU countries that 
allow biotech products; 
 
--  Explore joint participation in the February 2009 Mobil 
World Congress Exhibition in Barcelona and EuroSun 2008 in 
Lisbon; 
 
CONSULAR: 
 
--  Resume joint consular conference initiative and possibly 
initiate consular exchange program in 2009; 
 
--  Extend Madrid program to enter names of sexual predators 
and pedophiles into consular CLASS listings; 
 
--  Continue use of U.S. state victim's programs to assist 
Amcits in the Iberian Peninsula (may include funding for 
Amcits to travel and testify at trials); 
 
¶6.  Given staff rotation through our missions, our intent is 
to repeat the process every two or three years if possible. 
Apart from the specific initiatives resulting from the joint 
country team, the opportunity to forge working relationships 
with counterparts was invaluable and is expected to have 
intangible benefits as well.  We welcome suggestions from the 
Department and other posts 
regarding how to implement the proposals or enhance the 
program in the future. 
Stephenson