08MANAGUA102
PEACE CORPS DIRECTOR'S MEETING WITH ORTEGA POSITIVE
Mon Jan 28 00:00:00 +0100 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0102/01 0281957
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 281957Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2005
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 000102 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 01/28/2018 
TAGS: PGOV ECON KDEM NU
SUBJECT: PEACE CORPS DIRECTOR'S MEETING WITH ORTEGA POSITIVE 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Paul A. Trivelli for reasons 1.4(b,d) 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY: On Thursday, January 17, Worldwide Peace 
Corps Director Ronald Tschetter, met with Nicaraguan 
President Daniel Ortega to provide an overview of Peace Corps 
programs and activities.  Ortega, First Lady Rosario Murillo, 
and GON ministers displayed interest in, and satisfaction 
with, U.S. assistance, both from the Peace Corps and USAID. 
Ortega expressed regret at not having an opportunity to visit 
a Peace Corps project in 2007, but pledged to do so in 2008. 
The meeting was positive, productive, and free of any anti-US 
rhetoric.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Director Tschetter Provides Peace Corps Overview 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  (U) Director Tschetter provided Ortega, Murillo, and the 
ministers of health, education, and agriculture with an 
overview of the Peace Corps, global reach and presence -- 
commenting that the Peace Corps has some 8,000 volunteers 
working 74 countries, the highest number in 37 years -- and 
its program here in Nicaragua.  He explained that the 
Nicaraguan program is in its 27th year and currently numbers 
nearly 170 volunteers working in education, health, and 
agriculture sectors.  Tschetter assured Ortega that the 
volunteers have a "strong understanding" of Nicaragua through 
their daily interactions at the community level and expressed 
the Peace Corps, sincere appreciation for the "chance to 
serve" in Nicaragua. 
 
Keen Interest in Organic Products 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3.  (U) Ortega, Murillo, and Agricultural Minister Ariel 
Bucardo all expressed a strong interest in organic 
agricultural projects, especially aimed at small producers 
and women.  Murillo asked about an organic agriculture 
program that had operated "for years in the past" and queried 
whether this program was still operational.  The Ambassador 
mentioned that a Michigan State University program and 
another implemented through the Adventist Development Relief 
Agency (ADRA) recently ended, but that a new agricultural 
sector program was recently launched in northern Nicaragua. 
Picking up the theme, Bucardo repeatedly emphasized the 
importance of organic agriculture for small farmers and asked 
for U.S. support.  He acknowledged that Nicaragua was 
producing beef and coffee in this way, but lamented the loss 
of an organic production program a few years earlier.  Ortega 
was advised of the fact that, according to Peace Corps 
project evaluation reports, upwards of 60 % of participants 
in small agricultural programs are women. 
 
"Project Excellence" Big Success 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶4.  (U) Prompted by Tshcetter,s description of the Peace 
Corps' emphasis on educational programs, Ortega turned to 
Education Minister De Castilla for comment.  In an 
uncharacteristically effusive style, De Castilla praised 
USAID,s "Project Excellence" program, stressing that this is 
a model program that others can and should learn from.  De 
Castilla also underlined the fact that the ministry has very 
good relations with both the Peace Corps and USAID. 
 
Supporting Local Farmers 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5.  (U) Following Tschetter,s overview of Peace Corps, 
program in Nicaragua, Ortega used the theme of rural support 
to segue into a discussion of his government's efforts to 
support local farmers by restoring grain storage 
infrastructure and working directly with small farmers to 
offer them "just" prices for their products.  He criticized 
speculators for having driven up grain prices in the wake of 
Hurricane Felix and pledged that his government -- through 
ENABAS, the national grain board -- would stabilize supplies 
and prices of basic grains while improving farmers, lives. 
Within this context, Ortega expressed his gratitude for the 
work of volunteers who are assisting rural agricultural towns 
and families. 
 
¶6.  (U) The Ambassador pointed out the importance of building 
"connections" between (small) producers and exporters and 
businesses in the U.S., explaining that improving and 
strengthening the entire production chain is a key success 
factor.  He specifically mentioned Walmart,s venture into 
the agricultural market and the positive impact that is 
having on smaller producers linked into their supply chains. 
 
Emphasis on Community Health Programs 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7.  (U) Acknowledging that the communities in which there are 
active health promotion programs have "very positive" 
opinions of the U.S., Health Minister Gonzalez commented that 
he would like to see the assistance "better organized" but 
did not go into details, stating that the topic would be 
discussed the following day in a meeting at the Ministry.  De 
Castilla also remarked on the importance -- and success -- of 
Peace Corps and USAID community health projects and their 
vital link to the success of community education. 
 
Ortega Interested in Exchange Program 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶8.  (U) After learning that hundreds of PCVs have cycled 
through Nicaragua during the program,s 27 years in 
Nicaragua, Ortega asked if the Peace Corps offered an 
exchange program, whereby qualified Nicaraguan youths -- he 
specifically mentioned women -- could go to the U.S. to see 
and learn about U.S. markets and business opportunities with 
an eye towards identifying future opportunities in Nicaragua 
upon their return. 
 
Members of U.S. Delegation 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
Ambassador Trivelli 
Kathryn Rulon, Deputy Director of Peace Corps programs in 
Latin America and the Pacific 
George Baldino, Director of the Peace Corps program in 
Nicaragua 
Carol Barrick, Peace Corps Nicaragua Deputy Director 
 
Members of Nicaraguan Delegation 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
Rosario Murillo, First Lady 
Guillermo Gonzalez, Health Minister 
Ariel Bucardo, Agriculture and Forestry Minister 
Miguel De Castilla, Education Minister 
Representatives from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
TRIVELLI