08MANAGUA1102
NICARAGUA:  WOMEN'S PROTESTS AGAINST ORTEGA GAIN
Tue Aug 26 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO8942
PP RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #1102/01 2391548
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 261548Z AUG 08
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3092
INFO RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION PRIORITY 0052
RUEHTG/AMEMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA PRIORITY 4319
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUMIAAA/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL//J2/J3/J5// PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 MANAGUA 001102 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN SJUSTICE 
DEPT FOR INR/IAA AEMERSON 
DEPT FOR DRL GMAGGIO 
DEPT FOR G/IWI 
DEPT FOR USOAS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/26/2018 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KDEM KWMN PINR NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA:  WOMEN'S PROTESTS AGAINST ORTEGA GAIN 
REGIONAL TRACTION 
 
REF: A. 2006 MANAGUA 2599 
     ¶B. 08 MANAGUA 349 
     ¶C. 08 MANAGUA 964 
 
Classified By: DCM Richard M. Sanders for reasons 1.4 (b, d) 
 
SUMMARY 
- - - - - 
 
¶1.  (C) Women's rights leaders and activists in Paraguay and 
Honduras have staged back-to-back protests against having 
President Daniel Ortega of the Sandinista National Liberation 
Front (FSLN) set foot on their soil and have reignited 
mainstream interest in the unresolved sexual abuse scandal 
involving Ortega and his step-daughter Zoilamerica Narvaez. 
The revival of interest in the case has galvanized local 
Nicaraguan women's rights networks and sharpened the divide 
within the Nicaraguan left.  The FSLN's defensive reaction, 
and in particular the hostile campaign of Rosario Murillo, 
Ortega's wife and Zoilamerica's biological mother, to 
discredit female critics as "demons" and agents of the U.S. 
Government, indicates that the reemergence of solidarity for 
Zoilamerica has hit a nerve with Nicaragua's first couple. 
The fact that the repudiation is coming from feminist groups 
outside Nicaragua also reveals Ortega's past reputation as a 
child molester and rapist has been neither forgotten nor 
forgiven. END SUMMARY 
 
ZOILAMERICA CASE NEVER CLOSED 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  (C)  In 1998, Zoilamerica Narvaez came forward with a 
formal complaint of sexual abuse--including rape, harassment, 
and psychological and physical trauma--against her 
step-father Daniel Ortega which, according to her testimony, 
began when she was 11 and continued for 20 years (ref. A). 
The case was never fully prosecuted locally, in part because 
Ortega enjoyed parliamentary immunity and was further 
protected by "el pacto," the power-sharing deal he cut with 
ex-president and convicted felon Arnoldo Aleman of the 
Constitutional Liberal Party (PLC).  The female judge who 
ruled in Ortega's favor, Juana Mendez, is a fervent FSLN 
militant and widely despised by Nicaraguan women who 
abandoned the Frente for the dissident Sandinista Renovation 
Movement (MRS).  When Zoilamerica's case was dismissed in the 
Nicaraguan courts, she took it to the Inter-American 
Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) in 2001, where it has 
languished ever since.  Although she has sent repeated 
letters to the IACHR requesting a hearing, she has yet to 
receive a formal response.  Since Ortega's election victory 
in November 2006, she told us she has preferred to stay out 
of the public spotlight, not out of fear for herself, but 
rather in the interest of protecting her friends and allies. 
Now at the age of 40, she continues to feel threatened by and 
exposed to the abuse of power. 
 
PARAGUAYAN AND HONDURAN WOMEN TO ORTEGA: STAY OUT 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Spain's leading center-left daily "El Pais" and 
well-known Peruvian writer Mario Vargas Llosa have put the 
Zoilamerica story back in the media spotlight with recent 
articles.  Now the Paraguayan and Honduran women protests 
have produced a "snowball effect" which their Nicaraguan 
counterparts hope will have international reach.  According 
to local media, on August 14, Paraguay's newly-appointed 
Minister for Women's Affairs, Gloria Rubin, voiced her 
objections to having President Ortega attend the August 15 
inauguration of President-elect Fernando Lugo, underscoring 
Ortega's history of abuse and "sexual slavery" of his own 
step-daughter.  Rubin was clear that she was speaking out of 
personal conviction and not in any official capacity.  Her 
defiant act inspired other women and human rights activists 
to come forward in solidarity with Zoilamerica and sparked 
international condemnation of Ortega.  The Ortega team 
abruptly canceled the trip to Asuncion, officially citing 
mechanical problems with the presidential airplane. 

¶4.  (SBU) On August 18, Honduran women's activists, led by 
the feminist Gladys Lanzas of the Movement of Women for 
Peace, picked up the baton, repudiating Ortega who is 
expected to travel to Tegucigalpa for the August 25 induction 
of Honduras into the Bolivian Alternative for the Americas 
(ALBA) agreement.  "If he has any shame left," Lanzas 
reportedly chided, "he should not come."  Echoing the outrage 
voiced by the left-leaning Nicaraguan women's movement, the 
Honduran feminists insisted Ortega did not deserve to be 
"received and applauded" in their country. They have asked 
President Zelaya not to allow Ortega at the ALBA ceremony, 
warning there will be more protests if he attends. The 
resignation of the Honduran Minister of Women's Affairs, 
Selma Estrada de Ucles, as a further gesture in repudiation 
of the Ortega visit, combined with the wave of protests has 
sent an even stronger signal that women throughout the region 
stand united in solidarity on this issue. (NOTE: 
Coincidentally, Ortega cancelled a trip to the Dominican 
Republic scheduled over the weekend. END NOTE.) 
 
NICARAGUAN WOMEN'S MOVEMENT COMMITTED TO PURSUING JUSTICE 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Declaring him a "coward" with no moral authority to 
govern, the Nicaraguan Autonomous Women's Movement (MAM) 
(refs B.C.), praised Rubin for speaking out against Ortega 
and proclaimed that women around the world were coming 
together in this fight for justice and solidarity.  This 
network of women has led the charge denouncing Ortega 
domestically and internationally and vowed never to abandon 
Zoilamerica or ignore the consequences of Ortega's impunity. 
They have often accused the Ortega government of installing 
an "anti-gender policy" which includes the political 
persecution of women.  They find First Lady Rosario Murillo 
equally guilty of what they have termed a "patriarchal and 
anti-democratic" style of governance.  Leading MAM activists 
Sofia Montenegro, Patricia Orozco, and Juana Jimenez are 
calling for a global protest, stating they are certain that 
where there are women fighting for the rights of women, "the 
indignation will grow."  The reaction in Paraguay and 
Honduras also indicated that Ortega's image as a 
revolutionary was losing credibility even among the left, 
they observed.  MRS deputy and former FSLN militant Monica 
Baltodano deemed both the Paraguayan and Honduran protests 
legitimate and vindication for what Nicaraguan women had long 
been fighting. The renewed international attention has also 
raised hope among the Nicaraguan women's movement that the 
pressure will move the IACHR to take action on the 
controversial issue. 
 
¶6.  (C) Ortega's political rivals may be assessing whether 
they can exploit the international shaming of Ortega to their 
advantage.  On August 20, Enrique Quinonez, PLC deputy and 
Managua vice mayoral running on the PLC-Vamos Con Eduardo 
ticket, reportedly invited Zoilamerica to the National 
Assembly to present her case to the Commission for Peace, 
Defense, Governance, and Human Rights over which he presides. 
 Quinonez suggested that after listening to her, the 
commission might be willing to write a letter to the IACHR on 
her behalf, given that "Nicaragua had denied justice to 
Zoilamerica Narvaez."  MRS alternate deputy Hugo Torres and 
PLC deputy Jose Pallais worried that the rejection of Ortega 
taking place in other Latin American countries was 
embarrassing for the image of Nicaragua. 
 
MURILLO SPEAKS FOR ORTEGA, DISMISSES CRITICISM AS CIA PLOT 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶7.  (C) In the immediate aftermath of the Paraguayan 
protests, Rosario Murillo and the FSLN machinery went on the 
offensive in an attempt to discredit the international 
women's activists as paid agents of the U.S. Embassy and the 
CIA, and part of an elaborate media campaign of slander and 
insults against her and the president.  She chastised the 
international media for its complicity in joining the 
campaign of disparagement.  In a press monologue she 
delivered on official Channel 4 TV, Murillo dismissed 
Minister Rubin as a low-ranking secretary of "third or 
fourth" degree. She further explained that Rubin had ties 
with the "right wing remnants" of the Stroessner 
dictatorship, who never got over the fact that Nicaraguan 
homologue Anastasio Somoza had been assassinated on their 
turf.  Therefore, the attacks against Ortega were also a form 
of payback against the Sandinista Revolution.  (NOTE:  When 
the scandal first broke back in 1998, Murillo also accused 
Zoilamerica of being part of a plot against Daniel Ortega 
END NOTE.) Murillo also gave a lengthy and convoluted 
explanation that Ortega's presidential plane could not fly 
due to mechanical problems involving a leak in the gas tank 
and was unable to make the trip to Asuncion and return in 
time for an event planned the following day in Jinotega, 
underscoring how he needed to keep his commitment to the 
people.  She suggested those trying to bring down Ortega were 
sowing hatred instead of respecting the Government of Peace 
and Reconciliation. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) FSLN International Relations director Jacinto 
Suarez responded to the Honduran episode with a similar 
tactic to disparage and discredit the female protesters, 
calling them "devils" being paid by the "empire."  These 
women were "renegades of the left" with ties to the Communist 
Party.  Asserting that Lanzas had been expelled from all 
parties and unions in Honduras, he observed that she was just 
like all feminists "cut from the same cloth" and on "the same 
payroll."  Downplaying the hype, meanwhile, FSLN Deputy Edwin 
Castro insisted that as far as the Nicaraguan justice system 
was concerned, the Zoilamerica case is closed.  He speculated 
these feminists were just "rehashing" it like they always do 
close to an election. 
 
ZOILAMERICA EXPRESSES GRATITUDE FOR SHOW OF SOLIDARITY 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶9.  (C) Just as she thanked the editors of Spain's "EL Pais" 
for their moral support, in a letter posted on the Nicaraguan 
daily left-of-center "El Nuevo Diario" webblog, Zoilamerica 
thanked those like Gloria Rubin who were willing to speak out 
on behalf of her cause despite "political inconveniences." 
She expressed heartfelt gratitude for the outpouring of 
warmth and solidarity, underscoring that she had no economic 
nor political arrangement "of any kind" with her mother nor 
with Daniel Ortega. (NOTE:  Zoilamerica had recently told us 
privately that the rumors earlier in the year that she had 
reunited with her family were patently false, and probably an 
attempt by FSLN insiders to discredit her among her MRS 
supporters. END NOTE.)  She reiterated that her pursuit of 
justice was no longer about punishing her abuser but rather 
it was against the government of Nicaragua for having 
remained complicit in the denial of justice.  In her letter, 
she lamented that because of the IACHR process, her case 
continued to stagnate.  She has vowed to continue helping 
other victims of sexual violence and discrimination through 
her non-profit foundation "Sobrevivientes" (Survivors). 
Zoilamerica, now 40, is the daughter of Rosario Murillo and 
the late Jorge Narvaez Parajon, Murillo's first husband. 
Adopted legally by Daniel Ortega in 1986, her surname is 
officially Ortega Murillo a name she has since rejected in 
favor of her original family name of Narvaez. 
 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
 
¶10.  (C) The emblematic and controversial Zoilamerica case 
has never vanished from the country's collective memory, but 
its resurfacing just ahead of the November municipal 
elections--expected to be a referendum on the president and 
the FSLN--is particularly inconvenient for Ortega.  Although 
the electorate was also reminded of Ortega's alleged sexual 
misconduct ahead of the 2006 national elections, it did not 
prevent him from winning.  The revived interest in the case 
may have some impact in this year's municipal elections.  We 
shall see whether it is true, that as one contact recently 
told us, the people now would rather vote for a "tamal" 
(crook) than a "violador" (rapist). 
 
 
CALLAHAN