08MANAGUA485
NICARAGUA: EMBASSY SCIENCE FELLOWS PROGRAM
Mon Apr 21 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0003
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0485/01 1121533
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 211533Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2475
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS MANAGUA 000485 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
OES/STC - EKANE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV EAGR KSCA TSPL AMGT OTRA APER NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA: EMBASSY SCIENCE FELLOWS PROGRAM 
 
REF: STATE 28712 
 
¶1. (U) In response to reftel, Embassy Managua submits two proposals for the Embassy Science Fellows Program 2008: (i) The Nicaraguan National Autonomous University (UNAN) Biotechnology Laboratory, and (ii) UNAN Leptospirosis Epidemiology Research. Embassy Managua commits to providing one Science Fellow with housing, office support, in-country travel arrangements, where applicable, computer, e-mail/Internet access, mail, medical services, and other logistical support information. Post RSO has given specific support and office clearance for the receipt of a Fellow in support of the program.
 
PROPOSAL I:  UNAN BIOTECHNOLOGY LAB 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) The Nicaraguan National Autonomous University (UNAN) - 
Managua, Food Technology Laboratory conducts research activities in 
the areas of the molecular characterization of national cacao 
criollo and hybrid germplasms (microsatellite); micropropagation of 
timber-yielding  trees, such as teak and mahogany; and the detection 
of Genetically Modified Organisms (GMO-biovigilance program). 
 
¶3. (U) In addition to its work in micropropagation, microsatellite, 
and GMOs, the Food Technology Laboratory supports research in the 
molecular characterization of Phitaya (dragon fruit) using RFLP; the 
bioprospection of cellulasa in the Bosawas Natural Reserve of remote 
northern Nicaragua; and the identification and isolation of fungus 
cellulasa (ligno-cellulose degradation) used in the production of 
bioenergy.  Dr. Ivan Marin is the Director of the Food Technology 
Laboratory. 
 
Proposed Activities 
------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) UNAN's primary request for assistance is to characterize the 
molecular markers of the native Nicaraguan cacao germplasm through 
the application of Simple Sequence Repeats (SSR) microsatellite 
molecular DNA markers.  The laboratory hopes to identify the native 
cacao tree with the best genetic potential.  Technically, the 
techniques of molecular characterization germplasm (molecular 
markers) include the extraction and quantification of plant DNA; 
molecular marker applications - Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA 
(RDPS), Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphisms (AFLP) and SSR 
microsatellite; the assembly and running of Vertical Polyacrylamid 
Gel and Silver Stain; and the genetic interpretation of the obtained 
results using statistical programs such as Arlequin or Structure. 
 
¶5. (U) The germplasms of various endogenous vegetative resources, 
such as cacao, dragon fruit, avocado, corn and beans, require the 
protection of their DNA characteristics.  Researchers can then 
identify regions of the genome for disease tolerance, stress 
resistance, growth rate and yield.  Utilizing this methodology, the 
lab identified the peanut Mottle Potyvirus in Nicaragua, eventually 
eliminating the expensive import of foreign peanut seeds. 
 
¶6. (U) The Fellow would also work on the micropropagation of tissue 
culture involving the elaboration of tissue culture media (component 
and concentration).  This would require knowledge in growth 
regulating phytohormone applications; and Asepsis antibiotics use 
and pathogen contamination control. 
 
¶7. (U) In addition, the Fellow would provide assistance in GMO seed, 
grain, or plant detection, requiring knowledge in the methods of 
said detection, such as PCR and ELISA. 
 
¶8. (U) Secondary activities might include teaching the subject of 
Biotechnology to undergraduates, numbering 60 students per year; 
participating in the UNAN Bioscience Forum, an event held two or 
three times per year focusing on the development and diffusion 
biotechnology applications; and advising the biotechnology 
documentation center on how to organize itself. 
 
Installed Laboratory Equipment 
---------------------------- 
 
¶9. (U) Current laboratory equipment consists of: 
    a) Greenhouse; 
    b) Tissue Culture Room; 
    c) Autoclave; 
    d) PCR (Eppendorf); 
    e) Horizontal and Vertical Gel Electrophoresis; 
    f) Ethidium bromide stain; 
    g) Phenol - Chloroform DNA extraction; 
    h) Distillated water; 
    i) Refrigerated centrifuge (Eppendorf); and 
    j) Ph-Meter and precision balance. 
 
Required Skills 
--------------- 
 
¶10. (U) Substantive knowledge and practical experience in 
agrobiotechnology; Spanish language fluency. 
 
Preferred Time Frame 
-------------------- 
 
¶11. (U) Three months between May to November 2008 requiring a 
medical clearance (no security clearance is required). 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
¶12. (U) The Nicaraguan population, including the media and 
legislators, has limited understanding of biotechnology products. 
Generally, consumers associate biotechnology exclusively to GMOs. 
The lack of information reduces the level of acceptance of 
biotechnology products among consumers. 
 
¶13. (U) Nicaragua does not produce any biotechnology crops.  It does 
not have the technical resources to develop them for commercial 
purposes and has not imported biotechnology seeds for planting. 
Nicaragua is a large food aid recipient due to its limited capacity 
to supply food for human and animal consumption.  Yellow corn for 
animal feed is the only biotechnology crop imported from the United 
States.  Imports of other biotechnology products from other 
countries are limited or non-existent. 
 
¶14. (U) To date, Nicaragua's regulatory approach to biotech has been 
essentially science-based.  Nicaragua is a signatory of the 
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, under which the government began in 
2005 to require notifications of imports of living modified 
organisms (LMO) and risk analyses for such imports.  At present, 
there is no labeling regulation for food or feed containing GMOs. 
 
¶15. (U) A commission on Risk Analysis for GMOs (CONARGEN), composed of government officials and academics, conducts these risk analyses, and the Minister of Agriculture and Forestry makes a final decision on biotechnology imports.
 
¶16. (U) At present, yellow corn for animal feed is the only 
biotechnology commodity that has been subjected to risk analysis. 
Risk analyses for human food use have not been requested. 
Legislation allows for field-testing of biotechnology crops after 
the required risk analysis, but field trials of a biotech crop have 
never been conducted. 
 
¶17. (U) CONARGEN does not have the technical capability to test whether a product is transgenic or not, but its members are inclined to base their decisions on factual scientific data. The main problem is they lack the capacity and equipment to conduct detailed risk analysis. CONARGEN has expressed interest in developing such a properly equipped laboratory. UNAN's laboratory hopes to provide this capacity in plant health security to facilitate international trade.
 
PROPOSAL II: UNAN LEPTOSPIROSIS EPIDEMIOLOGY RESEARCH
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶18. (U) The Fellow will be working with the national Ministries of Agriculture and Forestry (MAGFOR), Health (MINSA) and the Nicaraguan National Autonomous University - Leon (UNAN-Leon) to control leptospirosis and other zoonotic diseases in Nicaragua. The Fellow will be working in the departments of Leon and Chinandega, where most of the leptospirosis cases are. Dr. William Jiron of UNAN-Leon will manage the proposal.
 
Proposed Activities 
------------------- 
 
¶19. (U) The Fellow will help local scientists to determine the 
zoonotic epidemiology of leptospirosis in domestic 
animals/livestock, and to isolate and characterize the leptospira 
organism in an attempt to break the cycle.  The Fellow will work 
with UNAN-Leon, MINSA, and MAGFOR on protocols to improve 
surveillance and diagnostics.  All diagnoses so far have been via 
serology.  No one in Nicaragua has isolated the organism from a 
suspected case in the last 15 years.  Isolating and characterizing 
the organism may require the Fellow to return to the U.S. with 
samples. 
 
¶20. (U) Systematic surveillance, an improved understanding of the 
epidemiology of leptospirosis, and improvement in the capacity to 
diagnose leptospirosis are necessary for development of strategies 
for the prevention and control of leptospirosis outbreaks. 
Improving the understanding of the distribution and epidemiology of 
leptospirosis in the region targeted for this proposal will lead to 
establishment of the most effective methods to control the disease 
and prevent outbreaks in the region.  Such methods may also be 
applicable to other Central American countries at risk for 
leptospirosis outbreaks. 
 
Required Skills 
--------------- 
 
¶21. (U) Veterinarian and zoonotic disease specialist, with emphasis 
in microbiology and experience extraction methods of DNA from 
bacteria for polymerase chain reaction; and Spanish language 
fluency. 
 
Preferred Time Frame 
-------------------- 
 
¶22. (U) Three months between May to November 2008 requiring a 
medical clearance (no security clearance is required). 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
¶23. (U) Leptospirosis is recognized as an emerging infectious 
disease with recent large outbreaks reported from many locations 
throughout the world.  The incidence of infection is significantly 
higher in warm climates compared to temperate regions.  Infection in 
humans is primarily acquired through direct or indirect contact with 
the urine of infected animals, most commonly through occupational or 
recreational exposure to urine-contaminated surface water.  Animals 
can serve as maintenance hosts and remain chronically infected, and 
contaminate the environment with leptospires shed in their urine.  A 
variety of different animals, including rodents and wild and 
domestic animals, serve as maintenance hosts for the different 
leptospira serovars, and certain serovars are commonly associated 
with specific maintenance hosts. 
 
¶24. (U) Nicaragua continues to have endemic cases of leptospirosis. 
Domestic animals and livestock are considered to maintain the 
endemic state of the disease in various communities. 
 
¶25. (U) In 1995, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) collected 
serum samples from cattle, horses, pigs, and dogs in the Department 
of Leon.  In northern Leon, 76% of the horses, 35% of the pigs, 50% 
of the dogs, and 59% of the cattle were sero positive.  In the local 
abattoir of Leon, 67% of the cattle were sero positive.  During the 
outbreak of February 2007, in the community of Leona, the sero 
prevalence in domestic animals was 27%.   At that time all goats and 
sheep tested were negative.  During an outbreak in October/November 
of 2007, 34% of the animals tested had a titer greater than 1:400. 
The serovars identified were similar to those found in previous 
studies.  Previous experience in the post-disaster setting in 
Nicaragua has demonstrated different risk factors and sources of 
leptospiral contamination. 
 
¶26. (U) Similar outbreaks of leptospirosis have occurred in other Latin American countries. Strategies for prevention and control of outbreaks of leptospirosis following flooding or similar emergencies, including chemoprophylaxis, have been recommended but have not been evaluated for their utility and effectiveness. Such measures include minimizing contact with contaminated water and soil, wearing protective clothing, rodent control, and chemoprophylaxis with doxycycline for persons with limited exposure to high-risk areas of endemic disease.
 
¶27. (U) To date, all attempts to culture and isolate the organism 
have failed.  The results so far demonstrate the need for improved 
surveillance, control and diagnosis of leptospirosis in domestic 
livestock and to better understand the zoonotic epidemiology of the 
disease.  Prevention of leptospirosis is dependent upon an 
understanding of the local epidemiology of the disease, locally 
important serovars, and associated animal hosts. 
 
TRIVELLI