08MOSCOW102
RUSSIAN DUMA TAKES ON AGGRESSIVE AGENDA
Wed Jan 16 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Moscow
VZCZCXRO3894
PP RUEHLN RUEHPOD RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHMO #0102/01 0161518
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 161518Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6150
INFO RUCNCIS/CIS COLLECTIVE
RUEHXD/MOSCOW POLITICAL COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 MOSCOW 000102 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM RS
SUBJECT: RUSSIAN DUMA TAKES ON AGGRESSIVE AGENDA 
 
REF: 07 MOSCOW 5682 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (U) The Duma has planned an aggressive legislative agenda 
for its spring session.  The lower body of parliament has 
decided that more than 600 bills will be considered by its 
committees during the session that runs through July.  Of 
these bills, a much smaller number are considered to be high 
priority.  Quality of life issues are expected to dominate 
the session with pension reform, an increase in wages for 
government employees and other social issues leading the way; 
issues emphasized by Putin during the Duma campaign.  Among 
the bills to be considered is one that would establish 
presidential libraries for Russian presidents since the fall 
of the Soviet Union.  The Duma plans a new "Government Hour" 
during which officials will respond to questions from Duma 
deputies.  End summary. 
 
---------------------------------- 
DUMA TO CONSIDER HUNDREDS OF BILLS 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) The Duma, which began its legislative work on January 
11, is scheduled to consider more than 600 bills during its 
spring legislative session which runs through July.  Of the 
651 bills proposed so far, more than 30 are considered to be 
high priority.  Most of these bills were submitted by the 
government and two were submitted by the presidential 
administration.  Under Russian law, bills can originate 
within the Duma or Federation Council or they can come from 
the Kremlin or government.  According to news reports, Deputy 
Speaker Oleg Morozov said six bills involve "state and 
constitutional structure," eight concern the economy, eight 
are budget-related and eight deal with defense and security. 
Quality of life issues will be a major focus during this 
session.  Pension reform and increasing salaries for 
government employees and payments to military personnel are 
expected to be considered and approved early in the session. 
Other bills regarding water issues, prevention of 
homelessness and third party car insurance are also expected 
to be taken up during the session. 
 
¶3. (U) The Duma's legislative focus is expected to follow the 
course set by Putin which he laid out in a speech to the 
United Russia Congress in October.  In his remarks, Putin 
emphasized the need to increase salaries of government 
employees, increase payments to military personnel and 
examine the pensions of military retirees.  Duma Speaker 
Boris Gryzlov has noted with dismay that the Duma is ready to 
pass bills to accomplish these things but that the government 
has not yet submitted the necessary draft laws. 
 
¶4. (U) The Communist faction, the only opposition faction in 
the Duma, has expressed its dissatisfaction with the  agenda. 
 Vice Speaker and Communist faction member Ivan Melnikov, 
told the media "the agenda is missing a whole row of 
important legislation," specifically citing draft laws on 
corruption, progressive income taxation and changes to the 
laws on water and forestry which are intended to "stop the 
stealing of natural resources." 
 
¶5. (U) A draft law backed by Federation Council Speaker 
Sergey Mironov and other members of the Just Russia party, 
would establish presidential libraries for heads of state 
following the end of the Soviet Union. The libraries would 
serve as a repository for presidential papers and other 
memorabilia.  The Kremlin has not commented on the idea. 
 
--------------- 
DUMA COMMITTEES 
--------------- 
 
¶6. (U) Members of the United Russia faction, which holds a 
constitutional majority in the Duma (315 of 450 seats), will 
lead 26 of 32 Duma committees (reftel).  Of the 35 posts of 
first deputy committee chair, four were given to members of 
parties in the minority (2 to the Communist Party, 1 to the 
Liberal Democratic Party (LDPR) and 1 to Just Russia.)  Of 
the 107 deputy committee chairmanships, 36 will go to members 
of minority parties.  A commentator in Vedomosti noted that 
an enticing aspect of these positions is the right to a 
personal car. 
 
¶7. (U) Despite the fact that the Duma session is underway, 
the leadership is still working on committee assignments. 
This unfinished piece of business has been a major irritant 
for some Duma deputies.  Until they are assigned to a 
committee, they are without an office.  Offices are assigned 
 
MOSCOW 00000102  002 OF 002 
 
 
based on proximity to the committees on which deputies serve. 
 
 
------------------------------------ 
NEW "GOVERNMENT HOUR" TO BE LAUNCHED 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶8. (U) A new feature to be added to the work of the Duma will 
be a regularly scheduled "Government Hour" during which 
officials of the executive branch will answer questions posed 
by deputies.  The idea was initiated by Communist Party 
faction member Anatoly Lokot, who expressed interest in 
questioning Prime Minister Zubkov about inflation. Another 
member of the party has stated she would like to question 
ministers about social reforms. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) As the Duma sets out on an aggressive course of 
lawmaking, the path it follows will be determined by the 
Kremlin.  While there will be some expressions of dissent 
from the Communist faction and the voice of LDPR leader 
Zhirinovskiy will be heard often, United Russia's 
constitutional majority guarantees that any legislation it 
takes up will pass with limited debate. 
BURNS