08NAIROBI2182
Somalia - International Contact Group Meeting
Wed Sep 17 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO4622
RR RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #2182/01 2611011
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 171011Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7072
INFO RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE
RUEHRN/USMISSION UN ROME 0398
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 7380
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOA
RHMFIUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FLUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NAIROBI 002182 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/E AND A/S FRAZER 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: EAID PHUM PREL PREF SO
SUBJECT: Somalia - International Contact Group Meeting 
 
NAIROBI 00002182  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  On September 16, the International Contact Group on Somalia 
(ICG) met in Djibouti.  Formerly co-chaired by the United States and 
Norway, the ICG is now chaired by United Nations Secretary General's 
Special Representative (SRSG) for Somalia Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah. 
This was the first ICG meeting with the SRSG at the helm.  The 
format and content of the ICG was similar to pervious meetings, yet 
more loosely organized.  There was considerable wrangling over the 
communique, the final text of which follows in paragraph 3. 
 
¶2.  Transitional Federal Government (TFG) Prime Minister Nur Hassan 
Hussein and Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Information, 
Youth Affairs and Sports Ahmed Abdisalam Adan, along with Sharif 
Sheikh Ahmed, Chairman of the Alliance for the Re-liberation of 
Somalia (ARS) and Sharif Hassan Sheikh Aden, Chairman of ARS Central 
Committee, participated in the first session of the ICG meeting. 
(Comment: During the first round of discussions between the TFG and 
the ARS in May, these leaders would not meet face-to-face.  During 
this ICG, all four leaders sat together, behind a single "Somalia" 
name plate on the table.  End Comment).  The ICG communique focuses 
on the implementation of Djibouti Agreement and collaboration 
between the TFG and ARS.  Discussions also focused on the 
humanitarian situation and the growing problem of piracy. 
 
¶3.  Begin Text of ICG Communique: 
 
The International Contact Group (ICG) on Somalia met for the first 
time under the chairmanship of the UN Special Representative for 
Somalia, Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah, on 16 September in Djibouti to 
discuss the situation in Somalia.  It focused on ways to help 
implement the Djibouti Agreement signed between the Transitional 
Federal Government (TFG) and Alliance for the Re-Liberation of 
Somalia (ARS) on 19 August 2008.  The ICG welcomed the joint 
participation of the TFG and ARS in its deliberations. 
 
The ICG welcomes the signing of the Djibouti Agreement and the 
establishment of the High Level and Joint Security Committees. 
Members of the ICG urge the parties to the Djibouti Agreement to 
agree on concrete measures to implement the cessation of armed 
confrontation to allow the timely withdrawal of Ethiopian forces and 
the deployment of the stabilization force requested in the Djibouti 
Agreement.  Members of the ICG stand ready to support politically 
and financially the implementation of agreements reached in the 
meetings of the Committees. 
 
The ICG expresses its continued support for the political 
cooperation between the two parties including addressing issues of 
justice and reconciliation, impunity and the discussion on the 
political future of the two Parties along with the implementation of 
concrete measures enhancing confidence between them. 
 
The ICG urges the Transitional Federal Institutions to fully 
implement the Federal Charter requirements within the context of the 
Djibouti Agreement, including developing the constitution and the 
setting up of local administrations.   The ICG renewed its 
commitment to support the rule of law and security as well as the 
institutions. 
 
The ICG acknowledges the important work of AMISOM under difficult 
conditions inside Somalia, condemns the attacks on AMISOM soldiers 
and calls for more resources from the international community to 
allow it to deploy at full capacity. 
 
The ICG condemns the continuing violence in Somalia especially 
against the most vulnerable members of society - women and children. 
 It condemns all attacks against humanitarian workers and calls on 
all parties to immediately cease all hostilities and allow free and 
unhindered access for humanitarian aid and calls for an increase in 
international support for humanitarian needs. 
 
The ICG is determined to ameliorate the humanitarian catastrophe. 
ICG members urge the Parties to work through the Committees to 
urgently agree on plans and mechanisms to support the delivery of 
much needed humanitarian assistance in consultation with 
humanitarian partners. 
 
The ICG welcomes the commitment to convene an international 
conference on reconstruction and development of Somalia as agreed 
upon in the Djibouti Agreement.   The process is expected to take 
place in phases and the ICG has stated its willingness to 
immediately engage in the required preparatory work. 
 
The ICG is deeply concerned by the growing number of incidents of 
piracy directly threatening international maritime activities and 
the delivery of humanitarian aid.   It calls for the urgent 
implementation of measures to fight this scourge in line with 
 
NAIROBI 00002182  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
Resolutions 1814 and 1816 and relevant international law principles. 
  The ICG welcomes the support provided by countries escorting World 
Food Programme shipments to Somalia and calls on other countries to 
ensure the continuity of this critical operation. 
 
The ICG welcomes and is encouraged by the political cooperation 
between the TFG and ARS and calls on all Somalis, at home and 
abroad, to fully support the Djibouti Agreement.  ICG members 
express their determination to support the consolidation of this 
cooperation.  They further urge all parties to join the political 
process to quickly restore peace and stability to Somalia.  They 
emphasize that no individuals or groups should be allowed to 
obstruct the peace process. 
 
The ICG welcomes the recent agreement reached between the leaders of 
the Transitional Federal Institutions in Addis Ababa and calls for 
its implementation without delay. 
 
The ICG expresses its thanks to the Government of Djibouti for 
hosting this conference and for all its support for the peace 
process in Somalia. 
 
The next ICG meeting will be held at a date and location to be 
determined. 
 
Present at Meeting: 
UN, African Union, European Commission, European Union Council 
Secretariat, Presidency of European Union (France), IGAD, League of 
Arab States, Organization of Islamic Conference, World Bank, Canada, 
Djibouti, Egypt, Ethiopia, Italy, Kenya, Norway, Sweden, United 
Kingdom, United States 
 
End Communique Text. 
 
RANNEBERGER