08NAIROBI2579
SOMALIA - Deputy Prime Minister Questions TFG Future
Thu Nov 13 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO9531
PP RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #2579/01 3180449
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 130449Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7568
INFO RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOA
RHMFIUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FLUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 NAIROBI 002579 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/E AND A/S FRAZER 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL SO
SUBJECT: SOMALIA - Deputy Prime Minister Questions TFG Future 
 
REF: A) Nairobi 2520  B) Nairobi 2380 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY.  On the margins of the IGAD summit in Nairobi, A/S 
Frazer met with TFG Deputy Prime Minister Ahmed Abdisalam Adan. 
Abdisalam noted the fragility of the TFG and the ARS and the 
importance of strengthening both institutions and the Djibouti 
process that binds them.  The DPM emphasized the hope of all Somalis 
for a change and their strong commitment to a peace process.  He 
expressed concern with IGAD's apparent attempt to usurp the ongoing 
Djibouti process with a parallel initiative.  Abdisalam also voiced 
his frustration with both President Yusuf and the Prime Minister, 
saying they have lost all credibility and that no progress can be 
made with them leading the TFG.  He said the bombings in Hargeisa 
and Bossaso were a signal to discourage good governance and to 
change Somalia's focus to terrorist threats.  Abdisalam told A/S 
Frazer that time is of the essence and the longer it takes for a 
shift in leadership of the TFG, the more difficult it will be to 
effect real progress.  End Summary. 
 
-------------------------- 
IGAD - A Parallel Process? 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) On October 29, Assistant Secretary for African Affairs 
Jendayi Frazer met with Transitional Federal Government (TFG) Deputy 
Prime Minister and Minister of Information, Sports and Youth Ahmed 
Abdisalam Adan.  Abdisalam, who entered government in January as one 
of the new cabinet representatives from outside parliament, has 
worked closely with Prime Minister Hussein on the reconciliation 
process, beginning in Mogadishu.  The meeting took place shortly 
after the conclusion of the IGAD summit (Ref A) and Abdisalam raised 
several questions about the apparent new role for IGAD in Somalia's 
peace process.  He expressed concern that IGAD appears to be 
launching a parallel track to the Djibouti Process at a critical 
juncture when Somalis are ready to support a common solution to 
achieve peace. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Abdisalam thanked A/S Frazer for her strong support of the 
Djibouti process, even with the serious challenges to its 
implementation.  He believes the international community should 
emphasize support for the process, rather than bolstering either the 
TFG or the ARS as institutions.  Abdisalam noted his concern that 
the IGAD summit appeared to be an attempt to squeeze the UN 
Political Office for Somalia out of the process.  The DPM was 
especially concerned by Article 16 of the communique stating "...the 
anchor of all efforts in relation to Somalia must be IGAD." 
Abdisalam said we should not allow the role of UN SRSG Ould-Abdallah 
to be minimized or for IGAD to open a parallel track that will send 
"mixed messages" to the political negotiations.  He said most 
Somalis were against the IGAD meeting that seemed to usurp the 
existing Djibouti process.  (Note: Abdisalam voiced similar 
apprehensions in a meeting with us prior to the IGAD Summit.  See 
Ref B for a report of this discussion.) 
 
------------------------ 
TFG Fragile 
with Discredited Leaders 
------------------------ 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Abdisalam told A/S Frazer that with the signature of the 
two agreements in Djibouti on October 26 and with the deadlines 
outlined in the IGAD communique, the "tough job starts now." 
Unfortunately, he did not believe the existing TFG leadership was up 
to the job.  Abdisalam said that communities in Merka, Beletweyn, 
and others across Somalia are lashing out against targeted 
assassinations and the terror that has gripped their neighborhoods, 
but that neither the TFG nor the ARS has the capacity to support 
them.  He said bluntly, "The TFG cannot move forward with the 
current leadership."  After the harsh criticism leveled against 
Yusuf by his regional colleagues during IGAD, Abdisalam said, "If I 
was Yusuf I would have resigned to allow the process to move 
forward." 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Abdisalam said any roadmap that is developed to implement 
the peace process will not go anywhere with the current TFG 
leadership.  He asserted that it is a losing proposition for the ARS 
to join the TFG as is.  The DPM opined that Yusuf sees the peace 
process as a clan issue, not a peace issue.  "The President can be 
given a decent exit, as can the Prime Minister and the Speaker," he 
said.  Abdisalam believed that the TFG's problems stemmed from the 
top, but they were compounded by corrupt figures such as 
Commissioner of Police Abdi Awale Qeybdid and Director of National 
Security Mohamed Warsame Farah "Darwish", who use the excuse of 
 
NAIROBI 00002579  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
security to block any political progress. 
 
----------------- 
Competing Agendas 
----------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Abdisalam confirmed that parliament is ready to force 
regime change and came to Nairobi for that sole purpose.  The hot 
debate at the end of the first day of the IGAD summit set the stage 
for the impeachment vote the MPs had prepared by circulating a 
petition in Nairobi signed by the majority of its members.  While 
the parliamentarians were hoping to force Yusuf out, Kenyan 
President Kibaki changed the agenda, abruptly ending the IGAD summit 
before they had a chance.  After inviting all 275 parliamentarians 
to Nairobi, there was no role for them in the summit, the DPM said. 
He suggested that the resulting confusion was part of the Kenyan 
attempt to take a more prominent role in Somalia. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Abdisalam commented that Kenya understands the least about 
the Somalia crisis and sees itself in competition with Djibouti, 
which has played a central constructive role in supporting the peace 
process.  In response to A/S Frazer's question about the TFG's 
relationship with the Government of Kenya, Abdisalam replied, "We 
have no contact with them."  He said the Somali-Kenyan politicians 
have not been involved in the political process.  He noted that even 
the Chief of Police and the Deputy Speaker, two of the most 
prominent ethnic Somalis in the Kenyan government, are suspicious of 
the peace process. 
 
------------------- 
A Critical Juncture 
------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) A/S Frazer agreed that Somalis have no confidence in their 
government.  She encouraged Abdisalam to take the breathing space 
afforded by the IGAD's preemption of an immediate regime change to 
pull the TFG together and make it functional.  Frazer also said that 
any change in the TFG should be sooner, rather than later to take 
advantage of the present momentum.  A/S Frazer volunteered U.S. 
assistance to the TFG through the process. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Abdisalam shared our concern that the time is short for 
any changes to be made.  He said that if the ARS does not join them 
to create a broader institution, all momentum will be lost.  "The 
more you extend the time, the more people will break off from the 
process," he predicted.  The Deputy Prime Minister asserted that on 
the other hand, if ARS joins a new TFG, together they can move 
forward, broaden the base, and establish a unity government, open to 
all Somalis.  But the TFG must do its part.  Abdisalam concluded, 
"You cannot organize an institution that does not want to be 
organized." 
 
¶10.  (SBU) With another jab at the present administration, Abdisalam 
said, "The leaders must realize that it is not about them, it is 
about Somalia."  The DPM warned that if he discovers that things 
will not change this time, he does not want to be part of the 
government.  "It does not make sense to stay in conflict - I have 
done all I can do." 
 
----------------------------- 
Bombing Targets Peace Process 
----------------------------- 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Abdisalam said that the October 29 bombings in Hargeisa 
and Bossaso will open the eyes of all Somalis.  "You cannot leave 
Mogadishu burning and think it will not affect you."  He said the 
attacks were well-planned and coordinated, marking a "localization 
of the conflict."  Abdisalam likened the bombers' tactics to those 
used in Iraq and Afghanistan -- striking deep within many 
communities to weaken the resolve of its residents and demonstrate a 
wide reach.  He said the terrorist tactics used on October 29 were 
intended to destabilize the security situation and keep Ethiopia in 
Somalia.  As long as Ethiopia remains, Abdisalam said, Somalis 
regard the crisis as a conflict with an outside power.  He concluded 
the meeting by telling A/S Frazer, "The solution to the threat is 
good governance." 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶12.  (SBU) Abdisalam is regarded as one of Somalia's new generation 
of leaders, although he has not proved as effective within the TFG 
 
NAIROBI 00002579  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
as many hoped.  In recent meetings, he has evinced a level of 
confidence in the ongoing reconciliation and peace process, at times 
seemingly at odds with the realities on the ground.  His total lack 
of confidence in Yusuf is not a surprise as Abdisalam himself is a 
lightening rod for Yusuf's criticism.  However, Abdisalam's similar 
critique of the Prime Minister, who he said has lost all support in 
an effort to please the President, is telling.  There is a short 
fuse for the TFG to change its leadership and strengthen its ranks 
to be part of an effective unity government; it appears the DPM 
doubts it can deliver.  In this case, the TFG (and Somalia) may lose 
the commitment of one of its brightest leaders and hope for a new 
generation to usher in peace. 
 
¶13.  (U) Assistant Secretary Frazer has cleared this message. 
 
RANNEBERGER