08OTTAWA271
MORE CANADIAN AID FOR HAITI ANNOUNCED
Thu Feb 21 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO4126
PP RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHOT #0271/01 0522117
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 212117Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7348
INFO RUEHPU/AMEMBASSY PORT AU PRINCE PRIORITY 0157
RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 OTTAWA 000271 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAN AND WHA/CAR 
USAID FOR LAC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID SOCI CA HA
SUBJECT: MORE CANADIAN AID FOR HAITI ANNOUNCED 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  Shortly before Foreign Minister Bernier's 
ongoing visit, the Canadian Government announced nearly C$125 
million in support to Haiti, much of which will be used to 
construct and rehabilitate roads.  The rest will be targeted 
to improve reproductive health; provide technical assistance 
to the Haitian State project; support school feeding; provide 
credit for tuition fees; support education; and improve 
disaster preparedness.  Haiti is the largest recipient of 
long-term Canadian development assistance in the Americas. 
Its aid projects are consistent with Canada's focus on 
greater democratic governance, enhanced prosperity, and 
stronger security in the Hemisphere (septel).  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U)  Since the departure of President Aristide in 2004, 
Canada has played an important role in international efforts 
to re-establish security and stability in Haiti and to assist 
in reform and reconstruction efforts.  Haiti has become 
Canada's most important long-term development assistance 
beneficiary in the Americas, and the second largest in the 
world (after Afghanistan). 
 
¶3. (U)  Foreign Minister Bernier is visiting Haiti on 
February 20-23.  On February 15, International Development 
Minister Bev Oda and Public Works Minister Michael Fortier 
announced that Canada will spend nearly C$125 million on 7 
projects to build roads, feed children, improve health care 
for mothers, contribute to economic recovery and increase 
Haiti's ability to respond to natural disasters.  "These 
projects will provide immediate relief to Haitians and will 
also help create the long-term conditions essential to 
Haiti's sustainable development," Minister Oda said.  "The 
Government of Canada is committed to reviving and expanding 
its leadership throughout the Americas, especially in fragile 
states like Haiti."  The money is part of Canada's commitment 
of C$555 million over five years (2006-2011) to 
reconstruction and development efforts announced during Prime 
Minister Harper,s July 2007 visit to Haiti. 
 
¶4. (U) C$75 million will go to the construction and 
rehabilitation of the 92 kilometer road between the major 
cities of Jeremie and Les Ceyes, through the Inter-American 
Development Bank's infrastructure program.  This project will 
enable Haitians to have better access to services and will 
foster economic development in southwestern Haiti. 
 
¶5. (U) The remaining nearly C$50 million will support six 
other initiatives: 
 
-- Improving Reproductive Health - C$19 million.  This 
initiative aims to improve reproductive health care for women 
and adolescents.  Implemented by the United Nations 
Population Fund (UNFPA), it will contribute to improving 
material health and reducing the maternal mortality ratio at 
the national level and especially in the Nippes and Southeast 
regions by three quarters by 2015.  The UNFPA will provide 
obstetric care and implement information and education 
campaigns on family planning and reproductive health.  The 
initiative aims to sensitive 40,000 Haitians of childbearing 
age every year on reproductive health issues; 
 
-- Technical assistance to the Haitian State project - C$13.8 
million.  Canada will provide assistance to central 
government institutions in Haiti to help them better fulfill 
their mandates.  Activities will include: sharing expertise, 
training programs for Haitian public servants and the 
rehabilitation and construction of infrastructure projects. 
These activities will increase the technical and strategic 
capability of Haitian government institutions to implement 
Qcapability of Haitian government institutions to implement 
its National Strategy for Growth and Poverty Reduction; 
 
-- School Feeding Support - C$5.4 million.  Implemented by 
the World Food Programme (WFP), this initiative will provide 
balanced daily meals to 330,000 primary school children in 
five Haitian departments (North, Northeast, Northwest, 
Southeast, and Artibonite).  A variety of foods will be 
provided in accordance with the country's dietary habits. 
Enriched products meet the needs to address micronutrient 
deficiencies; 
 
-- Credit for Tuition Fees - C$5.4 million.  The project will 
provide parents with loans to pay for their children's school 
fees, uniforms, and books through a network of 35 credit 
unions.  This initiative will also include a component to 
implement innovations in teaching and learning, and inform 
parents about the importance of regular and continuous school 
attendance.  It is expected that 45,250 loans will be 
delivered and the 210 primary schools will benefit from the 
program; 
 
 
OTTAWA 00000271  002 OF 002 
 
 
-- Education for All in Haiti - C$1.2 million.  This 
initiative will increase access to primary school to up to 
13,500 poor children aged 6-12 this year, responding to 
Haiti's pressing need to facilitate the yearly back-to-school 
process.  Canada's contribution will cover the operational 
expenses of the schools and the distribution of textbooks to 
students to enable poor families to enroll their children 
free of charge.  The target areas are Nippes and Artibonite. 
The project is being implemented through Haiti's Ministry of 
Education; 
 
-- Disaster Preparedness in Haiti - C$700,000.  Through the 
Pan-American Health Organization, this initiative will 
enhance Haiti's capacity to respond to disaster.  Its key 
elements include the development of a national disaster 
preparedness and response plan, training for health care 
staff and information campaigns targeting the general public, 
particularly in southern Haiti.  The overall objective is to 
reduce the population's vulnerability to floods, landslides 
and cyclones. 
 
 
 
 
Visit Canada,s Economy and Environment Forum at 
http://www.intelink.gov/communities/state/can ada 
 
WILKINS