08PARIS235
FRANCE AGRICULTURAL BIOTECH OUTREACH PROPOSAL
Mon Feb 11 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHFR #0235 0421134
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 111134Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1927
INFO RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS 2181UNCLAS PARIS 000235 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EEB/TPP/ABT/BTT Q JOHN FINN AND GARY CLEMENTS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR ECON TBIO ETRD KPAO FR
SUBJECT: FRANCE AGRICULTURAL BIOTECH OUTREACH PROPOSAL 
 
REF:07 STATE 160639 
 
 
¶1. (U) Economic Minister-Counselor, Agricultural Minister-Counselor, 
Public Affairs Minister-Counselor and Science Counselor present this 
joint request for support from EEB FY 2008 biotech outreach funds 
for critical public outreach in France.  In the wake of late 2007 
GOF broad-based environmental consultations, government policy on 
agricultural biotechnology has succumbed to populist non 
science-based pressures and has turned decidedly negative.  With its 
upcoming EU presidency, FranceQs views on the subject will impact 
the evolution of the global environment for this technology not only 
in the European Union, but worldwide. 
 
¶2. (U) When President Sarkozy held a press conference to announce 
the conclusions of the environmental consultations, he highlighted 
concerns about Qpesticide GMOsQ and announced a freeze on their 
planting.  High-level Ministry of Environment officials have made it 
known that their concern about biotech is environmental (as opposed 
to food safety). The proposed program would improve understanding of 
how GMOs interact with the environment and encourage acceptance of 
the environmental benefits of biotechnology by policymakers and 
consumers. The program would also be designed to encourage the 
adoption of a science-based regulatory system in France. 
 
¶3. (U) A. Program description: We are requesting a high-level 
speaker who will address how GM plants interact with the 
environment, particularly, those with pesticide-resistant traits. 
 
 
-What is the U.S. experience with the sustainability of 
pesticide-resistant and herbicide-tolerant transgenic technology and 
its impact on non-GM plants and weeds? 
- How do U.S. farmers use biotechnology as part of their sustainable 
disease management system? 
- How does the USG (particularly EPA) regulate pest-resistant 
biotech varieties? 
-Do GM plants threaten local insect populations? 
 
¶B. (U) Time Frame: We are requesting a high-level speaker for at 
least three days in Paris. If available for a longer period, we 
could develop other programs outside of Paris. 
Best periods and venue are: 
- Annual French agricultural show in Paris, held in late 
February-early March 
- Economic committee meeting of leading French farmers union (FNSEA) 
in May. 
 
¶C. (U) Purpose of the Program: To counterbalance the recent French 
negative stance on biotechnology by increasing  understanding by 
policy makers and the public of how genetically-modified crops 
interact with the environment.  To encourage France to adopt a 
rational, science-based co-existence regime, and to discourage the 
GOF from using spurious scientific arguments to justify a negative 
policy approach in France and at the EU level. 
 
(U) This program can be expected to positively address French 
policymakersQ and consumersQ concerns associated with biotechnology. 
It will provide practical information on how GM technology can be 
safely integrated into the agricultural economy without significant 
negative impacts on conventional crops and the environment, and can 
offer environmental benefits. 
 
¶D. (U) Audience: The speakers will give presentations to French 
regulators (government representatives and Parliamentarians), farm 
organizations, planting seed associations, the animal feed industry, 
agri-food industry, students and press. 
 
¶E. (U) Proposed topics and nature of events: how GM plants  interact 
with the environment, particularly, pest-resist GMO varieties; and 
environmental benefits of agricultural biotechnology. We will 
organize various presentations, more or less technical, depending on 
the audience. We will also have presentations for students in 
science and in agriculture. 
 
¶F. (U) We anticipate the cost of the proposed program to be 
$6,000.00 
 
¶I. (U) NAME AND CONTACT OF PROGRAM OFFICER:  Sylvie Vacheret, 
Economic Public Affairs Specialist.  Tel. 33-1-4312-4897, cell 
phone: 33-6-20 35 16 41, fax 33-1-4312-4932.  E-mail: 
vacheretsr@state.gov 
 
¶J. (U) We would like to use EB fund for speakers on agricultural 
biotechnology. 
 
Stapleton#