08PARISFR2202
UNESCO DIRECTOR GENERAL SUCCESSION:  CONVERSATIONS WITH
Thu Dec 04 00:00:00 +0100 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Mission UNESCO
C O N F I D E N T I A L   UNESCOPARI   12042202 
VZCZCXYZ0007
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHFR #2202/01 3391701
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 041701Z DEC 08
FM UNESCO PARIS FR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC
INFO RUCNSCO/UNESCO COLLECTIVEC O N F I D E N T I A L PARIS FR 002202 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  DECL: 12/04/2018 
TAGS: UNESCO PREL FR SW MX BR
SUBJECT: UNESCO DIRECTOR GENERAL SUCCESSION:  CONVERSATIONS WITH 
MEXICO, SWEDEN, BRAZIL, FRANCE, AND TURKEY 
 
REF: (A) PARIS FR 2144 
     (B) PARIS FR 2153 
 
Classified by Ambassador Louise V. Oliver, reason 1.4 (b). 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary:  The Mexican and Swedish UNESCO Ambassadors told 
Ambassador Oliver that their respective countries will oppose the 
candidacy of Egyptian Minister of Culture Farouq Hosni for the 
position of Director General of UNESCO.  The Mexican Ambassador also 
expressed misgivings about the possible candidacy of UNESCO's 
Brazilian Deputy Director General, Marcio Barbosa.  The French UNESCO 
Ambassador told Ambassador Oliver that she expected that France would 
soon inform the Egyptian Government that France would be unable to 
support Hosni, but that it had not done so yet.  The Turkish 
Ambassador to UNESCO told Ambassador Oliver that Turkey was also 
uncomfortable with Hosni's candidacy, but, since Turkey was not on 
UNESCO's Executive Board, it would not become very involved in the 
campaign for Director General.  The Brazilian Ambassador told 
Ambassador Oliver that Brazil will very likely put forth a candidate, 
but they have not decided who that candidate will be. Thus far, 
Ambassador Oliver has not spoken with anyone at UNESCO who is 
positive about Hosni.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (C) Ambassador Oliver met with the Mexican Ambassador to UNESCO, 
Homer Aridjis Fuentes, on December 1 to discuss the campaign for 
UNESCO's next Director General.  Ambassador Fuentes said that Mexico 
had been lobbied by the Egyptians, but that the Mexican Government 
had refused to endorse Hosni.  The Mexican Ambassador said that they 
do not think Hosni is the right individual to lead UNESCO, because 
they think he is too controversial and provocative.  Ambassador 
Fuentes said that Hosni's comments on burning Israeli books, and his 
accusations that UNESCO's Moroccan Ambassador is an agent for the 
Jew, are evidence of Hosni's tendency to say things that are highly 
inappropriate.  Mexico feels that UNESCO needs a Director General who 
is capable of calming tensions and is able to work with all 
countries.  The Mexican Ambassador added that these qualities are 
particularly important after the terrorist attacks in India. 
 
¶3.  (C) Ambassador Fuentes also told Ambassador Oliver that the Saudi 
Ambassador to UNESCO, Ziad bin Abdullah al-Drees, agrees with these 
sentiments.  Many of the more moderate Arab countries feel the same. 
The Mexican Ambassador was very pleased to be informed about the U.S. 
opposition to Mr. Hosni, as it would help Mexico resist Egyptian 
pressure. 
 
¶4.  (C) When Ambassador Oliver asked Ambassador Fuentes about the 
other candidates for Director General, he responded that he thought 
that neither the Ambassador of Lithuania nor the Ambassador of 
Bulgaria had the stature to lead UNESCO.  He also said that Mexico 
would not support UNESCO's Brazilian Deputy Director General Marcio 
Barbosa.  He said the Barbosa had not shown leadership qualities, and 
that he did not seem to be committed to raising the importance of 
Latin America within UNESCO.  He said that during Barbosa's recent 
visit to Mexico, none of the senior government officials would meet 
with him. The Mexican Ambassador said that other Latin American 
countries, such as Chile and Argentina, agreed with this assessment, 
and that Brazil had said that it would not go ahead with Barbosa's 
candidacy without Mexico's endorsement of Barbosa.  Ambassador 
Fuentes also said that the next Director General does not need to be 
from Latin America, but that he or she does need to be sensitive and 
supportive of Latin American issues.  (Comment:  The Latin American 
countries are unhappy about the fact that Africa, and increasingly 
the Arab region, seem to be getting most of the UNESCO's attention. 
His comments may also explain why Barbosa just announced that UNESCO 
would start to focus on the issue of bio-fuels, a top priority for 
Brazil.  End Comment.) 
 
¶5.  (C) Ambassador Fuentes ended the meeting by saying that Mexico 
had not given much thought to identifying an alternative candidate, 
because it felt it was first necessary to end Hosni's candidacy. 
When Ambassador Oliver asked him what the most effective way to do 
that might be, Ambassador Fuentes said that he thought a few articles 
in the press, preferably not the American press, that discussed the 
Director General race, reviewed the current candidates, and 
highlighted Hosni's flaws, would accomplish that goal.  (Comment. 
Mission agrees with the suggestions.  End Comment.) 
 
¶6.  (C) Ambassador Oliver also met with the Swedish Ambassador to 
UNESCO, Mats Ringborg, on December 1.  Ambassador Ringborg was very 
pleased to hear that the U.S. would not support Hosni's candidacy. 
Sweden does not think that Hosni is the right man for the position of 
Director General, especially as it has doubts that Hosni would keep 
freedom of expression and the press as a top UNESCO priority. 
Ambassador Ringborg was not very informed about the Director General 
race, and asked many questions about the process.  The Swedish 
Ambassador said that it was obvious that the African countries would 
play an important role in the election, and offered to speak with the 
other Nordic Ambassadors to develop a strategy to approach some of 
the African countries.  Ambassador Ringborg also said that he had 
expressed his doubts on Hosni's candidacy in an EU meeting the 
previous week.  He added that he approved of the U.S. strategy to 
keep the U.S. position quiet for now, as it would not be good to turn 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  DECL: 12/04/2018 
TAGS: UNESCO PREL FR SW MX BR
SUBJECT: UNESCO DIRECTOR GENERAL SUCCESSION:  CONVERSATIONS WITH 
MEXICO, SWEDEN, BRAZIL, FRANCE, AND TURKEY 
 
the Director General race into a public contest between Egypt and the 
U.S. 
 
¶7.  (C) Ambassador Oliver spoke with the Turkish Ambassador to 
UNESCO, Ali Tinaz Tuygan, on December 1 about the campaign for 
Director General.  Tuygan said that Turkey is not happy with Hosni. 
The Turkish Ambassador specifically mentioned Hosni's interview in 
the November 27 issue of Egyptian magazine al-Ahram, and said that 
the allegations of corruption are disturbing.  He added that, since 
Turkey is not on UNESCO's Executive Board and, therefore, cannot 
participate in the September vote, he will not become actively 
involved in the campaign. 
 
¶8.  (C) Ambassador Oliver engaged France's UNESCO Ambassador, 
Catherine Colonna, on December 1.  The French Ambassador said that 
she had met with the Egyptian Ambassador to UNESCO, Shadia Kenawy, on 
November 28 at the Egyptian Ambassador's request.  When asked about 
French support for Hosni, Ambassador Colonna responded that France is 
looking for the best candidate possible, one with a real vision for 
UNESCO.  Ambassador Colonna told Ambassador Oliver that since she had 
been told to be imprecise, she could not say anything more direct 
than that.  The French Ambassador went on to say that the real French 
message on Hosni's candidacy is supposed to be delivered at a much 
higher level.  She said that France's position will be that despite 
their excellent bilateral relations, France will not support Hosni's 
candidacy.  Ambassador Colonna also said that France will say that 
because of French support for an Egyptian for a high level post at 
the IMF; France has paid its debt to Egypt and does not owe them 
anything more. 
 
¶9.  (C) On December 3, Colonna telephoned Ambassador Oliver to say 
that the French Ambassador in Cairo is trying to push back on the 
French decision not to support Hosni by saying the French have 
already made a commitment to Egypt. She also said that the French 
Ambassador in Cairo had said that there seemed to be some doubt about 
the U.S. position as he understood that it is not yet "official." 
She asked if the U.S. could speak to a high level member of the 
French government to encourage them to stick to their decision not to 
support Hosni.  (Comment:  Mission strongly supports this suggestion, 
which we feel should be done as soon as possible.  End Comment.) 
Ambassador Colonna added that it would be a very good idea for the 
U.S. Ambassador in Egypt to speak directly to the French Ambassador 
in Cairo to clarify the U.S. position, if she has not already done 
so.  (Comment:  Mission also supports this suggestion, which should 
also be done as soon as possible.  End Comment.) 
 
¶10.  (C) Ambassador Oliver met the Brazilian Ambassador to UNESCO, 
Joao Carlos de Souza-Gomes, on December 3.  Ambassador Souza-Gomes 
 
said it was very likely that Brazil would submit a candidate for the 
Director General position, although Brazil has not decided who that 
candidate should be.  One possibility is UNESCO's Director General 
Marcio Barbosa, but many countries are not enthusiastic about his 
candidacy.  Barbosa recently lost support at UNESCO when he said that 
UNESCO should focus on bio-fuels, a top priority for Brazil.  Another 
possibility is Cristovam Buarque, President Lula da Silva's first 
Minister of Education, who is mobilizing the Brazilian Senate in 
support of his candidacy.  The Brazilian Ambassador said that he 
thought that Senator Buarque wanted to force Lula into supporting his 
candidacy, as it would be difficult for the Brazilian President to 
oppose the Brazilian Senate on this issue. 
 
¶11.  (C) Ambassador Souza-Goumes told Ambassador Oliver that he had 
met with many UNESCO ambassadors, and that he had learned that there 
was a lot of support for a Brazilian candidate.  He also said that 
there was enthusiasm in a number of African states.  Ambassador 
Souza-Gomes said that a number of Arab states, especially the Gulf 
states, are uncomfortable with Hosni, but that the situation is very 
awkward for them, given the statement by the Arab Foreign Ministers. 
The Brazilian Ambassador added that the Saudi Ambassador to UNESCO 
had said that the Americans would probably oppose Hosni.  When 
Ambassador Oliver told him that the U.S. had in fact formally 
notified the Egyptians that it would not support Hosni, Ambassador 
Souza-Gomes was very pleased.  He also agreed that the U.S. should 
keep its position quiet for the moment. 
 
¶12.  (C) Comment:  The Egyptians seem to have exaggerated the number 
of countries that they claim support Hosni.  It also seems that many 
countries that supposedly support Hosni are doing so very 
reluctantly, and would like to see an alternative.  The problem is 
that the U.S. and other countries from the North, must continue to 
move quietly and carefully in order to prevent Egypt from turning the 
election into a North-South battle, which would allow Egypt to rally 
support not on the basis of having a good candidate but on political 
grounds.  Ensuring that the French communicate their opposition to 
Hosni is the most important thing that the U.S. can do at this time. 
Encouraging the Brazilians to submit a candidate is also important, 
as it will send a strong signal to the rest of the UNESCO community 
that Hosni's election is not inevitable.  This would threaten the 
entire Egyptian strategy, as the Egyptians do not want more 
candidates to enter the race, since they know their candidate is 
weak.  Egypt is trying to use its power as an influential Arab 
country to force countries to endorse Hosni. It is quite significant, 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  DECL: 12/04/2018 
TAGS: UNESCO PREL FR SW MX BR
SUBJECT: UNESCO DIRECTOR GENERAL SUCCESSION:  CONVERSATIONS WITH 
MEXICO, SWEDEN, BRAZIL, FRANCE, AND TURKEY 
 
however, that Egypt has not formalized Hosni's candidacy.  French 
opposition, combined with an additional candidate, would make it more 
difficult for the Egyptians to move forward with Hosni, and to claim 
that it is simply the U.S. that is opposing him. 
 
Oliver