08PARIS265
PARIS CLUB - JANUARY 2008 TOUR D'HORIZON AND
Thu Feb 14 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXRO7918
RR RUEHBZ RUEHGI RUEHPOD
DE RUEHFR #0265/01 0450941
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 140941Z FEB 08
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1964
INFO RUEATRS/DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN 6740
RUEHSW/AMEMBASSY BERN 2059
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6596
RUEHCP/AMEMBASSY COPENHAGEN 1526
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 6803
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID 2765
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 6039
RUEHNY/AMEMBASSY OSLO 1564
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 8733
RUEHSM/AMEMBASSY STOCKHOLM 1575
RUEHTC/AMEMBASSY THE HAGUE 2927
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 2629
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS 2185
RUEHLU/AMEMBASSY LUANDA 0906
RUEHGI/AMEMBASSY BANGUI 0149
RUEHRY/AMEMBASSY CONAKRY 1110
RUEHBZ/AMEMBASSY BRAZZAVILLE 0079
RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD 0727
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 1073
RUEHMV/AMEMBASSY MONROVIA 7313
RUEHBW/AMEMBASSY BELGRADE 0894
RUEHPOD/AMEMBASSY PODGORICA 0059
RUEHPS/USOFFICE PRISTINA
RUEHKI/AMEMBASSY KINSHASA 1554
RUEHAB/AMEMBASSY ABIDJAN 1150
RUEHLC/AMEMBASSY LIBREVILLE 1292
RUEHJL/AMEMBASSY BANJUL 0342
RUEHPU/AMEMBASSY PORT AU PRINCE 0773
RUEHPL/AMEMBASSY PORT LOUIS 0933
RUEHBH/AMEMBASSY NASSAU 0074
RUEHPC/AMEMBASSY LOME 1026UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 12 PARIS 000265 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EEB/IFD/OMA 
TREASURY FOR DO/IDD AND OUSED/IMF 
SECDEF FOR USDP/DSCA 
PASS EXIM FOR CLAIMS - MPAREDES 
PASS USDA FOR CCC -- ALEUNG/WWILLER/JDOSTER 
PASS USAID FOR CLAIMS -- WFULLER 
PASS DOD FOR DSCS -- PBERG 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN ECON OECD EAIDXMXAXBXFFR
SUBJECT:  PARIS CLUB - JANUARY 2008 TOUR D'HORIZON AND 
NEGOTIATIONS WITH GUINEA AND THE GAMBIA 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  At the Paris Club's January 22-24 
session, the U.S. and other creditors signed an accord with 
Guinea to resume interim debt relief under the enhanced 
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative.  The 
Paris Club (PC) also granted The Gambia 100 percent 
cancellation of its eligible stock of debt after The Gambia 
reached HIPC completion point.  During the Tour d'Horizon, 
Russia announced that it would sign the long-delayed 
bilateral debt agreement with Iraq during a February 11-12 
inter-governmental economic commission meeting in Moscow. 
The Secretariat indicated that Paris Club negotiations with 
Liberia will now take place in April because the IMF 
Executive Board meeting to approve HIPC decision point will 
not occur until March.  Creditors discussed an outreach 
strategy to inform China about the Paris Club's principles 
and functions.  Paris Club creditors also discussed 
relations with Angola, Congo (Brazzaville), Cote d'Ivoire, 
Democratic Republic of Congo, Gabon, Grenada, Haiti, 
Seychelles, and Togo.  Methodological topics discussed 
included how creditors implement HIPC interim relief, 
countries having no relations with the IMF or Paris Club, 
statutes of limitations and their application to sovereign 
debt, and the recent OECD discussions about sustainable 
lending practices.  End Summary. 
 
------ 
Angola 
------ 
 
¶2.  (U) Six of fourteen creditors have concluded bilateral 
agreements implementing the late interest settlement 
reached with Angola in December 2007. (Under the terms of 
the settlement, Angola committed to pay, in three 
installments over 26 months, $1.8 billion of $2.2 billion 
in late interest owed to Paris Club creditors.)  The 
Secretariat noted that the settlement called for all 
 
SIPDIS 
agreements to be concluded before payment of the first 
installment planned for January 31, 2008. 
 
------------------- 
Congo (Brazzaville) 
------------------- 
 
¶3.  (U) The IMF reported that performance under the IMF 
Staff-Monitored Program (SMP) during the period April- 
September 2007 was unsatisfactory.  An IMF mission would 
depart in the coming weeks to negotiate a new six-month SMP 
to get reforms back on track before the Executive Board 
 
PARIS 00000265  002 OF 012 
 
 
could consider a full-fledged Poverty Reduction and Growth 
Facility (PRGF) program.  (Congo-Brazzaville reached 
decision point under the enhanced HIPC initiative in March 
2006, but its PRGF program subsequently went off track, 
resulting in a suspension of interim relief from the Paris 
Club.)  The World Bank reported that it had increased its 
lending envelope for Congo-Brazzaville from $75 million to 
$130 million.  Brazil, Spain, and the UK have not yet 
concluded their bilateral agreements with Congo-Brazzaville 
implementing the April 2006 Paris Club agreement.  Germany 
asked for more information about reported PRC financing. 
 
------------- 
Cote d'Ivoire 
------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) Creditors supported the Secretariat's 
recommendation that Cote d'Ivoire's HIPC common reduction 
factor (CRF) be adjusted upward to take into account the 
exceptionally generous debt relief the Paris Club 
previously provided Cote d'Ivoire in 1998 and 2002.  The 
IMF welcomed this course of action, noting that it was 
consistent with the HIPC initiative and with the Fund's 
uniformity of treatment policy.  Recognizing the complexity 
of the topic and that a higher CRF will require London Club 
and other non-Paris Club creditors to provide deeper debt 
relief, Paris Club co-chairman Benoit Coeure recommended 
the IMF reach out to the London Club at an early stage. 
The IMF will also use its forthcoming HIPC paper to convey 
this information.  The Secretariat reported Cote d'Ivoire's 
advisors are working with the London Club.  With respect to 
Cote  d'Ivoire's macroeconomic performance, the IMF's 
Executive Board is scheduled to vote on a second Emergency 
Post-Conflict Assistance program on February 15.  The IMF 
reported that in early 2008, Cote d'Ivoire made payments 
toward arrears clearance, which had to be completed by the 
end of that week (January 25), but still had to close its 
financing gap.  World Bank and African Development Bank 
financing were still being finalized, and Cote d'Ivoire has 
issued domestic and regional bonds to raise the necessary 
funds.  An IMF mission would depart for Abidjan when 4Q 
2007 data are available, perhaps in mid-March.  The Fund 
will seek creditor data for its debt sustainability 
analysis.  Based on preliminary calculations using end-2006 
figures, Cote d'Ivoire would qualify for HIPC due to its 
high ratio of external debt to government revenue, although 
the common reduction factor would be small.  It is unclear 
at this stage whether Cote d'Ivoire would go directly to 
 
PARIS 00000265  003 OF 012 
 
 
HIPC decision point upon approval of a new PRGF (with 
performance under the EPCA counting as a track record), or 
receive a Naples treatment first.  When asked by the 
Netherlands about private creditors, both the IMF and the 
World Bank indicated there was no evidence that so-called 
vulture funds held Ivorian debt. 
 
---------------------------- 
Democratic Republic of Congo 
---------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The DRC has not yet responded to the Paris Club's 
October 31 letter inquiring about the financial arrangement 
with China.  The IMF said its December mission had achieved 
good progress.  A new PRGF, which would trigger resumption 
of interim HIPC relief, could come to the IMF Executive 
Board next month, depending on the outcome of further 
discussions with the authorities on pending fiscal and 
budget issues.  The IMF did not shed more light on the 
reported $5 billion joint venture "protocol" that the DRC 
recently signed with China to finance the development of 
copper mines and infrastructure projects.  The IMF said the 
composition of debt versus equity still needs to be 
clarified, and that the project could complicate DRC's 
chances of reaching completion point under the HIPC 
initiative.  The World Bank indicated that, unless 
exceptions to Bank policy were made, the World Bank would 
soon reach its ceiling on possible interim HIPC relief for 
the DRC. 
 
----- 
Gabon 
----- 
 
¶6.  (U) All creditors except Brazil have concluded their 
bilateral agreements with Gabon to implement the discounted 
buyback agreed in July 2007. (Brazil awaits approval from 
its Senate.)  France, the Netherlands, and Spain have 
already received payment; the other creditors expect to 
complete the transaction at the end of January.  The IMF 
said Gabon is financing the buyback through a $1 billion 
Eurobond issue, a $180 million bond issue on the regional 
Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa (CEMAC) 
market, and $500 million in fiscal reserves.  The IMF 
reported that the first review of Gabon's Stand-By 
Arrangement occurred in December, and that a mission was 
scheduled to visit in March to conduct the IMF's Article IV 
evaluation. 
 
PARIS 00000265  004 OF 012 
 
 
 
---------- 
The Gambia 
---------- 
 
¶7.  (U) On January 24, creditors provided The Gambia its 
HIPC completion point treatment.  (The U.S. is not a 
creditor.)  In line with their commitment at decision 
point, creditors agreed to cancel $4.4 million of debt 
(calculated as of December 1999 in present value terms), 
including $0.2 million in interim relief already provided. 
Austria, Belgium, France, and the Netherlands declined to 
cancel on a voluntary basis their remaining $11.9 million 
in debts incurred after July 1, 1986 (the Paris Club's 
"cut-off date" for The Gambia).  (In a discussion among 
creditors, France noted that The Gambia should not be 
rewarded for borrowing excessively from non-Paris Club 
creditors -- in particular Taiwan and Kuwait.)  The Gambia's 
Secretary of State for Finance and Economic Affairs Mousa 
 
SIPDIS 
Gibril Bala-Gaye expressed disappointment and hoped 
creditors would take to their capitals his request for 
cancellation of all post-cutoff date debt.  He added that 
the February 5-6 donors conference in London would "provide 
a second opportunity to be more forthcoming -- as donors, 
not creditors."  Replying to questions about The Gambia's 
efforts to secure comparability of treatment from non-PC 
creditors, he outlined high-level approaches to Taiwan 
(which he described as willing to consider a change in 
legislation to allow debt relief) and Kuwait (which he said 
had indicated willingness to consider PC-comparable 
relief).  The Gambia has sent letters to other creditors 
and had received no replies, but expected a response from 
OPEC.  The minister said these approaches would continue in 
March.  The IMF reported that its latest analysis indicates 
that The Gambia will remain at high risk of debt distress 
even after fully benefiting from debt cancellation under 
the HIPC and Multilateral Debt Relief initiatives.  The 
World Bank said its technical assistance to The Gambia in 
2008 focuses on improving debt management. 
 
------- 
Grenada 
------- 
 
¶8.  (U) The IMF said the first review of the PRGF, which 
was due to be completed before the end of April 2007, would 
not be completed for another few months at best.  Key 
issues of concern included excessive government spending in 
 
PARIS 00000265  005 OF 012 
 
 
2007, the need for tax reforms, and an unregulated bank. 
The IMF said progress had been made since it completed 
Grenada's Article IV evaluation, and that IMF officials 
will visit again in late January.  With the PRGF off track, 
the second phase of Grenada's May 2006 rescheduling, as 
implemented in the U.S.-Grenada bilateral agreement signed 
on July 11, 2007, remains on hold.  For the U.S., this 
means that until the second phase enters into force, the 
Export-Import Bank must send bills for payments scheduled 
on or after January 1, 2007.  Creditors agreed to discuss 
the matter again at the March Paris Club session. 
 
------ 
Guinea 
------ 
 
¶9.  (U) Following IMF and World Bank approval of a new 
three-year PRGF reform program, creditors agreed to a new 
debt treatment (Guinea's seventh) to resume interim debt 
relief under the HIPC initiative on "Cologne terms," 
normally a 90 percent cancellation of accumulated arrears 
and future payments on eligible debt.  Given Guinea's 
limited capacity to pay, creditors agreed to defer until 
2011 the repayment of arrears on debt contracted after 
January 1, 1986 (the Paris Club's "cut-off date" for 
Guinea) and short-term debt, as well as a portion of post- 
cutoff-date payments falling due during the consolidation 
period.  In accordance with our HIPC policy, the U.S. will 
go beyond Cologne terms and forgive all debt payments 
(including arrears and late interest) that originated 
before the Cologne G8 Summit (June 20, 1999) and that fall 
due during the 2008-2010 consolidation period, provided 
that Guinea performs on its PRGF.  The IMF anticipates that 
Guinea could reach its HIPC completion point by the end of 
¶2008.  The IMF highlighted Guinea's strong potential for 
growth, especially in the mining sector; Guinea's success 
in lowering inflation from 40 percent in 2006 to 10 percent 
in 2007; and the country's very low level of foreign 
exchange reserves.  The World Bank reported it had taken 
the highly unusual step of increasing its interim HIPC debt 
relief to 50 percent of the present value of Guinea's debts 
to the Bank, noting that Guinea will need full MDRI and 
HIPC debt relief, including comparable debt relief from 
non-Paris Club creditors, to bring its debt to a 
sustainable level. 
 
----- 
Haiti 
 
PARIS 00000265  006 OF 012 
 
 
----- 
 
¶10.  (U) The IMF said its Executive Board would act on the 
second review of Haiti's PRGF in February, pending the 
completion of two structural performance criteria. 
However, the PRGF is broadly on track.  Creditors will 
decide at the next Paris Club session in March whether to 
enter into force the second phase of Haiti's 2006 Paris 
Club agreement, which is conditioned on completion of the 
second PRGF review. 
 
---- 
Iraq 
---- 
 
¶11.  (U) Russia announced its intention to sign its long- 
delayed bilateral agreement with Iraq implementing the 2004 
Paris Club agreement at an inter-governmental economic 
commission with Iraqi government officials in Moscow on 
February 11 and 12.  The Secretariat summarized its January 
18 working paper on Iraq's efforts to conclude debt 
restructuring agreements with its non-Paris Club bilateral 
creditors. 
 
¶12.  (U) The Secretariat argued it would be inappropriate 
for creditors to endorse or even acknowledge Iraq's plan to 
unilaterally not recognize late interest owed to bilateral 
creditors that have not yet signed a debt restructuring 
agreement with Iraq.  Canada cautioned that other debtor 
countries could interpret the Club's silence as assent and 
one day implement a similar policy toward Paris Club 
creditors.  The IMF said the Iraqi authorities had assured 
Fund staff that they had no intention of repudiating Iraq's 
debt contracts and would continue their efforts to 
normalize relations with external creditors.  The 
Secretariat reported that, in informal conversations the 
 
SIPDIS 
week before, it had told Iraq's advisors that the Paris 
Club would have difficulty approving the GOI's late 
interest proposal; the Secretariat had proposed not to take 
an official position on the matter.  The GOI, the 
Secretariat said, was aware of the Club's position, which 
 
SIPDIS 
had been conveyed informally. 
 
 
¶13.  (U) Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, and Sweden 
objected to the Secretariat's recommendation to utilize 
European Union and European Commission fora to contact 
Iraq's European, non-Paris Club creditors, arguing that the 
 
PARIS 00000265  007 OF 012 
 
 
EU had no competence in Paris Club matters.  The 
Netherlands and Sweden said that if the Secretariat were 
going to send letters to some of Iraq's non-Paris Club 
creditors, it should send letters to all of Iraq's non- 
Paris Club creditors (including the Gulf countries and 
China) and not differentiate among them based on political 
factors.  In calling for comparability of treatment and 
full participation, the UK sought inclusion of language to 
the effect that non-Paris Club creditors should not sell 
claims to creditors that do not take part in the HIPC 
initiative; the Netherlands advised against the reference 
to HIPC, as Iraq is a special case.  The Secretariat 
questioned whether letters to the Gulf countries would be 
effective, and said a letter to China could be awkward 
given current Paris Club outreach efforts and the fact that 
Iraq was reportedly close to reaching an agreement with 
China.  In the end, the Secretariat agreed to write to all 
of Iraq's non-Paris Club creditors, and agreed not to ask 
the EU to approach Iraq's European creditors.  Some 
European creditors, noting their own efforts, suggested 
bilateral demarches as an alternative.  The Secretariat 
will hold off sending a letter to China pending the outcome 
of negotiations between the Iraqi and Chinese authorities. 
 
¶14.  (U) The IMF reported that Iraq's Stand-By Arrangement 
would be treated as a precautionary one.  Under a regular 
SBA, Iraq could draw 40 percent of quota but does not 
intend to do so.  Consistent with the 2004 Agreed Minute, 
the third phase review of the SBA is scheduled to occur no 
later than December 31, 2008. 
 
------- 
Liberia 
------- 
 
¶15.  (U) The IMF reported that arrears clearance procedures 
were finalized and that the Executive Board had approved 
the necessary HIPC rule change to allow Liberia's 
performance on its Staff-Monitored Program to count toward 
HIPC decision point.  An IMF mission is in the field, and 
work on the preliminary HIPC document is underway in 
preparation for approval of Liberia's three-year PRGF and 
HIPC decision point in mid-March.  As a result, Paris Club 
negotiations are now likely to take place in April.  The 
Secretariat will launch a new data call.  The World Bank 
 
SIPDIS 
singled out the U.S. Treasury for its support in providing 
a bridge loan to finance the clearance of Liberia's 
arrears, the longest-running default in World Bank history. 
 
PARIS 00000265  008 OF 012 
 
 
 
---------- 
Seychelles 
---------- 
 
¶16.  (U) The IMF said the authorities' interest in an IMF 
program was unclear and that a mission was currently in 
country to conduct the Article IV consultation.  In March 
2007, the authorities initially expressed interest in an 
IMF program.  During a Fund mission in June and during the 
IMF/IBRD Annual Meetings in October, however, the 
authorities said they needed more time to consider a 
program.  Reporting an on-and-off dialogue, the World Bank 
said that it had no further claims on the Seychelles after 
the authorities had cleared all arrears in 2006.  The 
Seychelles has one of the highest debt-to-GDP ratios in the 
world.  France said it would underscore to the authorities 
during a planned bilateral meeting in February that an IMF 
program would pave the way for a Paris Club debt treatment. 
(The US is not a creditor.) 
 
---- 
Togo 
---- 
 
¶17.  (U) The IMF reported increased donor interest 
following successful elections in October 2007, although 
energy shortages and a current account deficit equivalent 
to 6.5 percent of GDP represent significant challenges to 
the current recovery.  An IMF staff mission reached 
preliminary agreement with Togo in December 2007 on a new 
three-year PRGF.  The program could come to the IMF 
Executive Board in the second quarter of 2007.  Significant 
arrears to the World Bank and African Development Bank will 
need to be cleared through an operation similar to what 
donors arranged for Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire.  The IMF 
said it would ask the Paris Club for financing assurances 
(a commitment to provide future debt relief) in the near 
future.  The Secretariat will launch a data call once 
financing assurances have been requested. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Methodological Discussion: 
Delivery of Interim Relief by Paris Club Creditors 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶18.  (U) Creditors discussed the Secretariat's January 2007 
working paper on how to deal with HIPC countries that reach 
 
PARIS 00000265  009 OF 012 
 
 
decision point but later fail to implement the necessary 
reforms under the PRGF program.  The working paper outlined 
three options with the aim of preserving equity among 
creditors.  Since the first two options result in virtually 
the same outcome for the debtor country, creditors did not 
express a preference, although Russia noted that it would 
have no legal mechanism to refund amounts that had been due 
and paid.  The U.S., supported by Australia, Canada, 
Italy, Spain, and the UK, expressed concern about option 
three in the paper, noting that it ran counter to our HIPC 
policy. (Option three entails halting interim HIPC relief 
and requiring the debtor to clear any arrears to the Paris 
Club before interim relief can resume.  In such a scenario, 
the amounts collected would not be refunded.) Japan asked 
whether creditors could, in certain circumstances, provide 
less debt relief at completion point than what was 
committed at decision point. (The answer from the 
Secretariat was no.)  The Secretariat took note that option 
 
SIPDIS 
three was problematic for many creditors on a political 
level and promised to revise the working paper, which 
Germany and several other creditors criticized as overly 
technical and difficult to understand, for discussion and 
approval in March. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Methodological Discussion: 
Countries Having no Relations with the IMF 
and the Paris Club 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶19.  (U) Creditors discussed the latest version of the 
Secretariat's working paper on countries "away" from the 
 
SIPDIS 
Club.  Noting that the guidelines set forth in the working 
paper were stricter than previous Paris Club 
understandings, the Netherlands, Sweden, Spain, and Canada 
asked that the working paper explicitly state that the 
guidelines would not apply retroactively and that, 
regardless of the status of the debtor country, creditors 
were free to take bilateral measures to try to collect on 
the debt. 
 
¶20.  (U) In response to a question from Germany, the 
Secretariat confirmed that debt swaps were a type of debt 
 
SIPDIS 
restructuring and therefore were covered by the guidelines 
in the paper.  Germany asked to revisit this issue at the 
next meeting.  Spain said that when assessing whether 
bilateral negotiations should be authorized, the Paris Club 
should consider the number of creditors and the amount of 
 
PARIS 00000265  010 OF 012 
 
 
debt.  Sweden added (and the Secretariat confirmed), 
however, that the Paris Club's solidarity principle should 
ensure that claims of large and small creditors are treated 
equally.  The UK suggested adding an additional guideline: 
where bilateral negotiations are authorized, creditors 
agree to keep the Paris Club informed.  Japan requested 
language to clarify that the proposed guidelines do not 
apply to creditors' financial relations with countries that 
are most unlikely to seek debt relief, such as South Korea. 
The U.S. stressed that the key principle was that the Paris 
Club should have a discussion before any creditor decides 
to initiate bilateral negotiations.  The Secretariat will 
incorporate this feedback and issue a revised working 
paper. 
 
¶21.  (U) In addition to asking how the Club would reach a 
decision to maintain a multilateral dialogue with a debtor 
(e.g., would it require a consensus, or would the size of 
claims be factors?), Russia stated that it has begun an 
active dialogue with Libya.  Debts numbers have yet to be 
reconciled, as Libya does not recognize Russian claims and 
has put forth its own claims vis-a-vis Russia.  Russia 
expects negotiations in the near future. 
 
¶22.  (U) The U.S. informed the Club that Suriname had 
recently cleared its ODA arrears and was seeking 
cancellation of late interest on its non-ODA debt.  The 
U.S. asked whether any creditors had concluded bilateral 
agreements with Suriname since the last Paris Club 
discussion in April 2007.  The Netherlands responded that 
Suriname had recently paid off its ODA debt in full with no 
restructuring.  The Secretariat will add Suriname to the 
March Paris Club agenda. 
 
-------------------------- 
Methodological Discussion: 
Relationships with China 
-------------------------- 
 
¶23.  (SBU) The Secretariat presented its revised working 
paper on outreach to China and informed creditors that it 
had contacted staff-level officials at China's Ministry of 
Finance, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Commerce, 
and Exim Bank to request a technical meeting in Beijing to 
discuss PC principles and functions.  The preliminary 
response at the staff level was favorable, but the Chinese 
officials indicated political level approval is required 
before agreeing to such a meeting.  Noting the generally 
 
PARIS 00000265  011 OF 012 
 
 
successful OECD outreach effort, PRC sensitivity to being 
singled out, and the cost of time lost if China declines 
this second PC invitation, Australia urged the Secretariat 
to approach several emerging creditors simultaneously. 
Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, and the UK supported this 
broader outreach approach, with Germany suggesting that 
Beijing-based embassy representatives participate in the 
meeting.  Japan encouraged the Secretariat to include 
SINOSURE (China Export and Credit Insurance Corporation). 
The Netherlands suggested PC creditors use high-level 
contacts to convey the need for engagement.  The 
Secretariat believes a two-step approach might succeed:  an 
 
SIPDIS 
initial technical meeting with the Chinese at the staff 
level aimed at building confidence, followed by a broader 
outreach meeting, to which China and other non-Paris Club 
official creditors would be invited.  The Secretariat will 
ask the Chinese whether they would prefer an initial 
meeting with the Secretariat, or a broader meeting that 
might include Paris Club country representatives.  The 
Secretariat also circulated a draft 60-slide Powerpoint 
 
SIPDIS 
presentation for use in a meeting with the Chinese and 
suggested the 2008 G-8 Hokkaido Toyako Summit might present 
a good opportunity to raise creditor coordination. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Methodological Discussion: 
Prescription of Paris Club Creditors' Claims 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶24.  (U) The Secretariat asked whether creditors would be 
interested in having the Secretariat conduct a survey of 
how statutes of limitation in Paris Club countries impact 
their debt collection efforts.  The Netherlands said it 
believed statutes of limitation do not apply to government- 
to-government debts. Though it had requested the agenda 
item, Switzerland requested more time to look into the 
matter.  Belgium said a survey would be an onerous 
exercise, citing the need to analyze the domestic legal 
regimes of all debtor countries in addition to that of the 
creditor country.  The Secretariat noted the lack of 
enthusiasm for a survey, but said it would raise the 
question again at the next Paris Club meeting. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Methodological Discussion: 
OECD Working Group on Export Credits Guarantees 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
 
PARIS 00000265  012 OF 012 
 
 
¶25.  (U) Italy and the Netherlands noted that the OECD 
Working Party on Export Credits and Credit Guarantees had 
reached agreement on a set of principles and guidelines to 
promote sustainable lending from export credit agencies to 
low-income countries.  The principles are located on the 
OECD website at www.oecd.org.  An outreach meeting to non- 
OECD members will be held on February 20.  The IMF and 
World Bank voiced strong support for the principles, noting 
that the agreement demonstrated an understanding that 
creditors also have a role to play in debt sustainability, 
especially where the capacity for debt management is weak. 
As non-OECD members, Russia said it would try to follow the 
guidelines on an informal basis, and Brazil said its 
government was reviewing the agreement. 
 
STAPLETON