08PANAMA897
PANAMA POST:  THE FIRST OPEN SOURCE CENTER
Wed Dec 03 00:00:00 +0100 2008
CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN
Embassy Panama
VZCZCXRO7791
RR RUEHAO RUEHGA RUEHGD RUEHHA RUEHHO RUEHMC RUEHMT RUEHNG RUEHNL
RUEHQU RUEHRD RUEHRG RUEHRS RUEHTM RUEHVC
DE RUEHZP #0897/01 3381932
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 031932Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY PANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2700
INFO RUEHWH/WESTERN HEMISPHERIC AFFAIRS DIPL POSTS
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 PANAMA 000897 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/20/2018 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PM
SUBJECT: PANAMA POST:  THE FIRST OPEN SOURCE CENTER 
COLLABORATION EDITION 
 
REF: A. A) PANAMA 818 
     ¶B. B) PANAMA 725 
 
Classified By: Classified by POLCOUNS Brian R. Naranjo. Reasons 1.4 (b) 
, (c) and (d). 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU/NF) Welcome to the revamped Panama Post,a new 
collaborative effort between Embassy Panama's Political 
Section (POL) and the Open Source Center (OSC). POL and OSC 
are cooperating to highlight the most salient story lines in 
recent OSC reporting, incorporate key insights garnered from 
POL's own reporting activities, and enhance the effectiveness 
of both POL's and OSC's products. In this edition of the 
Panama Post, our headlines are: 
 
-  Cabinet shake-up leaves Minister of Government and Justice 
Daniel Delgado Diamante (DDD) down, but not out for good; 
-  Democratic Change (CD) presidential candidate Ricardo 
Martinelli surging; 
-  Governing Revolutionary Democratic Party (PRD) too busy 
infighting to respond to attacks; 
-  PRD presidential primary loser Juan Carlos Navarro talking 
to Martinelli; and 
-  Panamenista Party presidential candidate Juan Carlos 
Varela playing nice. 
 
Those not familiar with OSC's excellent unclassified 
summaries of open source media should log on to 
www.opensource.gov and set up an account for daily updates on 
issues, regions or countries of your choice.  OSC analysts 
follow open source material on a daily basis providing 
translations of timely news stories and analysis.  OSC can 
also be a partner in providing contributions across the 
Hemisphere and around the world.  END SUMMARY. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
DDD out in cabinet shake-up, but not down for good 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶2.  (SBU//NF) President Torrijos removed Minister of 
Government and Justice Daniel Delgado Diamante (DDD) and 
replaced him with Dilio Arica, who had been Minister of the 
Presidency (the rough equivalent of a palace chief of staff), 
on November 17.  DDD's removal was part of a larger cabinet 
shake-up in which the Ministers of the Presidency, Commerce 
and Industry (MICI) and Agriculture were also replaced.  This 
announcement comes less than a month after revelations that, 
thirty-eight years ago, DDD killed one of his subordinates 
(REFTEL A).  DDD, who did not dispute the basic facts in the 
case, consistently asserted that this case had been 
judicially reviewed and that he had been found innocent of 
murder.  Panama City daily La Prensa, which broke the story, 
insisted that there was no evidence of such a finding of 
innocence.  DDD lashed out at the newspaper with a libel and 
slander suit, though he was unable to produce any paperwork 
attesting to his innocence. In his latest move, DDD, 
asserting that his case file had been destroyed in a fire 
that had destroyed judicial archives, requested relief as the 
time period to reconstruct lost files had expired.  Torrijos 
has made no statement on DDD's removal. Attorney General Ana 
Matilde Gomez announced that since DDD was no longer a 
government official, the case against him would be 
transferred from her office to that of a lower level 
prosecutor.  (COMMENT:  This may be a blessing in disguise 
for DDD, since the notoriously slow Panamanian justice system 
might not get to his case for years.) 
 
¶4.  (C) COMMENT:  DDD's removal has emboldened the Citizen 
Democracy Network and others who have been beating the drum 
for the repeal of the security decrees, which they call "the 
DDD laws" (reftel B).  New MOGJ head Arcia has said that his 
priority in this new post would be to reinforce the 
government's agenda on public security, and noted that the 
controversial security laws had been approved "according to 
the legal and political framework."  Further, he noted that 
the fate of the laws was not in the hands of the executive 
branch, but rather the National Assembly.  Arcia's position 
is disingenuous as the National Assembly is dominated by the 
governing PRD party and will not take action on anything 
without close coordination with the Executive Branch, 
 
PANAMA 00000897  002 OF 003 
 
 
particularly with respect to the security decrees.  Arcia is 
a lifelong member of the governing PRD party and an 
end-of-administration placeholder for Torrijos.  He can be 
expected to hew to the party line on all matters.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
------------------ 
Martinelli surging 
------------------ 
 
¶5.  (U) Democratic Change (CD) presidential candidate Ricardo 
Martinelli leads the polls with 36.7 percent support, 
according to a poll conducted by Ipsos for Channel 13 and 
Panama America.  He is trailed by PRD presidential candidate 
Balbina Herrera at 31.2 percent, and by the Panamenista 
presidential candidate Juan Carlos Varela at 11.4 percent. 
 
¶6.  (C) COMMENT:  Martinelli's campaign continues to be the 
most dynamic, innovative and determined so far in this 
election contest.  Martinelli, whose goal for the remainder 
of the year is to knock Varela out of the race, has very 
effectively relegated Varela to a distant third place.  This 
supermarket magnate apparently has no financial problems in 
terms of implementing a well-articulated publicity campaign 
strongly attacking the PRD in general, the current overnment 
in particular, or Varela.  Martinelli asserted to the Panama 
Post on November 21 that many inside the PRD e.g., Panama 
City Mayor Juan Carlos Navarro) and Panamenista parties 
(e.g., Alberto Vallarino) were beating a path to his door. 
Even former President Mireya Moscoso, a Panamenista, was 
seeking accommodation with Martinelli, according Martinelli: 
"She wants two things:  not to be named in the campaign and 
not to be indicted."  Presently, Martinelli appears to be 
benefiting from the traditional bandwagoning effect in 
Panamanian politics. END COMMENT. 
 
---------------------------------- 
PRD too busy infighting to respond 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) As Martinelli rolls along, an uncharacteristically 
public and bitter spat within the PRD is keeping the ruling 
party off-balance and off-message.  Panama City Mayor Juan 
Carlos Navarro (JCN) recently came out against the 
controversial new security laws and has unleashed a string of 
criticisms and accusations  at President Torrijos' 
administration over the increased crime rate.  The offensive 
began on November 3, when Navarro said that a "tough hand" 
(mano dura) was necessary to deal with crime, and blamed 
Torrijos personally for his administration's failure in the 
fight against crime.  Navarro later said that if the PRD 
loses the 2009 elections it would be Torrijos' fault.  The 
usually disciplined and on-message PRD machine is 
uncharacteristically reeling from these accusations. 
 
¶8.  (C) COMMENT. The reasons for Navarro's outbursts are 
unclear, but theories abound.  Recently, it has been reported 
that Torrijos  is quietly pushing a constitutional amendment 
that would shorten the period of time during which a 
president would have to wait to run for reelection from 10 to 
5 years, thus bringing Torrijos back in to the political mix 
in 2014, when it is otherwise assumed that Navarro would be 
the next PRD leader in line to run for the Presidency. 
Martinelli told the staff of the Panama Post that he and 
Navarro have formed an informal alliance with Navarro based 
on the shared objective of a PRD lose in 2009, which would 
remove Herrera and Torrijos as PRD leaders, leaving the road 
open to Navarro.  "Navarro has nowhere to go," Martinelli 
explained.  "If Balbina wins, he loses.  If Torrijos succeeds 
in shortening the period before which he can run again to 
five from ten years, then Navarro also loses." This could 
explain Navarro,s outbursts.  Panamanista presidential 
primary also-ran Marco Ameglio told the Panama Post, "That 
Navarro has no scrupples, absolutely none.  He,s a complete 
opportunist and would split the PRD and ally with Martinelli 
simply to save his own skin and keep open options to run in 
the future.  He,s been screwed too many times by the PRD, 
including by Torrijos and Balbina, to remain loyal."  To the 
surprise of virtually all political observers, on November 26 
Navarro announced that he would be Herrera's VP running mate, 
an announcement that Herrera herself promptly confirmed with 
her own announcement.  END COMMENT. 
 
----------------------------- 
 
PANAMA 00000897  003 OF 003 
 
 
Navarro talking to Martinelli 
----------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (C) Navarro had spoken with Martinelli about creating an 
alliance, the Panama Post learned from Jimmy Papadimitriu, a 
Martinelli advisor.  Sporadic press reporting indicated some 
known Navarro followers have been seen about town conspiring 
with Martinelli's advisors.  Indeed, in his public 
exhortations against Torrijos, Navarro echoed Martinelli's 
campaign themes:  the need for a "tough hand" against crime 
and complaints about the high cost of food.  Navarro has 
publicly denied any intention of leaving the PRD or that he 
is negotiating with Martinelli, but acknowledged receiving 
"many political offers."  Herrera, for her part, was guarded 
in her comments, saying that she had no plans to choose a 
running mate until December.  Navarro, though, gave Herrera 
until December 1 to make her choice.  Reportedly, the 
National Executive Committee (CEN) of the PRD had an 
eight-hour conciliation meeting in which Navarro reiterated 
his support of the party, and his willingness to serve as 
Herrera's running mate.  Needless to say, Panamanian 
political observers were stunned to learn on the afternoon of 
November 26 that Navarro had been chosen as Herrera's VP 
running mate. 
 
------------------- 
Varela playing nice 
------------------- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) The "clean hands" (manos limpias) strategy of 
Panamenista presidential candidate Juan Carlos Varela has 
been lost in the maelstrom of Martinelli attacks and PRD 
infighting.  He is losing credibility and hasn't won over 
many voters. Various Panamenista party leaders are openly 
proposing the need to seek unity with the CD in order to 
achieve victory and gain an opposition legislative majority. 
 
¶12.  (C) "Where is he?  What is he doing?" lamented Ameglio 
to the Panama Post.  Ameglio, who is now working on Varela's 
campaign platform committee, complained that Varela was 
playing too nice and was incapable of attacking the PRD. "He 
focuses his fire on Martinelli, not the PRD.  Why is he too 
ready to take on Moscoso, who flawed as she is was 
nonetheless the last Panamenista to hold the presidency, and 
yet refrains from attacking Torrijos?" Ameglio asked. 
Ameglio also asserted that Varela was broke; "He and his 
brother Popi spent over USD 1 million on the (November 23) 
Panamenista convention.  Sure he,ll get a bounce, but how 
will they sustain it?  Varela has no strategy and is waiting 
until January while Martinelli continues to run a smart 
campaign and has never lost his focus." 
GILMOUR