08PHNOMPENH861
EMBASSY PHNOM PENH'S NOMINATION FOR THE INTERNATIONAL WOMAN
Mon Oct 27 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHPF #0861 3010555
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 270555Z OCT 08
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 0026UNCLAS PHNOM PENH 000861 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPARTMENT FOR G/IWI, DRL/ILCSR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWMN KPAO PREL PHUM ELAB
SUBJECT: EMBASSY PHNOM PENH'S NOMINATION FOR THE INTERNATIONAL WOMAN 
OF COURAGE AWARD 
 
¶1. Embassy Phnom Penh is proud to nominate Sam Sreymom for the 
International Woman of Courage Award.  Charge d'Affaires Piper 
Campbell oversaw the nomination process which proved to be difficult 
this year considering the number of Cambodian activists that have 
received regional and international attention for their work.  Word 
of Ms. Sreymom's accomplishments have not yet traveled beyond the 
borders of her country, although she is well known amongst her 
peers.  The Embassy is thrilled to have this opportunity to 
recognize her work and her courage through this nomination. 
 
Name: Sam Sreymom 
Job Title:  Vice President of the Free Trade Union of Workers of the 
Kingdom of Cambodia (FTUWKC) 
DOB: June 5, 1979 
COB:  Cambodia 
Citizenship:  Cambodia 
Address:  #16A, Street 376, Sangkat Boeung Kang III, Khan Chamcar 
Mon, Phnom Penh 
Telephone:  012 212 812 
E-mail address:  sreymom@ftuwkc.org 
Passport number:  N0300705 
 
¶2.  Award justification:  Sam Sreymom is one of Cambodia's leading 
labor advocates, working as vice president of the Free Trade Union 
of Workers of the Kingdom of Cambodia (FTUWKC) since 2003.  In 
particular, she serves the interests and protects the rights of 
Cambodia's estimated 350,000 garment and shoe industry workers, of 
whom more than 90 percent are women. 
 
In a field dominated by men, where only 6 of the roughly 90 labor 
union leaders are women, Sam Sreymom has been a formidable 
negotiator on behalf of garment factory workers in labor disputes 
with management.  She also represents union members of the FTUWKC 
when cases appear at the country's labor Arbitration Council.  Sam 
Sreymom has received several arrest threats for her role organizing 
and participating in workers' rights protests against factory 
management.  With high inflation afflicting workers in early 2008, 
Sam Sreymom was instrumental in organizing union federations to 
lobby the government and employers to increase wages.  Partially due 
to her efforts, the government added a mandatory cost of living 
increase of $6 for garment and shoe workers in April 2008. 
 
Sam Sreymom stands out for her labor advocacy philosophy to exhaust 
all negotiating possibilities before striking or protesting.  She 
has sat at negotiating tables with factory managers, government 
officials, and International Labor Organization representatives. 
Much of her focus has been on improving working standards for female 
laborers such as allowing women to take maternity leave, 
criminalizing sexual harassment, and providing toilet facilities. 
She has been a champion for issues such as the prohibition of 
anti-union discrimination and workplace education on HIV/AIDS.  Her 
efforts have directly contributed to factory condition improvements 
such as increased ventilation, access to safe drinking water, and in 
some factories the installation of medical and canteen facilities. 
 
The garment and industrial sectors have played an important role in 
the economic development of Cambodia in the past ten years.  Labor 
conditions and workers' rights have been a continuous issue of 
contention for formerly impoverished Cambodians who are trying to 
make a better living in the garment sector. 
 
Sam Sreymom is active in other social sectors, especially the 
protection of human rights, democracy and women's empowerment.  In 
December 2005, she joined with other civil society representatives 
demanding the release of five prominent human rights activists 
detained on defamation charges.  The activists were released in 
January 2006.  Also in January 2006, Sam Sreymom led a march to the 
site of the killing of prominent labor leader Chea Vichea.  For her 
activity, Sam Sreymom was threatened and also summoned for 
questioning by Phnom Penh municipality government authorities. 
 
 
¶3.  The subject has been informed of her nomination. 
 
CAMPBELL