08PHNOMPENH103
CIVIL SOCIETY LEADERS TOUT MEASURED PROGRESS, HIGHLIGHT
Wed Jan 23 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO8577
PP RUEHCHI RUEHCN RUEHDT RUEHGH RUEHHM RUEHNH RUEHVC
DE RUEHPF #0103/01 0230740
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 230740Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9299
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVE
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 PHNOM PENH 000103 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR D, P, EAP/MLS, S/WCI, DRL, DRL/ILCSR--MITTELHAUSER, 
EEB/TPP/ABT--CLEMENTS 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USTR FOR BISBEE AND WEISEL 
BANGKOK FOR USAID--KISSINGER, FCS--BACHER 
HANOI FOR FCS--NAY 
HO CHI MINH CITY FOR FCS--MARCHAK AND LE 
COMMERCE FOR ITA/OTEXA--D'ANDREA, ITA/MAC--MIKALIS 
LABOR FOR LI 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV ECON ELAB CB CM VN
SUBJECT:  CIVIL SOCIETY LEADERS TOUT MEASURED PROGRESS, HIGHLIGHT 
CONCERNS IN MEETINGS WITH DAS MARCIEL 
 
REF: A.  PHNOM PENH 74 
 
 ¶B.  PHNOM PENH 95 
      ¶C.  PHNOM PENH 97 
 
¶1.  (U) Sensitive but unclassified.  Not for internet distribution. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Summary:  Civil society leaders presented a "glass half 
full" picture of Cambodian progress on a variety of political, 
economic, and human rights issues to Deputy Assistant Secretary Scot 
Marciel during his January 16-18 trip to Cambodia.  Political 
violence and voter intimidation have declined over previous years, 
but election-watchers fear new, more sophisticated forms of 
tampering.  (Apparently they haven't told opposition leader Sam 
Rainsy, who remarked on growing political openness and described his 
party as having good prospects in the July national elections during 
a separate meeting.)  Khmer Rouge Tribunal (KRT) prosecutor Robert 
Petit declared the KRT is capable of delivering a "pretty good 
measure of justice," while economic and business leaders predicted 
that Cambodia's economic growth would continue--though perhaps at 
six to seven percent per year rather than its current breakneck 
double digit rate.  Human rights leaders were the most downbeat, 
highlighting land disputes, the growing gap between rich and poor, 
and NGO self-censorship as continuing, serious human rights 
concerns.  End Summary. 
 
Elections:  Overt Intimidation Declines, but Concerns about New 
Forms of Electoral Fraud 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  The DCM hosted a dinner of civil society and NGO groups 
focused on the elections, including the directors of the Neutral and 
Impartial Committee for Free and Fair Elections (NICFEC) and the 
Committee for Free and Fair Elections in Cambodia (COMFREL).  The 
group acknowledged that violence and intimidation had decreased and 
the political climate for elections seemed to have improved; 
however, they expressed concerns about new, more sophisticated forms 
of electoral fraud such as a "white finger campaign" to pay voters 
not to vote.  (NOTE:  Since such non-voters would not have dipped 
their fingers in the India ink used to avoid duplicate voting, the 
party paying for the favor would know with certainty that they had 
lived up to their agreement, versus uncertain knowledge associated 
with vote-buying which cannot be verified in a secret ballot.  END 
NOTE.) 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Two systemic electoral problems mentioned were lack of 
equal access to resources and media and the need for an independent 
institution to deal with complaints.  National Election Committee 
(NEC) member Em Sopath defended his institution, saying new draft 
regulations were being circulated to NGOs for comment.  But UNDP 
election project manager Aamir Arain noted that even with the legal 
right to manage the election, the NEC had no effective control over 
certain aspects.  He gave as an example the role given to village 
and commune chiefs to submit names for the Form 1025 voter roll 
deletion list, now standing at about 580,000 (after some 70,000 
names were restored to full voting rights through a complaints 
mechanism).  The local officials, largely from the CPP, appeared to 
be able to act regardless of NEC regulations stipulating the need 
for evidence to delete a name.  Others such as NICFEC's Koul Panha 
cited close observation by the CPP at the grassroots as a form of 
quiet intimidation, but could cite no more evidence than stories of 
village-based CPP groups who keep watch on the political activities 
of local residents.  When asked by DAS Marciel to identify a clear 
set of benchmarks that would make for a free and fair election, the 
group began to name a few--such as media access--but did not provide 
a full or comprehensive list. 
 
Sam Rainsy:  Upbeat on Election Prospects, US-Cambodia Relationship 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  In a luncheon meeting January 18 hosted by the 
Ambassador, opposition party leader Sam Rainsy was joined by MPs 
Tioulong Saumura and Son Chhay in giving DAS Marciel an upbeat 
assessment of the political climate, noting Sam Rainsy Party's good 
prospects in the July elections.  Cambodia is moving in the right 
direction, said Rainsy.  Three interconnected factors were part of a 
more positive situation:  stronger relations between the United 
States and Cambodia; less violence; and the deterioration of other 
political parties, leaving the field to the CPP and SRP.  "FUNCINPEC 
is finished," he said.  Rainsy urged the U.S. to use its new 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000103  002 OF 004 
 
 
influence to help ensure free and fair elections without violence. 
He did not see much benefit in forming a coalition with the Human 
Rights Party at this time but saw some possibilities of joining with 
the CPP in a new government after the election:   it depends on what 
changes CPP will make and is willing to make, he said, and on what 
it offers to SRP to fulfill its election platform. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) On the SRP "message" he noted jobs, high prices, and free 
health care were at the core of the platform.  Health care would be 
paid for with money returned to the government coffers that had 
previously been mis-spent.  Rainsy also recounted a speech he gave 
that morning praising Hun Sen for his willingness to recognize the 
legitimate winner of the July elections, and the efforts he would 
make to be a good caretaker during a turnover.  This was evidence 
that the CPP was beginning to understand what a liberal democratic 
environment was, Rainsy noted.  While problems remained--from the 
need for more open debate in parliament to intolerance for protests 
and free speech-- the SRP leader exuded confidence in his party's 
chances in the July elections and general approval of the U.S. 
bilateral relationship as it affected the political climate. 
 
Human Rights Leaders Highlight Land Disputes, Growing Income Gap, 
Political Freedoms, and Prison Labor 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) DAS Marciel, in a meeting with human rights leaders in 
Cambodia, had a wide-ranging discussion that touched on the topics 
of land, poverty, political freedom and labor.  Participants 
stressed that land conflict cases were one of the most pressing 
issues facing Cambodia today.  They asserted that the current land 
law was good but that implementation of it was poor, resulting in 
few opportunities for just resolution in the courts.  While 
discussing the historic and legal causes of today's contentious land 
issues, human rights leaders emphasized the sensitive role that 
foreign companies, particularly Chinese and Vietnamese, play in 
fueling the conflict due to the economic land concessions that they 
receive, which also have a serious impact on the environment.  DAS 
Marciel acknowledged the significance of the land issues and 
emphasized that he had already raised the subject a number of times 
during his visit. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Yeng Virak of Community Legal Education Center voiced his 
concern over the current attitude of growth at all costs in which he 
sees the poor becoming poorer and vulnerable people losing, which 
could have an impact on stability.  When asked about statistics that 
indicate economic growth is pulling more Cambodians out of poverty, 
human rights leaders admitted that it was difficult to know with 
certainty the overall impact but they felt confident that those who 
were already poor were becoming more impoverished.  One participant 
noted that the chasm was becoming wider between the rich and poor. 
Another felt that the looming oil and gas profits could also have a 
negative impact on poverty levels as the possible "resource curse" 
could lead to greater corruption. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) DAS Marciel's question about the political space in which 
human rights organizations have to operate touched off an 
interesting discussion.  Theary Seng of Center for Social 
Development underscored the chilling effect that events of two years 
ago continue to have on human rights organizations, with most still 
uncomfortable testing to see if political space has, in fact, opened 
up.  Naly Pilorge of LICADHO opined that the RGC only tolerated 
human rights organizations because of the need for international 
recognition. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Pilorge also raised reports of incarcerated individuals 
in two prisons being used to cut fabric for garment factories. 
(Note:  Licadho monitors 18 prisons.  Pilorge did not name the two 
prisons where these alleged abuses are occurring.  End Note.)  While 
LICADHO is still investigating the allegations, there is information 
to indicate that this is occurring and that there is neither consent 
from the prisoners, nor any benefits being provided to them for 
their labor.  Pilorge assured DAS Marciel that she would keep the 
USG informed of any further findings. 
 
Khmer Rouge Principals:  KRT Can Deliver "A Pretty Good Measure of 
Justice" 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
¶11.  (SBU)  Khmer Rouge Tribunal (KRT) Co-Investigating Prosecutor 
Robert Petit and Defense Unit Head Rupert Skilbeck briefed DAS 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000103  003 OF 004 
 
 
Marciel and the Ambassador on developments in the KRT, covering many 
of the same topics they reviewed with Staffdel Grove earlier in the 
week (Ref A).  They noted in context that the Cambodian system of 
justice was problematic but that systems in the KRT had been 
established to deliver what Petit called a "pretty good measure of 
justice."  Petit added that there may be more persons prosecuted 
than the initial five KR leaders now in custody.  Skilbeck said that 
the KRT structures so far seemed to be working and there would 
possibly be a vigorous defense, but the "crunch time" had not yet 
come to fully test the court's internal rules.  Skilbeck said that 
corruption seemed to have stopped in the form of kickbacks, but in 
some cases, voluntary payments might still be made.  Petit noted the 
work of this court, like that of other war crimes tribunals, was not 
easy, never pretty, but they could get the job done.  Petit said the 
court could only accomplish its goals with sufficient financial 
support. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Both Petit and Skilbeck supported the appointment of a 
Special Advisor to the UNSYG who would focus on court management and 
administrative issues (including corruption) over the next nine 
months.  That person would need to have a leadership role and be 
physically located in Phnom Penh for some time, they noted. 
 
Strong Economic Growth, but Many Obstacles to Sustainability 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶13.  (U) In a roundtable discussion with a diverse group of industry 
and economic development representatives, participants agreed that 
the current growth rate, averaging nine percent per year since 2000, 
is the result of renewed political stability and regional economic 
growth.  Representatives from the banking, legal, and garment 
sectors said that investors are now starting to perceive less risk, 
resulting in dramatic increases in foreign direct investment.  Dr. 
Hang Chuon Naron, Secretary General the Supreme National Economic 
Council, noted that the National Bank's dollar reserves are higher 
than ever, increasing more during the last year than the previous 
ten years.  Furthermore, savings deposits are growing at 70 percent 
per year.  IMF Resident Representative John Nelmes pointed out that 
current macro-economic conditions, including inflation rates and 
balance of payments, are also favorable. 
 
¶14.  (SBU) However, all eight participants agreed that growth is 
unlikely to continue at the same high rate, with the IMF predicting 
six to seven percent growth in the years to come.  Cambodia is 
starting from a very low base, which makes high growth easier to 
achieve in the early years, Nelmes noted.  Michael Stephen, a banker 
and American-Cambodian Business Association board member, explained 
that the lack of diversification makes Cambodia's economy fragile. 
Garments and tourism, the foremost economic drivers, are susceptible 
to international markets and global economic trends.  Dr. Naron 
projected that it would take another ten years for the economy to 
diversify away from these two economic mainstays.  He also noted 
that new investors are fueling a real estate bubble.  Double and 
triple digit returns from fast appreciating properties are 
attracting investment away from sectors that will support long-term 
growth, such as agriculture. 
 
¶15.  (SBU) In response to DAS Marciel's question about the factors 
inhibiting future economic growth, the representatives responded 
with a number of challenges.  In the immediate future, the falling 
dollar will hurt Cambodia's dollarized economy and the impact will 
be further aggravated by rising fuel and food prices.  The 
representatives also listed a number of challenges to long-term 
growth: growing inequity, an inadequate education system, unreliable 
infrastructure, corruption, and the lack of an independent 
judiciary.  Brett Scarioni, lawyer and American-Cambodian Business 
Association President, described how companies must seek dispute 
resolution in Singapore or Hong Kong, where there is less corruption 
and systems are more transparent and impartial.  Van Sou Ieng, 
Executive Director of the Garment Manufacturers Association of 
Cambodia, explained that the garment sector is currently restricted 
to low value cut-and-sew operations because electricity costs are 
too high.  With utility rates two to three times higher than its 
neighbors, Cambodia is unable to advance into more capital intensive 
manufacturing, like textiles and electronics.  The economics and 
business leaders gathered increasingly view Vietnam as Cambodia's 
biggest competitor.  Vietnam's entrance into the WTO is likely to 
result in many investors passing over Cambodia for Vietnam's more 
highly educated workforce, lower electricity costs and more reliable 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000103  004 OF 004 
 
 
infrastructure. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶16.  (SBU) Cambodia's civil society presented a largely upbeat, but 
not unflawed, picture of Cambodian political and economic progress. 
Just as the KRT Prosecutor said that the institution could deliver 
"a pretty good measure of justice," in other arenas, Marciel heard 
that Cambodia is achieving "pretty good development."  Voter 
intimidation and political violence have declined, the leading 
opposition party feels confident about the future and is 
complimenting the Prime Minister, and economic leaders predict that 
while Cambodia's growth may slow, it will remain at an enviable six 
to seven percent.  Nonetheless, real concerns exist and should be 
taken seriously:  new forms of electoral fraud; land disputes and 
NGO self-censorship; growing income disparity; and poor 
infrastructure, low human capacity, and corruption hampering 
Cambodia's future economic growth.  End comment. 
 
¶17.  (U) DAS Marciel did not have the opportunity to clear this 
cable. 
 
MUSSOMELI