08PRETORIA2093
SOUTH AFRICA: PRESIDENT THABO MBEKI'S RESIGNATION
Mon Sep 22 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
O 221514Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5777
INFO AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS PRETORIA 002093 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM SF
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICA: PRESIDENT THABO MBEKI'S RESIGNATION 
ADDRESS 
 
REF: A. PRETORIA 2079 
     ¶B. PRETORIA 2080 
 
¶1. Summary: In a September 21 televised address to the 
nation, Thabo Mbeki announced his resignation as President of 
South Africa.  Mbeki said he respected the African National 
Congress (ANC) September 20 decision to recall him (reftels). 
 He thanked the nation and the ANC for the opportunity to 
serve since 1994 as Deputy President and then President. 
Mbeki spoke of his work in pursuit of a vision of a 
democratic South Africa.  Mbeki pointed to South Africa's 
long sustained economic growth, acknowledging that the fruits 
of economic growth have yet to be shared by all.  Mbeki said 
work is needed to strengthen the justice system and to enlist 
grassroots support in the fight against crime.  Mbeki 
underscored his respect for the independence of the judiciary 
and took exception to inferences of judicial interference. 
Mbeki also sharply denied that he used the executive and the 
prosecutor to lead a political conspiracy to prosecute Jacob 
Zuma.  Mbeki spoke of his commitment to the regeneration of 
the continent and listed his conflict resolution efforts. 
Mbeki said he was convinced that the incoming Zuma 
administration would build on his work to meet the challenges 
facing South Africa and the continent.  End summary. 
 
¶3. Begin Text: 
 
Fellow South Africans, 
I have no doubt that you are aware of the announcement made 
yesterday by the National Executive Committee of the ANC with 
regard to the position of the President of the Republic. 
 
Accordingly, I would like to take this opportunity to inform 
the nation that today I handed a letter to the Speaker of the 
National Assembly, the Honourable Baleka Mbete, to tender my 
resignation from the high position of President of the 
Republic of South Africa, effective from the day that will be 
determined by the National Assembly. 
 
I have been a loyal member of the African National Congress 
(ANC) for 52 years. I remain a member of the ANC and 
therefore respect its decisions. It is for this reason that I 
have taken the decision to resign as President of the 
Republic, following the decision of the National Executive 
Committee of the ANC. 
 
I would like sincerely to thank the nation and the ANC for 
having given me the opportunity to serve in public office 
during the last 14 years as the Deputy President and 
President of South Africa. 
 
This service has at all times been based on the vision, the 
principles and values that have guided the ANC as it 
prosecuted a difficult and dangerous struggle in the decades 
before the attainment of our freedom in 1994. 
 
Among other things, the vision, principles and values of the 
ANC teach the cadres of this movement life-long lessons that 
inform us that wherever we are and whatever we do we should 
ensure that our actions contribute to the attainment of a 
free and just society, the upliftment of all our people, and 
the development of a South Africa that belongs to all who 
live in it. 
 
This is the vision of a South Africa that is democratic, 
non-racial, non-sexist and prosperous; a country in which all 
the people enjoy a better life. 
 
Indeed the work we have done in pursuit of the vision and 
principles of our liberation movement has at all times been 
based on the age-old values of Ubuntu, of selflessness, 
sacrifice and service in a manner that ensures that the 
interests of the people take precedence over our desires as 
individuals. 
 
I truly believe that the governments in which I have been 
privileged to serve have acted and worked in the true spirit 
Qprivileged to serve have acted and worked in the true spirit 
of these important values. 
 
Based on the values of Ubuntu, the significance of which we 
learnt at the feet of such giants of our struggle as Chief 
Albert Luthuli, OR Tambo, Nelson Mandela and others, we as 
government, embarked, from 1994, on policies and programmes 
directed at pulling the people of South Africa out of the 
morass of poverty and ensuring that we build a stable, 
developed and prosperous country. 
 
Accordingly, among many things we did, we transformed our 
economy, resulting in the longest sustained period of 
economic growth in the history of our country; we introduced 
an indigent policy that reaches large numbers of those in 
need; we made the necessary advances so as to bring about a 
developmental state, the better to respond to the many and 
varied challenges of the transformation of our country. 
 
This is, of course not the occasion to record the 
achievements of government. An additional critical few are 
however worth mentioning. They include our achievements with 
regard to many of the Millennium Development Goals, the 
empowerment of women, the decision to allow us to host the 
2010 FIFA Soccer World Cup and our election as a 
non-permanent member of the UN Security Council two years 
ago. 
 
Despite the economic advances we have made, I would be the 
first to say that even as we ensured consistent economic 
growth, the fruits of these positive results are still to be 
fully and equitably shared among our people, hence the abject 
poverty we still find coexisting side by side with 
extraordinary opulence. 
 
Importantly, we had an obligation to ensure that democracy 
becomes the permanent feature of our lives and that all our 
citizens respect the rule of law and human rights. This is 
one of the cornerstones of our democracy, which we have 
consistently striven to protect and never to compromise. 
 
We have also worked continuously to combat the twin 
challenges of crime and corruption, to ensure that all our 
people live in conditions of safety and security. We must 
admit that we are still faced with many challenges in this 
regard. 
 
Work will therefore have to continue to strengthen and 
improve the functioning of our criminal justice system, to 
provide the necessary resources for this purpose, to activate 
the masses of our people to join the fight against crime and 
corruption, and to achieve new victories in the struggle for 
moral regeneration. 
 
With regard to the latter, our successive governments from 
1994 to date have worked consistently to encourage the 
entrenchment in our country of a value system whose 
observance would make all of us Proudly South African, a 
value system informed by the precept of Ubuntu ) umuntu 
ngumuntu ngabanye. Among other things this means that we must 
all act in a manner that respects the dignity of every human 
being. 
 
We have sought to advance this vision precisely because we 
understood that we would fail in the struggle to achieve the 
national and social cohesion that our country needs, as well 
as the national unity we require to enable us to act together 
to address the major challenges we face. 
 
Fellow South Africans, 
 
Since the attainment of our freedom in 1994, we have acted 
consistently to respect and defend the independence of the 
judiciary. For this reason our successive governments have 
honoured all judicial decisions, including those that went 
against the Executive. This did not mean that the Executive 
did not at times have strong views which we would have 
publicly pronounced upon. The central approach we adopted has 
always been to defend the judiciary rather than act in a 
manner that would have had a negative impact on its work. 
 
Indeed, on the infrequent instances when we have publicly 
expressed views contrary to those of the judiciary, we have 
done so mindful of the need to protect its integrity. 
 
Consistent with this practice, I would like to restate the 
position of Cabinet on the inferences made by the Honourable 
Judge Chris Nicholson that the President and Cabinet have 
interfered in the work the National Prosecuting Authority 
(NPA). Again I would like to state this categorically that we 
have never done this, and therefore never compromised the 
right of the National Prosecuting Authority to decide whom it 
Qright of the National Prosecuting Authority to decide whom it 
wished to prosecute or not to prosecute. 
 
This applies equally to the painful matter relating to the 
court proceedings against the President of the ANC, Comrade 
Jacob Zuma. 
 
More generally, I would like to assure the nation that our 
successive governments since 1994 have never acted in any 
manner intended wilfully to violate the Constitution and the 
law. We have always sought to respect the solemn Oath of 
Office each one of us made in front of the Chief Justice and 
other judges, and have always been conscious of the fact that 
the legal order that governs our country was achieved through 
the sacrifices made by countless numbers of our people, which 
included death. 
 
In this context it is most unfortunate that gratuitous 
suggestions have been made seeking to impugn the integrity of 
those of us who have been privileged to serve in our 
country,s National Executive. 
 
Compatriots, 
 
Again, as you know, we have often pointed to the fact that 
our liberation movement has always been pan-African in its 
outlook and therefore that we have an obligation to 
contribute to the renaissance of the African continent. 
 
All of us are aware of the huge and daunting challenges that 
face our continent. In the short years since our freedom, as 
South Africans we have done what we could to make our humble 
contribution to the regeneration of our continent. 
 
We have devoted time and resources to the task of achieving 
the Renaissance of Africa because this is what has informed 
generations of our liberators, even before the ANC was formed 
in 1912. We have done this fully understanding that our 
country shares a common destiny with the rest of our 
Continent. 
 
I therefore thank the many dedicated compatriots ) men and 
women ) who have made it possible for us to contribute to 
the resolution of conflicts and the strengthening of 
democracy in a number of countries including the Kingdom of 
Lesotho, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Burundi, Cte 
d,Ivoire, Comoros, Zimbabwe, Sudan and elsewhere. We have 
also done this work conscious of our responsibilities as a 
State Member of both SADC and the African Union. 
 
I would like to thank my colleagues, the many Heads of State 
and Government on the African continent whose abiding vision 
is that Africa must be free; that all our countries, 
individually and collectively should become democratic, 
developed and prosperous, and that Africa must unite. These 
African patriots know as I do that Africa and Africans will 
not and must not be the wretched of the earth in perpetuity. 
 
Similarly we have worked to contribute to the achievement of 
the aspirations of the countries and peoples of the South, 
conscious of the need for us to act in solidarity and in 
unity with the billions with whom we share the common 
challenge to defeat poverty and underdevelopment. 
 
Accordingly, I depart the Office of President of South Africa 
knowing that this country has many men and women who have 
dedicated their lives to ensure that South Africa, Africa and 
the countries of the South will, in time, manage to ensure a 
better world for all of humanity. 
 
I depart this Office conscious that the sterling work done by 
the Presidency, the Ministries and departments, the provinces 
and local government structures will continue, driven by the 
determination to achieve the goal of a better life for all. 
 
I am convinced that the incoming administration will better 
the work done during the past 14-and-half years so that 
poverty, underdevelopment, unemployment, illiteracy, 
challenges of health, crime and corruption will cease to 
define the lives of many of our people. 
 
I have received many messages from South Africans, from all 
walks of life, through e-mails, telephonically and through 
cell phone text messages as well as those conveyed through my 
colleagues. I thank all of you, fellow South Africans, for 
these messages. 
 
To everyone, and responding to these messages, I would like 
to say that gloom and despondency have never defeated 
adversity. Trying times need courage and resilience. Our 
strength as a people is not tested during the best of times. 
As we said before, we should never become despondent because 
QAs we said before, we should never become despondent because 
the weather is bad nor should we turn triumphalist because 
the sun shines. 
 
For South Africa to succeed there is more work to be done and 
I trust that we will continue to strive to act in unity to 
accelerate the advance towards the achievement of our shared 
national goals. 
 
In this regard, it may be worth repeating what I said during 
the inauguration of the President of the Republic in 1999. 
Using the metaphor of the Comrades Marathon, I said then 
that: 
 
"Those who complete the course will do so only because they 
do not, as fatigue sets in, convince themselves that the road 
ahead is still too long, the inclines too steep, the 
loneliness impossible to bear and the prize itself of 
doubtful value." 
 
Once more, I thank you most sincerely for affording me the 
opportunity to serve you and to serve the people of Africa. 
 
Thank you, ngiyathokoza, ke ya lebogang, ndo livhuwa, 
ndiyabulela, ndza khensa, baie dankie, ngiyabonga. 
 
Issued by: The Presidency 
21 September 2008 
¶4. End Text. 
 
 
BOST