08PRETORIA1453
SOUTH AFRICAN ENVIRONMENT, SCIENCE, AND TECHNOLOGY MONTHLY
Thu Jul 03 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO9200
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSA #1453/01 1851217
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 031217Z JUL 08
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4969
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
INFO RUEHTN/AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 5764
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 9953
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 8167UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 PRETORIA 001453 
 
DEPT FOR OES/PCI, OES/ENV, AND AF/S 
DEPT PASS EPA/OIA, 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: SENV SOCI ETRD SF
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICAN ENVIRONMENT, SCIENCE, AND TECHNOLOGY MONTHLY 
BRIEFINGS, JUNE 2008 
 
PRETORIA 00001453  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  This is the South African Environment, Science and 
Technology Monthly Briefings newsletter, June 2008, Volume 3, Number 
6, prepared by the U.S. Embassy Pretoria, South Africa. 
 
Topics of the newsletter: 
-- GLOBE PROGRAM BRINGS 500 STUDENTS, TEACHERS AND SCIENTISTS 
TOGETHER IN CAPE TOWN 
-- SA TO DEVELOP BATTERY- POWERED CAR 
-- SA COMPANIES TO INCREASE SUBMISSIONS OF GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS 
DATA 
 
-- MUNICIPALITIES HOLD CLIMATE CHANGE SUMMIT 
 
-- SA TO PRIORITIZE BIOSAFETY 
 
-- SOLAR-POWERED CARS TO RACE IN SA 
 
-- AUSTARALIA AND SA TO DISCONTINUE COLLABORATIONS ON RADIO 
ASTRONOMY 
 
-- ORGANIZED CRIME RESPONSIBLE FOR RHINO POACHING 
 
-- MONDI AND WWF JOIN HANDS FOR WETLANDS CONSERVATION 
 
-- SOUTH AFRICA'S NEWEST WORLD HERITAGE SITE THREATENED 
 
-- DROUGHT FORCING KAROO FARMERS TO SELL 
 
-- FACTOID 
 
End Summary. 
 
GLOBE Program Brings 500 Students, Teachers and 
Scientist Together in Cape Town 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶2. (U) GLOBE (Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the 
Environment) brought together over 500 students, teachers and 
scientists from 51 different countries to participate in the 
quadrennial GLOBE Learning Expedition in Cape Town June 22-17, 2008. 
 Students from Cameroon, Lebanon, and the U.S. gave the youth 
keynote speeches; Jane Goodall Institute (South Africa) Rescue 
Director Eugene Cussons provided the keynote speech.  Guest speakers 
included scientists and professors from U. S. government agencies, 
U.S. universities and the University of Cape Town.  Cape Town Consul 
General Helen LaLime provided welcoming remarks.  Students presented 
research programs in four thematic areas: 1) Health and Environment; 
2) Water Quality and Availability; 3) Regional Impacts of Climate 
Change; and 4) Earth Systems Projects.  Students conducted field 
studies at various locations in the Cape Town region and presented 
cultural programs highlighting their respective countries.  Embassy 
EST Officer provided support. 
¶3. (U) GLOBE is an interagency U.S. government program funded by the 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the 
National Science Foundation (NSF), supported by the U.S. Department 
of State, and implemented through a cooperative agreement between 
NASA and the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR) 
in Boulder, Colorado.  GLOBE is a cooperative effort of schools in 
partnership with colleges and universities, state and local school 
systems, and non-government organizations.  GLOBE has bilateral 
agreements between the United States and over 100 countries.  Each 
country manages and supports its national and regional programs. 
GLOBE functions as a worldwide hands-on, primary and secondary 
school-based science and education program, working in partnership 
with NASA and the NSF Earth System Science Projects (ESSPs).  GLOBE 
began operations on Earth Day 1994. 
SA to Develop Battery-Powered Car 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) South Africa is developing battery-powered passenger and 
utility vehicles.  The first prototype is expected to be launched by 
the end of 2008.  Department of Science and Technology (DST) Deputy 
Minister Derrick Hanekom announced the project during his budget 
vote speech in parliament.  Hanekom stated that the 
environmentally-friendly car would mitigate the pollution from 
fossil fuels and reduce South Africa's economic vulnerability to oil 
Qfossil fuels and reduce South Africa's economic vulnerability to oil 
prices.  He said the project was a concerted effort between various 
stakeholders, including universities and the auto industry. 
 
¶5. (U) DST Group Executive Officer Dr. Boni Mehlomakulu added that 
the six-passenger car will have a speed-determined range of between 
100 km and 400 km and would be fitted with roof solar panels to 
enable the battery to charge either when parked in the sun or 
plugged into the electricity grid.  The project is funded from DST's 
Innovation Fund.  An additional R300 million ($38.9 million) will be 
required to build a manufacturing plant to produce the vehicles. 
 
PRETORIA 00001453  002.2 OF 004 
 
 
Mehlomakulu said  manufacturing would commence by 2010, with the 
first 4,000 units targeted for the South Africa government fleet. 
Additional production would be determined by demand and interest 
shown by investors. 
 
SA Companies to Increase Submission of Greenhouse 
Gas Emissions Data 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
 ¶6. (U) Over fifty South African companies are expected to disclose 
information about their carbon emissions, which will be incorporated 
into the world's largest databank of greenhouse gases (GHG) later 
this year.  The exercise dubbed the Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP) 
was launched in 2007, with an initial target of 40 South African 
companies.  The CDP project includes GHG accounting for emissions, 
management, reduction and costs.  Although 40 companies were 
targeted in 2007, only 15 provided quantitative data on emissions. 
The South African CDP project is managed by Incite Sustainability 
and the National Business Institute.  Officials from those entities 
observed that many companies have started to acknowledge that their 
carbon footprint issue affects business.  South African firms in the 
agriculture sector and wine production are already feeling the 
pressure exerted by importers and retailers, who demand to know the 
size the exporters' carbon footprint.  Incite Sustainability's John 
Hanks said the CDP has received 28 companies' responses for 2008. 
Twenty-one companies requested extensions, while another eight 
confirmed their intention to respond.  Targeted corporations include 
Sasol, BHP Billiton and Anglo-American. 
 
Municipalities Hold Climate Change Summit 
----------------------------------------- 
¶7. (U) South African municipal officials and other stakeholders met 
in mid-June to discuss the need to coordinate plans and strategies 
to combat climate change.  Summit delegates adopted a declaration 
encouraging clearer carbon aims and strategies for municipalities. 
City of Johannesburg Executive Mayor Amos Masondo pointed out that 
local government was in the front line for implementation and 
services delivery, and therefore it needed to pursue mitigation and 
adaptation strategies vigorously.  He encouraged other cities to 
play active roles in mitigation against climate change.  Masondo 
advised cities to establish partnerships with local communities, the 
private sector and NGOs. 
¶8. (U) Masondo noted that the City of Johannesburg had already 
enacted climate change initiatives, including reducing coal-based 
energy consumption, retrofitting all municipality buildings, 
introducing energy efficient resources in households and planting 
trees.   City of Johannesburg Official Prema Naidoo added that 
cities should make environmental management central to their 
planning, especially for public-initiated projects.  Buffalo City 
Mayor Zintle Peters added that climate change required champions at 
the local level and that the success of the climate changes projects 
depended on political will and commitment. 
SA to Prioritize Bio-Safety 
--------------------------- 
 
¶9. (U) Department of Agriculture (NDOA) Biosafety Directorate 
Officer Chantal Arendse told attendees at the Public Understanding 
of Biotechnology (PUB) seminar that South Africa is making serious 
strides to ensure that bio-safety is a priority.  The PUB was 
established by the Department of Science and Technology to raise 
awareness among the public and to ensure a balanced understanding of 
Qawareness among the public and to ensure a balanced understanding of 
the potential of biotechnology.  Arendse said the government is 
"committed to ensure that all activities pertaining to GM0s are 
carried out in a responsibly and a reasonably safe way."  Arendse 
noted that there is no clear labeling and segregation between GMO 
and non-GMO products, but the NDOA is developing relevant 
procedures.  He informed that South Africa already grows GM cotton, 
maize and Soya.  He said the South African government would begin 
soon to prioritize GM research in accordance with the annual 
increases in global GM crop planting of twelve percent in 2006 and 
¶2007. 
 
Solar-Powered Cars to Race in SA 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (U) The Advanced Energy Foundation (AEF) is organizing an 
international solar-powered car race in SA in September 2008.  Teams 
planning to participate in "The Solar Challenge" are already in the 
process of designing and building solar-powered vehicles.  The 
vehicles are expected to have the capability to reach between 80km 
and 100km per hour without external assistance.  AEF Head Winston 
Jordaan said the event would be an opportunity to showcase 
cutting-edge solar technology innovations from around the world. 
Jordaan also noted that to win the contest, racers needed advanced 
technological prowess combined with exceptional strategy and 
tactics.  Participants would set out on a 4,175 km long-distance 
 
PRETORIA 00001453  003.2 OF 004 
 
 
race around the country, starting and finishing in Pretoria at the 
Innovation Hub.  Two entrants will represent South Africa while 
other participants are expected to come from Australia, Holland, and 
the U.S. 
 
Australia and SA Discontinue Collaboration 
in Radio Astronomy 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (U) Australia and South Africa recently agreed to discontinue 
their collaboration in the development of a radio astronomy software 
program known as the Convergent Radio Astronomy Demonstrator 
(Conrad).  Australia and South Africa had established Conrad in 2006 
to develop software for the South Africa Karoo Array Telescope 
(MeerKat) and the Australian Square Kilometer Array Pathfinder 
(ASKA).  The software technology requirements for the two projects 
had begun to diverge, seeking different software development 
approaches and data processing.  The parties also received 
larger-than-expected funding, which allows them to pursue software 
development independently.  The two parties will continue to share 
relevant information. 
 
¶12. (U) Both countries are the front-runners in the bid to host the 
multi-billion-dollar Square Kilometer Array (SKA) radio telescope, 
which will be 50-times more sensitive than current telescopes. 
Meerkat and ASKA are the precursors to the SKA project.  The Conrad 
Telescope Operating System, developed by the two countries, is 
currently operating South Africa's MeerKat prototype dish at the 
Haartebeesthoek Radio Astronomy Observatory, west of Pretoria. 
 
 
Organized Crime Responsible for Rhino Poaching 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
 
¶13. (U) Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism (DEAT) 
Marthinus Van Schalkwyk said in his budget speech to Parliament in 
June that illegal hunting for rhino and  trade in rhino has 
increased.  The Minister advised that twenty-seven rhino had been 
poached in the Kruger National Park over the last two years, with 
other incidents reported in different areas in the country.  Both 
black and white rhino are listed as protected species and trade in 
rhino and their products is regulated internationally.  The Minister 
linked escalating poaching activities to organized crime, 
emphasizing that this was a serious cause for concern.  The Minister 
said prospective hunters applied for permits, but the hunts never 
actually occur.  Van Schalkwyk said this allows permit holders to 
legally export illegally obtained rhino horn as trophies.  He noted 
that the authorities were partly to blame for poor policing, and 
added that "without enforcement of compliance, environmental 
legislation was worth no more than the paper it is written on". 
 
Mondi and WWF Join Hands for Wetlands Conservation 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶14. (U) Forest company Mondi has signed a five-year extension 
agreement continuing their World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) 
partnership for wetlands conservation in South Africa.  The parties 
have developed the Mondi Wetlands Program (MWP) which is committed 
to delineating and protecting all wetlands on land owned by Mondi. 
They also plan to remove all commercially-planted tress.  Mondi is 
providing R20 million ($2.5 million) for implementation of the 
project.  MWP Manager David Lindley noted that it was imperative to 
rehabilitate and manage the country's wetland more wisely.  He said 
"failure to do so could result in the country having less pure 
Q"failure to do so could result in the country having less pure 
water, increased flooding, lower agricultural productivity and more 
endangered species". 
 
¶15. (U) Mondi Natural Resources Manager Peter Gardiner stated that 
the industry was losing nearly 1.4 million tons of timber per year. 
He added that his company owned 25% of the industry and thus lost 
about R200 million ($25 million).  Gardiner said that over 70 
percent of wetlands are located on privately owned land, and 55 
percent of the country's wetlands have been impacted by poor land 
management. 
 
South Africa's Newest World Heritage 
Site Threatened 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶16. (U) White Rivers Exploration, an Australian mining company, has 
applied for prospecting rights on 80 farms in the Vredefort Dome 
area.  Most of the land in this area is privately owned.  Vredefort 
Dome is believed to be the largest and most ancient meteorite impact 
site on earth.  It was declared a World Heritage Site by the UN 
Education, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) in July 
 
PRETORIA 00001453  004.2 OF 004 
 
 
¶2005.  (It is South Africa's 7th World heritage Site.) 
Vredefort Dome Conservancy Chairman Stephen de la Harpe stated that 
there is no reason to allow prospecting as mining will not be 
allowed in a World Heritage Site.  He noted that gold reserves do 
exist in the area, but the gold is fragmented due to the meteor 
impact.  De la Harpe said only open cast-mining would be 
economically feasible, and this type of mining would destroy the 
biodiversity of the site.  Free State Department of Environmental 
Affairs and Tourism Conservation Coen Erasmus said prospecting would 
not pose a threat since only boreholes would be drilled to determine 
geological strata.  He agreed that mining would never be allowed. 
Vredefort Dome faces other environmental challenges, including 
pollution from sewage in the Vaal River and increasing development 
along its borders.  Visitors also chip away at the delicate shatter 
cone rocks. 
¶17. (U) South African government officials dismiss rumors that the 
site will be declared "threatened" during an upcoming UNESCO World 
Heritage Committee meeting.  The South African government has not 
yet confirmed the site's status as a World Heritage Site under South 
African law.  Erasmus said that the government "hoped" to confirm 
the site's status by December. 
Drought Forcing Karoo Farmers to Sell 
-------------------------------------- 
¶18. (U) Four years of drought have forced many Karoo farmers to put 
their farms and sheep ranches up for sale.  Farmers have reduced the 
size of their sheep flocks and have tried to sell shares in flocks 
to help pay feed bills.  One farmer noted that he had brought his 
sheep from the veld and placed them in kraals for their survival. 
He emphasized that a birthing ewe will abandon a lamb if she has no 
milk.  Other farmers have sent their flocks as far as Mossel bay and 
Beaufort West. 
¶19. (U) Farmers in several meat- and wool-producing towns have moved 
out of the Karoo, heading for towns or other areas not affected by 
drought.  Retail sectors have also felt the impact.  Stores are 
laying off employees; shopkeepers report that sales are down and 
long-time customers are behind in payments.  Nation Red Meat 
Producers Organization CEO Gerhard Schutte said the drought would 
not impact South Africa's supply of red meat as South Africa is a 
net importer of red meat.  Western Cape Agricultural Director for 
Sustainable Resource Management Andre Roux said that 
drought-stricken farmers received government assistance last year. 
He added that those funds have been depleted and applications for 
assistance this year have not been successful.  Pam Golding 
Properties Realtor Wayne Rubidge noted that not all news was bad for 
Karoo farmers.  He said that a number of farms had been converted to 
hunting and several farms had been sold to "lifestyle buyers." 
 
 
Monthly Factoid 
--------------- 
 
20 (U) The Trans-frontier Park set in South Africa, Mozambique and 
Zimbabwe in a world first. The 38,600 square kilometer park is 
bigger than the Yellow Stone Park in the US, and bigger than 
Switzerland, Belgium or Taiwan. 
Bost