08PRETORIA2007
SOUTH AFRICAN ENVIRONMENT, SCIENCE, AND TECHNOLOGY MONTHLY
Wed Sep 10 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO9358
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSA #2007/01 2541034
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 101034Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5655
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
INFO RUEHTN/AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 5987
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 0138
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 8346UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 PRETORIA 002007 
 
DEPT FOR OES/PCI, OES/ENV, AND AF/S 
DEPT PASS EPA/OIA, 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: SENV SOCI ETRD SF
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICAN ENVIRONMENT, SCIENCE, AND TECHNOLOGY MONTHLY 
BRIEFINGS, AUGUST 2008 
 
PRETORIA 00002007  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  This is the South African Environment, Science and 
Technology Monthly Briefings newsletter, August 2008, Volume 3, 
Number 8, prepared by the U.S. Embassy Pretoria, South Africa. 
 
Topics of the newsletter: 
 
-- AFRICAN PENGUINS ON THE BRINK OF EXTINCTION 
 
-- DEAT LAUNCHES PLAN TO SAVE SEABIRDS 
 
-- New AIR QUALITY MONITORS INSTALLED IN HOT SPOTS 
 
-- DME WINS TURF BATTLE - MINING APPROVED 
   FOR WILD COAST DUNES 
 
-- SUPER-THIN SOLAR PANEL PRODUCTION DELAYED 
 
-- GREEN RATING SYSTEM FOR SA PROPERTY 
   MARKET LAUNCHED 
 
-- ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT REGULATIONS 
   TO BE REVIEWED 
 
 
-- ENGEN INVESTS IN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPROVEMENTS 
 
-- SA COMPANY ASSUMES LEAD IN 
   WASTE-TO-ENERGY CONVERSIONS 
 
-- NORTH WEST PROVINCE PLANNING 
   NEW HUMAN EVOLUTION MUSEUM 
 
-- MONTHLY FACTOID 
 
African Penguins on the Brink of Extinction 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) The Sothern African Foundation for the Conservation of 
Coastal Birds, (SAFCCB) has raised a warning about the accelerated 
decrease in population numbers of the African penguin species. 
SAFCCB Chief Executive Officer Vanessa Strauss stated that 
scientific predictions indicate that current trends indicate that 
the species could be extinct in the next 16 years.  A 2007 census 
recorded 31,000 breeding penguin pairs, while in 2008 the number 
dropped to 26,000 pairs. 
SAFCCB reports show that in the 1900s there were over 4 million 
African penguins in the wild.  The population numbers dropped to 
450,000 in 1950 and further down to 200,000 in the year 2000. 
 
 
¶3. (U) The foundation has been rescuing birds affected by oil spills 
on the Cape Town coast and is currently caring for over 80 
dehydrated and emaciated penguins picked up in June and July. 
Strauss attributes the dwindling penguin population to oil 
pollution.  She said 'oiled penguins are at risk because they cannot 
swim or find food".  The oil clumps the penguin's feathers together, 
exposing their skin to cold sea water, putting their lives in 
danger.  According to Strauss, penguins are "an indicator species 
whose status reflects the well being of marine ecosystem. 
 
DEAT Launches Plan to Save Seabirds 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶4. (U) Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism (DEAT) Head 
of Research for Antarctica and Islands Dr. Johann Augustyn announced 
that DEAT has launched its National Plan of Action for Reducing the 
Incidental Catch of Seabirds in Long-line Fisheries (NPOA-Seabirds). 
 Dr. Augustyn announced the NPOA in the Western Cape in late August 
during his opening speech to the Agreement on the Conservation of 
Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP) advisory meeting.  Over 18,000 birds 
are reported killed annually because of incidental catches during 
long-line fishing.  Augustyn said that by-catch studies indicate 
that long-line catches are responsible the declining populations and 
threatened the conservation status of many species.  According to 
Augustyn "Thirteen of these recorded species are currently 
threatened with extinction resulting from factors such as the 
deterioration of breeding grounds for many albatrosses and petrels". 
 The recent incidental killing of over 28 albatross and petrel 
species prompted DEAT to develop its NPOA. 
 
New Air Quality Monitors Installed in Hot Spots 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶5. (U) DEAT and the Mpumalanga Provincial Department of Agriculture 
Q5. (U) DEAT and the Mpumalanga Provincial Department of Agriculture 
and Land Affairs (DALA) installed new air quality monitoring 
stations in a 31,106 square kilometer area encompassing the small 
 
PRETORIA 00002007  002.2 OF 004 
 
 
towns of Balfour, Middleburg, Standerton and Witbank.  The region is 
noted for its heavy industry operations, residential coal burning 
and veld fires, all of which contribute to its severe air pollution. 
 DEAT Deputy Minister Rejoice Mabudafhasi stated that the new air 
quality monitoring stations will identify pollutants and the 
specific areas from which they come.  The stations will also detect 
and measure pollutants such as benzine, carbon monoxide, lead, and 
sulfur dioxide.  The data collected will be made available to the 
general public and to relevant stake holders such as the Air Quality 
Officers Forum, a forum that includes representatives from priority 
area municipalities. 
 
¶6. (U) Mabudafhasi noted that once a polluter was identified, 
especially the heavy industry companies, DEAT would present the 
company with proof about its pollution levels.  DEAT would then work 
with companies to remedy the situation over a stipulated time frame. 
 She added that polluters could be subjected to fines or jail terms 
if they were recalcitrant or ignored time frames.  The monitoring 
stations were installed at a cost of R1million ($134,000) each, with 
the financial partnership of DALA and the Royal Danish Embassy. 
 
DME Wins Turf Battle - Mining Approved 
For Wild Coast Dunes 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) A twelve-year old turf battle between the Department of 
Minerals and Energy (DME) and the Department of Environmental 
Affairs and Tourism (DEAT) ended in July when DME approved titanium 
dune mining on the Wild Coast.  The DME granted Australian mining 
company Mineral Commodities (MRC) rights to extract titanium from 
the Xolobeni Mineral Sands project located on the Indian Ocean 
coast.  The sand dunes are reported to contain over 346 metric tons 
of titanium, with an estimated value of R11 billion ($1.46 billion). 
 DME spokesperson Sputnik Ratau was adamant that decisions on mining 
applications should not be driven "only by environmental issues". 
DEAT and an environmental group Sustaining the Wild Coast maintain 
that the mining project could cause irreparable harm to the 
ecosystem, which includes international recognized unique biomes. 
They are also concerned that the environmental, land, and mineral 
rights of local inhabitants will be violated.  Some commentators 
believe that this victory could be DME's last one because the 
National Environmental Management Act will soon be amended to make 
DEAT the ultimate authority to oversee mining applications. 
 
Super-Thin Solar Panel Production Delayed 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶8. (U) Production equipment problems have stalled manufacturing 
South Africa's super-thin solar panels.  Commercial production was 
set to commence earlier this year this year at a Brandenburg, 
Germany plant, but has now been rescheduled for October or November. 
 University of Johannesburg (UJ) Professor Vivian Alberts lead the 
research team that invented this solar panel.  The South African 
panel is only five micrometers thick compared to the common 350 
micrometer thick panel.  Experts believe that the thin silicon-free 
panel layered with semiconductor materials like copper, indium, 
gallium, or selenium is more effective in absorbing solar energy. 
Alberts and the UJ formed the Photovoltaic Technology Intellectual 
Property (PTIP) company, which then teamed with Germany's IFE Thin 
Film for financial, licensing, technical and production capacities. 
QFilm for financial, licensing, technical and production capacities. 
The project is expected to produce about 450,000 panels a year.  A 
local plant in Paarl, Western Cape province is envisioned for the 
future. 
 
Green Rating System for SA Property 
Market Launched 
-------------------------------------- 
¶9. (U) The Green Building Council of South Africa (GBCSA) will 
launch the first environmental rating system for the country's 
property market (Green Star South Africa) at its inaugural 
conference in November 2-4, 2008.  The rating system is modeled on 
the Australian, UK and U.S. systems.  GBCSA CEO Nicolas Douglas said 
Green Star SA will have several distinctive rating tools for 
different property sectors such as residential, office and public 
buildings, hotels, and shopping centers.  The first phase of the 
ratings system will target office buildings.  Council Chairman Bruce 
Kerswell said "Green Star is a crucial first step in bringing an 
effective, industry-driven initiative to South Africa".  Douglas 
noted that international experience has shown that green buildings 
have higher rents, better occupancy rates, and perform better 
operationally 
 
Environment Impact Assessment Regulations 
to be Reviewed 
------------------------------------------ 
 
 
PRETORIA 00002007  003.2 OF 004 
 
 
¶10. (U) The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism (DEAT) 
is studying its current Environmental Impacts Assessment (EIA) 
process to "review the efficiency and effectiveness of EIA as a tool 
for environmental management in South Africa".  Energy, mining and 
infrastructure development companies have complained that the EIA 
process is slow and cumbersome.  NGOs feel that the process is 
non-inclusive and not responsive to dissent.  EIA regulations were 
first enacted as part of the National Environmental Management Act 
107 of 1998.  Amendments were put into effect in July 2006 following 
a review of the initial process and procedures.  DEAT's goal is to 
make certain that environmental impacts are considered before 
decisions are implemented.  DEAT anticipates releasing the results 
of this study at an EIA conference in November 2008. 
 
Engen Invests in Environmental Improvements 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (U) Durban-based petroleum refinery and fuel supply group Engen 
claimed to have spent over R60 million ($7.8 million) on 
environmental improvements over the last decade and to have reduced 
its emissions by 60%.  Engen Managing Director Willem Oosthuizen 
described the investment as a part of Engen's efforts to receive an 
ISO 14001 certificate.  The ISO 14001 is administered and enforced 
by the South African Bureau of Standards, and requires rigorous site 
emissions audits.  Each plant must create a monitoring system to 
track potential negative environmental impacts to comply with the 
ISO process.  Oosthuizen said it was a "milestone that was part of a 
journey which Engen started in 1999 when the refinery started 
voluntary emission reductions."  Community Liaison Forum's 
Environmental Representative Lawrence Vartharajulu congratulated 
Engen and noted that there was still room for improvement. 
 
SA Company Assumes Lead in 
Waste-to-Energy Conversions 
---------------------------- 
 
¶12. (U) Gauteng-based industrial heating specialist company Prestige 
Thermal (PT) successfully installed the world's largest pyorolysis 
waste-to-energy plant in seven months, compared to the usual 12 - 18 
months.  Sales and Marketing Director Mark Potgieter said PT's 
unique technology converts many different materials, unlike most 
technology which can only convert one type of material.  Potgieter 
commented: "There has been a lot of global competition towards this 
technology, but ours is the world's first commercially-viable, 
full-scale, waste-to-energy conversion plant."  The plant cost over 
R28 million ($3.68 million) and its production capacity is estimated 
at 3 MW of energy from every three tons of calorific waste. 
Potgieter noted that the company currently has no agreements that 
would allow PT's technology to contribute to the national 
electricity grid.   The company has received interest from European 
companies.  Potgieter says the technology is especially useful for 
countries looking for alternative non-landfill solutions for the 
management of municipal waste.  He noted that the PT technology is 
reducing landfill sites in the UK by 70% in areas where it is in 
use.  PT has been involved in waste-to-energy technology for over 
six years. 
 
 
North West Province Planning 
New Human Evolution Museum 
------------------------------------------- 
¶13. (U) North West provincial officials and Wits University 
academics recently agreed to collaborate on launching a new museum 
Qacademics recently agreed to collaborate on launching a new museum 
in an isolated corner of North West province.  The Taung Skeleton, a 
fossil found in 1924 near Taung, (about 100 kilometers from 
Kimberley) will be the drawing card.  The museum will be located 
near the lime works quarry where the skull was found.  NW Province 
Department of Economic Development and Tourism MSC Darken Africa 
said that the museum will depict the history of the skull and all 
the other artifacts discovered in the quarry.  The Taung Child (as 
the complete skeleton is known) will remain at Wits.  Africa said 
that security, climate and other factors did not make it feasible to 
display the skull, which will instead be represented by casts 
supplied by the University. 
¶14. (U) The Taung Skull was discovered by a quarry worker and was 
delivered to Raymond Dart, an anatomist at Wits who recognized its 
significance.  Dart described it as a new species, an 
Australopithecus Africanus.  Wits University Anatomy and Human 
Biology Professor Emeritus Philip Tobias noted, "It was the first 
discovery in Africa of an ancient member of the family of man and 
has switched the spotlight of ancient human ancestry from Asia to 
Africa for the first time."  Tobias has worked in the quarry since 
the 1980's and said sampling in the quarry has Tobias has worked in 
the quarry since the 1980's and said sampling in the quarry has 
established that the site was occupied during a number of periods 
from the Pleistocene to the San/Bushman.  Tobias commented that this 
 
PRETORIA 00002007  004.2 OF 004 
 
 
meant that Taung has a "nearly unique record of the difference 
stages of human evolution. 
Monthly Factoid 
¶15. (U) South Africa has the oldest meteor scar in the world at the 
Vredefort Dome near Parys in the Free State province. 
www.southafrica.co.za 
Bost