08PRETORIA2742
SOUTH AFRICA'S VIEWS ON UN CLIMATE CHANGE TALKS IN POLAND
Fri Dec 19 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
R 191224Z DEC 08
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 6789
INFO AMEMBASSY GABORONEUNCLAS PRETORIA 002742 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR OES/PCI;OES/ENV and AF/S 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENVENV IO SF
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICA'S VIEWS ON UN CLIMATE CHANGE TALKS IN POLAND 
 
REF: STATE 132715 
 
¶1.  Summary.  EST officer and EST Assistant met with South Africa 
Climate Change officials on December 18, 2008.  Atmospherics were 
cordial.  The South Africans expressed minimal satisfaction with the 
Poznan talks, noting that progress towards long-term resolutions 
would have to be reached by June/July 2009 for adoption in 
Copenhagen.  All felt there was a "leadership gap" and hoped the 
U.S. would step into that role.  EST Officer provided the group with 
material regarding U.S. Climate Change activities and bio 
information on the potential new members of the U.S. Cabinet.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2.  EST officer and EST Assistant met on December 18, 2008 with 
South Africa Climate Change officials, including  Chief Director: 
Planning and Coordination Judy Beaumont; Senior Policy Advisor: 
International Environment and Climate Change Deborah Ramalope; 
Senior Policy Advisor: Africa and bilateral Engagements Stuart 
Mangold; Policy Analyst: Africa and Bilateral relations Efa Methi 
and Chief Director: International Governance and Relations Zaheer 
Fakir.  EST Officer had asked for the meeting to discuss the South 
African government views leading up to Poznan, but the South 
Africans were unwilling to meet prior to the conference. 
 
¶3.  Beaumont provided a summary of the South Africa position and 
reactions to the Poznan Conference.  She felt the developing 
countries "did not get much" except for approval of adaptation 
funds.  However, Beaumont said the conference was "useful" because 
it "cleared the way for serious negotiations."  The March 
intersessional will be critical in her view as it will indicate 
whether there is possible divergence or convergence in views and 
whether there will be movement by developed countries. 
 
¶4.  Beaumont and Fakir agreed that the Poznan conference was forced 
to operate in a political vacuum since both the EU and the U.S. were 
changing political regimes.  They pointed out that South Africa was 
changing political leaders, but they felt the positions on these 
issues would likely remain consistent. 
 
¶5.  Fakir noted that they had met with Senator John Kerry as well as 
DOS officials in Poznan.  Fakir stated that South Africa understood 
the Administration faces political constraints in trying to convince 
Congress to adopt climate change legislation.  He was encouraged by 
statements from Senator Kerry that it might be possible to sign an 
agreement without having to enact implementing legislation 
immediately.  Fakir said that delegates would have to work towards 
finding ways to "package" climate change to make it attractive to 
Congress. 
 
¶5.  Beaumont said that South Africa wants the U.S. to move from its 
position of not accepting "historical responsibility."  She said 
South Africa cannot accept a viewpoint that only wants to "work 
forward."  She said that goals requiring developing countries to cut 
emissions from 20-80 percent by 2020 puts those countries in 
"difficult positions".  Any such goals would have to be in the lower 
levels to be acceptable.  Long term goals must be conditioned on 
achievement of midterm goals. 
 
¶6. Fakir said there was a world leadership gap, which he described 
as the "penguin effect."  He said, "The nations are like penguins 
all poised together on the shoreline with no one willing to make the 
first dive into the water; the EU is waiting for the U.S., the U.S. 
is waiting for China."  Fakir said he would like the U.S. to take 
firm leadership and make commitments.  He said there is no other 
nation that can play that role. 
 
¶7. Beaumont felt the Rio+20 concept was an "interesting" proposal. 
South Africa has been in contact with Brazil regarding the 
QSouth Africa has been in contact with Brazil regarding the 
conference, which has been agreed to in principle.  The venue 
remains uncertain.  The conference will provide a "useful 
opportunity" to review commitments made since Rio and WSSD. 
 
¶8.  Comment.  South African working level climate change officials 
are pragmatic and  realistic.  While they remain adamant that the 
U.S. cannot ignore so-called "historical responsibility," they also 
understand political realities in the U.S. and appear willing to 
work within their parameters to reach a climate change agreement 
that would be acceptable to the U.S. 
 
BOST