08RIYADH1230
CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION IN SAUDI: NEXT
Mon Aug 11 00:00:00 +0200 2008
SECRET
Embassy Riyadh
VZCZCXYZ0009
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRH #1230/01 2241610
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
O 111610Z AUG 08
FM AMEMBASSY RIYADH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8948
INFO RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH IMMEDIATE 9673
RUEHRH/CHUSMTM RIYADH SA IMMEDIATE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RHMFISS/COMUSCENTAF SHAW AFB SC IMMEDIATE
RHRMAKS/COMUSNAVCENT  IMMEDIATE
RHEBAAA/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEAUSA/DEPT OF HHS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEAHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE 0235
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL IMMEDIATE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATES E C R E T RIYADH 001230 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/ARP, S/CT, AND PM 
WHITE HOUSE FOR OVP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/10/2018 
TAGS: ECON ENRG EPET PGOV PINR PREL PTER SA
SUBJECT: CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION IN SAUDI: NEXT 
STEPS 
 
Classified By: Charge' d'Affaires Michael Gfoeller 
for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D) 
 
¶1. (S) SUMMARY.  The enormous Saudi energy facilities located 
in the Kingdom's Eastern Province, which provide 
approximately 12 percent of global oil supply, remain highly 
vulnerable to external attack. Even partial disruption of 
these production facilities would have an immediate impact on 
oil supplies and prices, with a likely devastating impact on 
the U.S. national economy and the global economy as a whole. 
The Technical Cooperation Agreement (TCA) on Critical 
Infrastructure Protection (CIP) signed at the US-Saudi Summit 
Meeting in May by the Secretary and Saudi Interior Minister 
Prince Nayif bin Abd al-Aziz created a Joint Commission to 
oversee bilateral cooperation in implementing CIP. Developing 
and implementing the Joint Commission's technical work 
program is a foremost priority to ensure the production and 
supply of Saudi oil is secure from terrorist attack.  As we 
move to stand up the Joint Commission, Embassy Riyadh 
proposes the attached substantive work plan for the next 
12-18 months, which Saudi Ministry of Interior (MOI) 
interlocutors have confirmed corresponds to their priorities. 
In addition, we should also make progress on setting up the 
management and financial structure of the Joint Commission, 
without which the substantive work program cannot move 
forward swiftly and efficiently.  END SUMMARY. 
 
 
CONTINGENCY PLANNING 
---------  --------- 
 
¶2. (S) Background: During President Bush's May 2008 visit to 
the Kingdom, Secretary Rice signed the 
Technical Cooperation Agreement authorizing the formation of 
the Joint Commission on Infrastructure and 
Border Protection.  Developing and implementing the 
Commission's technical work program is a foremost 
priority to ensure the supply of Saudi oil is secure from 
attack.  The Saudi Ministry of Interior's (MOI) 
first priority for the existing Joint Working Group (JWG) on 
Critical Infrastructure Protection (CIP) and 
the new Joint Commission on Infrastructure and Border 
Protection is completing work on contingency planning 
for key critical infrastructure facilities.  The MOI is 
deeply concerned about possible attacks on these 
facilities by Al-Qaeda or other terrorist networks, whether 
domestic or international, or by hostile 
neighbors, particularly Iran. 
 
¶3. (S) This contingency planning provides for systematic 
study, planning, and regular exercising - before 
a catastrophic attack - to ensure resiliency of capability 
and operations.  It provides for designing 
system redundancy ahead of time, and planning for both 
government and company measures which allow 
maximum recoverability of operations in the fastest possible 
period of time.  Proper contingency planning 
mitigates the worst consequences of an attack.  Together with 
proper security measures, contingency planning 
provides for continuity of business and operations under 
extreme conditions. 
 
¶4. (S) So far, the Joint Working Group (JWG) on Critical 
Infrastructure Protection (CIP) and a select 
inter-agency team have completed a review of a number of 
existing Saudi contingency plans, including those 
from Saudi Aramco, SABIC (petrochemical), SWEC (water), SEC 
(power), the Royal Commissions of Yanbu and 
Jubail (integrated industrial cities), and Civil Defense, a 
department within MOI (civil response).  The 
plans were generally found to be less than credible, given 
high terrorism and transnational threats to 
key installations.  The Saudi Aramco plans were better 
developed than some of the others.  Yet while 
the plans were of superior quality, they do not appear to be 
regularly exercised, so the assessors remain 
doubtful they could be implemented to a high standard. 
 
¶5. (S) In our JWG meetings to date with the MOI, we have 
explained the U.S. government-industry partnership 
model for contingency planning - we coordinate jointly, and 
engage in regular crisis simulations and 
exercises together to practice this cooperation.  We noted 
the USG is responsible for continuity and 
response plans, while industry is responsible for continuity 
of operations and recovery plans. 
 
 
PROPOSED NEXT STEPS IN CONTINGENCY PLANNING 
--------   ---------------   -------------- 
 
¶6. (S) The next steps include conducting a gap analysis of 
the existing Saudi contingency plans, carrying 
out mitigation planning, and working with the MOI and the 
Saudi parastatal firms (e.g., Saudi Aramco, SABIC, 
SEC, SWEC) to develop generally more robust contingency 
planning documents.  Finally, we should work with 
the MOI and these parastatal firms to conduct table top 
exercises, and eventually, full-scale crisis 
simulations.  The annual planning and exercise cycles should 
be followed by comprehensive plan reviews. 
In the future, this work may be coordinated through the JWG 
on CIP, as well as the newly-established 
Joint Working Group on Homeland Security. 
 
¶7. (S) The completion of vulnerability assessments, as noted 
below, should proceed simultaneously, as this work 
will provide additional engineering and security knowledge 
for the contingency planning. 
 
 
VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT OF OIL FACILITIES 
----------  --------------------  ----- 
 
¶8. (S) We have worked with the Ministry of Interior since 
2006 to identify the Kingdom's most critical 
infrastructure and assess its vulnerabilities.  We have 
provided preliminary security recommendations 
to defend several of the most important energy installations, 
including Abqaiq, Qateef Junction, Ras Tanura, 
and the Royal Commission cities of Jubail and Yanbu. 
However, in light of the increasing threat facing 
these facilities, the paradigm has changed.  We are now 
moving to apply in Saudi Arabia the same model 
we use to protect nuclear facilities internationally - a 
highly-rigorous, mathematical, and engineering-based 
model.  This model is named Design-Based Threat (DBT), which 
has been presented to the Kingdom by Sandia 
National Laboratories under the direction of the Department 
of Energy.  Sandia has provided similar training 
to forces protecting nuclear facilities all over the world 
where the USG deems it in our strategic national 
interest. 
 
¶9. (S) In June 2007, under the direction of a technical team 
from Sandia Labs, a twenty-two person security 
team composed of officials from the Ministry of Interior, and 
security officials from Saudi Aramco, SABIC, 
SEC, and SWEC (the energy, petrochemical, power and water 
sectors) completed a ranking of the Kingdom's most 
important critical infrastructure.  Facilities were ranked as 
Tier I, II, and III according to their criticality 
to the Kingdom and world.  The Sandia team also provided 
associated training to these officials on threat-based design 
and improving security at individual installations. 
 
¶10. (S) Training included identifying internal and external 
threats (also domestic vs. international), 
the motivations, intentions and capabilities of these threats 
(group size, weapons, explosives, tools, 
transport, skills, funding, collusion, etc.), collecting and 
organizing threat-related information, 
formalizing threat-related information, defining a 
threat-based design from the threat assessment, 
and introducing the threat-based design into the national 
regulatory framework. 
 
 
PROPOSED NEXT STEPS IN VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT 
---------  -----------------  ---------------- 
 
¶11. (S) In order to understand the vulnerabilities of the 
Kingdom's infrastructure at an in-depth level, 
we must move from the 2-3 day "walk-the-fence" security 
overviews we have conducted in the past.  We used 
these overviews to provided useful but preliminary security 
recommendations to the MOI. 
 
¶12. (S) The Vulnerability Assessment (VA) is an in-depth, 
technical review of the facility's operational 
and security systems.  The VA includes a 2-week on-site data 
collection and discussion period, followed by 
a month-long data analysis period.  The Saudi MOI would 
receive VA results and recommendations within about 
one month after completion of the on-site data collection in 
Saudi Arabia.  We are particularly concerned to 
identify Abqaiq components which were custom-manufactured 
several decades ago, in the 1970s, and for which 
Saudi Aramco may have no replacements or spare parts.  Such 
single-point failures would be of grave concern. 
 
¶13. (S) The assessment of Abqaiq Plants, the Kingdom's most 
critical facility, is currently ongoing and will 
be completed by late August, 2008.  An in-depth analysis of 
Abqaiq's engineering plans and drawings, along 
with extended access to and discussion with key technical 
personnel, are being done to better understand the 
plant's specific vulnerabilities.  The Saudis' willingness to 
share this level of technical detail with us 
on the world's most important petroleum facility is 
unprecedented in our relationship.  Only two 
successive Presidential visits and the signing of the TCA 
could have made this level of cooperation possible. 
 
¶14. (S) After conducting the VA of Abqaiq, we recommend the 
next move be a similar assessment of the Ras Tanura Complex. 
Ras Tanura is Saudi Arabia's largest crude oil export 
facility, and includes export facilities, 
tank farms, Sea Island crude loading facility, a refinery, 
and a host of other associated facilities. 
Ras Tanura can export more than 5 million-plus barrels/day of 
crude, and should be the USG's next facility 
of major concern.  A VA of Ras Tanura will be several orders 
of magnitude more complex than Abqaiq, as the 
complex is vast, over 10 kilometers long, and includes both 
land-based and maritime facilities.  In spite 
of these difficulties, given Ras Tanura's role in crude 
exports, conducting a VA of Ras Tanura is key to 
USG interests. 
 
¶15. (S) After conducting VAs of these two facilities, we 
should engage the MOI in discussions regarding the 
next target for a VA, using a list of Tier I facilities to 
guide our discussions.  The next target facility 
could be a major desalination or power plant, which may not 
meet specific USG interests.  However, the 
Saudi government could view such facilities as critical to 
its ability to sustain essential services to 
its population. We may wish to propose a VA of the Jubail 
Desalinization Plant (second on the Saudi's list 
of critical infrastructure after Abqaiq), an argument which 
likely find favor with the Saudi government.  The 
 Jubail Desalinization Plant provides Riyadh with over 90% of 
its drinking water.  Riyadh would have to evacuate 
within a week if the plant, its pipelines, or associated 
power infrastructure were seriously damaged or 
destroyed.  The current structure of the Saudi government 
could not exist without the Jubail Desalinization 
Plant. 
 
¶16. (S) Future work on VA issues should be coordinated 
through the JWG on CIP, as well as the newly-established 
Joint Working Groups on Ports and Oil Terminals, and JWG on 
Coast Guard. 
 
 
NATIONAL THREAT NOTIFICATION SYSTEM PLANNING 
---------------   ------------------------- 
 
¶17. (S) Saudi Arabia currently has no coordinated, national 
threat notification system.  Individual firms, 
such as Saudi Aramco, do have threat warning systems. 
However, they are not coordinated or linked with a 
government security force threat warning system.  Development 
of a national threat warning system is critical 
to the MOI's ability to protect critical infrastructure from 
terrorism or other threats, and to carry out 
robust civil response functions. 
 
¶18. (S) During a July DOE delegation visit to Riyadh led by 
Assistant Secretary Kolevar, DOE Infrastructure 
System Analyst Vandermey presented a brief to Saudi Joint 
Working Group Co-Chair Dr. Saud-Al Semari on the 
U.S. threat warning systems.  She explained DHS's Homeland 
Security Advisory System and the U.S. Coast Guard 
Maritime Security System (MARSEC).  Our MOI interlocutors 
were particularly impressed to learn how the USG 
works with industry in implementing the threat warning 
system, sharing information on an as-needed basis, and 
even sponsoring some industry personnel for security 
clearances so that information could be better shared. 
MOI, DOE, and Embassy interlocutors discussed the utility of 
restricting a specific threat warning to a given 
region, city, or industrial sector. 
 
 
PROPOSED NEXT STEPS IN NATIONAL THREAT NOTIFICATION SYSTEM 
--------  ------------------    ------------------------- 
 
¶19. (S) Dr. Saud-Al Semari requested the USG make available 
an employee who is familiar with the U.S. threat 
warning systems to assist the MOI in implementing a threat 
warning system for Saudi Arabia. DOE Assistant 
Secretary Kevin Kolevar offered DOE Infrastructure System 
Analyst Carissa Vandermay to provide initial guidance 
in August 2008.  We are waiting for an MOI response to this 
offer, which we expect to be strongly positive. 
After these initial meetings, we should identify a USG 
expert, Vandermay if possible, for an additional 1-2 
months in the Kingdom to further develop the national threat 
warning system.  In the future, this work may 
be coordinated through the newly-established Joint Working 
Group on Homeland Security. 
 
 
FACILITIES SECURITY FORCES TRAINING 
----------------  ----------------- 
 
¶20. (S) By 2007, the Saudi MOI had identified the Facilities 
Security Force (FSF) as the primary organization 
responsible for protecting the country's critical energy 
infrastructure.  They determined the force would 
be organized and trained for defensive and offensive missions 
in the protection of oil, gas, national power, 
and other sites that were heretofore under the protection of 
various branches of the MOI and MODA.  Proposed civilian 
nuclear power production facilities would also be under he 
FSF umbrella.  MOI is in the process of recruiting 
and training an entirely new force of 35,000 personnel for 
this purpose.  To date, over 10,000 new recruits 
have been put through initial training, with forces from the 
Ministry of Defense and Aviation (MODA) and the Saudi 
Arabian National Guard (SANG) reinforcing the FSF in its role 
until the FSF is fully staffed. 
 
¶21. (S) Since the 2007 JWG discussions, the FSF has been a 
component of the JWG framework.  FSF officers 
participated in the June 2007 workshop on threat analysis and 
contingency planning.  Based on this training, 
in January 2008, a highly experienced group of Sandia 
trainers conducted an assessment of several FSF 
training centers, training doctrine, and courses.  The 
Embassy's Defense Attach Office and Economic section 
also participated. 
 
¶22. (S) The assessment provided MOI with recommendations on a 
number of key organizational changes to support 
the MOI's goal of rapidly expanding FSF manpower to assume 
security responsibilities.  The assessment team 
recommended FSF quickly expand the Training Department, and 
separate it from the FSF Operations Unit. 
With this new emphasis on training, the training staff could 
recruit and train more instructors.  They recommended 
a more rigorous process for selecting trainers with the 
appropriate background (much of the FSF instructor 
staff was taken from MOI and MODA units that are devoted to 
traditional combat arms, rather than facilities protection). 
The assessment team recommended FSF seek new training 
technology to improve the standard of 
training.  Additionally, the assessment team encouraged MOI 
to fully support the establishment of a dedicated 
FSF academy and the expansion of FSF training facilities. 
 
 
PROPOSED NEXT STEPS FOR FACILITIES SECURITY FORCES 
------------    ---------  --------------------- 
 
¶23. (S) The FSF is rapidly assuming its role as a 35,000-plus 
man uniformed security force charged with defending 
Saudi Arabia's critical infrastructure.  This includes 
defending Saudi Arabia's critical infrastructure 
against terrorist attack, and could include close cooperation 
and coordination with MODA and SANG in the event of an 
attack by a regional neighbor.  A large training contract 
will be required to support the creation of the FSF, 
along the lines of what private contractors such as Vinnel do 
now under the auspices of the Office of the Program Manager - 
Saudi Arabian National Guard (OPM-SANG).  However, even after 
a training contract is signed with a suitable contractor, 
significant USG personnel assets would be necessary to 
support the creation and training of the FSF, and to advise 
its leadership. 
 
¶24. (S) There seems to be a clear role for DOD and CENTCOM to 
play here.  Training, equipment, and doctrine would 
all seem to be areas in which CENTCOM could bring a great 
deal to the table.  The MOI is moving ahead swiftly to 
train the FSF, regardless of our involvement.  They have 
already asked Pakistan and other forces to assist in 
this training during the past year, as we have been unable to 
respond quickly with further assistance.  The nature 
of the Facilities Security Force's mission places it squarely 
in CENTCOM's area of responsibility (AOR).  It 
seems advisable to expedite the USG efforts to train and 
equip the FSF, in order to assure this vital 
initiative remains within the purview of  U.S.- Saudi 
security cooperation, instead of being subcontracted to a 
third state.  DoD involvement, of course, is predicated upon 
obtaining the proper legal authorities. 
 
CREATING A FINANCING PIPELINE 
----------------------------- 
 
¶25. (S) The MOI has told us multiple times they are ready to 
pay nearly all the costs of CIP implementation. 
The CIP Agreement contains this Saudi commitment.  An 
essential next step in this regard is the establishment of 
the necessary financial pipeline, which would consist of a 
bank account at the Federal Reserve, under the Treasury 
Department's supervision.  One available option for this 
financing might be the old account once used by the US-Saudi 
Joint Economic Commission (JECOR), which still exists.  Once 
we have the account established, MOI has promised to begin to 
fund CIP activities. CIP implementation should then progress 
quickly, while placing a minimal financial burden on the USG. 
 
ESTABLISHING A CIP COORDINATOR POSITION 
-----------   ------------------------- 
 
¶26. (S) CIP will be a complex undertaking.  Proper 
implementation of this major initiative will require a 
dedicated, senior-level officer at post, operating under the authority 
of the Chief of Mission.  Given the Saudis' sense of urgency 
regarding CIP and the very real nature of the threat from 
Iran and al-Qaeda to the Kingdom's energy sector, this 
position should be created and staffed as son as possible.  The 
incumbent would oversee all aspects of CIP implementation at 
post and deal on a daily basis with senior figures in the Saudi 
government, especially the MOI, on CIP issues.  The incumbent 
would also oversee all other personnel at post involved in 
CIP implementation. 
 
 
AN HISTORIC OPPORTUNITY TO COUNTER A MAJOR THREAT 
-----------  ------------   --------------------- 
 
¶27. (S) COMMENT AND RECOMMENDATION: The continuing 
vulnerability of Saudi Arabia's strategic oil and gas 
production facilities represents an Achilles' heel for US 
strategic interests in the Kingdom and the broader Gulf 
region, not to mention US economic security in general.  In 
the estimation of the MOI, these facilities face a serious 
threat from both al-Qaeda and Iran.  Al-Qaeda in fact 
attacked one of the Kingdom's key energy sector sites, the 
Abqaiq oil and gas separator, in February 2006.  Describing 
the terrorists' failure in that assault, Prince Muhammad bin 
Naif remarked to the Charge', "We did not save Abqaiq, God 
did."  Had the attack been successful, it could have reduced 
Saudi Arabia's oil production and export capacity severely, 
in addition to drastically impacting the Saudi gas industry. 
The effect on oil prices of a successful repeat attack on 
Abqaiq or another key energy sector site would be 
catastrophic.  The Saudis realize this.  Indeed, it was the 
psychological shock produced by the Abqaiq incident that 
first led the Saudis to consider creating the Facilities 
Security Force, begin CIP talks with the USG, and conclude 
the CIP Agreement with us this May. 
 
¶28. (S) USG participation in CIP could offer us tremendous 
opportunities.  CIP implementation has huge commercial 
potential, which could be measured in billions of dollars 
worth of contracts. More importantly, it would result in the 
largest expansion of USG influence in Saudi Arabia in a 
generation, via the creation of a  qualitatively new 
relationship with the MOI.  If we move quickly, we can seize this 
opportunity. If we wait too long, the Saudis could potentially 
decide to offer it to one of our competitors.  Such a 
development would lead to a permanent loss of US influence in 
this strategically vital country.  We therefore recommend 
rapid implementation of the proposed CIP work plan, 
establishment of a CIP funding mechanism, and the creation 
and staffing of a senior-level CIP Coordinator position at 
Embassy Riyadh under the authority of the Chief of Mission. 
END COMMENT AND RECOMMENDATION. 
GFOELLER