08SAOPAULO87
SAO PAULO STATE SLOWLY ADDRESSES PRISON CONDITIONS (3 OF 3)
Fri Feb 22 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Sao Paulo
P 221253Z FEB 08
FM AMCONSUL SAO PAULO
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7931
INFO AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 
AMEMBASSY ASUNCION 
AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES 
AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO 
AMEMBASSY LA PAZ 
AMEMBASSY CARACAS 
AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO 
AMCONSUL RECIFE 
AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 
NSC WASHDC
DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHDC
DEA HQS WASHDC
CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FLUNCLAS SAO PAULO 000087 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/BSC, INL, DRL 
DEPARTMENT ALSO FOR DS/IP/WHA, DS/IP/ITA, DS/T/ATA 
NSC FOR TOMASULO 
SOUTHCOM ALSO FOR POLAD 
USAID FOR LAC/AA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM SOCI ASEC BR
SUBJECT: SAO PAULO STATE SLOWLY ADDRESSES PRISON CONDITIONS (3 OF 3) 
 
REF: A) 06 Sao Paulo 751 B)Sao Paulo 49 C) Sao Paulo 56 D) Sao Paulo 66 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED - PLEASE PROTECT ACCORDINGLY 
 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Sao Paulo State officials candidly admit that a host of 
challenges exist within the state penitentiary system but tell us 
they are working hard on addressing the prison network's 
shortcomings.  According to state authorities, the cash-strapped 
Secretariat for Prison Administration (SAP) is continuing to clean 
 
SIPDIS 
up the poorly planned and overpopulated prison system, some of whose 
units are so bad that even SAP Secretary Antonio Ferreira Pinto 
called them "concentration camps".  State contacts tell us that a 
lack of prison space, particularly for the rising number of female 
inmates, rampant corruption, and rehabilitation are major issues. 
Human rights groups note that while Sao Paulo has the most developed 
prison system in Brazil, the state needs to continue jail reform and 
develop alternative sentencing plans.  These NGO contacts stress 
that while the penitentiary structure is broken and an overhaul 
desperately needed, the state government is taking some positive 
steps towards creating a better managed and organized prison system. 
 End Summary. 
 
Admitting Problems Exist 
------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (SBU) This is the last in a three-part series exploring the 
prison system in Sao Paulo State, how penitentiary conditions fueled 
the rise of the First Capital Command (PCC) criminal organization, 
and the state's response to these concerns. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Secretary for Prison Administration Antonio Ferreira Pinto 
admitted that Sao Paulo's penitentiaries face a number of 
challenges, and signaled that recognizing this fact was an important 
first step in addressing the system's shortcomings.  Despite the 
fact that Sao Paulo has 40 percent of Brazil's jails, the state does 
not have a public policy to deal with the prisons' problems 
including overcrowding and the locations of the facilities, a 
framework for preventive programs to steer would-be criminals into 
becoming productive members of society, nor rehabilitation 
initiatives to help prisoners emerging from incarceration. 
Secretary Pinto told Poloff that he took over a broken and 
 
SIPDIS 
"disorganized" penitentiary network when his predecessor was forced 
to resign following the May 2006 PCC attacks and prison riots.  One 
major problem he found is that in an effort to stimulate the local 
economies of neglected parts of the state, Sao Paulo constructed 
prisons in various far-flung parts of the state.  The unintended 
consequence of this plan, according to Pinto, is that prisons are 
located far from the homes of the families of the incarcerated.  In 
addition to the poorly located prisons, the state also does not have 
enough semi-open regime facilities or rehabilitation centers that 
could be useful in curbing recidivism among the inmates.  Finally, 
Pinto confirmed complaints by human rights activists of primitive 
medical attention, even stating that the conditions "make them look 
like concentration camps". 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Julia Gorla, Municipal Secretary for International 
Relations of Araraquara, a municipality with a population of 
approximately 200,000 in Sao Paulo State, told Poloff that the state 
penitentiary located in the city remains overcrowded, though not as 
dramatically as in 2006 when it attracted headlines and photos in 
the media (Ref A).  Gorla attributed the prison's overcrowding to 
high levels of violent crime and the slowness of the judicial 
system, which keeps people in custody for long pre-trial periods. 
She noted that while the situation is certainly of concern in 
Araraquara, prison conditions and the need for reform are national 
issues. 
 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The State Secretary of the Sao Paulo State Governor's 
Civil Household (Chief of Staff equivalent), Aloysio Nunes Ferreira 
Filho, told Poloff that the state hopes to build 40 new 
penitentiaries before Governor Jose Serra's term ends in December 
¶2010.  Nunes noted that Sao Paulo's budget and credit are in good 
shape and some of the funds derived from the upcoming privatization 
of several state highways and the Sao Paulo Energy Company (CESP) 
may be devoted to improving the prisons.  The success of 
penitentiary expansion will depend on the state's finances, Nunes 
stressed, because the federal government has provided very little 
public security assistance to Sao Paulo.  (Comment: The government's 
recently enacted National Program on Public Security with 
Citizenship includes funding for prison construction in eleven 
cities with the highest crime rates, including Sao Paulo.  Whether 
that funding materializes or a significant proportion makes its way 
to Sao Paulo is yet to be seen.  End Comment)  Nunes believes that 
the number of female inmates is on the rise because they are 
increasingly used as "drug mules" in transporting narcotics. 
Constructing women's units is the most pressing penitentiary issue 
in Sao Paulo, Nunes stated. 
 
Problems Impeding Change 
------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) While acknowledging the state has been "negligent" in its 
responsibilities and expressing the hope to bring about improvement 
during his tenure, SAP Secretary Pinto cited several complicating 
factors.  Corruption is wide-spread, including the existence of many 
outside groups who categorize themselves as NGOs that petition to 
run small detention units and, after receiving state approval, 
siphon off funds into their organizers' private accounts.  Unlawful 
prison staff behavior is also common, he admitted, and noted further 
that some penitentiaries are virtual "homes" for criminals who leave 
the facilities during the day and return at night just to sleep. 
Responding to the issue of overpopulated prisons, Pinto said some 
jails had to be closed because "even by Brazilian standards," their 
"sub-human conditions" were unacceptable.  The results of these 
closures were that those prisoners were transferred to units that 
were already over-capacity thus exacerbating the overcrowding 
problem.  However, there are no easy solutions as building a prison 
takes at least a year, he added, and therefore constructing enough 
to house the current incarcerated population would take several 
decades.  In contrast with State Secretary Nunes, Pinto said that 
the state is hindered in building new prisons because of budget 
constraints.  University of Sao Paulo Center for the Study of 
Violence (USP-NEV) Researcher Fernando Salla commented that even if 
the state were focused on fundamental changes, including new prison 
construction, the general public is unlikely to support a serious 
overhaul of the prison system.  According to Salla, the 
non-incarcerated population prefers to have criminals and suspected 
lawbreakers "locked up and forgotten about".  Without public 
backing, the state can only do so much and should not be blamed for 
the lack of new prison construction, he inferred. 
 
First Steps 
----------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The May 2006 PCC riots destroyed 19 state prisons, 
Secretary Pinto noted, highlighting that he spent almost a full year 
 
SIPDIS 
after becoming head of SAP focused solely on re-building those 
facilities.  In addition to these units, Governor Serra has promised 
to build eight new prisons in 2008, including the first unit 
specifically constructed to house women (Note: Pinto told us that 
Sao Paulo's ten female prisons were adapted from male units.  End 
Note.)  The state would like to build these eight facilities closer 
to populated areas to facilitate family visits.  Pinto also plans on 
increasing from 30 to 50 the number of alternative sentencing prison 
units in the belief that this will be an effective method for 
dealing with prison overcrowding as well as recidivism.  In 
 
 
addition, Pinto noted that the SAP has reduced solitary confinement 
cells to 54 from 147 and continues to decrease the number because 
"keeping prisoners locked up for 22 hours a day is not justified", 
Pinto said.  He argued that some solitary confinement units must 
continue to operate to deal with extremely serious cases, but in 
general he is not convinced of the efficacy of solitary confinement 
in general and believes that these punitive measures may be 
counter-productive. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Heidi Cerneka, President of the Institute of Land, Work 
and Citizenship and Coordinator for the Women's Prisons Program at 
the Pastoral Commission for the Incarcerated, (a Catholic Church 
organization that attends to prisoners), noted that while she is 
very disappointed with the state's lack of efforts to improve the 
penitentiary system, Sao Paulo has taken some initial steps. 
Cerneka said that Secretary Pinto has transferred or demoted some 
prison administrators accused of abuse and has improved the living 
conditions of some prisons.  For example, Sao Paulo's 
"resocialization centers" for prisoners, smaller units where the 
incarcerated have more living space and can take some training 
classes in preparation for release, are functioning well, when they 
are not overcrowded, she added.  She stressed, however, that these 
actions are the start of a very long and difficult process. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Secretary Pinto said that Sao Paulo continues to test new 
methods for dealing with its poor prison conditions as well as 
seeking out new methods to fund prison construction.  For example, 
the state is asking for financial support from the National Economic 
and Social Development Bank (BNDES) to build new units.  Regarding 
prison conditions, Pinto claims that when allegations of physical 
and mental abuse arise or prisoners complain about serious 
incidents, he immediately takes action to punish prison wardens, 
even if the person accused happens to be a member of the 
administrator's staff, rather than the head of the unit itself.  In 
this way, Pinto told Poloff that he holds prison wardens accountable 
not only for their own actions, but for all employees under their 
supervision.   He has also empowered monitoring councils that were 
created to highlight problems within the jails and has regular 
contact with them to hear criticism.  In addition, the state is 
building a facility exclusively for non-Brazilian prisoners so that 
consulates can have better and easier access to their incarcerated 
constituents.  Public defender Carlos Weiss said that although the 
state needs to do much to address serious problems in the prison 
system, its focus on building more units has helped improve the 
situation at least partially.  Still, in order to keep up with the 
growing prison population, Sao Paulo needs to construct many more 
facilities, he emphasized. 
 
Sao Paulo Still More Developed than Other States 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶10.  (SBU) According to Father Silveira, Sao Paulo State Coordinator 
and National Vice President for the Pastoral Commission for the 
Incarcerated, Sao Paulo's jails are much more developed than those 
in other states.  Acknowledging that nepotism and corruption are 
rampant problems within jails throughout Brazil, Sao Paulo adheres 
to a system of merit-based appointments for senior penitentiary 
positions, as opposed to what he finds common in other states where 
prison administration officials hand out jobs to family and friends. 
 Silveira added that SAP training is much more developed than in 
other prison secretariats around the country and that in Sao Paulo 
State, prison directors must have completed university studies.  He 
emphasized that SAP is more open to suggestions from his 
organization than its counterparts elsewhere and that he finds 
Secretary Pinto welcoming to new ideas.  (Note: All our contacts 
 
SIPDIS 
including Silveira told us, and Secretary Pinto confirmed, that he 
no longer speaks with the press because he finds the media 
sensationalist and not willing to tell the whole story.  End Note.) 
 
 
Comment 
------- 
¶11.  (SBU) State authorities impressed us with their candid 
admission of severe shortcomings in the prison system.  Along with 
Governor Serra's admission that Sao Paulo's penitentiaries are "very 
problematic" and could use assistance in their administration, we 
see a unique opportunity to help with a very serious human rights 
and public security concern (Ref A).  As we previously noted (Refs B 
and C), the expected signing of the Letter of Agreement on 
counternarcotics efforts and law enforcement cooperation will pave 
the way for bilateral initiatives in dealing with concerns such as 
prison reform.  End Comment. 
 
¶12.  (U) Embassy Brasilia coordinated with and cleared this cable. 
 
WHITE