08SHANGHAI326
NINGBO'S ECONOMY - OUT WITH THE OLD AND IN WITH THE NEW
Thu Aug 14 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Shanghai
VZCZCXRO0193
RR RUEHCN RUEHVC
DE RUEHGH #0326/01 2270707
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 140707Z AUG 08
FM AMCONSUL SHANGHAI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7065
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUEHGH/AMCONSUL SHANGHAI 7638UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 SHANGHAI 000326 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
TREASURY FOR OASIA/INA/CUSHMAN AND WINSHIP 
DEPT FOR EAP/CM 
EMBASSY BEIJING PASS WUHAN 
USDOC FOR ITA/MAC/OCEA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON PGOV ELAB ETRD KIPR CH
SUBJECT: NINGBO'S ECONOMY - OUT WITH THE OLD AND IN WITH THE NEW 
 
REF: SHANGHAI 318 
 
SHANGHAI 00000326  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary.  During an August 4 farewell visit to Ningbo 
in Zhejiang Province, the Consul General (CG) discussed Ningbo's 
economy and development plans  with Mayor Mao Guanglie and 
Ningbo Foreign Affairs Office Director Kong Weiwei.  The two 
officials said Ningbo aims to "upgrade" its economy by moving 
out the old manufacturing industry and ushering in a service and 
R&D-based economy.  International educational institutions will 
play a key role in this effort.  Ningbo's biggest concern now is 
its 3.3 million migrant workers, many displaced by the economic 
downturn in the United States and other export markets.  Kong 
said Central Government approval for resumed provincial-level 
cooperation with the Consulate on IPR has not yet been received, 
but may materialize after the Olympics.  In a separate meeting, 
Ningbo Entry-Exit Inspection and Quarantine Bureau officials 
discussed trends in U.S. agriculture imports, U.S. food and 
product safety concerns, and opportunities for cooperation 
(reftel).  End Summary. 
 
Understanding is the Basis of Cooperation 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Mayor Mao emphasized that relations and cooperation 
between Ningbo and the Consulate have been very good during the 
CG's tenure and noted the need to continue working together.  As 
part of the greater Yangtze River Delta (YRD) development along 
with Hangzhou, Nanjing and Shanghai, Ningbo actively seeks to 
build relationships with and attract businesses from other 
cities within China.  In foreign relations, the city hopes to 
establish a special relationship with Atlanta, but Atlanta has 
not yet made a final decision.  (Note:  Wuhan is also courting 
Atlanta.  Atlanta has not yet decided which city it will choose 
and whether it will be a "sister city" relationship or a 
"friendship city" relationship. Ningbo has suggested that 
Atlanta select both and simply describe them differently. 
Ningbo would be satisfied as the "friendship" city.  End Note.) 
 
 
A Vision for Future Development 
------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) According to Mao, Ningbo is developing rapidly (11.4 
percent GDP growth in 2007) and integrating more closely with 
the rest of the YRD.  Modern transportation connections support 
the integration of the region, including the new Hangzhou Bay 
Bridge (opened May 2008), which has reduced the travel time from 
Shanghai to Ningbo by two hours.  The highway and rail 
infrastructure plays a major role in connecting the region. 
However, Mao said that, to date, the Hangzhou Bay Bridge has not 
had a measurable effect on the Port of Ningbo's throughput.  Mao 
emphasized that there is much misunderstanding in the West about 
China's efforts on environmental protection.  Many foreigners 
come to Beijing "expecting dust storms," not realizing China has 
made great strides in improving environmental conditions. 
Ningbo is doing its part and paying attention to the environment 
in its quest to develop. 
 
"Education Is Key to Service Sector Development" 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Mao said that as the city strives to upgrade its 
economy to compete in the service sector, it wants to upgrade 
its education system.  Ningbo people are highly innovative, and 
the Ningbo Government wants to build on this foundation.  In 
order to become more competitive, Ningbo wants to establish a 
world-class education system.  The city plans to introduce 
international education institutions and give them 
responsibility for a part of the curriculum, up to 30 percent, 
in certain occupational training programs such as accounting and 
law.  Ningbo has already started this type of collaboration, 
with an educational institution from Nottingham, England.  Mao 
welcomes U.S. educational institutions' participation in the 
"modernization" of Ningbo's universities and believes this 
collaboration would be profitable for both sides.  These 
international institutions will lay the groundwork for a service 
industry that meets international standards. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) In addition, Mao noted the city has great potential 
for development, but needs land.  The city is using financial 
incentives to encourage old factories to move away from the city 
to inland areas.  Mao said that this effort will not only 
provide land for service and R&D industries, but also help 
alleviate pollution, energy shortages, and migrant labor issues. 
 
 
SHANGHAI 00000326  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
Displaced Workers Causing Instability 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Mao noted that the issue of unemployed migrant 
laborers is the most pressing question on his plate.  There is 
now more unrest due to displaced labor than either environmental 
degradation or land dispute issues.  In total, the city has more 
than 3.3 million migrant workers, mostly from neighboring 
provinces.  Since 20 percent of the economy is dependent on 
foreign trade, many migrant workers are losing jobs as the 
United States' and other countries' economies begin to slow 
down.  Migrant workers do not have Ningbo residency and are not 
entitled to participate in municipal social programs.  Ningbo 
industries hit the hardest include plastics, petrochemicals, 
toys and textiles.  The new Labor Contract Law has made 
companies more hesitant to hire laborers.  Adding to the 
difficulty, inflation (approximately 6.5 percent according to 
Mao) is hitting these displaced workers the hardest. 
 
IPR Cooperation Still Not Approved 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) In a separate discussion with FAO Director Kong, CG 
inquired whether the resumption of intellectual property rights 
(IPR) cooperation in the JCCT meant that the provinces would 
also resume cooperation on IPR.   (Note:  Since the filing of 
the IPR-related WTO cases in 200X, Zhejiang, including Ningbo, 
has consistently rejected every request from the Consulate to 
meet on IPR issues.)  Kong replied that approval from the 
Central Government has not yet arrived, but thought that 
approval might be forthcoming after the Olympics.  He added his 
regret about the disruption in exchanges on the issue and hoped 
the situation would change in the near future. 
JARRETT