08SHANGHAI552
SHANGHAI LEGAL EMPLOYMENT MARKET HIT BY ECONOMIC DOWNTURN
Wed Dec 17 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Shanghai
VZCZCXRO7994
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH
DE RUEHGH #0552/01 3520046
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 170046Z DEC 08
FM AMCONSUL SHANGHAI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7438
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 2364
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 1616
RUEHGZ/AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU 0075
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 1783
RUEHSH/AMCONSUL SHENYANG 1608
RUEHIN/AIT TAIPEI 1409
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 0302
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 0461
RUEHGH/AMCONSUL SHANGHAI 8048UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 SHANGHAI 000552 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM AND DRL 
NSC FOR LOI, KUCHTA-HELBLING 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM SOCI ECON CH
SUBJECT: SHANGHAI LEGAL EMPLOYMENT MARKET HIT BY ECONOMIC DOWNTURN 
 
The following is Sensitive But Unclassified (SBU).  Please 
protect accordingly. 
 
 
 
Summary 
 
------- 
 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Expansion of Shanghai's legal employment market appears 
to have come to a sudden halt.  Partners at Chinese and 
international law firms report a hiring freeze, but they said 
their firms have not yet begun layoffs.  Law students express 
frustration trying to find legal employment.  Professors report 
increased numbers of students seeking post graduate study and 
government employment as alternatives.  Legal consultants 
complain of a "glass ceiling" imposed on their careers by 
China's restriction that prohibit lawyers at international firms 
from practicing Chinese law, while Chinese lawyers complain of 
losing clients to international firms that are "illegally" 
interpreting Chinese law.  End Summary. 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Congenoff met with lawyers in Shanghai during November 
and December 2008 to ascertain their views on a variety of 
challenges facing the legal profession.  This report is the 
first of two readouts from those meetings. 
 
 
 
Downturn Halts Law Firms' Expansion 
 
----------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) The economic downturn has brought an end to the 
expansion of the legal labor market in Shanghai according to 
partners at Shanghai-based law firms.  Anthony Wang, a partner 
in the Shanghai office of Weil Gotschal, a major international 
law firm, told Congenoff that associates would not meet their 
billable hours requirement this year or likely next year as a 
result of the firm's transactional law business decreasing. 
Without additional work, Weil Gotschal does not plan to hire 
beyond replacement levels, he said.  Wang added that his firm 
still views China as a growth market in the long term, however, 
and is not considering layoffs.  Instead they are using the 
downturn to invest in training opportunities for their 
associates and staff. 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Luo Jie owns her own Chinese law firm with seven 
associates working for her.  She has also put a freeze on 
creating new positions, but is planning to replace two 
associates who recently took jobs as legal consultants at an 
international law firm.  She expressed frustration at losing the 
two attorneys, saying that Chinese law schools do not adequately 
prepare graduates to practice law and she is not looking forward 
to training new employees. 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Li Yunlong and Liu Xinyu, associates at large Chinese 
law firms, both said their firms -- AllBright Law and DaCheng 
Law respectively -- will not meet their billable hours targets 
this year.  Li said that as a result, AllBright is holding off 
on further expansion. 
 
 
 
Students Turning to Graduate School and Civil Service 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
 
 
 
SHANGHAI 00000552  002 OF 003 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) Recent law graduates told Congenoff that they are 
having a difficult time finding legal related employment.  At a 
meeting with students and recent graduates at Fudan Law School 
on November 26, they said they all want to practice law, but 
only one had a job offer.  The students were applying for 
graduate study and signing up for civil service exams as backup 
plans.  The students were pessimistic about their employment 
prospects and the ability of the private sector to absorb new 
graduates. 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) Liu Xinyu said that only one out of a hundred law 
graduates can expect to find a job at a large firm like DaCheng 
Law.  Having to choose your major during the application process 
to undergraduate study means that many students do not 
understand what a legal career is when they make the decision to 
pursue one, according to Liu, thereby limiting the talent pool 
for law schools.  Ruan Chao, a 2007 law school graduate and 
paralegal at Ryser and Associates, estimated that less than 
thirty percent of his classmates have found jobs since finishing 
school and only five percent are lawyers eighteen months after 
graduation. 
 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) Charles McElwee, a professor at Shanghai Jiaotong 
University, also has noticed an increase in the number of 
students who, citing difficulties in the job market, have said 
they intend to apply for post graduate studies this year.  In 
addition to the economic downturn, one cause of the employment 
difficulties faced by recent graduates is that the vast majority 
of them are not prepared to practice law after graduating. 
McElwee echoed the sentiments of Liu and Luo, saying that his 
students approach law like a science.  They assume that if you 
insert variables into the equation, that is the law, and then 
you can quickly determine the correct result.  He said this 
approach leads law students and young lawyers to quickly reach 
conclusions that may not be supported upon further analysis, 
often to the detriment to their client. 
 
 
 
Being a "Chinese" Lawyer Depends On Who You Work For 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) Career advancement for Chinese lawyers who choose to 
join international law firms is inhibited by a restriction that 
prohibits lawyers at international law firms from practicing 
Chinese law.  Chinese lawyers who work for international firms 
therefore are referred to as "legal consultants," and many of 
them complained to Congenoff of a "glass ceiling" imposed on 
their careers by this restriction.  They said they joined 
international firms to expose themselves to a broader range of 
issues and for better pay but were required to give up their 
Chinese law licenses as a condition of working at an 
international firm.  If lawyers at international firms are later 
hired by a Chinese firm, then their Chinese law license is 
restored, the lawyers said. 
 
 
 
¶10. (SBU) Lawyers at Chinese firms consider legal consultants at 
international firms to be illegal competition.  Luo Jie said 
international firms' "illegal" practice costs her both clients 
and her top associates.  She and several other Chinese lawyers 
said it is unfair for the government to turn a blind eye to 
legal consultants practicing Chinese law when it is prohibited 
under current law. 
 
 
 
Is the Policy Fair? 
 
------------------- 
 
 
 
SHANGHAI 00000552  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) Several lawyers commented on whether or not the 
restriction prohibiting lawyers at international firms from 
practicing Chinese law is fair.  Li Yunlong would not say if the 
policy is "fair," but he said that from a Chinese firm's 
perspective, a lack of enforcement against "legal consultants" 
at international firms who are practicing Chinese law is hurting 
his firm.  Several Chinese lawyers told Congenoff that the goal 
of the policy is to help domestic firms retain top legal talent, 
and when pressed, said that the restriction on lawyers at 
international firms from practicing Chinese law probably is a 
barrier against trade in services.  Regardless, however, the 
policy is not achieving its objective, our contacts said, 
because the large salary disparity between domestic and 
international firms still manages to draw many more top legal 
professionals to international firms. 
 
 
 
¶10. (SBU) Chinese lawyers who work at international firms as 
legal consultants find it difficult to advance to associate or 
partner in their company unless they obtain a law license in 
another country.  In practice, therefore, many of the Shanghai 
lawyers at international firms have law licenses in the United 
States or United Kingdom.  Liu Xinyu, who is at a Chinese law 
firm, said he supports the policy preventing lawyers at 
international firms from practicing Chinese law, primarily 
because his Chinese law firm is retained by many foreign 
companies to provide legal advice on the Chinese law aspects of 
business transactions.  Because his law firm handles has 
domestic and foreign clients, Liu said, it has developed a 
strong client base and a good reputation. 
 
 
 
Comment 
 
------- 
 
 
 
¶11. (SBU) While partners at law firms report that layoffs have 
not started in Shanghai, employment prospects for new graduates 
appear limited.  According to our contacts in Shanghai, China's 
prohibition on international law firms practicing Chinese law, 
even when their employees have passed the Chinese bar exam, 
creates an extra barrier for Chinese working in international 
firms to rise above the level of legal consultant.  With Chinese 
lawyers needing to secure a foreign law license to become 
associates in international firms, and new graduates having 
difficulty finding jobs, there is evidence that more lawyers in 
Shanghai are opting for graduate studies.  The Shanghai Consular 
Section has seen a nearly fifty percent increase in the number 
of student visa applications -- undoubtedly including law 
students -- in December 2008 over a year ago.  End Comment. 
CAMP