08STATE119309
AFGHANISTAN: INSTRUCTIONS FOR UNGA AFGHANISTAN
Sat Nov 08 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0003
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #9309 3130106
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 080056Z NOV 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
ALL NATO POST COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO IMMEDIATE 0000
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS IMMEDIATEUNCLAS STATE 119309 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNGA UNAMA KDEM PREL MARR MOPS SNAR PHUM AF
SUBJECT: AFGHANISTAN: INSTRUCTIONS FOR UNGA AFGHANISTAN 
RESOLUTION 
 
¶1.  The Department requests that USUN co-sponsor the 
resolution on the situation on Afghanistan (para 3), to be 
considered by the UN General Assembly on November 10, and 
that USUN draw on the following points for use during the 
discussion. 
 
¶2. Begin points: 
 
Mr. President: 
 
The United States is pleased to co-sponsor this resolution 
reaffirming the solidarity of the international community 
with the government and the people of Afghanistan.  In 
particular, we would like to thank the German delegation 
for their hard work in ensuring that this resolution 
received the broadest possible support. 
 
This resolution underscores the leading role that UNAMA is 
playing as the central coordinator for all international 
assistance and for ensuring that such assistance is 
coordinated with military efforts.  UNAMA is an essential 
partner of the Afghan government as it continues to 
develop its capacity to meet the needs of the Afghan 
people. 
 
The United States commends the work of Special 
Representative Eide and the UNAMA staff.  We call on 
member states to join us in supporting a surge in UNAMA's 
capabilities with the SRSG's plan to expand the reach of 
UNAMA throughout the provinces and to engage more 
intensively in coordinating international assistance in 
support of the Afghan National Development Strategy.  We 
further call on member states to support the Special 
Representative's request for additional budgetary and 
personnel resources, which will soon be considered by the 
5th Committee.   We urge the Secretariat to do everything 
in its power to make sure that Mr. Eide is given the 
support and resources he needs to carry out his mission. 
 
As winter approaches, we remain gravely concerned about 
the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan.  The situation 
is worsening and many lives are in jeopardy --  both from 
possible food shortages and extreme cold weather.  We urge 
member states to respond to Afghan government as well as 
UN appeals for all possible humanitarian, reconstruction, 
development, and financial assistance to Afghanistan.  The 
United States will continue to do its part.  We are the 
largest donor in food assistance to Afghanistan, both 
financially and in kind.  We are prepared to do more. 
 
The United States deeply regrets the accidental loss of 
civilian lives.  We are doing everything in our power to 
ensure that ISAF and Operation Enduring Freedom, working 
in partnership with Afghan security forces, take every 
precaution to prevent civilian casualties. 
 
But let us be clear about the root cause of the violence 
in Afghanistan.  The Afghan people face an increasingly 
vicious campaign of violence and intimidation carried out 
by the Taliban, Al-Qaida, and other extremists groups 
aimed at imposing an authoritarian government and 
systematically denying them their most fundamental human 
rights.  These forces are systematically targeting 
civilians, aid-related targets, and NGOs in an effort to 
derail the establishment of democratic government and the 
creation of conditions that will lead to peace and 
stability.  Thus, the Afghan people remain on the front 
lines in the world-wide battle against terrorism and the 
effort to ensure that enlightened and civilized governance 
prevails over barbarism. 
 
Mr. President, last June the international community 
endorsed the Afghan National Development Strategy, and 
there was an unprecedented level of pledges.  This is a 
clear sign of our determination to help Afghanistan 
succeed. There are other positive indicators as well. 
National institutions continue to grow.  The National 
Solidarity Program is serving more than 20,000 villages. 
The Afghan National Army has nearly reached its initial 
target of 70,000 personnel, and a new target of 134,000 
has been set.  Cooperation between the Ministry of Public 
Health and the international community has enables more 
than 80 percent of the Afghan population to gain access to 
primary medical care. 
 
Though the challenges in Afghanistan remain enormous, we 
must continue to work together and renew our mutual 
commitment to help Afghanistan succeed. 
 
End points. 
 
3: Begin text: 
The General Assembly, 
Recalling its resolution 62/6 of 13 December 2007  and all 
its previous relevant resolutions, 
Recalling also all relevant Security Council resolutions 
and statements by the President of the Council on the 
situation in Afghanistan, in particular resolutions 1659 
(2006) of 15 February 2006, 1806 (2008) of 20 March 2008, 
1817 (2008) of 11 June 2008 and 1833 (2008) of 22 
September 2008,  as well as the statement by the President 
of the Council on 11 July 2008, S/PRST/2008/26; see 
Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 
August 2007-31 July 2008, 
Reaffirming its strong commitment to the sovereignty, 
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of 
Afghanistan, and respecting its multicultural, 
multi-ethnic and historical heritage, 
Reaffirming its continued support for the implementation 
of the Afghanistan Compact of 31 January 2006, S/2006/90, 
annex providing the framework for the partnership between 
the Government of Afghanistan and the international 
community and recalling in this regard the spirit and the 
provisions of the Bonn Agreement of 5 December 2001, the 
Berlin Declaration, including the annexes thereto, of 1 
April 2004, 
Recognizing once again the interconnected nature of the 
challenges in Afghanistan, reaffirming that sustainable 
progress on security, governance and development, as well 
as the cross-cutting theme of counter-narcotics, is 
mutually reinforcing, and welcoming the continuing efforts 
of the Government of Afghanistan and the international 
community to address these challenges in a coherent 
manner, 
Reiterating the urgent need to tackle the challenges in 
Afghanistan, in particular the increased violent criminal 
and terrorist activities by the Taliban, Al-Qaida, illegal 
armed groups and those involved in the narcotics trade, in 
particular in the south and east, and the development of 
Afghan Government institutions, including at the 
sub-national level, the strengthening of the rule of law, 
the acceleration of justice sector reform, the promotion 
of national reconciliation, without prejudice to the 
fulfillment of the measures introduced by the Security 
Council in its resolution 1267 (1999) of 15 October 1999 
and other relevant resolutions, and an Afghan-led 
transitional justice process, the safe and voluntary 
return of Afghan refugees and internally displaced persons 
in an orderly and dignified manner, the promotion and 
protection of human rights and the advancement of economic 
and social development, 
Condemning in the strongest terms all attacks, including 
Improvised Explosive Device (IED) attacks, suicide attacks 
and abductions, targeting civilians and Afghan and 
international forces and their deleterious effect on the 
stabilization, reconstruction and development efforts in 
Afghanistan, and condemning further the use by the 
Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremist and criminal groups 
of civilians as human shields, 
Deeply concerned about the recent increase in violence in 
Afghanistan, in particular in the south and east, 
recognizing the increased threats posed by the Taliban, 
Al-Qaida and other extremist and criminal groups as well 
as the challenges related to the efforts to address such 
threats, expressing its serious concern with the high 
number of civilian casualties, noting relevant statements 
of Afghan authorities and high-ranking UN officials, as 
well as Press statements of the President of the Security 
Council in this regard, and calling for compliance with 
international humanitarian and human rights law and for 
all appropriate measures to be taken to ensure the 
protection of civilians, 
Recognizing the efforts taken by ISAF and other 
international forces to minimize the risk of civilian 
casualties, and calling on them to take additional robust 
efforts in this regard, notably by the continuous review 
of tactics and procedures and the conduct of after-action 
reviews and investigations in cooperation with the Afghan 
Government in cases where civilian casualties have 
occurred and when the Afghan Government finds these joint 
investigations appropriate, 
Noting the importance of the national Government being 
representative of the ethnic diversity of the country and 
ensuring also the full and equal participation of women, 
¶1. Stresses the central and impartial role of the United 
Nations in promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan 
and expresses its appreciation and strong support for all 
efforts of the Secretary General and his Special 
Representative in this regard and welcomes the leading 
role of UNAMA in the coordination of the international 
civilian effort, guided by the principle of reinforcing 
Afghan ownership and leadership; 
¶2. Welcomes the Declaration of the Paris Conference of 12 
June, 2008 and the additional international support as 
pledged, reaffirms that the Afghanistan Compact, including 
the annexes thereto, remain the agreed basis for the work 
of both Afghanistan and the international community, 
welcomes the launching of the Afghan National Development 
Strategy (ANDS), that reflects, inter alia, increased 
Afghan ownership and responsibility; welcomes the Afghan 
commitment to pursue political and economic reform; 
¶3. Welcomes the reports of the Secretary General A/63/372 
of 23 September 2008, S/2008/434 of 3 July 2008 and 
A/62/722 of 6 March 2008. and the recommendations 
contained therein; 
¶4. Expresses its strong concern about the security 
situation in Afghanistan, stresses the need to continue to 
address the threat to the security and stability of 
Afghanistan caused by increased violent and terrorist 
activity by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremist and 
criminal groups including those involved in the narcotics 
trade, and strongly condemns all acts of violence and 
intimidation taking place in Afghanistan, in particular in 
the southern and eastern parts, including suicide attacks; 
¶5. Expresses in this regard deep regret at the resulting 
loss of life and physical harm inflicted upon Afghan 
civilians and civilians of other nationalities including 
the personnel of Afghan and international agencies and all 
other humanitarian workers and the diplomatic corps, as 
well as upon the personnel of the Afghan National Security 
Forces, the International Security Assistance Force and 
the Operation Enduring Freedom coalition; 
¶6. Stresses the need for the Afghan government and the 
international community to continue to work closely 
together in countering these challenges of terrorist 
attacks by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremist and 
criminal groups which are threatening the democratic 
process as well as the reconstruction and economic 
development of Afghanistan, and reiterates in this regard 
its call for full implementation of measures introduced in 
relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular 
Security Council resolution 1267 (1999); 
¶7. Notes with concern that the security situation is 
causing some organizations to cease or curtail their 
humanitarian and development work in some parts of 
Afghanistan; 
¶8. Stresses the importance of the provision of sufficient 
security, welcomes the presence of ISAF throughout 
Afghanistan, and calls upon Member States to continue 
contributing personnel, equipment and other resources to 
ISAF and to further develop the provincial reconstruction 
teams in close coordination with the Government of 
Afghanistan and UNAMA; 
¶9. Notes, in the context of the comprehensive approach, 
the synergies in the objectives of UNAMA and of ISAF; 
¶10. Notes that the responsibility for providing security 
and law and order throughout the country resides with the 
Government of Afghanistan supported by ISAF and the 
Operation Enduring Freedom coalition, recognizes the 
institutional progress achieved in this respect and the 
continued coordination between ISAF and the coalition; 
¶11. Stresses the importance of further extending central 
government authority, including the presence of Afghan 
security forces, to all provinces of Afghanistan; 
¶12. Calls upon the Government of Afghanistan, with the 
assistance of the international community, including 
through the Operation Enduring Freedom coalition and ISAF, 
in accordance with their respective designated 
responsibilities, to continue to address the threat to the 
security and stability of Afghanistan; 
¶13. Commends the Afghan National Army and the Afghan 
National Police, ISAF and the Operation Enduring Freedom 
coalition for their efforts to improve security conditions 
in Afghanistan; 
¶14. Welcomes the continued development of the Afghan 
National Army and the Afghan National Police, recognizes 
the international support provided, calls for intensified 
Afghan and international efforts to modernize and 
strengthen both institutions and related Government 
departments with particular attention to the Afghan 
National Police which continues to face challenges in its 
development, and welcomes in this regard the continued 
deployment of the European Union Police Mission in 
Afghanistan and the Focused District Development in 
In-District Reform programs; 
¶15. Acknowledges in this context, that the Afghan National 
Army and the Afghan National Police require additional 
support to enhance their capability and professionalism, 
including through the provision of increased training and 
mentoring, more modern equipment and infrastructure, and 
continued salary support; 
¶16. Urges the Afghan authorities to take all possible 
steps to ensure the safety, security and free movement of 
all United Nations, development and humanitarian 
personnel, their safe and unhindered access to all 
affected populations and to protect the property of the 
United Nations and of development or humanitarian 
organizations; 
¶17. Urges the Afghan authorities to make every effort, in 
accordance with General Assembly  resolution 60/123 of 15 
December 2005, to bring to justice the perpetrators of 
attacks; 
¶18. Stresses the importance of advancing the full 
implementation of the program of disbandment of illegal 
armed groups throughout the country under Afghan 
ownership, while ensuring coordination and coherence with 
other relevant efforts, including security sector reform, 
community development, counter-narcotics, district-level 
development and Afghan-led initiatives to ensure that 
entities and individuals do not illegally participate in 
the political process such as elections in 2009 and 2010, 
in accordance with adopted laws and regulations in 
Afghanistan, and calls for adequate support in order for 
the Ministry of Interior to increasingly assume its 
leading role in implementing the program of disbandment of 
illegal armed groups; 
¶19. Welcomes the commitment of the Government of 
Afghanistan to stand firm on the disbandment of illegal 
armed groups and to work actively at national, provincial 
and local levels to advance this commitment and stresses, 
in this regard, all efforts to create sufficient legal 
income-earning opportunities and calls for continued 
international support for these efforts; 
¶20. Remains deeply concerned about the problem of millions 
of anti-personnel landmines and explosive remnants of war, 
which constitute a great danger for the population and 
major obstacle for the resumption of economic activities 
and for recovery and reconstruction efforts; 
¶21. Welcomes the progress achieved through the Mine Action 
Programme for Afghanistan, and supports the Government of 
Afghanistan in its efforts to meet its responsibilities 
under the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, 
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel 
Mines and on Their Destruction, Ibid., vol. 2056, No. 
¶35597. and to cooperate fully with the Mine Action 
Programme coordinated by the United Nations and to 
eliminate all known or new stocks of anti-personnel 
landmines and acknowledges the need for more assistance 
from the international community in this regard; 
¶22. Stresses that regional cooperation constitutes an 
effective means to promote security and development in 
Afghanistan; 
¶23. Pledges its continued support, after the successful 
completion of the political transition, to the Government 
and people of Afghanistan as they rebuild their country, 
strengthen the foundations of a constitutional democracy 
and resume their rightful place in the community of 
nations; 
¶24. Recalls the constitutional guarantee of human rights 
and fundamental freedoms for all Afghans as a significant 
political achievement, stresses the need to fully 
implement the human rights provisions of the Afghan 
Constitution, including those regarding the full enjoyment 
by women and children of their human rights; 
¶25. Calls for the full respect of the human rights and 
fundamental freedoms of all, without discrimination of any 
kind, including on the basis of gender, ethnicity or 
religion, in accordance with obligations under the Afghan 
Constitution and international law; 
¶26. Commends the achievements and the commitment of the 
Government of Afghanistan in this respect and expresses 
its concern over the harmful consequences of violent and 
terrorist activities by the Taliban, Al-Qaida, extremist 
and other criminal groups on the enjoyment of human rights 
and on the capacity of the Government of Afghanistan to 
ensure human rights and fundamental freedoms for all 
Afghans; 
¶27. Recalls Security Council resolutions 1674 (2006) of 
28 April 2006 and 1738 (2006) of 23 December 2006 on the 
protection of civilians in armed conflict and expresses 
its concern at the high number of civilian casualties as 
stated in the recent report by the Secretary General on 
the situation in Afghanistan, A/63/372 of 23 September 
2008 including women and children, reiterates its call for 
all feasible steps to be taken to ensure the protection of 
civilians and calls for full compliance with international 
humanitarian and human rights law; 
¶28. Recognizes the importance of holding free, fair and 
secure elections in 2009 and 2010 as a crucial step to 
consolidate democracy for all Afghans as identified in the 
Afghanistan Compact,2 stresses the responsibility of the 
Afghan authorities in this regard and calls upon the 
international community to continue to provide sustained 
support, including financial assistance and support to the 
Afghan government on ensuring the security of the 
elections; 
¶29. Welcomes the steps taken by the Government of 
Afghanistan on justice sector reform, stresses the need 
for further accelerated progress towards the establishment 
of a fair and effective justice system as an important 
step towards the goal of strengthening the Government, 
providing security and ensuring the rule of law throughout 
the country, and urges the international community to 
continue to support the efforts of the Government in these 
areas in a coordinated manner; 
¶30. Welcomes in this regard the adoption by the Afghan 
authorities of the National Justice Programme, and 
stresses the importance of its full and timely 
implementation by all the relevant actors; 
¶31. Urges the Government of Afghanistan and the 
international community to devote adequate resources to 
the reconstruction and reform of the prison sector in 
order to improve respect for the rule of law and human 
rights therein, while reducing physical and mental health 
risks to inmates; 
¶32. Emphasizes the importance of ensuring access for 
relevant organizations to all prisons in Afghanistan and 
calls for full respect for relevant international law, 
including humanitarian law, and human rights law, where 
applicable, including with regard to minors, if detained; 
¶33. Notes with concern reports of continued violations of 
human rights and of international humanitarian law 
including violent or discriminatory practices, violations 
committed against persons belonging to ethnic and 
religious minorities, as well as against women and girls, 
stresses the need to promote tolerance and religious 
freedom as guaranteed by the Afghan constitution, 
emphasizes the necessity of investigating allegations of 
current and past violations, stresses the importance of 
facilitating the provision of efficient and effective 
remedies to the victims and of bringing the perpetrators 
to justice in accordance with national and international 
law; 
¶34. Stresses the need to ensure respect for the right to 
freedom of expression and the right to freedom of thought, 
conscience or belief, while noting with concern recent 
attempts to limit freedom of expression and to intimidate 
journalists and condemns cases of the abduction and even 
killing of journalists by terrorist as well as extremist 
and criminal groups; 
¶35. Reiterates the important role of the Afghan 
Independent Human Rights Commission in the promotion and 
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms, 
stresses the need to expand its range of operation in all 
parts of Afghanistan in accordance with the Afghan 
Constitution, encourages the Government of Afghanistan to 
take increasing responsibility for the core funding of the 
Commission and calls on the international community for 
continued support in this regard; 
¶36. Calls for the full implementation by the Government of 
Afghanistan of the Action Plan on Peace, Justice and 
Reconciliation, in the framework of the Afghan 
constitution without prejudice to the implementation of 
measures introduced by the Security Council in its 
resolution 1267 (1999) and recalls other relevant 
resolutions in this regard, including Security Council 
resolution 1806 (2008); 
¶37. Recalls Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) of 31 
October 2000 and 1820 (2008) of 19 June 2008 on women and 
peace and security, commends the efforts of the Government 
of Afghanistan to mainstream gender issues and to protect 
and promote the equal rights of women and men as 
guaranteed, inter alia, by virtue of its ratification of 
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination against Women, Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378. 
and by the Afghan Constitution, and reiterates the 
continued importance of the full and equal participation 
of women in all spheres of Afghan life, of equality before 
the law and equal access to legal counsel without 
discrimination of any kind; 
¶38. Welcomes the creation of a special fund for the 
protection of women at risk set up by UNIFEM with the 
support of the Office of the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees; 
¶39. Welcomes the implementation of the National Action 
Plan for Women in Afghanistan and the significant efforts 
by the Government of Afghanistan to counter 
discrimination, urges the Government to actively involve 
all elements of Afghan society, in particular women, in 
the development and implementation of relief, 
rehabilitation, recovery and reconstruction programs, and 
encourages the collection and use of statistical data on a 
sex-disaggregated basis to provide information on 
gender-based violence and accurately track the progress of 
the full integration of women into the political, economic 
and social life of Afghanistan; 
¶40. Applauds the progress achieved on gender equality and 
in the empowerment of women in Afghan politics as historic 
milestones in the political process which will help to 
consolidate durable peace and national stability in 
Afghanistan, while noting the need to promote the 
empowerment of women also at the provincial level; 
¶41. Strongly condemns incidents of discrimination and 
violence against women and girls, in particular if 
directed against women activists and women prominent in 
public life, wherever they occur in Afghanistan, including 
killings, maimings, and "honor killings" in certain parts 
of the country; 
¶42. Stresses the need to ensure respect for the human 
rights and fundamental freedoms of children in 
Afghanistan, recalls the need to fully implement the 
Convention on the Rights of the Child and the two Optional 
Protocols thereto by all States parties, as well as 
Security Council resolution 1612 (2005) of 26 July 2005 on 
children and armed conflict; 
¶43. Expresses in this regard its concern about the ongoing 
recruitment and use of children by illegal armed and 
terrorist groups in Afghanistan as expressed in the report 
of the Secretary General on children and armed conflict of 
21 December 2007, A/62/609 - S/2007/757. and stresses the 
importance of ending the use of children contrary to 
international law, welcomes the progress achieved by and 
firm commitment of the Government of Afghanistan in this 
regard including the strong condemnation of any 
exploitation of children  SG Report on the situation in 
Afghanistan and its implication for the security situation 
of 24 September 2008; 
¶44. Welcomes the adoption by the Government of Afghanistan 
of the National Plan of Action on Combating Child 
Trafficking, also welcomes initiatives to pass legislation 
on human trafficking, guided by the Protocol to Prevent, 
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially 
Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations 
Convention against Transitional Organized Crime, 
Resolution 55/25, annex II. and stresses the importance of 
considering becoming a party to the Protocol; 
¶45. Urges the Government of Afghanistan to continue to 
effectively reform the public administration sector in 
order to implement the rule of law and to ensure good 
governance and accountability at both national and local 
levels, and stresses the importance of meeting the 
respective benchmarks of the Afghanistan Compact, with the 
support of the international community; 
¶46. Welcomes the appointment of officials, as required by 
the Afghanistan Compact, to the Senior Appointments Panel 
and encourages the Government of Afghanistan to make 
active use of this panel, thus enhancing efficiency and 
transparency in the appointment of senior officials; 
¶47. Encourages the international community, including all 
donor nations, to assist the Government of Afghanistan in 
making capacity-building and human resources development a 
cross-cutting priority; 
¶48. Welcomes Afghanistan's ratification of the United 
Nations Convention against corruption, encourages the 
Government of Afghanistan to vigorously pursue its efforts 
to establish a more effective, accountable and transparent 
administration at national, provincial and local levels of 
Government leading the fight against corruption in 
accordance with the Afghanistan Compact, and notes with 
concern the effects of corruption with regard to security, 
good governance, combating the narcotics industry and 
economic development; 
¶49. Applauds the establishment of the Independent 
Directorate of Local Governance by the Government of 
Afghanistan, calls on Afghan authorities and the 
international community to actively support the work of 
the IDLG to establish and strengthen governance 
institutions at sub-national levels, and ensure that these 
institutions play a strong role in facilitating the 
delivery of national activities and programs to improve 
the well-being of the Afghan people, and welcomes in this 
regard international support provided including the 
agreements the IDLG signed with India and the Islamic 
Republic of Iran to expand public service training; 
¶50. Urges the Government of Afghanistan to address, with 
the assistance of the international community, the 
question of claims for land property through a 
comprehensive land titling program, including formal 
registration of all property and improved security of 
property rights, and welcomes the steps already taken by 
the Government in this regard; 
¶51. Welcomes the launch of the Afghanistan National 
Development Strategy, as well as further efforts of the 
Government of Afghanistan to achieve the Millennium 
Development Goals; 
¶52. Welcomes the continuing and growing ownership of the 
rehabilitation, reconstruction and development efforts by 
the Government of Afghanistan, and emphasizes the crucial 
need to achieve ownership in all fields of governance and 
to improve institutional capabilities, including at the 
provincial level, in order to use aid more effectively; 
¶53. Stresses the need for a continued strong international 
commitment to humanitarian assistance and for programs, 
under the ownership of the Government of Afghanistan, of 
recovery, rehabilitation, reconstruction and development, 
and expressing, at the same time, its appreciation to the 
United Nations system and to all States and international 
and non-governmental organizations whose international and 
local staff continue to respond positively to the 
humanitarian, transition and development needs of 
Afghanistan despite increasing security concerns and 
difficulties of access in certain areas; 
¶54. Expresses its appreciation for the humanitarian and 
development assistance work of the international community 
in the reconstruction and development of Afghanistan, 
recognizing the necessity for further improvement in the 
living conditions of the Afghan people and emphasizing the 
need to strengthen and support the capacity of the 
Government of Afghanistan to deliver basic social 
services, in particular education and public health 
services, and to promote development; 
¶55. Expresses its appreciation for the work of the 
provincial reconstruction teams; 
¶56. Urgently appeals to all States, the United Nations 
system and international and non-governmental 
organizations to continue to provide, in close 
coordination with the Government of Afghanistan and in 
accordance with its national development strategy, all 
possible and necessary humanitarian, recovery, 
reconstruction, development, financial, technical and 
material assistance for Afghanistan, and recalls in this 
regard the leading role of UNAMA in coordinating 
international efforts; 
¶57. Urges the international community, in accordance with 
the Afghanistan Compact, to increase the proportion of 
donor assistance channeled directly to the core budget, as 
agreed bilaterally between the Government of Afghanistan 
and each donor, as well as through other more predictable 
core budget funding modalities in which the Government 
participates, such as the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust 
Fund, the Law and Order Trust Fund and the 
Counter-Narcotics Trust Fund; 
¶58. Invites all States, intergovernmental and 
non-governmental organizations providing assistance to 
Afghanistan to focus on institution-building in a 
coordinated manner and to ensure that such work 
complements and contributes to the development of an 
economy characterized by sound macroeconomic policies, the 
development of a financial sector that provides services, 
inter alia, to microenterprises, small and medium-sized 
enterprises and households, transparent business 
regulations and accountability; 
¶59. Encourages the international community to support the 
local economy as a measure for long-term stability and 
countering narcotics and, in this respect, to explore 
possibilities for enhancing local procurement; 
¶60. Welcomes all efforts to increase regional economic 
integration. 
RICE