08STATE73173
URGENT DEMARCHE SEEKING SUPPORT FOR UNSC
Wed Jul 09 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0002
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #3173 1920534
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 090220Z JUL 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
INFO RUEHSB/AMEMBASSY HARARE PRIORITY 2722-2723
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 2413-2414UNCLAS STATE 073173 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y   (ADDED SENSITIVE CAPTION) 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL PHUM ZI XA ZU
SUBJECT: URGENT DEMARCHE SEEKING SUPPORT FOR UNSC 
RESOLUTION ON ZIMBABWE 
 
REF: STATE 70836 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary and Action request:  On July 8, the U.S. 
will table a draft Security Council resolution on Zimbabwe 
and seek a vote on July 9.  The draft resolution condemns the 
government-sponsored violence that made it impossible to hold 
free and fair elections in Zimbabwe and imposes an arms 
embargo as well as targeted sanctions against Zimbabwean 
officials responsible for the campaign of violence.  Action 
addressees are requested 
to demarche host governments at the Ambassadorial level on an 
urgent basis to solicit their support for the resolution 
prior to the July 9 vote.  Posts are requested to respond as 
quickly as possible by e-mail or cables slugged for 
IO/UNP-Rebecca Goldenberg.  End Summary and Action Request. 
 
¶2.  (U) Talking Points: 
 
-- The Security Council will vote on the draft resolution on 
Zimbabwe on July 9.  We urge you to support the draft 
resolution to send the strongest possible signal to Mr. 
Mugabe on the need to end the violence and begin a serious 
dialogue with the opposition to end the crisis that threatens 
Zimbabwe and the region. 
 
-- Your support for the resolution is urgently needed in 
light of the on-going violence in Zimbabwe and its effect on 
its neighbors, the region, and international security.  Just 
this past weekend a group of armed militia raided two 
internally displaced person camps near Ruwa leaving eight 
individuals hospitalized and over a dozen others missing.  On 
July 2, over 200 members of the opposition sought refuge at 
the U.S. Embassy in Harare, and internally displaced persons 
fleeing the violence have sought shelter in other embassies, 
churches, NGO facilities, and the opposition headquarters. 
 
-- The resolution contains targeted measures against those 
designated as having ordered, planned or participated in 
politically-motivated acts of violence.  In particular, the 
measures are directed at those who led a well-orchestrated 
military-style campaign of violence and intimidation against 
the opposition and its supporters, including those who led 
the campaign &CIBD8 or &Coercion, Intimidation, Beating, 
and Displacement.8  According to media reports, this 
military operation involved up to 200 senior army officers, 
who established nearly 2,000 base camps around the country to 
conduct brutal violence against the opposition.  The small 
farming village of Chaona, which had voted for Morgan 
Tsvingarai in the March election, was the first to feel the 
brunt of this military assault.  Starting May 5, the village 
suffered a rampage that left seven individuals dead and many 
more seriously beaten and injured, including women and 
children. 
 
-- This military style offensive continued through the 
country targeting the members and supporters of the 
opposition.  Then on election day, as an additional measure 
to ensure victory, the Mugabe regime forced voters to the 
polls and threatened to track through ballot serial numbers 
those who refused to vote or who cast their votes for 
Tsvangirai, despite his withdrawal from the run-off election. 
 No election conducted in these circumstances can produce 
legitimate results. 
 
-- The people of Zimbabwe have few options to address their 
dire situation.  Their government has failed them 
economically and politically.  They were refused the chance 
to democratically express their views.  Many are fleeing the 
country, further straining the resources of Zimbabwe,s 
neighbors. 
 
-- As much as one quarter of Zimbabwe's population is now 
outside of the country.  Zimbabwe's neighbors are also 
bearing the brunt of Mugabe's failed policies and repression. 
 
-- The crisis in Zimbabwe is a threat to regional peace and 
security.  As UN Deputy Secretary General Migiro said at the 
AU Summit last week, "Zimbabwe is the single greatest 
challenge to regional stability in Southern Africa." 
 
-- At the Africa Union Summit, African leaders issued a 
statement that expressed deep concern about the 
violence and loss of life in Zimbabwe.  The Vice President of 
neighboring Botswana expressed his specific concern about the 
level of violence. 
 
-- In the face of this criticism, on July 4 Mr. Mugabe said 
that &if there is a . . . neighboring country itching for a 
fight . . . then let them try it,8  implicitly threatening 
the region with retaliation if they oppose his rule. 
 
-- We fully support efforts to reach a mediated solution to 
the crisis that respects the will of the Zimbabwean people 
and the results of the March 29 election.  We believe that 
this draft resolution would reinforce those efforts by 
encouraging Mr. Mugabe to negotiate seriously and in good 
faith. 
 
-- We welcome the Statement by the G-8 Leaders that expressed 
their commitment to &take further steps, inter alia, 
introducing financial and other measures against those 
responsible for violence.8 
 
-- United UN Security Council action will send a clear 
message to the Mugabe regime that its actions in defiance of 
the will of the Zimbabwean people will not be accepted by the 
international community. 
 
¶3.    (U) Additional Talking Points for Beijing and Moscow: 
 
-- We are pleased that the G-8 leaders reached agreement on a 
statement on Zimbabwe that expressed their commitment to 
&take further steps, inter alia, introducing financial and 
other measures against those responsible for 
violence.8 
 
-- We understand that you have concerns about the draft 
resolution on Zimbabwe, but hope you will not block adoption 
of the resolution.  The UNSC must send a united message to 
the Mugabe regime to immediately end the violence and to 
begin a serious dialogue with the opposition in order to 
achieve a solution that respects the will of the Zimbabwean 
people and the results of the March 29 elections.  Such a 
dialogue is urgently needed to end the crisis that threatens 
Zimbabwe and the region. 
 
End points. 
RICE