08STATE123238
SOMALIA: TALKING POINTS FOR SOMALIA BRIEFING
Thu Nov 20 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0011
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #3238 3251630
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 201623Z NOV 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 123238 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL PHUM PHSA EWWT KCRM SO XA XW
SUBJECT: SOMALIA: TALKING POINTS FOR SOMALIA BRIEFING 
 
¶1.  USUN is instructed to draw from the talking points in 
paragraph 2 for the UN Security Council briefing and 
consultation on Somalia to be held on November 20. 
 
¶2.  Begin points: 
 
-- We would like to thank the (DPA official), (DPKO 
official), as well as the IMO Secretary-General Mitropoulos 
for their briefings this morning. 
 
-- The United States retains keen interest and concern for 
Somalia.  Despite political progress under the framework of 
the Djibouti Peace Agreement and follow-on dialogue, Somalia 
is once again embroiled in political battles among the 
leadership of the Transitional Federal Government (TFG). In 
addition, the security and humanitarian situations continue 
to paint bleak pictures for the lives of everyday Somalis. 
 
-- The United States reiterates its support for the dialogue 
process in Djibouti under the leadership of SRSG Ahmedou 
Ould-Abdallah and for the process outlined by the 
Transitional Federal Charter.  Once again, we call upon all 
Somali stakeholders, including the leadership of the TFG, to 
engage constructively in this process in the interest of 
establishing lasting peace, stability, and effective 
governance in Somalia. 
 
-- In paragraph 103 of the November 17 UN report on Somalia, 
the Secretary-General states that the international 
community's strategy for addressing the multiple threats to 
regional stability that emanate from Somalia should be 
coherent.  We could not agree more.  The Council cannot take 
a piecemeal approach to dealing with these problems.  The 
problem of Somalia piracy is a direct result of the lack of 
rule of law and poverty on the ground.  The political 
situation impacts the security situation, and vice versa. 
The humanitarian situation is a direct result of the security 
situation and so on. 
 
-- The United States is encouraged by the signing on October 
26 of the Cessation of Armed Confrontation Agreement as well 
as an agreement to form a unity government between the 
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and the Alliance for 
the Reliberation of Somalia (ARS).  Along with the Djibouti 
Agreement, these positive developments signal real political 
progress on the ground.  However, this political progress is 
being threatened by the deteriorating security situation. 
The international community must take immediate steps to 
stabilize the situation so that the political process can 
continue. 
 
-- The United States notes with appreciation the 
Secretariat's concept brief for an International 
Stabilization Force/Multinational Force. 
 
-- The United States, however, was disappointed with the 
conops for a UN Peacekeeping Operation to Somalia.  The 
United States does not agree that an assessment team needs to 
be on the ground to develop a feasible concept of operations, 
nor do we agree that a peacekeeping operation must be 
preceded by an International Stabilization 
Force/Multinational Force.  Therefore, the United States will 
continue to push for an additional conop for a UN PKO for 
Somalia with a limited mandate, a geographic focus on 
southern and central Somalia, and one that is not dependent 
on the deployment of a preceding Multinational 
Force/International Stabilization Force. 
 
-- We understand that it is the recommendation of the UN 
Secretariat that first an International Stabilization 
Force/Multinational Force must pacify the area before a UN 
PKO can be deployed, but we respectfully disagree.  The 
United States feels it is only prudent to have contingency 
planning for every scenario. 
 
-- On piracy, the United States tabled this morning a 
resolution on Somalia piracy to renew the authorities 
provided in UNSCR 1816.  It is obvious from this week's news 
that piracy is still a significant problem, and that these 
authorities must not be allowed to lapse even for one day. 
 
--  Since the adoption of 1816 we have seen an exponential 
increase in the number of piracy incidents off the coast of 
Somalia.  Just this week Somali pirates have seized an oil 
tanker the size of an aircraft carrier off the coast of 
Kenya.  Fueling the rise in piracy is that fact that, for the 
most part, pirates are not facing any consequences for their 
actions.  This suggests that granting states the authority to 
interdict pirates is not enough.  This body must make 
progress on the vital issue of what to do with pirates once 
you've captured them.  Fortunately, the 
international community has an existing legal mechanism to 
address this issue.  The 1988 Convention on the Suppression 
of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Maritime Traffic -- 
the "SUA Convention" -- provides that state parties will 
establish as criminal offenses, among other things, the 
seizing or taking control of a ship by force or threat of 
force or any other form of intimidation and establish 
jurisdiction over these offenses in a variety of 
circumstances.  Moreover, the SUA Convention contains 
provisions facilitating the delivery of captured pirates to 
state parties for investigation and, where appropriate, 
extradition or potential prosecution.  Currently, 150 states, 
including many in the region, are party to SUA. 
 
-- Our resolution urges all States that have not already done 
so to become parties to the SUA Convention - by the way, 
something the Security Council has repeatedly urged in the 
past - and further urges States parties to the SUA onvention 
to fully implement their obligations under that Convention. 
It also calls upon the Secretary-General, in cooperation with 
the IMO, to work with States parties to the SUA Convention 
and other Member States to build judicial capacity for the 
successful prosecution of persons suspected of piracy and 
armed robbery at sea. 
 
-- We look forward to working with all of you on this 
important resolution. 
RICE