08STATE103448
CORAL TRIANGLE INITIATIVE: BACKGROUND & GUIDANCE
Fri Sep 26 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO2879
RR RUEHDT RUEHPB
DE RUEHC #3448/01 2702058
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 262052Z SEP 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUEHML/AMEMBASSY MANILA 8081
RUEHKL/AMEMBASSY KUALA LUMPUR 9858
RUEHJA/AMEMBASSY JAKARTA 1194
RUEHPB/AMEMBASSY PORT MORESBY 1179
RUEHDT/AMEMBASSY DILI 5127
INFO RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 2430
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 6040
RUEHWL/AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON 5974
RUEHSV/AMEMBASSY SUVA 7294
RHHMHAA/COMPACFLT PEARL HARBOR HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 STATE 103448 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV EAID AORC EFIS KGHG BP ID PP RP TT XB XV
SUBJECT: CORAL TRIANGLE INITIATIVE: BACKGROUND & GUIDANCE 
 
Ref: N/A 
 
¶1. This is a joint State-USAID action request for Manila, Jakarta, 
Kuala Lumpur, Dili, Honiara, Port Moresby, Bangkok, and Canberra. See 
para 7. 
 
¶2. Summary: Posts are requested to provide political and public 
diplomacy support to highlight USG involvement in the Coral Triangle 
Initiative (CTI), and to encourage the six governments involved to 
take the ambitious steps needed to make the initiative a success. The 
Coral Triangle is a 5.7 million square kilometer region of great 
biological abundance and diversity bounded by the Philippines, 
Malaysia, Indonesia, Solomon Islands, Timor Leste, and Papua New 
Guinea. The heads of these six countries have agreed to work together 
under the CTI to promote sustainable fisheries, sustainable 
livelihoods and adaptation to climate change. CTI has been endorsed 
by the White House. The USG in coordination with the governments of 
these states (plus Fiji and Vanuatu), the GEF and ADB, the Government 
of Australia, and a consortium of NGOs headed by World Wildlife Fund 
for Nature (WWF) is providing significant support to the CTI. The 
project seeks to preserve the unique biology and improve the 
management of marine resources, which directly support the lives of 
over 120 million people and contribute to regional stability and food 
security. End Summary. 
 
BACKGROUND 
---------------------- 
¶3. The Coral Triangle covers roughly 5.7million square kilometers of 
ocean and is "the epicenter of marine life abundance and diversity" 
on Earth, with over 600 coral species; 3,000 fish species; and the 
greatest extent of mangrove forests of any region on the planet. In 
August 2007, Indonesian President Yudhoyono proposed the multilateral 
"Coral Triangle Initiative" partnership to preserve the region's 
unique marine and coastal biological systems. These systems are now 
significantly at-risk due to overfishing, destructive fishing methods 
(e.g. dynamite / blast fishing), habitat degradation and conversion, 
climate change, and land-based sources of pollution among other 
factors. At the APEC Summit Declaration in September 2007, 21 leaders 
in the Asia Pacific region welcomed the CTI. Since then this 
initiative has steadily gained momentum. The USG first publicly 
announced its intent to provide financial assistance to the CTI in 
December 2007 at the Bali Cop-2 meetings. The "CT-6" governments are 
working to finalize the regional "CTI Plan of Action" by May 2009, 
when the World Oceans Conference will be held in Manado, Indonesia. 
Substantial early donor commitments have already been made by the 
USG, the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and the Asian Development 
Bank (ADB). We expect other bilateral donors, in particular 
Australia, to also provide significant financial and/or in-kind 
support. 
 
¶4. The CTI as currently conceived is a five-year project that focuses 
on protecting the marine and biological systems of the region in the 
Pacific called the Coral Triangle: an area bounded by the littoral 
states of Indonesia, Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Solomon 
Islands, and Timor-Leste (known as the "CT-6" countries). Under the 
GEF and ADB umbrella funding, Fiji and Vanuatu are also included in 
the Initiative. This region's biological resources produce direct 
economic benefits that support over 120 million people living in the 
region, and provide further positive economic externalities for 
millions worldwide. The CTI is the logical extension of three decades 
of US-investments in costal resource management, fisheries and 
marine-protected area work funded through the USAID-supported 
Sulu-Sulawesi Marine Ecosystems (SSME) matching grant program, 
USAID-supported bilateral programs with Indonesia and the 
Philippines, USAID-supported seascapes in Indonesia and Papua New 
Guinea, USAID-supported biodiversity programs in the Pacific, and 
State/EAP -funded marine and coastal programs in the South Pacific. 
The CTI builds on these successful USG programs and investments in 
coastal resources management and marine conservation in the Coral 
Triangle region, and using lessons-learned from previous initiatives 
actively promotes cooperation and coordination among the six main CTI 
nations and two neighboring islands. 
 
¶5.  Department of State has provided start-up support of $750,000 for 
the CTI Secretariat over two years. USAID has programmed regional and 
bilateral support up to $40 million for the CTI over five years in 
its budgets starting in FY08. The USAID project will fund NGO 
consortium activities that meet specific, well-defined program and 
project needs. A "rolling design" will allow the program implementers 
to meet needs identified in national and regional CTI plans of 
 
STATE 00103448  002 OF 004 
 
 
action. (Descriptions of NGO consortium activities are provided 
below.) If emerging needs or unexpected exigencies arise during 
implementation, the flexibility of this "rolling" program design will 
allow various components or milestones in specific projects to shift. 
 
¶6. Roles of the Various Actors: 
 
-CT-6 governments: For the CTI to reach its full potential, host 
governments will need to take the lead in their respective countries 
in developing appropriate plans, investing human and financial 
resources, and creating effective policies and regulations to carry 
out the key aspects of the CTI program.  Without this leadership, the 
CTI will be nothing more than an externally-driven, donor-led plan 
that will not achieve success or sustainability.  The region is 
littered with such failed efforts and the CT-6 governments, with 
encouragement from donors, should do everything within their means to 
avoid a similar fate.  In the near term, host governments need to 
establish a National Coordinating Committee (NCC) with as 
broadly-based representation of government and non-government 
stakeholders as possible, develop a CTI National Action Plan (NAP), 
engage actively in formulation of the Regional Action Plan, push to 
meet ambitious timelines envisaged in the CTI plan, make necessary 
policy and regulatory reforms for sustainable fisheries and marine 
resource management, increase investments (budgets) in sustainable 
resource management, if at all possible identify and provide staffing 
and financial support to establish and maintain an effective CTI 
secretariat, and maintain open communication with NGO Consortium 
representatives active in their country. 
 
-USAID/RDMA: provides overall management, coordination, and 
administrative support for the integrated USG program through its 
Bangkok mission. RDMA will coordinate with appropriate USAID mission 
officers and CTI "Cognizant Technical Officers" in Indonesia, 
Philippines, and Timor Leste; as well as appropriate USG Mission 
officers in Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Fiji, and 
Vanuatu.  The RDMA will also explore possibilities to work in 
conjunction with NGOs to address demand-driven resource degradation 
problems emanating from China. 
 
-USAID "Program Integrator" (PI): In September 2008, USAID selected a 
contractor (ARD-Tetra Tech) to function as a "Program Integrator." 
The central role of the PI is to provide, promote and coordinate USG 
support to the CTI. In addition, the  PI coordinates the regular 
exchange of information among USAID partners, RDMA, bilateral 
missions, USAID and State representatives in Washington, and other 
USG agencies, coordinates dialogue among donors to avoid duplication 
, provides program coordination and administrative support for the 
CTI, consolidates semi-annual financial and progress reports,  plans 
program assessments, provides technical and training support for the 
Secretariat, and conducts long-term sustainability planning. 
 
-US Department of State: The Department of State with funding from 
EAP and expertise/oversight by OES is providing FY 07 funding to the 
NGO consortium to support the establishment and strengthening of a 
Regional CTI Secretariat. The Secretariat's role will be to 
coordinate the interaction of the six governments involved, key NGOs, 
and other relevant multilateral actors to ensure that the CT6 move 
toward timely production of the CTI Regional Action Plan. The 
Government of Indonesia has seconded staff to provide initial support 
for the Secretariat. The consortium NGOs (see below) will contract 
and mentor six (one from each CT-6 country) interim staff for the 
Secretariat, until a more permanent Secretariat can be established, 
and provide staffing capacity in the run-up to the World Oceans 
Conference in May 2009. 
 
-NGO Consortium: The World Wildlife Fund (WWF), Conservation 
International (CI), and The Nature Conservancy (TNC) are the lead 
implementing NGOs on this project for both the State and USAID 
assistance programs. These NGOs have developed and delineated the CTI 
concept in partnership with the CT6 country governments. They 
continue to play this intermediary role, as well as to serve in an 
advisory capacity to the Secretariat and the National Coordination 
Committees (NCCs) who will serve as arms of the Secretariat at the 
national and local levels. The following provides brief detail on the 
CTI focus/role of each. 
-World Wildlife Fund  for Nature (WWF):  WWF has a 40 year history of 
conservation and resource management work in the Coral Triangle (CT) 
region, (NOTE: delete, as part of that investment is from USAID) and 
their WWF Coral Triangle Program is built upon over 20 years of 
experience and lessons learned from substantial site-based work. 
Their current work in the region is focused on five transformational 
themes: Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) and sustainable financing of 
MPAs; sustainable fisheries, species conservation and management, 
with a focus on sea turtle bycatch; climate change; and tourism. 
 
STATE 00103448  003 OF 004 
 
 
-The Nature Conservancy (TNC): TNC has been active in the Coral 
Triangle region since 1991 and has well-established conservation 
programs in Indonesia, Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands. TNC 
established the Coral Triangle Center in Bali in 2000, and launched 
the Coral Triangle program in 2006. To date, TNC has provided funding 
for Key interim Secretariat staff and for "CTI Plan of Action" 
Roadmap-related activities. The Nature Conservancy's goal in the 
Coral Triangle is to help establish 15% of the coral reef systems in 
effective conservation management in the next 10 years; it has also 
taken a leading role in the selection and design of resilient Marine 
Protected Area (MPA) networks. TNC is involved in efforts to 
understand how to identify and protect those reefs most resistant to 
bleaching and currently is working in seven large MPA networks across 
Indonesia, Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands. 
-Conservation International (CI):  One of CI's highest-priority goals 
for 2005-2014 is to establish protective management regimes in five 
key seascapes globally - in ocean ecosystems with the most species at 
risk, and to initiate 20 new marine protected areas for marine 
wildlife and critical habitats. CI's programs are managed by 
highly-qualified professionals located in Indonesia, Papua New 
Guinea, Philippines, Solomon Islands, and Australia. CI technical 
staff consists of complementary specialists in species conservation, 
coastal zone management, integrated conservation and development 
projects, governance, policy, communications and education. CI 
specifically supports policy reform in Philippines, Indonesia, and to 
a lesser extent in PNG, the Solomon Islands and Sabah. CI has 
supported 42 institutions (government, local communities, academic 
institutions, and NGOs) in the Sulu-Sulawesi and Papuan Bird's Head 
Seascapes. 
Bilateral USAID Missions: Bilateral missions in the Philippines and 
Indonesia are devoting a portion of bilateral assistance money to the 
RDMA's CTI Program, and in addition will support other CTI-relevant 
projects in light of the centrality of environmental, food security 
and regional stability goals in those mission's foreign assistance 
strategies. USAID Missions through their CTOs will retain approving 
authority over the use of the funds they contribute to the RDMA's CTI 
Program. In addition, bilateral missions will continue or expand 
their support of programs that contribute to CTI objectives. 
-Local Community Groups and NGOs:  A critical component of the CTI is 
the participation and substantive involvement of local community 
groups and NGOs in development of National Action Plans and in 
overall efforts to implement the CTI. These groups will work with the 
NCCs on daily implementation of the CTI projects and help spread 
awareness of the importance of CTI. The regional "CTI Plan of Action" 
is also intended to be inclusive of women, minorities and 
marginalized groups, represent local sentiments and viewpoints, and 
to be sustainable given specific local needs and capacities. 
 
-Other USG Agencies: Other USG agencies not named above (such as NOAA 
and DOI) may be engaged for specific CTI-related tasks through 
Interagency Agreements. 
 
-Other Donors: Donors such as the ADB, UNDP, World Bank, other 
developed countries, and various national or international private 
foundations, such as the Walton Family  Foundation, may potentially 
provide significant funding or leverage third-party resources for 
CTI.  ADB has been selected to manage a portfolio of GEF activities 
in South Asian and Pacific countries. 
 
¶7. Action requested:  The CTI is a significant and very complex 
USG-supported initiative which has the prospect of addressing in an 
integrated fashion a region of considerable importance to the 
prosperity, sustainability, stability and viability of this six 
nation-plus, multi-million person ecological region. State and USAID 
urge posts to utilize political and public diplomacy tools in as 
active a manner as feasible to highlight USG support for the CTI and 
encourage host governments to take the steps necessary for the 
initiative to meet its far-reaching goals. Posts are also encouraged 
to report on CTI activities undertaken, host country and civil 
society views, and other information pertinent to understanding the 
evolution of CTI efforts and updating USG strategy. Posts are also 
urged to continue pressing countries for improved fisheries 
management, improved coastal management and environmental/ regulatory 
reforms. Among specific steps posts are encouraged to consider are: 
 
-Utilize meetings and demarches, as appropriate, to convey strong US 
interest in, and support for CTI and its objectives, and to identify 
and encourage support from host government officials whose buy-in is 
crucial to CTI progress. 
 
-Urge host country governments to devote sufficient attention and 
resources to make the initiative successful and to identify and task 
appropriate ministries and staff to work together on CTI as their 
primary focus. Encourage these personnel to work closely with the CTI 
 
STATE 00103448  004 OF 004 
 
 
Secretariat and/or national Coordinating Committee members to develop 
their national Plan of Action. Encourage countries to accelerate 
their CTI efforts so as to meet the May 2009 target to present a 
regional CTI plan at the World Oceans Conference. 
 
-In coordination with Embassy PAOs, identify public diplomacy and/or 
public information resources and opportunities to highlight the 
importance of CTI, USG support for the initiative and local 
involvement with CTI activities. 
 
-Continue the practice of supporting sound fisheries management and 
environmental regulatory reform with CTI 6 governments. 
 
-Ensure appropriate US mission officers have regular communication 
with WWF, TNC, CI, and PI representatives on CTI topics. 
 
-Report back to State / USAID on CTI related topics. 
 
¶8. Department and USAID appreciate posts' efforts to support the CTI 
initiative as part of what we realize is already a very full plate. 
Department and USAID would welcome comment and feedback on your 
information and how we can assist you in promoting the success of CTI 
in your country. First POC's for CTI inquiries are: State: Christine 
Dawson, OES/ENRC and Ariel Wyckoff, EAP/RSP; USAID: Barbara Best, 
EGAT/NRM/W, John Wilson ME/TS and Charles Barber EGAT/ESP/MPC, and 
RDMA Bangkok: Winston Bowman, Rene Acostas. Bilateral POC's for the 
CTI are: 
State: Howell Howard, ESTH Officer/ Bangkok; Joe Murphy ESTH Hub 
officer/ Suva; 
USAID: Alfred Nakatsuma, USAID/Indonesia; Daniel Moore, 
USAID/Philippines. 
RICE