08STATE123072
GUIDANCE FOR UNSC CONSULTATIONS ON ZIMBABWE
Wed Nov 19 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO5199
OO RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN RUEHTRO
DE RUEHC #3072/01 3250006
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 192358Z NOV 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 3882
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHSB/AMEMBASSY HARARE PRIORITY 3191UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 STATE 123072 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL PHUM ZI XA ZU KDEM
SUBJECT: GUIDANCE FOR UNSC CONSULTATIONS ON ZIMBABWE 
NOVEMBER 20 
 
 ¶1. (U) This is an action request.  USUN should draw from the 
statement in para 2 during the UN Security Council 
consultations on Zimbabwe November 20.  USUN should also 
address the press after the UNSC briefing to summarize the 
key points from the U.S. statement.  Additionally, USUN 
should hand to reporters the "Zimbabwe Fact Sheet" in para 3, 
which is available at: 
(http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/104399.htm) End action. 
 
¶2. (U) Begin points: 
 
I would like to thank Assistant Secretary General Political 
Affairs Haile Menkerios for his briefing on the situation in 
Zimbabwe. Today, I would like to make three points. 
 
First, the United States remains deeply concerned about the 
welfare of the Zimbabwean people given the increasingly dire 
humanitarian situation.  We are concerned the reality and 
magnitude of the situation has gone underreported.  Food 
insecurity will soon affect five million people.  The 
healthcare system has collapsed as hospitals lack even the 
most basic supplies and are forced 
to close their doors. There are inadequate efforts and 
resources to address the cholera outbreaks in urban areas and 
NGOs report as many as 1.4 million may be at risk of 
contracting the disease. Human rights remain brutally 
restricted as government-sponsored political violence 
continues against MDC supporters and ordinary citizens, 
including unpaid doctors and nurses, exercising their right 
to peacefully protest conditions in their country.  The U.S. 
continues to provide food and non-food humanitarian 
assistance, with no conditions attached. 
 
Second, the United States notes more than nine weeks have 
passed since the September 15 signing of the Zimbabwe 
power-sharing Agreement, yet still there is no legitimate 
government.  The United States believes the SADC proposal for 
ZANU-PF and MDC to share the Home Affairs Ministry 
contravenes the letter and spirit of the September 15 
Agreement, as does Mugabe,s unilateral appointment of 
government officials.  Mugabe must accede to an equitable 
power-sharing arrangement that provides for a 
genuinely democratic transitional government that reflects 
the will of the Zimbabwean people as expressed in the March 
29 elections and the spirit of the September 15 agreement. 
 
Third, we urge all SADC member states to require Mugabe to 
honor his commitment to act in good faith and form an 
inclusive government with the MDC that can begin to address 
the urgent crises facing the people in Zimbabwe. 
 
Lastly, we thank UN Assistant Secretary General for Political 
Affairs Haile Menkerios for keeping the Council informed of 
developments in Zimbabwe. 
 
¶3. DRL Factsheet on Zimbabwe: 
 
As Talks Stall, Zimbabweans Suffer 
 
In violation of both the September 15 power-sharing agreement 
between political parties and the will of the Zimbabwean 
people as expressed in the March 29 elections, Zimbabwe 
remains without a legitimate government, causing further 
suffering to its people. Twenty-one African leaders witnessed 
the signing of the accord between Mugabe,s ZANU-PF and the 
opposition Movement for Democratic Change (MDC). Since then, 
the Mugabe regime has refused to implement an equitable and 
inclusive government and has continued to use violence 
against peaceful demonstrators. 
In the face of condemnation by the international community, 
including United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon, human 
rights violations in 2008 have more than tripled from 2007, 
and there are signs that the violence may again be 
increasing. The Mugabe regime continues to brutally restrict 
basic freedoms through state-sponsored violence. Security 
forces refuse to allow peaceful demonstrations by democratic 
groups to proceed, often using batons and tear gas to 
violently disperse gatherings. Just last month, two peaceful 
marches protesting Zimbabwe,s humanitarian crisis and 
crumbling infrastructure, each attended by over 200 members 
of civil society, were disrupted by police who resorted to 
both beatings and arrests to disperse civilians. NGOs report 
that violence could escalate further at any time. 
Due to the intransigence of the regime, the humanitarian 
crisis worsens. Zimbabweans struggle to survive in an economy 
 
STATE 00123072  002 OF 003 
 
 
that has been decimated by malfeasance, corruption and 
inaction. Facing the highest inflation in the world, many 
citizens have resorted to a barter system. Unemployment is 
the norm. The Mugabe regime continues to impede humanitarian 
access, despite warnings that over 5 million Zimbabweans may 
go hungry in the coming months. 
Attacks 
     190 opposition activists and supporters have been 
murdered since the March 29 election. 
     Violence continues at significantly higher rates than 
seen before the March 29 election. Although overall violence 
has decreased from the highest levels seen during the 
inter-election period from May-July, it may again be 
escalating. 
     In October alone, at least 1,300 incidents of 
politically-motivated violence or harassment by ZANU-PF 
members or supporters against the opposition have been 
documented by independent organizations, who note an increase 
from August and September. 
     Politically-motivated rape by ZANU-PF against 
opposition supporters has occurred.  According to media 
reports, women were held as sex slaves at ZANU-PF camps. 
Several victims state they were held against their will and 
raped multiple times a day. Some of the perpetrators of these 
crimes are reportedly ZANU-PF officials holding elected 
office. 
     NGOs report that in some rural areas, ZANU-PF &hit 
squads8 and youth militia continue to act with impunity to 
intimidate and harass civilians. 
Illegal Arrest and Detention 
     The MDC reports that several of its activists remain in 
police custody on trumped up charges. For example, in late 
October twelve MDC activists in Mashonaland West were 
arrested by security forces on charges of receiving training 
in sabotage, terrorism and banditry. Police also took one 
activist,s two-year-old daughter into custody. The detainees 
have been held incommunicado for over two weeks and their 
location remains unknown. Despite repeated attempts by 
lawyers, the detainees have had no access to legal counsel or 
medical care. On November 11, a High Court judge issued four 
orders, including to the Minister of Home Affairs and the 
Police Commissioner-General, demanding they produce the 
activists in court. The government has not complied. 
     The National Constitutional Assembly (NCA) sponsored 
peaceful demonstrations in five cities on November 11, four 
of which were broken up violently by riot police who arrested 
over two dozen protesters. Police detained NCA Chairman 
Lovemore Madhuku for four hours, keeping him from a Harare 
demonstration. 
     After three weeks in jail following their arrest for 
peacefully protesting the crisis in Zimbabwe, Jenni Williams 
and Magodonga Mahlang, both leaders of the NGO Women of 
Zimbabwe Arise (WOZA), were granted bail on November 4. Upon 
their release, they shared stories of worsening conditions 
and food shortages in the country,s prisons. On November 16, 
Amnesty International,s German Section awarded WOZA its 5th 
Annual Human Rights Award. 
     On November 18, riot police disrupted a peaceful 
attempt by an estimated 1,000 medical staff, including 
doctors and nurses, to protest the country,s deteriorating 
healthcare system. The protesters planned to present a 
petition to the government calling for urgent action to 
address the crisis. Police reportedly blocked staff from 
leaving the main hospital in Harare to join the march and 
threatened those who continued demonstrating with arrest. 
Humanitarian Emergency 
     The number of hungry Zimbabweans is expected to rise to 
over 5 million in early 2009. Millions of Zimbabweans have 
already run out of food or are surviving on just one meal a 
day. International aid agencies are being forced to reduce 
daily rations in order to stretch their remaining supplies. 
There are widespread reports of citizens in rural areas 
scavenging for wild fruits and roots. A poor summer harvest, 
hyperinflation, the lack of foreign exchange to import food 
and the previous ban on NGO activities have led to an acute 
food crisis. The winter harvest is forecast to be less than 
one tenth of the local consumption requirement. 
     The number of Zimbabweans seeking asylum in South 
Africa exceeded 2007's total figure in the first quarter of 
2008 alone, according to experts. An estimated three million 
Zimbabweans have left for South Africa and neighboring 
countries over the past decade seeking both economic 
opportunity as well as political asylum. 
     While health care in Zimbabwe was once amongst the best 
in Africa, it has declined dramatically, a trend which has 
accelerated in recent months. Public hospitals lack water, 
electricity, soap, and even basic medical supplies, forcing 
many hospitals to refuse patients treatment. Untold numbers 
of Zimbabweans have died as a result. Even private hospitals 
now have limited resources, as medications and supplies, 
 
STATE 00123072  003 OF 003 
 
 
where available, must be purchased with scarce foreign 
currency. 
     Even as Zimbabwe,s health care system collapses, news 
broke in November that Zimbabwe,s Reserve Bank &diverted8 
over $7 million donated to the country by the Global Fund for 
AIDS, TB and Malaria. The Bank has since returned the funds. 
     Outbreaks of cholera are plaguing communities across 
Zimbabwe. Five separate outbreaks have resulted in 2,893 
cases of cholera and at least 115 deaths since August. 
Doctors Without Borders has warned that another 1.4 million 
people are at risk. 
     The quality of Zimbabwe,s once thriving education 
sector continued to erode, resulting in a loss of teachers, 
suspension of national exams, inflationary increases in 
school fees, and the postponement of the university semester. 
In November, teachers, unions called for the cancellation of 
the entire academic year. 
Economic Meltdown 
     Inflation continues its unprecedented rise. Official 
regime figures placed the July inflation rate at 
231,000,000%. Independent economists estimate inflation in 
November at over 13,000,000,000%. According to one economist, 
prices now double every 1.3 days. At this rate, the annual 
inflation rate will surpass the world record by the end of 
¶2008. As a result, the cash economy has largely collapsed, 
replaced by barter and foreign currency, neither of which 
permits most Zimbabweans access to desperately needed goods 
and services. 
     The impact of hyperinflation is devastating. Those 
fortunate enough to be employed now find that insurance 
companies can no longer afford to cover even urgent medical 
care, including surgery and dialysis. Salaries cannot keep 
pace with the skyrocketing increase in fuel, electricity, and 
food prices. 
     The World Bank estimates that just six percent of the 
working-age population is employed in the formal sector. The 
majority of Zimbabweans are now working informally or not at 
all. 
     Amid fuel shortages, gasoline prices have soared, 
raising the price of a one-way bus trip to more than the 
average daily wage. 
     Power and water outages occur daily across large swaths 
of the city, placing large sectors of the population at 
serious risk. In some communities that have gone without 
water for months or years, citizens have dug crude shallow 
wells in which water sometimes mixes with sewage flowing from 
broken sewer pipes. These practices contribute to cholera and 
other disease outbreaks. 
     Shelves at shops that sell in local currency are bare, 
as price controls do not allow retailers to recoup their 
costs or replace goods. Basic commodities such as milk and 
meat are only available in foreign currency shops or on the 
black market at exorbitant prices. 
RICE