08STATE132284
USUN INSTRUCTIONS FOR UNAMID CONSULTATIONS
Wed Dec 17 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
O 172147Z DEC 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 
INFO DARFUR COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM IMMEDIATEUNCLAS STATE 132284 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KPKO SU
SUBJECT: USUN INSTRUCTIONS FOR UNAMID CONSULTATIONS 
 
¶1.  This is an action request.  USUN is requested to draw 
from the following points during consultations on the hybrid 
UN/AU Mission in Darfur (UNAMID) scheduled for December 19, 
¶2008. 
 
Begin Points: 
 
I would like to thank UN Secretary General Ban (or 
appropriate) for his briefing.    I would also like to thank 
the Secretary General and the personnel of UNAMID for their 
work in attempting to reduce the severe insecurity of the 
civilian population in the Darfur region of Sudan.  The 
people of Darfur have suffered from violence and deprivation 
far too long, and we appreciate the efforts of UNAMID to help 
ease this suffering.  We recognize the personnel of UNAMID 
have undertaken a critically important task -- one that must 
be performed under the most trying circumstances and in a 
most difficult environment.  We salute their continuing 
efforts to bring peace to the region and express our 
sincerest appreciation for their efforts. 
 
Today, I would like to make the following points: 
 
First, the U.S. welcomes and fully supports all efforts to 
attain full deployment of UNAMID's authorized force level. 
We are, however, very disappointed in the continuing problems 
and roadblocks preventing a complete and rapid deployment. 
The reasons for these delays are many, but none should be 
permanent or persistent spoilers.  The U.S. believes all 
parties must identify weaknesses preventing UNAMID from 
reaching its potential, and take immediate action to address 
those weaknesses.  We believe a much greater effort is needed 
to manage the mission and the logistics required to support 
it.  The U.S. has continually exerted efforts to assist in 
improving mission operations.  Other nations have also 
indicated a willingness to contribute to this effort; 
however, the United Nations has not developed the 
efficiencies to take full advantage of assistance when it is 
offered.  We urge DPKO to take a more aggressive stance in 
soliciting and utilizing international resources to obtain 
full operational capacity for UNAMID.  We urge UNAMID's troop 
and police contributing countries to fulfill their 
commitments, and ask other countries to give aid and support 
to this vital mission attempting to protect those in danger. 
 
Second, we noted with interest the recent announcement of a 
ceasefire by the Sudanese government, however, we are 
dismayed that military action by rebel groups and Sudanese 
armed forces continues.  In light of these concerns, the U.S. 
is prepared to take a leading role working with UNAMID on an 
international ceasefire monitoring team to ensure 
implementation and maintenance of a true ceasefire.  We stand 
ready to assist the Government of Sudan and UNAMID in this 
endeavor. 
 
Third, we welcome the recent efforts by the Government of 
Qatar in developing a framework for a peace agreement for 
Darfur.  We believe that regional entities can play an 
important and constructive role in establishing peace in 
Darfur.  At the same time, we iterate our support for UN/AU 
Chief Mediator Bassole's efforts to bring all parties to the 
negotiating table and establish a framework for lasting 
peace.  We urge the governments of Chad, Libya, and Egypt to 
provide immediate and continuing assistance and support for 
these effort.  We implore the parties to create an atmosphere 
conducive to bringing all groups to the bargaining table, 
which is an essential element in attaining a sustainable 
peace. 
 
Fourth, the U.S. is deeply concerned about continuing attacks 
and harassment of humanitarian aid workers in the Darfur 
region, including some reportedly perpetrated by Government 
of Sudan forces.  Violence and harassment directed against 
aid workers prevent the delivery of critically needed 
supplies and assistance, and has a chilling effect on all 
relief efforts.  We also condemn the attacks on UNAMID as 
well, and express our deep sorrow and disappointment about 
the killing and injury of UN peacekeepers.  The U.S. believes 
the Government of Sudan and UNAMID must work cooperatively 
and consistently to create a secure environment permitting 
the delivery of much needed assistance to the people of 
Darfur and to provide protection for all UN personnel.  The 
Government of Sudan must also commit to identifying and 
bringing to justice the lawless elements committing these 
crimes. 
 
Fifth, we iterate our support and encouragement for the 
normalization of relations between Chad and Sudan, and 
ongoing efforts to establish a border monitoring mechanism. 
We recognize the regional linkages of the conflict, and the 
impact of the crisis in Darfur on neighboring countries.  We 
applaud the exchange of ambassadors and the establishment of 
the Peace and Security force to monitor the Chad - Sudan 
border. 
 
Finally, the United States would like to highlight our grave 
concern for the ongoing gender-based violence that is 
continuing in Darfur.  Internally displaced women and girls 
continue to be attacked and raped while going about daily 
tasks such as gathering firewood or getting water.  In most 
cases, the perpetrators are reported to be men in Sudanese 
military uniforms.  We call on the Government of Sudan to 
address this unacceptable behavior within its ranks, to 
ensure that the perpetrators are investigated and brought to 
justice and convey without question that rape and other forms 
of gender-based violence are not tolerated or condoned by the 
Government of Sudan.  We ask UNAMID to continue to be 
especially responsive on this horrific issue and do 
everything within its scope to offer protection, monitoring, 
assistance, and reporting channels for the women and girls of 
Darfur. 
 
 
RICE