08STATE54797
IRAN SANCTIONS ACT: PLANS FOR NEW TURKISH DEAL ON
Thu May 22 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCBSO567
OO RUEHBS
DE RUEHC #4797/01 1431352
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 221344Z MAY 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA IMMEDIATE 4431
INFO IRAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 STATE 054797 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG EPET ETTC IR PREL TU
SUBJECT: IRAN SANCTIONS ACT: PLANS FOR NEW TURKISH DEAL ON 
INVESTMENT IN IRAN'S ENERGY SECTOR 
 
REF: A. 08 ANKARA 711 
     ¶B. 07 ANKARA 1809 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action message; please see paragraphs 3 and 
4 below. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Washington thanks post for its reporting on Turkey's 
plans to develop Iranian South Pars gas for Turkish and 
European consumption.  On the margins of the April 17 
Economic Partnership Commission with Turkey, EEB DAS Hengel 
raised U.S. concerns about investments in the Iranian oil and 
gas sector with MFA Deputy Undersecretary Haydar Berk. Hengel 
underlined that U.S. policy opposing such investment had not 
changed and that there was much Congressional interest in 
reports of pending deals with Iran.  Hengel also noted our 
obligations under the Iran Sanctions Act.  Berk said 
emphatically that no investment deals with Iran were moving 
ahead and that Turkey would not do anything with Iran that 
would so clearly antagonize the U.S. and Israel.   At the 
same time, he commented that Turkey must think about its 
long-term energy requirements and therefore needs to continue 
to engage with the Iranians. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The Embassy is requested to reiterate our concerns 
at a senior level of the Turkish government to underscore the 
risks inherent in doing business with Iran, and to discourage 
the GOT from pursuing these negotiations further with Iran. 
 
¶4. (SBU) In raising our concerns, Embassy may draw as 
appropriate on the following points. 
 
-- We are concerned to hear of Turkish Petroleum Company's 
(TPAO) continued pursuit of a deal to develop Iran's South 
Pars gas fields, as well as plans to welcome an Iranian 
delegation in Ankara. 
 
-- Although not directly covered by current UN sanctions, new 
energy deals such as the one contemplated by TPAO undermine 
the concept reflected in the P-5 plus 1 proposal of offering 
enhanced economic and energy engagement as an inducement for 
Iranian compliance. 
 
-- TPAO's signing of new deals with Iran would be a serious 
blow to the international effort to bring Iran into 
compliance with UNSC resolutions regarding its nuclear 
activities. 
 
-- This is not the time for "business as usual" with Iran, 
and TPAO may want to reconsider the risks of being associated 
with the Iranian regime.  We believe that companies should 
ask themselves whether they really want to do business with a 
country that is already under sanctions from three UNSC 
Chapter 7 resolutions. 
 
-- The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) stated in October 
2007 that Iran's lack of a comprehensive anti-money 
laundering and combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) 
regime represents a significant vulnerability in the 
international financial system.  Further, on March 3, 2008, 
the United Nations Security Council passed Resolution 1803 
(UNSCR 1803), calling on all states to exercise vigilance 
over activities of financial institutions in their 
territories with all banks domiciled in Iran and their 
branches and subsidiaries abroad. 
 
-- On the financial front, the cost of doing business with 
Iran has increased.  Iran's credit risk rating has gone up, 
and many banks have stopped issuing letters of credit to 
companies seeking to do business with Iran.  Major 
international banks including Deutsche Bank, Dresdner Bank 
and Commerzbank have also scaled back or completely severed 
their Iran-related business. 
 
-- New energy investments in Iran also raise concern under 
the Iran Sanctions Act (ISA).  ISA is triggered when "a 
person has, with actual knowledge" made an investment of 
$20,000,000 or more "that directly and significantly 
contributed to the enhancement of Iran's ability to develop 
petroleum resources of Iran."  The ISA definition of 
"investment" encompasses, among other things, "entry into a 
contract that includes responsibility for the development of 
petroleum resources located in Iran." 
 
-- We hope your government understands our concerns.  In view 
of the serious negative consequences involved, we ask that 
you urge TPAO to reconsider going forward with this deal. 
 
-- More broadly, we hope the Turkish government will 
discourage Turkish firms from entering into new energy 
investments with Iran. 
 
¶5. (U) The Department would appreciate further information 
from post regarding the nature and terms of TPAO's planned 
investment. Please send any updates to Paul Malik in EUR/SE 
and Sonata Coulter in EEB/ESC/TFS. 
RICE