08STATE133455
SOMALIA - DECEMBER 16, 2008 COMMUNIQUE OF THE
Mon Dec 22 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO2591
PP RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHC #3455/01 3571624
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 221616Z DEC 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI PRIORITY 0156
INFO SOMALIA COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 STATE 133455 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EAID KPKO SO
SUBJECT: SOMALIA - DECEMBER 16, 2008 COMMUNIQUE OF THE 
INTERNATIONAL CONTACT GROUP 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY.  The International Contact Group (ICG) on 
Somalia met December 16 at the United Nations (UN) in New 
York to discuss Somalia's ongoing political process, security 
issues, reconstruction, and the humanitarian situation 
(reported septel).  The meeting concluded with the adoption 
of a communique noting a majority of participants favored a 
UN peacekeeping operation for Somalia.  The text of the 
communique is as follows.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (U) Begin communique text. 
 
International Contact Group on Somalia 
16 December 2008 
UN Headquarters (UNHQ), New York 
Communique 
 
The International Contact Group on Somalia met on 16 December 
2008 at the UNHQ in New York under the chairmanship of the UN 
Special Representative of the Secretary-General (SRSG) 
Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah. 
 
The Contact Group expresses its serious concern regarding the 
continued dispute between the leaders of Somalia's 
Transitional Federal Institutions, which only serves as a 
distraction from the political dialogue process.  The Contact 
Group calls on all parties to put aside disagreements and to 
work together in the interest of lasting peace and stability 
to implement the Djibouti Agreement and resume the 
constitutional process outlined by the Transitional Federal 
Charter. 
 
In this regard, the Contact Group welcomes the 26 October 
declaration between the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) 
and the Alliance for the Re-liberation of Somalia (ARS) to 
form a unity government.  This agreement paves the way for 
the creation of a unity government representing the majority 
of the Somali people, and is another key step in the Djibouti 
Peace Process.  The Contact Group urges all Somali parties to 
participate constructively in this process, which provides 
the only comprehensive framework for peace in Somalia. 
 
The Contact Group further welcomes the 26 October ceasefire 
agreement between the TFG and ARS and the 24 November 
establishment of a verification and monitoring mechanism 
(VMM) to promote a full ceasefire arrangement in Somalia. 
The Contact Group reiterates its commitment to provide 
financial and political support for this agreement and the 
work of the Joint Security Committee (JSC).  It also 
recognizes the need to support the UN-trained police force. 
 
The Contact Group expresses its great appreciation for the 
important work of the Africa Union Mission in Somalia 
(AMISOM) under difficult conditions and recognizes its urgent 
need for more resources and material support.  The Contact 
Group urges the international community to address this 
together with the need for an accelerated political process. 
The Contact Group recalls its support for the deployment of 
the stabilization force requested in the Djibouti Agreement. 
In that context various proposals were discussed including 
the deployment of a UN Peacekeeping Operation, for which 
significant support was expressed while a few delegations 
preferred that the issues be discussed in more depth. 
 
The Contact Group condemns the continuing violence in 
Somalia, particularly the taking of hostages and targeted 
attacks against civilians and humanitarian workers.  The 
Contact Group calls on all parties to immediately cease all 
hostilities and allow free and unhindered access for 
much-needed humanitarian aid. 
 
The Contact Group also condemns piracy, which was discussed 
in the Security Council in parallel with the Contact Group 
meeting and at a UN Political Office for Somalia 
(UNPOS)-convened meeting in Nairobi.  The Contact Group sees 
this as a result of the lawlessness and lack of effective 
government institutions and believes it illustrates the 
danger of ignoring a failed state.  The Contact Group 
therefore stresses the need for a comprehensive approach to 
address the underlying causes. 
 
The Contact Group expresses deep concern about the human 
rights situation in Somalia and calls for an end to the 
continuing culture of impunity.  Preparations should be made 
for reconstruction and development to give hope to Somalis, 
particularly the large number of unemployed youth. 
 
The next Contact Group meeting will be held at a date and 
 
STATE 00133455  002 OF 002 
 
 
location to be determined. 
 
Present at Meeting: Burundi, Canada, Djibouti, Egypt, 
Ethiopia, France, Germany, Italy, Kenya, Norway, Saudi 
Arabia, South Africa, Sweden, Tanzania, United Kingdom, USA, 
Yemen, African Union, European Union, European Commission, 
Organization of Islamic Conference, United Nations, World Bank 
 
¶3.    (U) End communique text. 
RICE