08STATE18360
UNSC INSTRUCTIONS FOR FEBRUARY 26 CONSULTATIONS
Sun Feb 24 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0004
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #8360 0552116
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 242113Z FEB 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 0000
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0000UNCLAS STATE 018360 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS, SENSITIVE 
NSC FOR KARA MCDONALD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC KPAL IS LE
SUBJECT: UNSC INSTRUCTIONS FOR FEBRUARY 26 CONSULTATIONS 
ON MIDDLE EAST 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Mission is instructed to draw from the points in 
para. 2 below in discussing events in the Middle East 
during the consultations to be held Tuesday morning, 
February 26 in the UN Security Council. 
 
¶2. (U) Begin points: 
 
The United States is committed to the process begun at 
Annapolis, and we continue to work to support progress on 
four tracks: implementing the Roadmap, building economic 
and institutional capacity, encouraging regional support, 
and promoting bilateral negotiations between the parties. 
I'd like to focus on some of the progress that has been 
made so far. 
 
On implementation of the Roadmap, General Fraser, who 
leads the U.S. effort to monitor progress on 
Roadmap implementation, has just returned from his second 
trip to the region for meetings with the parties. 
 
On the capacity building track, we are looking forward to 
the planned conference in Bethlehem in May that will 
discuss public-private partnerships, with an intent to 
attract investment in the area.  The conference that 
Germany recently offered to host will focus on increasing 
investment for capacity building in the Palestinian 
justice sector.  Both events reflect the determination of 
the international community to support the parties' 
efforts and help lay the foundation for a two-state 
solution to this conflict. 
 
On the bilateral negotiations track, both parties are 
committed to this process and we would like to applaud the 
vigorous discussions that are underway, as well as 
discourage any actions that could prejudice final status 
discussions.  We urge Israel and the Palestinians to work 
to improve conditions on the ground and build confidence. 
 
We remain concerned about the humanitarian plight of the 
Gaza Palestinians who continue to suffer under the Hamas 
regime which gained control as a result of an illegal coup 
against the legitimate institutions of the Palestinian 
Authority.  The rockets and mortars being fired into 
Southern Israel are unacceptable and must stop.  We 
welcome the ongoing dialogue between Egypt, Israel and the 
Palestinians on the humanitarian situation in Gaza and 
stress the importance of working to support their efforts 
to find a solution that: (1) ensures Israeli, Palestinian 
and Egyptian security, (2) meets the humanitarian needs of 
the Gazans, (3) puts the legitimate Palestinian Authority 
in control of Gaza borders and crossings, and 
(4) works to bring about conditions that will allow for 
the implementation of the 2005 Agreement on Movement and 
Access. 
 
The United States continues to provide basic humanitarian 
assistance to Palestinians living in Gaza via ongoing 
USAID programs and annual UN Relief and Works Agency 
(UNRWA) contributions.  In FY 2007, we contributed over 
$154 million to UNRWA. 
 
Turning to Lebanon, last week marked the anniversary of 
the assassination of former Prime Minister Hariri.  To 
demonstrate our commitment to promote justice in Lebanon, 
Secretary Rice announced that the U.S. intends to double 
 
SIPDIS 
its contribution to the Lebanon Tribunal from $7 million 
to $14 million, subject to the necessary Congressional 
notification procedures.  We welcome the Secretary 
General's statement of February 13 announcing the 
establishment of the Management Committee and outlining 
the steps that have been taken to make the Tribunal a 
reality.  The U.S. hopes the Tribunal will help deter 
further political assassinations, end an era of fear for 
Lebanese citizens and impunity for the perpetrators of 
these crimes, and help protect the sovereignty of 
Lebanon.  We urge all states to show their support for the 
Tribunal by making a contribution to fund future years' 
operations.  Even symbolic contributions are useful signs 
of the support of the international community for Lebanon. 
 
I would also like to recognize that Lebanon's parliament 
had been scheduled to meet today, February 26, to elect a 
new president for Lebanon.  The United States continues to 
support immediate presidential elections in Lebanon, held 
without foreign interference and precondition.  It is 
unacceptable that Syria, Iran, and their allies continue to 
interfere in Lebanon's political process and to block the 
election of a new President.  Their actions are destabilizing 
and threatening to Lebanon's security and to that of the 
region.  Until such time as a new president takes office, 
the United States has full confidence in the legitimate 
Lebanese Government in managing the affairs of the state 
and in the Lebanese Armed Forces in continuing to provide 
security. 
RICE