08STATE87197
OSCE/PERMANENT COUNCIL: STATEMENT ON RECENT
Wed Aug 13 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO9982
OO RUEHAST RUEHFL RUEHLA RUEHMRE RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHC #7197/01 2262359
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 132354Z AUG 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUEHVEN/USMISSION USOSCE IMMEDIATE 2850
INFO ORG FOR SECURITY CO OP IN EUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 STATE 087197 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OSCE PREL PBTS GG RS
SUBJECT: OSCE/PERMANENT COUNCIL: STATEMENT ON RECENT 
EVENTS IN GEORGIA 
 
¶1. (U) Post is authorized to deliver the following statement 
at the August 14, 2008, special meeting of the OSCE Permanent 
Council in Vienna. 
 
Begin text: 
 
Mr. Chairman, 
 
We appreciate so much that you scheduled this special session 
of the Permanent Council, and express our full support for 
the joint efforts of the Chairman in Office, Special Envoy 
Talvitie, and the European Union to resolve this crisis.  We 
deeply regret the loss of life  caused by this conflict, 
including the senseless civilian casualties, and our thoughts 
and prayers are with the victims and their families. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the United States continues to be deeply 
concerned by the recent events in Georgia,  when Russian 
forces moved beyond the zone of conflict in South Ossetia, 
overran the city of Gori, and attacked military installations 
near Tbilisi.  We also continue to be concerned by reports 
that in the same period, Russian troops moved beyond Abkhazia 
to the port of Poti and the city of Senaki and  in the Gori 
area.  We are gravely concerned by  reports of ethnic 
cleansing of Georgians in South Ossetia, and we urge the OSCE 
to investigate these and any other claims of such abuses. 
 
The aggressive military actions of the Russian Federation 
were completely out of proportion to events in South Ossetia 
and went beyond any reasonable steps to ensure the safety of 
civilians and peacekeepers, escalating to open hostilities 
with Georgia.  Russia,s actions represented a dramatic and 
brutal escalation of the conflict and were inconsistent with 
assurances that its objectives were limited to restoring the 
status quo ante that existed before fighting began August 6. 
 
Russian military action was also inconsistent with Russia,s 
peacekeeping role under the 1994 Moscow Agreement and with 
commitments made in Istanbul and under Article II of the UN 
Charter, which calls for all UN members to refrain from the 
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or 
political independence of any state. 
 
In our view, Russia acted outside international law and must 
be considered a party to the conflict.  It invaded a 
sovereign neighboring state and threatened a democratic 
government duly elected by its people.  We strongly condemn 
Russia,s actions, and we deplore the casualties and physical 
damage that resulted from the re-emergence of armed conflict 
on European soil.  Russia,s actions this week raised serious 
questions about its intentions in Georgia and the region. 
These actions have damaged substantially Russia,s standing 
in the world and jeopardized Russia,s relations with the 
United States and other countries. 
 
The United States welcomes the ceasefire mediated by the 
French President on behalf of the European Union.  We 
strongly urge the full cessation of hostilities and the 
withdrawal of those Russian military forces introduced after 
initiation of the current conflict from Georgian territory 
and a return to the military status quo as of August 6.   We 
urge Russia to demonstrate respect for Georgia,s territorial 
integrity.  We reaffirm our support for the sovereignty and 
territorial integrity of Georgia within internationally 
recognized borders. 
 
We note the current diplomatic efforts taking place in Moscow 
and Tbilisi and urge the parties to put in place a lasting 
cease-fire and reach a political solution to the conflict 
that ensures Georgian territorial integrity and sovereignty. 
A safe and secure humanitarian assistance corridor for the 
victims of these tragic events should be immediately 
established.  We urge Russia to lift its naval blockade of 
Georgia,s coast in order to allow food, fuel and 
humanitarian aid to reach civilians throughout the Caucasus. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we would like to express again our full support 
for the joint efforts of the Chairman in Office and the 
European Union to resolve this crisis.  The United States 
will work with the international community to ensure Georgia 
has all the assistance it needs to meet immediate 
humanitarian needs and, over the longer term, to rebuild its 
country and repair the damage done by recent assaults. 
 
We support fully the continued work of the OSCE Mission to 
Georgia and believe the OSCE can play a key role in further 
mediation, monitoring, and humanitarian work.  We applaud the 
 
STATE 00087197  002 OF 002 
 
 
efforts of Foreign Minister Stubb and call on OSCE Secretary 
General de Brichambaut, Ambassador Salber and Ambassador 
Hakala to develop and implement an OSCE plan that helps 
facilitate the delivery of international humanitarian 
assistance where OSCE can add value to efforts underway. 
OSCE as a promoter of peace and stability must respond 
immediately to the needs of the victims of this tragedy. 
 
In practical terms, we urge continued joint OSCE-EU 
involvement in negotiations to reach a lasting solution to 
this conflict.  We encourage consideration of enhanced OSCE 
border control activities and approval for an immediate 
increase in the number of OSCE Mission Monitoring Officers in 
South Ossetia.  We also urge consideration of EU proposals to 
send EU peacekeepers to the region. 
 
We believe these are practical steps the OSCE can take to 
help resolve this conflict.  We urge the OSCE and our 
Chairman in Office to implement them immediately. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman 
 
 
End text. 
RICE