08TELAVIV916
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Tue Apr 22 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #0916/01 1131019
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 221019Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6409
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 3718
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 0357
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 3990
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 4522
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 3732
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 2006
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 4480
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 1352
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 1796
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 8344
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 5825
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 0735
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 4854
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 6803
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 9568
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 000916 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Leading media reported that former U.S. President Jimmy Carter has 
passed a message to Israel from Hamas which offers tacit recognition 
and a 10-year truce if Israel withdraws to the pre-1967 borders. 
Khaled Mashal told reporters in Damascus yesterday that Hamas would 
accept a Palestinian state in the West Bank with Israel as its 
neighbor, but stressed that his group would not formally recognize 
it, a move that several media noted the U.S. (State Department 
Spokesman Tom Casey and White House Press Secretary Dan Perino) 
immediately dismissed as meaningless.  Media quoted Carter, who has 
concluded his nine-day trip, as saying that Hamas told him that a 
referendum on a peace deal must be preceded Palestinian 
reconciliation.  Ha'aretz quoted Sami Abu-Zuhri, the Hamas spokesman 
in Gaza, as saying that Palestinian refugees living in exile must be 
included in the voting -- a condition that could complicate approval 
of a deal.  Abu-Zuhri also noted that Hamas would regard any future 
Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza as "transitional." 
Carter told reporters that the Hamas leaders he met "didn't say 
anything about transitional."  Yediot front-paged the picture of a 
three-year-old boy from Kibbutz Gavim -- next to the border with 
Gaza -- who was wounded by a Palestinian rocket, under the headline: 
"Carter, Look into His Eyes." 
 
Israel Radio quoted the Egyptian daily Al-Ahram as saying that Egypt 
has prepared a "tahdiya" (truce) plan between Hamas and Israel.  The 
radio reported that the Kuwaiti newspaper Al-Rai detailed the terms 
of a gradual process with Hamas ceasing operations against Israel 
and Israel lifting the blockade of Gaza.  An exchange of prisoners 
would then be postponed to a later date. Egyptian sources told 
Al-Rai that Israel is insisting that a stop to arms smuggling be 
part of the deal.  Israel Radio quoted GOI officials in Jerusalem as 
saying that there is no agreement with Hamas and that the reports 
about it are exaggerated.  Ha'aretz reported that over the past few 
days Israel has noticed a shift in Hamas's position on a truce. 
Maariv reported on tension within the Hamas leadership, as Mashal, 
who "leads the group's moderate line" promised another letter from 
Shalit.  Maariv reported that Mahmoud Zahar directs the continuation 
of terrorist attacks and kidnapping attempts.  Yediot and other 
media quoted Gilad Shalit's family as saying that a letter from him 
is not enough. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Shas chair Eli Yishai was criticized 
yesterday by members of his party, who said it was strange that the 
party leader should be calling on Israel to stop negotiations with 
Abbas while saying that he is willing to meet with Mashal.  The 
Jerusalem Post quoted a "senior government source" as saying 
yesterday that it is extremely unlikely that Yishai could have met 
Carter without PM Ehud Olmert's tacit approval. 
 
Ha'aretz and other media quoted Carter as saying yesterday in 
Jerusalem that Syrian President Bashar Assad is "eager" to restart 
negotiations with Israel over the Golan and that he believes that 85 
percent of the differences between the two countries have already 
been resolved.  Makor Rishon-Hatzofe cited the "heavy concern" of 
right-wing politicians that Carter's visit will serve as a platform 
for a pullout from the Golan.  Ha'aretz cited Japanese media and 
Reuters reports as saying that the U.S. suspects that North Korea 
has transferred plutonium to Syria and that it will demand 
clarifications from North Korea at talks that begin today. 
 
Israel Radio quoted former Mossad director Ephraim Halevy as saying 
that the moment Hamas was allowed to participate in the Palestinian 
elections, its expansion was inevitable, and that Carter's role will 
be acknowledged in the future. 
 
Ha'aretz quoted a government official in Jerusalem as saying that 
Italy is expected to join an EU consensus on Iran's nuclear program, 
after dropping earlier objections last week, possibly paving the way 
for new sanctions.   Ha'aretz quoted the official as saying: "The 
outgoing government does not want to enable prime minister-designate 
Silvio Berlusconi to portray it as a government that went against 
the whole European Union."  Ha'aretz cited Jerusalem's belief that 
Berlusconi's return to office will strengthen the line for imposing 
additional sanctions on Iran. Ha'aretz quoted an Israeli source as 
saying that Italy's objection to widening the sanctions on Iran was 
also based on the close ties between the outgoing Italian 
administration and senior Iranian officials. 
 
Israel Radio cited the London-based Al-Hayat quoting Jordanian 
sources as saying that Jordanian King Abdullah II will ask President 
Bush during his upcoming visit to Washington to cancel his visit to 
Israel unless Israel and the Palestinians sign a declaration of 
principles this year. 
 
The Jerusalem Post cited a report produced for Israeli policymakers 
by the "semi-official" Intelligence and Terrorism Information 
Center.  The document says that Muslim anti-Semitism is growing in 
scope and extremism, to the point that it has become a credible 
strategic threat for Israel. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that five years after British filmmaker James 
Miller was fatally shot by IDF troops in Gaza, Israel is poised to 
pay the family some 12 million shekels (about $3.5 million) in 
compensation.  In return, the British government will close the case 
and not pursue extradition of any of the soldiers responsible. 
 
Yediot reported that pilot retention by the IAF has increased 
following a four-year decline. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted senior defense officials as saying that 
the Kerem Shalom crossing, which was targeted by Hamas in a double 
car bombing over the weekend, will likely remain closed until after 
Passover, which ends on Saturday.  Maariv reported that the Sufa 
crossing to Gaza will reopen today.  Yediot reported that Vice PM 
Haim Ramon is calling for cutting contacts with Gaza and stopping 
the transfer of food and fuel to the Strip. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted defense officials as saying yesterday that 
the IDF will allow Palestinian policemen to conduct patrols in 
villages throughout the West Bank armed with automatic weapons. 
 
Yediot reported that a survey commissioned by Vice PM Ramon found 
that 25% of the settlers needing to be removed in a future agreement 
with the Palestinians would voluntarily relocate for financial 
compensation. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that the Shin Bet charged yesterday that 
Palestinians from Gaza have bribed local doctors to declare they 
were seriously ill and required treatment in Israel. 
 
Ha'aretz and Israel Radio reported that UN Secretary-General Ban 
Ki-moon has demanded that all Lebanese militias be dismantled. 
Ha'aretz cited a report drafted by Ban, which says that a UNIFIL 
force was forcibly ousted when it discovered Hizbullah weapons. 
 
Yediot reported that Hamas survives on taxes levied on goods 
smuggled through tunnels from Egypt to Gaza. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that a group calling itself the Foundation for 
Israel's Lands is planning to resettle Moshav Atarot, north of 
Jerusalem, which was dismantled on May 17, 1948, due to attacks by 
the Jordanians. Atarot, which sits within Jerusalem's city limits, 
is now home to an industrial zone and a defunct airport. 
Resettlement is planned for May 18 by the group, headed by 
right-wing activist Aryeh Koenig.  Koenig says he has power of 
attorney from the owners of the land and their heirs to take over 
300 dunams (about 122 acres) of the 1,150 dunams of Jewish-owned 
land in the area.  The group intends to farm the land. 
 
Maariv reported that Barbra Streisand, who was scheduled to come to 
Israel to mark the country's 60th anniversary, has canceled her 
trip.  The newspaper cited the belief of President Shimon Peres' 
bureau that this is a protest against President Bush's visit. 
 
Yediot reported that Kirk and Michael Douglas have contributed to a 
new museum that will contain a model of the Jewish Temple.  The 
museum will be built opposite the Western Wall. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-------- 
Mideast: 
-------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Veteran journalist and anchor Dan Margalit wrote on page one of the 
independent Israel Hayom: "Peace was born out of an Israeli-Egyptian 
initiative.  Carter took a ride.  He hasn't stopped slandering 
Israel ever since." 
 
Dov Weisglass, who was former prime minister Ariel Sharon's top 
diplomatic advisor, wrote in the mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot: "An enemy whose very essence is the negation of Israel's 
existence as a Jewish state is not one who can be talked with." 
 
Liberal columnist and anchor Ofer Shelach wrote in the popular, 
pluralist Maariv: "[The Israeli leaders who boycotted Carter] don't 
realize, or pretend that they don't realize, that it was not Carter 
they boycotted this week but themselves." 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: "Too bad 
that in the twilight of his public life, Carter has undermined the 
relative moderates among the Palestinians and become an apologist 
for violent religious fanatics." 
 
Defense commentator Amir Oren wrote in the independent, left-leaning 
Ha'aretz: "Khomeini chose Reagan, and freed the hostages the moment 
he was sworn in as president.  Mashal [and other Hamas terrorists] 
are now working for McCain.  This may yet do some good for the hopes 
of peace." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "Carter -- a Sophisticated and Relentless Adversary" 
 
Veteran journalist and anchor Dan Margalit wrote on page one of the 
independent Israel Hayom (4/22): "Jimmy Carter didn't get everything 
he wanted from Mashal, but Hamas got what it wanted. The very 
presence in Damascus of a former president for talks with Mashal 
ended the boycott.  After it received this, Hamas no longer had an 
interest in giving Carter anything in exchange.  But his trip was 
mostly successful.  Carter functions as a serial provocateur who 
comes to the Middle East each time there is a consensus in the 
enlightened world to curb a wave of Palestinian terror threatening 
Israel.... For unknown reasons, which apparently relate to 
education, culture, and faith, Carter has always been a 
sophisticated and relentless adversary of Israel.  Already during 
his 1976 election campaign he provoked the Jewish voter with 
embarrassing remarks about the future of the Temple Mount.... Peace 
was born out of an Israeli-Egyptian initiative.  Carter took a ride. 
 He hasn't stopped slandering Israel ever since.... The worst 
appeared in his book that denigrates Israel as an apartheid state. 
Israel's right to defend itself is insignificant compared with the 
ambitions of Hamas, Hizbullah, Al-Qaida, and Iran.  Palestine cannot 
accept the notion of another Jewish settlement in its midst -- 
Carter views Israel as the embodiment of apartheid.  Israel's far 
Left treats him as a peace-lover." 
 
II.  "One Does Not Talk with Every Enemy" 
 
Dov Weisglass, who was former prime minister Ariel Sharon's top 
diplomatic advisor, wrote in the mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot (4/22): "In Israel, the slogan that we 'talk peace' only 
with an 'enemy' is increasingly being repeated.  Indeed, it is 
important to talk with an enemy when one can reasonably assume that 
a common platform will be found.  An enemy whose very essence is the 
negation of Israel's existence as a Jewish state is not one who can 
be talked with.  Peace with Israel contradicts the essence of 
Hamas's very existence, and extremist organizations do not tend to 
dismantle themselves willingly.  Therefore, any temporary 
arrangement is nothing but a place to rest and recuperate on the way 
to the final goal: the destruction of Israel as a state.... 
Regrettably, 'pragmatic' politicians offer 'to be practical' and 
speak with Hamas every morning.  And Hamas learns that patience, 
persistence and cool-headedness pay off.... The fact that Gilad 
Shalit is in captivity will be a burden on Israel in all its 
attempts to subdue Hamas.... Israel has an immediate interest in the 
soldier's return -- first of all because of the supreme moral 
obligation to do so, but no less in order to deprive Hamas of a 
valuable asset.... [A prisoner exchange] is liable to turn out in 
the end as the lesser of the evils that Hamas can bring about 
through its holding of Gilad." 
 
III.  "The Real Boycott" 
 
Liberal columnist and anchor Ofer Shelach wrote in the popular, 
pluralist Maariv (4/22): "[Jimmy] Carter came here as a peace envoy. 
 Perhaps confused, I'm not sure, but you are definitely entitled to 
think so.  Perhaps biased.  But in his travels between Damascus and 
Ramallah and Jerusalem, he did not carry bombs, but rather messages 
of negotiations.  The people with whom he spoke are those that 
Israel must conduct a dialogue with and doesn't want to.  This means 
that while maybe it is impossible to recognize officially the talks 
that Carter held or wanted to help conduct, this certainly does not 
justify the total boycott of someone who with his own hands, brought 
us the most important peace agreement in the history of our country. 
 [The Israeli leaders who boycotted Carter] don't realize, or 
pretend that they don't realize, that it was not Carter they 
boycotted this week but themselves, one day they will use the exact 
same explanations that he used or when they do exactly what he 
recommends doing, because they will have no other choice." 
 
IV.  "Hamas's Apologist" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized (4/22): 
"To [Jimmy] Carter's muddled thinking, Palestinians and Israelis are 
equally responsible for the conflict.  After all, Palestinians 
launch Qassam rockets into Israeli kindergartens, and Israelis live 
 
over the Green Line.... Carter professes to understand why Israel is 
'reluctant' to negotiate with Hamas.  The organization refuses to 
renounce violence, has 'yet' to recognize Israel and doesn't accept 
the 1993 Oslo Accords.  But Carter forgives all this.  He 
'understands' that Hamas feels 'some violence is necessary' to keep 
the Palestinian issue alive, and that when the organization is 
sidelined, the 'cycle of violence' is exacerbated.... To sum up 
Carter's assessment: Hamas wants peace.... That Hamas carried out an 
attack against the Kerem Shalom border crossing on Saturday, 
wounding 13 soldiers --  while its leaders were telling Carter they 
supposedly wanted peace -- is irrelevant, Carter insists, because 
the mission had been planned 'months in advance'.... Carter, of all 
people, ought also to know how far Israel is prepared to go for 
peace.  It ceded every inch of the Sinai to Anwar Sadat.  But the 
Egyptian leader first demonstrated that he genuinely sought an 
accommodation with Israel.  When King Hussein embraced Yitzhak 
Rabin, a peace treaty resulted 100 days later... Carter's 'study 
mission' 'failed to uncover the obvious: Hamas is a toxic opponent 
of peace.  Too bad that in the twilight of his public life, Carter 
has undermined the relative moderates among the Palestinians and 
become an apologist for violent religious fanatics." 
 
 
¶V.  "Hamas for McCain" 
 
Defense commentator Amir Oren wrote in the independent, left-leaning 
Ha'aretz (4/22): "The battle for Gaza will not be won at Kerem 
Shalom [along the Israel-Gaza border], but in Washington.  [John 
McCain] wanted to say, here is an evil square: 
Iran-Hamas-Carter-Obama.  He also meant: If Obama is like Carter, 
the weak loser, then McCain is like Reagan, his idol, and all that 
is left is to rerun the election results from 1980.... McCain, who 
visited rocket-bombarded Sderot, and expressed his identification, 
as a former prisoner of war, with the suffering of the families of 
the abducted IDF soldiers, represents a clear and firm line against 
terror.  The Democrats are tottering after him in half silence: 
According to their view, Al-Qaida also certainly had a moderate 
wing, which on September 11 supported knocking down only one of the 
twin towers in Manhattan.  Khomeini chose Reagan, and freed the 
hostages the moment he was sworn in as president.  Mashal [and other 
Hamas terrorists] are now working for McCain.  This may yet do some 
good for the hopes of peace." 
 
JONES