08TELAVIV1226
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Wed Jun 11 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #1226/01 1631032
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 111032Z JUN 08
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7047
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 3957
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 0593
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 4251
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 4763
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 3972
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 2265
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 4722
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 1592
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 2038
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 8581
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 6067
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 0971
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 5091
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 7045
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 9885
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 001226 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Israel is preserving maximum ambiguity about 
its intentions regarding the possibilities of tahdiya (truce) or a 
military operation in Gaza.  Ha'aretz reported that  Ahmed Yousef, 
an adviser to Hamas's Gaza leader Ismail Haniyeh, told the newspaper 
yesterday that Hamas expects a gesture from Israel because it 
delivered a letter from Gilad Shalit to his family.  Yousef was 
quoted as saying that as a gesture of goodwill, Israel could release 
women prisoners or minors to prove it is serious about a prisoner 
exchange.  Last night Israel TV quoted excerpts of Shalit's letter 
to his family.  "Dear Dad, Mom, my brother and sister, grandma and 
granddad and all the family. I am being treated well, although my 
health is very bad. I feel weakness and shortness of breath ... I 
ask you to do everything to return me home, otherwise it might end 
in tragedy. Israel must release Palestinian prisoners, because they 
also have families waiting for them at home, and then I will be able 
to come home quickly," the letter said.  Maariv reported that a 
senior Hamas official told the newspaper that Hamas does not intend 
to allow the Shalit family to pass on a reply to their son.  Yediot 
reported that residents of the "Gaza envelope" will demonstrate 
today in Jerusalem to demand that the government make its mind up 
about a truce with Hamas or a military operation in Gaza. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that PM Ehud Olmert  "is likely to 
initiate the end of his political career" today when he is expected 
to give the authorization necessary for a primary in Kadima to 
replace him.  Leading media reported that PM Ehud Olmert will hold a 
"crucial" meeting today with Kadima MKs Tzachi Hanegbi and Eli 
Aflalo to determine the framework and a possible date for a Kadima 
party primary.  The meeting follows an announcement by Likud 
yesterday that next Wednesday it would bring a bill before the 
plenum calling for the Knesset's dissolution in an effort to set a 
date for new elections, as early as November.  Also yesterday, 
coalition partners Labor and Shas announced they would support a 
proposal for the dissolution of the Knesset.  Ha'aretz reported that 
Labor faction head Eitan Cabel said that Kadima must replace Olmert 
by July.  In light of these developments, calls within Kadima have 
intensified for a primary within the party, as a way of staving off 
Labor's threat to support the dissolution of the Knesset.  Israel 
Radio reported that associates of FM Tzipi Livni stressed her 
determination in the matter and expressed her belief that Kadima 
will wilt if it does not hold primaries.  Meretz announces Tuesday 
that unless Kadima announced this month a date in the near future 
for a primary, it will also support the call to dissolve the 
Knesset.  Shas chairman and Industry and Trade Minister Eli Yishai 
reiterated his party's ultimatum yesterday that unless a decision is 
made by Wednesday to increase stipends for children, Shas will vote 
to dissolve the Knesset. 
 
Maariv quoted defense sources as saying that over the past few weeks 
Egypt's handling of weapons smuggling from Sinai to Gaza has 
significantly improved.  (Ha'aretz quoted Brig. Gen. Yossi Baidatz, 
who heads IDF Intelligence's research division, as saying that there 
has been some improvement in the matter.  However, the newspaper 
quoted him as saying at the cabinet meeting: "Activity is still a 
drop in the sea, and the smuggling is continuing,")   Ha'aretz 
reported that the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers has begun training 
Egyptian soldiers to locate and destroy tunnels, in an effort to 
improve the Egyptian army's ability to cope with arms-smuggling from 
Sinai to the Gaza Strip.  A second, larger group of Egyptian 
soldiers is also due to arrive shortly for training, which is taking 
place at a U.S. Army base in Texas. 
 
Electronic media quoted Palestinian sources as saying that a 
9-year-old Gazan girl was killed by fire from an IDF tank east of 
Khan Yunis, and that soldiers shot and killed a Hamas gunman. 
 
Yediot and Maariv reported that at Tuesday's cabinet meeting, PM 
Olmert expressed his concern that the next U.S. administration will 
be less friendly to Israel.  Yediot quoted Olmert as saying that the 
negotiations with the Palestinians should therefore be promoted. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon offered 
during a meeting of the Quartet in London several weeks ago to send 
a multinational force to Gaza to assist the security forces 
answerable to Salam Fayyad's PA government to operate the Rafah, 
Karni, and Sufa border crossings.  That way, Ban explained, the 
border crossings could be opened continually and fully.  According 
to a senior Israeli diplomatic source, the plan, known as "pockets 
of access to Gaza," originated with Fayyad and was recently adopted 
by the UN chief and presented to Secretary Rice and senior Russian 
and EU officials.  According to this plan, the multinational force 
sent to Gaza would operate in the "triangle" between the Rafah, 
Sufa, and Kerem Shalom crossings, and possibly also at Karni. 
 
The Jerusalem Post and Israel Radio reported on the visit to Israel 
of American Professors John Mearsheimer and Stephen Walt, the 
authors of "The Israel Lobby," which claims that AIPAC has 
manipulated American foreign policy.  They were invited by Uri 
Avnery's Gush Shalom movement and will speak at a Gush Shalom forum 
in Tel Aviv and at the Hebrew University. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that yesterday the Association of Civil 
Rights in Israel charged the army with barring West Bank 
Palestinians from using beaches along the northern shore of the Dead 
Sea.  A petition filed with the High Court of Justice against the 
IDF criticized the area's checkpoints as a means to keep 
Palestinians out so as not to discourage Israelis from swimming 
there and contributing to Jewish concessionaires. 
 
Yediot reported that the U.S. Justice Department has not yet acceded 
to Israel's request for a judicial inquiry to probe the path of 
Morris Talansky's contributions to Olmert and Talansky's legal and 
financial status.  Yediot cited the concert of Israeli law 
enforcement officers that American delays might obstruct the 
judicial process. 
 
Yediot reported that the Rafael Armament Development Authority will 
conduct a test of the Iron Dome anti-missile system today in 
southern Israel.  Ha'aretz quoted an Israeli security source as 
saying yesterday that the U.S. Defense Department is considering 
participating with Rafael on the Tamir rocket interceptor -- a part 
of the Iron Dome system.  The source was quoted as saying that 
Israel, which is now waiting for an answer from the Americans, would 
like to see them cover two-thirds of the development costs.  Defense 
officials expect it to be tested against a simulated Qassam rocket 
by the end of the year. 
 
Leading media reported that yesterday Syria's Deputy FM, Faisal 
Mekdad, played down chances of direct talks with Israel. 
 
Media reported that the Knesset approved yesterday a bill in first 
reading that exempts the state from responsibility for most damages 
suffered by Palestinians during and after the Intifada.  The bill, 
dubbed Intifada Law II, is meant to circumvent a High Court of 
Justice ruling that unanimously overturned a similar law two years 
ago.  The media also reported that yesterday the Knesset passed the 
first reading of a bill stating that people who have visited an 
enemy country cannot be elected to parliament.  If the bill, which 
has extensive backing in the Knesset, becomes law, the senior 
members of all the Arab parties would be disqualified.  Ha'aretz 
noted that the widespread support for the bill, which passed by a 
vote of 63-16, indicates that it has a good chance of becoming law 
by the end of the summer session -- in time to apply to contenders 
in the next general election.  Ha'aretz quoted National Religious 
Party Chairman MK Zevulun Orlev, who proposed the bill along with MK 
Esterina Tartman (Yisrael Beiteinu), as saying: "The bill is 
intended to stop Trojan horses from infiltrating the Israeli 
Knesset."  Arab MKs objected to the move.  Ha'aretz quoted MK Wasal 
Taha (Balad - National Democratic Assembly) as saying: "This is a 
black day for the Knesset and for democracy.  The proposal is 
directed against the leadership of the Arab public." 
 
Ha'aretz reported that the Jordanian Embassy in Tel Aviv has created 
a web site in Hebrew, for the first time since the Hashemite Kingdom 
signed a peace agreement with Israel in 1994. "The purpose of the 
web site is to address Israeli public opinion directly, in an effort 
to present the way Jordan sees the situation in the region," 
Ambassador Ali al-Ayid told Ha'aretz yesterday.  This is the only 
official Arab web site in Hebrew that is in regular operation.  The 
web site, www.jordanembassytelaviv.gov.jo, is administered by 
embassy staff and contains a wide variety of information.  Among the 
documents available on the site is a full translation into Hebrew of 
the Arab Peace Initiative as it was approved by the Arab League 
Summit in Beirut in 2002.  The site also contains the texts of all 
agreements between the two countries, including the 1994 peace 
treaty. 
 
Leading media reported that American entertainer Madonna intends to 
produce a documentary about the Arab-Israeli impasse.  Ha'aretz 
quoted her as saying that her film would focus on children. 
 
Yediot reported that an increasing number of gay Israeli couples are 
opting to avail themselves of American surrogate mothers to create a 
family. 
 
Major media cited an Israel Democracy Institute poll that found that 
90% of the public believe that Israel's leadership is riddled with 
corruption..  Public trust in the office of prime minister was only 
17%.  Public support for the Supreme Court fell from 61% approval in 
2007 to 49% this year.  The most favored institution was the IDF, 
trusted by 71% of respondents. 
 
-------- 
Mideast: 
-------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: " In the 
twilight of his term, the Prime Minister should not attempt to take 
the country into another military operation.  The Egyptian-sponsored 
cease-fire must not be delayed." 
 
Meretz-Yahad Party Chairman Yossi Beilin wrote in Ha'aretz: "The 
biggest idiot in Islamic Jihad understands that Israel can wipe Gaza 
off the face of the earth. This realization does not require a 
military operation in which victory over the militias will be, at 
best, imperfect." 
 
Nationalist writer Emuna Elon commented in the independent Israel 
Hayom: "[Don't] let the U.S., and the world that supposedly wants to 
help, neglect the real problems and abandon both the hungry, 
despairing population of Gaza and the citizens of Israel to the 
mercies of Hamas." 
 
 
 
 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "No Good Reason for Gaza Op" 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (6/11): "The 
Prime Minister's skills as a military leader were tested in the 
Second Lebanon War and documented in the Winograd Report.  Israel 
paid dearly for the decision to go to war against Hizbullah in July 
2006, a price that is still difficult to gage in terms of loss of 
deterrence.... Now on the agenda is a justified military action in 
Gaza.  The overabundance of talk about a major operation, one that 
alternately approaches and recedes depending on the political 
predicament of members of the government, broadcasts neither 
strength nor deterrence, but rather indecision.  There is no 
persuasive reason for a military action, except the fact that we 
cannot accept continued firing on Israel, and Hamas's continued 
arming. In contrast, there are a number of reasons for a cease-fire, 
however temporary.  The main reason is that Hamas can no more be 
eradicated than could Hizbullah..... Indifference to the firing on 
the communities around the Gaza Strip is intolerable not only 
because of the suffering of the people there, but also because the 
country must not become accustomed to such blows to its sovereignty 
and citizens.  A border means a line of defense for a country's 
inhabitants; otherwise it has no point..... The concern over a 
cease-fire with Hamas is understandable: Egypt might not protect the 
crossings, and Hamas will continue to grow stronger.  However, Egypt 
might also want to prolong the calm and try to ensure that the 
agreement with Hamas -- which puts its prestige to the test -- will 
be kept to the letter.  In any case, calm should be tried and its 
success judged with the passage of time, rather than trying war and 
judging its outcome after hundreds of casualties.  In the twilight 
of his term, the Prime Minister should not attempt to take the 
country into another military operation.  The Egyptian-sponsored 
cease-fire must not be delayed." 
 
II.  "A Moment before the Obvious" 
 
Meretz-Yahad Party Chairman Yossi Beilin wrote in Ha'aretz (6/11): 
"In a few more days, something will apparently happen that almost no 
one wants, but no one has enough courage to prevent.... [After the 
large-scale military operation], obviously, the decision-makers will 
remember that they had completely forgotten to prepare an exit plan 
from the Gaza Strip.... It is still possible to try to reach a 
cease-fire instead of the war, and to overcome the primitive thought 
that the cease-fire must be preceded by a major strike so as to 
rehabilitate deterrence.'  The biggest idiot in Islamic Jihad 
understands that Israel can wipe Gaza off the face of the earth. 
This realization does not require a military operation in which 
victory over the militias will be, at best, imperfect." 
 
III.  "Forethought First" 
 
Nationalist writer Emuna Elon commented in the independent Israel 
Hayom (6/11): "Don't you dare bring our sons back into the accursed 
Gaza Strip; donQt you dare risk their lives with another tough 
military operation, with the terrible rules of engagement that you 
succeeded in creating; donQt you dare use our children in order to 
prove, supposedly, something to Hamas, to public opinion, or to 
yourselves.  Bring us back into Gaza only if you have a clear plan, 
for a change.  Demand that our sons sacrifice their lives only if 
you know exactly what you will do after the cease-fire.... Don't you 
dare go in and fight there only to leave the moment Hamas 
'surrenders' and announces, via the Egyptians, its willingness to 
accept IsraelQs conditions for a cease-fire.  There is no sense in 
gambling with Gilad ShalitQs life, there is no sense in giving Hamas 
an excuse to intensify, in response to the IDFQs operation, the 
rocket fire on our communities, and there is also no sense in taking 
a barrage of international condemnations for harming the Palestinian 
population if you let terrorism make the rules once again.  If, once 
again, you leave the majority of GazaQs residents in refugee camps, 
which are an infrastructure of Palestinian terrorism.  If, once 
again, you let the U.S., and the world that supposedly wants to 
help, neglect the real problems and abandon both the hungry, 
despairing population of Gaza and the citizens of Israel to the 
mercies of Hamas." 
 
JONES