08TELAVIV114
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Mon Jan 14 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #0114/01 0141242
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 141242Z JAN 08
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4976
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 3255
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 9914
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 3459
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 4022
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 3280
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 1432
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 4016
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 0863
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 1337
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 7897
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 5369
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 0281
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 4409
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 6353
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 8827
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 000114 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Leading media reported that PM Ehud Olmert and Defense Minister Ehud 
Barak are at loggerheads over the evacuation of West Bank outposts. 
Ha'aretz reported that sources close to Barak told the newspaper 
that Barak has reached an agreement with leaders of the settlement 
movement for the peaceful evacuation of 18 outposts in the West 
Bank. The sources warned that PM Olmert's "rash" intention to 
forcefully uproot an outpost near Ramallah may jeopardize the deal. 
Olmert himself said Sunday that not evacuating outposts was 
"disgraceful."  Ha'aretz quoted Barak's office as saying that the 
negotiations with the settler leaders involved 26 outposts which 
were set up since March 2001.  For its part, The Jerusalem Post 
reported that senior defense officials close to Barak accused Olmert 
of holding up a detailed plan to remove them. 
 
On Sunday The Jerusalem Post quoted PM Olmert's spokesman Mark Regev 
as saying on Saturday that Israel and the U.S. are "on the same page 
regarding the gravity of the Iranian nuclear threat and their 
commitment to thwart it.  On Sunday Maariv reported that President 
Bush concluded his visit to Israel without receiving any of the 
information that is known here about IranQs efforts to develop 
nuclear weapons -- because officials in the political echelon and 
security establishment do not want to appear to be pushing the 
Americans into military action.  Yediot reported that late this 
month Israel and the U.S. will reassess their joint policy vis-a-vis 
the Iranian threat and discuss means to intensify sanctions against 
Iran.  The teams will be headed by Transportation Minister Shaul 
Mofaz and Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Nicholas 
Burns. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that ahead of the meeting between PM Ehud Olmert 
and Vice Premier Avigdor Lieberman on Tuesday, which is meant to 
clarify Lieberman's threat to leave the coalition if core issues are 
discussed, sources close to Olmert dismissed any substantive 
differences between the two.  Ha'aretz and The Jerusalem Post 
reported that PM Olmert renewed efforts to bring United Torah 
Judaism into his coalition last week as a hedge in case Lieberman 
should leave.  Ha'aretz wrote that Sunday's announcement that 
Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni and PA chief negotiator Ahmed Qurei 
would begin talks on the core issues, suggests that Olmert is not 
impressed by Lieberman's threats. 
 
On Sunday Maariv quoted reliable Palestinian and Egyptian sources 
close to the negotiations as saying that in the near future, Israel 
is supposed to carry out a dramatic confidence building measure by 
freeing a large group of Hamas prisoners "with blood on their hands" 
in order to move forward the deal to release Gilad Shalit.   This 
group of 80 to 100 prisoners were included on the original list of 
prisoners that Hamas gave to Israel. 
 
Israel Radio quoted PA Chairman [President] Mahmoud Abbas as saying 
on Sunday that the Palestinian refugees are only visitors in the 
Arab countries, and that they should be returned to their homeland. 
 
Major media reported that in a raid in the Gaza Strip -- near the 
home of Hamas PM Ismail Haniyeh -- on Sunday, IDF troops killed 
three Palestinians (according to Israel Radio, including a senior 
Fatah activist and a Popular Resistance Committees militant).  Over 
the weekend media reported that the IAF struck and killed two Hamas 
militants in the southern Gaza Strip on Saturday. 
 
Ha'aretz quoted Shin Bet chief Yuval Diskin as saying at Sunday's 
cabinet meeting that Israeli security forces killed 810 Palestinians 
in the Gaza Strip in 2006 and 2007.  He estimated that some 200 of 
those killed were not clearly linked to terrorist organizations. 
However, an examination by Ha'aretz reveals that the number of 
Palestinians killed by Israeli security forces was 816 over those 
two years, and that of them, 360 were civilians not affiliated with 
any armed organizations.  Internal Security Minister Avi Dichter, 
also present at the briefing, said that "about 5 percent of the 
militants in the Gaza Strip have been killed," adding that their 
number today is estimated at some 20,000.  The Jerusalem Post quoted 
Dichter as saying that the IDF's tactics in Gaza are not working. 
 
Over the weekend The Jerusalem Post reported on a campaign targeted 
by feminist Jewish activists against the U.S. magazine Ms. after it 
refused to run an ad featuring influential Israeli women because it 
was "too controversial." 
 
Over the weekend media quoted Ismail Haniyeh as saying on Friday 
that President Bush's visit to the region proved his bias toward 
Israel and hurt Palestinian aspirations for a state of their own. 
Ha'aretz quoted Shin Bet chief Yuval Diskin as saying on Sunday 
during a briefing to the Knesset's Foreign Affairs and Defense 
Committee that Hamas managed to smuggle $100 million into the Gaza 
Strip in recent weeks.  He was quoted as saying that the funds were 
smuggled into the Strip by hundreds of pilgrims returning from the 
hajj in Mecca. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted Israeli defense officials as saying on 
Sunday that the defense establishment's decision to rescind a 
decision to limit the supply of industrial diesel to the Gaza Strip 
is part of a plan to end ties between Israel and the Hamas-run 
territory.  Ha'aretz reported that Israel is considering the 
proposal of PA Prime Minister Salam Fayyad to transfer control of 
the crossings into the Gaza Strip to forces loyal to the PA and 
Fatah. 
 
On Sunday Ha'aretz reported that Palestinian landowners on whose 
property the West Bank settlement of Homesh was constructed are 
demanding 40 million shekels (around $10.5 million) in compensation 
and the right to access their land.  The state is trying to reach an 
out-of-court settlement to avoid a setting a precedent. 
 
Over the weekend media reported that a satellite photograph of a 
Syrian site bombed by Israel in September appears to show new 
construction that resembles the site's former main building. 
 
On Sunday Ha'aretz pointed at Tony Blair's poor achievements six 
months after entering his post as the Quartet's envoy to the Middle 
East. 
 
On Sunday Ha'aretz reported that the government is looking for 
Arabic translators to create an Arabic version of its website. 
 
Leading media reported that Daniel Barenboim, the world-renowned 
Israeli pianist and conductor, has taken Palestinian citizenship, 
and quoted him as saying that he believed that his new status could 
serve a model for peace between the two peoples. 
 
-------- 
Mideast: 
-------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
The Director of the Interdisciplinary Center's Global Research in 
International Affairs Center, columnist Barry Rubin, wrote in the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post: "Bush's new policy may be 
a big change for him but, after all, he is merely making the same 
analysis and offering the same terms as his predecessor." 
 
The Jerusalem Post editorialized: "Why would Mahmoud Abbas [the 
'right of return'] if even the U.S. will not routinely explain that 
this demand is not just another negotiating item but a denial of 
Israel's right to exist?" 
 
Senior Middle East affairs analyst Zvi Bar'el wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "How is it that the Arab states 
have still not recognized the existence of Israeli supporters of 
peace?  Where is their Arab partner?" 
 
Senior columnist Haggai Huberman wrote on page one of the 
nationalist, Orthodox Makor Rishon-Hatzofe: "The vision outlined by 
the American President does not conform to the vision of the Arab 
world: a Middle East without a Jewish state." 
 
Veteran journalist Hemmi Shalev wrote in the independent Israel 
Hayom: "It seems that the true goal of Bush's current visit to the 
Middle East was an attempt to minimize the terrible damage that was 
caused by the American intelligence estimate, which stipulated that 
Iran had stopped its nuclear program." 
 
Columnist and former Meretz Party Chairman Yossi Sarid wrote in 
Ha'aretz: "Anyone who is elected in America will maintain the 
friendship with Israel and treat it as an ally.  But it would be a 
welcome change for the friendship not to be a blind one, and for the 
alliance not to lead to a mishap." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "Here We Go Round the Mulberry Bush" 
 
The Director of the Interdisciplinary Center's Global Research in 
International Affairs Center, columnist Barry Rubin, wrote in the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post (1/14): "Hundreds, perhaps 
thousands, of articles have been written on President George Bush's 
visit to the Middle East and the Israeli-Palestinian issue.  And not 
a single one that I've seen has mentioned the ridiculously obvious 
point that goes so far in explaining everything.  To paraphrase the 
nursery rhyme, Bush is merely taking us around the mulberry bush 
once more.  Namely, this is an exact replay of Bill Clinton's 
presidency.... Bush's new policy may be a big change for him but, 
after all, he is merely making the same analysis and offering the 
same terms as his predecessor.  It was an understanding of what went 
wrong with Clinton's thinking and his generous bid -- in part taught 
them by Clinton itself -- that explains the Bush administration's 
lower level of effort for most of its time in office.  What does 
Arafat's situation and behavior tell us about those of his 
successors today?  In all but a single respect -- and that one only 
apparently -- things are worse today.... The apparent improvement 
regarding PA leader Mahmoud Abbas is that he is more willing to make 
peace.  Yet this is more than counterbalanced by his extraordinary 
weakness.  Not only has Hamas seized control of the Gaza Strip, 
Abbas also does not have control over Fatah itself.  If anything, 
Palestinian attitudes, where they count in terms of public politics 
and not merely personal opinions, are even more extreme.... Of 
course nothing will happen.  But the real question is: Will anything 
be learned?" 
 
II.  "10 Essential Words" 
 
The Jerusalem Post editorialized (1/13): "'The agreement must 
establish Palestine as a homeland for the Palestinian people, just 
as Israel is a homeland for the Jewish people.'- US President George 
¶W. Bush, January 10.... The significance of Bush's 10 critical 
words, uttered in Jerusalem on Thursday night as the President 
declared his confidence that a peace treaty could be signed before 
the end of his term in January 2009, may be that he has realized 
that it is not enough for the U.S. to leave the 'right of return' as 
a final-status issue.  This demand, he was making plain, must be 
taken off the table now, because it stands in fundamental 
contradiction to the entire two-state concept.  The more clearly and 
forcefully Bush repeats these 10 words, the better the chances that 
the agreement in whose achievement he professes such confidence will 
indeed be reached.  This is so because no Palestinian leader can 
reach agreement with Israel without preparing his people and the 
Arab world for abandoning the demand of 'return.'  And why would 
Mahmoud Abbas do that if even the U.S. will not routinely explain 
that this demand is not just another negotiating item but a denial 
of Israel's right to exist?" 
 
III.  "The Arabs Should Stop Whining" 
 
Senior Middle East affairs analyst Zvi Bar'el wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (1/14): "It is toward Saudi 
Arabia that the Egyptian intellectual and researcher, Mamoun Fandy, 
directed his incisive article: 'The Cards are in the Hands of the 
Arabs.'  The article appeared in the daily Ash-Sharq Al-Awsat, which 
is controlled by a Saudi prince who rules a large media empire in 
the Middle East.  If the ties between Saudi Arabia and the United 
States are so close and warm, why are the Arabs unable to take 
advantage of this to further their interests, Fandy asks.  Why does 
Israel succeed in promoting its narrative, arguing that it is alone 
in its desire for peace, while the Arabs want war?.... [Israeli] 
supporters [of peace] need to rally to Fandy's call and his 
criticism of the Arabs -- because those favoring peace sorely need 
an Arab partner, a king or a president, who will make the desired 
dramatic move.  One could ask them to consider another question in 
this regard: How is it that the Arab states have still not 
recognized the existence of Israeli supporters of peace?  Where is 
their Arab partner?" 
 
IV.  "The Bush Vision Contradicts the Arab Vision" 
 
Senior columnist Haggai Huberman wrote on page one of the 
nationalist, Orthodox Makor Rishon-Hatzofe (1/13): "The President of 
the United States left Israel on Friday, leaving in his wake a 
dazzling 'vision' that is to be implemented within a single year: 
the establishment of an independent Palestinian state alongside 
Israel.  But the vision outlined by the American President does not 
conform to the vision of the Arab world: a Middle East without a 
Jewish state.  The American President's visit should be considered 
to be one of the Palestinians' greatest successes in the past number 
of years.  The American President left them a slew of gifts, such as 
a demand to end the Israeli 'occupation,' a Palestinian state based 
on the 1967 lines with a capital in Jerusalem.  Bush underscored 
that he was talking about a state with territorial contiguity.  Bush 
used Palestinian rhetoric for first time when he spoke about the 
'right of return' instead of the refugee problem.  But after all 
that, the Palestinians and the Arab world are furious with Bush 
because he spoke about a 'Jewish state.'  We would do well were we 
to listen to what they say. Ambassador Mohammed Sabih, who is 
responsible for the Palestinian issue in the Arab League, said on 
Thursday that Bush's statements contradicted the United States' 
human rights policy." 
 
¶V.  "Bush and Out" 
 
Veteran journalist Hemmi Shalev wrote in the independent Israel 
Hayom (1/13): "Aside from bolstering Ehud OlmertQs political 
standing -- an effort that Bush made in the course of a dinner at 
the Prime Minister's Residence last week with the delicacy and tact 
becoming of a Texas rancher -- it seems that the true goal of Bush's 
current visit to the Middle East was an attempt to minimize the 
terrible damage that was caused by the American intelligence 
estimate, which stipulated that Iran had stopped its nuclear 
program.  That document cast the United States as an unreliable 
crutch that would never attack Iran.  Ever since, the Arabs, first 
and foremost Egypt, have been fawning on Tehran in hope of appeasing 
it." 
 
VI.  "Nice Things in America, Which Would Do Us Well" 
 
Columnist and former Meretz Party Chairman Yossi Sarid wrote in 
Ha'aretz (1/13): "It is not yet clear whether Obama's candidacy will 
come to full fruition, even though it has already produced early 
fruits.  But the alarm bells are already ringing in Jerusalem: 
'Israel is worried about Obama.'  The media reports: 'Senior 
government officials in Israel fear his meteoric rise.'  And the 
main reasons for this concern, it is reported, are Obama's support 
for dialogue with Iran and his weak connections with the Jewish 
lobby in Washington.  Don't worry. Anyone who is elected in America 
will maintain the friendship with Israel and treat it as an ally. 
But it would be a welcome change for the friendship not to be a 
blind one, and for the alliance not to lead to a mishap.  It is 
worthwhile conducting talks with Iran, just as much as it is 
worthwhile conducting talks with Syria, just as it was worthwhile 
talking with Libya and North Korea.  And it is not worthwhile 
dancing like a trained bear on every issue according to the tune of 
the American Israel Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC) or the 
evangelical pastors." 
 
JONES