08TELAVIV548
EMBASSY TEL AVIV RESPONSE FOR TRAFFICKING IN
Mon Mar 10 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0167
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #0548/01 0701342
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 101342Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE
RUEHAR/AMEMBASSY ACCRA 0093
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4287
RUEHAE/AMEMBASSY ASMARA 0027
RUEHBK/AMEMBASSY BANGKOK 1042
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0834
RUEHBM/AMEMBASSY BUCHAREST 1591
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 1744
RUEHCH/AMEMBASSY CHISINAU 0177
RUEHLM/AMEMBASSY COLOMBO 0354
RUEHDL/AMEMBASSY DUBLIN 0112
RUEHKT/AMEMBASSY KATHMANDU 0474
RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0029
RUEHKV/AMEMBASSY KYIV 0028
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 1128
RUEHML/AMEMBASSY MANILA 0267
RUEHSK/AMEMBASSY MINSK 0145
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 1985
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA 1091
RUEHZP/AMEMBASSY PANAMA 0011
RUEHNT/AMEMBASSY TASHKENT 0203
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 9250
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 37 TEL AVIV 000548 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USAID 
 
G/TIP, G, INL, DRL, PRM, NEA/RA, NEA/IPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF ELAB IS
SUBJECT: EMBASSY TEL AVIV RESPONSE FOR TRAFFICKING IN 
PERSONS REPORT 
 
REF: A. STATE 2731 
     ¶B. INL G/TIP GAYATRI PATEL EMAILS 
     ¶C. GAYATRI PATEL - ALAN HOLST TELEPHONE 
        CONVERSATION MARCH 7 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  001.2 OF 037 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) This cable is Embassy Tel Aviv's input for the 
2008 Trafficking in Persons (TIP) Report per Reftel A. 
Embassy point of contact is Alan Holst, telephone (972) 
3-519-7437, fax 519-7484, email holstar@state.gov.  The 
Government of Israel (GOI) TIP Report coordinator was 
hospitalized, and Post was granted extra time to prepare 
this response in order to allow for the GOI official, 
upon her return, to organize and submit the GOI's input, 
and for Post to analyze and incorporate that input. 
(Reftel B)  Nomination of Heroes and Best Practices will 
be forthcoming in a separate cable. 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
Overview of a country's activities to eliminate 
trafficking in persons 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶2.  Responses to questions in paragraph 27, section A of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. Is the country a country of origin, transit, and/or 
destination for internationally trafficked men, women, or 
children? 
 
Although numbers have declined dramatically from the 
past, Israel remains a destination country for women 
trafficked internationally for the purpose of 
prostitution.  NGOs reported that some Israeli women were 
trafficked to other countries for the purpose of 
prostitution. NGOs allege that an unknown number 
(estimates vary) of foreign workers are trafficked for 
the purpose of labor, although reliable quantification of 
those charges remains elusive. 
 
-- B. Provide, where possible, numbers or estimates for 
each group; how they were trafficked, to where, and for 
what purpose. 
 
Most sex trafficking victims are women age 18 to 35.  The 
government reported that that police estimates were "a 
few hundred" victims in 2007, but no exact figures are 
available.  In 2007, 75 trafficked women were housed at 
the Maagan shelter, with 42 women and 7 children resident 
at the shelter as of March 1, 2008.  The former Soviet 
Union (FSU) remains the main source of sex trafficking 
victims, with Ukraine, Moldova, Russia and Uzbekistan the 
most common countries of origin.  NGO Isha L'Isha Haifa 
Feminist Center (Isha L'Isha) reported 5 sex trafficking 
victims from China, and a "suspicion" that some women 
from the Philippines had been trafficked for the purpose 
of prostitution. 
 
According to the government, most of the sex trafficking 
victims were smuggled across the Israel-Egyptian border, 
while a limited number arrived through Ben-Gurion airport 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  002.2 OF 037 
 
 
either pretending to be tourists or using false marriage 
documents obtained from Israeli nationals.  Most women 
were transferred from the Egyptian border directly to the 
Tel Aviv area, although some were taken to brothels or 
other sex establishments in other parts of Israel. 
According to evidence brought before the subcommittee 
that drafted the recommendations for the National Plan to 
Combat Trafficking for Prostitution, most trafficking 
victims are now found in call-girl establishments rather 
than in brothels. 
 
According to NGO Hotline for Migrant Workers (Hotline), 
some Israeli women were trafficked to Canada and Ireland, 
which would make Israel a country of origin as well.  The 
Task Force on Human Trafficking (TFHT) identified England 
and Canada as the destination countries for trafficked 
Israeli women.  No estimates were available on the number 
of Israeli women trafficked to other countries, but we 
received no reports to indicate it was more than a few 
individuals. 
 
The extent of labor trafficking is disputed, with 
government and NGO estimates (and even estimates from 
different NGOs) often reaching very different 
conclusions.  Two of the reasons for these discrepancies 
are the problems of locating potential victims (many are 
either in private homes as domestic servants or in 
isolated areas as agricultural workers) and the 
difficulty in soliciting testimony from the workers even 
when they are located.  TFHT also complained that lack of 
enforcement of labor trafficking laws by Israeli 
authorities limits collection of reliable data. 
 
The main countries of origin for foreign workers are 
China, the Philippines and Thailand, which are likely the 
main countries of origin for labor trafficking victims as 
well. 
 
Histadrut, the national federation of labor unions, 
reported that 50 migrant workers were smuggled into 
Israel from Egypt.  Histadrut agreed "there is no doubt" 
that migrant workers - as well as Israeli workers - were 
sometimes deprived of their rights.  Nonetheless, 
Histadrut maintained that Israel is not a destination 
country for trafficked men and women.  Histadrut noted 
that foreign workers are able to file complaints against 
their employers and "attain their full labor rights and 
benefits" and differentiated between discrimination 
against foreign workers, which they acknowledged, and 
trafficking or forced labor.  Histadrut reported that 20 
foreign workers were trafficked in the past five years - 
they did not clarify when within that period the workers 
were trafficked - due to debt bondage, withholding of 
passports, and other actions resulting in forced labor. 
Histadrut noted that they were aware of these individuals 
because they came to Histadrut's offices to complain 
against their employers. 
 
NGOs have acknowledged that in many cases the workers 
fear losing their jobs, and thus their means of paying 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  003.2 OF 037 
 
 
back large debts they incurred to secure the job and 
travel to Israel.  This often prevents labor trafficking 
victims from speaking out against their treatment.  The 
government has pointed out that in many cases the 
workers, despite the harsh conditions of their 
employment, do not see themselves as victims because they 
left even worse conditions and/or wages in their home 
country and would not voluntarily leave their job in 
Israel.  The government has therefore maintained that, 
for a variety of reasons, it is difficult to determine 
which foreign workers are in fact trafficking victims, 
and that while labor trafficking certainly exists in 
Israel, it is very problematic to determine its 
magnitude. 
 
According to most estimates, very few labor trafficking 
victims entered Israel through illegal means.  Almost all 
labor trafficking victims entered Israel with visas.  The 
Ministry of Industry, Trade and Labor (MITL) issued 
92,344 permits for employment of foreign workers in 
various fields.  Based on the number of trafficking 
victims it assisted in 2007, Hotline estimated that 1.2 
percent of migrant workers become labor trafficking 
victims - i.e., approximately 1,100 new labor trafficking 
victims in 2007. 
 
-- C. Does the trafficking occur within the country's 
borders? 
 
Some Israeli women are trafficked internally.  Isha 
L'Isha noted a "sharp" increase of internally trafficked 
women in Israel.  According to Hotline, most victims of 
labor trafficking entered the country legally and were 
later trafficked.  In the words of the GOI response, 
"Trafficking is not an isolated event occurring at one 
specific point of time and place; it is a chain of events 
resulting in the trafficking of a person.  Some elements 
may occur in Israel, while others occur in the origin and 
transit countries.  In this sense, most of the 
trafficking cases include elements committed within 
Israel." 
 
-- D. Does it occur in territory outside of the 
government's control (e.g. in a civil war situation)? 
 
Isha L'Isha charged that sex trafficking to and from the 
Palestinian Authority has been going on for many years, 
but said that they were not yet in a position to estimate 
the amount. 
 
-- E. Are any estimates or reliable numbers available as 
to the extent or magnitude of the problem? 
 
Hotline theorized that sex trafficking of foreign women 
decreased and moved underground.  Hotline reported that 
it assisted 49 women in 2007 who had been trafficked for 
sex, but that all had been trafficked before 2007.  See 
paragraph 2, section B for additional estimates.  NGO Kav 
LaOved estimated that "at least" several hundred migrant 
workers "suffer from working conditions which constitute 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  004.2 OF 037 
 
 
slavery" and that "several thousand are subjected to 
forced labor." 
 
-- F. What is (are) the source(s) of available 
information on trafficking in persons or what plans are 
in place (if any) to undertake documentation of 
trafficking? 
 
There is no comprehensive report on the numbers, 
demographics or circumstances of labor trafficking 
victims, nor is any currently planned by the GOI, NGOs or 
IOs, to the best of our knowledge.  Sources include 
government and NGO estimates, media reports (also 
estimates), and data from organizations like the Maagan 
shelter's annual report on the number of victims they 
assisted, although such data does not include 
undocumented cases.  NGO Machon Toda'a collected most of 
its information through contact via the internet.  The 
government reported that the Intelligence Department of 
the Israeli Police conducted routine surveys, reports and 
analysis of trafficking, and that the Commissioner of 
Police and the Minister of Public Security received 
monthly reports on police activity in trafficking and 
related offenses.  Hotline reported that police stopped 
conducting brothel raids and consequently no arrests of 
traffickers and little or no contact with victims by 
Hotline. 
 
-- G. How reliable are the numbers and these sources? 
 
The sources are reliable, but the numbers are often 
estimates and therefore vary greatly, particularly in the 
case of labor trafficking. 
 
-- H. Are certain groups of persons more at risk of being 
trafficked (e.g. women and children, boys versus girls, 
certain ethnic groups, refugees, etc.)? 
 
For internal trafficking, Israeli women from the lower 
socio-economic strata, often immigrants from the FSU, 
minors, and drug addicts are most at risk, according to 
the government.  TFHT added women with a history of 
sexual abuse.  For international trafficking, women age 
18-35 from the FSU are at highest risk for sex 
trafficking, while workers from China (often construction 
workers), Thailand (often agricultural workers) and the 
Philippines (often domestic servants) constitute the 
largest groups of alleged labor trafficking victims.  Kav 
LaOved identified female caregivers as the highest risk 
group for labor trafficking (especially those from Nepal 
and Sri Lanka due to languages issues) as well as Thai 
agricultural workers.  Individuals with limited or no 
English skills are at higher risk for both sex and labor 
trafficking, and foreign workers who paid large fees to 
secure their jobs (Chinese workers reportedly paid the 
highest of fees of all foreign workers) are at higher 
risk for labor trafficking.  The government reported that 
Thai agricultural workers are highly vulnerable due to 
their isolated places of work, lack of Hebrew language 
skills, and their cultural background.  Hotline and Kav 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  005.2 OF 037 
 
 
LaOved alleged that Turkish workers employed under the 
"Tanks for Turks" agreement were also at risk, as the 
agreement between the GOI and GOT (according to Kav 
LaOved, salaries were transferred directly to Turkey and 
deducted from the reciprocal purchase to which the GOI 
was obligated in the arrangement) bound the workers to 
the contracted company and left them open to abuse and 
exploitation.  Although there are no reports of 
trafficking of African asylum seekers in 2007, the 
growing number of African asylum seekers who entered 
Israel illegally - their population increased from a few 
hundred in late 2006 to several thousand by the end of 
2007 - and the desperate circumstances many of them now 
find themselves in suggest that they constitute an at 
risk group for future trafficking. 
 
¶3.  Responses to questions in paragraph 27, section B of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. Please provide a general overview of the 
trafficking situation in the country and any changes 
since the last TIP Report (e.g. changes in direction). 
 
The nature of sex trafficking in Israel is in flux.  The 
tougher laws and increased investigations and 
prosecutions against sex traffickers have greatly reduced 
the number of women trafficked into Israel from years 
past.  The sex industry is adapting, both in going 
underground (call girls vs. brothels) making it harder to 
locate and interdict, and by procuring victims with new 
methods -- such as internet advertising -- and from new 
locations.   One clear trend seems to be an increase in 
internal trafficking, a concern echoed by, among others, 
the National Investigator's Office of the Israel Police 
and NGO Isha L'Isha Haifa Feminist Center.  There were 
also reports of a small number of Israeli women 
trafficked to other countries.  While the overall problem 
of trafficking for the purposes of prostitution remains 
smaller than in the past, both the government and NGOs 
expressed concern about keeping ahead of the traffickers, 
and are working together to assess and respond to the 
situation. 
 
In labor trafficking, Kav LaOved reported an increase of 
foreign workers exploited by the use of "flying visas," 
particularly in the caregiver sector, that they believe 
left increasing numbers of migrant workers subject to 
debt bondage.  (See paragraph 3 section F for further 
reporting on this phenomena.)  Kav LaOved also reported a 
rise in "open visas" leading to debt bondage.  In this 
practice, employers and recruitment agents with permits 
to employ caregivers charge workers large amounts of 
money to register their names on the employer's permit. 
According to Kav LaOved, this enables the worker to work 
elsewhere without a permit, while ostensibly employed 
with a valid work permit, and the workers are defrauded 
into thinking this practice is legal and/or necessary. 
Kav LaOved also reported an "alarming" increase in the 
practice of employers or manpower agencies attempting to 
remove migrant workers from Israel forcefully by threats, 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  006.2 OF 037 
 
 
intimidation and deceit.  According to Kav LaOved, 
employers have become aware that workers are reporting 
these practices to the NGO, and are confiscating cell 
phones, restricting movement, and threatening the workers 
to prevent them from contacting Kav LaOved (or other 
organizations) to voice their complaints. 
 
Changes in direction included the following. 
 
On January 10, 2007 the inter-agency Committee of 
Directors General approved a National Plan regarding the 
Battle against Slavery and Trafficking in Persons for the 
Purposes of Slavery or Forced Labor.  The plan identified 
five actions as the highest priorities as this stage, and 
appointed teams to design steps to implement them. 
 
(1) In the realm of prevention, to undertake 
information campaigns in the countries of origin of 
foreign workers in order to equip them with basic 
information about their conditions of employment and 
rights. 
 
(2) In the realm of prosecution, to coordinate a 
clear division of labor among the law enforcement 
agencies in regard to investigation and prosecution 
of regulatory offenses versus criminal law offenses 
like trafficking and slavery. 
 
(3) In the realm of prosecution, to design a guide 
by which to identify victims of trafficking and 
slavery (otherwise known as a national referral 
mechanism) to be used at relevant crossroads. 
 
(4) In the realm of protection, to establish 
supportive frameworks and an array of services for 
victims of trafficking and slavery, including 
residence solutions and medical insurance. 
 
(5) In the realm of protection, to promote safe 
return of victims of trafficking and slavery to 
their countries of origin. 
 
On July 11, 2007 the Committee of Directors General 
approved a National Plan regarding the Battle against 
Trafficking in Persons for the Purpose of Prostitution. 
The committee identified five goals as the highest 
priorities at this stage, and appointed inter-ministerial 
teams to design steps to implement them. 
 
(1) In the realm of prevention, to strengthen 
supervision of the Egyptian border. 
 
(2) In the realm of prosecution, to encourage 
awareness of possible changes in patterns of 
criminal activity and act accordingly. 
 
(3) In the realm of protection, to fashion a tool 
kit to facilitate the identification of victims of 
trafficking. 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  007.2 OF 037 
 
 
(4) In the realm of protection, to promote the safe 
return of victims of trafficking to their countries 
of origin. 
 
(5) In the realm of protection, to make efforts to 
ensure medical treatment to all victims of 
trafficking who have legal status in Israel. 
 
On December 2, 2007, Government Resolution 2670 approved 
the National Plan to Combat Trafficking for Prostitution 
and the National Plan to Combat Trafficking for Labor; 
approved the establishment of a shelter and three 
apartments for victims of slavery and trafficking for 
slavery and forced labor; and approved an annual national 
award for individuals and organizations or offices that 
made "outstanding contributions to the battle against 
trafficking." 
 
In June 2007, detailed guidelines concerning trafficking 
in persons were issued by the Investigations and 
Intelligence Division of the Israeli Police dealing with 
treatment of trafficking offenses, including distribution 
of areas of responsibility between police units and 
treatment of related offenses. 
 
Following a series of inter-agency meetings chaired by 
the National Coordinator to Combat Trafficking in Persons 
(National Coordinator) a procedure to transfer relevant 
information between agencies was developed. 
 
Israel signed and is in the final stages of ratifying the 
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the 
Child, on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and 
Child Pornography; and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress 
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women in 
Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention 
against Transnational Crime. 
 
Israel facilitated an agreement between the International 
Organization of Migration (IOM) and Thailand -- a key 
country of origin for labor trafficking victims in Israel 
-- to supervise the recruitment of Thai workers to Israel 
so as to prevent high middleman fees and to "insure 
legal, fair and well informed temporary  migration to 
Israel for work in the agricultural sector."  The 
agreement sets a maximum recruitment fee of 3,135 NIS, 
including medical examinations, exclusive of travel 
expenses to Israel.  IOM will work with an NGO partner in 
Israel and with the Foreign Workers Department of MITL to 
implement the program. 
 
The government halted the entry of Nepalese workers in 
2007 because Nepal lacked diplomatic representation in 
Israel.  Kav LaOved noted that the entry of Nepalese 
workers has not resumed despite the recent opening of a 
Nepalese Embassy. 
 
Various government and police officials participated in 
numerous international events related to fight against 
trafficking. 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  008.2 OF 037 
 
 
 
Responsibilities for the Omsbudswoman for the Complaints 
of Foreign Workers, which served as a clearing house for 
complaints of foreign workers in the construction 
industry, broadened its responsibilities to include 
foreign workers in agriculture and nursing care.  The 
Omsbudswoman received 243 complaints in 2007, of which 
170 were concluded and 73 were still under investigation. 
 
MITL issued a special workers' rights brochure for the 
construction industry in English, Russian, Romanian, 
Turkish, Thai and Chinese.  MITL also began distributing 
a brochure -- in Hebrew, English, Chinese, Thai, Russian, 
Romanian and Turkish -- setting out general labor rights 
of foreign workers in Israel to every foreign workers 
upon their arrival to Ben Gurion Airport, and posted the 
brochure on its website. 
 
Using a wide variety of sources, the National 
Coordinator's office began conducting research into the 
political, economic and social conditions of countries of 
origin of foreign workers in order to better acquaint 
government agencies and NGOs with the attitudes and 
perceptions of victims.  Reports on China, Ghana and 
Eritrea were completed and disseminated to relevant 
bodies.  A report on Thailand is currently in 
preparation. 
 
-- B. (Other items to address may include:  What kind of 
conditions are the victims trafficked into? 
 
Sex trafficking victims have generally gone underground 
with the industry itself, and thus it is difficult to 
ascertain their conditions.  The government postulated 
that "harsh verdicts delivered in cases of trafficking 
accompanied by violence increased deterrence among 
traffickers and resulted in less violence towards the 
women." 
 
Labor trafficking victims, both acknowledged and alleged, 
tend to fall into one of two categories -- domestic 
servants whose conditions vary greatly from employer to 
employer, and agricultural workers who often are crowded 
into unsanitary accommodations that might not have even 
been constructed for human habitation, sometimes 
compelled to work extreme hours with curtailed freedom of 
movement (including passports withheld), and in some 
cases subjected to violence, physical restraint and/or 
sexual harassment. 
 
Examples of individual cases are highlighted in the 
individual NGO reports forwarded by email per Reftel C. 
 
-- C. Which populations are targeted by the traffickers? 
 
Women from the FSU remain the most common targets for sex 
trafficking, while Chinese construction workers, Thai 
agricultural workers and Philippine domestic servants the 
most common victims of labor trafficking. 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  009.2 OF 037 
 
 
-- D. Who are the traffickers/exploiters?  Are they 
independent business people?  Small or family-based crime 
groups?  Large international organized crime syndicates? 
 
The government and NGOs agreed that trafficking of women 
into Israel for the purpose of prostitution is generally 
conducted by organized crime groups.  The government 
noted that in some cases trafficking was conducted by 
families or individuals, while Hotline added as well 
"amateur entrepreneurs" such as drivers, brothel managers 
and other "on the ground" operatives "looking to make a 
quick buck." 
 
Hotline reports that labor traffickers tend to be private 
individuals who employ domestic workers or agricultural 
workers, plus some manpower agencies, "someone from the 
origin country working with Israeli partners" or 
"sometimes married to an Israeli or residing in the 
country illegally."  Histadrut identified "exploiters" as 
manpower companies who took large up front fees, or 
employers who intimated and abused the workers.  The 
government reported "no exact statistics" on labor 
trafficking, citing the newness of the labor law 
amendments that criminalized labor trafficking in October 
2006 and the small number of indictments to date (three 
in the final stages of approval by the State Attorney's 
Office.)  Thus far, according to the government, "the 
perpetrators have been found to be otherwise normative 
Israeli citizens in the field of agriculture." 
 
-- E. What methods are used to approach victims?  (Are 
they offered lucrative jobs, sold by their families, 
approached by friends of friends, etc.?) 
 
According to Hotline, NGOs in the Ukraine report that 
women are often recruited for sex trafficking through 
friends and newspaper ads.  Israeli women who are 
trafficked internally reportedly are commonly found via 
newspaper and internet ads, or trafficked by a lover, 
family member or someone else they know.  The government 
also reported that newspaper and internet ads in the 
countries of origin were the most common form of 
recruitment.  Labor trafficking victims almost always 
come to Israel voluntarily, often seeking out manpower 
agencies in search of overseas employment.  Kav LaOved 
reported that recruitment agents abroad often visit poor 
villages and tempt workers with promises of lucrative 
employment and good conditions, both of which later turn 
out to be false.  As an example, Kav LaOved noted that 
some Thai agricultural workers take out loans or raise 
amounts up to $10,000 for recruitment fees based on 
promises of high monthly salaries, only to discover when 
they arrive that their low monthly salary does not even 
enable them to meet their loan repayments. 
 
-- F. What methods are used to move the victims (e.g., 
are false documents being used?). 
 
Hotline reports that Israeli women trafficked externally 
entered the target countries on tourist visas.  An 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  010 OF 037 
 
 
unknown number of labor trafficking victims enter Israel 
via "flying visas" that are work visas for jobs that turn 
out to be nonexistent, resulting in the workers -- now 
without a source of income, no legal status in Israel, 
and presumably large debts accrued in acquiring the non- 
existent job and transportation to Israel -- extremely 
vulnerable to exploitation.  According to the government 
and numerous NGOs, most sex trafficking victims were 
smuggled across the border with Egypt. 
 
-- G. Are employment, travel, and tourism agencies or 
marriage brokers involved with or fronting for 
traffickers or crime groups to traffic individuals? 
 
The government reported that it had not found travel 
agencies or marriage brokers serving as a front for sex 
trafficking or labor trafficking.  Machon Toda'a charged 
that marriage brokers are used to approach victims, as 
are modeling agencies, family and friends.  NGOs allege 
that employment agencies are often involved in labor 
trafficking, both in the overt manner of the "flying 
visas" described in answer 3F, and in facilitating 
Israeli employers who allegedly withhold passports and 
take other actions that would constitute trafficking. 
 
¶4.  Response to questions in paragraph 27, section C of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. Which government agencies are involved in anti- 
trafficking efforts and which agency, if any, has the 
lead? 
 
The national inter-agency coordinator for GOI anti- 
trafficking efforts is Rachel Gershuni of the Ministry of 
Justice (MOJ).  Primary agencies involved in these 
efforts include MOJ (the Attorney General, State 
Attorney, the Legal Aid Division, and the Tribunal for 
Detention Review, in addition to the National 
Coordinator); the Ministry of the Interior (Interior); 
The Ministry of Social Affairs and Social Services; The 
Prime Minister's Office (PMO) (particularly the Authority 
for the Advancement of Women); The Ministry of Education; 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA); The National 
Police Investigations Unit; The Immigration Authority 
(and Immigration Police); MITL; The Prison Administrative 
Tribunal; and the Knesset (notably the Special 
Parliamentary Committee on the issue of Foreign Workers.) 
 
¶5.  Responses to questions in paragraph 27, section D of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
¶A. What are the limitations on the government's ability 
to address this problem in practice?  For example, is 
funding for police or other institutions inadequate? 
 
While praising the National Coordinator's efforts, TFHT 
observed that her office was understaffed and 
overburdened and this prevented the completion of certain 
functions, often resulting in "a bottleneck."  Some 
funding issues hamper efforts.  MITL has only 1 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  011 OF 037 
 
 
investigator for 350 manpower companies.  TFHT complained 
that police did not commit sufficient manpower to combat 
trafficking, and said that police are not permitted to 
execute sting operations by order of MOJ.   Isha L'Isha, 
however, said that trafficking in women is successfully 
investigated in the Tel Aviv central unit and "it can be 
seen that state resources are allocated to this unit" but 
that "central units in the periphery rarely treat the 
issue of trafficking in women."  Labor trafficking 
victims still lack a shelter.  NGOs complain of lack of 
interpreters at deportation hearings.  The problem is not 
a lack of resources, but with many competing security and 
other demands, a question of allocation. 
 
In labor trafficking specifically, Kav LaOved complained 
of "indifference, lack of good will, and bureaucracy," 
noting for example that the government funds more than 
400 policeman to apprehend and deport undocumented 
migrant workers, but "only a handful" of policemen to 
deal with the protection of migrant workers' rights and 
investigate criminal offenses committed against migrant 
workers.  Kav LaOved complained of lack of coordination 
among Israeli authorities when it comes to labor 
trafficking, and an unwillingness to acknowledge offenses 
symptomatic of trafficking (notably excessive recruitment 
fees.)  Another problem, according to Kav LaOved, is that 
the National Coordinator only has an advisory roles and 
lacks essential powers, such as the ability to halt the 
deportation of a suspected trafficking victim.  Kav 
LaOved cited a number of other problems, such as lack of 
screening of deportees for trafficking victims prior to 
deportation, an insufficient number of translators, and 
the lack of a shelter for labor trafficking victims.  Kav 
LaOved singled out Interior as the source of "most of the 
problems" they encounter, and complained that the 
ministry was unresponsive to complaints, lacked 
sensitivity to the issues or the victims, failed to 
identify victims, and was reluctant to take actions it is 
authorized to take to combat trafficking, such as issuing 
visas to victims. 
 
¶B. Is overall corruption a problem? 
 
No. 
 
¶C. Does the government lack the resources to aid victims? 
 
No. 
 
¶6.  Response to questions in paragraph 27, section E of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. To what extent does the government systematically 
monitor its anti-trafficking efforts (on all fronts - 
prosecution, victim protection, and prevention) and 
periodically make available, publicly or privately and 
directly or through regional/international organizations, 
its assessments of these anti-trafficking efforts? 
 
The government reported that the National Coordinator 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  012 OF 037 
 
 
attempts to monitor the efforts of government agencies 
"on micro and macro levels" to "identify problems and 
seek solutions," and cited inter-agency meetings she 
convened and meetings between NGOs and government 
officials she initiated.  The government explained that 
the National Coordinator annually prepares a summary of 
the government's steps to combat trafficking that is 
placed on the MOJ website and advertised to the public. 
A special internet site for the office of the National 
Coordinator is in final stages of preparation.  The 
Department of International Agreements and Litigation in 
MOJ submits an annual report to the State Department, 
which is then disseminated among key government 
officials.  The Parliamentary Subcommittee of Trafficking 
in Women chaired by MK Zehava Gal-On (a subcommittee of 
the Committee on the Status of Women) held its annual 
session following the publication of the State 
Department's Trafficking in Persons Report to discuss the 
issues raised in the report, and Ambassador Jones gave 
remarks at the event and participated in the discussion. 
As usual, the Special Parliamentary Committee on the 
issue of Foreign Workers, chaired by MK Ran Cohen, teamed 
with the Parliamentary Subcommittee of Trafficking in 
Women for the meeting on the State Department's TIP 
Report. 
 
Hotline described GOI efforts as "poor" and said "we are 
usually the ones providing information."  Isha L'Isha 
described the government's monitoring efforts as "not 
acceptable" and that ministries are not helping to 
implement the "new law" (2006 amendments to the 
trafficking law) and the situation is "now 
deteriorating." Machon Toda'a noted that "the internet 
domain is fenceless" and is now the main platform of the 
sex industry worldwide and in Israel, and argued the need 
for education and awareness campaigns on the virtual sex 
industry. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Investigation and prosecution of traffickers 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  Response to questions in paragraph 28, section A of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. For questions A-D, posts should highlight in 
particular whether or not the country has enacted any new 
legislation since the last TIP report. 
 
In August 2007 an amendment to the Criminal Procedure Law 
(Consolidated Version) 5742-1982 was passed by which the 
courts are empowered to receive a psychosocial survey of 
the condition of a victim of a crime of violence and of 
the damage caused by the crime.  "Crime of violence" 
includes all trafficking crimes, abduction for the 
purposes of trafficking, holding a person under 
conditions of slavery, forced labor, causing a person to 
leave the country in order to engage them in prostitution 
or enslave them. 
 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  013 OF 037 
 
 
In hopes of expediting cases, the Knesset approved an 
amendment to the Courts Law on January 29, 2008 that 
entered into force on February 7, 2008 by which 
trafficking for prostitution case will be heard by one 
judge instead of a bench of three judges, as was the case 
previously.  The amendment is entitled Courts Law 
(Amendment number 48) (a Sole Judge in Trafficking in 
Persons for Prostitution). 
 
-- B. Does the country have a law specifically 
prohibiting trafficking in persons--both for sexual and 
non-sexual purposes (e.g. forced labor)? 
 
Yes. 
 
-- C. If so, please specifically cite the name of the law 
and its date of enactment and provide the exact language 
of the law prohibiting TIP and all other law(s) used to 
prosecute TIP cases. 
 
The comprehensive anti-trafficking law entitled 
Prohibition of Trafficking in Persons (Legislative 
Amendments) Law 5766-2006 came into force on 
October 29, 2006. 
 
-- The courts are authorized to hold trials involving 
trafficking in persons behind closed doors and to prevent 
the publication of details that identify the victims. 
 
Additional details sent to G/TIP via email per Reftel C. 
 
-- D. Does the law(s) cover both internal and external 
(transnational) forms of trafficking? 
 
Yes.  Hotline, however, charged that while the law does 
not make a distinction between internal and external 
trafficking, no cases of internal trafficking have ever 
been opened. 
 
-- E. If not, under what other laws can traffickers be 
prosecuted?  For example, are there laws against slavery 
or the exploitation of prostitution by means of force, 
fraud or coercion? 
 
Not applicable. 
 
-- F. Are these other laws being used in trafficking 
cases? 
 
Isha L'Isha cited various laws dealing with extortion, 
threats, rape, indecent assault, attempted murder, and 
drug trafficking, in addition to the comprehensive sex 
and labor trafficking statutes in the trafficking law as 
amended in 2006.  Kav LaOved noted non-criminal statutes 
not specifically enacted for trafficking that allow for 
civil penalties, such as national labor laws, tort laws 
(particularly provisions on exploitation), and the 
Prevention of Sexual Harassment Law (where victims can 
receive compensation without proof of damage.) 
 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  014 OF 037 
 
 
-- G. Please provide a full inventory of trafficking 
laws, including non-criminal statutes that allow for 
civil penalties against alleged trafficking crimes, 
(e.g., civil forfeiture laws and laws against illegal 
debt). 
 
Additional details sent to G/TIP via email per Reftel C. 
 
¶8.  Response to questions in paragraph 28, section B of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. What are the prescribed penalties for trafficking 
people for sexual exploitation? 
 
The maximum penalty for trafficking in persons under the 
law is 16 years, increasing to 20 years if the victim is 
a minor. 
 
The maximum penalty for kidnapping for any of the 
purposes of trafficking is 20 years, with a maximum 
penalty of 10 years for taking a person outside the 
borders of the country in which they reside for the 
purposes of trafficking. 
 
The 2006 amendments to the trafficking law increased from 
one to three years the penalty for withholding a 
passport, increasing to five years with certain 
aggravated circumstances, such as placing the person 
deprived of their passport in jeopardy. 
 
The trafficking law instructs the court to grant to 
trafficking victims compensation to be paid by the 
offender or through a dedicated fund to be set up for 
such purposes. 
 
-- B. What penalties were imposed for persons convicted 
of sexual exploitation over the reporting period?  Please 
note the number of convicted sex traffickers who received 
suspended sentences and the number who received only a 
fine as punishment. 
 
Hotline reported that sentences for sex trafficking 
convictions ranged from 3 months to 6 years, with an 
average of 2.8 years, which Hotline said was a small 
decline from 2006.  According to Hotline, the courts 
awarded legal redress to 8 victims in 6 cases in amounts 
ranging from 5,000 NIS to 50,000 NIS, with an average of 
31,666 NIS per defendant and 25,626 per victim.  TFHT 
complained that not enough cases were prosecuted, and 
insufficient sentences were handed down when convictions 
were achieved.  It cited one instance (Case 1130/06 State 
of Israel vs. Aleksai Sakhno and Vladimir Abromov, 
decision dated September 16, 2007) of "two known 
traffickers with a history of trafficking that went 
unprosecuted" who were given "a particularly lenient 
sentence" of 15 months, and the victims were not awarded 
any compensation.  Other NGOs also complained about what 
they considered the lack of prosecutions and insufficient 
sentences in trafficking cases, particularly labor 
trafficking, although TFHT noted that "as with any new 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  015 OF 037 
 
 
law (regarding the 2006 amendments criminalizing labor 
trafficking) the application of the law will be 
complicated, requiring some time before law enforcement 
and courts are able to efficiently implement it."  Isha 
L'Isha, however, noted that "penalties (for sex 
trafficking) have increased in general." 
 
¶9.  Response to questions in paragraph 28, section C of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. Punishment of Labor Trafficking Offenses: What are 
the prescribed and imposed penalties for trafficking for 
labor exploitation, such as forced or bonded labor and 
involuntary servitude? 
 
The prescribed penalty for trafficking for labor is up to 
16 years of imprisonment, or up to 20 years of 
imprisonment if the offense if committed against a minor. 
Trafficking for forced labor carries a penalty of up to 7 
years imprisonment.  Holding a person under conditions of 
slavery carries a penalty of up to 16 years of 
imprisonment. 
 
In December 2007 two defendants were convicted or organ 
trafficking under the new labor and organ trafficking 
sections of the anti-trafficking law.  Some of victims' 
cases constituted debt bondage.  One defendant was 
sentenced to four years of imprisonment, an additional 
suspended sentence, and 60,000 NIS compensation to be 
awarded to the victims.  The other defendant was 
sentenced to 20 months imprisonment and an additional 
suspended sentence. 
 
The National Coordinator stressed that showed that Israel 
has internalized a comprehensive view of trafficking and 
is determined to enforce the law in all aspects of 
trafficking, and that it was a groundbreaking case on an 
international level, and cited a number of colleagues 
from governments in other countries that called the case 
precedent-setting. 
 
-- B. Do the government's laws provide for criminal 
punishment - i.e. jail time - for labor recruiters in 
labor source countries who engage in recruitment of 
laborers using knowingly fraudulent or deceptive offers 
that result in workers being trafficked in the 
destination country? 
 
Yes, the law carries a penalty of up to 16 years for 
labor recruiters, with another possible 10 years for 
causing the victim to leave his or her country for the 
purposes of prostitution or slavery.  Hotline noted that 
there is no case law regarding this issue since no 
criminal charges have been filed against labor 
traffickers.  (The government noted the conviction for 
organ trafficking was the result of the amendment to the 
labor law that included the criminalization of labor 
trafficking.)  The MITL office responsible for manpower 
agencies said it revoked 50 licenses during 2007. 
 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  016 OF 037 
 
 
-- C. Are there laws in destination countries punishing 
employers or labor agents in labor destination countries 
who confiscate workers' passports or travel documents, 
switch contracts without the worker's consent as a means 
to keep the worker in a state of service, or withhold 
payment of salaries as means of keeping the worker in a 
state of service? 
 
Yes, the trafficking law carries a maximum sentence of 
three years imprisonment for detaining a passport, up to 
five years for detaining a passport for the purposes of 
trafficking.  The law also carries a penalty of up to 
three years of imprisonment for "taking advantage of the 
distress, physical or mental weakness, inexperience of 
carelessness of another person" which the government said 
could be viewed as circumstantial evidence pointing to 
trafficking, slavery or forced labor.  Hotline noted that 
there is no specific law prohibiting switching contracts 
as a means to keep the worker in a state of service or 
withholding payment for that means, but that if such act 
results in keeping a worker in a state of servitude the 
offender might be liable for punishment for holding a 
person under conditions of slavery under article 375A of 
the Penal Code, or for forced labor under article 376 of 
the Penal Code.  Kav LaOved complained that the 
government was "well aware of the existence and the 
extent of the industry in recruitment fees" but was not 
actively pursuing the issue in Israel or in source 
countries.  The government has expressed frustration with 
such charges, and pointed out their limitations in 
investigating and prosecuting cases in source countries 
where the activity might not even be criminalized.  Kav 
LaOved also complained that employers - particularly 
farmers, according to their examples - that are given new 
permits even after they were found guilty of offenses. 
 
-- D. If law(s) prescribe criminal punishments for these 
offenses, what are the actual punishments imposed on 
persons convicted of these offenses?  Please note the 
number of convicted labor traffickers who received 
suspended sentences and the number who received only a 
fine as punishment. 
 
The government reported 693 criminal indictments, 48 
judgments and 11,169,280 NIS in fines against employers 
and manpower companies for violations of labor laws 
pertaining to foreign workers, plus 37 licenses revoked 
and 28 licenses limited.  However, the only explicit 
labor trafficking-related conviction and sentence was the 
organ trafficking case described in paragraph 9 section 
¶A. 
 
¶10.  Response to questions in paragraph 28, section D of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. What are the prescribed penalties for rape or 
forcible sexual assault? 
 
For rape, 16 years, 20 years under aggravated 
circumstances, including use of violence or rape of a 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  017 OF 037 
 
 
minor.  For consensual sex with a minor, up to 5 years. 
 
-- B. How do they compare to the prescribed penalties for 
crimes of trafficking for commercial sexual exploitation? 
 
The penalty for rape carries the same penalty as 
trafficking for the purposes of prostitution, although 
TFHT noted that the letter of the law is stricter with 
respect to sex trafficking. 
 
¶11.  Response to questions in paragraph 28, section E of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. Is prostitution legalized or decriminalized? 
Specifically, are the activities of the prostitute 
criminalized? 
 
The activities of the prostitute are not criminalized, 
nor currently is soliciting a prostitute except when a 
minor is involved.  Related activities such as 
maintaining a place for the purpose of prostitution, 
pimping, and publication of sex advertisements (under 
certain circumstances) are criminalized. 
 
-- B. Are the activities of the brothel owner/operator, 
clients, pimps, and enforcers criminalized? 
 
Yes.  See previous answer. 
 
-- C. Are these laws enforced? 
 
Yes, according to the government.  TFHT complained that 
the laws against related activities are rarely 
prosecuted.  Hotline said the laws are rarely enforced 
due to directives issued by the State Attorney in 2006 
that specified cases should be investigated by the police 
only if one of a set of conditions applied, such as the 
involvement of minors or when other criminal activities 
took place. 
 
-- D. If prostitution is legal and regulated, what is the 
legal minimum age for this activity?  Note that in many 
countries with federalist systems, prostitution laws may 
be under state or local jurisdiction and may differ among 
jurisdictions. 
 
Prostitution is not considered legal. 
 
¶12.  Response to questions in paragraph 28, section F of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. Has the government prosecuted any cases against 
human trafficking offenders?  If so, provide numbers of 
investigations, prosecutions, convictions, and sentences 
served, including details on plea bargains and fines, if 
relevant and available. 
 
The courts prosecuted 20 sex trafficking cases.  Some of 
the 84 pandering cases that were prosecuted were 
originally trafficking cases that were adjusted due to 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  018 OF 037 
 
 
lack of evidence.  Kav LaOved noted that minutes of a 
December 26, 2007 government joint committee meeting of 
Knesset Committee for the Problem of Migrant Workers and 
the Committee for the Struggle against Trafficking in 
Women showed that the Immigration Department at the 
Ministry for Public Security reported that three 
indictments have been prepared concerning forced labor, 
and one indictment concerning slavery, and that one of 
the indictments has been filed in court.  No further 
information is available at this time on these reported 
indictments. 
 
-- B. Please indicate which laws were used to 
investigate, prosecute, convict, and sentence 
traffickers. 
 
The Prohibition of Trafficking in Persons law. 
 
-- C. Also, if possible, please disaggregate by type of 
TIP (labor vs. commercial sexual exploitation) and 
victims (children, as defined by U.S. and international 
law as under 18 years of age, vs. adults). 
 
Except for the organ trafficking case reported 
previously, all trafficking cases were prosecuted for sex 
trafficking.  There were no labor trafficking cases, 
although the government did fine and indict employers for 
various labor law offenses.  We do not have a breakdown 
of how many involved minors.  Isha L'Isha noted that "the 
difficulties of implementing the new law are mainly due 
to its innovative concepts that regard every human being 
as entitled to dignity, and it is hard to implement it in 
several ministries." 
 
-- D. Does the government in a labor source country 
criminally prosecute labor recruiters who recruit 
laborers using knowingly fraudulent or deceptive offers 
or impose on recruited laborers inappropriately high or 
illegal fees or commissions that create a debt bondage 
condition for the laborer? 
 
Not applicable. 
 
-- E. Does the government in a labor destination country 
criminally prosecute employers or labor agents who 
confiscate workers' passports/travel documents, switch 
contracts or terms of employment without the worker's 
consent, use physical or sexual abuse or the threat of 
such abuse to keep workers in a state of service, or 
withhold payment of salaries as a means to keep workers 
in a state of service? 
 
The government has the authority to do so under the 
comprehensive anti-trafficking law, but all reported 
judgments against employers and labor agents were under 
labor laws, except for the organ trafficking case.  Post 
forwarded by email per Reftel C information Kav LaOved 
provided on a number of cases that it alleged were 
examples of the government's failure to respond to labor 
trafficking. 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  019 OF 037 
 
 
 
-- F. Are the traffickers serving the time sentenced?  If 
not, why not? 
 
The government reported that all are serving their 
sentences, except those who fled justice.  Hotline 
reported that as far as they knew all convicted sex 
traffickers were serving the time sentenced. 
 
-- G. Please indicate whether the government can provide 
this information, and if not, why not? 
 
See previous answer. 
 
¶13.  Response to questions in paragraph 28, section G of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. Does the government provide any specialized 
training for government officials in how to recognize, 
investigate, and prosecute instances of trafficking? 
Specify whether NGOs, international organizations, and/or 
the USG provide specialized training for host government 
officials. 
 
Yes, many in concert with NGOs.  Details forwarded by 
email per Reftel C. 
 
¶14.  Response to questions in paragraph 28, section H of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
--A. Does the government cooperate with other governments 
in the investigation and prosecution of trafficking 
cases? 
 
Yes, the government cooperated with authorities from 
Russia, Ukraine, and other Western European and FSU 
countries, in cases involving both international and 
Israeli traffickers.  Hotline agreed that when a 
trafficked woman claimed it was dangerous for her to 
return to her home country, Israeli police cooperated 
with local police to investigate.  Hotline noted that the 
bilateral agreement the government signed with Thailand 
whereby IOM will facilitate the recruitment of Thai 
workers has yet to take effect, so it is not yet known 
what effect that might have on investigations and 
prosecutions of labor trafficking cases.  Kav LaOved 
noted that the Government passed a decision that as of 
August 2008 migrant workers will only be brought into 
Israel from countries with which Israel has bilateral 
relations. 
 
-- B. If possible, can post provide the number of 
cooperative international investigations on trafficking 
during the reporting period? 
 
No specific number was reported. 
 
¶15.  Response to questions in paragraph 28, section I of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  020 OF 037 
 
 
-- A. Does the government extradite persons who are 
charged with trafficking in other countries? 
 
Yes. 
 
-- B. If so, can post provide the number of traffickers 
extradited during the reporting period? 
 
No specific number was reported.  The government cited as 
an example an October 2007 request to Ukraine for the 
provisional arrest of an Israeli national to stand trial 
for organ trafficking. 
 
-- C. Does the government extradite its own nationals 
charged with such offenses? 
 
Yes, according to Israel's Extradition Law 5714-1954, the 
government may extradite Israeli nationals charged with 
trafficking for a number or purposes, including 
prostitution and forced labor.  Two requests, one from 
Ukraine and one from Panama, are pending. 
 
-- D. If not, is the government prohibited by law form 
extraditing its own nationals? 
 
Not applicable. 
 
-- E. If so, what is the government doing to modify its 
laws to permit the extradition of its own nationals? 
 
Not applicable. 
 
¶16.  Response to questions in paragraph 28, section J of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. Is there evidence of government involvement in or 
tolerance of trafficking, on a local or institutional 
level?  If so, please explain in detail. 
 
The government stated that its authorities unequivocally 
condemn all forms of trafficking.  Several NGOs expressed 
a desire for greater anti-trafficking efforts and 
investment (especially in services to victims), Hotline 
reported that a brothel was on the municipal records of 
one city (that sued the brothel for non payment of 
taxes), and Kav LaOved raised questions about the 
government's policy toward Eritrean asylum seekers (a 
number of whom were placed in work situations within 
Israel) but we received no reports indicating government 
involvement in or tolerance of trafficking. 
 
¶17.  Response to questions in paragraph 28, section K of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. If government officials are involved in 
trafficking, what steps has the government taken to end 
such participation? 
 
For the past seven years, the Department for 
Investigation of Police Officers, an autonomous body with 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  021 OF 037 
 
 
the Ministry of Justice, has been operating a unit 
investigations and undercover activity to uncover any 
involvement by government officials in trafficking- 
related corruption. 
 
-- B. Please indicate the number of government officials 
investigated and prosecuted for involvement in 
trafficking or trafficking-related corruption during the 
reporting period. 
 
A few cases of improper activity, such as mistreatment of 
foreign workers, were investigated, and some were 
prosecuted.  The government reported no cases of 
trafficking involving government officials. 
 
-- C. Have any been convicted?  What sentence(s) was 
imposed?  Please specify if officials received suspended 
sentences, were given a fine, fired, or reassigned to 
another position within the government as punishment. 
Please provide specific numbers, if available.  Please 
indicate the number of convicted officials that received 
suspended sentences or received only a fine as 
punishment. 
 
Not applicable. 
 
¶18.  Response to questions in paragraph 28, section L of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. As part of the new requirements of the 2005 TVPRA, 
for countries that contribute troops to international 
peacekeeping efforts, please indicate whether the 
government vigorously investigated, prosecuted, convicted 
and sentenced nationals of the country deployed abroad as 
part of a peacekeeping or other similar mission who 
engage in or facilitate severe forms of trafficking or 
who exploit victims of such trafficking. 
 
Not applicable. 
 
¶19.  Response to questions in paragraph 28, section M of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. If the country has an identified child sex tourism 
problem (as source or destination), how many foreign 
pedophiles has the government prosecuted or 
deported/extradited to their country of origin?  What are 
the countries of origin for sex tourists? 
 
Not applicable. 
 
-- B. Do the country's child sexual abuse laws have 
extraterritorial coverage (similar to the U.S. PROTECT 
Act)? 
 
Yes. 
 
-- C. If so, how many of the country's nationals have 
been prosecuted and/or convicted under the 
extraterritorial provision(s) for traveling to other 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  022 OF 037 
 
 
countries to engage in child sex tourism? 
 
None were reported. 
 
------------------------------------ 
PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶20.  Response to questions in paragraph 29, section A of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. Does the government assist foreign trafficking 
victims, for example, by providing temporary to permanent 
residency status, or other relief from deportation?  If 
so, please explain. 
 
The government reported that all trafficking victims in 
the Maagan shelter received temporary shelters, plus work 
visas if requested, whether they chose to testify or not. 
Women who chose to testify received a visa for the 
duration of the court proceedings, which have taken a 
year on average.  After the legal proceedings are 
concluded, the women who choose to testify are entitled 
to request a temporary visa for another year, though in 
special circumstances the period may be longer or 
shorter.  In 2007, 15 women received a visa (equivalent 
to a U.S. B1 visa) for 6 months, 25 women received an 
extension of their visa following their testimony, 13 
women receive an "inter-visa" allowing its holder to 
leave the country and return with a designated time 
during their testimonies, and 40 women received 1-year 
visas for humanitarian reasons. 
 
A written procedure for giving visas to victims of labor 
trafficking and slavery is still in process.  Interior 
granted 6 victims 1-year visa extensions. 
 
According to the government, foreign workers who file 
complaints regarding criminal offenses are not arrested, 
are generally placed in alternative employment, and are 
released with a special Immigration Authority document 
that is renewed monthly. 
 
Isha L'Isha complained that women victims of trafficking 
are entitled to their rights only if they are in the 
Maagan shelter, and that women outside of the shelter 
face great difficulty in obtaining visas to remain in 
Israel.  They said that in two cases Interior did not 
approve the transfer of women from a detention center to 
the shelter until the clarification of their legal case, 
and that "this went on for eight months."  According to 
Isha L'Isha, women who do not testify and mothers who 
cannot leave Israel because of their children and do not 
receive legal status in Israel encountered problems in 
receiving services and benefits. 
 
¶21.  Response to questions in paragraph 29, section B of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A.  Does the country have victim care facilities which 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  023 OF 037 
 
 
are accessible to trafficking victims? 
 
Yes.  Women identified as sex trafficking victims were 
transferred directly to the Maagan shelter without 
passing through any detention facilities.  The police, 
Immigration Authority and NGOs all referred victims to 
the shelter. 
 
Besides the director and administrative staff, the 
shelter includes three social workers, nine counselors, a 
housemother, and a security officer.  A physician visits 
twice weekly, a psychiatrist visits when deemed 
necessary, teachers provide what the government called 
"enrichment" sessions, and numerous volunteers contribute 
their time. 
 
The women in the shelter are entitled to a working visa, 
and shelter staff assist them in finding employment. 
Professional training in fields such as computers, 
English, cosmetics and hairdressing are offered.  The 
shelter also offered recreational options such as a 
library, film club, activities such as music and sewing, 
and two sightseeing trips in Israel, and personal 
enrichment activities such as a motherhood workshop. 
 
Isha L'Isha complained that the government does not fund 
any treatment for trafficking victims who are outside of 
the shelter. 
 
-- B. Do foreign victims have the same access to care as 
domestic trafficking victims? 
 
The complaint among NGOs is the lack of facilities for 
domestic trafficking victims, not the other way around. 
Isha L'Isha charged that domestic trafficking victims are 
not receiving treatment at all and "are forced to hide 
their identity."  The NGO also said that foreign victims 
outside the shelter to no receive any medical treatment 
or services from the Welfare Department. 
 
According to the government, "no need for victims care 
for Israel trafficking victims has been detected to this 
date."  Foreign victims who are in detention facilities 
rather than the shelter (according to the government, 
they are either "not identified as victims" or "do not 
wish to go to the shelter") are provided with basic 
necessities and medical care by the facilities of the 
Immigration Administration and the Israel Prisons 
Services.  Victims who received visas, no longer reside 
in the shelter, and are employed receive medical 
insurance provided by their employer according to the 
Foreign Workers Law.  Legal aid is provided to every 
trafficking victim, regardless of residence, through the 
Legal Aid Department in MOJ. 
 
Israel currently has no shelter specifically for labor 
trafficking victims.  In 2007, seven labor trafficking 
victims were referred to the Maagan shelter.  Government 
Resolution 2670, passed December 2, 2007, approved a 
budget for the establishment of a shelter and three 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  024 OF 037 
 
 
apartments for victims of slavery and trafficking for 
slavery and forced labor.  The government acknowledged 
and is studying the different needs that will need to be 
addressed at the labor trafficking shelter as opposed to 
the Maagan shelter for sex trafficking victims. 
 
-- C. Does the country have specialized facilities 
dedicated to helping victims of trafficking? 
 
Yes, the shelter and services described in paragraph 21 
section A. 
 
-- D. If so, can post provide the number of victims 
placed in these care facilities during the reporting 
period? 
 
During 2007, 75 women and nine children resided in the 
shelter, with an average stay of six months.  42 women 
and seven children were residing in the shelter as of 
February 2008.  The shelter has a capacity of 50 women. 
 
-- E. What is the funding source of these facilities? 
 
The Ministry of Social Affairs and Social Services 
provided funding for the operation of the Maagan shelter, 
the Ministry of Public Security provided funding for 
security, and the Ministry of Health provided funding for 
medical care. 
 
-- F. Please estimate the amount the government spent (in 
U.S. dollar equivalent) on these specialized facilities 
dedicated to helping trafficking victims during the 
reporting period. 
 
The budget for Maagan shelter was $1,030,000 for 
operations, $277,000 for security, and $100,000 for 
medical care, a total of $1,407,000. 
 
-- G. Does the government provide trafficking victims 
with access to legal, medical and psychological services? 
If so, please specify the kind of assistance provided, 
and the number of victims assisted, if available. 
 
Yes, as described above.  The government reported that 
ten women at Maagan shelter received psychiatric 
treatment in 2007, 73 medical cases were referred to 
Ichilov Hospital "mostly for gynecological reasons," and 
that 94 percent of the women referred to the shelter 
receive legal aid.  Also as reported above, NGOs complain 
that these services are not made available to internal 
trafficking victims or victims residing outside the 
Maagan shelter. 
 
Hotline reported one case where a women coming out of the 
hospital and in need of round-the-clock assistance was 
denied entry to the Maagan shelter because it could not 
provide her with appropriate care, and Hotline was asked 
to find another alternative "within a few hours." 
 
¶22.  Response to questions in paragraph 29, section C of 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  025 OF 037 
 
 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. Does the government provide funding or other forms 
of support to foreign or domestic NGOs and/or 
international organizations for services to trafficking 
victims?  Please explain and provide any funding amounts 
in U.S. dollar equivalent.  If assistance provided is in- 
kind, please specify exact assistance.  Please explain if 
funding for assistance comes from a federal budget or 
from regional or local governments. 
 
The government cooperates with domestic NGOs providing 
services to victims, but no government funding was 
provided to the NGOs.  According to the government, the 
Immigration Authority, in cooperation with local NGOs, 
provided funding to trafficking victims and foreign 
workers and family members who wanted to leave Israel but 
could not afford to pay for the flights. 
 
¶23.  Response to questions in paragraph 29, section D of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. Do the government's law enforcement, immigration, 
and social services personnel have a formal system of 
proactively identifying victims of trafficking among 
high-risk persons with whom they come in contact (e.g., 
foreign persons arrested for prostitution or immigration 
violations)? 
 
For sex trafficking, the Immigration Authority circulated 
checklists/guidelines and provided training to field 
operatives and detention facilities officials on 
identifying and locating victims of trafficking.  The 
government reported that referrals from NGOs such as 
Hotline and Isha L'Isha were considered part of the basic 
screening procedures. 
 
For labor trafficking, Immigration Administration teams 
met with foreign workers on a daily basis to inform them 
of their rights and question them to identify any 
trafficking victims, according to the government.  The 
information relayed to the workers was developed for 
trafficking guidelines circulated by the government in 
2007, which included information on terms of employment 
(conveyed to both employer and employee, on issues such 
as the employment contract, medical insurance, working 
hours, pay, debt bondage, safety conditions, and 
residence facilities) and denial of freedom (on issues 
such as debt bondage, withholding of passports, access to 
telephones, and the use of physical and verbal violence 
against employees.) 
 
Isha L'Isha noted disagreements regarding who constitutes 
a trafficking victim.  According to Hotline, the 
Administrative Tribunal that oversees the cases of 
foreigners detained prior to deportation is a 
"particularly weak link" with trafficking case 
"continually ... unidentified by the judges." 
 
-- B. What is the number of victims identified during the 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  026 OF 037 
 
 
reporting period? 
 
No information was provided on this question. 
 
-- C. Has the government developed and implemented a 
referral process to transfer victims detained, arrested 
or placed in protective custody by law enforcement 
authorities to institutions that provide short-or long- 
term care? 
 
As reported in paragraph 21 section A, women who prima 
facie seem to be sex trafficking victims are referred to 
Maagan shelter without passing through detention 
facilities.  Foreign workers who are detained are 
interviewed by a police officer and entitled to a hearing 
before a representative of Interior.  NGO representative 
are also given access to detention facilities where they 
can assist foreign workers, and can be present at 
tribunal hearings with the worker's approval. 
 
-- D. How many victims were referred for assistance by 
law enforcement authorities during the reporting period? 
 
No information was provided on this question. 
 
¶24.  Response to questions in paragraph 29, section E of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
¶A. For countries with legalized prostitution:  does the 
government have a mechanism for screening for trafficking 
victims among persons involved in the legal/regulated 
commercial sex trade? 
 
While the act of prostitution is not criminalized, 
prostitution is not legalized in Israel. 
 
¶25.  Response to questions in paragraph 29, section F of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. Are the rights of victims respected? 
 
The rights of victims are generally respected, although 
complaints persist.  NGOs have issues with perceived 
barriers to accessing certain rights -- notably language 
problems - and Hotline argued that sex trafficking 
victims face difficulties with the legal system in 
receiving legal redress, although it was not clear if 
that was an issue for trafficking victims or an aspect of 
the Israeli legal system for legal redress generally. 
But NGO complaints about denial of rights focus on 
individuals they consider to be labor trafficking 
victims, but have not been so identified by the 
government.  Hotline noted one example where they said 
they were "forced to submit a legal petition" each of the 
seven times they requested a visa for a labor trafficking 
"survivor," but did not clarify if and how that differed 
from a normal visa application process. 
 
-- B. Are trafficking victims detained or jailed? 
 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  027 OF 037 
 
 
The government does not detain or jail individuals who 
have been identified as trafficking victims.  The benefit 
of the doubt is generally given to possible sex 
trafficking victims, and we have no reported complaints 
of such individuals being classified as criminals in 
¶2007.  NGOs do complain that labor trafficking victims 
are often not identified as such by the government. 
Foreign workers residing in Israel illegally are detained 
in facilities separated from criminal detainees. 
 
-- C. If detained or jailed, for how long? 
 
Victims who are to be deported can be detained until 
deportation. 
 
-- D. Are victims fined? 
 
No. 
 
-- E. Are victims prosecuted for violations of other 
laws, such as those governing immigration or 
prostitution? 
 
No.  Isha L'Isha reported one case where a victim was 
jailed for armed robbery and false documents, received 
treatment from the Welfare Department, and is now 
rehabilitating. 
 
¶26.  Response to questions in paragraph 29, section G of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. Does the government encourage victims to assist in 
the investigation and prosecution of trafficking? 
 
Yes, in sex trafficking cases.  It is unclear in labor 
trafficking cases, due to the small number of labor 
trafficking victims that the government identified. 
Legal aid did assist 12 victims of labor trafficking in 
10 lawsuits. 
 
-- B. How many victims assisted in the investigation and 
prosecution of traffickers during the reporting period? 
 
The government reported that 12 of the 34 women directed 
to the shelter during 2007 refused to testify, 12 agreed 
but were eventually not required to do so, five are 
awaiting testimony, 1 concluded her testimony, and 3 left 
the shelter before their testimony was given. 
 
-- C. May victims file civil suits or seek legal action 
against traffickers? 
 
Yes.  Victims may also initiate petitions to the High 
Court of Justice against government agencies, if they so 
choose. 
 
-- D. Does anyone impede victim access to such legal 
redress? 
 
There are NGO complaints about victims' lack of knowledge 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  028 OF 037 
 
 
of the law, lack of representation, lack of 
identification as a victim, low redress awards, and 
difficulties in collecting from the traffickers redress 
awarded by the courts.  But while Isha L'Isha complained 
of what they called a "Kafkaesque" Interior policy 
regarding trafficking victims, and Kav LaOved voiced 
concerns that threats from traffickers intimidated some 
victims from seeking redress, there were no reports of 
any government action to intentionally impede access to 
legal redress. 
 
-- E. If a victim is a material witness in a court case 
against a former employer, is the victim permitted to 
obtain other employment or to leave the country pending 
trial proceedings? 
 
Yes.  NGOs note that other employment can be difficult to 
find, but agreed that the government provided the option 
to do so. 
 
-- F. Are there means by which a victim may obtain 
restitution? 
 
There is no victim restitution program other than the 
right to file civil and administrative lawsuits, and 
court awarded compensation in criminal cases. 
 
¶27.  Response to questions in paragraph 29, section H of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. What kind of protection is the government able to 
provide for victims and witnesses?  Does it provide these 
protections in practice? 
 
There is currently no working witness protection program. 
On February 10, 2008 the Ministerial Committee on 
Legislation and Law Enforcement approved a bill entitle 
"The Witness Protection Program Law" aimed at creating a 
basis for establishing the Authority for the Protection 
of Witness in Israel in the Ministry of Public Security. 
 
Along with its other roles, the Maagan shelter provided 
protection for sex trafficking victims who were 
testifying against their traffickers.  The shelter also 
operates the "Safe Return" project through contact with 
NGOs in origin countries. 
 
Police Intelligence, with the assistance of Interpol and 
the Israeli Police delegate abroad, prepare risk 
assessments when presented with evidence of danger to a 
trafficking victim. 
 
-- B. What type of shelter or services does the 
government provide? 
 
Answered in previous questions regarding the Maagan 
shelter. 
 
-- C. Are these services provided directly by the 
government or are they provided by NGOs or IOs funded by 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  029 OF 037 
 
 
host government grants? 
 
The services associated with the government are provided 
directly by the government.  There is no funding of NGOs 
or IOs by host government grants for services to 
trafficking victims. 
 
-- D. Does the government provide shelter or housing 
benefits to victims or other resources to aid the victims 
in rebuilding their lives? 
 
Answered previously. 
 
-- E. Where are child victims placed (e.g., in shelters, 
foster care, or juvenile justice detention centers)? 
 
Israel has not identified a problem in sex trafficking of 
minors.  Children of trafficking victims are housed in 
the same facilities as their mother, such as the Maagan 
shelter. 
 
-- F. What is the number of victims assisted by 
government-funded assistance programs during the 
reporting period? 
 
No information provided, other than the 75 women and nine 
children who received services in the Maagan shelter 
during 2007. 
 
-- G. What is the number of victims assisted by non 
government-funded assistance programs? 
 
Hotline reported that they assisted 49 sex trafficking 
victims and 32 labor trafficking cases.  Isha L'Isha 
reported that they assisted 49 sex trafficking victims. 
 
-- H. What is the number of victims that received shelter 
services during the reporting period? 
 
As reported previously, 75 women and nine children 
received services in the Maagan shelter during 2007. 
 
¶28.  Response to questions in paragraph 29, section I of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. Does the government provide any specialized 
training for government officials in identifying 
trafficking victims and in the provision of assistance to 
trafficked victims, including the special needs of 
trafficked children? 
 
Yes, the government provided many specialized training 
sessions in 2007 for government officials, both in 
identifying trafficking victims and in providing 
assistance to trafficking victims.  Examples included a 
seminar on trafficking by the Institute for Judicial 
Training of the MOJ, attended by State and District 
Attorney representatives; courses in the Investigations 
and Intelligence Training School; routine updates and 
guidelines issued by Legal Aid Department of MOJ; two 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  030 OF 037 
 
 
toolkits developed by the National Coordinator to 
identify labor trafficking; training for Immigration 
Administration officers on issues such as inter alia, the 
right to dignity and liberty, and xenophobia; guidelines 
for giving legal aid to victims for Tel Aviv and Haifa 
legal aid office lawyers; and a seminar co-hosted by the 
Haifa Legal Aid Office and Hotline that dealt with issues 
such as legal representation of minors. 
 
Isha L'Isha reported that there is "more and more" 
prevention activity and identification of trafficking 
victims.  "NGOs are invited to various events which are 
held by the government to talk with government 
representatives on identification for trafficking victims 
and raising awareness on the issue." 
 
-- B. Does the government provide training on protections 
and assistance to its embassies and consulates in foreign 
countries that are destination or transit countries? 
 
The training program that Israeli diplomats must undergo 
before starting their mission abroad includes a chapter 
on trafficking in persons.  In a related vein, Isha 
L'Isha said they organized the seminar the government 
conducted in early 2007 for representatives of Eastern 
European embassies regarding steps being taken by Israel 
to combat trafficking in women. 
 
-- C. Does it urge those embassies and consulates to 
develop ongoing relationships with NGOs and IOs that 
serve trafficked victims? 
 
MFA encouraged Israeli embassies to develop and maintain 
relationships with NGOs and IOs on trafficking issues. 
In January 2007, MITL in cooperation with the Israeli 
Ambassador to Thailand launched an information booklet in 
Thai on the rights of foreign workers in Israel, which 
was attached to the passport of every worker who received 
a visa. 
 
-- D. What is the number of trafficking victims assisted 
by the host country's embassies or consulates abroad 
during the reporting period?  Please explain the level of 
assistance.  For example, did the host government provide 
travel documents for the victim to repatriate, did the 
host government contact NGOs in either the source or 
destination countries to ensure the victim received 
adequate assistance, did the host government pay for the 
transportation home for a victim's repatriation, etc. 
 
With the understanding that this refers to any Israelis 
who might have been trafficked abroad, there were no such 
reported cases by the government. 
 
¶29.  Response to questions in paragraph 29, section J of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. Does the government provide assistance, such as 
medical aid, shelter, or financial help, to its nationals 
who are repatriated as victims of trafficking? 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  031 OF 037 
 
 
 
Not applicable. 
 
¶30.  Response to questions in paragraph 29, section K of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. Which international organizations or NGOs, if any, 
work with trafficking victims? 
 
The Center for International Migration and Immigration, 
Hotline for Migrant Workers, Isha L'Isha Haifa Feminist 
Center, the Israeli AIDS Task Force, Kav LaOved, Keshet 
(which runs the Maagan shelter under government 
supervision), Machon Toda'a, and the Task Force on Human 
Trafficking are six prominent Israeli NGOs that work with 
trafficking victims.  International NGOs that work with 
sex trafficking victims in Israel include the Angel 
Coalition, IOM Belarus, IOM Chisinau-Moldova, IOM Moscow, 
IOM Ukraine, IOM Uzbekistan, Istikamboli Avlod 
Uzbekistan, La Strada in Moldova, the Odessa (Ukraine) 
Public Movement "Faith, Hope, Love", Physicians for Human 
Rights, the St. Petersburg INGI Crisis Center for Women, 
and Winrock Russia.  UNHCR and Amnesty International work 
with refugees, who can become trafficking victims. 
 
-- B. What type of services do they provide? 
 
Each organization provides a different set of services to 
a different group of victims.  A partial list of the 
kinds of services they provide includes: protection; 
absorption; victim's hotline; economic assistance; 
temporary shelter; legal representation; legal advocacy; 
job training; psychiatric treatment; medical treatment; 
greeting women at the airport when they land in the 
source country; and helping the women to safely arrive 
home from the airport. 
 
-- C. What sort of cooperation do they receive from local 
authorities? 
 
Isha L'Isha reported that IOM in all countries has 
significant influence on the government, but that other 
NGOs have less influence, and specifically that all NGOs 
in Russia have "no influence whatsoever on the 
government."  Isha L'Isha added that IOM Uzbekistan has 
no influence on the government, but that there is 
cooperation between them. 
 
-- D. How much funding (in U.S. Dollar Equivalent) did 
NGOs and international organizations receive from the 
host government for victim assistance during the 
reporting period?  Please disaggregate funding for 
prevention and public awareness efforts from victim 
assistance funding.  NOTE:  If post reports that a 
government is incapable of providing direct assistance to 
TIP victims, please assess whether the government ensures 
that TIP victims receive access to adequate care from 
other entities.  Funding, personnel, and training 
constraints should be noted, if applicable.  Conversely, 
the lack of political will in a situation where a country 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  032 OF 037 
 
 
has adequate financial and other resources to address the 
problem should be noted as well. 
 
The government cooperated with NGOs and IOs in many ways, 
including joint hosting of conferences and NGO 
participation in creating the national plans for 
combating trafficking, but the GOI did not provide any 
direct funding to NGOs or IOs for anti-trafficking 
efforts. 
 
Isha L'Isha charged that there is an acute problem "and 
the sources is all the above: lack of funding; lack of 
personnel; and in many cases, lack of will."  Isha L'Isha 
also quoted research by Dr. Miriam Shif from the School 
of Social Work and Shivtati Levit of the Methadone Center 
in Jerusalem that said "in the past few years in Israel, 
there has been a drastic increase in the privatization of 
numerous social services the state is obliged to provide 
by law" and private organizations and business 
corporations are being given the responsibility to care 
for many vulnerable populations. 
 
----------- 
PREVENTION 
----------- 
 
¶31.  Response to questions in paragraph 30, section A of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. Does the government acknowledge that trafficking is 
a problem in the country?  If not, why not? 
 
The government has publicly acknowledged on numerous 
occasions that trafficking is a problem in Israel, and 
has taken numerous steps to raise public awareness of the 
situation. 
 
¶32.  Response to questions in paragraph 30, section B of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. Are there, or have there been, government-run anti- 
trafficking information or education campaigns conducted 
during the reporting period? 
 
Yes, several. 
 
-- B. If so, briefly describe the campaign(s), including 
their objectives and effectiveness. 
 
The Authority for the Advancement of the Status of Women, 
a part of the PMO, carried out activities in various 
parts of the public sector.  In cooperation with the Unit 
for Gender Equality in the Ministry of Education, the 
Authority conducted awareness campaigns in the school 
system that included seminars for administrators and 
presentations for teachers.  In cooperation with the 
National Coordinator, the Authority prepared information 
on trafficking that was disseminated to supervisors at a 
seminar on December 2, 2007.  In September 2007, the 
Authority and the Chairman of the Union of Local 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  033 OF 037 
 
 
Authorities disseminated trafficking awareness 
information to all heads of local authorities in Israel, 
and the Chairman of the Local Authorities instructed that 
the issue of trafficking in women be integrated into 
every training activity the local authorities.  The 
government reported that such training has already begun. 
On December 2, 2007, in cooperation with the Tel Aviv 
Municipality and the Union of Local Authorities, and 
several NGOs, the Authority held a national conference 
titled "Women Trafficking - Modern Slavery." 
 
On December 2, 2007, the government created a national 
award for persons who contributed to the fight against 
human trafficking. 
 
MITL issued a special workers' rights brochure for the 
construction industry in English, Russian, Romanian, 
Turkish, Thai and Chinese.  MITL also began distributing 
a brochure -- in Hebrew, English, Chinese, Thai, Russian, 
Romanian and Turkish -- setting out general labor rights 
of foreign workers in Israel to every foreign workers 
upon their arrival to Ben Gurion Airport, and posted the 
brochure on its website. 
 
The National Coordinator participated in numerous 
seminars and conferences, and gave lectures at several 
universities and young leaders programs. 
 
The Director of the Maagan shelter gave several lectures 
at government agencies and schools. 
 
The Police approved the text for a brochure to be 
circulated by Hotline in police stations regarding the 
rights of trafficking victims. 
 
The Immigration Police ran a radio campaign that warned 
employers not to exploit migrant workers. 
 
The Ministry of Education held five conferences for 
members of the education system in order to raise 
awareness on trafficking issues. 
 
The Israel Broadcast Authority ran television and radio 
programs on the subject of trafficking. 
 
The government conducted a training session for 200 
prosecutors on trafficking in women. 
 
Isha L'Isha noted that the police invite NGOs to their 
training session on trafficking in women. 
 
Other government activities included a call against human 
trafficking that was disseminated to all heads of the 
kibbutzim movement, and an IDF pledge to conduct 
educational activities on trafficking. 
 
Many of the programs described above dealt with labor 
trafficking as well as sex trafficking. 
 
-- C. Please provide the number of people reached by such 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  034 OF 037 
 
 
awareness efforts if available. 
 
No estimates were available, but the programs reached 
large numbers of people within various arms of the 
government and in the general public. 
 
-- D. Do these campaigns target potential trafficking 
victims and/or the demand for trafficking (e.g. "clients" 
of prostitutes or beneficiaries of forced labor)? 
 
Some of the programs, such as the MITL brochures, 
targeted potential victims.  The Immigration 
Administration ran campaigns targeting potential 
beneficiaries of trafficking, warning them of 
consequences of exploitation. 
 
¶33.  Response to questions in paragraph 30, section C of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. What is the relationship between government 
officials, NGOs, other relevant organizations and other 
elements of civil society on the trafficking issue? 
 
There is strong cooperation among NGOs.  Despite 
frustration in some quarters over what they consider lack 
of enforcement of the new trafficking law, NGOs report 
excellent working relationship with the National 
Coordinator and many elements of the government, 
including the police.  NGO complaints persist regarding 
alleged resistance in Interior.  Hotline noted that they 
"found that the higher up in government we go, the 
stronger the cooperation" but that cooperation on the 
lower levels is often difficult.  Isha L'Isha noted that 
the government is making efforts to implement prevention 
actions, and that its work in all aspects of prevention 
can be noted positively, especially the work of Marit 
Danon Authority for the Advancement of Women.  While they 
complimented government-NGO cooperation generally, Isha 
L'Isha and Machon Toda'a voiced several complaints 
against Interior in their response for this report. 
 
¶34.  Response to questions in paragraph 30, section D of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. Does the government monitor immigration and 
emigration patterns for evidence of trafficking? 
 
The government reported that Interior monitored new 
patterns of trafficking using forged documents or 
fictitious marriages.  Isha L'Isha noted that the 
government is "making efforts." 
 
-- B. Do law enforcement agencies screen for potential 
trafficking victims along borders? 
 
According to the government, "border controllers are 
skilled at detecting passport forgeries." 
 
¶35.  Response to questions in paragraph 30, section E of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  035 OF 037 
 
 
 
-- A. Is there a mechanism for coordination and 
communication between various agencies, internal, 
international, and multilateral on trafficking-related 
matters, such as a multi-agency working group or a task 
force?  Does the government have a trafficking in persons 
working group or single point of contact? 
 
Yes, the National Coordinator, who works out of MOJ, 
coordinates multi-agency cooperation and working groups, 
and is the first point of contact in the government on 
trafficking issues.  The National Coordinator also heads 
a multi-agency permanent round table that meets 
periodically to map out problems and strategies.  In 
addition, the Knesset Subcommittee on Trafficking in 
Women and the Knesset Special Committee on Foreign 
Workers serve as forums for debate on trafficking issues, 
and monitor measures taken to address trafficking. 
 
-- B. Does the government have a public corruption task 
force? 
 
A inter-agency Implementation Committee in "The Battle 
against Severe Crime and Organized Crime and their 
Outcomes" is charged with developing operational 
mechanism and performance measures on issues such as 
intelligence fusion and money laundering, some of which 
include elements of investigating public corruption. 
 
¶36.  Response to questions in paragraph 30, section F of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. Does the government have a national plan of action 
to address trafficking in persons? 
 
Yes.  On December 2, 2007, Government Resolution 2670 
approved the National Plan to Combat Trafficking for 
Prostitution and the National Plan to Combat Trafficking 
for Labor. 
 
-- B. If so, which agencies were involved in developing 
it? 
 
MOJ, Ministry of Public Security, Ministry of Social 
Affairs, Interior, MITL, MFA, Ministry of Health, Israel 
Police, PMO, State Attorney's Office, Authority for the 
Advancement of Women, and the Director of the Maagan 
Shelter. 
 
-- C. Were NGOs consulted in the process? 
 
Yes, including Hotline, Kav LaOved, Isha L'Isha, Machon 
Toda'a, Atzum, Amnesty International and Physicians for 
Human Rights. 
 
-- D. What steps has the government taken to disseminate 
the action plan? 
 
A synopsis of the National Plan was published on the MOJ 
website. 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  036 OF 037 
 
 
 
¶37.  Response to questions in paragraph 30, section G of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A: For all posts:  As part of the new criteria added 
to the TVPA's minimum standards by the 2005 TVPRA, what 
measures has the government taken during the reporting 
period to reduce the demand for commercial sex acts? 
(see ref B, para. 9(3) for examples) 
 
On December 2, 2007 - The International Day for the 
Abolition of Slavery - the Ministry of Education 
circulated information throughout the educational system 
on the issue of trafficking in women.  The information 
focused on the issue of demand, and the education 
system's role in reducing demand for sexual services and 
pornography, through education on human dignity and 
equality. 
 
October 16, 2007 the Parliamentary Subcommittee held a 
special session, attended by the Swedish Trafficking 
Ambassador and high ranking representatives of the 
Philippine and French embassies in Israel, that included 
discussion on preventing trafficking and presentations of 
the trafficking situation in the respective countries. 
 
The National Plan to Combat Trafficking for Prostitution 
authorized research to consider legislation to 
criminalize purchasing prostitution services.  The 
research has been completed by the Office of the National 
Coordinator and is in the process of being edited and 
submitted to the Deputy Attorney General for Criminal 
Matters for consideration. 
 
¶38.  Response to questions in paragraph 30, section H of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. Required of Posts in EU countries and posts in 
Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Japan, China, Singapore, 
South Korea, Taiwan, and Hong Kong:  As part of the new 
criteria added to the TVPA's minimum standards by the 
2005 TVPRA, what measures has the government taken during 
the reporting period to reduce the participation in 
international child sex tourism by nationals of the 
Country? 
 
Not applicable. 
 
¶39.  Response to questions in paragraph 30, section I of 
instructions cable.  (Reftel A) 
 
-- A. Required of posts in countries that have 
contributed over 100 troops to international peacekeeping 
efforts (Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, 
Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, 
Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Denmark, Egypt, Ethiopia, 
Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, 
Guatemala, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, 
Jordan, Kenya, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mongolia, Morocco, 
Namibia, Nepal, the Netherlands, Niger, Nigeria, 
 
TEL AVIV 00000548  037 OF 037 
 
 
Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, 
Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Senegal, Slovakia, South Africa, 
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Tanzania, Togo, Tunisia, 
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom, Uruguay, Zambia, and 
Zimbabwe): What measures has the government adopted to 
ensure that its nationals who are deployed abroad as part 
of a peacekeeping or other similar mission do not engage 
in or facilitate severe forms of trafficking or exploit 
victims of such trafficking? 
 
Not applicable. 
Not applicable.