08TORONTO20
Ontario Conducts Emergency Management Exercise
Thu Jan 24 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Toronto
VZCZCXRO0458
PP RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHON #0020 0241939
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 241939Z JAN 08
FM AMCONSUL TORONTO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2316
INFO RUCNCAN/ALCAN COLLECTIVE
RUEAHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHDC
RUEAUSA/DEPT OF HHS WASHDC
RUEHPH/CDC ATLANTA GA
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0040UNCLAS TORONTO 000020 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMED PREL CASC PGOV CA
SUBJECT: Ontario Conducts Emergency Management Exercise 
 
Sensitive but Unclassified - Protect Accordingly. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Following up on recommendations by the UK and U.S. Consuls 
General in Toronto, Emergency Management Ontario (EMO) organized an 
emergency management exercise in Toronto on January 16.  Hosted by 
Ontario Commissioner for Emergency Management Jay Hope, the session 
brought together five staff from the British, U.S., Portuguese, and 
South African consulates general, with 26 Canadian municipal, 
provincial, and federal emergency management professionals from law 
enforcement, fire, hospital administration, transit, community 
safety, the Red Cross, and Canadian Forces agencies.  Discussion 
focused on post-emergency decision-making and communication 
strategies. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The discussion was kicked off by an in-depth "procedures 
followed and lessons learned" review of the aftermath of the 
September 2, 1998 crash of New York to Geneva-bound Swiss Air flight 
111 just off Nova Scotia.  The investigation concluded the Swiss Air 
flight, which crashed while attempting an emergency landing at 
Halifax airport killing all 229 persons on board, was due to an 
electrical fire.  In detailing the crash and its aftermath, Andy 
Latham, the RCMP officer in charge of the investigation and 
currently the Director of Emergency Programs at Emergency Management 
Nova Scotia, explained the challenges of managing the multinational 
response to the accident while maintaining the integrity of the 
investigation.  He stressed the importance of:  Looking after the 
people involved, both victims' families and responders; "Think big 
or go home" i.e., making decisions and following-through with huge 
resource commitments; including other agencies and volunteers (the 
recovery itself clocked 40,000 volunteer hours); establishing and 
maintaining strong lines of communication; and encouraging 
volunteers to leave their egos at the door. 
 
¶3. (SBU) After the Swiss Air crash overview, the group conducted an 
emergency response scenario to a simulated head-on commuter train 
and passenger train collision during a winter morning's rush hour 
just east of Toronto, resulting in hundreds killed or injured and up 
to 2,000 people wandering around the accident site.  The 
after-scenario discussion focused on the roles of emergency 
management (especially fire and police first response), medical 
needs, identifying and tracking the victims, communication to 
consulate representatives and the general public, handling of 
international visitors and the media, and the impact of language and 
cultural considerations.  One participant emphasized the truly 
catastrophic nature of the fictional scenario by noting that, other 
than the Swiss Air 111 crash, the last time Canada experienced a 
tragedy of this magnitude was the Halifax explosion of 1917. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Comment:  British Consul General Nicholas Armour began the 
afternoon by noting that, following the August 2, 2005 Air France 
crash at Toronto's Pearson International Airport, he could not get 
an answer from any offices he called looking for information about 
British citizens on the flight.  Following the Air France crash U.S. 
Consulate staff also could not obtain vital information, such as the 
nationalities of passengers, from provincial officials.  Informal 
person to person contacts developed by our Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement (ICE) officers working at Pearson Airport helped us 
quickly identify and locate the AmCits involved. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Comment (continued):  Given that more than 50% of the 
Greater Toronto Area's 5 million residents are foreign-born, that 
about 250,000 American citizens live in ConGen Toronto's consular 
district, and that many Ontario municipalities along the border 
already have cross-border emergency response agreements (mostly 
informal) with neighboring U.S. municipalities, the response to any 
significant emergency in southern Ontario will be international (and 
almost certainly involve the U.S.).  The exercise did not provide 
certainty regarding which of Canada's federal, provincial, or 
municipal government agencies would be our primary points of contact 
for different kinds or locations of emergencies, perhaps previewing 
the difficulty for consular officials of finding the information 
nexus in the aftermath of the next emergency in Ontario.  We hope 
that EMO will soon develop an effective standard operating procedure 
to ensure that provincial officials provide the information that we 
and other consulates will need during future emergencies involving 
foreign nationals in Ontario.  End Comment. 
 
TUNIS