08USUNNEWYORK84
SECURITY COUNCIL BRIEFING ON UNAMI, MNF-I
Tue Jan 29 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO4393
OO RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0084/01 0292114
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 292114Z JAN 08
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3620
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 000084 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV IZ
SUBJECT: SECURITY COUNCIL BRIEFING ON UNAMI, MNF-I 
 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: The Security Council held its quarterly 
meeting January 21 on the situation in Iraq.  Special 
Representative to the Secretary-General (SRSG) Staffan de 
Mistura briefed for the first time in his new capacity as the 
head of the United Nations Assistance Mission to Iraq 
(UNAMI), and Ambassador Khalilzad briefed on behalf of the 
Multinational Force (MNF-I).  Both de Mistura and the 
Ambassador told the Council that significant improvements in 
the security situation had created an opportunity for durable 
progress with regard to national reconciliation that must be 
seized by Iraq.  Other members of the Council, as well as 
Iraqi PermRep Bayati, echoed these statements.  Russia, South 
Africa and Libya were more sparing in their assessments and 
said they continued to have grave concerns about the security 
and political situation in Iraq.  Russia and Libya were the 
only delegations to raise the issue of security contractors. 
Libyan PermRep Ettalhi called on MNF-I to end its 
"occupation" of Iraq, but Iraqi PermRep Bayati forcefully 
rejected this statement, stating that MNF-I is a "friendly 
force."  Bayati also restated Iraq's willingness to make a 
financial contribution to the new UNAMI compound, and asked 
for the Council to reduce Iraqi oil revenue contributions to 
the UN Compensation Commission from five to one percent.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
UNAMI, MNF-I BRIEFINGS 
 
¶2. (U) In his first briefing to the Council as Iraq envoy, 
SRSG de Mistura underscored the importance of Security 
Council Resolution 1770, which expanded the UN mandate.  In 
dealing with UNAMI,s increased responsibilities, de Mistura 
said the goals are to "monitor emerging trends and propose 
carefully chosen, and time-sensitive, initiatives - either 
jumpstarting or galvanizing existing processes."  He outlined 
UNAMI,s primary areas of attention: 1) resolving disputed 
internal boundaries, 2) helping returnees, 3) entering the 
debate of the timeliness and preconditions for provincial 
elections, 4) supporting Iraq,s international partnership 
under the Compact, and 5) advancing regional dialogue. 
 
¶3. (U) De Mistura said 2008 is "a window of opportunity," 
given the recent advances in the security situation, and 
certain preliminary advances in the political and economic 
situation.  Given this situation, UNAMI plans to expand its 
office in Irbil, and seeks to establish a presence in both 
Basra International Airport as well as Kirkuk.  In short, 
said de Mistura, UNAMI plans to enhance, both qualitatively 
and quantitatively, its presence in Iraq. 
 
¶4. (U) Drawing on reftel points, Ambassador Khalilzad 
followed with a briefing on behalf of MNF-I.  He underscored 
the positive effects of the surge - monthly overall attacks 
have been reduced by 60 percent since June 2007, while 
hard-hit provinces such as Anbar and the Baghdad area have 
seen marked increases in stability.  The Ambassador noted 
that Iraqi security forces are "moving forward to take 
greater control of their country,s security," and the 
transition to Provincial Iraqi Control is proceeding as 
planned.  Regional and international engagement continues to 
improve, and "hope is returning."  The Ambassador concluded 
that Iraqis must take advantage of the momentum created by 
the improvements in security to pass and implement key 
legislation, and promote reconciliation. 
 
REACTIONS FROM THE SECURITY COUNCIL 
 
¶5. (U) Council members uniformly supported the role of UNAMI, 
and praised the recent downturn in violence.  France, the UK 
and China, among others, expressed their hope that the 
improvements would prove durable, and to that end emphasized 
the importance of regional dialogue.  Russia also emphasized 
the importance of regional dialogue, and praised Syria and 
Iran for the "positive dynamic" of the dialogue.  Regarding 
the security situation, Russian PermRep Churkin said, 
however, that "declaring victory is premature," and said the 
security situation will remain unstable for the foreseeable 
future.  He said that UNAMI reporting on the humanitarian and 
human rights situation was not as fulsome as it had been in 
past reports, and asked UNAMI to focus on the detention 
practices of the Iraqi government and MNF-I.  Russia and 
Libya criticized the presence of foreign security contractors 
in Iraq, with Libya saying their presence should be 
"criminalized."  Russia and Panama also expressed concern 
about the local citizen watch groups, and said they should be 
fully integrated under the supervision of Iraqi security 
forces. 
 
¶6. (U) Indonesia said it "draws encouragement from the steady 
decline in security problems," and looked forward to 
continuing progress, which "will lead to the withdrawal of 
MNF-I."  Indonesia expressed support for intra-religious 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000084  002 OF 002 
 
 
dialogue within Iraq, and praised recent attempts to bridge 
Sunni and Shia misunderstandings.  South Africa and Libya 
were more grudging in their acknowledgment of improvements in 
the security situation.  As in previous interventions, South 
Africa emphasized that the mandate of MNF-I must be closely 
monitored by the Security Council.  SC President and Libyan 
PermRep Ettalhi, speaking immediately before Iraqi PermRep 
Bayati, blamed "occupation forces" for all of Iraq,s 
problems, saying they destroyed Iraq,s political, 
administrative and cultural institutions.  Ettalhi said Iraq 
is "fully able to shoulder all their responsibilities," and 
called for a  "clear horizon to end the occupation." 
 
IRAQ PERMREP BAYATI REACTS 
 
¶7. (U) Iraqi PermRep Bayati forcefully rejected Ettalhi,s 
characterization of MNF-I as an "occupier," stating that 
MNF-I is a "friendly force."  Bayati underscored recent 
political progress, including the adoption by the Council of 
Representatives of the Justice and Accountability Law.  He 
said Iraq looks forward to the Security Council addressing 
Iraq,s challenges outside of the Chapter VII format.  Given 
improvements in the security situation, Bayati said Iraq 
invites "all brotherly and friendly countries" to re-open 
their embassies in Iraq.  Bayati asked that Iraq,s Paris 
Club debt be forgiven, and also called for the UN 
Compensation Committee to reduce payment of compensation from 
Iraq,s oil revenues from five percent to one percent. 
Bayati reaffirmed Iraq,s willingness to work with UNAMI, and 
in this regard, noted that the Ministries of Justice, 
Defense, Interior and Labor and Social Affairs in Baghdad and 
Kurdistan have extended an invitation to the UNAMI Human 
Rights office to visit their respective detention facilities. 
 Bayati closed by noting his government,s willingness "to 
contribute to building the new headquarters of UNAMI in Iraq 
to facilitate the fulfillment of its mandate." 
WOLFF