08USUNNEWYORK1080
UNGA DEBATES SITUATION IN AFGHANISTAN
Mon Nov 17 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUCNDT #1080/01 3222348
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 172348Z NOV 08
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5383UNCLAS USUN NEW YORK 001080 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL AORC AF UNGA
SUBJECT: UNGA DEBATES SITUATION IN AFGHANISTAN 
 
¶1. SUMMARY:  On November 10, the UN General Assembly 
considered the situation in Afghanistan, and adopted by 
consensus a resolution reaffirming international commitment 
to rebuilding the country.  Virtually every speaker expressed 
strong concern over the increase of attacks against 
humanitarian aid workers in Afghanistan.  Delegates agreed 
that a successful strategy would be centered on the principle 
of Afghan ownership.  Many noted the progress that has been 
made over the past seven years, and emphasized that refocused 
international coordination was needed to overcome the 
remaining challenges.  END SUMMARY 
 
¶2. On November 10, the UN General Assembly considered the 
situation in Afghanistan, and adopted draft resolution 
A/63/L.17, entitled "The Situation in Afghanistan," by 
consensus.  Nineteen delegations spoke, many underscoring the 
need to promote social and economic development before the 
security situation fully could be addressed.  Virtually every 
speaker expressed strong concern regarding the significant 
increase in attacks against humanitarian aid workers in 
Afghanistan.  Several speakers, including Ambassador 
Khalilzad, offered their condolences in light of the deaths 
of two Spanish soldiers in Afghanistan the day before the 
debate. 
 
¶3. The Afghan PermRep reminded the Assembly of the "noble 
purpose" of the international force in Afghanistan, which he 
defined as "to prevent the malady of terrorism from infesting 
a nation and the world."  "Never again," he declared, "will 
the Taliban regime have control of a country and crush the 
hopes, dreams and lives of their own people.  Never again 
should Al Qaeda have sanctuaries in Afghanistan and elsewhere 
to project its extremist terror to kill thousands of innocent 
people across the world."  The PermRep called for a strategy 
based on three principles:  increased Afghan ownership at 
every level and in every dimension; international refocus on 
the overall security of the Afghan people; and a re-emphasis 
on regional partnerships.  He highlighted the progress made 
in building schools, health clinics, roads, and 
telecommunications infrastructure, in human rights and rule 
of law, and in counter-narcotic efforts.  The Taliban was 
fighting a "war of perception" he stated, and the 
international community must remain vigilant to demonstrate 
its success to the Afghan people.  Noting that there were two 
Afghanistans, one portrayed in the media, and the other 
"experienced by millions of Afghans building daily lives in 
peace," the PermRep implored the Assembly not to forget the 
"second Afghanistan." 
 
¶4. Ambassador Khalilzad delivered the U.S. statement, which 
stressed that success required the Afghan government to make 
tough decisions to implement agreed policies in the areas of 
local governance, combating corruption, enforcing rule of 
law, achieving economic development, pursuing robust 
counter-narcotic efforts, and reform of the police forces. 
Ambassador Khalilzad underscored the important role played by 
Afghanistan's neighboring states in cooperating against 
terrorists and extremists.  He noted that the U.S. deeply 
regretted the accidental loss of civilian lives in 
Afghanistan, and assured the Assembly that the U.S. would 
take every precaution to prevent civilian casualties.  The 
statement also called upon Member States to assist the Afghan 
people in preparing to deal with food shortages and cold 
weather, in order to avoid a worsening humanitarian situation 
this winter.  (The complete text of the U.S. statement can be 
found at www.usunnewyork.usmission.gov.) 
 
¶5. The Pakistani PermRep focused on the stress the situation 
in Afghanistan was causing in Pakistan, including its massive 
population of Afghan refugees, and the high number of deaths 
of Pakistani soldiers and innocent civilians on its border 
with Afghanistan.  Pakistani support for international 
efforts in Afghanistan, he continued, required "reciprocal 
cooperation based on goodwill, respect for each other's 
sovereignty and territorial integrity, and mutual commitment 
not to allow our respective territories to be used against 
each other."  The French PermRep affirmed the European 
Union's support for identifying criteria to measure aid 
effectiveness; establishing a database to track resources per 
donors' commitments; and strengthening the Afghan 
institutions working to combat corruption.  He emphasized 
that the challenges in Afghanistan required a political 
solution. 
 
¶6. In introducing draft resolution A/63/L.17, the German 
PermRep reminded the Assembly that the reconstruction and 
development of Afghanistan remained the "heart" of the 
international community's efforts, with the ultimate 
objective of improving the lives of Afghans.  The resolution, 
he stated, would emphasize the Assembly's solidarity with the 
Afghan people and send a strong message of support for the 
international community's efforts to rebuild the country 
after "devastating years of Taliban terror."  The PermRep 
highlighted the progress made in Afghanistan during the past 
 
seven years, noted the need for further efforts to improve 
governance in Afghanistan, and encouraged the Afghan 
government to take further actions to combat terrorism, drug 
production and trafficking, and corruption, as well as 
continued judicial reform efforts. 
Khalilzad