08USUNNEWYORK180
UNSC: GAZA SITUATION UNDERMINING ANNAPOLIS OPTIMISM
Wed Feb 27 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO7951
PP RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHKUK RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0180/01 0580039
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 270039Z FEB 08
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3804
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 000180 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PTER IS LE KPAL KWBG
SUBJECT: UNSC: GAZA SITUATION UNDERMINING ANNAPOLIS OPTIMISM 
 
REF: STATE 18360 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY.  Recently appointed UN Special Coordinator 
for the Middle East Peace Process Serry and UN Under 
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Holmes provided 
 
SIPDIS 
the Security Council on February 26 with a detailed 
description of the situation in the Palestinian territories, 
arguing that dire conditions on the ground are undermining 
the optimism generated by the launch of the Annapolis 
process.  The Israeli delegation purposely absented itself 
from the open briefing to show Israel's opposition to these 
UN statements, including assertions that Israeli measures 
amount to collective punishment and an appeal to Israel to 
abide by its obligations under international law. 
 
¶2. (SBU) In closed consultations following the briefing, 
Council members agreed the situation on the ground threatened 
the Annapolis process.  All delegations except Libya 
condemned rocket attacks and suicide bombings.  While 
asserting Israel's right to self-defense, most including the 
Europeans called on Israel to respond proportionately in 
accordance with international law, and also called for the 
reopening of the Gaza crossings.  In response to an appeal by 
Holmes for the Council "to speak up," several delegations 
lamented the Council's silence on the subject.  Many 
expressed support for a more active Quartet role.  In his 
remarks, Ambassador Khalilzad cited the four elements 
necessary for a solution to the situation in Gaza (reftel), 
and recalled the Council's failure last month to reach a 
balanced statement.  Although most delegations withheld 
comments on Lebanon pending upcoming UN reports, the Russian, 
UK, French, Italian, and Chinese delegations noted their 
support for the Arab League's mediation efforts.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
 
UN REPRESENTATIVES EMPHASIZE DIRE CONDITIONS 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) UN Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace 
Process Robert Serry briefed the Council for the first time 
on February 26.  Serry emphasized that the Annapolis process 
could only progress if there were real changes on the ground. 
 He called for an intensification of efforts in the West Bank 
in accordance with the Road Map and for a different and more 
positive strategy to address the situation in Gaza, which he 
called "unacceptable and unsustainable."  He urged Israel to 
meet its obligations to the civilians of Gaza under 
international law, but also noted that Hamas had not acted 
sufficiently to end the rocket and mortar attacks against 
Israel.  In closed consultations with Council members, Serry 
said he plans to update the Council regularly and expects to 
play an active role in the Quartet. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Under Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and 
Emergency Relief Coordinator John Holmes briefed the Council 
on his recent trip to the West Bank, Gaza, and Sderot.  He 
focused his remarks on the "grim and miserable" situation in 
Gaza.  He said only 10 percent of the goods and people that 
had gone into Gaza in January 2007 was allowed to enter in 
January 2008, and he noted that 80 percent of the population 
was receiving food aid.  He also said that most industry and 
agriculture had collapsed, power cuts were impairing the 
functioning of essential services and infrastructure, water 
quality was declining, the sewage system was inadequate, and 
the medical and education systems were approaching failure. 
Holmes made clear that Hamas must accept its full 
responsibility for the situation, but said no matter the 
provocation and illegality of terrorist acts, the Israeli 
response amounts to collective punishment and is contrary to 
international humanitarian law.  He further argued that the 
Israeli response is not having the desired effect, but 
leading to further radicalization.  In closing, he called for 
the reopening of the Gaza crossings and appealed to the 
Council to speak up about the impact of the situation on 
civilians. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Israel purposely did not attend the briefing to 
signal its disagreement with the content of the UN 
statements.  The Israeli mission informed USUN that Israeli 
PermRep Gillerman met with Serry on February 25 and told him 
that the Israeli response to the rocket and mortar attacks is 
not targeted against civilians per se, but driven by security 
concerns.  Gillerman said the recent drop in the number of 
Qassam rockets fired into Israel showed the measures were 
effective. 
 
 
UNSC: HUMANITARIAN SITUATION UNDERMINING ANNAPOLIS PROGRESS 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000180  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) In closed consultations following the briefing, 
Ambassador Khalilzad reiterated the U.S. commitment to the 
Annapolis process and its support for progress on four 
tracks.  He also welcomed the dialogue between Egypt, Israel 
and the Palestinians on the humanitarian situation in Gaza 
and outlined four elements necessary for a solution (reftel). 
 In response to calls for Council action, Ambassador 
Khalilzad raised last month's failed efforts to reach 
consensus on a balanced statement. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Delegations noted the growing gap between the 
aspirations of the political process and the reality on the 
ground, and said the dire humanitarian situation was 
undermining the optimism generated by the Annapolis process. 
All delegations except Libya condemned the rocket and other 
attacks against Israel, but also objected to what was 
characterized as Israel's disproportionate response.  Libyan 
PR Ettalhi questioned Israeli actions, asking if it is 
possible to say that Israel has a desire for peace.  All 
delegations called on both parties to fulfill their Roadmap 
obligations.  The UN's appeal for the Gaza crossings to be 
re-opened was supported by the UK, Belgium, France, Russia, 
China, South Africa, and Costa Rica. 
 
 
MEMBERS DISAPPOINTED BY UNSC INACTION 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) In reaction to Holmes' call for the Council to speak 
up, several elected delegations expressed disappointment at 
the Council's failure to issue a statement on the situation 
in Gaza, and the delegations from South Africa, Costa Rica, 
and Panama spoke out strongly against Council inaction on 
this file.  Panamanian PR Arias blamed the inaction on "some 
members'" unconditional support for the parties.  South 
African PR Kumalo contested Ambassador Khalilzad's statement 
that the Council had made every effort to issue a statement 
in January, arguing that the Council would never come to 
agreement if it was expected to equate the rocket attacks 
against Israel with the humanitarian plight of the 
Palestinians.  Kumalo also urged the Council to visit the 
area to demonstrate its concern to the international 
community.  In seeking a greater Council role, Kumalo and 
Costa Rican PR Urbina also criticized the Quartet for failure 
to fully engage the Council on its activities. 
 
 
SUPPORT FOR ARAB LEAGUE EFFORTS IN LEBANON 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶9. (SBU) Given the focus of the statements by Serry and 
Holmes, most delegations said they would wait for the UN's 
upcoming reports on Lebanon before speaking to the issue, but 
the UK, Russian, French, Italian, Chinese delegations voiced 
their support for the Arab League's mediation efforts. 
KHALILZAD