08USUNNEWYORK882
UN GENERAL DEBATE: INDIA, GERMANY, ITALY AND
Tue Sep 30 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUCNDT #0882 2741610
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 301610Z SEP 08
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5025
INFO RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS USUN NEW YORK 000882 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR IO/UNP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV AORC UNGA BP MT IN HR TV MO BB
IC, FJ, DO, TN, ST, GV, GJ, LU, GM, IT, LO, SO, AO 
SUBJECT: UN GENERAL DEBATE: INDIA, GERMANY, ITALY AND 
OTHERS SPEAK 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: Speakers at the UN General Debate the afternoon 
of September 26 continued discussion of the energy, food, and 
financial crises; climate change; and UN reform.  India 
focused on nuclear issues, support for Afghanistan, and its 
intent to resolve issues with Pakistan.  Germany and Italy 
stood firm against Iranian actions and anti-Israeli rhetoric. 
Some countries warned against reintroducing "Cold War 
rivalry."  Others, including Morocco, called for resolving 
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.  Morocco encouraged 
dialogue and reconciliation in Iraq.  Smaller, conflict-prone 
states spoke against the proliferation of small arms. 
Disturbingly, Fiji stated that it was "not able to schedule 
an election" to return to parliamentary democracy.  Speakers 
included:  Solomon Islands, India, Croatia, Tuvalu, Morocco, 
Barbados, Iceland, Fiji, Dominican Republic, Tonga, Saint 
Lucia, Republic of Guinea, Luxemburg, Grenada, Germany, 
Italy, Slovakia, Somalia, and Angola.  Video and texts are 
available at www.un.org/ga/63/generaldebate. END SUMMARY. 
 
HIGHLIGHTS 
---------- 
 
¶2.  Iran: Germany reiterated that "An armed Iran with nuclear 
weapons would pose a threat to security....Therefore, Iran 
must put its cards on the table.  We have made our offer. 
The Iranian side's delaying tactics must not exhaust the 
patience of the international community.  We expect a clear 
signal from Iran indicating its willingness to comply with 
the international community's demands and build confidence." 
Italy joined in, emphasizing the importance of strengthening 
the Non-Proliferation Treaty.  The western Europeans 
condemned Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's comments 
calling for the destruction of Israel. 
 
¶3. Georgia:  Croatia welcomed the European Union's August 
2008 "six-point agreement," and warned that failure to 
address issues multilaterally could lead to "old paradigms of 
confrontation" and compromise "democratic gains" achieved 
after the Cold War.  Luxemburg called for resolution "on 
principles of independence, sovereignty and territorial 
integrity."  Germany said it stood firm on Georgian borders, 
and announced that the EU Observer Mission will forward a 
comprehensive strategy in October.  Slovakia cautioned that 
unresolved disputes nurture extremism and hailed the 
importance of a "European and transatlantic perspective." 
 
¶4. Israeli-Palestinian Conflict:  Morocco expressed support 
for the "Road Map" and "Arab Peace Initiative;" and called 
for an end to "projects that are taking place around the Al 
Aqsa Mosque and other parts of Jerusalem."  Malta and the 
Solomon Islands praised Turkey's facilitation of the indirect 
Israeli-Syrian negotiations, and expressed support for the 
Annapolis Conference and continued Israeli-Palestinian 
negotiations.  Guinea urged the creation of a Palestinian 
state. 
 
¶5. Burma, Cuba, and Venezuela:  Croatia raised the need to 
alleviate the suffering of the Burmese people.  On Cuba, the 
Solomon Islands noted it as "a new partner" and its providing 
"medical training opportunities" to youth.  Grenada, 
identifying itself as "a friend of both the United States and 
Cuba," was joined by Angola in calling for an end to the 
embargo, and thanked Venezuela for subsidized oil. 
 
¶6. South Asia:  Singh highlighted India's "impeccable" record 
on non-proliferation, reconfirmed its commitment to 
disarmament, and reiterated its proposal for a Nuclear 
Weapons Convention.  Singh called Afghanistan "a deep 
concern" and called on the international community to ensure 
the success of reconstruction and democratization.  On 
Pakistan, he said: "We welcome the return of democracy," and 
"are committed to resolving outstanding 
issues...including...Jammu and Kashmir."  FM Steinmeier of 
Germany said "Pakistan's internal stability is crucial to the 
stability of the entire region." 
 
¶7.  Security Council:  Luxemburg announced its candidacy for 
2013-2014.  St. Lucia called for a permanent seat for Africa, 
and stated that selection criteria should be based on 
adherence to UN Charter principles.  Tonga gave explicit 
support for a permanent UNSC seat for Japan.  Germany 
declared that it is "prepared to shoulder more 
responsibility."  Slovakia supports permanent seats for 
Japan, Brazil, India and Africa; as well as a non-permanent 
seat for eastern Europe. 
Khalilzad