08USUNNEWYORK1077
SECURITY COUNCIL DEBATES UNAMI/MNF-I
Mon Nov 17 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO3106
OO RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUCNDT #1077/01 3222227
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 172227Z NOV 08
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5380
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 001077 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV IZ UNSC
SUBJECT: SECURITY COUNCIL DEBATES UNAMI/MNF-I 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: The Security Council received a quarterly 
briefing on November 14 from Staffan de Mistura, head of the 
UN Assistance Mission to Iraq (UNAMI), and from Ambassador 
Khalilzad, on behalf of MNF-I.  Iraqi PR Bayati also 
addressed the Council.  All participants, including members 
of the Security Council, praised the recent improvements in 
the security situation and the efforts of the UN, 
particularly with regard to election preparation, disputed 
internal boundaries and the humanitarian situation.  Several 
countries - Libya, Russia and South Africa - criticized the 
recent raid by U.S. forces into Syria on October 26.  Syria 
attempted to exercise a right of reply following the U.S. 
intervention, but its insistence on speaking instead of 
conveying its message via letter was not approved by Council 
members.  END SUMMARY. 
 
UNAMI/DE MISTURA 
 
¶2. (U) SRSG Staffan de Mistura began by emphasizing the 
importance of the robust Security Council mandate that 
allowed UNAMI to support Iraq,s national reconciliation 
process and provide assistance with regard to disputed 
internal boundaries, development strategies, election 
preparations, and the Neighbors Process.  Next year will be 
the time to consolidate 2008 gains, he said, noting the 
"unquestionable" reduction in violence.  He warned that 
spikes in violence may occur in the run-up to the January 
elections, but stressed that the GOI continues to improve its 
security forces, including the integration of the Awakening 
Councils.  He also raised concerns regarding continuing 
political tensions, such as the recent Kurdish - Arab dispute 
in Khanaquin and the attacks on Mosul,s Christians. 
 
¶3. (U) De Mistura described UNAMI,s role in breaking the 
CoR,s electoral law impasse, which he called the most 
important piece of legislation approved during this reporting 
period.  He was pleased to note the CoR,s amendment of the 
law to include specific seats in the Baghdad, Ninewa and 
Basrah provincial councils for minorities, which would ensure 
Iraq,s respect for minority rights.  He said the elections 
would lead to a more inclusive sectarian balance and shift 
Iraq,s political landscape, adding that the burden of 
election observation would fall to Iraqi national observers. 
On Kirkuk and disputed internal boundaries de Mistura cited 
the recent displacement of Mosul,s Christians as 
illustrative of the complex relationship between minority 
rights, elections, and disputed territories.  UNAMI would 
provide technical assistance to the recently established 
Kirkuk Commission, he said, in addition to the advanced 
analysis of the 15 "fault-lines" in northern Iraq already 
undertaken. 
 
¶4. (U) In regards to Iraq,s relationship with the 
international community, de Mistura spoke positively of 
greater Iraqi ownership of the International Compact for Iraq 
and of the Iraqi MFA,s Ad-Hoc Support Mechanism.  He also 
applauded regional engagement, such as the several high-level 
Arab visits to Iraq and the establishment of diplomatic 
missions in Baghdad.  Turning to humanitarian issues, de 
Mistura noted that the GOI must ensure conditions are right 
for IDPs and refugees to return and announced next week,s 
launch of a Sub-Regional 2009 humanitarian appeal.  He 
concluded with UNAMI,s plans to open offices in Najaf, 
Ramadi, Mosul, Kirkuk, and Basrah, and added that nine UN 
agencies now have permanent senior-level international 
presence in county. 
 
GOI STATEMENT 
 
¶5. (U) Iraq Perm Rep Bayati praised the tangible security 
improvements throughout Iraq due to GOI operations, citing an 
89 per cent drop in violence in 2008 compared to 2007. 
Increases in armed forces and police numbers, as well as the 
transfer of security to the GOI from MNF-I in Al-Anbar, Babil 
and Wasit, demonstrated the GOI capacity to provide security, 
he said.  Continuing with security gains, he cited the 
September 2008 return of 432 Christian families to Baghdad, 
the integration of the Awakening Councils and members of 
Saddam Hussein,s army into the security forces, and the two 
brigades sent to Mosul to protect Christians. 
 
¶6. (U) On economic growth, Bayati said Iraq expects 8 per 
cent economic growth by the end of 2008.  He noted that the 
GOI had allocated 19 billion USD to encourage increased 
foreign investment in Iraq.  Oil production increased by 11 
per cent in 2008, and the GOI had announced plans to 
introduce a monitoring mechanism to ensure oil revenue 
transparency.  Bayati stressed that the GOI was keen to 
promote a culture of tolerance, noting the Ministry of 
Interior had dismissed over 27,000 employees due to human 
rights abuses.  Finally, he highlighted GOI cooperation with 
neighboring countries, including recent high level visits to 
 
USUN NEW Y 00001077  002 OF 002 
 
 
Iraq, the opening of several Arab embassies, and the arrival 
of an Arab League Representative.  He encouraged the 
forgiveness of Iraq,s debt and welcomed a bilateral meeting 
with Kuwait to discuss the issue under the auspices of the 
UNCC. 
 
COUNCIL MEMBERS REACT 
 
¶7. (U) Council members all praised the recent decline in 
security incidents, and noted the importance of election 
preparation.  They praised the efforts of the UN, 
particularly with regard to elections, disputed internal 
boundaries and the humanitarian situation.  Croatia and the 
UK expressly praised the efforts of MNF-I.  Libya and Panama 
both welcomed the decrease in violence, but called for an end 
to "foreign occupation."  Libya, Russia and South Africa 
criticized the recent raid by U.S. forces into Syria on 
October 26.  South Africa concluded its remarks by stressing 
that the Security Council authorized MNF-I,s mandate, and, 
therefore, MNF-I must operate in a manner consistent with the 
authority provided. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Ambassador Khalilzad delivered remarks on behalf of 
MNF-I.  His statement, which included a brief mention calling 
on Syria to halt the flow of terrorists and foreign fighters 
across the border, caused the Syrian PR to ask the Costa 
Rican Presidency for a right of reply.  The Presidency asked 
that the right of reply be given in written form, as is 
customary in the debate format.  The Syrian PR refused and 
insisted on speaking.  The U.S. and several other Council 
members (including a key role played by Burkina Faso) 
objected privately to Syria speaking in the Council, and the 
session adjourned without Syria,s intervention. 
Khalilzad