08VLADIVOSTOK3
RUSSKIY ISLAND: FROM ICE FISHING PARADISE TO APEC HOST?
Tue Jan 15 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Vladivostok
VZCZCXRO1986
RR RUEHLN RUEHPOD RUEHYG
DE RUEHVK #0003/01 0150324
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 150324Z JAN 08
FM AMCONSUL VLADIVOSTOK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0868
INFO RUEHXD/MOSCOW POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC 0029
RUCNCIS/CIS COLLECTIVE
RUEHVK/AMCONSUL VLADIVOSTOK 0939UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 VLADIVOSTOK 000003 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON PREL SENV RS
SUBJECT: RUSSKIY ISLAND: FROM ICE FISHING PARADISE TO APEC HOST? 
 
VLADIVOSTO 00000003  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  (U)  Summary.  Consulate staff chose the coldest day of the 
season at minus 21 centigrade to visit Russkiy Island, the 
purported site of the 2012 APEC summit.  It is immediately 
apparent that the island has a long way to go before it is ready 
to accept many international visitors, let alone host one of the 
world's major economic summits.  While it has a reasonable 
one-lane road that circumnavigates the island, it almost 
entirely lacks stores, hotels, and other tourist infrastructure. 
 There are doubts, furthermore, that a planned bridge to the 
island can be completed in time for the summit.  At the moment, 
the island only serves local summer tourists who relax in 
relatively primitive conditions along the seaside.  The island's 
relatively pristine nature and proximity to the city of 
Vladivostok make it an attractive location, however.  If the 
government is serious about hosting APEC on Russkiy in four 
years, construction will need to begin soon.  End summary. 
 
ICY PASSAGE 
----------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) The 25-year-old ferry broke ice most of the way to the 
island, and some consternation arose when the regular noontime 
run was cancelled due to heavy ice, but the afternoon ferry came 
and "rescued" the travelers from the island.  Russkiy has a long 
and proud history as a bulwark against invaders, guarding the 
Peter the Great Gulf with its heavy artillery emplacements on 
the island's highest points.  While batteries capable of firing 
250 kilogram missiles every 40 seconds still loom over the Gulf, 
Russkiy is now a tourist destination in the summer and a haven 
for ice fisherman in winter.  The gun turrets are open to the 
public, even in winter, and the guide requests a minimum of an 
hour to show visitors all the ins and outs of military life at 
an artillery station.  The bunks are still intact, and the 
museum boasts antique weapons, including an American rifle from 
World War I. 
 
¶3.  (U) Russkiy Island is home to some 4,000 year round 
residents.  There are few shops, no restaurants, and no other 
amenities, but there is a public bus, and the ferry that most 
residents use to commute to Vladivostok.  The 15km-by-20km 
island has a decent, one-lane dirt road circumnavigating it, but 
apart from that there is very little in the way of 
infrastructure.  The only hotels on the island are summer 
"resorts" that would appear rather primitive to most 
international tourists or business travelers.  In winter, almost 
nothing is open: we searched unsuccessfully from one end of the 
island to the other for a place to buy tea, which in even the 
smallest Russian town would not require such a pilgrimage. 
 
SEE THAT BRIDGE? 
----------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) Residents we spoke to did not seem overly optimistic 
about the chances of APEC turning life around on the sleepy 
island.  One resident said the planned 3.2-km bridge to the 
island could not be built in time.  There is a shorter stretch 
of water between Vladivostok and Russkiy, but that would require 
demolishing homes in the "elite" Egersheld district of 
Vladivostok, hence the longer span.  Another used the 
Chernomyrdin quote that has almost become a Russian proverb 
about trying for the best, but ending up with the same old 
thing.  There is already a joke about the bridge, perhaps 
recycled from Soviet times.  A group of Russian officials 
visiting San Francisco were treated to a sumptuous reception. 
When the Russians asked where the money for the feast came from, 
the Americans pointed out a window and answered, "See that 
bridge?  The tolls bring in revenues and the city prospers."  A 
year later it was the American turn to visit Vladivostok, where 
they too were hosted at a fine reception.  When they asked how 
the reception was paid for, their Vladivostok hosts pointed out 
a window and answered, "We were thinking about building a bridge 
over there, but instead we used the money for this reception." 
 
¶5.  (U) In any case, Vladivostok itself is gearing up for 
change, with new hotel contracts reportedly being signed and 
talk of new international flights this spring.  There is also 
talk about casinos, restaurants, an aquarium, and other 
amenities on Russkiy Island, but so far, there is no 
construction underway for any of these projects.  Marriott and 
Accor Group, a French hotel company, are both reportedly 
planning to build hotels in downtown Vladivostok in advance of 
the APEC Summit, but no hotel chain has yet committed to 
Russkiy.  Note:  Diplomats have had on again off again access to 
Russkiy Island,  On this trip, the local MFA and Border Guards 
assured us that the island is now completely open and indeed no 
documents were checked.  It seems this issue was finally 
resolved during the last Consular Bilateral meeting in 
Washington.  End note. 
 
¶6. (U) Comment:  Russkiy Island certainly looks pristine, and is 
a nice contrast to Vladivostok's busy streets.  The ferry ride 
 
VLADIVOSTO 00000003  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
is part of the experience, and on this trip we even saw seals 
poking their heads through the ice and an eagle looking for 
scraps from the ice fishermen.  Undoubtedly, something of the 
character of Russkiy Island would be lost in a massive 
development plan, but if done right, the island can still 
attract visitors with its picturesque bays and miles and miles 
of trees.  As with so many critical issues in the Far East, the 
big decisions will be made in Moscow.  No doubt the ice 
fishermen will make their way to Russkiy Island come what may. 
ARMBRUSTER