08WELLINGTON114
PIF MINISTERIAL MEETING ON FIJI
Fri Mar 28 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Wellington
VZCZCXRO6854
PP RUEHAP RUEHKN RUEHKR RUEHMJ RUEHNZ RUEHPB
DE RUEHWL #0114/01 0880200
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 280200Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5164
INFO RUEHAP/AMEMBASSY APIA 0455
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 5152
RUEHKN/AMEMBASSY KOLONIA 0017
RUEHKR/AMEMBASSY KOROR 0006
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0195
RUEHMJ/AMEMBASSY MAJURO 0119
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 0322
RUEHPB/AMEMBASSY PORT MORESBY 0733
RUEHSV/AMEMBASSY SUVA 0730
RUEHNZ/AMCONSUL AUCKLAND 1644
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RHHJJAA/JICPAC HONOLULU HI
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0125
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHINGTON DC
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 WELLINGTON 000114 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/ANP 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL FJ UN NZ XV
SUBJECT: PIF MINISTERIAL MEETING ON FIJI 
 
REF: STATE 30331 
 
¶1. (SBU)  Summary.  On March 26, Pacific Island Forum (PIF) 
Foreign Ministers met in Auckland to review the situation in 
Fiji, in particular to assess progress by the Interim 
Government (IG) towards meeting the commitments made by 
Commodore Bainimarama to PIF leaders in Tonga in October 
¶2007.  In an outcome document, PIF officials were united in 
outlining their strong concerns about the IG's degree of 
progress towards the holding of elections in the first 
quarter of 2009, human rights issues surrounding the media 
and the judiciary that may impinge on the environment 
necessary for free and fair elections, and the continued IG 
focus on the People's Charter process, which PIF Ministers 
worry may divert focus from election preparations.  Fiji 
Interim Foreign Minister Nailatikau, head of the IG 
delegation, criticized visa sanctions, emphasized the 
importance of the People's Charter to national reconciliation 
and the election process, and blamed the international 
community for the lack of progress to date.  Commonwealth 
representative Sir Paul Reeves briefed the ministers on his 
effort to encourage political dialogue.  Reeves intends to 
visit Suva again in late April.  The ministers agreed 
unanimously to augment the monitoring of the Fiji situation 
via a Ministerial Contact Group. Nailatikau promised an IG 
timetable for elections by mid-April.  End Summary. 
 
Auckland PIF Ministerial Keeps Pressure on Fiji IG 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶2. (SBU)  When Pacific Island Forum leaders met in Tonga in 
October 2007, they instructed PIF Foreign Ministers to meet 
early in 2008 to review progress by the IG towards Commodore 
Bainimarama's promise of a free and fair parliamentary 
election in the first quarter of 2009.  The March 26 
ministerial in Auckland considered a report by the PIF-Fiji 
Joint Working Group and a presentation by interim Foreign 
Minister Ratu Epeli Nailatikau.  Nailatikau complained 
bitterly about visa sanctions, specifically mentioning "the 
U.S., Australia, and New Zealand."  He reaffirmed the IG's 
election commitment, but also emphasized the IG view that the 
People's Charter process is an essential pre-election step 
for Fiji's future.  It will be a "strategic framework" for 
future governments and is the military's "exit strategy." 
Several Pacific Island Country (PIC) representatives queried 
Nailatikau about a seeming contradiction between the 
"commitment" to elections and the People's Charter.  They 
also inquired about human-rights problems.  Nailatikau 
reportedly stuck closely to the standard IG brief. 
Thereafter, the IG delegation was asked to leave the room. 
(Note: We hear the IG tried hard the night before to be 
allowed to stay in place throughout, but PIF ministers, 
citing Tonga as precedent, said "no."  End Note.) 
 
¶3. (SBU)  In subsequent discussion, Australia and New Zealand 
raised their well-known concerns about the state of affairs 
in Fiji; and a good number of Island ministers, including 
those from PNG, Solomon Islands, Niue, Samoa, and the Cooks, 
reportedly also raised serious worries about the IG's 
approach to governance and its half-hearted efforts to 
prepare for free and fair elections.  Several, including 
Samoa, praised the visa sanctions imposed by Australia, New 
Zealand, the U.S., and others as helping focus the IG on 
important issues.  PNG proposed, and ministers approved, 
setting up a Ministerial Contact Group (MCG) to take 
monitoring of IG electoral preparations to a higher level in 
the lead-up to the next PIF leaders meeting in Niue in 
August.  Contact Group minister members will be Australia, 
New Zealand, PNG, Samoa, Tonga, and Tuvalu.  Reportedly, the 
MCG came about because ministers saw a need for more clout 
than the PIF-Fiji Working Group could provide, but the IG and 
some other PIC governments had objections to resuscitating 
last year's Eminent Persons Group. 
 
 
WELLINGTON 00000114  002 OF 003 
 
 
¶4. (SBU)  In their deliberations, ministers judged the draft 
outcomes document as "too soft" on the IG and ordered the 
toughening of language throughout.  The final document, 
agreed to unanimously, outlines the PIF's strong view that 
the IG is expected to fulfill Bainimarama's election promises 
in Tonga.  (The Commodore promised that all parties will be 
allowed to compete under the current constitution's rules in 
free and fair polls and that the military will respect the 
outcome.)  The document expresses concern about election 
preparations to date as well as about human rights 
developments that could undermine conditions necessary for a 
free and fair electoral process.  It welcomes the IG's 
promise to provide a timetable for elections by the end of 
the second week in April as well as the announcement that an 
elections supervisor will be appointed shortly.  Finally, it 
announces the Ministerial Contact Group and expresses 
appreciation for a parallel effort by Sir Paul Reeves to 
facilitate dialogue. 
 
Commonwealth/Reeves Effort for Political Dialogue 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶5. (SBU)  During the Ministerial, Sir Paul Reeves was invited 
to brief delegations on his effort, at Commonwealth urging, 
to foster a political dialogue in Fiji among the leading 
political players from all sides.  The decision of 
Bainimarama and interim Finance Minister Chaudhry not to 
participate in a group meeting when Reeves visited Suva in 
early March was disappointing; but Reeves received a letter 
from Bainimarama early on March 26 inviting a follow-on visit 
and expressing appreciation for the conversations that had 
occurred.  In that light, Reeves intends to return to Suva in 
late April to try again to bring the parties together for 
talk.  (Note: We heard from several well-placed sources at 
the Auckland meeting that it was Chaudhry and interim 
Attorney General Sayed-Khaiyum who discouraged Bainimarama 
from participating in the Reeves dialogue in March.  Those 
sources of pressure, and Bainimarama's own unwillingness to 
engage deposed PM Qarase face-to-face, could still impede 
dialogue, but Reeves told us he is willing to give his effort 
at least one more shot.  End Note.) 
 
Australia, New Zealand, Other PICs Pleased with Outcome 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶6. (SBU)  The PIF did not permit non-PIF members to sit in on 
the meeting, but USG officials spoke with a number of 
participants before and after to make USG views clear and to 
solicit comments on the state of play. Australian Foreign 
Minister Smith, attending his first PIF meeting on Fiji, told 
us he was very satisfied with the way the region continued to 
stand firm on the need for proper elections, without 
interference from the People's Charter process.  He sees the 
Ministerial Contact Group essentially as a contingency 
mechanism to be invoked as necessary to keep pressure on and 
to ensure leaders at the PIF meeting in Niue are fully 
informed.  New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade 
(MFAT) officials said the results were as good they could 
have hoped for, and FM Peters was happy.  They said it was 
clear before the meeting that PIC governments were not 
pleased with Fiji, and ministers made that clear both when 
the IG delegation was in the room and even more so 
afterwards.  The IG could not easily conclude that the 
process was being driven by New Zealand and Australia.  We 
heard from several PIF delegations similar expressions of 
satisfaction with the continued PIF unity of concern and of 
purpose. 
 
¶7. (SBU)  The Tonga, Niue, PNG, Australia and New Zealand 
Foreign Ministers held a post-meeting press conference.  They 
stressed that the region is expecting the IG to fulfill 
Bainimarama's promises in Tonga, and the PIF will be 
optimistic about IG intentions unless otherwise warranted. 
That said, ministers noted skepticism -- particularly 
 
WELLINGTON 00000114  003 OF 003 
 
 
surrounding the IG emphasis on the People's Charter process 
-- that only the Fiji IG can overcome by living up to its 
commitments to the international community.  The Ministerial 
Contact Group is to help monitor IG progress and promote 
constructive and productive dialogue.  Smith noted that a MCG 
visit to Fiji may not be necessary if the IG makes sufficient 
progress on its own, pre-Niue.  He offered that, in the first 
instance, the FMs will encourage the Reeves effort.  Niue PM 
Vivian Young said that the Ministerial Contact Group would 
raise the level of dialogue with IG authorities, bumping it 
up from the working level. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8. (SBU)  The PIF Ministers fulfilled their mission 
admirably.  They, and not just Australia and New Zealand, 
made clear they continue to expect the IG to move 
expeditiously with a timetable to fulfill its commitment to 
facilitate acceptable elections by March 2009.  The unified 
PIF message to the IG delegation in Auckland was impressive, 
and it seemed clearly to have affected Nailatikau and his 
delegation.  When they departed the meeting, all 
IG-delegation faces, including Nailatikau's, looked somber 
and subdued, and they declined to do a media conference.  The 
IG undoubtedly hoped to hear expressions of understanding. 
That didn't happen.  Instead, they faced a solid front of PIF 
delegations that were not inclined to give the IG the benefit 
of the doubt and who were pressing the same themes the USG 
has been pressing. 
MCCORMICK