09AITTAIPEI306
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA NAVAL SHIPS CONFRONTATION,
Thu Mar 19 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0306/01 0780904
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 190904Z MAR 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1162
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 9026
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0478UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000306 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA NAVAL SHIPS CONFRONTATION, 
U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused March 
19 news coverage on a meeting between President Ma Ying-jeou and AIT 
Chairman Raymond Burghardt and a press conference hosted by the 
latter Wednesday; on cross-Strait relations; and on the ongoing 
investigation into former President Chen Shui-bian and his family's 
legal cases.  All major Chinese-language and English-language 
dailies in Taiwan reported on Burghardt's meetings with Ma and with 
the media representatives.  The pro-unification "United Daily News" 
front-paged a banner headline reading "AIT Chairman Raymond 
Burghardt Urges Chinese Communist Party to Remove Missiles."  The 
pro-independence "Liberty Times" ran a banner headline on page two 
reading "Burghardt: China Must Remove Missiles Targeting Taiwan No 
Matter How Many They Are," while its English-language sister 
newspaper, "Taipei Times" front-paged a news story with the headline 
"U.S. Comfortable with Detente: AIT." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a column in the 
centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" discussed the recent navy ships 
confrontation between the United States and China in the South China 
Sea.  The article speculated on the behind-the-scene factor 
concerning the role of the United States in the navy ships' conflict 
in the South China Sea, saying it may be a trap set up by the United 
States, which intentionally lured China into it.  An op-ed in the 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times," written by a 
senior fellow at the Atlantic Council, discussed the cross-Strait 
situation and said "[B]oth sides and Beijing in particular may need 
to engage in Strategic Reassurance Measures (SRMs)" in order to 
resolve the lack of mutual trust between the two sides of the Taiwan 
Strait.  End summary. 
 
¶3. U.S.-China Navy Ships Confrontation 
 
"[U.S.-China] Conflicts in the South China Sea and Behind-the-Scene 
Factors Concerning the United States" 
 
The "International Lookout" column in the centrist, KMT-leaning 
"China Times" [circulation: 150,000] wrote (3/19): 
 
"Be it [called] turmoil or an incident in the South China Sea, China 
had no other alternative but send a 4,500-ton fishery administration 
ship, remodeled from an [old] destroyer, to the area, thus turning 
[the state of mind of] the Philippines from soaring to panic.  All 
these happenings appear to be profound and abstruse, so there is 
speculation claiming that it was the United States which set up a 
trap and intentionally [lured] China into it. 
 
"The background [of the speculation] went like this:  China's 
Southeast [Asia] policy has started to produce effects, as its free 
trade agreement with Southeast Asia will kick off in 2010, and the 
ASEAN nations will grow increasingly dependent on mainland China 
economically.  China's influence as a big country in the region will 
definitely outweigh that of the United States.  Since ASEAN plays a 
major role in constituting the geo-politics in Asia, the United 
States will by no means sit back and watch itself being excluded 
[from the region].  Yet Washington can hardly stop such a trend. 
The United States is at its wit's end, even though it is in 
possession of enormous military power in the Pacific.  Washington 
thus came up [with the idea of] creating conflicts between the ASEAN 
and China. ... 
 
"USNS Impeccable was actively and heavily engaged in the South China 
Sea and reconnoitering the navy base of China [in the area].  Isn't 
that [some kind of] challenge?  Previously when conflicts happened 
between the United States and China, both sides were normally 
reluctant to make them public.  But this time the U.S. military 
proactively announced [the incident] with a tough attitude.  Wasn't 
it a show put on to encourage [other] nations that have ambitions 
toward the South China Sea?" 
 
¶4. U.S.-China-Taiwan Relations 
 
"China Can Use Strategic Reassurance" 
 
Yu Tsung-chi, a senior fellow at the Atlantic Council of the United 
States, opined in the pro-independence, English-language "Taipei 
Times" [circulation: 30,000] (3/190: 
 
"In a recent report to the National People's Congress, Chinese 
Premier Wen Jiabao said Beijing was ready to hold talks on political 
and military issues in pursuit of ending hostilities across the 
Taiwan Strait.  However, Wen failed to mention any specific 
confidence-building measures (CBMs), even though Beijing, Taipei and 
Washington have all recently expressed some interest in this 
proposal. ...  For China and Taiwan to solve this 'mutual mistrust,' 
both may need to first struggle to demonstrate that their long-term 
intentions are benign. Both sides and Beijing in particular may need 
to engage in Strategic Reassurance Measures (SRMs). ... 
U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
"As far as China is concerned, 'Taiwanese independence' and Taiwan's 
military capabilities, including arms procurements from the US, are 
the major threats to China's territorial integrity. Responding to 
these concerns, Taiwan has taken steps to reassure China. These 
include renouncing the pro-independence policy, scrapping plans for 
developing long-range cruise missiles, downsizing military troops, 
cutting the frequency of war games, decreasing its military outlays, 
planning to phase out the conscription system by 2014 and even 
working on a think tank to coordinate strategic dialogues with the 
Chinese military.  In contrast, in response to Taipei's major 
concern - the 1,500 missiles pointed at Taiwan - Beijing has so far 
done nothing at all, let alone shown any benign gestures regarding 
military CBMs. Beijing simply keeps ignoring that Taiwan has 
frequently pointed out the missiles are a significant threat to the 
island. ... 
 
"Now is the perfect time for China to withdraw the missiles it 
points at Taiwan. Taipei has reiterated that China must reduce its 
military threat before peace talks can be held, specifically calling 
for China to remove the missiles. The world would extend a hand if 
China were willing to unclench its fist by removing the missiles in 
line with its statement that its peaceful development and rise pose 
no threat to any country. Such a benign gesture would also greatly 
reduce the worry and mutual mistrust in the region. ... For the 
benefit of all sides, now is the right time for cross-strait SRMs." 
 
YOUNG