09AITTAIPEI864
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Fri Jul 17 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0006
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0864 1980939
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 170939Z JUL 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1957
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 9289
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0722UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000864 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/P, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
Summary:  On July 17, Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies gave 
extensive coverage to the 2009 World Games, which began in Kaohsiung 
the evening of the 16th.  Straight news coverage also focused on 
developments in cross-Strait relations and other local political 
issues.  In terms of editorials and commentaries, a column in the 
centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" discussed the recent riots that 
broke out in China's Xinjiang region and independence activities in 
Tibet, Xinjiang and Taiwan, respectively.  The article said that 
current U.S. policy insists on the maintenance of the status quo in 
the Taiwan Strait, which is akin to supporting Taiwan's de facto 
independence, and what is absent is nothing but a name and a form. 
End summary. 
 
"Taiwan Independence, Tibetan Independence, and Xinjiang 
Independence" 
 
Washington correspondent Norma Fu wrote in his column in the 
centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" [circulation: 120,000] (7/17): 
 
"... The United States has always regarded Tibet as a country 
independent of China, and as a result, Congress enacted a law 
clearly indicating that Tibet is an occupied country. 
The State Department also has an office with officials dealing 
especially with Tibetan affairs.  Both the Voice of America and 
Radio Free Asia broadcast Tibetan-language programs, and in the 
private sector, there is a 'Campaign for Tibet' organization 
dedicated to lobbying and fund-raising for Tibet around-the-clock. 
Well-known movie star Richard Gere is also a loyal worshiper of the 
Dalai Lama.  All these are something that Xinjiang has never 
enjoyed.  [Nonetheless,] it goes without saying that the nuclear 
facilities set up by Beijing in Xinjiang and the U.S. listening 
stations there, joined by the rich oil reserves in the area, have 
forced the United States not to overlook the unrest in Xinjiang. 
 
In addition to [activists for] Tibetan independence and Xinjiang 
independence, there are [activists pushing for] Taiwan independence. 
 When compared [with the other activists], the Taiwan independence 
activists are in the most favorable situation.  They are free from 
direct persecution by communist China and are not forced to live in 
exile or homelessly all their lives like the activists for Tibetan 
and Xinjiang independence do.  The Taiwan independence activists can 
return to Taiwan anytime they want and enjoy all the rights that the 
people of Taiwan enjoy. ...  As a matter of fact, Taiwan has been 
practically independent over the past half century; namely, it has 
enjoyed the state of de facto independence, as referred to in the 
international law.  What it does not have is merely de jure 
independence. 
 
"The current policy of the United States upholds the maintenance of 
the status quo in the Taiwan Strait, which must not be altered by 
[either side of the Strait].  Such a policy is tantamount to 
supporting Taiwan's de facto independence, and what is absent is 
nothing but a name and a form.  In earlier years, the Taiwan people 
were unable to call their own shots, and their yearning for 
independence was thus understandable.  But now Taiwan has had three 
elected presidents; would it not run the risk of 'pushing the 
envelope' if the island still embraces and calls for independence?" 
 
 
WANG