09AITTAIPEI642
MEDIA REACTION: NORTH KOREA, PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
Tue Jun 02 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0642 1530937
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 020937Z JUN 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1667
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 9220
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0650UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000642 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT:  MEDIA REACTION: NORTH KOREA, PRESIDENT OBAMA'S 
IMAGE-BUILDING 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage June 2 on President Ma Ying-jeou's visit to El Salvador, 
including his interaction with United States Secretary of State 
Hillary Clinton at a dinner hosted by outgoing El Salvador President 
Elias Antonio Saca; over the controversy of the National 
Communications Commission (NCC)'s ruling on the change of ownership 
of the China Times Group; and on improper price hikes for 
cigarettes. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, an editorial in the 
conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
commented on North Korea's provocative moves recently.  The 
editorial said that China is the only country able to dissuade North 
Korea from further belligerent behavior.  The editorial urged China 
to show its leadership and solve the problem.  Otherwise, other 
countries will follow the lead of North Korea and pursue nuclear 
weapons.  Another editorial in the "China Post" commented on United 
States President Barack Obama's recent visits to local hamburger 
restaurants, saying that Obama has cleverly established his personal 
image and brand among Americans to facilitate the promotion of his 
policies.  The editorial recommended that Taiwan's President Ma 
Ying-jeou do liekwise and act as a true leader.  End summary. 
 
¶3. "Time for Beijing to Rein in Pyongyang" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (5/30): 
 
"... But after the change of political power in Washington in 
January, President Barack Obama did not change Bush's hostile policy 
toward North Korea. ... 
 
"Anyway, it's time for Beijing to demonstrate leadership as a 
regional, if not global power.  Visionary leaders in Beijing should 
look beyond beggar-thy-neighbor policies.  A nuclear-free Korean 
Peninsula is in the best interests of Beijing, as well as its 
important neighbors - Japan, South Korea, Russia, not to mention the 
United States. 
 
"Besides, if North Korea enters the exclusive nuclear club, Japan 
will definitely be the next to jump in.  South Korea will follow 
suit, and Taiwan has long been known to possess the knowhow.  In the 
Middle East, Israel is believed to have a nuclear arsenal.  In 
Central Asia, Iran is either on the threshold or over it.  In South 
Asia, India and Pakistan are already nuclear nations. Allowing 
everyone to possess weapons of mass destruction is too dangerous to 
contemplate. ... 
 
"So, when the Korean Peninsula is facing a nuclear crisis, Beijing 
should not shirk the responsibility of helping stave it off. 
Beijing has the means and resources to rein in the recalcitrant and 
wayward Pyongyang.  Beijing should take the initiative to push for 
the building of a firewall against nuclear proliferation in Asia, a 
la PSI [Proliferation Security Initiative], for the collective 
security of all in this part of the world." 
 
¶4. "Pushing the Obama Brand with Burger Joint Visits" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (6/2): 
 
"Last Friday, U.S. President Barack Obama and an entourage of aides 
and press left the White House to pick up lunch at a renowned local 
hamburger joint. ...On May 6, the President and Vice President Joe 
Biden had their power lunch at another burger restaurant. ... 
 
"Presidents should regard creative venues and brand building not 
only as PR measures, but also as effective tools of governance. ... 
 
"The image of the U.S. president lunching in a burger joint sends 
out powerful messages to the American people.  It showed that even a 
significant change as becoming the president does not deny Obama the 
right to the quintessential American way of life: Eating a burger 
with one's pal. 
 
"This image sums up the policy of Obama's ideal in a single image 
most people can instantly recognize and identify.  In other words, 
the Obama Policy is now the Obama Brand. 
 
"Obama is conscious of the usefulness of such branding.  In the Wall 
Street Journal Magazine, Desiree Glapion Rogers, Obama's White House 
Social Secretary, described the Obama Brand as "the best brand on 
earth" and regarded White House's social events as strategic plans 
to promote that brand and, by extension, Obama's policy. ..." 
 
YOUNG