09AITTAIPEI927
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Mon Aug 03 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0011
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0927 2150946
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 030946Z AUG 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2037
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 9316
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0749UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000927 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/P, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage August 1-3 on the H1N1 flu epidemic, which is quickly 
spreading across Taiwan; on the heat wave hitting the island; on the 
year-end mayor and magistrates' elections; and on developments in 
cross-Strait relations.  In terms of editorials and commentaries, an 
editorial in the KMT-leaning "China Times" discussed the impact of 
the U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue.  The article said 
Taiwan needs to calmly ponder its role in light of the developments 
in U.S.-China relations.  A separate "China Times" op-ed piece 
described U.S.-China relations as "inseparable" and said if one just 
looks at the results, the dialogue certainly has generated good 
results for world peace.  End summary. 
 
A) "View with Calmness the New Situation in the Wake of the 
U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue" 
 
The KMT-leaning "China Times" [circulation: 120,000] editorialized 
(8/1): 
 
"... When it comes to strategic issues, this year's [dialogue] 
focused on the nuclear issue in North Korea and Iran and issues such 
as the war on terrorism and non-proliferation.  The issue Taipei is 
concerned about most -- Taiwan -- apparently was never brought up in 
this year's dialogue.  The [U.S.-Taiwan] arms sales issue was not 
touched on, nor was the so-called 'one China' position reiterated; 
it looks as if this once believed to be the core issue in U.S.-China 
relations did not even appear in this year's dialogue.  Some people 
might be worried if such a development indicated that the 'Taiwan 
issue' has been marginalized, but this paper does not think so.  The 
fact that the Taiwan issue was not included in this year's dialogue 
agenda merely indicated that currently there is no major difference 
between Washington and Beijing on the Taiwan issue.  In particular, 
cross-Strait dialogue is now under way, so Beijing did not need 
Washington to state its position on the Taiwan issue again. ... 
 
"What Taiwan really needs to pay attention to is how the island 
should view the new situation [particularly] when the two strong 
powers -- the United States and China -- are working more and more 
closely on many issues.  How is Taipei going to define its role in 
such a completely new situation when Washington has clearly 
indicated that U.S.-China relations are 'the most important 
bilateral relations in the world?'  What this involves is not merely 
[Taiwan's] role in regional politics, but also the new situation 
concerning trade, economics, energy and environmental protection. 
It is time that the ruling and opposition elites confront and ponder 
[such questions] coolly now." 
 
B) "Beijing, Washington Inseparable" 
 
Taiwan's former Ambassador to South Africa Loh I-cheng wrote in his 
column in the KMT-leaning "China Times" [circulation: 120,000] 
(8/3): 
 
"... It was not easy for U.S.-China relations to get to its current 
state since the two countries formally established diplomatic ties 
30 years ago.  [U.S. Secretary of State] Hillary Clinton first put 
out the word in New York in early February that it was very 
important to develop U.S.-China relations, then immediately in the 
same month she flew to Beijing.  In April, [U.S. President Barack] 
Obama met with [his Chinese counterpart] Hu Jintao in London and 
both agreed to establish the mechanism of a strategic and economic 
dialogue.  In late May, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Treasury 
Secretary Timothy Geithner visited Beijing, respectively, and in 
mid-July, Commerce Secretary Gary Locke and Energy Secretary Steven 
Chu, both Chinese Americans, also visited Beijing under orders.  All 
these showed Washington's deliberate intent to befriend Beijing. 
 
"Frankly speaking, the relations between Beijing and Washington can 
actually be described using the six-character phrase of Mao Zedong: 
namely, the two are 'cooperating with and fighting against each 
other' at the same time.  Obama has obviously picked up this [new] 
skill.  The old history of love and hatred between China and the 
United States is an inextricable knot, which is hard to untangle. 
But if one just looks at the results, [the dialogue] results 
certainly have every advantage and not a single disadvantage for 
world peace." 
 
WANG