09AITTAIPEI908
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS, NORTH KOREA
Wed Jul 29 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0908/01 2101052
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 291052Z JUL 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2011
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 9304
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0737UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000908 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/P, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS, NORTH KOREA 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage July 29 on former President Chen Shui-bian, who attended 
the last hearing for his money laundering and corruption trial 
Tuesday; on the U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue; and on 
developments in cross-Strait relations.  In terms of editorials and 
commentaries, an op-ed piece in the pro-unification "United Daily 
News" discussed the U.S.-China Strategic Dialogue in Washington D.C. 
and said the dialogue is not a zero-sum game and should not harm 
Taiwan's interests.  A column in the conservative, pro-unification, 
English-language "China Post" discussed Secretary of State Hillary 
Clinton's participation in the annual ASEAN ministerial meeting 
recently and said the United States is now poised to further deepen 
its involvement in the Southeast Asian region.  With regard to North 
Korea, a column in the KMT-leaning "China Times" said Pyongyang has 
made it clear that it wants bilateral talks with the United States, 
not the Six-Party talks any more.  End summary. 
 
¶2. U.S.-China-Taiwan Relations 
 
A) "Taiwan Should Pay Attention to, but Needs Not Be Startled by the 
U.S.-China [Strategic and Economic] Dialogue" 
 
Assistant Professor Alexander Huang of Tamkang University's Graduate 
Institute of International Affairs and Strategic Studies opined in 
the pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
(7/29): 
 
"... The first round of the U.S.-China 'Strategic and Economic 
Dialogue' covered issues such as the global financial crisis and 
economic recovery, climate change, energy, environmental protection, 
regional security and development.  Though several observers have 
limited expectations [for the dialogue] as it covered too many 
issues which can hardly be resolved fundamentally in the short term, 
this dialogue remains significant and thus deserves [our] 
attention: 
 
"First, the United States' strategy toward China has its continuity 
and has, to a certain extent, scored success. ...  Second, China's 
rise in terms of its economic and military strength has grabbed [the 
United States'] attention. ...  Third, the authority to steer the 
United States' relations with China is back in the hands of the 
State Department again. ...  The fact that this year's dialogue has 
combined the previous two-track dialogue -- strategic dialogue and 
economic dialogue -- into one has more or less symbolized that 
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton is now personally in charge of 
[the United States'] policy toward China. 
 
"Fourth, the competition between Washington and Beijing is not a 
zero-sum game, which will unlikely endanger Taiwan's interests. ... 
Media reports said U.S. Pacific Command Commander Admiral Timothy 
Keating would be at the dialogue, but his presence is likely to be 
related to the recent confrontation between U.S. and Chinese 
battleships in the South China Sea and is thus unlikely to 
jeopardize [the United States'] arms sales policy to Taiwan.  In 
addition, while Washington and Beijing are engaged in their 
strategic dialogue, it does not affect the timing and level of the 
predetermined dialogue between Taiwan and the United States.  By 
contrast, the systematic talks between the two sides of the Taiwan 
Strait should not be viewed as a zero-sum game either and will thus 
not endanger U.S. interests." 
 
B) "U.S. Looks to Boost Southeast Asia Influence" 
 
Columnist Frank Ching wrote in his column in the conservative, 
pro-unification, English-language "China Post" [circulation: 30,000] 
(7/29): 
 
"... During the Bush administration, Washington used to be quite 
relaxed about China making inroads in various parts of the world, 
including Southeast Asia, Africa and even Latin America, America's 
backyard.  Not any more.  In May, Mrs. Clinton, while meeting with 
foreign service officers at the State Department, said candidly that 
Iran and China had made 'quite disturbing' gains in Latin America. 
...  And so, the Obama administration has decided to compete for 
influence and attention around the world with other countries, 
particularly China.  American efforts in Southeast Asia are 
particularly noteworthy.  While Clinton was in Thailand, she signed 
the 1976 Treaty of Amity and cooperation in Southeast Asia (TAC), 
which the United States had in the past refused to sign. ... 
 
"Accession to the treaty is a prerequisite to membership in the East 
Asian Summit.  Thus, the United States is now poised to further 
deepen its involvement in the region by applying to join that body 
as well.  China is known to be cool to the idea of American 
participation in the East Asian Summit. ...  China has taken note of 
the renewed American interest in Southeast Asia.  The official press 
agency, Xinhua, reported 'deepening U.S. engagement in the region 
after years of negligence' and termed U.S. accession to the amity 
treaty a 'widely-watched move that could have profound implications 
 
for the future of Southeast Asia, as well as the Asia-Pacific region 
at large.'  The game is on." 
 
¶3. North Korea 
 
"Pyongyang Makes it Clear That It Wants Bilateral Talks with 
Washington" 
 
The "International Lookout" column in the KMT-leaning "China Times" 
[circulation: 120,000] wrote (7/29): 
 
"The spokesman for North Korea's Foreign Ministry said that the 
'Six-Party talks' have become a venue that impedes [Pyongyang's] 
peaceful technological development and normal economic development, 
and that there are 'other formats of dialogue' to resolve the 
current situation.  This statement revealed the same attitude as 
shown by [other] North Korean officials at international events. 
Those officials were more straightforward:  '[we] are never against 
dialogue with the United States.'  This clearly indicated that 
Pyongyang is determined to show its real face and talk with the 
United States. ... 
 
"Pyongyang is aware that China and Russia are 'powerless' toward it, 
while Japan and South Korea can do nothing about it, either.  There 
is really little value to talk with [these countries], whereas only 
bilateral talks with the United States might really achieve 
something.  [Pyongyang's] hopes are to normalize its relations [with 
Washington] based on its own principles and ways, and the price 
Pyongyang is willing to pay will be 'non-proliferation' or further, 
to return to the 'Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty.'  But it surely 
wants to retain its nuclear power.  The Obama administration, 
without a doubt, will not agree to [Pyongyang's] ideas; it still 
wants to maintain the Six-Party talks and only agrees that bilateral 
talks [with Pyongyang] be conducted under such a framework.  As a 
matter of fact, the United States' procrastination will certainly 
make North Korea more isolated, but it has also offered time for 
Pyongyang to develop more nuclear weapons." 
 
WANG