09AITTAIPEI232
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Tue Mar 03 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0010
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0232 0620932
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 030932Z MAR 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1039
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 8985
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0435UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000232 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused March 3 
news coverage on the continuing depreciation of the New Taiwan 
dollar against U.S. dollar, on the island's sagging economy, and on 
the debate over whether Taiwan should sign an Economic Cooperation 
Framework Agreement (ECFA) with China.  In terms of editorials and 
commentaries, an editorial in the conservative, pro-unification, 
English-language "China Post" discussed the recent resumption of 
military talks between the United States and China and said "[T]he 
U.S. is growingly convinced that China's emergence as a military 
power is not a threat to American interests, but a stabilizing force 
in an uncertain world."  An editorial in the pro-independence, 
English-language "Taipei Times," on the other hand, discussed the 
"controversial" appointment of Charles Freeman as the chairman of 
the U.S. National Intelligence Council.  The article concluded that 
now is "too early to be overly alarmed by the appointment" as 
"despite Freeman's positions on Taiwan and China -- which are indeed 
worrying -- others in the US government will counterbalance him." 
End summary. 
 
A) "U.S., PRC Hold Military Talks" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (3/3): 
 
"... The resumption of military talks less than two months after 
President Bush left office demonstrates China's eagerness for a 
fresh start.  Factors including the new Obama administration, the 
depth of the American financial crisis, China's increased 
confidence, and growing instability in Afghanistan and Pakistan have 
combined to produce the most frank and open talks in years.  The 
PLA's main goal remains defending the position and interests of the 
Communist Party leadership, a purpose unaltered by the military's 
active new diplomacy and recent improvements in China's relationship 
with Taiwan. 
 
"The U.S. is growingly convinced that China's emergence as a 
military power is not a threat to American interests, but a 
stabilizing force in an uncertain world.  For many years, American 
officials, and especially the military, have expressed concern that 
China is buying weapons systems specifically designed to deny 
American access to the region should there be a conflict over 
Taiwan.  Now there is little concern that China can threaten the 
continental United States, and great efforts have been made to make 
China a partner in regional peace." 
 
B) "Obama's NIC Chief Causes a Stir" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (3/3): 
 
"The appointment by the administration of US President Barack Obama 
of Charles Freeman as National Intelligence Council (NIC) chairman 
has caused a stir in many circles, not least among China/Taiwan 
watchers. Freeman, John Chait warned in the Washington Post, is from 
the "realist school" and would drop friends like Israel or Taiwan if 
it were in the US' interest. ...  But Chait, and the many Zionist 
organizations who have criticized Freeman's appointment, overstate 
the impact he would have on foreign policy. Part of their mistake is 
to assume that governments speak in one voice, as if the Obama 
administration would be homogeneously realist. ...  Despite 
Freeman's appointment to the NIC, it is unlikely the US will abandon 
Israel for the sake of its own 'interest,' because the US foreign 
policy establishment is a plurality of voices. ... 
 
"The same applies to Obama's Asia team. For one, a purely realist 
administration would not have tapped Harvard University professor 
Joseph Nye, the high priest of 'soft power,' as ambassador to Japan. 
In other words, despite Freeman's positions on Taiwan and China - 
which are indeed worrying - others in the US government will 
counterbalance him.  The NIC is but one of many government bodies 
involved in US foreign policy. It is not even the most powerful one, 
as demonstrated by the lack of traction that its principal product, 
the National Intelligence Estimate, has had in the White House under 
previous administrations.  It is too early, therefore, to be overly 
alarmed by the appointment." 
 
YOUNG