09ANTANANARIVO138
COMOROS WELCOMES IRANIAN PRESIDENT AHMEDINEJAD
Thu Feb 26 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Antananarivo
VZCZCXRO3409
PP RUEHBC RUEHBZ RUEHDE RUEHDIR RUEHDU RUEHGI RUEHJO RUEHKUK RUEHMA
RUEHMR RUEHPA RUEHRN RUEHTRO
DE RUEHAN #0138/01 0571432
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 261432Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANTANANARIVO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2134
INFO RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE
RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANTANANARIVO 000138 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/E AND AF/FO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PREL PTERPGOV PHUM PREL EAID ECON CN IR
SUBJECT:  COMOROS WELCOMES IRANIAN PRESIDENT AHMEDINEJAD 
 
REF:  08 ANTANANARIVO 759 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Thousands of moderate Sunni Comorans saw no 
contradiction in turning out to enthusiastically welcome Shi'a 
Iran's President, Mahmoud Ahmedinejad, to the Comoros February 25. 
Comorans are pro-American, eagerly asking that we reopen our Embassy 
and Peace Corps program.  After years of "cooperation," Iran has 
offered little beyond promises and a derelict fishing boat (REFTEL). 
 Many Comorans criticize Sambi, nicknamed "Ayatollah" because he 
studied in Iran in the 1980s, for bringing the Comoros close to a 
pariah like Iran.   And yet tens of thousands of them turned out to 
welcome Ahmedinejad, standing for hours in a heavy rain to listen to 
him speak in front of the National Assembly.  Comorans forgot their 
reservations and rejoiced that the visit of a famous Muslim leader 
had put their country, however momentarily, on the world map.  By 
association, Comorans also praise President Sambi for being 
important enough to have a world leader, even one so infamous, come 
visit their tiny, remote country.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Despite a heavy rain, thousands gathered in front of the 
National Assembly to hear Union of the Comoros President Ahmed 
Abdallah Mohamed Sambi and his "honored guest" Iranian President 
Mahmoud Ahmedinejad.  While treading carefully on the Sunni-Shi'a 
issue, Sambi said Comoros had a long historical link to the Arab and 
Persian world, even claiming linguistic ties between Comoran and 
Farsi.  He said Comorans respect the Islamic importance of Shiraz 
and even have a mosque, in Domoni on Anjouan, named for that Iranian 
city.  President Sambi congratulated Iran on the 30-year anniversary 
of the Islamic revolution and praised his counterpart for his 
"development success" despite the international embargo.  Sambi said 
all Muslims were proud of Iran's accomplishment in launching a 
satellite.  He concluded by calling on Ahmedinejad to give aid to 
the Comoros. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) President Ahmedinejad announced, "Iran is ready to help 
Africa, particularly the Comoros, to develop after decades of being 
pillaged by the west."  He denounced the former colonial powers in 
Africa and said "anything is possible in independent African 
countries."  The Iranian President said his country prospered 
without expecting anything from the west and called for "Muslim 
solidarity."  Ahmedinejad's speech was interrupted several times by 
enthusiastic cries of "Allah Akbar" (praise God) from the audience. 
Notably absent were opposition leaders:  Grande Comore island 
"president" Abdouwahabi and Moheli island "president" Ali Said 
refused to attend.  In a meeting with diplomats February 26 
(SEPTEL), the former said the GOC was careful to decorate Moroni 
only on the morning of the visit, lest angry Comorans (or the 
opposition) embarrass Sambi by tearing it all down if they had done 
so earlier. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The Iranian President announced he would finance the 
construction of 2,500 houses in the Comoros (Sambi's "international 
housing conference" to prepare to build 75,000 low-cost homes took 
place this week), to provide help repairing generators at the MAMWE 
electric utility, and to provide "technical" experts in agriculture, 
development and related fields.  The first lady of Iran visited the 
el-Marouf Hospital of Moroni, where she reportedly promised 
financial assistance and materials. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Sambi himself visited Iran in July, 2008; reportedly the 
two countries agreed to open Embassies in each other's capitals.  In 
2006, the Comoros and Iran signed numerous "Memoranda of 
Understanding" on cooperation that have led to very little.  Iran 
donated a fishing boat that now sits derelict in the port of Moroni. 
 In spring, 2008, Iran promised a large quantity of crude oil; 
leading the GOC to cancel its supply contract with TOTAL.  There 
were acute fuel and energy shortages in August and September, 2008, 
while the Comorans found ad hoc petroleum suppliers.  The Iranian 
crude, apparently, did not come with free shipment, had to be 
transported to Yemen to be refined, and in general does not appear 
to have been a helpful gift.  Iran has also opened a clinic and 
foundation in Moroni (REFTEL).  President Sambi studied in Iran in 
the 1980s, earning the nickname "Ayatollah," and is believed to have 
been supported by Iran ever since in his mattress, water, and 
perfume businesses prior to being elected president of the Union of 
the Comoros in May, 2006. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Ahmedinejad's advance team and delegation included dozens 
of Iranians who took over almost every room at both of Moroni's two 
international hotels.  The day before the President's arrival, his 
staff were frantically trying to put the program in place, which 
included a welcome at the airport, speeches at the National 
Assembly, and a state dinner at the Itsandra Hotel (Note: 
Interestingly, the Itsandra Hotel is owned by Comoro Gulf Holdings, 
a "Kuwait-based" investment group led by French-Syrian Bashar Kiwan 
and financially backed by Kuwaiti Prince Sheikh Sabah.  End Note). 
Comoros Officer was invited to the events honoring Iran's President, 
but declined due to USG policy. 
 
 
ANTANANARI 00000138  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) Diplomatic colleagues were summoned to be at the airport at 
1400, where they waited for over two hours.  President Sambi arrived 
10 minutes prior to Ahmedinejad's 1605 landing, obviously aware of 
the ETA.  Tens of thousands of Comorans, most holding small Iranian 
flags, lined the road from the airport into Moroni.  Homemade 
banners hung all over, "Welcome To Your Country," and "We Are Proud 
You Launched A Satellite." Diplomats arrived for dinner at 2000, but 
waited until 2230 for the Presidents to arrive.  Ahmedinejad 
reportedly departed the country sometime after midnight, not staying 
overnight as was previous thought. 
 
¶8. (SBU) An African ambassador described the Comoran reaction to 
Ahmedinejad well: "it's an event."  A friendly honorary consul who 
participated in the events quipped, "it was a day of total chaos." 
The same consul, a business leader at the chamber of commerce, was 
surprised to read in today's newspaper that the Iranians wanted to 
open car factories, fisheries, and other businesses with Iranian 
investment - to his knowledge the delegation did not meet the 
private sector. 
 
 
MARQUARDT