09ANKARA1751
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Wed Dec 09 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1465
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1751/01 3431446
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 091446Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1425
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0179
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6622
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4317
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7678
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7585
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4182
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001751 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 9, 2009 
 
Media Highlights 
 
Turkey Cries for Martyrs 
All papers and TV channels widely and sadly cover the funeral 
ceremony held in Tokat for seven soldiers who were martyred in an 
ambush.  Bodies of the martyrs were sent to their respective home 
towns to be buried there.  During the funerals, demonstrations took 
place in many provinces to condemn PKK and terrorism. 
 
Erdogan Blasts Israel, Genocide and the EU 
Turkish media continued its extensive coverage to PM Erdogan's US 
visit, with emphasis today on his twin speeches at Johns Hopkins 
University and the new SETA Foundation. Mainstream Hurriyet 
headlines "My Ancestors Did Not Commit Genocide" and highlighted 
Erdogan's comments on the Middle East. Noting his admonition that "I 
am not criticizing Israel's stance in Gaza just because I am a 
Muslim, but because I am a human being" Hurriyet emphasized his 
characterization of Gaza as "an open prison...you can enter there 
only if Israel allows it."   Regarding Armenia, he rebuffed genocide 
charges, and noted "if the Minsk Group resolves the Karabakh issue, 
parliamentary approval of the protocols signed between 
Turkey-Armenia, will be easier."  Regarding EU membership, 
conservative-nationalist Turkiye quotes Erdogan saying that "We will 
not accept anything other than full membership in the EU." 
Mainstream Sabah headlines "We Got What We Wanted" and reports that 
PM's delegation characterized the Erdogan-Obama meeting as "very 
successful" and "five of the eight files brought to the table by 
Ankara were supported by the White House." 
 
Editorial Whirlwind:  Erdogan Aftershocks (Yeni Sefak) 
Yeni Safak columnist Fehmi Koru in "Aftershocks of the Meeting" 
observes "every meeting in the White House has 'aftershocks,' just 
like in previous visits of Erdogan. Turkey's attitude on the issues 
of the US interest including Iraq, Afghanistan, Iran and Arab-Israel 
conflict corresponds to Obama's election platforms.   Although 
there's been some who wished this meeting would fail, it looks like 
Erdogan impressed Obama with what he said and with his attitude." 
 
Zaman columnist Ali Aslan says in "Intersection of Axis in 
Washington," that:   "Resources from both sides say that the 
meetings were very positive.  Turkey has gone beyond a country 
profile as having geopolitic importance and military needs.  Now, 
it's a pragmatic and self-confident country running after its 
national interests.  The Obama-Erdogan meeting shows Turkey's value 
with both its symbolic aspects and its content." 
 
Hurriyet columnist Cuneyt Ulsever in "Turkey-US Ties: Iran, Critical 
Threshold," says "Since the foreign policy choices of Turkey and the 
US do not always match for Iran, it means that Iran issue will 
remain as a critical threshold in the US-Turkey relations." 
 
Milliyet senior Columnist Sami Kohen in "Standing Straight at the 
Summit", says that "it is understood that Turkey stood up for all 
its rights during the meeting in the Oval office, including on the 
issues Iran, Afghanistan and Armenia.  Of course, this is valid only 
if there weren't different remarks when the leaders were alone." 
 
"Erdogan: The Course of Turkey's Mission in Afghanistan is Clear" 
Zaman Online reports, in an interview with CBS TV's Charlie Rose 
Show on 12/8,  that PM Erdogan said "Turkey's mission in Afghanistan 
was clear since the beginning.  If we betray the Afghan people's 
trust, we may not be able to do the job that we are capable of." 
Reminded that President Obama had his first overseas visit to 
Turkey,  Erdogan said during this visit that Obama re-characterized 
the US-Turkey strategic partnership, calling it a "model 
partnership."  He emphasized that establishing model cooperation is 
the most important step in this process.  Erdogan said Turkey could 
help establish Afghanistan's national army, as it did in 
early-1900s, and train the Afghan police, adding that he made the 
offer at the meeting with Obama.  Erdogan said that Turkish officers 
could train Afghan soldiers and police in Turkey and in Afghanistan. 
 
ANKARA 00001751  002 OF 003 
 
 
 Erdogan also called for a well-prepared road map in Afghanistan, 
saying, "if something goes wrong, we can have big troubles. In my 
opinion, the basis of the road map is more important and it should 
be the one to be focused on. If the road map is followed in 
coordination with the people of that region, we can have very good 
results." 
 
FM Davutoglu: Israel Conflicts Are "Three Legs of the Same Stool" 
Davutoglu's comments at the Washington SETA forum on 12/8 led the 
morning news programs on NTV and CNNTurk, which in news programs and 
online under the headline "Israel's Gaza Attacks" highlighted "we 
have no tolerance for massacres any longer...regardless of religion 
or creed." Mainstream Milliyet Online also reports Davutoglu had 
harsh words for Israel: "Turkey views the Israeli-Palestinian, 
Israeli-Syrian and Israeli-Lebanese ties as three legs of the same 
stool, all supporting one another.  The Israeli attacks on Gaza 
destroyed this balance and Israel made a big mistake during Gaza 
offensive.  More than that, Israel committed crimes by using 
phosphorus in Gaza. . . We are working to support reconciliation 
between Fatah and HAMAS, because we realize that unless there is 
agreement between them, there will be no peace between Israel and 
Palestine."  Hurriyet reported that Davutoglu saluted President 
Obama's Middle East approach, and referring to today's Iraq blasts, 
said "We won't tolerate humanitarian massacres in our region any 
more.  Turkey condemns any terrorist attacks in Iraq irrespective of 
who is targeted. . .  On Iran, Davutoglu emphasized that "all 
countries have a right to obtain peaceful nuclear energy. Turkey 
supports a nuclear free Middle East and global nuclear disarmament. 
We don't want a nuclear Iran, but nor do we want a nuclear Israel." 
 
 
Washington Gives Green Light for Drones 
Hurriyet senior columnist Enis Berberoglu writes in "The Secret 
Behind the Second Milestone: Drones" that "the reason PM Erdogan 
announced his meeting with Obama as "the second milestone in 
countering PKK terrorism," has become obvious.  During the recent 
meetings, Washington gave the green light to deliver some critical 
equipment to Turkey to be used in the fight against terrorism. 
Within this framework, Turkey is planning 
to buy three drones from the US." 
 
Climate Agreement in Danger (Milliyet)  Mainstream Milliyet opines 
in "Climate Agreement in Danger," that "the positive atmosphere has 
left and in its place are concerns" at the Summit, because "the US 
and China are staying distant to demands" for lowering emissions. 
In "Copenhagen Will Get Warm," leftist Taraf  says "real bargaining 
will start next week" and that success will depend on American and 
Chinese moves on emissions.  Taraf gloomily highlights Turkey's 
first place position as the world's fastest emitter of greenhouse 
gases and underlines that "this weakens the country's 
competitiveness." Meanwhile, mainstream Hurriyet Online headlines 
"Precaution At the Climate Summit: Cage to Protesters," saying 
"protesters from all around the world are getting ready for huge 
protests on Saturday," and that "police are taking the toughest 
precautions in Denmark's history." 
 
Afghanistan. Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak headlines, "Second NATO 
Crisis in Afghanistan," and says, "NATO forces hit Lehman province 
in eastern Afghanistan killing six civilians. In his surprise visit 
to the country, Secretary Gates offered assurances. 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports, "Defense Secretary Gates 
arrived in Afghanistan, the first senior US official to visit with 
Afghan President Hamid Karzai since President Obama's announcement 
last week of his new strategy for Afghanistan." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- The Constitutional Court continues to hear the case for disbanding 
DTP. 
 
ANKARA 00001751  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
- DTP activists attempt to rally in Izmir to protest suit for 
banning their party, but tight security measures forced them to 
disperse after releasing a press statement 
 
- CHP leader Baykal criticizes the government for its determination 
to press ahead with the democratic opening and says that this is 
treason 
 
- DTP leader Ahmet Turk denounces illegal protests and killing of 
seven soldiers in Tokat and says this was dark provocation 
 
- 25 DTP officials have been taken into custody in Adana 
 
 
World 
 
- Car bombs exploded in Baghdad yesterday killing at least 127 
people injuring 450 people 
 
- Greek Cypriot FM Kyprianou said "Southern Cyprus will block EU 
talks in six more policy areas unless Turkey meets conditions yet to 
be spelled out" 
SILLIMAN