09ANKARA266
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Feb 19 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6920
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0266/01 0501516
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 191516Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8828
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9487
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5409
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3620
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7133
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6996
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3584
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000266 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 19, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Holiday Inn Jihad 
Media report a conference entitled "Victory in Gaza," was held this 
weekend at the Istanbul Airport Holiday Inn in which Islamist 
leaders called for a jihad against Israel because of their actions 
in Gaza.  Mainstream Milliyet calls the meeting, "A Jihad Summit in 
Istanbul" and notes, "Hamas leaders met with 200 religious 
conservatives and Sunni religious leaders from the Middle East, 
Sudan, Somalia, Pakistan, and Indonesia to call for 'A Third Front 
in the Jihad'" as "The conference rained praise on Erdogan." 
Mainstream CNN Turk reports, "Up to 200 religious scholars and 
clerics met with senior Hamas officials in Istanbul this weekend to 
plot a new jihad centered on Gaza."  Mainstream Milliyet says the 
delegates focused on the creation of the "third front" -- the first 
two being Afghanistan and Iraq -- in closed meetings after sessions. 
 
 
Mohammed Nazzal, a senior Hamas leader based in Damascus, urged the 
Arab governments to "open their borders and allow fighters into 
Gaza."  Milliyet quoted BBC reporter Bill Law, who was the only 
Western journalist to attend the gathering, who said "More 
importantly, this conference represented something of a coup for 
Hamas.  They were promised weapons, money and fighters." In 
addition, Law noted, "At the very least this statement of intent 
from Sunni hardliners poses new challenges, not just to the Israelis 
and to Western efforts to broker a peace deal but to Arab regimes as 
well." Milliyet also notes most media outlets in Turkey were not 
invited to the conference.  Professor Ahmet Agirakca, a former 
Istanbul University fellow, told the conference in Arabic, "We are 
happy to host you in Istanbul, the capital of the caliphate."  The 
final communiqu of the conference called for a boycott against 
American and Israeli goods, and stressed Jerusalem could be saved 
only by jihad, reports Milliyet. 
 
Editorial Commentary on the Middle East Peace 
 
Erdal Safak wrote in mainstream Sabah: "Senator John Kerry's visit 
to Damascus marked an important step toward changing the U.S. game 
plan in the Middle East.  Now U.S. Congressman Howard Birman, the 
mastermind behind the Syria Accountability Act, will also visit 
Syria. These developments indicate a serious change in the U.S. 
attitude toward Syria, and Turkey also has an important role to play 
in this process.  Like Ankara has always said, 'Washington realizes 
that no peace in the Middle East can be long-lasting without the 
involvement of Syria.'" 
 
Kadri Gursel wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "When PM Erdogan said his 
harsh attitude toward Israel 'has found its place,' he probably 
meant that his criticism of Israel's Gaza operations is likely to 
play a role in Turkey's upcoming local elections.  Gaza is a 
political propaganda tool for Erdogan, just like it was a tool for 
right-wing politicians during Israel's recent elections.  Erdogan's 
Gaza stance will likely improve political Islam's chances for 
victory in Turkey's upcoming local elections." 
 
Erdogan and Olmert Continue to Spar as Wexler Advocates for 
Reconciliation 
Media feature the continuing row between the prime ministers of 
Israel and Turkey amid U.S. Congressman Wexler's visit to Ankara to 
call for reconciliation in Turk-Israeli bilateral ties.  Despite 
Israeli PM Olmert's weekend attempt to clarify why he did not inform 
PM Erdogan of the Gaza operations prior to their launch, Erdogan 
nevertheless slammed Olmert on charges of "creating a crisis in 
trust."  Mainstream CNN Turk reports in "Olmert's Explanation Angers 
Erdogan" that PM Olmert told a meeting of American Jewish 
Organizations in Jerusalem this weekend that "The Turkish prime 
ministry was angry that I visited Erdogan on Monday and didn't tell 
him we were going to attack Gaza on Saturday.  I didn't tell him we 
were going to attack on Saturday because how could I have known? 
 
ANKARA 00000266  002 OF 004 
 
 
How could I have known that Hamas was going to shoot 50, 60, 70 
rockets into Israel on Tuesday and Wednesday?"  In addition, liberal 
Radikal, and mainstream Vatan note Olmert pointed out, "I didn't 
call my good friend George Bush either to tell him we were going to 
attack Gaza, I didn't call my good friends Gordon Brown or Angela 
Merkel or Nicholas Sarkozy either," as Olmert asked, "Why should I 
tell any other prime minister about Israel's military plans to 
defend its citizens?"  Mainstream NTV quotes Olmert in the headline, 
"I Didn't Even Call George Bush, Why Should I Have Called Erdogan?" 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports "Erdogan Criticized Olmert" for his 
explanation and Erdogan accused Olmert of "Creating a Crisis in 
Trust."  Zaman quotes Erdogan's response to Olmert's statement, 
"First he says he was not aware of the plans to attack, but then he 
says he did not have to alert anyone to the plans." 
 
In a related story, mainstream NTV reports U.S. Congressman Robert 
Wexler spoke to the press after his meeting with Erdogan last night. 
 NTV notes Wexler emphasized, "Relations between Turkey and Israel 
are very important and must be restored."  In addition, Wexler 
praised President Gul for his diplomatic efforts with Armenia and 
noted, "Our support for Ankara will continue." 
 
A Syrian Olive Branch Extended to Obama 
Media report Syrian President Assad spoke to The Guardian in a call 
for reconciliation with the U.S. and Israel.  CNN Turk reports in, 
"Warm Messages from Assad to the U.S. and Israel" that "Syria is 
encouraged by the positive messages" from the Obama administration. 
Leftist Taraf quotes Assad's plea in the headline, "America, Send an 
Ambassador to Damascus."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak headlines, 
"Assad Extends an Olive Branch to Obama."  Mainstream Sabah reports, 
"The Syrian President Says He Is Ready to Talk Peace With the U.S." 
Mainstream NTV reports, "Syrian Is Hopeful for the Obama Era." 
 
Heavy Tax Fine for Dogan Group 
Sabah, Milliyet, Hurriyet, Vatan, Radikal, Posta, Zaman and others: 
The Ministry of Finance fined Dogan Media Group 826 million TL 
(approximately $488million), for allegedly not paying value added 
tax (VAT) during the sale of its shares to a German media giant. 
Liberal Radikal explains that the fine was related with the sale of 
25 percent shares of Dogan TV to German media giant, Axel Springer 
Group.  Although the sale was finalized on January 2, 2007 and the 
taxes were paid within the same year, the Finance Ministry claims 
that the sales took place in 2006 and thus imposed the fine on the 
Turkish media giant.  Dogan Media Group issued a statement of its 
own, which said, "According to Turkish Commercial Code, the sales of 
shares are completed when the shares are endorsed and handed over. 
This fine was given regardless of actual law and we will exercise 
our legal rights."  Mainstream Vatan calls this fine "the AKP 
government's revenge" for the Dogan Media Group's criticism of PM 
Erdogan. 
 
Education Ministry Withdraws Anti-Armenian Documentary from Schools 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet and mainstream Hurriyet report the 
Education Ministry has stopped the distribution of a documentary 
film about the Armenian issue to elementary schools due to negative 
reactions from academics and intellectuals.  The Education Ministry 
distributed a documentary developed by the military General Staff 
(TGS) entitled, "Sari Gelin -- The True Face of the Armenian 
Question," to all schools around the country.  On Wednesday, the 
Education ministry released a public statement which said the film 
was sent "to the teachers, not the students."  This documentary drew 
criticism from academics for reflecting the official ideology of the 
Turkish Republic on the 1915 incidents.  Earlier this week, 500 
Armenians and intellectuals sent an official letter of protest to 
the prime minister and requested that Armenian schools and Armenian 
students be exempted from watching it in order to "prevent feelings 
of guilt, shame and discrimination." 
 
Silopi Prosecutor Initiates Search for Human Remains in BOTAS' 
Alleged "Acid Wells" 
 
ANKARA 00000266  003 OF 004 
 
 
Hurriyet, Sabah, Zaman, Taraf:  A chief prosecutor in the 
Southeastern town of Silopi is looking for the human remains of 
people who were allegedly buried in acid wells after they were 
killed by JITEM in the 1990s.  The prosecutor initiated an 
investigation after PKK defector Huseyin Aygan (who allegedly worked 
for JITEM in the 1990s) and Tuncay Guney (of 'Ergenekon' fame) 
claimed that JITEM had killed many people and dumped their bodies in 
oil company BOTAS' acid wells in Silopi.  Relatives and lawyers of 
the victims are also attending the examination of the wells. 
 
Ambassador Jeffrey: A Deal with The IMF Will Benefit Turkey 
Media outlets report Wednesday Ambassador James Jeffrey told the 
Turkish-American Businessmen's Association (TABA) that "cooperation 
between Turkey and the U.S. will continue under the presidency of 
Barack Obama."  In addition, Jeffrey said "a new program with the 
IMF will benefit Turkey" in the face of the global economic 
downturn.  Jeffrey called Turkey "an attractive destination for 
American investors," and noted Turkey "should do more to lure 
foreign investors."  Jeffrey also mentioned that the energy 
cooperation between Turkey and the U.S. would continue, and he 
emphasized that the transport of energy resources via Turkey to 
Western countries would make a huge contribution to Turkey and the 
region. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Pakistan's Approval of Sheria Law in Svat 
Oktay Eksi wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "Special Envoy Richard 
Holbrooke expressed discontent concerning Pakistan's decision to 
allow a Sharia regime in the country's Svat region.  Let's hope that 
the Svat example will become a wake-up call to Washington about the 
dangerous consequences of exploiting religion for political affairs. 
 Washington has allowed this exploitation of Islam for political 
means in the region, including Turkey, and the new American 
administration should see the danger in it." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic News 
 
- The prosecutor's office for Frankfurt, Germany said the file 
concerning the fraud case in the Germany-based, Islamist-oriented 
charity Deniz Feneri was sent to the Turkish embassy in Berlin.  The 
file is expected to be sent to the Turkish Justice Ministry next 
week. 
 
- 22 suspected Hizbullah members, including five women, were taken 
into custody in Istanbul. 
 
- 48,650,000 voters are registered to go the polls for municipality 
elections on March 29. 
 
- The Turkish Central Bank monetary policy committee will hold a 
meeting Thursday to decide on interest rates. 
 
International News 
 
- In Baghdad, Iraqi President Jalal Talabani told Turkey's Iraq 
envoy Murat Ozcelik, "The PKK cannot disrupt the strategic ties 
between Turkey and Iraq."  Talabani also said he looks forward to 
President Gul's upcoming visit to Iraq. 
 
- German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier opens a German 
consulate in the northern Iraqi city of Erbil. 
 
- Iran's defense minister visits Moscow regarding the sale of an 
S-300 surface-to-air missile system to Tehran. 
 
- Foreign Minister Franco Frattini says Italy may send an additional 
250 troops to Afghanistan during the elections in August. 
 
 
 
ANKARA 00000266  004 OF 004 
 
 
JEFFREY