09ANKARA595
Ankara Media Summary
Fri Apr 24 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO8100
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0595/01 1141029
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 241029Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9488
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9624
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5659
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3784
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7256
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7134
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3712
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000595 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: Ankara Media Summary 
 
THURSDAY, APRIL 24, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Turkey and Armenia Agree on A Roadmap for Normalizing Relations 
All papers:  The Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA) said in a statement 
late Wednesday night that Turkey and Armenia have agreed on a 
roadmap for normalizing relations and reconciliation.  In its 
statement the MFA said "The two nations have made solid progress and 
have reached a mutual understanding to normalize ties according to a 
comprehensive framework that satisfies both sides.  Within this 
framework, a roadmap has been determined."  Mainstream Sabah reports 
that the roadmap is based on five steps for reconciliation:  Armenia 
will recognize the Treaty of Kars signed between Turkey and Armenia 
in 1923, third countries will be allowed to join the commission to 
be formed by historians to examine allegations of genocide, the 
border crossing between the two countries will be opened, necessary 
agreements will be signed to boost commercial relations, the two 
countries will first accredit their Ambassadors in Tbilisi, then, 
they will appoint Ambassadors mutually and finally, the agreement 
about the road map will be submitted to the Turkish Parliament for 
approval.  Mainstream Hurriyet reports "The opening of the border 
and establishment of diplomatic relations depends on the progress in 
the activities of commission established by the two countries to 
tackle genocide claims.  Also, the steps to be undertaken by Armenia 
in Nagorno Karabagh will play an important role in bilateral ties." 
 
 
Mainstream Sabah comments "The roadmap between Turkey and Armenia 
did not include steps for settlement in Nagorno Karabakh," but an 
unnamed government official is quoted as saying "There is a de facto 
understanding that, in order to achieve normalization between Turkey 
and Armenia, Nagorno Karabakh must be resolved in the same was that 
finding a resolution to Cyprus is a de facto condition for Turkey's 
EU bid."  Liberal Radikal also notes, "The step-by-step 
normalization" will "run parallel to steps regarding Karabakh."  In 
a related article, mainstream Aksam reports, "Turkey now expects 
Armenia to state its respect for Turkish territorial integrity," and 
"steps toward establishing diplomatic relations in the two countries 
depends upon this." 
 
Sabah reports that recent developments in Turkey-Armenia relations 
and the impact of it on Azerbaijan was high on agenda of the 
reception held at the parliament on the occasion of April 23 
National Sovereignty and Children's Day.  President Abdullah Gul 
said that he called Azeri President Aliyev to say that everything is 
being done according to the interests of Turkey and Azerbaijan. 
Meanwhile, at the same reception, PM Erdogan said "We will not take 
any steps to hurt our Azeri brothers," notes mainstream Vatan. 
Mainstream Milliyet notes PM Erdogan's comments saying "Details of 
the roadmap are not concrete yet," which has caused some to question 
the purpose of the accord.  The paper reports that Erdogan will go 
to Azerbaijan on Monday to meet with Aliyev. 
 
Obama not Likely to Use the 'G Word' 
Mainstream Vatan headlines, "The Turkish Statement to Normalize Ties 
with Armenia Will Make U.S. President Obama Avoid the 'G Word.'" 
Zaman's Washington correspondent Ali Aslan writes "It's not likely 
that Obama will use the 'G word' because Obama is likely to be 
pleased by the agreement between Turkey and Armenia, but he also 
does not want to offend the Armenians in America, so he may use the 
term 'mass killings' or even 'ethnic cleansing.'"  Far right 
Ortadogu also concludes "Obama is not expected to say 'genocide'" as 
"concrete steps have been taken between Turkey and Armenia." 
Mainstream Milliyet, liberal Radikal, and Islamist-oriented Zaman 
all note in their headlines, "The U.S. Is Pleased," with the 
announcement. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-Armenia-Azerbaijan 
 
Okay Gonensin notes in mainstream Vatan: "The normalization of 
 
ANKARA 00000595  002 OF 003 
 
 
Turkey-Armenia ties is something the Russian Federation will not 
like, because the conflict between Azerbaijan and Armenia and their 
borders remaining closed make both countries dependent on Russia. 
Both Armenia and Azerbaijan know that under Turkey's auspices they 
will make important progress in opening up to the world.  It's an 
important political success that Turkey will be on the lead in 
bringing peace to the Caucasus, even though this success will not 
relieve Turkey from the '1915 question.'" 
 
Fikret Bila observes in mainstream Milliyet: "Diplomatic circles in 
Ankara believe the Baku administration is not uneasy as the 
Azerbaijani public is over the possibility of the opening of the 
border between Turkey and Armenia.  President Aliyev is continuing 
contacts with Yerevan via the Minsk Group, and is working for the 
two processes to move forward in a way to support each other. 
Ankara, too, believes that if the two processes move parallel and 
support each other, the outcome will benefit the entire Caucasus." 
 
 
Ferai Tinc comments in mainstream Hurriyet: "The U.S., especially, 
knows that normalization in the region is not possible without a 
resolution to the Karabakh question.  Secretary Clinton assured the 
Azerbaijani government of U.S. support in resolving the Karabakh 
problem in Wednesday's hearing at the U.S .Congress, and American 
diplomats' visits to Armenia and Azerbaijan earlier this week was no 
coincidence.  What matters is the creation of a context regarding 
normalization through informing the public -- the Turkish government 
must eliminate the question marks the opposition might have, just as 
Secretary Clinton did during her hearing at the US Congress. 
Otherwise, the 'roadmap' will mean nothing but another effort to 
dodge another April 24, which will be a pity." 
 
Ali Aslan writes from Washington for the Islamist-oriented Zaman: 
"It seems unlikely that President Obama will mention the Armenian 
'genocide' in his April 24 speech.  Obama is not even expected to 
make an indirect reference to genocide, but there's a possibility 
that in order to not offend the Armenians, he might deliver a 
'heavy' text by calling the events of 1915 'mass killings' or 
'ethnic cleansing.'" 
 
Erdal Safak comments in mainstream Sabah: "Normalization of the 
Turkey-Armenia relationship will give us ground to calmly debate the 
Armenians' 'genocide' charges.  Both Turkey and Armenia must make 
good use of this ground, since both countries need to revitalize the 
friendship they have lost." 
 
Cengiz Candar writes in liberal Radikal: "Baku has toned down its 
reaction to the process between Turkey and Armenia, which gives us 
hope that the 'roadmap' between Ankara and Yerevan might work.  The 
process will push for progress also on Karabakh as the processes 
between Turkey-Armenia and Azerbaijan-Armenia move parallel to each 
other." 
 
Ali Akel writes from Washington for Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak: 
"The common opinion in Washington is that in his April 24 statement, 
President Obama will say everything without using the word 
'genocide,' just like previous presidents who termed the events of 
1915 as 'massacre.'  If Obama doesn't say 'genocide,' the Armenian 
Genocide Resolution will not be raised again this year.  Do you 
think the Turks and Armenians who stage demonstrations in front of 
the Turkish Embassy in Washington on April 24 could hold a 
'solidarity demonstration' together?  Such a likelihood, at least, 
sounds good." 
 
Guneri Civaoglu writes in mainstream Milliyet: "President Obama is 
not expected to use the word 'genocide' on April 24, because now he 
has an ethical pretext which he can explain to the Armenian lobby in 
the U.S.  Following Ankara, Yerevan made a similar statement on the 
normalization of ties, and Secretary Clinton stated she found this 
development 'positive.'  Looks like the April 24 storm will pass 
quietly this year." 
 
ANKARA 00000595  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
Weapons Unearthed in Istanbul 
Sabah, Zaman, Yeni Safak, Hurriyet:  Today's papers report that ten 
people were detained in connection with the Ergenekon investigation. 
 Security people unearthed weapons in Istanbul on land that belongs 
to the Istek Foundation.  Sabah reports that four of the suspects 
were regular military officers from the military unit using the area 
for training.  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports that following the 
statement of Bedrettin Dalan, an Ergenekon suspect and the founder 
of Istek Foundation, said that "the excavated land is in a military 
zone and no one is allowed in there", the Turkish General Staff 
stated that "The military does not have any buried weapons." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- Eight people were injured in Hakkari during protests against 
recent operations targeting DTP.  A 12 year old boy was rushed to 
the hospital after he was brutally beaten by a police officer. 
 
- The Istanbul Governor rejects the request of labor unions for 
holding May 1 celebrations in Taksim. 
 
- The government plans to offer temporary jobs to 500,000 people. 
 
World 
 
- 73 people were killed in two separate suicide attacks in Baghdad. 
 
- The alleged leader of Al-Qaeda in Iraq Abu Omar Al- Baghdadi was 
detained after clashes with Iraqi soldiers. 
 
JEFFREY