09ANKARA502
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Apr 02 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO7778
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0502/01 0921434
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 021434Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9305
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9573
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5589
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3729
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7209
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7084
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3662
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000502 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, APRIL 2, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Afghanistan-Pakistan Peace Summit in Ankara 
Mainstream Sabah and Islamist-oriented Zaman report that Turkey has 
brought together the leaders of Afghanistan and Pakistan in Ankara 
yesterday.  The presidents of Turkey, Afghanistan and Pakistan held 
a tripartite meeting in which, for the first time, the chiefs of 
General Staff, commanders of land forces and bureaucrats of 
intelligence offices of the three countries were also present. 
Presidents Abdullah Gul, Hamid Karzai  and Asif Ali Zerdari 
discussed regional and international matters that included counter 
terrorism.  Sabah says Karzai and Zerdari drafted a joint plan of 
action envisaging cooperation in the political, military and 
intelligence fields.  The paper outlines the main elements of the 
action plan as follows:  The leaders of the three countries will 
hold annual meetings; the Foreign Ministers of the two countries 
will hold annual meetings with representatives of their military and 
intelligence organizations; the three countries will set up a joint 
working group of diplomats and finally, the three countries will 
undertake steps to boost economic cooperation. 
 
Erdogan: Cabinet Reshuffle Possible 
Media outlets report Prime Minister Erdogan held a news conference 
Wednesday before departing for London to participate in the G-20 
summit talks.  Erdogan denied a Wednesday report in daily Sabah that 
six ministers, in a gesture to the PM, handed over their 
resignations during a cabinet meeting on Monday.  Erdogan stressed 
cabinet meetings are closed to the press, and said he would "show 
the door" to the six ministers if the reporter can prove that the 
mentioned ministers leaked the report to the press. 
 
After an eight-point drop in AKP party votes and the loss of 13 
cities in March 29 local elections, the ruling AKP has rolled up its 
sleeves to "revitalize" the party and reshuffle the cabinet, 
according to papers.  Papers expect Erdogan to make changes in the 
government and the party administration after completing his party's 
provincial conventions in October.  The AKP's general convention is 
set to be held early November, but election results will force 
Erdogan to pull that date forward, papers speculate.  "A cabinet 
overhaul might come any time; we are working on that," Erdogan told 
the press yesterday. 
 
Cicek's Remarks on DTP's Election Success Draw Reactions from 
Erdogan, DTP 
Media outlets report about the controversy over Deputy Prime 
Minister Cemil Cicek's remarks on the election victory of Turkey's 
main Kurdish party DTP.  Speaking to daily Hurriyet on Tuesday, 
Cicek implied that the victory of the DTP in Igdir, a province on 
the Turkish border with Armenia, could pose a national security 
risk.  "The DTP won in Igdir.  In other words, the DTP has pushed to 
the border with Armenia," Cicek said.  "We may congratulate 
ourselves for winning in Ankara, and the CHP for winning in Izmir. 
All this cheerfulness, however, cannot help a province that has 
serious security problems -- we must pay attention there," 
particularly in light of Igdir's proximity to the border with 
Armenia, Cicek said. 
 
PM Erdogan told the press yesterday Cicek's remarks were his 
"personal view."  "This country belongs to all of us.  We cannot 
allow such discrimination.  The AKP won in Gaziantep and Hatay, two 
other border provinces," emphasized Erdogan.  AKP deputy group chief 
Nihat Ergun said Cicek had to withdraw his statement.  DTP deputy 
group chief Selahattin Demirtas said Cicek was trying to distract 
people from the AKP's election defeat.  "The AKP lost was because 
their two-faced policies on the Kurds became apparent for all to 
see," Demirtas told Milliyet.  DTP lawmaker Bengi Yildiz said they 
were planning to carry Cicek's remarks to the parliament. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Post Election Analysis 
 
 
ANKARA 00000502  002 OF 003 
 
 
Yasin Dogan wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "In the post 
election process, the ruling AKP will certainly review its 
organizational chart, its party board staffing, its strategy and 
rhetoric." 
 
Kadri Gursel wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "The Kurdish issue has 
been the dominating factor in these elections, particularly in the 
southeast.  A mayor from one of the Diyarbakir districts has made a 
remarkable come back with over 65 percent votes even though he was 
sacked from his duty after winning the 2002 local elections since he 
promoted city services in a multi-language format.  Now with the 
March 29 outcome, the government has to acknowledge that Kurdish 
issue is a reality not only on cultural grounds but also on 
political grounds, and the government will move forward 
accordingly." 
 
Cuneyt Arcayurek wrote in leftist nationalist Cumhuriyet: "Even 
though it sounds like a distant future we have to believe that the 
AKP will take proper steps to eliminate its anti-secular activities. 
 What the CHP does now remains to be seen and who knows if the CHP 
will be able to open itself up and become a real popular party." 
 
 
Hope and Controversy Surround G20 
Media outlets pay close attention to the expectations for concrete 
results from the G20 meeting as protestors fill the streets of 
London to demonstrate against the current economic system. 
Mainstream Sabah calls the meeting "The Economy's Most Critical 
Summit."  Far right Ortadogu headlines, "The World's Eyes Turn to 
the G20."  Mainstream Vatan headlines, "The Summit to Solve the 
Crisis," and reports, "the views are very different" between "The 
industrial capitalists German and France," and the "financial 
capitalists the U.S. and the UK."  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, 
"Leaders Are Hopeful for a Joint Packet, And The World's Eyes are on 
London." 
 
Liberal Radikal points out the significance of the meetings that are 
taking place on the sidelines in "Obama Made His First Contact with 
Russia and China," as "Obama starts the test of his international 
leadership abilities."  Leftist Taraf headlines "Cold War in 
London," as "Obama wants a new packet to address the crisis but 
Merkel and Sarkozy say a new packet is impossible, and thus the 
summit is divided into two."  Taraf also reports in "Look at me, 
Medvedev" that "President Obama warned Russian President Medvedev on 
the topics of nuclear weapons and the struggle against terror." 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak focuses entirely on Obama's dietary 
preference in the front page headline, "Did Obama Veto Pork" on the 
summit menu - in a reference to President Obama's preference to not 
eat pork. 
 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports, "London Turns Into a War Zone," and the 
paper carries photos of violent protests in London. 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports, "Job Guarantees Are Wanted 
at the G20" as "The streets of London are filled with union 
representatives and academics who are demonstrating against 
capitalism." 
 
Mainstream Vatan headlines, "The Summit to Solve the Crisis." 
 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports, "London Turns Into a War Zone" in the 
middle of their front page. 
 
Sabah at Guantanamo 
Correspondent Bilge Eser is reporting from Guantanamo in mainstream 
Sabah this week.  Today's headline reads "Defense of Torture from 
American Commanders," and notes, "Guantanamo Commander David Thomas 
answered questions about torture at Guantanamo by saying 'We are 
proud of what we did.'" 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
ANKARA 00000502  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
Domestic 
 
- Following the March 29 elections, the main opposition CHP pushed 
the button for changes in the party administration.  Kemal 
Kilicdaroglu is expected to take a post in the party administrative 
board. 
 
- Former Iranian president Mohammed Khatami will participate in the 
Alliance of Civilizations forum talks to be held in Istanbul on 
April 6-7. 
 
- In March, Turkish exports fell 34.9 percent to USD 7.1 billion 
compared to the same month last year. 
 
- Automotive companies in Turkey push the button for price hikes 
after recent government incentives helped them sell all cars in 
stock. 
 
World 
 
- The Financial Times writes NATO heads of government will try this 
week to heal a rift with PM Erdogan over the Turkish government's 
opposition to the Danish PM Rasmussen becoming the next 
secretary-general of the alliance. 
 
- Cem Ozdemir, the co-chair of the German Green Party, was taken 
under a brief custody with his wife, Pia Castro, at Dulles Airport 
in Washington, D.C.  Ozdemir said he was treated as if he was a 
terrorist, and that he was held for at least an hour. 
 
- A source in Likud Party says PM Netanyahu's new government 
intended to distance itself from the US-sponsored Annapolis 
agreements on working toward a Palestinian state. 
 
- President Obama and the Russian President Medvedev discuss plans 
to announce negotiations to draft a new arms control treaty. 
 
- Middle East envoy Tony Blair says Palestinians must have their own 
state otherwise there will be little chance of the violence ever 
ceasing. 
 
JEFFREY