09ANKARA363
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Mar 10 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO5252
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0363/01 0691453
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 101453Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9014
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9518
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5487
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3667
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7161
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7026
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3614
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000363 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, MARCH 10, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Obama's Upcoming Visit to Turkey Illustrates Turkey's Importance and 
Angers Greece 
Media outlets hail the U.S. President Barack Obama's decision to 
visit Turkey as a sign of Turkey's significance in the region. 
Mainstream Sabah reports U.S. President Barack Obama's upcoming 
visit shows "Incirlik's importance will increase as the U.S. 
withdraws its forces from Iraq" and "Obama seeks to win over the 
Muslim world by visiting Turkey."  Columnist Sami Kohen of 
mainstream Milliyet notes in "Obama's Strategy to Win Turkey" that 
"Washington is closely watching Turkey shore up its geopolitical 
significance" by "Ankara's efforts regarding Syrian-Israeli 
relations, and Ankara's initiatives toward Iran, Afghanistan, and 
Pakistan."  Kohen calls the new administrations newfound approach to 
Turkey "an indication of American pragmatism in the region." 
Columnist Fikret Bila of the same paper also notes, "Obama's 
decision to come to Turkey shows that the new administration expect 
Turkey to contribute to efforts in Iraq, Palestine, Iran, and the 
Caucasus."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet headlines "Turkey Is An 
Ally Again."  Columnist Murat Yetkin of liberal Radikal writes, 
"Obama understands that Turkey can play a key political, security, 
and economic role in the region only if it is aligned with the West" 
and "Obama is coming to Turkey during his first trip to Europe, 
which indicated Obama seeks to redefine the framework of U.S. ties 
to Europe."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak carries the front page 
headline, "Obama Shocks The World By His Change of Course," in 
foreign policy.  Also, Yeni Safak notes, "Obama's upcoming visit 
proves that Turkey's foreign policy has been a success" as "Turkey 
is a country of central importance."  CNN Turk reports, "Circles in 
Washington describe Obama's decision to visit Turkey as 'Ankara's 
diplomatic victory.'" 
 
In a related story, mainstream Sabah, "Our Neighbor Is Seized with 
Jealousy," as U.S. President Barack Obama's plans to visit Ankara 
and bypass Athens "creates shattered dreams" in Athens and the Greek 
media reports this shows "Ankara is more important" to the new 
administration than Athens.  Mainstream Milliyet reports, "Athens Is 
in Shock" as "Obama Is Not Coming."  Liberal Radikal headlines, 
"Obama Makes Our Neighbor Jealous."  Mainstream Aksam says Athens 
feels like "it has been given a cold shower" by Obama's perceived 
snub.  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "Greek officials are alarmed 
by the fact that U.S. officials have begun to skip Athens in 
high-level visits to Turkey." 
 
Editorial Comment on U.S. President Obama's Upcoming Visit 
 
Murat Yetkin wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "Focusing only 
on Obama's message to Islamic world only reduces the importance of 
his visit to Turkey.  Turkey must analyze Obama's important upcoming 
visit from a broader perspective.  Turkey and the U.S. share similar 
priorities regarding Europe, Asia and the Middle East.  Obama's 
visit is an indication Obama is embracing Turkey's potential to play 
a political and economic role." 
 
Nazli Ilicak wrote in mainstream Sabah: "Due to the Bush 
administration's policy, American image in Turkey fell to its lowest 
degree.  The visit of Hillary Clinton reminded me of President 
Clinton's visit in 1999, which happened during an overall positive 
climate.  Hillary Clinton made a shining start and President Obama's 
will reach the summit: This is the time to love America again." 
 
Fikret Bila wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "With the new 
administration, Ankara and Washington are getting closer to each 
other.  Ankara has some expectations from Obama in that regard and 
given the statements of Turkish officials, the following can be 
noted:  Problems should be resolved through diplomacy and dialogue; 
equating Islam with terrorism should end; the Palestine issue should 
be treated fairly; Syria should be encouraged to explore ties with 
the West.  Finally, measures should be implemented for Iraq's unity 
 
ANKARA 00000363  002 OF 004 
 
 
and integrity in the aftermath of the U.S. pull out." 
 
Sahin Alpay wrote in Islamist oriented Zaman: "The Obama 
administration is giving signals to act together with Turkey 
particularly on certain things, namely dialogue and diplomacy. 
Washington should once again realize, if not has done already, that 
anti-American sentiment in Muslim countries stems from equalizing 
terror with Islam, which was a tone set by the Bush administration. 
If the new administration uses its power and clout toward freeing 
Palestinians from Israel oppression and stops giving unconditional 
support for Arab dictatorships and Israel, then there will be a 
completely new friendship with Islamic world." 
 
Mumtazer Turkone wrote in Islamist oriented Zaman: "The Obama visit 
is more of an international project: The U.S.-Turkey joint 
production for a new Middle East.  Washington wants to design the 
world, particularly starting with the Middle East and Turkey in 
hopes of using its influence as a regional power.  We have to think 
in a broader context and focus on advantages of this new initiative 
instead of getting obsessed with 'The Greater Middle east Project' 
and 'Moderate Islam' which is on no one else's agenda but ours." 
 
President Gul Goes to Iran Today and to Baghdad on March 20-21 
Mainstream Sabah and Islamist-oriented Zaman report that President 
Gul left for Iran today to attend the 10th summit of the Economic 
Cooperation Organization.  Gul will hold meetings with Iranian 
President Ahmedinejad and religious leader Khomeini and will give 
the message that they should make good use of a dialogue process 
with the United States.  Sabah adds that President Gul was invited 
by Iraqi President Talabani to visit Baghdad on March 20-21. 
Reportedly, Gul will stay at Talabani's residence in the green zone 
and will also meet with KRG President Massoud Barzani in Baghdad. 
Gul will not go to Erbil, Kirkuk or Necef for security reasons. 
 
FM Babacan to Visit Yerevan in April 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports that as "Ankara seeks new ways to 
prevent President Obama from using the word "genocide" in the annual 
April 24 speech for the Armenian commemoration day of the incidents 
in 1915, Turkey has taken an important step and FM Babacan has 
accepted an invitation by his Armenian counterpart FM Nalbandian to 
participate in a meeting of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation in 
Yerevan on April 16-17. 
 
"The Dollar Flies Upwards" (Cumhuriyet) 
Media note the sharp and fast rise in the value of the U.S. Dollar 
over the Turkish Lira (TL) is a signal that the Turkish economy is 
showing its vulnerability in the global economic crisis.  Mainstream 
Milliyet writes in "Why Is It Rising?" that "Investors are pulling 
their money out of developing countries like Poland, Romania, and 
South Africa, which is affecting the Turkish Lira."  Liberal Radikal 
reports, "The Dollar Reaches a New High" against the TL as 
"Factories Are Closed, and Industrial Production Fell by 21.3% to A 
Record Low" and "The impact of the crisis will be worse in Turkey 
than in the U.S."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports, "The 
Markets Go from One Place to The Other As They Surrender to the 
General Crisis."  Mainstream Hurriyet notes the latest economic 
figures indicate "A Red Alert in the Turkish Economy."  Haber Turk 
reports "The Turkish Lira suffered the biggest losses among the 
international currencies." 
 
The Global Economic Meltdown Deepens in Turkey 
Papers report a "huge decrease in Turkish industrial output by 21.3 
percent in January," signaling what Hurriyet calls "a red alert" for 
the contraction in the economy.  Papers comment that the recent fall 
in industrial production was sharper than that during the crisis of 
¶2001.  "In five months, Turkey has lost one quarter of its 
industry," says the business daily Referans, underlining that the 
losses took place in a period when the ruling AKP government was 
"confident" that the global economic meltdown had "by-passed" 
Turkey.  Automotive and textile sectors shrank by 54 and 28.3 
 
ANKARA 00000363  003 OF 004 
 
 
percent, respectively.  Following the announcement of the Turkish 
industrial output figure, analysts predict a five percent economic 
contraction in the first quarter of the year.  No increase in 
production is expected until the last quarter of 2009, and 
unemployment rates for the first months of the year might soar to 14 
percent.  Analysts also criticize the government for delaying a new 
stand-by agreement with the IMF, which has eroding effects on the 
"confidence" in Turkey's economy both at home and abroad. 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports the economic crisis has created "an army 
of three million unemployed people in Turkey." 
 
Excavations Under Way Yesterday at Silopi's BOTAS Facilities 
Hurriyet, Taraf, Sabah, Milliyet, Bugun:  Today's papers report that 
three locations at Silopi's BOTAS facilities were excavated 
yesterday.  The  Sirnak Bar Association Chairperson Nisirevan Elgi 
said remnants of two bones and a piece from an undershirt were 
found.  Elgi said they do not know for sure now whether the bones 
were those of an animal or not. "There are stains on the undershirt 
but we do not know now yet what these stains are. The bones and the 
fabric will be analyzed by the Forensic Authority. The excavations 
at the site at three spots were completed. We will continue either 
tomorrow or the next day to excavate a spot at a former restaurant 
located between Silopi and Cizre (in Sirnak)." 
 
'Darwin Censor' in Popular Science Magazine 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Vatan and Cumhuriyet report the Science and 
Technology journal, a 42-year old popular magazine published by 
Turkey's Scientific and Technical Research Institution (TUBITAK,) 
was "censored" by the organization's deputy head, Professor Omer 
Cebeci, for its cover and the contents on Charles Darwin's theory of 
evolution.  The magazine's March cover commemorating the 200th 
birthday of Darwin and the related articles were "removed," and 
replaced by files on global climate change.  The chief editor of the 
magazine, Dr. Cigdem Atakuman, was sacked.  The president of 
TUBITAK, Professor Nuket Yetis was appointed by the AKP government 
to head the institution in 2004.  Former President Ahmet Necdet 
Sezer had vetoed Yetis' prior nominations and Yetis assumed the post 
in 2008 only after President Gul came to office.  Omer Cebeci, a 
professor of chemistry, worked at King Abdulaziz University in Saudi 
Arabia from 1980-1989. 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- Opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal told a rally in Giresun the AKP 
will have to win at least 52 percent of the votes to claim success 
in the elections. 
 
- Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad will join the World Water 
Forum to be held in Istanbul from March 16-22. 
 
- President Abdullah Gul spoke with Egypt's President Hosni Mubarak 
over the phone to discuss the Palestine question and regional 
developments. 
 
- The International Press Institute (IPI) urged the EU to use its 
influence on PM Erdogan to abandon his attitude toward the media in 
Turkey. 
 
World 
 
- Iraq's Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari says Iraq and Iran are 
"seriously at odds" over defining their land and sea borders. 
 
- The semi-official Press Trust of India quotes a former Indian 
general as saying Pakistan's nuclear weapons prevented India from 
attacking it twice, one after the Mumbai attacks in November and the 
2001 terrorist attack on the Indian Parliament. 
 
 
ANKARA 00000363  004 OF 004 
 
 
- Some 80 leading Islamic intellectuals and Western academics have 
sent a letter to President Obama, urging him to support democracy 
and not the "oppressive regimes" in the Middle East.  The initiative 
was led by the U.S.-based "Islam and Democracy Studies Center." 
 
- President Obama signs an order reversing the Bush administration's 
strict restrictions on stem cell research. 
 
JEFFREY