09ANKARA423
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Mar 20 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO5615
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0423/01 0791540
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 201540Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9123
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9543
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5535
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3695
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7181
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7054
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3634
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000423 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
FRIDAY, MARCH 20, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Obama's Turkey Agenda (Milliyet) 
Mainstream Milliyet today reports that, based on 
statements from experts and officials, U.S. President Barack Obama 
"plans to discuss Iran, Iraq, and 
Afghanistan during his visit to Turkey."  During a 
meeting at the Istanbul Cultural University on the 
topic of Turkey, Iraq, and Iran, an unnamed American diplomat is 
quoted as saying, "Turkey is not seen 
as a model for the Islamic world," instead "Turkey 
is seen as a secular, democratic republic whose 
population is majority Muslim."  Meanwhile, Milliyet 
also reports Prime Minister Erdogan's Chief Foreign 
Policy Advisor Ahment Davutoglu is referring to the 
current honeymoon period in U.S.-Turkish relations 
as "an historic era of understanding" and Obama's 
decision to come to Turkey is "a mark of this 
historic era, this constructive and cooperative 
period."  Regarding the Armenian Genocide Resolution, Davutoglu said 
"I am confident that the U.S. 
administration will not allow this issue to derail 
the positive turn in relations with Turkey." 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet carries the front 
page headline, "Obama Will Ask For Troops" and the 
article predicts "Obama will come to Turkey to seek additional 
troops from Turkey for Afghanistan." 
 
In a related article, leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports in "The 
U.S. Is Still Thinking," that "Representatives in the U.S. Congress 
have opined 
that it is a signal in and of itself that President 
Obama has taken no steps to try and block the AGR 
from moving forward." 
 
Obama Gets Big Thumbs-Up from Turks ahead of Visit 
(Today's Zaman) 
Islamist-oriented Zaman's English edition reports 
today that the Infakto Research Workshop in Istanbul conducted a 
poll in mid-February regarding Turks' 
opinions of world leaders.  U.S. President Barack 
Obama "tops the list of foreign leaders" in the poll 
with a 51.6 percent approval rating from Turks. 
39.2 percent of those polled see Obama as a 
trustworthy leader, and 25.5 percent of those 
polled indicated they have a positive opinion of 
the United States.  The poll also indicates that 
"Obama is viewed most favorably by voters aligned 
with the AKP."  To read the full story, please 
visit: 
http://www.todayszaman.com/tzweb/detaylar.do? load= 
detay&link=170109 
 
Editorial Opinion on Obama's Visit to Turkey 
 
Amberin Zaman wrote in leftist Taraf: "Iraq, 
Afghanistan, Iran, Turkish-Armenian relations, 
energy security and pipeline projects as well as 
Turkey's EU process and the Cyprus issue are the 
items on President Obama's agenda as he prepares 
for his official visit to Turkey.  President Obama's 
stance regarding the Armenian Genocide Resolution 
has not yet been made clear.  Thus, it would be very 
wise for Turkish leaders to step up relations with 
Armenia at this time.  Regarding the fight against 
the PKK, Turkish-American cooperation has reached 
a level of perfection.  There is also good working political will 
and coordination between Ankara, 
Erbil and Baghdad.  The rhetoric in Turkey which 
claims the U.S. needs Turkey's help for the Iraq 
 
ANKARA 00000423  002 OF 004 
 
 
withdrawal is overly exaggerated.  The U.S. is not 
exactly dependent on Turkey for its withdrawal from 
Iraq.  This operation is already being carried out 
through Kuwait.  Turkey's importance comes more in 
the form of logistical support and supply routes. 
When it comes to Afghanistan, there is a different 
picture.  Things are not going well in Afghanistan, 
and Turkey may be asked for combat troops at any time." 
 
Poll: AKP to Win Mayoral Elections in Istanbul, 
Ankara, CHP in Izmir 
Media outlets report Sonar polling company conducted 
a public opinion survey, commissioned by the 
Alevi-owned Cem TV, ahead of the March 29 local 
elections.  In Istanbul, the poll shows 50.1 percent 
of likely voters would vote for the AKP candidate 
Kadir Topbas and 33.1 percent would vote for CHP 
candidate Kemal Kilicdaroglu.  In Ankara, the poll 
shows that 45.2 percent of likely voters would vote 
for the AKP's Melih Gokcek; 29.7 percent would vote 
for the CHP's Murat Karayalcin; and 22.5 percent 
would vote for the MHP's Mansur Yavas.  In Izmir, 
the poll indicates 58 percent of the electorate will 
choose the CHP's candidate Aziz Kocaoglu and 25 
percent will vote for the AKP candidate Taha Aksoy. 
The survey is based on interviews with 3814 people 
in Istanbul, 3382 in Ankara and 3314 in Izmir.  The 
poll in Istanbul was completed two days ago; the 
polls in Ankara and Izmir were conducted two weeks 
ago. 
 
TRT to Launch Arabic TV, Kurdish and Armenian Radios 
Media outlets report the state-owned TRT broadcaster 
will launch a new TV channel in Arabic and new radio broadcasts in 
Kurdish and in Armenian.  The new 
initiatives were announced Wednesday evening by 
Prime Minister Erdogan.  Mainstream Aksam reports 
the new Kurdish radio, TRT Radyo Ses, will kick off broadcasts April 
1, which will reach Iraq, Iran and 
Syria on FM.  The new Arabic television, TRT-7 
(or TRT Seb'a in Arabic) will cover the Middle East 
and the Arabian peninsula.  Turkey's state broadcaster 
will also launch another television station called TRT 
Turk on March 21st, the beginning of Kurdish Nevruz festival.  TRT 
Turk will reach Central Asia.  TRT's 
new radio in Armenian, to be launched following a 
decision adopted by the National Security Council 
(MGK,) will begin broadcasts in June, according to 
Aksam. 
 
Editorial Opinion on the Kurdish Issue 
 
Yasemin Congar wrote in leftist Taraf: "Jalal Talabani 
has made it official - the upcoming Kurdish conference 
in April will call on the PKK to lay down their arms. 
What happens after that is not clear yet.  Ankara is 
afraid of using the word 'amnesty' and when asked about 
how to facilitate a return home, Turkish officials 
never give an answer that is sufficient to Kurds or to 
the rest of the world.  We must think of amnesty as 
being the key to peace." 
 
Frightening Confessions From Israel's 22-day Massacre 
(Yeni Safak) 
Media outlets pay close attention to a recent article 
in the Israeli newspaper Hareetz that reported some 
Israeli soldiers said that they targeted civilians 
during the 22-day military operations earlier this 
year.  Mainstream Hurriyet reports, "Some soldiers who 
took part in the 22 day offensive in Gaza are 
 
ANKARA 00000423  003 OF 004 
 
 
confessing that they killed defenseless Palestinian civilians." 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet headlines, "Israeli Troops Confess to 
Killing Children and 
Elderly People During the Gaza Operations."  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
headlines, "Israeli Soldiers Even 
Killed A Mother Who Was Lost, Along With Her Two 
Children."  In "Confessions from Israeli Soldiers," 
leftist Taraf reports, "Israeli soldiers are 
confessing to killing defenseless civilians in Gaza." 
 
An Ottoman Title Deed Finalizes Ownership Case Between 
Jews and Palestinians 
Mainstream Hurriyet cites Israel's Haaretz newspaper 
in reporting that Palestinians in Turkey found a title 
deed in the Ottoman Empire archives which shows that a building in 
East Jerusalem belongs to Arabs, not to Israelis.   During the last 
thirty years, there were ownership disagreements between 
Palestinians and 
Israelis over 30 buildings in Sheyh Cerrah neighborhood 
of East Jerusalem.  Haaretz newspaper noted that Palestinians might 
be able to remain in their houses if 
the Israeli court accepts this Ottoman deed as a 
sufficient evidence. 
 
Editorial Opinion on Security Issues between Iran and Israel; NATO 
Summit 
 
Mehmet Yilmaz wrote in Islamist oriented Zaman: "Iraq 
fired 39 Scud missiles to Israel during the 1990s Gulf 
War.  However, right after the 2003 American invasion, 
Iraq lost its ability to be a military threat against Israel.  Iran, 
on the other hand, remains very capable 
of posing a military threat against Israel.  Given the tense 
atmosphere in the region, it looks as if Iran 
and Israel are preparing for war.  A recent report by 
the American group CSIS may shed light on what may 
happen - the report claims Israel may use its 
long-range Jericho missiles to strike Iran." 
 
Ferai Tinc wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "The 
differences between the U.S. and the EU over Iraq are 
over and NATO has entered a new era as it reaches its 
60th birthday.  NATO remains an indispensable security structure of 
the Western alliance.  In the near future, Afghanistan will be the 
major focus for the 
organization." 
 
ANCA: Turkey Is Trying to Divide Armenia from the 
Armenian Diaspora 
Liberal Radikal and leftist Taraf report Ken Hachikian, president of 
the American National Committee of 
Armenians (ANCA), claims Turkey "is trying to divide Armenia from 
the Armenian Diaspora in America."  The 
day after the Armenian lobby in the U.S. submitted a 
bill on the events of 1915 to the U.S. Congress, 
Hachikian blamed Turkey for trying to "spoil" the ties between 
Armenia and the Armenians Diaspora, and called 
on the American Armenians to donate money to ANCA as a "contribution 
to the common cause," report papers. 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- On Saturday, Nevruz, a Kurdish festival celebrating 
the arrival of spring, will be held around Turkey. 
The celebrations in Ankara will be held on Sunday. 
 
- On the eve of municipal elections, irregularities 
were reported in Diyarbakir regarding the distribution 
 
ANKARA 00000423  004 OF 004 
 
 
of social aid to needy families, with the claims that 
there were many children and deceased people on the list 
of aid recipients. 
 
- Ankara objects to the pro-Kurdish DTP suggestion that 
the PKK should join the Kurdish conference to be held 
in the northern Iraqi city of Erbil in April. 
 
- Industry Minister Zafer Caglayan says in April, his government 
will announce "new incentives" favoring the automotive sector. 
 
World 
 
- 88 percent of Azerbaijani voters support a 
constitutional amendment removing a two-term limit on 
the presidency. 
 
- Turkish Cyprus leader Mehmet Ali Talat is expected 
to meet with Secretary Clinton in Washington on March 30. 
 
- Reporters Without Borders says Umidriza Mirsayafi, an Iranian 
blogger convicted of insulting the country's 
ruling clerics, has died in Tehran's main prison. 
 
- Police have started installing closed-circuit 
television (CCTV) cameras throughout the Iranian capital to lower 
crime rates. 
 
JEFFREY