09ANKARA757
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Thu May 28 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO4708
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0757/01 1481119
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 281119Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9755
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0061
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5794
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3877
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7327
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7206
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3789
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000757 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
THURSDAY, MAY 28, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Gul: Turkey Will Solve Its Kurdish Question On Its Own 
Papers report President Abdullah Gul, in Kyrgyzstan on a state 
visit, told Turkish reporters Turkey would solve its Kurdish 
question on its own, and stressed that all political parties should 
contribute to a solution.  Gul added state would never bargain with 
the terror organizations, and said democratic standards would not 
rise where there is terror.  Gul also warned that if Turkey loses 
more time, new problems would emerge.  Gul also said the status quo 
between Turkey and Armenia, along with the status quo between 
Armenia and Azerbaijan, benefits no one. 
 
Baykal: Amnesty Possible Once the PKK Lays Down Its Arms 
Media outlets report opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal, who was 
visiting Adiyaman on his tour of the predominantly Kurdish 
Southeastern Turkey, said the PKK could be granted amnesty if they 
agree to lay down their arms and completely abandon their armed 
struggle.  In "Baykal Sends Historic Message to the PKK," mainstream 
Hurriyet reports "an amnesty project will be launched as soon as the 
PKK quits making politics with weapons and completely disarms." 
Baykal added measures would be taken to not sentence those who turn 
themselves over to heavy imprisonment terms.  "We have to provide 
hope to the region," said Baykal. 
 
Meanwhile, papers report President Jalal Talabani has invited CHP 
leader Deniz Baykal to visit Iraq.  Baykal told the press he 
regarded the official invitation as "appropriate," and would be 
"happy" to go to Iraq. 
 
Disagreements Grow Over Sweeping of Mines on Turkey-Syria Border 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports that in 2007, the Turkish military 
cleared landmines on part of Turkey's border with Syria, and that 
the military was capable of doing the mine sweeping again.  In 
Adiyaman, CHP leader Deniz Baykal issued a call for blocking a bill 
drafted by the AKP to allow foreign companies to sweep the landmines 
along Turkey's border with Syria. An Israeli company is expected to 
win the contract, while the Turkish military says NATO's Maintenance 
and Supply Agency (NAMSA) should be considered as a primary choice. 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet says the Defense Ministry and the 
military General Staff (TGS) oppose the mine-sweeping draft.  The 
Defense Ministry told the Prime Ministry in February the bill was 
not seen appropriate because it won't help border security and it 
will negatively affect the people in the region.  The Ministry also 
said the move will cause problems with Syria, and will end in loss 
of Turkey's oil rights to the land.  Cumhuriyet also says the 
Finance Ministry made no explanation why the swept land would be 
leased for 44 years.  Earlier this week, the ruling AKP government 
was strongly criticized by opposition parties which claim the 
government was selling Turkish soil to foreigners. 
 
Mainstream Milliyet says the landmines along the Syrian border were 
first planted in 1956, and the Turkish military added more in 1989 
and 1999 as a measure against the PKK militants' border 
infiltrations into Turkey from Syria.  Official figures indicate 
650,000 mines along the Syrian border, which, over the last 50 
years, killed 3,000 people and crippled 7,000 others.  Sweeping the 
mines is estimated to cost USD 500 million.  The government plans to 
lease the territory to a mine-clearing company, which will be 
allowed to use the area for farming purposes for a period of 44 
years. 
 
Editorial Commentary on the Mine Sweeping Controversy 
 
Ismail Kapan wrote in conservative/pro-government Turkiye: "For some 
reason, the government remains silent against the ongoing uneasiness 
regarding mine sweeping at Turkey's border with Syria.  PM Erdogan 
should realize that this issue is not as simple as leaving the job 
to another country.  Turkey worked so hard to normalize its ties 
with Syria and now nothing should poison this relationship." 
 
ANKARA 00000757  002 OF 004 
 
 
 
Ibrahim Karagul wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "Any 
criticism about Israel's wrong doings and its crimes against 
humanity, such as Gaza, is being labeled as anti-Semitism in this 
country.  However, being opposed to Israeli involvement in landmine 
cleaning in Turkey has nothing to do with being against Israel. 
What we are talking about Turkey's border with Syria, in which 
Israel has absolutely no role to play." 
 
Nazli Ilicak wrote in mainstream Sabah: "The whole debate about 
cleaning landmines presents a confusing picture.  We just don't know 
what the role of Israel will be and to what extent the worry 
expressed by the opposition reflects the truth. Prime Minister 
Erdogan should think of inviting opposition party leaders for 
individual meetings to listen their worries as well as to explain 
his perspective to them." 
 
Taha Akyol wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "The ongoing landmine 
debate at the parliament has almost become a political landmine 
against the ruling AKP's unity.  This process is not only blocked by 
the opposition, because there is a significant degree of opposition 
within the ruling AKP despite PM Erdogan's personal efforts." 
 
Cuneyt Ulsever wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "PM Erdogan expressed 
harsh words against Israel in Davos but he tried to correct his 
approach vis-`-vis Israel afterwards.  The whole debate on landmine 
cleaning is an indication of this process.  In other words, it is 
now time for Turkey to pay the bill.  Israel was apparently given a 
promise to take this cleaning job to Turkey and use the field for 44 
years, and PM Erdogan is trying to juggle his promise to Israel and 
the growing ongoing opposition to it." 
 
Cyprus Oil Drilling Stokes Fresh Tensions 
Media are stirred up over an announcement from U.S. Ambassador to 
Cyprus Frank Urbancic's yesterday that a U.S. company has won the 
bid to drill for oil and gas off the coast of Cyprus.  Mainstream 
Sabah reports, "The U.S. Says 'We'll look for oil,' and Stokes 
Tensions in Cyprus."  Mainstream Haberturk reports, "The Petrol 
Crisis Is Dividing the Island," and notes, "The Turkish Cypriots 
voiced strong reactions to the U.S." and "condemned Ambassador 
Urbancic's statement."  The paper reminds, "In 2007, Turkey sent 
warships when the Greek Cypriots allowed Egypt and Lebanon to search 
for oil," off the coast of Cyprus, where disputes continue regarding 
the limits of the Turkish continental shelf.  Islamist-oriented 
Zaman headlines, "Greek Cypriots Call On the U.S. for Oil; Ankara Is 
Leery."  In "New Tensions in Cyprus," leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
reports, "The Greek Cypriots stoke tensions in Cyprus by awarding a 
U.S. company with the bid to explore for oil and gas," as "The Greek 
Cypriots play a petrol game in the Mediterranean." 
 
ECHR Rules against Turkey in Armenian Property Case 
Mainstream Haberturk reports the European Court of Human Rights 
(ECHR) has ruled that Turkey pay compensation of 600,000 Euro for 
seizing a three-storey building in Istanbul, which was donated by 
Armenian businessman Hovnan Palakasyan to Surp Kevork Armenian 
Church Foundation 60 years ago.  A court decision, however, seized 
the building and transferred it to the Treasury in 2002.  Following 
the ECHR ruling, Turkey gave back the building to the Armenian 
foundation to avoid paying the compensation, reports Haberturk. 
 
AI Report Criticizes Ongoing Rights Violations in Turkey 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet and the Islamist-oriented Zaman carry 
excerpts from the latest report issued by the Amnesty International 
(AI) which states that human rights conditions in Turkey have 
recently deteriorated in many respects.  AI notes severe human 
rights abuses regarding the Kurdish issue continued.  The report 
notes the significance of the 'Ergenekon' investigation in Turkey, 
calling it a "groundbreaking prosecution."  The report also 
criticizes the Constitutional Court's verdict against wearing the 
Islamic headscarf at universities.  It also notes torture and 
 
ANKARA 00000757  003 OF 004 
 
 
mistreatment rose during 2008, especially in police stations and 
prisons. 
 
War Alarms Sound on the Korean Peninsula (Radikal) 
Media outlets continue to express alarm over the increasingly 
dangerous war of words coming from North Korea.  In "We Could 
Declare War," mainstream Sabah reports, "North Korea has paved the 
way to another huge earthquake in politics," as "yesterday they 
threatened South Korea by saying, 'If you stop our ships, we'll 
declare war.'"  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak calls North Korea's 
statement, "Like a declaration of war."  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet reports, "North Korea No Longer Recognizes the 
Ceasefire," with South Korea, as "the nuclear gamble continues." 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports in, "Winds of War in Korea," that,"South 
Korea's reactions to North Korea's missile test have enraged North 
Korea," and "Russia took various measures along its border for fears 
that a nuclear war could break out."  In "A Threat of War from North 
Korea," mainstream Haberturk reports, "Russia sends a warning," as a 
statement from the Russian Foreign Ministry said, "We believe North 
Korea is playing a dangerous game." 
 
A Revenge Attack in Lahore 
Media outlets characterize yesterday's tragic suicide bombing in 
Lahore as an attack seeking revenge for Pakistan's operations in 
Swat.  Mainstream Sabah reports, "The attack is suspected to be 
revenge for the Pakistani military's operations in Swat." 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports in "Another Suicide Bombing in 
Pakistan," that "After Pakistan has fought the Taliban along its 
border region of Swat for the past month, the country was rocked by 
a bomb attack that took place in the Eastern Part of the country." 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak headlines, "Revenge for Swat: 30 
Dead." 
 
Obama's June 4 Speech 
Mainstream Haberturk reports in "An Obama Show from Egypt," that 
"The Egyptian administration is competing with Turkey, the rising 
star in the Islamic and Arab world," as "Obama chose Turkey as his 
first official overseas visit," but "he chose to deliver his speech 
to the Muslim world from Cairo."  Mainstream Sabah notes media in 
the U.S. urge Obama "to point to Turkey as a successful example for 
democracy in the Muslim world." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu did not comment on the PKK leader 
Murat Karayilan's proposal for opening a Kurdish parliament in 
Turkey according to the "Scottish model," and merely stressed that 
Turkey had a "well established parliamentary system." 
 
- Female DTP activists plan to rally on May 31 in Diyarbakir to 
demand the release of 23 women arrested in security operations 
against the DTP offices. 
 
- Niyazi Capa, the head of Osmangazi Culture Associations Federation 
in Eskisehir, is sentenced to five-month in prison sentence for 
posting during Israel's Gaza operations a placard which read, "Jews 
and Armenians Cannot Enter, Dogs Are Allowed."  The prison sentence 
has been transferred to a fine of 3,000 lira. 
 
- The State Planning Organization (DPT) expects Turkey's economy to 
shrink by 3.6 percent this year. 
 
- Merrill Lynch warns Turkey needs to make a new deal with the IMF. 
 
 
World 
 
- Iran's reformist presidential hopeful Mir-Hussein Mousavi takes 
 
ANKARA 00000757  004 OF 004 
 
 
the lead in 10 major Iranian cities. 
 
- Northern Iraq will begin on May 31 to export crude oil to Turkey's 
Mediterranean port of Ceyhan. 
 
- Berlin will hold an international gathering against the 
construction of Ilisu dam which will permanently submerge the 
10,000-year old settlement of Hasankeyf in mainly Kurdish southeast 
Turkey. 
 
- The Prime Minister of Muslim-Croat Federation of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, Nedzad Brankovic, resigns amid tensions with 
other members in the country's tripartite leadership. 
 
- Professor Ihsan Dogramaci, the founder of Turkey's prestigious 
Bilkent University, will open the International Bilkent University 
in the northern Iraqi city of Erbil, his birth place.  The 
university will cost USD 40 million, and will kick off its programs 
in 2010. 
 
SILLIMAN