09ANKARA1229
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Thu Aug 20 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO7036
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1229/01 2321102
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 201102Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0599
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0264
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6182
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4100
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7506
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7394
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3977
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 001229 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
THURSDAY, AUGUST 20, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Erdogan: "We Will be Integrated Under The Citizenship of The Turkish 
Republic" (Milliyet) 
All papers: Speaking at the opening of "D-Marin", a marina in Didim 
(Aegean province of Aydin), Erdogan said that some did not want 
Turkey to improve and strengthen further, and those people were 
trying to divide the country. Erdogan said those people would not 
achieve anything. "We will be integrated under the citizenship of 
the Turkish Republic. Investments continue in the western and 
northern regions of the country and some parts of the south. 
Unfortunately, the entrepreneurs cannot invest in the east and the 
southeast because of a lack of stability and confidence there.  An 
atmosphere of confidence, stability, tranquility and peace are among 
the fundamental needs of an economy.  The democratic move will also 
have a positive impact on the economy," Erdogan said. 
 
CHP Says It's Ready to Discuss AKP Government's Kurdish Initiative 
Papers report main opposition CHP said it will "evaluate" the AKP 
requests for a meeting to discuss the ruling party's 'Kurdish 
Initiative.'  Earlier, the CHP had turned down calls from Interior 
Minister Besir Atalay for talks on the AKP's 'democratic move' for a 
settlement regarding Turkey's Kurdish question.  CHP deputy chairman 
Onur Oymen said they did not rule out talks with the government, but 
added that first, the ruling AKP should put forth its demands 
clearly, and unveil a "concrete action plan" on its so-called 
"democratic initiative." 
 
Meanwhile, liberal Radikal reports CHP leader Deniz Baykal told his 
party board meeting that it was a "disgrace" that Turkey still lacks 
'Kurdish institutes' at its universities.  "It is a total necessity 
that Turkey teaches Kurdish language, history and folklore at its 
universities.  We, however, totally reject the universities to be 
used as a mechanism to merely educate teachers of the Kurdish 
language," emphasized Baykal. 
 
Editorials on 'Kurdish Initiative' 
 
Oktay Eksi wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "If the government prefers 
to call it a 'democratic initiative,' the substance should be 
properly filled.  A democratic initiative requires a start from 
scratch, including a fully independent judiciary system, fair 
representation of all views in parliament and a new party law to 
allow political freedom.  We haven't seen any steps regarding that 
but we can only hope at this point." 
 
Ismet Berkan wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "What Turkey 
really needs is a full scale democratic republic as opposed to 'half 
democracy' as we have today.  The implementation of full democratic 
rights is the correct approach to discourage people from going to 
the mountains and encouraging them work through the political 
process instead." 
 
Mehmet Barlas wrote in mainstream Sabah: "At least some in Turkey 
are surrounded by an interesting psychology as they live with 
conspiracy theories and blame foreigners for everything.  Let's not 
forget that conspiracies are basically scape goats to avoid reality. 
 When it comes to the Kurdish initiative it is happening once again 
that the U.S. and the EU are the ones to blame.  Those who oppose 
the Kurdish initiative want to hide every problem underneath the 
carpet as they always do and miss the chance to advancing Turkey." 
 
Kurdish Sermons in Mosques 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports Interior Minister Besir Atalay, who 
coordinates the ruling AKP's government's "democratic opening," will 
meet next week with the Religious Affairs Directorate (Diyanet) head 
Professor Ali Bardakoglu to discuss arranging for Kurdish-language 
sermons in mosques.  Diyanet will stick to the current arrangement 
of delivering Turkish-language sermons in key Kurdish provinces such 
as Diyarbakir, Mardin and Batman.  Kurdish-language sermons are 
expected to be introduced in remote provinces where the majority of 
 
ANKARA 00001229  002 OF 004 
 
 
mosque attendants are Kurds, and local imams will be allowed to 
choose the sermon language.  Diyanet is also preparing to air 
Kurdish-language religious broadcasts on the state owned Kurdish 
TRT-6 television during the Muslim holy month of Ramadan, reports 
Hurriyet. 
 
Third Alevi Workshop Held in Ankara 
Mainstreams Milliyet and Vatan report the third Alevi Workshop was 
held Wednesday with the participation of theologians and officials 
from the High Board for Religious Affairs.  At the meeting held in 
Ankara, Religious Affairs Directorate (Diyanet) board chair Hamza 
Aktan voiced objections to the proposals for recognizing the Alevis' 
gathering places (Cemevi) as "temple."  "Alevis are Muslims, and 
Muslims meet in mosques," said Aktan, noting that the recognition of 
cemevi as temple would "pave the way for division in Islam." 
Milliyet says the stance of Diyanet regarding Cemevis remains 
unchanged. 
 
Germany Wants Former Turkish Intelligence Member Arrested 
Mainstream Vatan reports Germany has issued an arrest warrant for a 
former informant, Mevlut K., who worked for the Turkish intelligence 
service MIT in connection with Germany's largest anti-terror 
investigation.  Mevlut K. is believed to have provided a detonation 
device for four al-Qaeda militants captured in 2007 and 2008 in 
Germany and Turkey.  German police found 400 kilograms of TNT that 
they believed would be used by the militants, of whom two of them 
were Turkish nationals, in planned attacks on the U.S. military 
bases in Germany and at the Frankfurt International Airport.  Vatan 
claims MIT has "unofficially confirmed" that Mevlut K. had worked 
for the organization until 2002. 
 
FM Davutoglu: Israel must show will for peace, Palestinian Factions 
must Unite 
Hurriyet web page reports that while emphasizing that the upcoming 
four or five months are very critical for the region, Foreign 
Minister Ahmet Davutoglu said Wednesday that Israel should act 
responsibly to ensure the revival of peace negotiations.  "It is 
time for Israel to show the will for peace," Davutoglu told a joint 
press conference with his Jordanian counterpart, Nasser Judeh. The 
foreign minister said Ankara was closely following the efforts of 
the U.S. administration's Middle East envoy, George Mitchell, in the 
region and warned that negative consequences would be seen if the 
opportunity was missed.  Also at this press conference, Minister 
Davutoglu urged Palestinian factions to act for unity for a prospect 
for peace in the Middle East.  "Our Palestinian brothers should come 
together with a common attitude and find a common ground of 
reconciliation in the shortest possible time. Otherwise, peace 
process in the Middle East cannot move ahead," he said. 
 
A Nightmare in Baghdad (Yeni Safak) 
Media outlets note Iraq experienced its "bloodiest day" yesterday, 
soon after U.S. forces transferred security responsibility over to 
local Iraqi officials.  Liberal Radikal headlines, "Instead of 
Turning Normal, The Iraqi Capital Turned Into a Fire Zone." In, 
"Terror Strikes In the Heart of Baghdad," mainstream Milliyet 
reports, "As U.S. troops withdraw from cities in Iraq," Baghdad, 
"experiences its bloodiest day."  Mainstream Haberturk reports in 
"An Anniversary Bomb in Baghdad," that "on August 20, 2003 a bomb 
ripped through the UN headquarters in Baghdad, killing over a 
hundred," and "yesterday's bombing came as security is being 
transferred from U.S. forces to local forces." Mainstream Hurriyet 
calls yesterday, "The Bloodiest Day in Baghdad," as, "After U.S. 
troops began to withdraw from cities on June 30th, yesterday was the 
country's bloodiest day."  Leftist Taraf calls the attack, "The 
largest attack on the Green Zone." In "This Time Terror in Iraq 
Targeted the Government," Islamist-oriented Zaman notes the attack 
occurred "as soon as Iraqi security forces took control of 
security." 
 
The Afghan Government Orders A Blackout of Foreign and Domestic 
Media on Coverage of Violence During Thursday's Polls (Milliyet) 
 
ANKARA 00001229  003 OF 004 
 
 
Today's media coverage focuses on the possibility that violent 
attacks could interrupt today's elections in Afghanistan. 
Mainstream Hurriyet headlines, "All preparations for fraud in Afghan 
elections are completed" and the paper reports there is "chaos and 
fraud" everywhere in Afghanistan, as "Ballots are being sold on the 
streets," and, "There is even a ballot in the name of Britney Spears 
on the Internet."  Meanwhile, Milliyet notes the Taliban have 
increased their threats and "the fear of big clashes" has grown 
among the people.  Milliyet also reports, "The government wants the 
day to pass with no news of an attack." Mainstream Sabah headlines, 
"The Taliban Claims 20 Suicide Bombers Already Infiltrated Kabul," 
and the paper reports "The violence won't stop in Afghanistan." 
 
Editorials on Afghan Elections 
 
Fikret Ertan wrote in Islamist oriented Zaman: "The Afghan elections 
mark a historical turning point in country's political history. 
However the recent polls show no candidate is strong enough to go 
beyond a 50 percent hurdle in the first phase which means lots of 
potential new problems are ahead.  Along with security issues, there 
are already other serious problems like the Taliban threat and the 
actual conditions in election ballots which might be a questioning 
point regarding the election's health.  Nevertheless, the 
realization of an election is an important event and a turning point 
by itself." 
 
Yasemin Congar wrote in leftist Taraf: "It looks like if Karzai is 
relected, he will focus on ending the violence mutually.  Karzai 
will invite to talk with the Taliban's Molla Birader and opposition 
leader Hikmetyar, in other words he will sit with his enemies to 
negotiate.  End of violence remains an urgent priority while other 
issues like government reform, constitutional changes and withdrawal 
of foreign forces will be at the very bottom of the to-do list." 
 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- Prime Minister Erdogan said the Kurdish opening would lead to a 
"boom in Turkey's economy." 
 
- Islamist Saadet Party (SP) said it will release a report on 
Turkey's Kurdish question. 
 
- Diyarbakir Governor's Office has opted to not object to a request 
for restoring the Kurdish name of a village in the province. 
 
- Istanbul Mayor Kadir Topbas said the new Bosphorus bridge would 
connect the districts of Beykoz and Tarabya. 
 
- NATO Secretary-General Andres Fogh Rasmussen will visit Turkey at 
the end of August. 
 
- In October, Turkey and the IMF will hold in Istanbul bi-annual 
meetings as uncertainty about talks on a new stand-by deal with the 
IMF continues. 
 
- Two British tourists touring the world on their bicycles have been 
attacked by the villagers in the Black Sea province of Ordu. 
 
World 
 
- Muslims' holy month of Ramadan begins on Friday. 
 
- Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu has asked Jordan to open a 
'liaison office' in Turkish Cyprus. 
 
- Taliban fighters attack a state-owned bank in Kabul and exchange 
fire with the police on the eve of Afghanistan's presidential 
election on Thursday. 
 
ANKARA 00001229  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
- Bulgaria will send a contingent of 210 troops to Afghanistan to 
guard Kabul's international airport. 
 
- South Korea's first rocket launch has been delayed because of 
technical failure. 
 
- Markets worldwide drop amid uncertainty about the global economy. 
 
 
SILLIMAN