09ANKARA769
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Mon Jun 01 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO7347
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0769/01 1521257
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 011257Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9781
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0069
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5807
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3886
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7335
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7214
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3797
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000769 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
MONDAY, JUNE 1, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Oil from Iraqi's Kurdistan Regional Gover to Flow to World Markets 
Through Turkey (Taraf) 
Papers report northern Iraqi oil will today, for the first time, 
begin to flow to world markets through the Ceyhan port on Turkey's 
Mediterranean coast.  Mainstream Aksam reports Turkey's Genel 
Enerji, which is partnered with the Canada-based Addax Petroleum, 
today began the shipment of oil from the Taq-Taq field in the 
province of Erbil in northern Iraq to Turkey.  Initial exports will 
be between 40,000-60,000 barrels per day, and 17 percent of the 
revenues Iraq makes out of the oil sales will be given to the 
Kurdish Regional Government, according to papers.  Aksam also says 
the oil facilities will provide hundreds of jobs in Erbil and 
Suleymaniye in northern Iraq. 
 
ATC to Begin Meetings in Washington June 1 
Media outlets report senior Turkish and American officials will 
begin meetings in Washington on Monday to discuss several aspects of 
the bilateral relationship during an annual two-day conference.  The 
Turkish and American army chiefs, General Ilker Basbug and Admiral 
Michael Mullen, will address the gathering at a dinner this evening. 
 Tomorrow, Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutioglu will deliver a 
speech during the conference.  Davutoglu will also meet with 
Secretary Clinton later this week, papers report. 
 
Papers also report Turkey will take over the rotating presidency of 
the UN Security Council as of June 1.  Mainstream Hurriyet comments 
Turkey's task comes during a critical period because of North 
Korea's recent nuclear bomb testing.  Other issues Turkey will have 
to deal with as the UNSC head include Sri Lanka, the Middle East, 
Iraq, Iran, the Caucasus and the Cyprus question, according to 
papers. 
 
Erdogan: Turkey Will Sign a Deal Once the IMF Accepts Our Demands 
Media outlets report Prime Minister Erdogan said Turkey would sign a 
new deal with the IMF only when the IMF "accepts Turkish demands." 
"Talks over Turkey making a new stand-by deal with the IMF have been 
continuing for almost a year," said Erdogan.  Erdogan criticized 
those pressing his government to make a deal with IMF "at any 
price," and stressed he would not sacrifice the interests of Turkey. 
 "We will sign an agreement after the IMF accepts our demands.  If 
our demands are rejected, we will not sign an agreement," emphasized 
Erdogan. 
 
Meanwhile, papers reported over the weekend that the IMF's Turkey 
representative Hussein Samei said Turkey and the IMF reached a 
compromise in principle, but added that talks would continue for an 
agreement in all topics. 
 
Turkish Cypriot Leader Talat: "We May Have to Give Up Land" 
Yeni Safak, Sabah, Vatan:  Mainstream Sabah reports that  Turkish 
Cypriot Leader Mehmet Ali Talat said, "A settlement regarding the 
Cyprus issue is very near. But, the Turkish side might have to give 
some land to the Greek Cypriots for a lasting settlement."  Islamist 
oriented Yeni Safak reports that Talat said "the main problem will 
be the land issue.  During the recent talks the Turkish side 
accepted the '29 percent plus' formula and because of this formula 
we may have to give up some land." 
 
Sabah: PKK-Linked Holdings in Germany Sponsor Terrorist Activities 
Sabah reports that a Ministry of Intelligence report accuses the 
German-based international Kurdish Businessmen's union (KARSAZ)  of 
being involved in drug money laundering.  The organization has 1000 
member companies and the allegations stem from suspicious that loans 
are being extended to companies with funds gained through drug 
smuggling.  According to the claim, the money accumulated from money 
laundering is sent to banks in Armenia and southern Cyprus to be 
used to fund the PKK's arms purchases.  The arms are shipped to PKK 
camps in northern Iraq, Sabah notes. 
 
ANKARA 00000769  002 OF 004 
 
 
 
In a related story, Sabah reports that a cultural festival in 
Diyarbakir which was arranged by the Diyarbakir Municipality, was 
broadcasted live by the ROJ TV.  Police intervened and tried to stop 
it, however, Diyarbakir mayor Osman Baydemir intervened and allowed 
the ROJ TV to continue broadcasting. 
 
Clashes Flare Up Again Between Hamas and Fatah (Taraf) 
Media note that clashes have broken out between Hamas and Fatah, 
with some papers referring to Hamas as 'militants' and some simply 
referring to Hamas 'members' or 'supporters.'  Mainstream Milliyet 
headlines, "High Tensions Between Fatah and Hamas," and reports, 
"six died when clashes broke out between Palestinian police and 
Hamas militants."  Mainstream Haberturk headlines, "Hamas Gets Into 
Clashes With Police in The West Bank," and the paper notes, 
"Tensions are rising in the Palestinian administration of the West 
Bank city of Kalkiliye."  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports in 
"Bloody Clashes in the West Bank," that "clashes broke out between 
Palestinian security forces and Hamas members."  Islamist-oriented 
Zaman reports, "Palestinian police tied to Fatah clashed with Hamas 
members" when, "Fatah security forces surrounded a Hamas hideout 
just days after Palestinian President Abbas promised Washington that 
he would fulfill his security commitments."  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet notes, "Hamas militants reacted to the raid harshly," and 
said, ""We are confronting two enemies, the Israeli occupier and the 
agency that serves the agenda of Washington and Tel Aviv." 
 
Pakistan: Victory is Near 
Media note the Pakistani military claims they are close to victory 
against the Taliban. Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "Pakistan Says 
The Taliban Will Supposedly Be Defeated."  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet is more optimistic in "Pakistan Says Victory Against the 
Taliban is Near," and notes, "The Pakistani military is within 2-3 
days of defeating the Taliban in the Swat region."  Mainstream 
Haberturk reports in "Pakistan Is Preparing for Victory," that, "The 
Pakistani military is preparing to declare victory against the 
Taliban in the next 2-3 days." 
 
Iran Elections 
Media report that candidates in presidential elections in Iran are 
appealing to women, youth, and sports fans.  Mainstream Haberturk 
headlines, "For Women in Iran, Their Hope Is In Musevei," and 
reports, "One woman attending a meeting of the reform presidential 
candidate Hussein Musevi wrote 'men and women are equal' on her 
hands in Farsi."  CNN Turk reports in "Support for Ahmadinejad from 
The Strongest Man in The World," that "Weightlifter Hussein 
Rizazade, who is revered by youth and by sports fans, has given his 
support to Ahmadinejad for president." 
 
Obama's Speech to The Islamic World 
Expectations run high in the media for President Obama's speech to 
the Muslim World from Cairo on Thursday; particularly, media hope 
President Obama's actions will speak louder than his words.  Far 
right Ortadogu reports, "Obama Is Hopeful in The Middle East," as 
President Obama said, "There is not doubt that there can be 
developments in the Mid East Peace Process."  Islamist-oriented 
Zaman reports, "Obama is expected to bring messages of peace to the 
Islamic World," but, "However, the Islamic world wants to see more 
than promises of important changes, in particular it is necessary 
that he takes some action regarding the Palestinian problem."  CNN 
Turk reports in "What Do Muslims Expect from Obama?" that "The 
Muslim world wants more than lovely words and promises," and notes, 
"Muslims want real action to follow Obama's promises of important 
change." Omer Taspinar of mainstream Sabah comments, "The general 
idea in Europe is that the people of the Islamist world are not well 
educated and well integrated into society, but this view is changing 
as second and third generation Muslim immigrants in Europe are being 
educated," and "this process, along with democratization in the 
Middle East, is bringing forth a more moderate approach and will 
marginalize Islamic radicalism," and "We hope that Obama's speech in 
 
ANKARA 00000769  003 OF 004 
 
 
Cairo touches on these points." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-Kurdish Issue 
 
Cengiz Candar wrote in business daily Referans (5/31): "Establishing 
peace requires giving Kurds their due beyond the silencing of guns. 
This needs to be started, before all, by forgiving each other in 
order to make Kurds feel that we, at least, understand the suffering 
they have been through. The constitutional recognition of cultural 
identities and cultural rights is needed, while easing up on Kurds' 
political representation and taking steps for administrative 
decentralization is also required. Lasting peace is not possible 
without these measures. Other socio-economical precautions would not 
bear fruit without these measures.  Turkey's health in general is 
related to the health of Kurds. Turkey cannot reach peace and 
prosperity before the Kurds do. Turkey cannot become free before the 
Kurds become free." 
 
Fatih Cekirge wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "There is a correlation 
between President Gul's initiative to talk about the Kurdish issue 
with opposition leaders and the recent stories regarding Iraqi 
President Talabani's role in convincing the PKK to lay down arms. 
The Turkish president is trying to get support from all parties for 
the potential solution process to the Kurdish issue.  In this 
regard, Iraqi President Talabani's invitation to CHP leader Baykal 
is very important." 
 
Editorial Commentary on President Obama and U.S. Middle East Policy 
 
Ceyda Karan wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "There is a 
significant degree of expectation for President Obama's upcoming 
trip to Egypt and the speech he is going to make.  The common 
expectation is that he will announce a new initiative for Middle 
East peace.  Given the current issues that the region is facing as 
well as the Israeli Prime Minister's reluctance, difficult and 
challenging days lie ahead of President Obama.  His initiative will 
certainly bring hope, even though chances for success cannot be 
taken for granted." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- Prime Minister Erdogan says his ruling AKP government will 
disclose Thursday details about a new incentives package targeting 
whole Turkey. 
 
- Former Kurdish lawmaker Leyla Zana called for all fighting in 
Turkey to end. 
 
- A State Planning Organization (DPT) report says the state-owned 
Ziraat Bank should cut support for farmers within the framework of 
EU harmonization. 
 
- The travel supplement of the British daily The Observer says the 
Turkish Mediterranean city of Antalya has become the "new Dubai." 
 
- Industry Minister Nihat Ergun expects the Turkish economy to 
stabilize in 2010. 
 
World 
 
- Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis welcomes the "brave" 
statements made by Prime Minister Erdogan in connection with 
minorities in Turkey. 
 
- British Foreign Secretary David Miliband says the guarantorship in 
Cyprus should be discussed when the parties agree about the future 
of the island. 
 
 
ANKARA 00000769  004 OF 004 
 
 
- From June 4-7, European voters will go to the polls to elect 785 
new members of the European Parliament. 
 
- The Afghan defense ministry says around 250 Taliban militants were 
killed in fighting with Afghan and international forces over the 
past ten days. 
 
- According to the World Health Organization, 53 countries reported 
15,510 cases of influenza A (H1N1) infection, including 99 deaths as 
of May 29. 
 
SILLIMAN