09BAGHDAD265
2009 INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT - IRAQ
Mon Feb 02 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO1561
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #0265/01 0330536
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 020536Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1515
RUCPDC/USDOC WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 BAGHDAD 000265 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV ECON ETRD PGOV IZ
SUBJECT: 2009 INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT - IRAQ 
 
Ref: 08 State 123907 
 
BAGHDAD 00000265  001.2 OF 006 
 
 
BEGIN TEXT: 
 
2009 INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT - IRAQ 
 
Sectarian violence and acts of war and terrorism declined 
dramatically in Iraq over the course of 2008.  These security gains 
remained fragile, and potential investors still identified security 
as their chief concern when considering whether to build a business 
here.  Nevertheless, reduced violence offered the Government of Iraq 
(GOI) and the Iraqi private sector the space to move more actively 
toward putting in place a modern business and investment climate. 
 
There were several advances in 2008:  The GOI created the National 
and Provincial Investment Commissions; two large state-owned banks 
made progress toward restructuring; and the private banking sector 
grew significantly.  The GOI also made steady, if slow, progress 
towards World Trade Organization (WTO) accession.  However, the 
overall investment climate remained unfriendly, especially to small 
and medium investors.  The GOI did not enact key laws and 
regulations to improve the investment climate, nor did it act to 
comply with international instruments.  In addition to the still 
significant security concerns, cumbersome procedures for new 
business registration, long delays, unclear land and property 
titling, unreliable dispute resolution mechanisms and endemic 
allegations of corruption also deterred investment.  More broadly, a 
legacy of central planning and inefficient state-owned enterprises 
continues to slow Iraq's attempts to become more market-based.  In 
its 2008 "Doing Business" Report, the World Bank ranked Iraq 152nd 
of 181 nations overall. 
 
 
OPENNESS TO FOREIGN INVESTMENT 
 
The GOI has stated its commitment to attracting foreign investment 
and made several efforts in 2008 to improve its investment climate. 
It continued to implement the National Investment Law (NIL) of 2006, 
which provides a good base line for a modern legal structure to 
protect foreign and domestic investors.  It provides for tax and 
other incentives, and once implementing regulations are added, the 
NIL's provisions should provide an open investment regime for 
foreign investors.  However, the NIL does not permit foreign 
investors to own land, though they may lease (for 50 years, 
renewable).  It also does not cover investments in the oil, banking 
and insurance sectors.  (A copy of the National Investment Law can 
be obtained from the U.S. Department of Commerce Iraq Task Force 
website - http://www.export.gov/iraq/.)  The GOI and regional 
authorities have sponsored several conferences intended to attract 
investors, including the November 2008 U.S.-Iraq Dialogue on 
Business and Investment Climate, which focused attracting U.S. 
investors. 
 
In accordance with the NIL, the GOI formed the National Investment 
Commission (NIC) and established Provincial Investment Commissions 
(PICs) in every province in 2008.  The NIC and the PICs are designed 
to be "one-stop shops" that can provide information, sign contracts, 
and facilitate registration for new foreign and domestic investors. 
In addition to being on a steep learning curve, Investment 
Commissioners struggled with unclear lines of authority, budget 
restrictions, and the absence of regulations and standard operating 
procedures.  The GOI also failed to confirm the NIC 
Chairman-Designate and later dismissed him.  This uncertain 
leadership situation -- along with other equally significant 
problems, including unclear land transfer policies, a lack of 
infrastructure coordination for investment projects, and provincial 
governments' inability to manage and facilitate investment projects 
Qgovernments' inability to manage and facilitate investment projects 
-- contributed to the fact that many of the investments the NIC had 
announced did not actually break ground. 
 
Regulation of investment is not an exclusive federal power, so the 
Kurdish Regional Government (KRG) and the national government both 
have the right to regulate investment.  The KRG has its own 
investment law (Law 89 of 2004).  The most significant difference 
between the KRG investment law and the national law is that the 
regional law allows foreigners to own land.  Under the Iraqi 
Constitution, when there is a contradiction between regional and 
national legislation in the area of land ownership, the regional law 
becomes applicable; in Kurdistan, KRG investment law has been 
applied in practice to the benefit of foreign investors for land 
ownership and oil contracts. 
 
CURRENCY CONVERSION AND TRANSFER POLICIES 
 
The currency of Iraq is the Dinar (IQD - sometimes referred to as 
the New Iraqi Dinar).  The Iraqi authorities confirm that in 
practice there are no restrictions on current and capital 
transactions involving currency exchange as long as underlying 
transactions are supported by valid documentation.  The 
International Monetary Fund's annual publication on Exchange 
Arrangements and Restrictions states that: "Restrictions on capital 
 
BAGHDAD 00000265  002.4 OF 006 
 
 
transactions are not enforced; however, documentation and reporting 
requirements apply."  The National Investment Law contains 
provisions that, once implemented, would allow investors to bank and 
transfer capital inside or outside of Iraq. 
 
The Government of Iraq's monetary policy since 2003 has focused on 
maintaining price stability primarily by appreciating the IQD 
against the US dollar while seeking to maintain exchange rate 
predictability.  Banks may engage in spot transactions in any 
currency, but are not allowed to engage in forward transactions in 
Iraqi Dinar for speculative purposes.  There are no taxes or 
subsidies on purchases or sales of foreign exchange.  Improved 
security has allowed for an increased supply of goods and services, 
which has reduced inflationary pressures as compared to 2006.  The 
Central Bank's monetary and exchange rate policies have continued to 
help temper inflation, which is down from a high of 76.6 percent in 
2006 to 12.3 percent in November 2008. 
 
EXPROPRIATION AND COMPENSATION 
 
Article 23 (Second) of the Iraqi Constitution prohibits 
expropriation in Iraq, unless it is "for the purpose of public 
benefit in return for just compensation."  The constitutional 
provision further stipulates that this provision shall be regulated 
by law, but legislation has yet to be considered.  Article 12 
(Third) of the National Investment Law also guarantees "non-seizure 
or nationalization of the investment project covered by the 
provisions of this law in whole or in part, except for a project on 
which a final judicial judgment was issued," but the absence of 
implementing regulation makes the application of the law uncertain 
in practice.  As a result, whether foreign investors will enjoy 
protection from expropriation that meets international standards 
will likely depend on domestic implementing legislation and/or 
future bilateral treaty obligations with investor states.  The 
United States does not have a Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) with 
Iraq. 
 
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT 
 
While the law of domestic arbitration is fairly well developed in 
Iraq, international arbitration is not sufficiently supported by 
Iraqi law.  Iraq is a signatory to the League of Arab States 
Convention on Commercial Arbitration (1987) and the Riyadh 
Convention on Judicial Cooperation (1983), but it has not signed or 
adopted the two most important legal instruments for international 
commercial arbitration: The United Nations New York Convention on 
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (1958 -- 
commonly called the New York Convention) and the attendant rules and 
procedures established by the UN Commission on International Trade 
Law (UNCITRAL). 
 
Article 27 of the NIL, which details the rights of Iraqis and 
foreigners with respect to Iraqi law, refers to dispute resolution. 
However, the absence of implementing regulation makes application of 
the law uncertain in practice. 
 
Domestic arbitration is provided for in Articles 251-276 of the 
Iraqi Civil Procedure Code, which require arbitration agreements to 
be in writing.  Panels of arbitrators are available through the 
Iraqi Union of Engineers, the Iraqi Federation of Industries, and 
private arbitrators. 
 
PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS AND INCENTIVES 
 
The NIL allows in theory both domestic and foreign investors to 
qualify for incentives equally.  It also allows for investors to 
take out capital brought into Iraq, and its proceeds, in accordance 
with the law.  Foreign investors are able to trade in shares and 
securities listed on the Iraqi Stock Exchange.  In principle, the 
Qsecurities listed on the Iraqi Stock Exchange.  In principle, the 
law also allows investors who have obtained an investment license to 
enjoy exemptions from taxes and fees for a period of ten years. 
Hotels, tourist institutions, hospitals, health institutions, 
rehabilitation centers and scientific organizations also are granted 
additional exemptions from duties and taxes on their imports of 
furniture and other furnishings.  The exemption theoretically 
increases to fifteen years if Iraqi investors own more than fifty 
percent of the project; however, the absence of implementing 
regulation makes uncertain the application of the law in practice. 
 
RIGHT TO PRIVATE OWNERSHIP AND ESTABLISHMENT 
 
The National Investment Law does not allow foreigners to own land. 
Foreign investors are permitted to rent or lease land for up to 
fifty years (renewable).  Foreign investors are also able to own 
investment portfolios in shares and securities. 
 
PROTECTION OF PROPERTY RIGHTS 
 
Iraq currently does not have adequate statutory protection for 
intellectual property rights (IPR).  The GOI is in the process of 
developing a new IPR law to comply with the WTO Agreement on Trade 
 
BAGHDAD 00000265  003.3 OF 006 
 
 
Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS).  The draft 
law covers patent, trademark and copyright, and it is hoped that 
strong implementing regulations will help consolidate IPR protection 
functions, which are currently spread across several ministries, 
into a "one-stop" IPR office.  (Currently, the Central Organization 
on Standards and Quality Control (COSQC), an agency within the 
Ministry of Planning, handles the patent registry and industrial 
design registry; the Ministry of Culture handles copyrights; and the 
Ministry of Industry and Minerals houses the office that deals with 
trademarks.)  Although the new draft will offer adequate statutory 
IPR protections, it has been stalled in the constitutional review 
process since mid-2007.  The GOI's ability to enforce IPR 
protections remains weak. 
 
Iraq is a signatory to several international intellectual property 
conventions, and to regional or bilateral arrangements, which 
include: 
 
-- Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property (1967 
Act) ratified by Law No.  212 of 1975. 
 
-- World Intellectual Property Organizations (WIPO) Convention; 
ratified by Law No. 212 of 1975.  Iraq became a member of the WIPO 
in January 1976. 
 
-- Arab Agreement for the Protection of Copyrights; ratified by Law 
No.  41 of 1985. 
 
-- Arab Intellectual Property Rights Treaty (Law No. 41 of 1985). 
 
TRANSPARENCY OF THE REGULATORY SYSTEM 
 
The absence of implementing regulation for the National Investment 
Law makes uncertain the application of the law in practice.  Once 
fully implemented, the law would establish a legal framework for 
investment.  Potential investors would nonetheless still face 
significant hurdles in understanding the basic steps for starting 
and operating a business in Iraq given the complexity of Iraq's 
existing laws, regulations, and administrative procedures.  The 
Iraqi Government has established and staffed National and Provincial 
Investment Commissions (NIC / PICs) as required under the National 
Investment Law.  The NIC announced in October that in its first 10 
months of existence, it had attracted $74 billion in FDI to Iraq 
(although only a fraction of that has progressed to the stage of an 
actual signed investment contract).  PICs have also been active in 
assisting regional investors.  However, NIC and PIC Commissioners 
and their staff lack training and expertise, and have not developed 
an effective "One Stop Shop" for investors to ease their entrance 
into the Iraqi market.  The U.S. government and other donors are 
sponsoring significant capacity development for both the NIC and 
PICs;  however, these initiatives will take time to pay dividends 
for Iraq's investment regime. 
 
The absence of other laws in areas of interest to foreign investors 
also creates ambiguity.  Iraq's WTO Legislative Action Plan for the 
Implementation of WTO Agreements -- the legislative "road map" for 
Iraq's eventual WTO accession -- requires competition and consumer 
protection laws that are critical for leveling the business playing 
field.  Both are in the drafting stage with the competent Ministry 
and were expected to be sent to the Council of Representatives in 
2008, but they have been delayed.  Without a competition law, 
investors do not have statutory protection against unfair business 
practices such as price-fixing by competitors, bid rigging, and 
abuse of dominant position in the market.  Likewise, the lack of a 
consumer protection law means that investors and consumers have no 
standard definition of unfair business practices.  While the Iraqis 
Qstandard definition of unfair business practices.  While the Iraqis 
do not currently have a building code for new construction, the GOI 
is currently evaluating this area. 
 
The way in which the Iraqi government promulgates regulations is 
opaque and lends itself to arbitrary use.  Regulations imposing 
duties on citizens or private businesses are required to be 
published in the Gazette.  However, internal Ministerial regulations 
are not.  This loophole allows bureaucrats to create internal 
requirements, procedures or other "turnstiles" with little or no 
oversight and use them to place additional burdens or exact payoffs 
from investors or other businesspersons. 
 
EFFICIENT CAPITAL MARKETS AND PORTFOLIO INVESTMENT 
 
The Central Bank of Iraq (CBI) is responsible for conducting 
monetary policy in Iraq.  The CBI was re-organized by CPA Order No. 
56 as a legal public entity that has financial and administrative 
independence.  The Iraqi banking system includes seven state-owned 
banks, the two largest being Rafidain and Rasheed, which account for 
about 96 percent of banking sector assets.  There are also 32 
private banks and six Islamic banks licensed by the CBI (see CBI's 
website - www.cbiraq.org).  Eleven foreign banks have either been 
licensed or have strategic investments in Iraqi banks. 
 
 
 
BAGHDAD 00000265  004.3 OF 006 
 
 
Although the volume of bank lending is growing, the  majority of 
banking operations remain confined to fee-based services.   The 
provision of credit is therefore largely conducted among individuals 
in private transactions.   Financial transfers from the government 
to provincial authorities or individuals, rather than business 
loans, is the major activity of the private banks; Iraq's economy 
remains primarily cash-based. 
 
The Trade Bank of Iraq (TBI) was established as an independent 
government entity under CPA Order No. 20 in 2003.  The TBI's main 
purpose is to provide financial and related services to facilitate 
import trade, particularly letters of credit.  In early 2008 the 
Ministry of Finance expanded trade finance opportunities for private 
banks by allowing letters of credits in amounts up to $2 million to 
be processed through the TBI and distributed to private banks. 
There is discussion at the Finance Ministry about raising this 
threshold. 
 
 
The letter of the National Investment Law allows for foreign 
investors to exchange shares and securities listed in the Iraqi 
Stock Exchange (ISX).  It also allows foreign investors to form 
investment portfolios.  Trading transactions and buy and sell orders 
are presently written by hand on grease boards in trading sessions. 
The automation of the ISX, expected in 2009, will provide greater 
speed and transparency than the current system.  There are also 
discussions about allowing shares to be  dematerialized (electronic 
book keeping by custodians)  thereby easing the logistical burden of 
transferring physical certificates.  In addition, a new permanent 
securities law has largely completed the Constitutional review 
process and could move to the Council of Representatives for 
enactment in 2009, and rules and regulations for the Iraqi 
Securities Commission (ISC) have been completed.  Until the new law 
passes, an extension of previous regulations will secure the status 
of the ISC. 
 
POLITICAL VIOLENCE 
 
 
Security continues to be a serious concern of the Iraqi Government. 
Despite great improvements in 2008, Iraq remains dangerous, volatile 
and unpredictable; interested investors still cite security as their 
primary obstacle when seeking to enter the Iraqi market.  Violence 
against both foreigners and Iraqis persists, and the threat of 
attacks against U.S. citizens and facilities remains high.  In 
addition, roads and other public areas continue to be dangerous for 
Iraqi or foreign travelers.  Law enforcement is limited, although 
new Iraqi police units continue to be trained and deployed.  Attacks 
against military and civilian targets throughout Iraq continue, 
including in the International (or "Green") Zone. 
 
Targets include trucking and military convoys, hotels, restaurants, 
police stations, security checkpoints, foreign diplomatic missions, 
international organizations and other locations with expatriate 
personnel.  In addition, there have been planned and random 
killings, as well as extortions and kidnappings.  U.S. citizens and 
other foreigners, as well as Iraqi officials and citizens continue 
to be targeted by insurgent groups and opportunistic criminals for 
kidnapping and murder. 
 
The U.S. Department of State issues up-to-date travel warnings for 
countries throughout the world, and U.S. companies and visitors are 
advised to assess carefully the situation in Iraq by consulting the 
Department's Travel Warning at 
http://travel.state.gov/travel/iraq_warning.h tml and its Consular 
Information Sheet at http://travel.state.gov/travel/iraq.html. 
These sites contain the essential security and safety information on 
QThese sites contain the essential security and safety information on 
travel to Iraq. 
 
In addition to violence, investors must be prepared to deal with 
unreliable delivery of essential sewer, water and electrical 
services and the impact this has on business development and 
operating costs. 
 
CORRUPTION 
 
Corruption in all areas remains a significant problem.  Under 
Saddam's regime, corruption was a fact of life for every Iraqi and 
touched upon every economic transaction.  The former regime's 
control of the economy left a legacy of heavy state procurement and 
subsidies distorting market prices.  Unfortunately, undoing this 
legacy will be a long process, and investors still may have to 
contend with requests for bribes or kickbacks from government 
officials at all levels. 
 
The Commission on Public Integrity (CPI) (now known as the 
Commission on Integrity or Integrity Commission - COI) is an 
independent, autonomous Iraqi governmental agency, established by 
CPA Order No. 55, responsible for anti-corruption, law enforcement 
and crime prevention, as well as public education on these topics. 
COI investigates nationwide allegations of corruption within the 
 
BAGHDAD 00000265  005.4 OF 006 
 
 
government and refers cases to the Iraqi judiciary.  It performs its 
duties in conjunction with the Board of Supreme Audit (BSA) and the 
Inspectors General (IG) from each ministry.  There is a need to 
impose and enforce credible penalties for government corruption, 
specifically adherence to laws related to government contracts, 
procurement and allegations of bribery.  The number of corruption 
cases brought to a successful conclusion remains quite small and at 
the lower levels, and the statutory and regulatory provisions 
intended to control corruption will require substantial revision to 
be effective. 
 
Transparency International in its Corruption Perception Index (CPI) 
has ranked Iraq in a tie for 2nd to last place.  While part of this 
perception is due to the legacy left by Saddam Hussein, there is 
ample evidence that corruption remains a major challenge unless 
there are significant changes in the Iraqi government and its body 
politic. 
 
Iraq signed and ratified the United Nations Convention against 
Corruption in March 2008 and is just starting the process of self 
evaluation on what changes are required to come into compliance. 
This process is likely to be the next big test of political will as 
to whether Iraq is serious about confronting corruption.  Iraq has 
also endorsed the World Bank's Extractive Industry Transparency 
Initiative and is seeking to become a full member. 
 
BILATERAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS AND REGIONAL COOPERATION 
 
Iraq is a signatory to some form of investor protection agreement or 
memorandum of understanding with thirty-two bilateral partners and 
nine multilateral groupings.  However, none of these is as 
all-encompassing as a U.S. Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT).  These 
agreements include arrangements on Investments Promotion and 
Protection (IPPA) within the Arab League, as well as some type of 
bilateral agreements with other countries including Afghanistan, 
Bangladesh, India, Iran, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Germany, Mauritania, 
Republic of Korea, Sri Lanka, Syria, Tunisia, Turkey, the United 
Kingdom, Vietnam and Yemen.  These agreements include general 
provisions on promoting and protecting investments, including 
clauses on profit repatriation, access to arbitration and dispute 
settlements, fair expropriation rules and compensation for losses. 
However, the Iraqi government's ability to enforce them remains 
uneven. 
 
In addition, Iraq has bilateral free trade area (FTA) agreements 
with the following eleven countries: Algeria, Egypt, Jordan, 
Lebanon, Oman, Qatar, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, Yemen, and the United 
Arab Emirates.  Iraq is also a signatory to several multilateral 
agreements, including the "Taysir" agreement with Arab countries 
dated February 27, 1982, and ratified in January 11, 1982. 
 
On July 11, 2005, Iraq and the U.S. signed a Trade and Investment 
Framework Agreement (TIFA) as a first step toward increasing trade 
and investment cooperation between the U.S. and Iraq.  The Iraqi 
Parliament has yet to ratify this agreement. 
 
OPIC AND OTHER INVESTMENT INSURANCE PROGRAMS 
 
The Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) and the 
Government of Iraq executed an Investment Incentive Agreement (IIA) 
in 2005.  However, the Iraqi Parliament has yet to ratify this 
agreement.  Without the IIA, OPIC has been able to offer programs in 
Iraq on a temporary basis and only because of a unique Congressional 
waiver of OPIC's statutory IIA requirement.  These include the 
ability to finance a variety of investment projects with substantial 
U.S. participation.  Some of OPIC's basic programs include 
QU.S. participation.  Some of OPIC's basic programs include 
structured finance projects; political risk insurance; investment 
funds and financing for small and medium-sized enterprises; and a 
planned mortgage pilot program. 
 
LABOR 
 
Iraqi labor law remains weak in promoting a flexible, 
business-friendly employment environment.  The existing Saddam-era 
law includes non-supportive benefit clauses, working conditions for 
foreign expatriate workers, and rules governing working hours. 
 
Iraq is a party to both International Labor Organization (ILO) 
Conventions related to youth employment, including child labor 
abuse.  The Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (MOLSA) also sets a 
minimum monthly wage for unskilled workers.  In addition, according 
to Iraqi law, all employers must provide some level of transport, 
accommodation, and food allowances for each employee.  The law does 
not fix allowance amounts. 
 
The National Investment Law states that priority in employment and 
recruitment shall be given to Iraqis.  In addition, foreign 
investors are expected to help train Iraqi employees as well as to 
raise their efficiency, skill, and capabilities.  There are existing 
labor-related requirements for foreign companies employing Iraqi or 
foreign workers. 
 
BAGHDAD 00000265  006.3 OF 006 
 
 
 
FOREIGN TRADE ZONES AND PORTS 
 
The Free Zone Authority Law No. 3/1998 (FZL) permitted investment in 
Free Zones (FZ) through industrial, commercial, and service 
projects.  This law operates under the Instructions for Free Zone 
Management and the Regulation of Investors' Business No. 4/1999 and 
is implemented by the Free Zones Commission in the Ministry of 
Finance. 
 
 
In theory, capital, profits, and investment income from projects in 
an FZ are exempt from all taxes and fees throughout the life of the 
project, including in the foundation and construction phases. 
Goods entering into Iraqi commerce from FZs are subject to Iraq's 5 
percent tariff; no duty is leveled on exports from FZs. 
 
Activities permitted in Free Zones include: (a) industrial 
activities such as, assembly, installation, sorting, and refilling 
processes; (b) storage, re-export and trading operations; (c) 
service and storage projects and transport of all kinds; (d) 
banking, insurance and reinsurance activities; and (e) supplementary 
and auxiliary professional and service activities.  Prohibited 
activities include actions disallowed by other laws in force, such 
as weapons manufacture, environmentally-polluting industries and 
those banned because of place of origin. 
 
There are currently four geographic areas designated as Free Zones. 
The Basrah/Khor al-Zubair Free Zone is located 40 miles southwest of 
Basrah on the Arab Gulf at the Khor al-Zubair seaport.  This area 
has been operational since June 2004.  The Ninewa/Falafel Free Zone 
is located in the north, near roads and railways that reach Turkey, 
Syria, Jordan and the Basrah ports.  The Al-Qa'im Free Zone is on 
the Iraqi-Syrian border and is being rehabilitated to its pre-2003 
state, and an undeveloped zone in Fallujah is in the planning 
stages.  In the Kurdish area a separate zone is being developed in 
Sulaymaniyah, to be lead by private master developers.  Two other 
zones are in the discussion stage in the region: Erbil and Zarko. 
However, none of these areas is operating as a significant focal 
point for investment or trade, and only the Ninewa/Falafel zone has 
businesses operating in it.  The Free Zone Commission lacks 
operational vision and capacity. 
 
FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT STATISTICS 
 
The National Investment Commission and 15 Provincial Investment 
Commissions outside of the KRG signed or successfully concluded 
negotiations on investment licenses totaling 2 billion USD from 
January to November 2008, which also included capital from some 
Iraqi firms.  Two foreign investor consortia also signed joint 
venture investments in two state-owned factories with the Ministry 
of Industry, totaling 300 million USD.  According to the KRG 
Investment Board, foreign investment in the region totaled 15 
billion USD between 2007 and the first half of 2008. 
 
END TEXT 
 
CROCKER