09BAGHDAD2936
FLASH FLOODS HIT ERBIL PROVINCE
Wed Nov 04 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO8268
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #2936 3080648
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 040648Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5335
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVEUNCLAS BAGHDAD 002936 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR NEA/I 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL EAID IZ TU
SUBJECT: FLASH FLOODS HIT ERBIL PROVINCE 
 
 ¶1.  (U) This is an RRT Erbil cable. 
 
¶2.  (U) Summary: On October 31, up to five inches of rain 
fell in the Kurdistan Region resulting in flash flooding in 
several mountainous sub-districts, particularly in Erbil 
Province.  A woman and her young child died, and 200 adobe 
houses were damaged or destroyed.  The Governor of Erbil, 
Nawzad Hadi, visited the affected area, declared an 
emergency, and asked for help from the Government of Iraq and 
the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG.) The Governorate and 
the NGO community are leading the relief efforts.  The RRT is 
preparing a QRF grant and is arranging to visit the area. 
Flooding is common this time of year. End Summary. 
 
¶3. (U) In the mountainous areas of the Kurdistan Region, 
deforestation, over-grazing, and erosion over the last 20 
years have increased the instability of the soil and the 
probability of mudslides in the mountainous areas of the 
Kurdistan Region.  Heavy rains on the night of October 31 
lead to flash-flooding in the two sub-districts of Piran and 
Goratoo in the Mergasur District of Erbil Province.  A 
30-year old woman and her two year-old daughter were killed 
in the flooding.  Another three individuals were injured. 
200 adobe houses in the area were either damaged or 
destroyed, and several roads were made impassable by 
landslides.  The Governor, who visited the area on Sunday, 
has declared the area in a state of emergency and assembled a 
committee of local government officials headed by the Mayor 
of Mergasur to coordinate relief efforts. 
¶4. (U) As part of the initial response, local teamshave 
started working on clearing the two main roads that were 
closed as well as repairing downed power lines.  The Iraqi 
Red Crescent is providing non-food item (NFI) kits. The Mayor 
of Mergasur told the RRT that the displaced families will 
temporarily stay with other families.  The KRG Ministry of 
Reconstruction will send a delegation to visit the area in 
the next few days.  Once damage has been assessed, the 
ministry will create a plan for rebuilding the area.  A 
delegation from President Barzani,s office inspected the 
damage November 2.  Local press reported on November 2 that 
Vice President Biden called President Barzani to discuss the 
election law and gave his condolences regarding the flooding 
victims. 
¶5. (U) Humanitarian NGOs, including the Iraqi Red Crescent 
Society, the Agency for Technical Cooperation and 
Development, the International Organization of Migration, and 
the International Committee of the Red Cross travelled to the 
area on November 2 to conducts needs assessments.  RRT staff 
have been in contact with these NGOs, as well as with the 
Mayor of Mergasur and the Governor of Erbil.  The United 
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees told RRT that it was 
providing 117 packages of non-food items, including hygiene 
kits, and discussing the possible need for tents with local 
officials.  The RRT is in the process of preparing a Quick 
Response Fund grant, pending a list of needed items from the 
mayor,s office.  RRT Team leader and staff are arranging a 
visit to the area in the coming days. 
¶6. (U) Comment. Fortunately, only a few localities 
experienced significant damage from the flash flooding, nor 
were there large casualty numbers.  Local press only started 
reporting on the flooding late November 1.  Vice President 
Biden,s condolences, along with civilian and military U.S. 
offers of help are appreciate by local authorities.  End 
Comment. 
HILL