09BAGHDAD1697
ENVIRONMENT MINISTER REQUESTS ASSISTANCE
Thu Jun 25 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO8900
RR RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #1697/01 1761437
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 251437Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3649
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0807UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BAGHDAD 001697 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
AIDAC 
 
FOR NEA/I/ECON, ISN/CTR AND OES/ENRC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EAID SENV SOCI EWWT KGHG IZ
SUBJECT: ENVIRONMENT MINISTER REQUESTS ASSISTANCE 
 
REF: A) BAGHDAD 959; B) BAGHDAD 960 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request.  See paragraph 6. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary.  During a meeting of the Environment Working Group 
under the Strategic Framework Agreement on June 22, 2009, the 
Minister for the Environment requested USG assistance for 
environmental legislation and regulation, laboratory capacity 
development, and environmental education programs.  End Summary. 
 
Environment Working Group 
------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) The Environment Working Group under the Strategic Framework 
Agreement (SFA) met on June 22, 2009 to discuss a work plan and next 
steps.  The meeting was hosted by the Minister of the Environment 
Narmin Othman Hassen, and included from the GOI Dr. Kamal H. Latif, 
Deputy Minister, and Ali Al-Lami, Chief Researcher and Minister 
Advisor.  The U.S. co-chair had been Dr. Maged Hussein, who was 
tragically killed on May 25, 2009 by a bomb attack.  The Minister 
and Deputy Minister praised Maged Hussein for all the superb help he 
had provided to Iraq and the Environment Ministry in particular. 
 
 
Key Goals for Bilateral Cooperation 
----------------------------------- 
¶4. (SBU) The meeting participants agreed on several goals for 
bilateral cooperation. 
-- Enhance the technical capacity of the Ministry of Environment to 
assess and protect the environment and any impacts that may affect 
human health. 
 
-- Support the Ministry of Environment in its development of legal, 
regulatory, and policy frameworks for the protection of the 
environment. 
 
-- Facilitate integration of Iraq into the relevant international 
institutions and standard setting bodies. 
 
-- Support the Ministry of Environment's outreach programs to 
increase awareness of the key environmental issues facing Iraq. 
 
-- Facilitate inter-ministerial cooperation for environmental 
restoration, including in key areas such as the Marshlands. 
 
Training and Technical Capacity 
------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) The Minister expressed great interest in "train the 
trainer" programs, in particular, related to laboratory and 
environmental assessments.  Dean Sinclair, of the Iraq Scientist 
Engagement Program (ISEP), suggested he could investigate additional 
training opportunities under ISEP.  ISEP provided similar training 
and technical assessments for other ministries. 
 
Environmental Laws and Regulations 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) The Minister welcomed assistance on environmental laws and 
regulations.  She indicated the Ministry needs to change from 
"monitoring" environmental issues to becoming a real regulator, with 
appropriate framework legislation.  She also sought a better sense 
for herself and her officials of U.S. and international best 
practices and environmental standards.  She specifically requested 
USG assistance in this area. 
 
ACTION REQUEST FOR WASHINGTON:  Embassy requests Washington's 
assistance in determining whether the existing Commercial Law 
Development Program (CLDP) for Iraq could be expanded to include 
environmental legislation and regulation to assist the Ministry of 
Environment under the Strategic Framework Agreement. 
 
Strategic Planning 
------------------ 
 
¶7. (SBU) A key objective of the bilateral working group is helping 
the Ministry to develop a strategic plan.  In the past, strategic 
planning has been geared toward five-year goals.  The Minister 
indicated a strong desire to take a comprehensive, long-term view to 
strategic plan development.  The Deputy Minister suggested we first 
Qstrategic plan development.  The Deputy Minister suggested we first 
look at challenges faced in the environmental sector and build a 
plan around the most critical issues.  The Minister stated that 
those responsible for polluting need to be a part of the plan 
development as well, such as the Ministries of Industry, Oil, and 
others.  The plan should also consider international organizations 
such as the relevant United Nations agencies and the World Health 
 
BAGHDAD 00001697  002 OF 002 
 
 
Organization.  It must also link to Iraq's National Development 
Strategy.  The Embassy will explore the possibility of ISEP program 
assistance for strategic planning training for the Ministry. 
 
Improving the Central Laboratory 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) The Minister described the new laboratory structure in the 
Ministry for detection and monitoring of air, water, and soil 
contaminants.  There are four regional labs (Baghdad, South, Middle 
and North), with Baghdad serving as the central lab.  The Ministry 
seeks equally capability for all labs; however, all need more 
equipment.  Dean Sinclair said he would look at what additional 
assistance ISEP could provide. 
 
 
Bilateral Exchanges 
------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) The Minister welcomed any and all bilateral exchanges that 
would assist the Ministry in developing its capacity and 
understanding of international standards and environmental 
regulatory agency function. 
 
Ground and Surface Water Monitoring 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Dean Sinclair described training provided by the ISEP 
related to remote water monitoring equipment in April.  The 26 
people trained were mostly in the Ministry of Environment.  The 
program was a success and the USG would like to donate the equipment 
to the GOI.  An agreement was developed by the Embassy, which will 
be reviewed by the Ministry's attorney and then signed.  Upon 
signature, the equipment will be delivered to the Central 
Laboratory.  This is an example of very practical training that can 
be put to use immediately when the equipment is delivered. 
 
Environmental Education and Outreach 
------------------------------------ 
 
 
¶11. (SBU) During the discussion of key goals, the Minister described 
her commitment to education and awareness outreach programs and 
requested these efforts be added as key goals on the work plan.  She 
described programs in Sadr City that reached over 5,000 school 
children, designed to educate teachers and students about 
environmental issues.  In addition, she highlighted UNEP programs 
offered in Southern Iraq, geared towards women, as the working 
population in this area is mainly comprised of women.  She also said 
that any environmental education program must involve local people 
closest to the issues.  "Locals know everything about the 
environment," she said, noting in particular the poor Marsh Arabs 
who live in that region. 
 
Education and Scholarships 
-------------------------- 
 
¶12. (SBU) The Deputy Minister inquired about scholarship programs. 
Dr. Paul Savello of ITAO described the Ministry of Higher 
Education's program to provide 10,000 scholarships to Iraqis.  The 
Minister indicated that she will meet with the Minister of Higher 
Education and will pursue this option.  The Fulbright program with 
Iraq has also been recently expanded, and could provide 
opportunities to train Iraqis in environmental studies and related 
engineering programs. 
 
Marshlands-Everglades Exchange 
------------------------------ 
 
¶13. (SBU) We mentioned to the Minister that officials in the South 
Florida Water Management District (SFWMD) were enthusiastic about 
having an exchange on the Marshlands, with details to be further 
defined (reftels A, B).  We asked which Ministries would be the 
appropriate counterparts for the SFWMD.  The Minister responded that 
both the Environment Ministry and the Ministry of Water Resources 
would be counterparts.    "We can't do anything without water.  The 
Marshlands are a big issue for both Ministries," she said.  The 
QMarshlands are a big issue for both Ministries," she said.  The 
Embassy mentioned Nature Iraq and the Marsh Research Center at Dhi 
Qar University as possibly being included in any exchange programs. 
The Minister said that local involvement would be essential for 
success, particularly the Marshland area residents, but that she 
would prefer that we start with government-to-government activity as 
a starting point.  The Embassy will explore additional ideas with 
Washington and the SFWMD for exchanges. 
 
FORD