09BEIJING980
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS, U.S. POLICY
Tue Apr 14 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO9018
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0980 1040904
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 140904Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3414
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS BEIJING 000980 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH PREL ECON
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS, U.S. POLICY 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
 
¶1. U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS 
 
a. "American media sensationalized the so called Chinese 'toxic 
construction materials'" The official Communist Party international 
news publication Global Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(04/14): "Since the 
American media reported about the "toxic, made-in-China, drywall", 
the reports of "suffering from the toxic effects of Chinese 
construction materials" have begun to be seen in the American media. 
 Some American media emotionally expressed that the U.S. government 
was "afraid of China" so they allowed the exporting of China's toxic 
construction materials to America. Two Chinese drywall producers 
were sued in Florida this January.  But according to the detecting 
results done by the Florida Health Department, the materials will 
not cause health problems to the public.  The Associated Press 
reported on the 12th that New Orleans residents, who used a lot of 
imported construction materials from China for their house 
construction, felt physically uncomfortable [due to the toxic 
effects of the construction materials] and were very disappointed in 
Chinese construction materials. Chinese experts questioned this 
since Hurricane Katrina happened four years ago, why is the media 
reporting this news about the "toxic construction materials" and 
"the residents feeling uncomfortable" in New Orleans now? 
The American Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) and some 
American States have conducted investigations on this issue. 
Researcher Niu Xinchun, from China Institute of Contemporary 
International Relations, said that it was "irresponsible to report 
such news before the whole situation has become clear. Such 
emotional reactions are related to the financial crisis." Niu said, 
"under the impact of economic downturn and importing problematic 
Chinese products, some American media and individuals have made the 
Chinese government and Chinese products their scapegoats."  He 
Weiwen from an institute of the U.S.-China Economy said that it is 
"unreasonable to politicize this incident and condemn China, or 
involve the American government." " 
 
b. "The West needs to liberate their thoughts" 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(04/14):  "This article discusses China's 
experiences through its 'opening up' period, over the last 30 years. 
 Constantly liberating its thoughts, throwing away old views, and 
accepting new things are the important experiences China did to 
successfully develop itself during the last 30 years.  The financial 
crisis has pushed the world into a crisis, this is a critical time. 
This crisis awakes people's awareness of a unified world.  Every 
international organization and country should work together to 
overcome the current crisis.  However, the world is dominated by old 
thinking, which is the biggest restraint.  There are still 
antagonism between "capitalism" and "socialism".  The old thinking 
is breaking apart the principles of free trade.  To make a better 
world, western countries need to liberate their thoughts and 
experience an 'opening' of their own." 
 
¶2. U.S. POLICY 
 
"The Pentagon will militarize U.S. diplomacy" 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(04/14):  "The key theme is "preserving global 
hegemony",  and the Pentagon is walking the walk of no return by 
increasing its powers, spending and becoming involved in more and 
more issues.  Meanwhile the ambitious Pentagon is being criticized 
by the Department of State, which is saying that they are "secretly 
seizing power". The Washington Post even suggests that the Pentagon 
is "showing off his muscles." The Pentagon is criticized by 
America's opponents that it is "doing things that are unsuitable to 
their level of power".  The criticisms against the U.S. say that the 
Pentagon is unrestrained when it "gambles with the military forces." 
 
The Pentagon has obvious advantages, especially when its budget is 
larger than the budget of the Department of State.  The unlimited 
power of the Pentagon has been challenged by domestic America.  The 
Pentagon is not only powerful in interfering with diplomacy, but 
also frequently creates troubles in order to lead diplomatically. 
For example, there are the events of shooting down the Iranian 
remotely piloted aircraft and the "Impeccable" in the South China 
Sea. For Americans, the Pentagon is a symbol. Looking back at 
American history, every important moment in American history was 
decided by the war, for example, the War of Independence and the 
Civil War that helped to gain the land in the south and the west, as 
well as World War II. These wars set a foundation for America's 
dominant position. The Pentagon is a product from the World War 
II." 
 
Weinstein