09BEIJING1391
MEDIA REACTION: A (H1-N1), Geithner visit,
Tue May 26 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO2294
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1391/01 1460149
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 260149Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4138
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001391 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH PREL ECON
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: A (H1-N1), Geithner visit, 
Ambassador-Designate Huntsman 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. A (H1-N1) 
 
"America's loose disease control measures arouses global argument" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(05/22): Quite a number of H1N1 cases have 
been exported from America.  Some developing countries, where there 
are few confirmed H1N1 cases, are very "nervous" about the H1N1 
virus and implemented strict disease prevention measures, while 
America - which has over 90% of the total confirmed H1N1 cases in 
the world - seems not care about this virus at all.  The rapid 
increase of confirmed cases worries the public in developing 
countries.   However, some American media and American people do not 
care so much about the fast spread of the virus.  Professor Shen 
Dingli, standing vice director for Institute of International 
Studies in Fudan University, explains that currently the flu can be 
prevented, and is under control and curable. The death rate of such 
virus is low in America, which is a developed country.  Therefore, 
Shen thinks that it is reasonable that the U.S. has adopted 
relatively loose controls against this epidemic flu. 
But many countries are not pleased with America's way of controlling 
the flu and America becoming the source country of the newly 
confirmed cases in other countries.  They appeal to America to 
strengthen its protection against the flu.  A Chinese expert Geng 
Xin, living in Japan, says to Global Times that under the 
globalization, it is requested for each country to be responsible 
for not only one's own country but also other countries in the 
world.  America used to require China to be a responsible power. 
They should do the same.  America should at least not become an 
exporter of disease, like they exported the financial crisis.  Geng 
Xin also thinks that developed countries have stronger capacity than 
developing countries do.  Therefore, the developed countries should 
bear more responsibilities.  The U.S. should at least strengthen the 
control in its border posts and at the airports, which is good to 
both America and other countries. 
 
¶2. Geithner visit 
 
"Before his visit to China, Geithner reiterates America's refusal to 
consider China a currency manipulator - Financing of U.S. Banks show 
improvement, 19 banks have raised $50 billion" 
 
The Shanghai-based Shanghai Media Group (SMG) publication, China 
Business News (Diyi Caijing) (05/22): The pressure on Geithner in 
Congressional hearings has been released a little.  It is estimated 
that the banks who received government financial help will pay back 
$25 billion, which gives a little extra money for Geithner's next 
rescue.  Geithner said the U.S. economy has shown some encouraging 
signs.  The Obama administration has made some progress in 
stabilizing the financial markets.  But there are also some negative 
voices from the Democrats and Republicans against Geithner's 
comments on America's economic development.  Geithner also said 
China has allowed the RMB to substantially appreciate and the 
Chinese government has decreased its involvement in the exchange 
rate.  The interesting point is that this January, some economists, 
including Geithner, were criticizing China's intentionally keeping 
the RMB low to make its exports cheaper, which damaged the American 
manufacturing industry and caused the rise in unemployment. But 
Obama's administration softened its tone toward China in the 
Treasury Department's report in the first half of this year, and did 
not say China manipulates exchanging rates. Geithner will pay his 
first visit to China on June 1 and 2. 
 
¶3. Ambassador-Designate Huntsman 
 
"The destiny with China of the nominee for U.S. Ambassador to 
China" 
 
The official China Communist Youth League Beijing Committee 
publications, Beijing Youth Daily(Beijing Qingnianbao) (05/22): 
Cheng Tieliang, a journalist of Beijing Youth Daily, accidentally 
interviewed Huntsman nine years ago in U.S. when he saw Huntsman and 
his Chinese daughter in a church.  Huntsman kindly accepted his 
interview request and invited him to his house.  From that 
interview, we learned that Huntsman taught his daughter Chinese and 
hoped his daughter could become a U.S. Ambassador to China.  He 
often took his daughter with him to the orphanage.  He also liked 
traditional Sichuan and Shangdong food. 
 
Analysis on how Huntsman will affect the future of U.S.-China 
relations: Zhang Guoqing, an expert on American issues, says that he 
anticipates that there will be an Ambassador who understands China 
well and has rich diplomatic experiences.  On the other hand, since 
U.S.-China relations involve many aspects, and there are many 
 
BEIJING 00001391  002 OF 002 
 
 
elements will affect its development, U.S.-China relations need not 
only the efforts from the Ambassador, but also the caring from the 
leaders of the two countries of various levels.  Professor Zhu from 
Peking University also says that U.S.-China relations are 
complicated and the development of relations does not only rely on 
the personal belief of an Ambassador.  The Ambassor's influence to 
the policy making is indirect.  It is not easy to evaluate the work 
performance of an Ambassador.  We can only judge his performance 
until he finishes his term in China. 
 
How does U.S. select its Ambassador to China:  Professor Zhu from 
Peking University thinks that the Ambassador selected by Obama needs 
to play three roles.  First, he is good at communicating with 
people.  He will effectively deliver the voices from China to the 
President, Congress, as well as the American public.  He will convey 
a controversial topic and explain why the policy is important and 
reasonable.  Second, he needs to become a message carrier.  The U.S. 
Ambassador is the first one to handle the U.S.-China relations in 
many fields among the enormous fields involved in the U.S.-China 
relations.  Whether he can directly deliver the messages to the 
President and whether he has special political relations with the 
President are the major concerns when appointing the Ambassador. 
Third, he has to be a supporter of President Obama. 
Professor Zhu says that Huntsman has three advantages to be selected 
as the U.S. Ambassador to China.  First, he is one of the 
Republicans who expressed support for Obama.  He has built up a 
relationship of political trust with Obama.  Second, he knows China 
and has his network of relationships dealing with Chinese issues. 
He can show his Chinese experiences to the Congress and American 
public.  Third, he has obtained rich diplomatic and domestic 
political experience.  Professor Zhang Guoqing from Chinese Academy 
of Social Science also says that it is the key for U.S. to enhance 
the cooperation between the two Parties when it is facing a series 
of internal and external challenges.  "Obama is showing the signal 
of cooperation by appointing some Republicans, which is also 
reflecting his big heart and confidence in politics," says Zhang. 
 
WEINSTEIN