09BERLIN1199
MEDIA REACTION: GERMANY, IRAN, ECONOMIC, GUANTANAMO,
Mon Sep 28 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
VZCZCXRO5891
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHLZ
DE RUEHRL #1199/01 2711308
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 281308Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5321
INFO RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVE
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 1573
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0266
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 0788
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 2314
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 1321
RUEHVEN/USMISSION USOSCE 0506
RHMFIUU/HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
RHMFISS/HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
RHMFISS/CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
RUKAAKC/UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BERLIN 001199 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/CE, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO GM IR ECON US HO
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: GERMANY, IRAN, ECONOMIC, GUANTANAMO, 
HONDURAS;BERLIN 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
¶2.   (Germany)    Outcome of Bundestag Elections 
¶3.   (Iran)   New Enrichment Plant 
¶4.   (Economic)   Aftermath of G-20 Summit 
¶5.   (U.S.)   Closure of Guantnamo 
¶6.   (Honduras)   Escalation of the Situation 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
 
There is only one story in the press this morning: the outcome of 
the Bundestag elections.  Editorials also focused on Bundestag 
elections but also on the state parliament elections in Brandenburg 
and Schleswig-Holstein.  ZDF-TV's early evening newscast heute and 
ARD-TV's early evening newscast Tagesschau opened with reports on 
the results of the Bundestag elections. 
 
¶2.   (Germany)    Outcome of Bundestag Elections 
 
The media this morning are dominated by the outcome of the Bundestag 
elections.   The headline in FAZ is: "CDU/CSU and FDP can Now Govern 
Together;" Die Welt headlined: "CDU/CSU/FDP Majority for Angela 
Merkel - SPD Reached Worst Result since 1949," and Sueddeutsche 
opened with the headline: "Majority for Merkel and Westerwelle - SPD 
Suffers Bitter Defeat."  According to Tagesspiegel, "FDP Safeguards 
Victory for CDU/CSU/FDP Coalition," and Handelsblatt emphasized: 
"FDP Saves Chancellor."  Commentaries and editorials dealt primarily 
with the domestic implications of the elections. 
 
ARD-TV's Tagesthemen (09/27) commented: "The Greens and the SPD 
failed spectacularly with the goal of preventing a coalition of the 
FDP and the CDU/CSU.   But there will likely be several areas where 
we can expect a controversy between the two parties: domestic 
security, civil rights or healthcare reform.  Chancellor Merkel will 
certainly be astonished at her new partner.  And what about the SPD? 
 It has been given a chance from the voters: for a personal but also 
programmatic renewal." 
 
ZDF-TV's heute journal (9/27) broadcast the following commentary: 
"The FDP under Chairman Guido Westerwelle is the clear winner of 
these elections. Because the voters knew exactly what he would get. 
With respect to the CDU, the voter did not know this because the 
chancellor left everything open.  The CDU now has to foot the bill 
because it reached its second-worst result since 1949....  This is a 
warning shot, but also offers the CDU the opportunity to define in a 
coalition with the FDP its Christian Democratic profile again.  The 
voters wanted a stable government, and this is what the country 
needs.  The CDU/CSU/FDP coalition must now resolve the main problems 
(the indebtedness of the state) and be measured against its election 
campaign promises, i.e. no tax increases." 
 
According to Sueddeutsche Zeitung (9/28), "During the election 
campaign, FDP leader Westerwelle only said what he always said: 
'Release the Market Forces,' and 'Reduce Taxes.'  Because of the 
simplicity of these slogans, he won.  The crash of the banks did not 
irritate him and he pretended that the economic crisis had nothing 
to do with the FDP and its doctrine.  Westerwelle simply stuck to 
his core statements.  Many voters obviously considered this to be 
the FDP's expression of sustainability.  This election 
Sunday...marks a turning point for Guido Westerwelle.  As of today, 
his airy promises and the FDP's vision of lowering taxes will be 
over.  To lower taxes when the State is in debt for hundreds of 
billions of euros in order to create the conditions for an economic 
boom would be to play Russian roulette with Germany's society." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine (9/28) editorialized: "The second Merkel 
government will be faced with a leftist phalanx which this country 
has not seen for a long time.  Will this power succeed in blowing 
away the rigidities of the grand coalition and reveal Angela 
Merkel's real core?   At least, the FDP would not be opposed to 
 
BERLIN 00001199  002 OF 004 
 
 
reforms.  And finally the CDU chairwoman can now act the way she 
always wanted to act.  It will be an exciting question to see which 
Angela Merkel will govern this country in the future." 
 
Mass-circulation, right-of-center tabloid Bild-Zeitung of Hamburg 
(9/28) argued: "What the politicians did not achieve during this 
blurred election campaign is something the voters achieved with 
their votes: clarity!  This is good for democracy.  This is good for 
Germany.  The grand coalition has been voted out of office, not 
because it did a bad job, but because the voters did not want a 
second round of bad compromises.  With a clear majority for a 
CDU/CSU/FDP coalition, the voters showed greater courage than the 
politicians entrusted in them.  This is a clear mandate for Angela 
Merkel and Guido Westerwelle.  A mandate FOR resolute action, a 
mandate FOR keeping to election campaign promises!" 
 
Frankfurter Rundschau (9/28) observed: "The decline of the 
mainstream parties is the headline of these elections.  It turned 
the SPD into a shadow of itself.  Germany's Social Democracy is 
faced with essential transformations.  It will definitely lose the 
status of a mainstream party if it continues to...save itself in a 
grand coalition.  After eleven years with limited top personnel, the 
SPD is faced with a new beginning.  With or without SPD chancellor 
candidate Steinmeier, the SPD must launch a tactical, programmatic 
offensive to win back the confidence of left-leaning voters.  It 
will have this chance in the opposition; it is its only chance." 
 
Regional daily Hannoversche Allgemeine Zeitung (9/28) had this to 
say: "Several things will now certainly change in the Chancellery. 
A new version must be loaded for the theory and practice of Merkel's 
governing system: Merkel 09.  Then the situation will be less 
presidential, but rather normal if not more combative.  Merkel's 
power has grown but at the same time, it will be easier to assail 
her policy.  Merkel must adjust to greater criticism in the 
Bundestag, in the media, and probably also in the streets.  When the 
grand coalition announced unpopular measures such as the higher 
pension age, the participation of the SPD subdued public anger.  In 
the future, however, this will be different." 
 
Neue Ruhr/Neue Rhein-Zeitung of Essen (9/28) judged: "Germany voted 
for a change.  After the monotony of the grand coalition, there will 
now be new impulses and a true political competition.  Angela 
Merkel's winning smile, however, is deceiving.  She has lost.  In 
view of the desolate state of the SPD, she should not have lost any 
percentage points. 
 
¶3.   (Iran)   New Enrichment Plant 
 
S|ddeutsche (9/28) editorialized: "The infamous clock for an attack 
on the nuclear plants is ticking very loud.  The Israelis are 
beating the drums.  Their support for new sanctions only seems to 
have a military purpose.  The highly cautious U.S. President Obama 
wants to know the whole truth about the nuclear program or have 
sanctions that hurt. Otherwise there will be a war.  However, the 
Iranians are standing by their tactic of gambling for time.  They 
want to show their new plant to IAEA inspectors, but they don't say 
when.   This kind of delaying tactics will no longer work.   On 
Thursday, the P5 and Germany will meet with the Iranians in 
Geneva." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine (9/26) remarked in an editorial: "For years, 
the Iranian regime has been deceiving the international community 
with its nuclear program.  Iran only admitted its secret activities, 
which have to be reported to the IAEA, when they became known 
elsewhere...  The long-term suspicion that Iran was operating 
another plant to enrich uranium for nuclear weapons seems to be 
true.  The explosive news announced by Obama at the beginning of the 
G20 will puts Iran on the defensive during the upcoming talks with 
 
BERLIN 00001199  003 OF 004 
 
 
the P5 and Germany.  If it again refuses to start serious talks, it 
will be easier to punish Iran with effective sanctions." 
 
Tagesspiegel (9/26) noted in an editorial: "It has been a long time 
ago since the West was so united, vigorous and definite in its call 
on Iran to disclose its nuclear program and allow international 
checks.  The short statement from Tehran... is a provocation.  It is 
difficult to believe that Western intelligence services did not know 
about the plant, but Iran's admission makes clear that the country 
is pursuing a deceptive policy in the face of international 
pressure.  The tough response by the West lays the groundwork for 
the talks of the P5 and Germany with Iran on its nuclear program, 
which will be restarted after a pause of half a year.   The West 
does not believe in quick successes....  However, the dual strategy 
of offers and threats will be no longer credible if consequences are 
not finally decided." 
 
Die Welt am Sonntag (9/27) remarked that "the existence of a second 
Iranian nuclear plant is not a surprise.  The West could have known 
it for a long time - and should have responded to it....  Even 
Barack Obama no longer rules out a military option to prevent the 
Iranian bomb.  It seems as if he is getting closer to his 
predecessor's disillusionment with the Iranian regime." 
 
Frankfurter Rundschau (9/28) opined: "Iran once again deceived the 
West.  Iran was secretly building a second enrichment plant, while 
U.S. President Obama offered talks to Tehran.  However, the West 
only has the option of diplomacy in the nuclear dispute with Iran. 
Obama is therefore warning against the unavoidable confrontation if 
Iran does not comply with international regulations.  However, he is 
also not giving up on the hope that the upcoming talks of the P5 and 
Germany with Iran will pave the way for an exit out of the dangerous 
nuclear crisis.  Iran's secrecy has increased the unity of the West. 
 Even Russia seems to be ready now to use sanctions to force Iran to 
comply." 
 
¶4.   (Economic)   Aftermath of G-20 Summit 
 
Deutschlandfunk (9/25) radio commented:  "The summit in Pittsburgh 
made obvious that not much has happened so far to make the 
international financial system more stable.  The fear of collapsing 
giants is enormous....   The governments can still be blackmailed 
and no watchdog in the world will be able to oversee the situation. 
More moderate bonus payments won't change this...  And let's hope 
that the next bubble has not been created by the time banks are 
forced to have more capital reserves." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine (9/26) editorialized on its front page: "The 
countries of the G20 are obviously convinced that this format is 
important and capable of taking action...  The announcement in 
Pittsburgh that the G20 will continue to cooperate on international 
economic policies does therefore not come as a surprise.  We don't 
have to call for a global economic government....  However, the 
changes in economic balances made this development obvious, if not 
even indispensible.  The upgrading of the G20 as a forum of the 
industrial and threshold countries is particularly an acknowledgment 
of Asia's economic rise." 
 
FT Deutschland (9/26) commented: "The leaders of the largest 
economic economies have introduced tougher and more binding 
regulations for banks than ever before.  Whether this will suffice 
will depend on the details of the regulations, which again depends 
on whether the governments will take the implementation seriously 
and resist the pressure of financial lobbyists.  The substance of 
the agreements means real progress is possible....   The only weak 
spot of the agreements is the timetable.... The reasoning of the G20 
for the extended timeframe that the banks need time to rebound is 
not convincing.  Too many of them are already making good profits 
 
BERLIN 00001199  004 OF 004 
 
 
again." 
 
Handelsblatt (9/28) said in an editorial: "The idea of a tax on 
financial transactions was taken quickly of the table in Pittsburgh. 
 However, the debate about the question of who would pay the bill 
for the crisis is only getting started.  This refers to another 
challenge the G20 faces.  The topic of climate protection will not 
move an inch if the key problem of funding environmental protection 
measures is not clarified first.  We can bet that the G20 will then 
discuss a tax on financial transactions again soon." 
 
¶5.   (U.S.)   Closure of Guantnamo 
 
Sueddeutsche Zeitung (9/28) opined under the headline: "America 
Unable to Get Rid of its Disgrace," and wrote: "Now four months 
before the period expires in which President Obama wanted to close 
the Guantnamo prison camp, one thing seems to be clear: America 
will have difficulty getting rid of it.  First, the government does 
not know where to bring the remaining 223 prisoners; and, second, 
there is the looming danger that America could again damage its 
reputation as a democracy by setting up a new Guantnamo on the 
mainland.  Opposition politicians in Congress want to prevent Obama 
from bringing any prisoners to U.S. territory, irrespective of 
whether these are masterminds of 9/11 or poor souls whom the U.S. 
courts have proclaimed to be innocent.  The populism with which 
Obama is confronted is as lousy as it is overpowering....  That is 
why he will have to fight.  But even if 'Camp Justice' is to close 
down, new injustice is looming because Obama's legal advisors want 
to keep at least 50 prisoners in custody which are 'highly 
dangerous,' but whose files are based on information obtained 
through torture.  By doing so, the U.S. president would again damage 
the United States's image as a country where the rule of law 
prevails.  Obama knows what he is doing, at least to the same extent 
as the general knew who set up the first block in Guantnamo in 
2001." 
 
¶6.   (Honduras)   Escalation of the Situation 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (9/26) editorialized: "If former 
Honduran President Zelaya had hoped that his return to Tegucigalpa 
would result in an uprising against the so-called putschists, then 
the past days taught him better.  Not only the oligarchy but also 
the majority of Hondurans are still determined not to allow 
Venezuelan President Chvez to have a say.  Six candidates are 
running for the job as president and they cover all political 
leanings.  It is necessary to vigorously back these presidential 
elections and not to delegitimize them from all sides." 
 
 
  MURPHY