09BEIJING2794
SEPTEMBER 29 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: IRAN, NORTH KOREA, BURMA,
Tue Sep 29 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7424
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2794/01 2722312
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 292312Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6278
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHEK/AMEMBASSY BISHKEK 1374
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RHEBAAA/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 002794 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM MNUC PARM CH KS KN RS IR ZK BM AF
MG, IN, AF 
 
SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 29 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: IRAN, NORTH KOREA, BURMA, 
TIBET, SCO 
 
¶1. Key points at the September 29 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- China supported the maintenance of the nuclear nonproliferation 
program and resolving the Iran issue through negotiation. 
 
-- During his visit to North Korea, Premier Wen Jiabao would 
exchange ideas on bilateral and regional issues of mutual interest, 
attend celebrations commemorating the 60th anniversary of the 
establishment of diplomatic relations and the year of friendship 
between China and the DPRK, review and "map out" the future of the 
China-North Korea relationship and sign agreements in economic 
cooperation, trade and tourism. 
 
-- China supported the solution of the North Korean nuclear issue 
through dialogue and consultation, and the Six-Party Talks were a 
"practical and effective mechanism in this regard." 
 
-- Reports that Burma had begun expelling Chinese citizens from its 
territory were "not in line with the facts." 
 
P5+1 and Iran 
-------------- 
 
¶2.  China hoped that the upcoming P5+1 meeting in Geneva would 
achieve positive results.  China supported the maintenance of the 
nuclear nonproliferation system and resolving the Iran issue through 
negotiation, said Jiang.  China hoped that relevant countries would 
"do the right thing" to maintain stability.  It was in the interest 
of all countries to properly handle the issue and China hoped that 
relevant countries would make efforts to relax tensions rather than 
to increase pressure.  The Chinese delegation to Geneva would be led 
by MFA Arms Control Department Director General Cheng Jingye. 
 
Wen Jiabao to North Korea 
------------------------- 
 
¶3. During his visit to North Korea, Premier Wen Jiabao would 
exchange ideas on bilateral and regional issues of mutual interest, 
attend celebrations commemorating the 60th anniversary of the 
establishment of diplomatic relations and the year of friendship 
between China and the DPRK, review and "map out" the future of the 
China-North Korea relationship and sign agreements in economic 
cooperation, trade and tourism, said Jiang.  China provided 
assistance to North Korea in order to improve the lives of the North 
Korean people and develop the country's economy, noted the 
spokesperson.  The visit would reciprocate the visit of North Korean 
Premier Kim Yong-Il to Beijing in March, said Jiang. 
 
¶4. China hoped to make joint efforts with North Korea to push 
forward bilateral relations and improve the situation on the 
peninsula.  Regional stability and denuclearization were in the 
interests of all parties and China hoped that relevant countries 
would make a positive contribution to these goals.  China supported 
the solution of relevant issues through dialogue and consultation 
and the Six-Party Talks was a "practical and effective mechanism in 
this regard," said Jiang. 
 
Burma Stability 
--------------- 
 
¶5. Reports that Burma had begun expelling Chinese citizens from its 
territory were "not in line with the facts," said the spokesperson. 
China's border with Burma was stable and people-to-people exchanges 
were proceeding normally.  China had asked Burma to protect the 
legitimate rights of Chinese citizens residing in Burma, said 
Jiang. 
 
Tibet Closure? 
-------------- 
 
¶6. Reports that Tibet would close to foreigners during the National 
Day holiday were not true, said Jiang.  There would be no 
restrictions on tourism to the region and numbers of travelers were 
expected to top 2007 levels.  Some travel agencies might adjust the 
schedules of tours due to the large number of visitors, said Jiang. 
 
 
SCO Meeting 
----------- 
 
¶7. China would host a meeting of the Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization (SCO) in Beijing on October 14, said Jiang.  Leaders 
from member and observer countries would attend discussions on the 
Yekaterinburg agreement, responses to the financial crisis and 
deepening regional economic and humanitarian cooperation.  In 
addition to leaders from member countries, Pakistan Prime Minister 
Yousuf Raza Gilani, Iranian Vice President Reza Rahimi, Mongolian 
 
BEIJING 00002794  002 OF 002 
 
 
Foreign Minister Sukhbaataryn Batbold and Indian Minister of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas Murli Deora would attend as observers. 
Representatives from Afghanistan and Turkmenistan would attend as 
"guests," said Jiang. 
 
Steinberg Visit 
--------------- 
 
¶8. Deputy Secretary of State James Steinberg would exchange ideas 
with Vice President Xi Jinping, Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi, State 
Councilor Dai Bingguo, Vice Foreign Minister Wang Guangya, Vice 
Foreign Minister He Yafei and leaders from the military during his 
visit to Beijing. 
 
National Day Security 
--------------------- 
 
¶9. China would take "necessary and effective" security measures 
during the upcoming national day celebrations.  Such measures 
reflected China's responsible attitude, said the spokesperson. 
 
Visits 
------ 
 
¶10. Russian Premier Vladimir Putin would visit China October 12-14 
to meet with Premier Wen Jiabao, attend celebrations of the 60th 
anniversary of diplomatic relations and attend meetings of the SCO. 
Russian Vice Premier Aleksandr Zhukov would visit China October 
10-12.  Kyrgyz Premier Igor Chudinov would visit China October 
15-17. 
HUNTSMAN