09BEIJING843
MEDIA REACTION; G20, MILITARY POWER REPORT
Mon Mar 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO3518
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0843/01 0890901
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 300901Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3179
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000843 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION; G20, MILITARY POWER REPORT 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
¶1. G20 
a. "China shouldn't sing too loudly at the G20" 
The official Xinhua News Agency international news publication 
International Herald Leader (Guoji Xianqu Daobao)(03/30): "China 
should become the strength supporting the reform and reconstruction 
of the international financial system. But this can only happen if 
China has handled its own domestic issues well. 
It is too idealistic to think about replacing the U.S. dollar. This 
suggestion ignores the political powers behind the international 
financial system.  Even if China successfully climbed to the top and 
claimed leadership, China still wouldn't change the limitations of 
the current system and won't perform better than the U.S. 
Additionally, there is too much effort and too little gain when one 
is the leader. As one of the most powerful emerging economic 
entities, it seems only China has the capacity to save the global 
economy.  But at this early phase, China won't benefit from being 
the leader.  The reason why China wasn't seriously affected by the 
global crisis is that China's financial system hasn't completely 
opened, not because China's financial system is perfect.  The 
developments in China's social and political systems are still 
insufficient for a world leader. 
Therefore, China shouldn't sing too loudly at the Summit as China is 
in a precarious situation. China should play an active role in 
supporting the reform and reconstruction of the international 
financial system.  But it needs to first handle its own business. 
China will be capable of playing the lead after it has successfully 
reformed its social and political systems. China is in an awkward 
position now. On the one hand, China buys USD in order to help 
maintain the U.S. hegemony. However on the other hand China has 
suggested replacing the USD. This shows that China is not happy with 
the current system, but at this time, cannot do anything to change 
it. One realistic option for China is to reduce its international 
responsibilities in IMF and spread its powers to other regional 
financial and economic organizations." 
b. "China claims that it is the "right of the world" to hear 
everyone's voice" 
The Beijing based News Agency economic news publication Economic 
Observer (Jingji Guancha)(03/30): "Certain high-level Chinese 
financial official's voices, a warm-up for the G20, have aroused the 
attention and responses of the leaders of the G20 countries.  For 
the first time, China doesn't want to be just a listener.  China is 
willing to take action on its responsibilities.  However, 
responsibilities and the right to relevant discourse are equal. 
This is what China wants to tell the world at the G20. 
China has done a lot and will do more. China needs to combine both 
its long-term objective and short term interests in order to push 
the establishment of a new, more impartial, international financial 
order. Of course, Zhou Xiaochuan, the leader of People's Bank of 
China, understands that his suggestion of a "super-sovereign reserve 
currency" won't produce results within a short time. But his call 
clearly reflects that China can't bear any unilateral obligations 
without first being guaranteed its benefits. 
We estimate that China's concerns will be put forward formally at 
the meeting between China and the U.S.  Many observers believe that 
the possible results of the G20 meetings will depend on the 
dialogues between China and the U.S. The rebalance of the global 
economy needs both the U.S. and China to make some adjustments. The 
U.S. won't gain full understanding +or support if it ignores its 
stake holder's interests and is always in a position to criticize. 
This won't contribute to the macro-political cooperation among the 
major economic entities. 
For their attempts in the fields of currency and financial 
regulation, the international society should give more respect to 
Asian economies, the world's emerging economies, including China. 
The Submit itself is a process of listening, which serves as the 
basis to put aside disagreements and seek resolutions." 
c. "Chinese people shouldn't indulge themselves in the illusion of 
saving the world" 
The official Xinhua News Agency news publication Beijing Youth 
Daily(Beijing Qingnianbao) (03/30): "Since the credits crisis became 
a global financial crisis, the U.S. and major western countries have 
constantly sent signals to China, and other new emerging economic 
entities, calling for help.  President Obama quickly responded to 
Premier Wen's worry about China's holding a huge amount of U.S. 
assets. This shows that China's U.S. assets have already been 
counted into America's stimulus package budget. any action by China 
concerning its U.S. debts may impact the USD's status and Obama's 
stimulus package. 
Chinese media have celebrated China's becoming the "only highlight" 
in the crisis.  It is true that, during this financial crisis, China 
has not been through and fatal up and downturns and that China might 
play an important role in the global economy recovery process. 
However, China's internal social and economic problems, such as the 
drop exports, the bankruptcy of its small and medium enterprises, 
educational issues, etc, won't disappear because of the worsening 
external crisis. Instead, these problems may become more serious. 
 
BEIJING 00000843  002 OF 002 
 
 
In this situation, as Premier Wen said, China's handling of its own 
domestic issues is the biggest contribution to the world.  China 
should be warned about Japan's experiences during the 1980s when 
Japan tried to "buy America" by purchasing American debts. Even with 
great expectations and encouragements, China shouldn't fall into the 
illusion that it can save the world." 
¶2. Military power report 
a. "What is behind the U.S. military report?" 
The official Xinhua News Agency international news publication 
International Herald Leader (Guoji Xianqu Daobao)(03/30): "This 
report is the voice of the Pentagon and the Congress to Obama: Don't 
get too close to Beijing. Professor Meng Xiang, from National 
Defense University, tells the International Herald Leader that 
publishing the military report in the current situation is 
inappropriate and inconsistent with the declaration and tendency of 
the Obama administration. He also points out that the purpose of 
this report is to put pressure on the new government, asking for 
more military budget moneys. 
Yuan Peng, from China Institute of Contemporary International 
Relations, says that the U.S. Defense Department is trying to 
influence Obama's China strategy. Professor Meng says that the U.S. 
won't change its defensive mentality towards China. America's China 
strategy will remain both restrained and cooperative. 
China's military is also keeping a sober awareness of this.  Qian 
Lihua, director of the Ministry's Foreign Affairs Office, has 
already expressed that Sino-U.S. military relations are having a 
difficult time and that the obstacles to developing the military 
relationship have not been eliminated.  Experts also believe that 
military relations between China and the U.S. failed to fully 
recover from the former administration's military communications. 
"(Therefore) America's publishing of the military report at such a 
sensitive and important period creates more difficulties for the 
U.S.-China military relationship" says Professor Meng. 
PICCUTA