09BEIJING3121
MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT OBAMA'S VISIT TO JAPAN AND CHINA
Mon Nov 16 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO8763
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3121/01 3200856
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 160856Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6848
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 003121 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON KMDR OPRC CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT OBAMA'S VISIT TO JAPAN AND CHINA 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S VISIT TO JAPAN AND CHINA 
 
a. "Don't use the 'cold war' mentality to look at the U.S.'s return 
to Asia" 
 
The official Xinhua News Agency international news publication 
International Herald Leader (Guoji Xianqu Daobao)(11/16)(pg 10): "In 
fact, the U.S. Asian policy has been steadily moving forward. 
'Returning to Asia' is only a continuation of the U.S.'s previous 
Asian policy, not a completely different policy.  It is too radical 
to view the U.S. making friends in Asia as making enemies of China. 
America's Asian diplomacy is first to fight for its own interests, 
and then to contain China.  In the future, China's economic strength 
and regional influence will continuously increase in the region, 
which will not be changed by the U.S.'s will.  As East Asian nations 
are deepening their mutual reliance and trust, the U.S. would better 
learn to fit in and coordinate with them, rather than to dominate or 
control them.  Meanwhile, China should stay wary about the possible 
challenges to China posed by the new U.S. policy towards Asia." 
 
b. "Obama arrived in Shanghai in the rain; Are Sino-U.S. relations 
re-defined?" 
 
The Shanghai-based Shanghai Media Group (SMG) publication, China 
Business News (Diyi Caijing)(11/16)(pg A1): "Obama has delivered his 
first Asian policy speech since he took office in Tokyo.  Obama, in 
his speech, welcomed China to play a greater role in the world. 
Obama said in Tokyo, 'The United States does not seek to contain 
China.'  Apart from expressing his 'strong friendliness' towards 
China, Obama also addressed the economic imbalances between China 
and the U.S.  With regard to Obama's addressing of 'imbalances,' 
Professor Chen Ping of the National Development Research Institute 
of Beijing University argued that the discourse of 'global 
imbalances' should be avoided in Sino-U.S. bilateral discussions. 
Chen argued that if there are 'global imbalances,' the root cause to 
this consequence is the unruly development of the U.S. financial 
industry, which has led to the hollowing out of its domestic 
industry.  An economist, Xiang Songzuo, said that the RMB exchange 
rate will be brought up again, which is the established policy of 
the United States due to U.S. domestic politics.  What's more, 
Professor Yang Fuqiang, director of WWF's Global Climate Initiative 
program, said that the U.S. has emphasized climate change, which is 
a result of Congressional pressure, to certain extent.  China could 
take the chance to tell the United States about China's plans on 
climate change and the two could start off from specific issues like 
low-carbon city construction." 
 
c. "The U.S. shows affection to China in seeking cooperation; 
Maintains 'conjugal' relationship with Japan - Obama's Asia balance 
leans towards China" 
 
The official Xinhua News Agency international news publication 
International Herald Leader (Guoji Xianqu Daobao)(11/16)(pg 1): 
"President Obama is obviously visiting China with expectations, 
regarding the long list of issues that he will discuss with Chinese 
leaders.  In September, the U.S. Deputy Secretary Sternberg brought 
forward the idea of 'strategic reassurance' towards China, asking 
China to ensure not to threaten the U.S. interests as it is rising. 
Therefore, Obama's visit is like a visit of public relations.  In 
the aim of pacifying Japan, Obama said that deepening U.S. relations 
with China will not impair relations with its allies.  Japanese 
experts said that Obama's speech in Japan is a good speech for 
balancing China and Japan.  Japanese media believes that, despite 
small frictions, the United and States and Japan still have good 
'conjugal relations.'  Meanwhile, Obama is also showing affections 
to China.  His remarks before he set off for the visit reflect that 
U.S.-China relations are beyond the bilateral, and embrace a larger 
global perspective.  Obama's remarks in Japan reflect the two-tier 
structure of his Asian strategy.  The first tier is to maintain 
peace and stability in Asia through U.S. military presence in Japan. 
 The second tier is to share the benefit of economic development 
with China through enhancing its relationship with China, which is a 
pragmatic diplomacy." 
 
d. "The new 'green exchange' between the United States and Japan" 
 
Guangdong 21st Century Publishing Company Ltd.'s business newspaper 
21st Century Business Herald (21Shiji Jingji Baodao)(11/16)(pg 2): 
"Obama's visit to Asia can be seen as the implementation of U.S. 
diplomacy in emphasizing Asia.  Though Japanese Prime Minister 
Hatoyama advocated a policy of 'leaving the United States and 
returning to Asia,' the U.S.-Japan alliance will not greatly change. 
 Another focus of Obama's visit to Japan, environmental protection 
cooperation, is worth noting.  Obama personally thinks his trip to 
Asia is critical.  Some people even said that the trip could even 
 
BEIJING 00003121  002 OF 002 
 
 
affect Obama's Presidential re-election.  This is a bit exaggerated, 
but not all unreasonable.  Obama is now faced with mid-term 
elections and if the U.S. unemployment rate continues to worsen, the 
Democrats would be in a difficult situation.  Obama cannot always 
'worship' Keynesianism; he has to find the cornerstone for his new 
administration.  As the dollar hegemony is diminishing, climate 
issues have become a turning point.  It's not known whether U.S. 
leadership in environmental technology would help it.  Perhaps, what 
would offer Obama a helping hand will be the 'green' rather than the 
blue (the Democrats) and the red (the Republicans)." 
 
HUNTSMAN