09BEIJING1877
JULY 7 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: XINJIANG, RUSSIA
Tue Jul 07 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO3297
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHTRO RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1877/01 1881138
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 071138Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5045
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001877 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV CH RS
 
SUBJECT: JULY 7 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: XINJIANG, RUSSIA 
 
¶1. Key points at the July 7 MFA press briefing: 
 
- Regarding the events in Xinjiang, MFA spokesperson Qin said that 
the "facts could not be clearer" and that an "evil crime" had taken 
place that some people called a "peaceful demonstration."  Qin said 
that these people were cowards and "totally lying," making rumors 
and distorting the facts.  Such people were "afraid" to see 
development in Xinjiang and did not want to see thriving industry in 
Xinjiang.  Competent authorities had taken decisive measures and 
"social order had returned to normal and the situation brought under 
control." 
 
- According to Qin, there was evidence that Rebiya Kadeer and the 
East Turkestan Islamic Movement (ETIM) were responsible for the 
attacks and Chinese authorities had already released some evidence 
about the involvement of foreign separatists in instigating the 
violence.  As the investigation continued, Qin said that he believed 
"we will find out what happened," and Rebiya could never succeed by 
"lying to the public forever."    ETIM had also attempted to "ruin" 
national unity and separate China and the "true terrorist nature" of 
the organization would be exposed to the world. 
 
- Qin said that some journalists were "believed to have violated 
certain regulations" but it was possible that local authorities 
mistakenly thought that journalists broke local laws. 
 
Attacks in Xinjiang: Evil Crime, Social Order Restored 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶2. Regarding the violence in Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region, the 
"facts could not be clearer" that an "evil crime" had taken place 
that some people called a "peaceful demonstration," said 
spokesperson Qin Gang at the July 7 regular MFA press briefing.  He 
said that these people were cowards and "totally lying," making 
rumors and distorting the facts and that such people were "afraid" 
to see development and thriving industry in Xinjiang.  Qin said that 
competent authorities had taken decisive measures and "social order 
had returned to normal and the situation brought under control." 
 
 
Rebiya Kadeer and ETIM Responsible for Violence in Xinjiang 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶3. Competent authorities in Xinjiang had called the violence a 
"premeditated and orchestrated crime" and a "serious violent 
criminal act."  According to Qin, there was evidence that Rebiya 
Kadeer was responsible for the attacks and competent authorities had 
already released some evidence about the involvement of foreign 
separatists in instigating the violence.  As the investigation 
continued, Qin said that he believed "we will find out what 
happened," and Rebiya Kadeer could never succeed by "lying to the 
public forever."  Qin said that Rebiya Kadeer had committed crimes, 
and jeopardized national security, and in a spirit of humanity was 
allowed to seek medical treatment in the United States under the 
condition that she would not undertake activities to "harm China." 
Her actions in the last few years proved she would "never stop her 
harmful activities" and Qin urged international countries not to 
provide any form of support to her separatist activities.  Qin said 
that the East Turkestan Islamic Movement (ETIM) had also attempted 
to "ruin" national unity and separate China and the "true terrorist 
nature" of the organization would be exposed to the world. 
 
Blackout of Phones and Internet 
------------------------------- 
 
¶4. Addressing telephone and internet service blackouts in Xinjiang, 
Qin noted the involvement of foreign forces who frequently used cell 
phones to incite violence, and said local authorities had taken 
responsive measures "according to law" and if journalists had 
communication difficulties they could refer to the MFA for 
assistance. 
 
China Totally Transparent to Media Organizations 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶5. China was totally transparent to media outlets and had organized 
and facilitated media reporting in Xinjiang and hoped international 
media would be fair and objective in reporting the truth of the 
incident.  Asked about journalists detained in Xinjiang, Qin said 
that some journalists were "believed to have violated certain 
regulations" but it was possible that local authorities had 
mistakenly believed that journalists had broken local laws.  Qin 
said that he personally had coordinated with local authorities to 
properly solve those issues.  He acknowledged that many journalists 
were in Xinjiang covering the issue and said that "social order is 
returning to normal" and that China welcomed journalists to 
Xinjiang, but also hoped they would respect local regulations, abide 
by Chinese laws and look out for their personal safety.  Out of 
concern for journalists' personal safety, Qin said he hoped 
 
BEIJING 00001877  002 OF 002 
 
 
journalists would understand and cooperate with authorities and 
contact the MFA if there were problems.  However, if anyone broke 
the law, the MFA would be unable to assist them. 
 
Arrests in Xinjiang Were for the Safety of the Chinese People 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶6. Responding to human rights organizations criticisms of China's 
handling of the riots, Qin said he was surprised that these 
organizations "showed no sympathy for the victims" and were making 
use of the incident to "point a finger at China."  The purpose of 
detaining people was to ensure the safety and security of the 
Chinese people, including lives and property, and that any country 
that faced such violent acts would not allow them to continue "or 
else they would not be a country under the rule of law."  Qin said 
that these actions had the support of the public.  Further 
investigations were still needed for those under arrest, but Qin 
said that the law was fair, treated everyone equally, and not a 
single "good person" would be prosecuted and not a single "bad 
person" would escape justice.  Some people had a bias against China 
and saw a problem with China no matter what China did, and China 
could never expect a fair perspective from people "opposed to 
justice and the Chinese people." 
 
Attacks on Chinese Missions Abroad 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶7. On July 6, demonstrations had taken place outside the Chinese 
Embassy in The Hague, the Netherlands. Stones and rocks had been 
thrown at the Embassy, breaking windows, putting diplomatic 
personnel at risk and disturbing the conduct of diplomatic business, 
said Qin.  At the Chinese consulate in Munich, two unidentified 
persons had thrown Molotov cocktails, causing damage to the building 
and flag.  China "strongly condemned" the attacks and had made 
solemn representations to the Dutch and German governments and urged 
them to take all necessary measures to abide by the Vienna 
Convention, ensure the safety and dignity of Chinese diplomats and 
bring the perpetrators to justice. 
 
Post-START Agreement 
-------------------- 
 
¶8. China welcomed the signing of a post-START agreement in Moscow 
and believed that by reducing their nuclear arsenals, Russia and the 
United States could create conditions for global disarmament, a goal 
China supported. 
GOLDBERG