09BEIJING253
MEDIA REACTION: U.S. POLICY, FINANCIAL CRISIS, NORTH KOREA
Tue Feb 03 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO1498
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0253 0340920
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 030920Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2057
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS BEIJING 000253 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S. POLICY, FINANCIAL CRISIS, NORTH KOREA 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. U.S. POLICY 
 
"What does the 'Buy American, hire American' Bill mean?" 
 
A Shanghai-based news company under Shanghai Media Group, China 
Business News (Diyi Caijing Ribao)(02/03): "Recently the U.S. House 
of Representatives approved a bill called the 2009 American Economic 
Recovery and Reinvestment Bill in order to encourage American 
enterprise, use American made machines, and hire Americans. This 
Bill is likely to have a strong trade protectionism influence. The 
American Chamber of Commerce is strongly against this Bill stating 
that, 'this proposal will lead to revenge by the U.S.' global 
trading partners causing a drop in the global economic growth, and 
finally leading to the U.S. losing its leadership in the global 
markets.' The Chairman of China's Climate Change Organization 
stated, 'I am anticipating the congress's vote concerning this 
reinvestment plan.' The challenge for Obama in approving the plan 
lies in the Senate where the Democrats are in the minority. Obama 
has been seeking support for the bill from Republicans." 
 
¶2. FINANCIAL CRISIS 
 
a. "Global economy's recovery still depends on the U.S." 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(02/03): "Since the beginning of the financial 
crisis, the question of what will become the major motives that pull 
the World away from the financial crisis has been the focus of many 
discussions.  China's general economic development and market system 
construction have had obvious flaws. China may step out of the 
crisis as the first country, but it is unable to lead the World's 
economic trends and surpass the American economy. Analysts have 
concluded that the sub-prime crisis is a necessary result of the 
natural fluctuations of an economic cycle. As long as the economy is 
able to restore it, the economic crisis will be overcome and the 
globe will become prosperous. This is where the American economic 
advantage lies. The American economy has a strong self-adjustment 
and self-recovery ability. China's economy is, comparatively, 
greatly ineffective in self-recovery. Although China has a large 
potential in its consumption market, quite a few reforms are needed 
to actually trigger the consumption needed. When the domestic need 
market is hard to trigger, and the foreign need market; American 
consumption, is recovering, only then will China's economic 
development have positive effects. Thus, global economic recovery 
still depends on the U.S. economy." 
 
b. "The speed of China's self-saving makes the U.S. and Europe look 
less glorious" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(02/03): "February second was the first day 
that China's stock market opened in 'the black'. Although some 
people still doubt China's 8% growth rate, more and more people 
admire and respect it. The Chinese economy has begun to rebound. 
This shows that the Chinese have many reasons to be happy and 
confident. China has impressed the World with a series of globally 
beneficial policies. This shows that China has defeated the U.S. in 
who will self-save, or recover the fastest. Chinese experts believe 
that China's economic influence in the World is that of a big 
country; although the storage is small, the growth trend is good. 
During the Spring Festival, China's economy has shown a trace of 
improvement in the fields of credit release index and consumption. 
They are closely related with the Chinese government's specific 
market rescue measures." 
 
¶3. NORTH KOREA 
 
"Will North and South Korea to have a war?" 
 
The China Radio International sponsored newspaper World News Journal 
(Shijie Xinwenbao)(02/03): "The situation on the Korean peninsula 
has suddenly become tense. Because of North Korea's recent position, 
South Korean experts worry that the Korean peninsula may become a 
battle field between the two countries. The North urges the South to 
surrender and adjust its policies. North Korea is trying to kill 
several birds with one stone. If South Korea refuses to give in, 
North Korea has made the propaganda effect. If South Korea does give 
in, North Korea has increased its reputation in the country and 
suppresses South Korea's arrogance. North Korea's stance worries its 
neighboring countries. Any incidents that might start a war will 
create a disastrous situation on the peninsula. It has made the 
North Korean issue more urgent. The U.S. Department of State has 
expressed that this issue has been at the 'top of the agenda'." 
 
PICCUTA