09BEIJING1626
JUNE 16 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: USS JOHN MCCAIN, KIM JONG-IL
Tue Jun 16 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO0327
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHTRO RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1626/01 1670958
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 160958Z JUN 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4571
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001626 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV AF CH GJ JA KN KS SENV
 
SUBJECT: JUNE 16 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: USS JOHN MCCAIN, KIM JONG-IL 
SONS, UNSCR 1874 
 
¶1. Key points at the June 16 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- China had "taken note" of media reports regarding a June 11th 
collision between a Chinese submarine and a sonar array trailed by 
the destroyer USS John McCain. 
 
-- The spokesperson said China was "not aware of the relevant 
situation" when asked about reports indicating that Kim Jong-il's 
son Kim Jong-un had recently visited Beijing. 
 
-- UN Security Council Resolution 1874 "had explicit provisions" 
and, China, "like other parties would earnestly implement the 
resolution." 
 
-- China "firmly opposed the accusations" made by a U.S. Department 
of State spokesperson regarding China's efforts to protect the 
rights of laborers. 
 
Chinese Submarine Collision with Sonar Array 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. China had "taken note" of media reports regarding a June 11th 
collision between a Chinese submarine and a sonar array trailed by 
the destroyer USS John McCain, said spokesperson Qin Gang at the 
June 16 regular MFA press briefing.  Qin said that the submarine 
"accidentally collided" with the sonar array the while conducting 
"normal exercises."  He added the MFA had not received a report 
detailing the situation. 
 
Activities of Kim Jong-il Sons in China 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. Asked repeatedly to confirm reports indicating that Kim Jong-il's 
son Kim Jong-un had recently visited Beijing and met with Hu Jintao 
and other leaders, Qin consistently responded, "We are not aware of 
the relevant situation."  The same answer was given to follow-up 
questions asking whether Kim Jong-il's eldest son Kim Jong-nan had 
suffered an attempted assassination attempt in China. 
 
UNSCR 1874 and Six-Party Talks 
------------------------------- 
 
¶4. UN Security Council Resolution 1874 "had explicit provisions" 
and, China, "like other parties would earnestly implement the 
resolution," said the spokesperson when asked whether China was 
willing to search North Korean ships.  China also hoped that 
relevant parties would remain calm and restrained, use dialogue and 
refrain from actions that could cause the situation on the Korean 
Peninsula to deteriorate.  Asked why China had not called for a 
resumption of the Six-Party Talks recently, the spokesperson 
responded that the issue "can only be solved through dialogue and 
political means."  China was ready to work with all parties to 
promote a peaceful resolution, said Qin. 
 
Chinese Labor Practices 
----------------------- 
 
¶5. China "firmly opposed the accusations" made by a U.S. Department 
of State spokesperson regarding China's efforts to protect the 
rights of laborers. "China attached great importance to protecting 
the rights of laborers," said Qin.  Qin listed minimum wage, child 
labor and discrimination regulations that had been put in place to 
protect laborers.  Following the start of the financial crisis, 
China took measures to stimulate the economy and increase 
consumption which would ultimately help workers.  China was still a 
developing country and might "lag behind" some developed countries 
on labor rights, admitted Qin.  However "plausible and reasonable" 
the State Department spokesperson's comments might seem, said Qin, 
it was important to remember where the financial crisis started. 
Qin asked rhetorically what the State Department spokesperson would 
say to the many innocent workers and countries who were victims of 
the financial crisis.  "If you make a mistake, you should stop 
pointing fingers at others," said Qin. 
 
April Decline in China purchase of U.S. Treasury Bills 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶6. Asked to explain why China's purchase of U.S. Treasury Bills 
decreased in April and whether this reflected declined confidence in 
the U.S. Dollar, Qin replied that China's foreign reserve was 
operated according to the principles of "security, liquidity, and 
good value, in accordance to need."  The timing and quantity of 
T-Bill purchases were based on those principles, and specific 
questions should be referred to "relevant authorities." 
 
Iran Election and unrest 
------------------------- 
 
 
BEIJING 00001626  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶7. Asked about the recent election and unrest in Iran, Qin responded 
that China hoped the "solidarity and stability" of the country could 
be maintained. 
 
EU acceptance of Chinese terrorist suspects 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. In response to a question about EU countries accepting Chinese 
citizen Guantanamo Bay detainees, Qin stated that China "firmly 
opposed" transferring Chinese "terrorist suspects" to any third 
country. 
 
Additional Indian Military Planes on Border 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. Qin was "unaware" of reports that India had deployed military 
planes to regions bordering China.  Developing a "comprehensive 
strategic partnership"" and promoting "good neighborliness" with 
India was the "mutual consensus" reached by the two governments and 
was the "aspiration of the two peoples."  China's position on border 
related issues was "consistent and clear."  Qin expressed hope that 
the two sides could work together to implement their "consensus" and 
safeguard peace and tranquility to create proper conditions for a 
"proper and reasonable settlement" of their border issues and 
development of bilateral relations. 
 
Visits 
------ 
 
¶10. Turkish President Abdullah Gul planned to visit China from June 
24-29.  China's envoy to the Middle East Wu Sike would visit Egypt, 
Palestine, Israel, Jordan, Syria, Lebanon and Russia from June 20 to 
July 4. Asked whether the North Korean Defense Minister visited 
China recently, Qin said that China and North Korea continued to 
have people to people exchanges and referred reporters to the 
Chinese Ministry of Defense. 
 
 
PICCUTA