09BEIJING1417
MEDIA REACTION: NORTH KOREA, HUMAN RIGHTS ISSUE, A/H1N1
Wed May 27 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO3637
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1417/01 1470922
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 270922Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4169
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001417 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH PREL ECON
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: NORTH KOREA, HUMAN RIGHTS ISSUE, A/H1N1 
VIRUS 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. NORTH KOREA 
 
a. "North Korea launches two missiles to fight against the Security 
Council" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(05/27): "The U.N Security Council has 
expressed its severe opposition and criticism about North Korea's 
nuclear test.  However, North Korea responded with two short-range 
missiles. The situation in the Korean Peninsula has quickly 
intensified.  Western media are treating North Korea's nuclear test 
as a provocation.  However, the military strike and economic 
sanctions will not have a satisfactory result.  North Korea is 
economically isolated from the West.  Chinese experts indicate that 
it is not in China's interest to let the Peninsula fall into 
violence.  However, it is impractical to expect China to solve the 
North Korean conflict on its own.  Shortly after North Korea's 
nuclear test, the visiting U.S. Speaker of the House, Pelosi who was 
in Shanghai at that time, called for China to bring Pyongyang back 
into the negotiation.  There were similar calls from western media 
outlets too.  China is facing increasing pressure.   Western 
opinions suggest that the lack of western resolution concerning this 
issue is due to North Korea's small dependence on the world economy. 
 In fact, North Korea has not gained the west's, especially the 
U.S.', acceptance and attention.  After Obama took office, the U.S. 
has not taken any necessary actions. The only action they have taken 
can be described as 'kind ignorance.'  By asking China to solve the 
issue, Western countries have misled the issue." 
 
b. "North Korea's nuclear test shows the complicated situation 
surrounding China" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(05/27): "Due to historical and geopolitical 
relationships, relations between China and its neighbors are very 
complicated.  The North Korean nuclear test is only one among all 
these very thorny issues. China's strength largely depends on the 
stability in the neighborhood.  China's stability mostly depends 
upon the resolution of some sensitive issues.  How to adopt an 
appropriate stance concerning relations with neighboring countries 
and how to resolve the coming issues is an urgent challenge for 
China's peaceful development.  China has advocated peaceful 
development, but it doesn't mean that China will always avoid 
conflicts in order to maintain peace.  Better resolving these issues 
challenge China's political wisdom concerning China, and concerning 
the further understanding of China's peaceful development. It is a 
challenge for Asia and the whole world." 
 
¶2. HUMAN RIGHTS ISSUE 
 
"The U.S. and Europe exaggerate the refugee situation in South 
Asia" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(05/27): "China and India recently supported 
Sri Lanka during the U.N. Human Rights council meeting.  This move 
reflects the divergences between Asia and Europe concerning the Sri 
Lankan issue.  Recently the human rights conflict has escalated 
because of the U.S. and other European countries. Since Sri Lanka, 
Pakistan and Burma are located so closely to China, the West's 
criticism of these countries' human rights issues will likely 
include China.  The west has asked China to pressure these Asian 
countries. The human rights conflict between China and the U.S. has 
left China's borders and has become more complicated.  Chinese 
experts indicate that the refugee issue surfaced; however, it is not 
the core of the South Asian issues, but a side effect in the process 
of removing insecurities in South Asia.  The west should pay 
attention to the major issues.  European countries' criticisms on 
Asian countries' human rights issues have always existed.  However, 
Asian countries have special reasons and backgrounds for their human 
rights conditions.  On these issues, China advocates conciliation 
and negotiation instead of interfering in internal affairs." 
 
¶3. A/H1N1 VIRUS 
 
"The fight between flu prevention methods and global capital" 
 
The China Radio International sponsored newspaper World News Journal 
(Shijie Xinwenbao)(05/27): "Concerning H1N1 virus prevention, China 
has been very successful. Given China's concentrated population and 
frequent human exchanges with the U.S. and Canada, China's strict 
prevention measures have been effective.  China deserves the 
compliments of the world.  However, instead, some western media has 
criticized China's over-reaction.  People's support is money and 
 
BEIJING 00001417  002 OF 002 
 
 
resources.  Japan also refused to allow the WHO to list Japan at the 
same level of disease-hit area as the U.S. Japan fears that it will 
influence Japan's exports and the inflow of capital.  It is noted 
that the American media seldom discusses its own flu situation.  The 
countries that are happy to see capital flowing into China will be 
put out if China is not effective in preventing the virus. 
Therefore, the A/H1N1 prevention efforts, this time, are not just a 
public health issue. In a broader sense, they are more like a fight 
for global economic resources and flowing capital.  Public opinion 
has just been used as a tool pushing for that goal.  Thus, the 
theory that 'China used excessively strict prevention measures'is in 
fact a plot against China." 
 
PICCUTA