09BEIJING1967
MEDIA REACTION: XINJIANG RIOT, U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS,
Mon Jul 13 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO5462
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1967/01 1940927
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 130927Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5141
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001967 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH PREL ECON
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: XINJIANG RIOT, U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS, 
AUSTRALIAN SPY 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. XINJIANG RIOT 
 
a. "Any country with the rule of law will not bear these violent 
crimes" 
 
The official popular newspaper Beijing Youth Daily (Beijing 
Qingnianbao)(07/13): "The Central Committee of the CPC and the 
Xinjiang local government took instant action when the Urumqi '7.5' 
incident occurred. They effectively maintained the stability of the 
situation.  All ethnic groups have supported the Chinese 
government's actions and the international society recognized the 
actions of the government.  These facts show that any country with 
rule of law will not bear the violent crimes of looting, attacking, 
crushing and burning.  Looking at the world's experience, it is a 
normal and necessary practice that the government will take 
immediate action when such violence happens.  No country or 
government will sit and ignore the crime when social order or the 
public's life and property are threatened.  China is a socialist 
country concerning their rule of law.  Everyone is equal in front of 
the law.  Anyone who committed the crime of looting, attacking, 
crushing and/ or burning will be severely punished." 
 
b. "National unity is the lifeline for Xinjiang's development" 
 
The official intellectual publication Guangming Daily (Guangming 
Ribao)(07/13): "China should strengthen ethnic unity and resolutely 
combat the ethnic separatists, religious extremists and terrorists. 
National unity is the basis of Xinjiang's stability and prosperity. 
A stable, harmonious Xinjiang is the whole nation's wish and it will 
affect the nation's core interests.  Han people cannot live without 
ethnic minorities and vice versa.  We should strive for a bright 
future for Xinjiang under the strong leadership of President Hu 
Jintao and the CCP.  The 7.5 incident is not an ethnic 
contradiction, but a serious and violent crime premeditated by 
overseas separatists with ulterior goals.  It is the common wish of 
Xinjiang, all ethnic groups and the Chinese nation that the country 
works for social stability, ethnic harmony and unification." 
 
¶2. U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS 
 
"'Global solution' should first address the U.S.'s problems" 
 
The official Xinhua News Agency international news publication 
International Herald Leader (Guoji Xianqu Daobao)(07/13): "Today 
almost every issue, at different levels, is global.  Thus Western 
scholars have brought up the concept of a 'global solution.'  No 
country, including the U.S., can singly solve the big issues facing 
the world.   At present, China has been invited by the west to 
participate in their global solution system, originally exclusive, 
like the G8.  It shows that China has stepped onto the world's 
economic and political stage.  However, larger pressures are 
continuously on China's shoulders, as it takes an increasingly large 
role in the global solution.  The financial crisis shows that the 
more globalized we become; the more global solutions are needed. 
However, U.S. 'unilateralism' always resists global solutions, 
because they see their interests above international rules and 
traditions.  China and other countries should pressure the U.S. so 
that, in case 'financial innovation' and 'financial liberation' 
excessively overflow the globe, the U.S. can supervise the world. 
One of China's tasks should be, jointly with the international 
community, to contain and balance the negative and selfish measures 
of the U.S. by participating in this global solution.  Thus China 
should uphold the flag of international cooperation. It should 
participate and make contributions to the new global order as an 
international partner.  The focus of China's participation in the 
global solution lies not in the international field, but in the 
domestic field.  China should make an entire plan for both fields." 
 
¶3. AUSTRALIAN SPY 
 
"China confidently caught Australian spies" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(07/13): "Zhou Shijian, former vice-chairman 
of China National Chemicals Import and Export Chamber of Commerce 
leader said, Western countries collect intelligence publicly and 
arrest spies confidently while, when China catches a real spy, the 
West immediately reacts.  China should not give in to external 
pressure.  As long as he/she is a confirmed spy, no matter what 
her/his nationality is, we should arrest her/him.  Insiders indicate 
that based on the National Confidential Law, the core situation 
concerning China's iron ore negotiation is related to the country's 
interests and security which belong to the country's secrets. 
Western counties have double standards on this spying issue. 
 
BEIJING 00001967  002 OF 002 
 
 
Western countries always catch their suspects based on alleged 
accusation.  The numbers of foreign spy cases that China has 
revealed are a 10th of the number that has been revealed by western 
media.  Any country will have a firm stance when protecting its 
security and interests.  China should act based on China's law, 
ignoring the world's doubts." 
 
GOLDBERG