09BEIJING3222
MEDIA REACTION: CLIMATE SUMMIT, CHINA MODEL
Wed Dec 02 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO5024
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3222 3360934
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 020934Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7024
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS BEIJING 003222 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON KMDR OPRC CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CLIMATE SUMMIT, CHINA MODEL 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. CLIMATE SUMMIT 
 
a. "U.S. emissions reduction sincerity is doubtful" 
 
Guangdong 21st Century Publishing Company Ltd.'s business newspaper 
21st Century Business Herald (21Shiji Jingji Baodao)(12/02)(pg 2): 
"China, who insists on continuing common but differentiated 
responsibilities for the Copenhagen conference, is unwilling to 
sacrifice  its goal of 'development being the primary task' for the 
total emissions reduction and therefore adopting 'carbon density 
tactic.'  At present, China's carbon emissions are about 6.5 billion 
tons in total, the country's per capita carbon emissions are up to 
4.5 tons.  The subtleness of carbon density lies in the calculation 
method which consists of the GDP, carbon emissions and exchange 
rates.  Because the carbon density will finally be calculated in 
dollars, China could achieve their standard based on the appreciated 
RMB exchange rate. Otherwise, it is a very difficult task to rely on 
technological advances to reduce per unit carbon emissions by 45% 
for China.  In contrast, the United States' total emissions 
reduction target is outrageous and the U.S. per capita carbon 
emissions are up to 19 tons, which is four times more than that of 
China, while their unit carbon emission is about 0.7 tons.  In other 
words, the key to the United States' emissions reduction lies in the 
per capita 'conspicuous consumption' of energy.  The Obama 
administration's target of 'reducing 4% emissions as compared to 
1990' is a goal with no sincerity, which is not only far lower than 
that of the Europe and Japan, its realization difficulties are far 
below China's." 
 
b. "China hoped the Copenhagen Conference would achieve 'fair and 
feasible' results" 
 
The official Communist Party People's Daily (Renmin Ribao)(12/02)(pg 
3): "Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesperson Qin Gang said 'China's 
fundamental stance on the issue is abiding by the UN framework 
convention on climate change and the Kyoto Protocol, insisting on 
the principle of 'common but differentiated responsibilities' and 
sticking to the Bali Roadmap.  All developing countries' concerns on 
climate change deserve great attention and the sincere consideration 
of the developed countries and the entire international society.  On 
the one hand, developed nations should honor their commitments to 
accomplishing or establishing the medium-term emissions reduction 
targets, and on the other hand provide developing nations with 
financing, technology transfer, and capability building support." 
 
¶2. CHINA MODEL 
 
"U.S.-China joint statement confirms 'China road'" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(12/02)(pg 14): "The U.S.-China joint 
statement has confirmed that, between the United States and China, 
there are two development models. The statement also recognized the 
legitimate and legal positions of these two models of social 
development.  This is a common view reached concerning different 
development directions for different social systems and different 
civilizations.  Therefore, the statement factually and politically 
is equal to announcing the end of 'Western civilization-oriented 
theory', which means that one can now create a broad vision for the 
development of mankind's social systems and civilizations.  Not 
following the West's political system and model represents China's 
Communist Party's courage, insight and insistence of over the issue 
of mankind's civilization model.  The fact that a 'China road' has 
been affirmed by the U.S.-China Joint Statement only 200 years after 
the 'historical termination theory ' was produced, gives the theory 
historical significance and realistic value.  Therefore it is the 
urgent task of Chinese intellectuals to extract and conclude any 
core values from the current China road." 
 
HUNTSMAN