09BEIJING3205
MEDIA REACTION: CLIMATE SUMMIT, CHINA MODEL
Tue Dec 01 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO3766
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3205 3350907
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 010907Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6993
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS BEIJING 003205 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON KMDR OPRC CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CLIMATE SUMMIT, CHINA MODEL 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. CLIMATE SUMMIT 
 
a. "From 'black cat' to 'green cat:' China's emission reduction 
roadmap" 
 
Guangdong 21st Century Publishing Company Ltd.'s business newspaper 
21st Century Business Herald (21Shiji Jingji Baodao)(12/01)(pg 21): 
"As 2012 nears and as the deadline for the Kyoto Protocol's first 
phase approaches, there are still many diverging global opinions 
concerning developed countries mid-term emissions reduction goals 
and the perspective funding for developing countries to help them 
reduce their emissions and adapt to climate change.  Though Obama 
has been more active on the issue than Bush, in light of the 
domestic political situation in the U.S., the future is not looking 
optimistic.  China, no matter if it is considering global interests 
or its own interests, should nevertheless take the green road for 
development.  China plays the most important role in global 
emissions reduction; their role surpasses the United States, the 
European Union, India and other developing countries.  If China 
succeeds in emissions reduction, the world succeeds.  If China 
fails, the world fails.  China cannot afford to fail.  As far as the 
'cat theory' is concerned, the theory brought forward by Chinese 
leader Deng Xiaoping and leading up to the opening up and reform 
policy, China should surpass this phase and step up their 
transformation from merely 'accelerating development' to 'scientific 
development.'  With the backdrop of global climate change China 
needs to transform from the biggest 'black cat' in the world to a 
'green cat.'  Two countries' attitudes on the coming Copenhagen 
conference will be critical: whether or not the U.S. will publicly 
promise to reduce its emissions; and China's roadmap and attitude 
concerning their support for global emissions reduction.  On 
November 25, Premier Wen Jiabao announced China's 2020 action and 
emission control goals, which will greatly help the Copenhagen 
conference to be successful.  China, as a responsible big socialist 
country, should work together with the world to realize the vision 
of 'One World, One (green) Dream,' and "'One World, One (reduction) 
Action.' 
 
b. "China- European cooperation will develop more smoothly with this 
new arrangement" 
 
The China Radio International sponsored newspaper World News Journal 
(Shijie Xinwenbao)(12/01)(pg 2): "At present, the EU has not relaxed 
its stance on issues like China's market economy status or 
restrictions on China's technological exports, therefore China can't 
provide the expected response on climate change issues or the RMB 
exchange rate issues that the EU is concerned about.  However, as 
long as the EU-China summit exits, it means that there is a common 
view, that developing the bilateral relationship can facilitate both 
sides' interests.  During U.S. President Obama's visit to China, 
Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao reiterated that China disagrees with the 
suggestion that there should be a 'G2'.  This reiteration should be 
helpful when eliminating Europe's concerns that China could develop 
its relationship with the United States at the expense of its 
relationship with Europe.  China and Europe share extensive common 
interests and therefore European politicians should adopt policies 
that promote win-win situations between the two global entities." 
 
¶2. CHINA MODEL 
 
"It's not the time to discuss the China model" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(12/01)(pg 14): "It is still too early to talk 
about China's contribution to the world's theory about development. 
To sum up China's theory and concepts concerning its opening up and 
reform, the 'case of China' should be a more appropriate phrase to 
use.  It is not yet the time to talk about the China model, which is 
still an ongoing process which has not yet been accomplished, nor 
has it been completely successful.  At present, China's contribution 
to the world's theory about development has only been limited to the 
creation of official concepts.  In fact, Chinese scholars should 
reflect on why China has contributed so little to the world's 
thoughts and contemplate how China could contribute more?" 
 
HUNTSMAN