09BEIJING607
FOREIGN MINISTER YANG JIECHI HOLDS NPC PRESS CONFERENCE
Mon Mar 09 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
O 091232Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2774
INFO CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
NSC WASHDC
DARFUR COLLECTIVEUNCLAS BEIJING 000607 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON ETRD EFIN PHUM ENRG CH TW XA RS KN KS
JA, FR, XC, XD 
 
SUBJECT: FOREIGN MINISTER YANG JIECHI HOLDS NPC PRESS CONFERENCE 
MARCH 7 
 
REFS: A. Beijing 531 
¶B. Beijing 559 
¶C. Beijing 580 
¶D. Beijing 589 
 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi outlined China's foreign policy 
priorities in a March 7 press conference held on the margins of the 
ongoing National People's Congress (NPC).  U.S.-China relations are 
"off to a good start" under the new Obama administration, Yang said, 
noting there currently is an "even greater range of common 
interests" between the two sides.  In addition to stressing the 
importance of working with other countries to overcome the global 
financial crisis, Yang emphasized the need for China's diplomacy to 
support its economic development and protect the interests of 
Chinese citizens and businesses overseas.  Regarding Tibet, Yang 
reacted defensively to a question about Beijing's cancellation of 
the China-Europe summit following French President Sarkozy's meeting 
with the Dalai Lama, who Yang characterized as a "political exile" 
seeking one-quarter of China's territory.  "No country in the world 
should allow 'the Dalai' to pay visits or use its territory to 
engage in separatist activities," Yang warned.  In yet another sign 
of improving cross-Strait relations, the Taiwan issue did not come 
up during the press conference.  Other issues discussed included the 
Six-Party Talks and North Korea's impending launch, climate change, 
Hong Kong and relations with Russia, France, Japan, South Korea, the 
rest of Asia and Africa.  End Summary. 
 
U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS OFF TO A GOOD START 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. At the annual Foreign Minister's Press Conference held on the 
margins of the ongoing National People's Congress, Foreign Minister 
Yang Jiechi on March 7 engaged in a wide-ranging and nearly two-hour 
long discussion with foreign and domestic media in Beijing's Great 
Hall of the People.  Ties between China and the new Obama 
administration have "gotten off to a good start," Yang said, noting 
that under the current circumstances, there is an "even greater 
range of common interests" between China and the United States. 
China hopes both sides will pay attention to each other's "core 
interests" and further strengthen exchanges, coordination and 
cooperation.  Yang expressed optimism that U.S.-China ties will 
continue to develop along a sound and stable track. 
 
¶3. Noting his impending visit to Washington, FM Yang said the 
purpose of his trip is to make necessary preparations for the 
meeting between President Hu and President Obama in London and to 
work with the U.S. side to make concrete plans for U.S.-China 
relations this year.  Asked about opposition in China to the 
purchase of U.S. debt instruments, Yang said China uses its foreign 
exchange assets in accordance with the principles of security, 
liquidity and appreciation and will continue to do so. 
 
FINANCIAL CRISIS 
---------------- 
 
¶4. In response to a question whether the United States was to 
"blame" for the global financial crisis, Yang responded that "people 
have their own fair judgment regarding the causes" and that "lessons 
should be learned."  The "most urgent task" however, is to prepare 
well for the upcoming G-20 summit in London to strengthen 
coordination between different countries' macroeconomic policies, to 
stabilize financial markets and reform financial systems.  China is 
willing to work with the United States and other countries in the 
world to face the financial crisis.  China's biggest contribution to 
dealing with the financial crisis is the maintenance of "steady and 
rapid economic development."  Yang also noted that China remains 
committed to assisting developing countries and to concluding 
foreign business deals and is an active participant in the G-20 
process. 
 
DALAI LAMA A "POLITICAL EXILE" 
------------------------------ 
 
¶5. Yang responded defensively to a reporter's question on why China 
cancelled the December EU-China summit over French President 
Sarkozy's meeting with the Dalai Lama, and whether future 
cooperation would be affected if EU leaders "have tea" with 
religious leaders.  It was not China's fault that the summit "had to 
be postponed," Yang asserted.  Yang alleged that the Dalai Lama 
plans to build a "Greater Tibet" on one-quarter of Chinese 
territory, "get rid of" the Chinese military and "drive out other 
ethnic groups."  How can such a person be a "religious figure," Yang 
asked rhetorically.  The Dalai Lama is "by no means simply a 
religious figure" Yang declared, but rather is simply a "political 
exile."  China's "contradiction" with the Dalai Lama is not over 
religion, human rights, ethnicity or culture but over the 
preservation of China's unity and whether Tibet should be separated 
from China's territory, Yang claimed. 
 
¶6. The Foreign Minister warned that no country in the world should 
allow "the Dalai" to pay visits or use its territory to engage in 
"separatist activities."  Yang claimed that countries should refrain 
from doing so not as a "special favor" to China, but rather in 
keeping with the "norms of international relations."  China hopes 
other countries will respect these norms, international law, China's 
Constitution and PRC law regarding the autonomy of ethnic regions. 
Plans were moving forward for a China-EU summit in Prague in the 
next few months, Yang said, noting that Premier Wen Jiabao was 
involved with setting up that summit meeting. 
 
DIPLOMACY:  AS EASY AS 1-2-3-4 
------------------------------ 
 
¶7. Yang gave a lengthy discourse on China's diplomatic work plan for 
¶2009.  First, the overall objective of China's diplomacy is to serve 
the goal of ensuring steady and rapid economic development in China. 
 Second, the two main priorities for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
are to "vigorously" deal with the financial crisis and help prepare 
Chinese leaders for participation in important multilateral 
conferences.  These would include the G-20, the "G-8-plus-5" in 
Italy in July, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization summit and the 
November APEC leaders' meeting.  Third, China must make advances on 
three fronts:  security diplomacy, cultural diplomacy and 
strengthening consular protection for Chinese citizens overseas. 
Fourth, China's diplomacy will work on four areas:  relations with 
major countries, relations with neighboring countries, enhancing 
solidarity and cooperation with developing nations and playing an 
"even more active" role in settling global and regional "hot-spot 
issues." 
 
CHINA'S GROWING STATUS 
---------------------- 
 
¶8. Echoing Premier Wen Jiabao's March 5 Government Work Report, (ref 
C) Yang remarked that China's international standing, role and 
influence have "visibly upgraded" over the past year.  China has 
made "important contributions to world and regional peace, stability 
and development."  Partly as a result of hosting the Olympics and 
Paralympics and the Asia-Europe Meeting Summit, over 180 foreign 
heads of state, heads of government and other political leaders came 
to China in 2008, which was "unprecedented."  Asked whether the 
global financial crisis was shifting the global balance of power in 
China's favor, Yang replied that the "rational and legitimate 
demands of the people" had won the upper hand and therefore 
governments should put the people's interests first to achieve 
"justice and equality for the world." 
 
SIX-PARTY TALKS, NORTH KOREA'S IMPENDING LAUNCH 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶9. Important progress has been made in the Six-Party Talks, and that 
progress should be "cherished," FM Yang said.  Acknowledging the 
existence of "some difficulties," Yang said such problems are 
"normal" when dealing with "such a complicated issue."  It is 
important for all parties to act in accordance with the September 
2005 agreement, to complete the second-phase actions and enable the 
talks to enter the third phase.  As the host of the Six-Party talks, 
China will continue to make its own "unique" efforts to mover the 
talks forward.  China has taken note of the DPRK's announcement that 
it will launch an "experimental communications satellite," as well 
as the reactions by various countries.  Yang expressed concern over 
this situation, commenting that maintaining peace and stability on 
the Korean Peninsula is in line with various parties' interests and 
stating his hope that "relevant parties" would act toward that 
goal. 
 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
-------------- 
 
¶10. The Copenhagen Conference on climate change conference in 
December 2009 will be "very important," FM Yang said in response to 
a question about the growing role of climate change issues in 
foreign relations.  China hopes relevant countries will work 
together to pursue the "Bali Roadmap" and achieve the goals set 
forth in Copenhagen.  China supports the principle of "common but 
differentiated responsibilities," and both developed and developing 
countries must each make their own efforts and work together to 
achieve success at the conference.  China will adopt measures 
according to its national plan on tackling climate change, fulfill 
its promises and make contributions toward the success of the 
Copenhagen conference, Yang stated. 
 
RELATIONS WITH OTHER COUNTRIES 
------------------------------ 
 
¶11. Reporters asked about China's relations with Russia, France, 
Japan, South Korea, Southeast Asia and Africa: 
 
--Russia:  FM Yang stressed the progress in relations in the 13 
years since Russia and China established a "strategic partnership." 
Yang highlighted the need to deepen energy cooperation, noting that 
the recent agreement to ensure a "long-term oil supply" through a 
pipeline deal was a "win-win result." 
 
--France:  China has always attached great importance to Sino-French 
relations and does not bear responsibility for the current problems. 
 Yang expressed confidence in the long-term development of the 
relationship but expressed hope that the French side will 
"positively and actively respond to the major concerns of the 
Chinese side." 
 
--Japan:  The "poisoned dumpling" incident was a criminal case, Yang 
said, noting that there has not yet been a break in the case, for 
which he asked for "understanding" from the Japanese side.  The 
Tianwaitian gas and oil field was outside the scope of the East 
China Sea understanding between the two sides, Yang asserted.  Yang 
praised Japan's hosting of a trilateral meeting together with China 
and South Korea, noting that the three countries should strengthen 
exchanges and cooperation in the face of the global financial 
crisis. 
 
--South Korea:  There had been "initial discussions" between China 
and South Korea on the establishment of a free trade zone, Yang 
said, asserting that it was a "good idea" to start talks "at an 
early date" on establishing a free trade zone.   Yang said China, 
Japan, and the ROK should become "role models" for "opposing 
investment and trade protectionism." 
 
-- Other Asian Countries:  For the Asian economy to be the first to 
escape from the "shadow" of the global financial crisis, China and 
other Asian countries must "be creative and take pioneering steps," 
Yang said.  China will continue to promote "10 [ASEAN]-plus-1" and 
"10 [ASEAN]-plus-3" cooperation, making the Chiang Mai Initiative 
more multilateral, development of the Greater Mekong Subregion and 
greater cooperation with member states of the South Asian 
Association for Regional Cooperation. 
 
-- Africa:  China does not look down on poor countries, nor is it 
only interested in oil, Yang stated.  "Some countries" do not want 
Africa to develop its resources, Yang said, preferring instead for 
Africa to "wait" to reach its full potential.  Cooperation between 
China and Africa is mutually beneficial and win-win.  On Darfur, 
Yang said China's position is to "promote dialogue and peace talks." 
 Beijing hopes to see "continual progress" in both peacekeeping 
operations and the political talks process in Darfur. 
 
HONG KONG, BUT NO MENTION OF TAIWAN 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶12. Asked by a Hong Kong reporter about the MFA's support for Hong 
Kong's international activities, Yang said the Ministry "goes all 
out" to create external conditions for prosperity and stability in 
Hong Kong. China invited representatives from Hong Kong to 
participate in the Washington G-20 summit and the upcoming London 
financial summit.  The MFA also encourages international 
organizations to consider Hong Kong and Macau as venues for 
international meetings.  Hong Kong and Macau officials and 
compatriots also go overseas to participate in multilateral and 
international activities and meetings.  The MFA has handled 600 Hong 
Kong-related consular protection cases involving over 2,000 people, 
Yang added. 
 
¶13. Reflecting the dramatic reduction of tensions between the 
Mainland and Taiwan over the past year, Yang did not receive a 
single Taiwan-related question, nor did he work Taiwan into any of 
his answers to questions posed by reporters. 
 
PICCUTA