09BEIJING995
MEDIA REACTION: CHINA POLICY, DPRK
Wed Apr 15 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO0177
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0995 1050906
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 150906Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3451
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS BEIJING 000995 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH PREL ECON
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CHINA POLICY, DPRK 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. CHINA POLICY 
 
"China's [effort] to improve their human rights is not a show for 
the west" The official Communist Party international news 
publication Global Times (Huanqiu Shibao) (04/15):   "Human rights 
related issues always touch a sensitive nerve in communications 
between China and western countries. The newly released human rights 
action plan brings both praise and criticism.  As one of the 
important measures to speak on global influences, western countries 
like to judge China's human rights. But Chinese people will no 
longer be angry with this criticism, because they are becoming more 
confident and are seeing clarity on the issues related to human 
rights. China is confident that the aim of improving these rights is 
for the interest of the Chinese people and not to simply show-off to 
the west. It is common sense that there is a need to improve China's 
human rights because China is developing and there are the needs of 
the Chinese people. 
 
It is undeniable that the west's criticism is used as a force for 
China's development. However, during the development process, China 
is finding out that it has its own situation and the Chinese people 
have their own concerns and interests, such as income, healthcare, 
housing, and employment. Only when we solve these problems, can 
China's human rights status improve. China has obviously improved in 
promoting their citizen's human rights throughout its development 
process.  In the future, their human rights will continue to be 
improved and developed. China needs more understanding and tolerance 
from the world, especially when it comes to viewing China's human 
rights issues from the perspective of Chinese history and social 
development. China will promote their people's human rights in their 
own way.  The determinations of the benefit to its people won't be 
changed because of external influences." 
 
¶2. DPRK 
 
"Care toward Nuke issue" The official English-language newspaper 
China Daily (04/15): "This is an excerpt of an article in the Global 
Times on the Korean Peninsula nuclear issue. The Korean Peninsula 
nuclear issue has recently become tense again, with the United 
Nations Security Council releasing an announcement on April 13 over 
the recent rocket launch by the DPRK. The stance taken by various 
parties are extremely different and the requests of each party are 
just too much in Chinese eyes. So China should find a way to break 
the deadlock. The most important concern is to clearly tell the 
U.S., Japan and the Republic of Korea (ROK) of China's own attitudes 
toward this issue. 
 
China should tell the parties that any attempts to overthrow the 
current regime of the DPRK should be abandoned for it has no power 
to threaten the safety of the U.S. and Japan. The two countries and 
the ROK (Republic of Korea) should show their sincerity in improving 
relations with the DPRK.  If the DPRK does not listen to the advice 
of neighboring countries and sticks to its provocative actions, it 
will pay a high price for its choice. The U.S., Japan, ROK and DPRK 
should all respect China's stance because it tries to protect and 
balance the interest of all parties. If the U.S., Japan and the ROK 
do not listen to the advice of China, they will suffer more than 
China; if they finally force the DPRK to become a nuclear country, 
China will not be the first country to be affected by it. 
 
On the other hand, the world will no longer tolerate the DPRK's dash 
down the nuclear path. China will be sad because it is implicated in 
this issue, but the saddest one will be the DPRK itself.  It will 
end up being the deserted orphan of the world. China has never been 
selfish on this issue and has never opposed any talks between the 
DPRK and other parties. China is willing to help the DPRK recover 
its economy, but China will not be its protector. A step beyond 
China's basic stance could be disastrous for the Korean Peninsula, 
and all parties should give the issue careful consideration." 
 
Weinstein