09BEIJING644
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS, U.S. DIPLOMACY,
Thu Mar 12 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO7313
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0644/01 0710934
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 120934Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2839
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000644 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS, U.S. DIPLOMACY, 
FINANCIAL CRISIS 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS 
 
a. "U.S. to offer more carrots, fewer sticks abroad" 
 
The official English-language newspaper China Daily (03/12): "Smart 
power replaces the lineal trade-off model of hard power, or the 
threat of actual use of bullets or other armed military force, with 
soft power, or the power of ideas, at the other end of the scale. 
Too much force has only created or encouraged more enemies. 
Throughout the cold war, the U.S. projected an image of vast 
technical competence....But in the past eight years, the U.S. 
projected a very different, or to be more exact, a bullying image. 
Now the domestic reality in the U.S. asks for wiser policies abroad. 
 It would simply be the smart thing to do. Smart power could start 
to make a difference.  But it will not solve all of the U.S.' 
problems if it shows no respect for other countries and recognizes 
their legitimate interests in their regions.  While the new 
administration has extended a hand, it remains to be seen if others 
will accept it." 
 
b. "U.S. military conducts intensive intelligence activities around 
China; The U.S.-China dispute in the South China Sea" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(03/12): "The U.S.-China dispute concerning 
the incident in the South China Sea is quickly expanding.  Since the 
1990s, U.S.-China frictions between the spying and anti-spying 
activities around China have not ceased.  This confrontation is 
considered the most serious incident since the airplane collision in 
¶2001.  Long term spying activities by the U.S. in China's waters and 
air space have greatly threatened China's national security. 
China's move expelling the American ship should be affirmed. 
Recently, since foreign media have been repeatedly reporting on 
China's construction of a harbor base for submarines or even 
aircraft carriers at Hainan, American surveillance ships took the 
risk of spying in the area.  Up to this point, only a small part of 
the U.S.'s spying activities near China's coastal area have been 
revealed.  The U.S. military has constructed an all-around spying 
network against China, maintaining intensive and continuous 
surveillance.  Chinese military experts indicate that it is very 
abnormal for the U.S. to always spy on China in China's neighboring 
area.  What if Chinese spy airplanes spy on the U.S. coastal area? 
China has been enduring this for a long time, considering the 
bilateral relations, which however has offered an excuse for the 
U.S. to upgrade its spying activities wantonly.  China is sending a 
clear signal to the U.S. that other countries' sovereignty should be 
respected.  Anti-spying fights will test the Chinese military's 
wisdom and ability in the future." 
 
¶2. U.S. DIPLOMACY 
 
"Hillary's [Secretary Clinton's] 'diplomatic show'" 
 
21 Century Business Herald (21Shiji Jingji Baodao) under Guangdong 
21 Century Publishing Company Ltd. (03/12): "U.S. Secretary of State 
Hillary [Clinton] has finally finished her trip around the globe and 
her so called 'smart power' is gradually taking shape.  However, it 
lacks a fresh feeling.  After Obama took office, there was a chance 
for the U.S. to repair its relationship with the Middle East and 
Europe. Hillary's [Clinton] trip was part of this plan.   Like a 
goodwill ambassador she had big smiles, said nice things and avoided 
controversial issues.  However, the success of the trip, this far, 
is only successful atmospherics.  She has gone too far in 'putting 
on the show.'  Obama and Hillary's [Clinton's] 'smart power' 
diplomacy have made people feel that it is like an election 
campaign.  As Kennedy once said, 'sincerity needs to be always 
verified.'  This 'diplomatic show' will not solve the foreign 
problems of the U.S." 
 
¶3. FINANCIAL CRISIS 
 
 
"To give up free trade is equal to giving up leadership" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(03/12): "The growth of the global economy is 
symbolized by Western oceanic hegemony. They control the world trade 
channels and are establishing and maintaining the international 
trade lines.  All of these [Western hegemonic] countries support 
free trade at sea.  Free trade and protectionism are mutually 
complimentary and reversible.  Free trade does not simply lead to a 
win-win result and protectionism doesn't mean a loss for both sides. 
 It is necessary that an international leader should insist on free 
trade and take on international responsibilities.  With a long-term 
 
BEIJING 00000644  002 OF 002 
 
 
large trade deficit, can a country's currency supply the world, set 
up currency hegemony, etc?  This time the economy of the U.S. and 
the world has gone wrong.  The U.S. attitude was the worst.  The 
U.S. does not lack resources, but what it needs is cultural and 
moral strength. It is the U.S. political system that has problems. 
U.S. Congressmen lack an international point of view and are only 
responsible for their citizens and interests groups.  In this way, 
the U.S. will lose its leadership role and the international 
economic order will be destroyed by the U.S.  Ironically China, 
described as narrow-minded nationalists by the West, upholds free 
trade this time.  China is willing to take on larger 
responsibilities.  Stabilizing the domestic economy and developing 
it is the most important task for China. China is proving to the 
world that China's rise has only brought peace and stability, not 
threat." 
 
PICCUTA