09BEIJING1992
JULY 14 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: XINJIANG UNREST, THREATS OF
Tue Jul 14 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO6829
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1992/01 1951245
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 141245Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5181
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 9742
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 0460
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 9365
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2178
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 001992 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MNUC CH AS RS TU
 
SUBJECT: JULY 14 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: XINJIANG UNREST, THREATS OF 
TERRORIST REPRISALS, RIO TINTO ESPIONAGE CASE 
 
¶1. Key points at the July 14 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- The spokesperson emphasized the fact that since "most of the 
dead" were Han and a "small number" were from ethnic minorities in 
the recent July 5 incident in Urumqi, there was "no such thing as 
ethnic genocide." 
 
-- When asked about threats by extremists, the spokesperson said 
that, China would "keep a close eye on developments" and make joint 
efforts through bilateral and multilateral channels to take all 
necessary measures to ensure the safety of overseas Chinese 
institutions and people. 
 
-- China took "prompt measures" to facilitate reporting by foreign 
journalists in Xinjiang.  Qin hoped the reporting activities of 
foreign journalists would abide by Chinese laws and local 
regulations, and not create "destabilizing elements" through 
reporting activities. 
-- Authorities took measures in accordance with law to detain the 
members of staff of Australian mining giant Rio Tinto, and because 
it was an investigation, some "related" people needed to be 
investigated.  The "majority" of foreign companies had positive 
comments and evaluations of China's investment environment, said 
Qin. 
 
Xinjiang Unrest: Accusations of Ethnic Genocide 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶2.  At the regularly scheduled July 14 MFA press briefing, MFA 
Spokesperson Qin Gang denied categorically that the incident was 
"ethnic .  In this incident "most of the dead" were Han and a "small 
number" from ethnic minorities, Qin noted.  The incident was a 
"highly violent crime" organized and orchestrated by three forces 
(i.e. terrorism, religious extremism and separatism) in and outside 
of China, said Qin.  By its nature, the violence was "not an ethnic 
issue, not a religious issue, and not an issue concerning human 
rights." Qin insisted that the purpose was to sabotage China's unity 
and ethnic solidarity.  Law breakers' beating, smashing, looting and 
arson sabotaged and hurt the lives, stability and social stability 
in Urumqi.  The Chinese government took "decisive measures" in 
accordance with law to safeguard the dignity of law and protect the 
rights and interests of Chinese people of all ethnic groups.  In the 
Chinese "big family," all ethnic groups were equal and enjoyed the 
rights and interests given by the law, said Qin.  People of all 
ethnic groups in Xinjiang including the Uighur people had "enjoyed a 
good life" there and their religious beliefs, customs, and cultural 
heritages "had been protected, respected, and inherited (sic)" 
there.  Citing statistics, Qin further emphasized that from 1949 to 
2009 the Uighur population in Xinjiang had grown from 3.29 million 
to nearly 10 million.  China hoped relevant countries could 
recognize the nature of the incident, respect the facts, understand 
and support the efforts made by the Chinese government to safeguard 
national unity and territorial integrity as well as maintain ethnic 
solidarity and sociability. 
 
Threats of Holy War and Terrorist Attacks against China 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶3.  China would "keep a close eye on developments" and make joint 
efforts through bilateral and multilateral channels to take all 
necessary measures to ensure the safety of overseas Chinese 
institutions and Chinese people.  Terrorist threats to security in 
non-traditional areas had been a "common challenge" to China and 
other countries and China's government had put "more emphasis" on 
the safety of the overseas Chinese institutions and people.  China 
reminded overseas Chinese to pay close attention to their 
surroundings and raise their awareness.  China had "made its 
position clear" on the incident, which was aimed to separate China 
and sabotage ethnic unity, said Qin.  Advocating conflict or 
confrontation between ethnic groups or religions was not good for 
the stability and peace of the world and "not appropriate."  China 
hoped Muslim countries and Muslims would "recognize the nature" of 
the July 5 incident.  If they had a "clear idea about the true 
nature" of the incident they would "all understand" China's policies 
concerning religious issues, and the measures China had taken. 
Relations with Muslim countries had "a very solid foundation," 
derived from mutual help and consideration of major concerns.  China 
hoped the relationship between China and Muslim countries could 
develop by joint efforts based on equality and mutual benefit and 
non-interference in China's internal affairs.  China's government 
was "firmly" against terrorism in all its manifestations and would 
like to "join hands" with other countries to enhance cooperation to 
jointly fight against terrorism. 
 
 
BEIJING 00001992  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
Treatment of Journalists in Urumqi 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  China took "prompt measures" to facilitate reporting by foreign 
journalists in Urumqi.  Their purpose was to help journalists 
produce "objective and accurate" reports unlike the "misleading 
reports" from the March 14 2008 incident in Lhasa, said Qin.  China 
hoped in the future such reports could be "avoided."  In response to 
a specific incident where journalists had been detained by local 
police, Qin maintained that some of the foreign journalists there 
had "disregarded advice" from Chinese authorities and caused drastic 
actions by the local people which harmed the safety of law 
enforcement.  Qin hoped the reporting activities of foreign 
journalists would abide by Chinese laws and local regulations, and 
not create "destabilizing elements" through reporting activities. 
 
Rabiya Kadeer 
------------- 
 
¶5.  Qin equated Kadeer and the Dalai Lama, as "the same," engaged in 
activities that "sabotaged national unity and ethnic solidarity." 
China "firmly opposed" any foreign countries or foreign forces 
indulging in or providing support to the three forces, including the 
East Turkistan forces, and "strongly urged" such support to cease. 
"Facts have proved" that in recent years these forces had engaged in 
activities to sabotage China's security, he added. 
 
 
Rio Tinto Espionage Case 
------------------------ 
 
¶6.  In response to reports that additional individuals were being 
investigated, Qin noted that authorities took measures in accordance 
with law to detain the members of staff of Australian mining giant 
Rio Tinto.  Because it was a criminal investigation, some "related" 
people needed to be investigated.  Qin was not aware of specifics in 
case, and reemphasized that it was an independent judicial matter 
handled according to law.  Staff members of Rio Tinto stole Chinese 
state sec rets and sabotaged the economic security and economic 
interests of China, he maintained.  The Chinese government protected 
the legitimate rights and interests of foreign corporations in 
China, but at the same time foreign corporations had obligations to 
respect and abide by the rules and regulations as well as laws in 
China.  Chinese government took measures in accordance with law, but 
this did not mean it would restrain the activities and cooperation 
of other corporations.  China had attracted many investments and was 
positioned on the top of developing countries on capital attraction 
for 17 years, and provided opportunities for operations from foreign 
countries.  Qin believed the "majority" of foreign companies had 
positive comments and evaluations of China's investment environment. 
 
 
 
DPRK: Sanctions, 60th Anniversary 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  Qin had "not heard the remarks" by Chinese Deputy Ambassador to 
the UN Liu Zhenmin, regarding new sanctions against the DPRK and 
wondered if such information was from a "credible source."  He 
reemphasized that the Chinese government "always firmly" implemented 
UN resolutions adding that the DPRK issue "would not be an 
exception."  In response to a question about the 60th Anniversary 
and year of friendship between China and the DPRK, Qin simply 
responded, "some commemorating activities will be held." 
 
India and Pakistan 
------------------ 
 
¶8.  China was "happy to see" India and Pakistan handle their 
disputes by dialogue and negotiation through their meeting on the 
sidelines of the Non-Aligned Movement Summit, said Qin.  This would 
improve their relationship and was also good for peace, stability, 
and common development of South Asia. 
 
Mental Health Reform 
-------------------- 
 
¶9.  Regarding reports that Chinese petitioners and troublemakers 
were being put in mental hospitals as a form of imprisonment, Qin 
responded that it was the "first time he had heard about this type 
of question," and he was "not aware of the specific situation." 
Nonetheless, he was certain that relevant authorities would deal 
with relevant cases, but if disputes between peoples, peoples and 
 
BEIJING 00001992  003 OF 003 
 
 
communities arose the government would try to ease conflict and 
dispute according to law. 
 
 
Visits and Meetings 
------------------- 
 
¶10.  The Fifteenth summit of the Non-Aligned Movement would be held 
from July 11-16 in Sharm El Sheikh, Egypt and Chinese VFM He Yafei 
would head the Chinese delegation to the meeting.  In response to a 
query about the July 27-28 Strategic and Economic Dialogue, Qin 
noted that China and the US would exchange views on China-US 
relations and strategic and longstanding issues to enhance mutual 
trust and mutual beneficial cooperation, to promote positive, 
comprehensive, constructive partnership.  Under the present 
circumstances, China believed that how to address the deepening and 
spreading of the financial crisis and promote utter recovery would 
become major topics of the SNED and the economic dialogue.  As for 
the strategic dialogue, China and the U.S. would exchange views on 
bilateral issues and regional issues of common interest, Qin noted. 
 
 
GOLDBERG