09BEIJING366
FEBRUARY 12 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: TIBET, ICC INDICTMENT,
Thu Feb 12 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO9909
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0366/01 0430951
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 120951Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2260
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0248
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 4496
RUEHSB/AMEMBASSY HARARE 0166
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 6822
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2099UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000366 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM CH SU ZI FR
 
SUBJECT: FEBRUARY 12 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: TIBET, ICC INDICTMENT, 
UNHRC, ART FROM THE BOXER REBELLION 
 
¶1. Key points at the February 12 MFA Press Briefing: 
 
-- Tibet is a matter of China's internal affairs and has been a part 
of China since the 13th century.  China continues to strive to 
improve its system of regional autonomy and to safeguard the 
interests of all ethnic groups. 
 
-- The Chinese Government hopes that the ICC indictment of Sudanese 
President Bashir will be a means of increasing stability in Sudan 
and Darfur.  All parties, including the Sudanese Government, have 
made positive efforts. 
 
-- The UN Human Rights Council's review of China's human rights 
record was undertaken in a positive manner, and only a few countries 
attempted to politicize the situation and "make groundless 
accusations." 
 
-- VISITS: Pakistan President Asif Zardari will visit China February 
20-23.  His visit will include Hubei Province and Shanghai. 
 
 
Dalai Lama and Tibet 
-------------------- 
 
¶2. Tibet, which has been a part of China since ancient times, is 
currently a matter of China's internal affairs, spokesperson Jiang 
Yu said during the regularly scheduled MFA press conference February 
¶12.  In response to multiple questions on Tibet, Jiang said that 
China has had effective jurisdiction over Tibet since the Yuan 
dynasty in the 13th century, and Tibet has therefore never been an 
independent state.  She noted this year marks the 50th anniversary 
since the implementation of democratic reforms in Tibet and said 
that there have been vast improvements in the social system 
including the abandonment of serfdom, a development similar to when 
America and the EU nations abandoned slavery.  Tibetans have full 
rights under the constitution, and the Tibetan people have observed 
and benefitted from the changes in Tibetan society and political and 
economic situations, she said.  Tibet has a harmonious society with 
a developing economy.  "I wonder why serf owners have suddenly 
become human rights activists," Jiang said.  She noted that the 
"Dalai issue" is neither religious nor ethnic, but rather is a 
matter of sovereignty and territorial integrity.  The Chinese 
Government will "never bend to foreign pressure," she said, adding 
that China will continue to improve the system of regional autonomy 
and to safeguard the interests of all ethnic groups. 
 
¶3. In response to repeated questions on the restrictions that 
foreign journalists face in travelling both to Tibet and to ethnic 
Tibetan areas, Jiang directed the questioners to local authorities. 
She added that the restrictions are in place to help safeguard 
social stability in Tibet.  In response to repeated questions 
regarding the Dalai Lama's statement that Tibet is "tense" and that 
another uprising may be "imminent," Jiang said that the situation in 
Tibet is stable, and that the incidents of March 14th have been 
dealt with in accordance with Chinese law.  China will continue to 
"support Tibetan areas" while taking measures to ensure stability. 
 
ICC and Bashir 
-------------- 
 
¶4. Asked about the International Criminal Court's indictment of 
Sudanese President Omar al Bashir, Jiang responded that while she 
has not read media reports on the indictment, she hopes that the 
actions taken will increase sabilty n Suan ad Drfr.  She 
noted that there has been great progress in the region, and that all 
parties involved, including the Sudanese Government, have made 
positive efforts.  She encouraged the continued use of the 
tripartite mechanism, involving the UN, the African Union and the 
Sudanese Government, to effectively promote the peace process. 
 
Swearing in of Tsvangirai 
------------------------- 
 
¶5. Regarding the election of Zimbabwean Prime Minister Morgan 
Tsvangirai, Jiang said that the swearing in of the National Unity 
Government reflects substantial progress towards political 
reconciliation.  China congratulates the new government and 
especially appreciates the efforts of African nations, particularly 
the South African Development Community. 
 
UN Human Rights Review of China 
------------------------------- 
 
¶6. Regarding the UN Human Rights Council's review of China, Jiang 
said that the review was generally undertaken in a spirit of 
 
BEIJING 00000366  002 OF 002 
 
 
cooperation, and that the majority of countries maintained a 
positive view of the situation.  A small number of countries 
attempted to politicize the situation and "made groundless 
accusations," she said.  The Chinese delegation described the 
"remarkable progress" in human rights in China and maintained an 
open and frank attitude "of which many countries approved," she 
said.  China will continue to make "unremitting efforts" in the area 
of human rights, she added. 
 
Art Stolen During the Boxer Rebellion 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. In response to a question regarding the potential auction of art 
from the Yves Saint Laurent estate that was originally taken from 
the Summer Palace by French soldiers after the Boxer Rebellion, 
Jiang said that the art was stolen by foreign intruders in the 20th 
century and should be returned to China.  She noted that the war in 
question offended the Chinese people and expressed hope that the 
relevant countries would take a "cautious attitude." 
 
Other Issues 
------------ 
 
¶8. Asked about the "Buy America" provisions of the U.S. economic 
stimulus plan, Jiang directed the questioner to the Ministry of 
Commerce.  Asked a question about Chinese President Hu Jintao's 
upcoming trip to Africa, Jiang responded that the trip is intended 
to increase friendly cooperation, and that the delegation will 
release information as it becomes available.  Regarding the upcoming 
Six-Party Talks working group meeting on the Northeast Asian Peace 
and Security Mechanism in Moscow, Jiang directed the questioner to 
authorities in Moscow.  Regarding the return of the Chinese fishing 
vessel that was abducted by Somali pirates, Jiang directed the 
questioner to the company which owns the boat. 
 
¶9. VISITS: Pakistan President Asif Zardari will visit China February 
20-23.  His visit will include Hubei Province and Shanghai.  This 
visit will be Zardari's second in four months and will include a 
visit to various projects, including a water resource project, an 
agricultural development and a "finance" project.  The visit is 
intended to deepen the friendly cooperation that already exists 
between China and Pakistan. 
 
PICCUTA