09BEIJING2552
MEDIA REACTION: JOINT MILITARY EXERCISE, U.S. NAVAL
Fri Sep 04 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO8663
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2552/01 2470939
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 040939Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5913
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 002552 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON KMDR OPRC CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: JOINT MILITARY EXERCISE, U.S. NAVAL 
PATROLS, U.S.-CHINA TIRE CASE, NORTH KOREA 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1.  JOINT MILITARY EXERCISE 
 
"U.S. and Australia invite China to participate in military 
exercise" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(09/04)(pg 1): "The invitation by the U.S. and 
Australia - through their respective media outlets - to China to 
participate in a joint military exercise surprised all Chinese 
military experts and scholars.  The Global Times interviewed 20 
experts on international politics and military affairs, 11 of whom 
expressed concern over this potential military exercise and 
opposition to the way the invitation was extended.  However, some 
scholars welcomed the invitation.  Fudan University professor of 
international relations Shen Dingli said China should be open to 
this.  Being afraid of contact shows weakness and a lack of 
confidence.  China should not lose out on the potential benefits 
just because there are also risks.  Li Daguang at China's National 
Defense University said that if the U.S. and Australia are sincere, 
then China should treat this invitation properly.  A joint military 
exercise between the U.S., Australia, and China would help preserve 
regional stability and would not influence Japan's and South Korea's 
alliances with the U.S. and Australia.  Li Jie, an expert at the 
Chinese Navy Military Academy Institute, argued that there needs to 
be discussion between the three parties prior to this sort of 
military cooperation.  This move puts pressure on China, but it also 
'tests the water.'  Editor-in-Chief of the online edition of 'Naval 
Knowledge,' Song Xiaojun, said that Western countries' ultimate goal 
is maintaining an international military order that protects their 
interests, which is contrary to China's goal of developing military 
strength for its own security need.  China should be vigilant." 
 
¶2.  U.S. NAVAL PATROLS 
 
"U.S. submarines wander around China carrying nuclear bombs" 
 
Elite Reference (Qingnian Cankao), a newspaper affiliated to the 
official Communist Youth League China Youth Daily (09/04)(pg 6): 
"China has expressed opposition to U.S. spying activities around 
China's territory.  While the U.S. and Russia are advocating nuclear 
disarmament, the U.S. is increasing its strategic patrolling 
activity near China.  Among the six American submarines patrolling 
the seas near China, at least two of them have been on 'high alert,' 
which means they are capable of launching 48 missiles just a few 
minutes after receiving orders.  Analysts question why, 20 years 
after the Cold War ended, the U.S. Navy still needs to send 14 
nuclear submarines, armed with more than 1,000 nuclear bombs, on 
more than 30 patrol missions a year.  Are U.S. nuclear weapons 
protecting or threatening world peace?  The UK, by comparison, sends 
only three submarines, with less than 160 missiles, on six patrol 
missions a year, which is sufficient for its self-defense.  The U.S. 
military's increased patrolling in the Pacific Ocean will definitely 
add to distrust between the U.S. and China and could increase the 
possibility of 'frictions' between the two countries at sea, even 
leading to a 'strategic misjudgment.'  It is also likely to motivate 
the Chinese Navy to develop more submarines or powerful 
anti-submarine capabilities, and to conduct similar patrols." 
 
¶3.  U.S.-CHINA TIRE CASE 
 
"Proposal on tire special protection case submitted to Obama; final 
result to be seen in 15 days" 
 
The Shanghai-based Shanghai Media Group (SMG) publication, China 
Business News (Diyi Caijing)(09/04)(pg A4): "Even if Obama approves 
the 'special protection' measure, he may not take 'extreme' 
measures, such as imposing high tariffs on Chinese tire imports. 
Obama will find a balance among the competing interests of Sino-U.S. 
trade relations, domestic employment, and political pressure.  It is 
still difficult to speculate on the final result.  Xu Wenying, 
Deputy Secretary General of the China Rubber Industry Association 
(CRIA), said that the proposal may not recommend imposing special 
tariffs of 55%, 45%, and 35% over the next three years on Chinese 
tires.  Deputy Minister of Commerce Zhong Shan visited the U.S. in 
August, increasing the level of the negotiations and demonstrating 
China's more intensified negotiating efforts.  Deng Yali, CRIA 
Deputy Director, warned domestic tire companies that even if the 
special tariffs are not adopted, the U.S. is still likely to 
implement anti-dumping and anti-subsidy measures.  Chinese tire 
companies should step up their efforts to develop new products, 
switch to a more low-end product model, and explore other exports 
market while still maintaining their operations in the North 
American market." 
 
 
BEIJING 00002552  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶4.  NORTH KOREA 
 
"China is willing to push for the denuclearization of the Korean 
Peninsula" 
 
The official intellectual publication Guangming Daily (Guangming 
Ribao)(09/04)(pg 8): "At a routine press conference on September 3, 
Chinese Foreign Ministry Spokeswoman Jiang Yu said that China is 
willing to work with the relevant parties to push for the 
denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.  Answering related 
questions, Jiang briefed the media on the visit of U.S. Special 
Representative for North Korea Stephen Bosworth and DPRK Vice 
Foreign Minister Kim Yong Il.  Jiang said Bosworth would pay a visit 
to China on September 3 and 4 and would have meetings with Chinese 
Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi and Vice Foreign Minister Wu Dawei in 
which they would discuss the Korean nuclear issue and the Six-Party 
Talks.  She confirmed that Kim is also paying a visit to China: 'He 
is in Jiangsu Province now and will return to Beijing.  The visit 
will last until the end of this week.'  According to Jiang, Kim has 
met Chinese Vice Foreign Minister Wu Dawei and exchanged views on 
issues of common concern." 
 
 
HUNTSMAN