09BEIJING3137
MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT OBAMA'S VISIT TO CHINA
Thu Nov 19 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO2404
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3137/01 3230923
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 190923Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6879
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 003137 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON KMDR OPRC CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: PRESIDENT OBAMA'S VISIT TO CHINA 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S VISIT TO CHINA 
 
a. "China should have the ability to shape the U.S." (pg 14) 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(11/19)(pg 14): "During his visit to Asia, 
President Obama has shown frankness, wisdom and a desire to move 
forward as a young American leader.  Suddenly confronted with a 
United States that has adopted a milder attitude, China should note 
several things.  First, China should not become cocky over the fact 
that after the financial crisis the world is praising China's 
economic model and criticizing the U.S. model.  Second, China should 
use this moment to look for diplomatic opportunities.  China always 
responded to American political signals rather than take the 
initiative to provide advice in dealing with the United States.  In 
the future, China should shift its diplomatic focus to the American 
people in the U.S., leading them to give up hostility and vigilance 
against China and understand China better.  And third, China should 
be sober enough to see the limits of the changes in U.S. diplomacy. 
That U.S. diplomacy is a mixture of ideology and dealing from 
strength will not change.  President Obama said in Shanghai that 
American students coming to study in China will greatly increase, to 
100,000.  However, currently there are still no relevant official 
regulations, or official fund, to guarantee that in the United 
States.  It would be a historical progress if the U.S. federal or 
state government could take effective measures to support the issue. 
 In this way, 'mutual study and common progress,' proposed by the 
U.S. Ambassador to China, looks likes it may be about to be 
realized." 
 
b. "Wen Jiabao: China opposes a 'G2'" 
 
The Shanghai-based Shanghai Media Group (SMG) publication, China 
Business News (Diyi Caijing)(11/19)(pg A3): "Although Obama is 
trying to promote Sino-American cooperation, China clearly does not 
support the concept of a 'G2.'  Premier Wen Jiabao talked about the 
reasons: first, China is a developing country with a large 
population and still has a long way to become modernized; second, 
China advocates independent diplomacy and will not ally itself with 
any country; and third, China insists that all countries should 
together make decisions on world's affairs, instead of one or two 
countries.  Shi Yinhong, the Director of Renmin University's 
Institute of International Relations, said that a lot of Americans 
are talking about a 'G2,' which is part of the United States' 
strategy to get China to do things in accordance with the 
recommendations of the United States on financial, economic and 
international security issues.  However, the U.S. emphasis on China, 
reflected by the concept of a G2, is welcomed.  China will not 
sacrifice relations with other countries for its relations with the 
United States.  China will for sure promote diplomacy of its own, a 
process in which the United States is very important." 
 
c. "The invisible concerns of building a China-U.S. partnership" 
 
The China Radio International sponsored newspaper World News Journal 
(Shijie Xinwenbao)(11/19)(pg 2): "The U.S.-China joint statement has 
shown an obvious characteristic of seeking common ground while 
accepting existing differences.  Experts believe that the statement 
is a chance for the U.S. to adapt to the era and shows the U.S.'s 
temporarily positive attitude about China's rise.  Both countries 
have honestly stated their stances on how to deal with each other's 
core interests.  On issues of China's core interests, like the 
Taiwan issue and trade protectionism, since China has clearly made 
its stance, the bilateral frictions on these issues will decrease in 
the future.  However, concerning core interests of the United 
States, the frictions will increase.  In contrast to China, the 
United States is unwilling to talk clearly about its core interests 
because they are difficult to talk about.  They are also vague and 
mutable.  Given the recent global changes, it is good for the world 
that China and the United States have affirmed their partnership to 
jointly address global challenges.  We hope, though, that this 
partnership can become more practical." 
 
d. "The common language of partners" 
 
The official Xinhua News Agency international news publication 
International Herald Leader (Guoji Xianqu Daobao)(11/19)(pg 10): 
"Cooperation in more than 20 fields and about 45 times citing 'both 
sides agree' in the U.S.-China joint statement has shown that 
U.S.-China relations, after 37 years of development, are at a 
critical time of deep cooperation.  A partnership to deal with 
common challenges -  a new phrase to describe new U.S.-China 
relations - reflects the common hope of both countries.  Sino-U.S. 
relations are definitely not characteristic of the 'beautiful and 
moderate' relations between big powers.  Although Obama's visit to 
 
BEIJING 00003137  002 OF 002 
 
 
China ended in a cheer, the difficult task of addressing U.S. 
domestic concerns and convincing the U.S. public of the importance 
of Sino-U.S. relations is still ahead.  It is not easy for a 
President with limited diplomatic experience.  Obama's visit to 
China is just a beginning." 
 
HUNTSMAN