09BEIJING885
APRIL 2 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: U.S.-CHINA SUMMIT, DPRK
Fri Apr 03 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBJ #0885/01 0930004
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 030004Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TORUEH/SECSATE ASHD IMEDIAT 3244
INFO RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 4531
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0273
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 000885 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM CH KS KN JA FR IN VE
 
SUBJECT: APRIL 2 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: U.S.-CHINA SUMMIT, DPRK 
"SATELLITE" LAUNCH, PRC-FRANCE RELATIONS, STRATEGIC AND ECONOMIC 
DIALOGUE 
 
BEIJING 00000885  001.9 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. Key points at the April 2 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- President Hu Jintao "explained China's principled position" on 
the March 8 USNS Impeccable incident in the South China Sea to 
President Barack Obama.  Both sides were committed to promoting 
continued development of bilateral military-to-military relations. 
 
-- Regarding North Korea's plans to launch a satellite, China would 
"try its utmost" to call on all relevant parties to "remain calm, 
act cautiously and refrain from actions that would escalate the 
situation." 
 
-- The U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue signaled a "new 
strategic partnership," as well as the "increased importance of 
bilateral cooperation."  Both sides were committed to a 
"cooperative, positive and comprehensive partnership for the 21st 
century." 
 
-- The April 1 China-France joint press communiqu was a "formal and 
serious agreement" that was "carefully negotiated" between the two 
sides, in which France reaffirmed the "one-China policy" and that 
"Tibet is a part of China." 
 
U.S.-China Summit, Mil-Mil Relations 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶2. Chinese President Hu Jintao "explained China's principled 
position" on the March 8 USNS Impeccable incident in the South China 
Sea to U.S. President Barak Obama, spokesperson Qin Gang said at the 
April 2 regular MFA press conference.  Both sides were committed to 
promoting continued development in bilateral military-to-military 
relations, Qin later added. 
 
North Korean "Satellite" Launch 
------------------------------- 
 
¶3. When asked whether China would support a United Nations Security 
Council Resolution or a Chairman's Statement in response to a 
possible North Korean "satellite launch," Qin said he would not 
comment on an event that had not yet occurred.  China was following 
North Korea's preparations to launch a "satellite" closely.  The PRC 
would "try its utmost" to call on all "relevant parties" to "remain 
calm, act cautiously and refrain from actions that would escalate 
the situation."  Qin said China urged all parties to deal with the 
situation from "the overall interests and long-term perspective of 
peace and stability in the region" and do more to advance the 
Six-Party Talks. 
 
China-France Relations 
---------------------- 
 
¶4. The "severe difficulties" in China-France bilateral relations 
recently were "known by all," Qin said, asserting that "China was 
not responsible."  China was glad that relations were "getting back 
to normal."  The April 1 China-France joint press communiqu was a 
"very formal and serious agreement" that was "carefully negotiated" 
between the two sides, in which "France reaffirms the one-China 
policy" and that "Tibet is a part of China."  China appreciated 
France's position and wanted to "promote a comprehensive strategic 
partnership" with France.  President Hu met French President Nicolas 
Sarkozy and "explained China's principled position on the issue of 
Tibet," Qin added. 
 
¶5. When pressed to comment further on China's attitude toward 
France's position, Qin replied that he left it to journalists to be 
able to "judge the difference between appreciation and 
satisfaction."  China hopes "France will follow the principle and 
spirit of the communiqu" to promote the healthy and stable growth 
of bilateral relations. 
 
¶6. Pushed for further explanation on whether the communique meant 
French leaders should not meet with the Dalai Lama or issue a visa 
to the Dalai Lama, and whether the joint communiqu allowed China to 
decide what activities constituted Tibetan independence activities 
in France, Qin said the "Chinese Government position on Tibet is 
clear and steadfast."  China "resolutely opposes" the Dalai Lama's 
activities overseas to "split the motherland" under any pretext and 
"opposes foreign leaders meeting with the Dalai Lama."  "No country 
in the world recognizes the Tibetan government-in-exile," Qin 
continued, asserting that this is "the international community's 
consensus."  A "few Tibetan separatists attempt to undermine China's 
relationships with other countries," but this is a question of 
"basic norms governing international relations, international laws 
and respect for other countries' sovereignty and territorial 
integrity."  China would never interfere in another country's 
internal affairs but "asks that all countries abide by the basic 
 
BEIJING 00000885  002 OF 003 
 
 
norms governing international relations." 
 
Strategic and Economic Dialogue 
------------------------------- 
 
¶7. The Strategic Economic Dialogue and the Strategic and Economic 
Dialogue were "not only different because of the addition of one 
word," Qin stated in response to a question on why China and the 
United States had changed the mechanism for high-level bilateral 
dialogue.  Rather, the change signaled a "new strategic partnership" 
and the "increased importance" of bilateral cooperation.  In the 
previous Strategic Economic Dialogue, both sides only had one 
"special presidential representative," but under the new Strategic 
and Economic Dialogue, both sides would have two special 
presidential representatives, which elevated the dialogue to a 
higher level." 
 
¶8. The two dialogues were also different, Qin said, because the 
Strategic Economic Dialogue previously was held twice a year, but 
the new Strategic and Economic Dialogue would occur annually.  Both 
sides "attached great importance to the mechanism" and thought it 
was important to "promote dialogue" to discuss global and bilateral 
issues.  Qin said this would promote dialogue in all fields.  The 
previous U.S. administration "laid a solid foundation" with the 
Strategic Economic Dialogue, Qin said, adding that the new U.S. 
administration was aiming for more concrete results. 
 
¶9. When pressed for a further explanation as to why it was necessary 
to change the dialogue mechanism, and whether reducing the frequency 
of meetings actually signaled a lessening of the importance of 
U.S.-China relations, Qin said it was a "technical issue" whether 
the meetings were held once or twice a year, and that the "frequency 
of meetings" did not signal the importance of the dialogue.  The 
"new U.S. administration had a new way of doing things" Qin stated. 
Both sides were committed to a "cooperative, positive and 
comprehensive partnership for the 21st century," he said. 
 
China's Stance on "Blacklisting" Tax Havens 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. When asked for a reaction to French President Sarkozy's comments 
on April 1 that China's position on not "blacklisting" uncooperative 
tax havens was a major obstacle to reaching a deal at the G-20 
summit because China wanted to protect Hong Kong and Macao, Qin said 
he had not read Sarkozy's comments but noted that China had acted 
"responsibly" since the start of the global economic crisis.  China 
held that the "international community should work together" to 
respond to the financial crisis.  The PRC was "actively taking part 
in the effort to reform the international financial system" and 
"cannot accept any allegation" that China is obstructing this 
process.  China is a "cooperative partner" in the global response to 
the financial crisis.  Beijing supports the international community 
in making a "coordinated effort" on the issue of tax havens.  China 
has "different views on the present status of Hong Kong and Macao" 
and regarding listing them as tax havens, because they were 
"different from other regions."  China was "against listing" Hong 
Kong and Macao as tax havens. 
 
Chinese Participation in ASEAN Meetings 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. Qin said Prime Minister Wen Jiabao would attend the 12th 
China-ASEAN meeting, the 12th ASEAN-China-Korea-Japan meeting, the 
fourth Asia Summit and a breakfast meeting with leaders from Korea 
and Japan, to be held in Thailand April 10-12.  China looked at 
these meetings in the context of the global economic crisis and 
would be "looking for East Asian cooperation to boost confidence in 
East Asian countries," and for "East Asian countries to join hands" 
to face the economic crisis together. 
 
¶12. Premier Wen would "affirm the 10-plus-1 results," explain 
China's position on regional development in East Asia and propose "a 
number of initiatives" on how to improve 10-plus-1 and 10-plus-3 
cooperation."  China and ASEAN had a "sound relationship" and were 
"strategic partners" who had eleven specific areas of cooperation. 
Both were "important trade partners," and "smooth cooperation" was 
important for both.  China and ASEAN "face common challenges." 
China was willing to work with ASEAN to "tide over the difficulties" 
and address the crisis, "further develop cooperation and create a 
peaceful, equal and win-win regional environment." 
 
Visit of Chavez to China 
------------------------ 
 
¶13. China welcomed Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez to visit China, 
Qin said.  China was "continuing consultations" with Venezuela on 
 
BEIJING 00000885  003 OF 003 
 
 
the details of Chavez's visit.  Qin said he had no additional 
information beyond what he provided at the March 31 press briefing. 
 
Other Travel/Visits 
------------------- 
 
¶14. State Councilor Liu Yandong would visit the United States and 
Singapore April 11-25.  Liu would hold "extensive exchange of views 
on bilateral issues" and issues of "mutual importance."  Kyrgyzstan 
Foreign Minister Kadyrbek Sarbaev would visit China April 5-7 at the 
invitation of PRC Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi.  The Chinese 
Government welcomed Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhom of Thailand to 
visit China April 3-10. 
 
PICCUTA