09BERLIN567
MEDIA REACTION: COUNTERTERRORISM, TALIBAN, BURMA, POPE,
Fri May 15 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
R 151224Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4092
INFO WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
DIA WASHINGTON DC
CIA WASHINGTON DC
DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
FRG COLLECTIVE
AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 
AMEMBASSY LONDON 
AMEMBASSY PARIS 
AMEMBASSY ROME 
USMISSION USNATO 
USMISSION USOSCE 
HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS BERLIN 000567 
 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/CE, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO GM US PK BM IS XF
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: COUNTERTERRORISM, TALIBAN, BURMA, POPE, 
MEPP, OPEL 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary. 1 
¶2.   Detainee Photos and Military Tribunals. 1 
¶3.   Pakistani Fight against the Taliban.. 2 
¶4.   Burma -- Aung San Suu Kyi Arrest 3 
¶5.   Papal Visit 4 to the Mideast 
¶6.   Israeli PM Netanyahu in Aqaba. 4 
¶7.   U.S.-German Efforts to Save Opel 5 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
 
Editorials focused on President Obama's reversal on abuse photos, 
the budget draft for FY 2010, and the debate over Opel's future. 
The headlines in the press are dominated by the budget draft and the 
future of Opel.  ZDF-TV's early evening newscast Heute and ARD-TV's 
early evening newscast Tagesschau opened with stories on the tax 
estimate and its implications on the budget. 
 
¶2.   Detainee Photos and Military Tribunals 
 
Broadcast and online media picked up U.S. media reports that the 
President plans to resurrect military tribunals.  Most newspapers 
carried lengthy reports and editorials on Obama's decision to 
prevent the publication of the detainee photos.  It is remarkable to 
note that most commentaries express understanding for Obama's 
decision. 
 
ARD-TV's Tagesschau reported this morning that, "according to media 
reports, President Obama is planning to announce today that the 
controversial military tribunals for terror suspects in Guantanamo 
will be resumed.  CNN is referring to unnamed government 
representatives.  Obama had suspended the proceeding until May 20. 
The rule of law will be applied in the future and statements made 
under torture may not longer be used." 
 
Germany's most important webzine Spiegel Online said in its intro: 
"A new U-turn of the Obama government.  The U.S. President wants 
indeed to resurrect the controversial military tribunals for 
Guantanamo detainees.  However, stricter rules than during the time 
of Bush Jr. will be applied."  The report continues: "This would be 
a withdrawal from one of his most important election promises." 
 
Sueddeutsche editorialized: "There are serious reasons for Barack 
Obama's decision to try to prevent the publication of additional 
photos showing American torture victims in Iraq and Afghanistan. 
Without any doubt, this would trigger a new spate of outrage over 
the United States.  The anger over the mistreatment could ignite new 
attacks on U.S. soldiers who fight in both countries.  Although he 
now holds back the photos because of this reason, Obama cannot get 
rid of the debate on torture....   First there was indecisiveness 
about the memos in which government lawyers justified torture, now 
we have the tug of war about the photos, and soon there is a dispute 
about the disastrous military tribunals for Guantanamo detainees. 
It will go on like this.  Obama won't be able to finesse his way 
through.  He must dare to make a painful step.  The U.S. must 
clarify its position on the use of torture and mistreatment in the 
name of America." 
 
Berliner Zeitung's editorial said: "Barack Obama is right.  It would 
not clarify anything but add fuel to the hatred of America across 
the world if the government published the photos.  We have known for 
six years that U.S. soldiers tortured in Abu Ghraib and 
Guantanamo.....  Without the photos, Obama would not have won the 
election and have the chance to commit the country again to human 
rights.  New torture photos would not be helpful in this attempt. 
However, those responsible for the torture should be taken to 
court." 
 
Tagesspiegel remarked: "The photos, which would serve as an excuse 
for a flare-up of hatred, would not just pose a danger to U.S. 
soldiers.  Above all, the Afghan people could not protect themselves 
against a new spate of violence.  Particularly for them, the 
publication of the photos would come at a bad time." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine commented: "President Obama favors pragmatic 
considerations over principles - and therefore bears the 
responsibility of his office.   This will not be the last turn, 
particularly in the field of terrorism." 
 
Die Welt opined: "By his refusal to publish the photos showing the 
mistreatment in Iraq and Afghanistan by U.S. soldiers, Obama made 
clear to Democrats and Republicans alike that they cannot 
ideologically trust him.  Obama's supporters are outraged because he 
explains his change of mind by using a slogan ffrom the Bush/Cheney 
era...  But is his U-turn therefore wrong or a sign of weakness? 
....  It is particularly about his new strategy for Afghanistan. 
Obama cannot simply win the hearts and minds of the people by an 
additional 20,000 soldiers....  Obama needs more confidence if he 
wants to stop Afghanistan becoming his Vietnam." 
 
Under the headline "Security over transparency," FT Deutschland 
commented:  "The consequences of a potential new series of photos 
would not just have an impact on the Americans, but also its allies 
in Afghanistan, including the Bundeswehr.  It is understandable that 
the idealistic supporters of Obama feel deceived.  The most 
important thing about the change of power in Washington is not to 
criticize the evil methods of the Bush era, but to stop them for 
good." 
 
¶3.   Pakistani Fight against the Taliban 
 
Under the headline "Pakistan at a turning point," Frankfurter 
Allgemeine commented: "Washington is aware of the fact that there 
are Pakistanis in the government and army who secretly approve of 
Jihad and do not want to do without Pakistan's 'religious army,' 
which played an important role in the Indian part of Kashmir in 
1990s - and today in Afghanistan.   The determination of the 
government and army will be seen in the tribal regions where the 
Taliban have their strongholds.  So far, they are not taking any 
action there.  The fact that the only Islamic nuclear state remains 
opaque and ambiguous also becomes clear in the outrage over the 
American drones, which bombard terror havens in the tribal regions 
week by week.  Everybody who joins in the criticism knows that the 
Pakistani army provides the U.S. with the necessary information on 
the targets.  It will take some time until we can trust Islamabad 
again." 
 
¶4.   Burma -- Aung San Suu Kyi Arrest 
 
Many national dailies carried reports on Aung San Suu Kyi's arrest. 
Frankfurter Allgemeine headlined: "The One who Received an 
Unexpected Visit is Sitting in the 'Devil's Hole'" and reported: "An 
American visited Nobel Peace laureate Aung San Suu Kyi without her 
having anything to do with it.  Now the guest and the 'host' are in 
prison and Suu Kyi is faced with a five-year imprisonment.  Her 
arrest is the most recent and most drastic measure with which the 
military regime is taking action against this icon of resistance." 
Financial Times Deutschland headlined: "Junta Arrests Opponent," and 
noted: "Aung San Suu Kyi is the most important opposition politician 
for the military junta that rules Burma with a tough hand." 
 
Sueddeutsche wrote: "The new arrest and the accompanying 
mud-slinging campaign against this icon of the opposition seems to 
have been perfectly organized, because the house arrest against the 
'Lady' should have ended in two weeks...  Now the junta thinks it 
has found a sound reason to keep Suu in detention and to possibly 
transfer her from her house on the sea to the Insein prison." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine noted: "It is hard to say from the outside 
whether the American who forced his way into Aung San Suu Kyi's 
house was 'apolitical,' but we can be sure that he came at the right 
moment for the generals.  Again they have a pretext to put the woman 
of whom they are still afraid, on trial.  And they are likely to 
have prefabricated the verdict, too.  Then the regime can be sure 
that the situation will again remain calm.  And as long as China is 
of the opinion that it is in its interest to have a 'stable' regime 
in Burma, western appeals will be in vain.  Only if China had to 
fear of its reputation, would Aung San Suu Kyi have a chance." 
 
Sueddeutsche Zeitung opined under the sub-headline: "Only a New 
Strategy, not a Blockade, Will Help Against the Military Junta in 
Burma " and judged: "As usual the junta in Burma is ignoring 
humanity, decency, and even its own laws because, in its 
pigheadedness, it does not tolerate anything that could threaten its 
rule, legitimized through the power of guns.  In Burma, unteachable 
generals have turned a potentially wealthy country into a poorhouse 
with their tyranny.  But the West must partly also be blamed for 
this situation.  For a long time, the only thing that has come to 
its mind are sanctions to put pressure on the regime, even though it 
has been clear for a long time that they are useless. There are two 
reasons for this.  India and China willingly stepped into the breach 
and undermined western sanctions.  Second, isolation as a means of 
pressure will not help if a regime has isolated itself.  But a new 
economic approach could offer political options.  People who need 
not fear for their existence day by day and for whom the Internet 
and the mobile phone have become self-evident will be totally 
different factors once Burma's fate will be decided.  The United 
States now has a man at its top, who is embarking on new paths.  Why 
not also towards Burma?" 
 
According to die tageszeitung, "the opposition will be further 
weakened by Aung San Suu Kyi's imprisonment but it will also 
increase the probability that the opposition NLD party will boycott 
the 2010 mock elections.  It is the goal of this entire mock 
democratization process to keep influential neighbors such as China 
in a good mood and to permanently safeguard the power of the junta. 
The military want to demonstrate to its neighbors that they are able 
to implement reforms but not according to the 'Western' model. 
Since sanctions have thus far not been successful and since a policy 
of integration has failed, we must now also fear that the military 
will succeed with their policy and that the neighbors will not 
insist on Aung San Suu Kyi's release." 
 
¶5.   Papal Visit to the Mideast 
 
Sueddeutsche editorialized:  "In the Holy Land, Benedict 
particularly made progress in the dialogue with Islam.  His 
Jordanian hosts, who demonstrated to all Islamophobic people in the 
West that there is a moderate, cooperative and tolerant Islam, were 
particularly helpful.  The bold engagement in favor of the rights of 
the Palestinians will also improve the relations between Christians 
and Muslims.  That is a success of this highly political pilgrimage. 
 Not just the church will benefit from this.  Benedict acted has a 
global holy leader in the interest of the world.  His moves towards 
the Jews were less fortunate.  Although he clearly condemned 
anti-Semitism and acknowledged the Second Vatican Council, which 
commits the church to the reconciliation with the Jews...Benedict's 
performance in Yad Vashem was quite a failure." 
 
Tagesspiegel commented: "Benedict's leeway in the Holy Land was 
smaller than the one his predecessor John Paul II enjoyed.  Given 
the spectacular mistakes he had made in the past, his different 
personality and the extremely difficult situation in the Middle 
East, he has done the best job he could under the circumstances." 
 
¶6.   Israeli PM Netanyahu in Aqaba 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine headlined: "Abdullah Reiterated Two-State 
Solution," and reported: "With his visit to the Aqaba for a meeting 
with Jordan's king, Prime Minister Netanyahu is trying to improve 
relations with his Arab neighbor before going to meet President 
Obama on Monday.  Netanyahu, however, avoided speaking of a 
Palestinian state." 
 
"Jordan's King Accuses Netanyahu," is the headline in a report in 
Financial Times Deutschland.  The paper reported: "During an 
unannounced visit of Israel's Premier Netanyahu, Jordan's King 
Abdullah strongly criticized Israel.  He accused Israel of working 
step by step for the displacement of Christians and Muslims from 
Jerusalem.  He called upon Israel to end the settlement activities 
in Eastern Jerusalem and in other occupied territories." 
 
¶7.   U.S.-German Efforts to Save Opel 
 
In a front-page editorial, Financial Times Deutschland argued: "In 
the efforts to find a solution for Opel, it cannot be an option to 
keep Opel alive with state subsidies.  This would be the preferred 
American solution, but for the German taxpayer it would result in 
the maximum risk.  Against this background, the government's favored 
trusteeship model is still the best solution....  The Opel question 
can be resolved only if Washington and Berlin find a common 
approach.  Since time is pressing, the issue must now become a top 
priority between Germany and the U.S.  At the latest on May 20, when 
all those who are interested in Opel have signed up in Berlin, the 
facts will be on the table.  Before GM files for bankruptcy, a 
decision on the highest political level is necessary.  As of now, 
Opel is a matter for Obama and Merkel." 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine said in an editorial: "If Fiat or Magna 
International present an acceptable solution and a more or less 
binding offer to buy Opel, the German government wants a trustee to 
take over parts of Opel.  Then it is likely that Opel will get a 
billion euro warranted loan.  But this would be nothing but an 
ill-concealed state intervention and thus a CDU/CSU breach of 
promise.  The chancellor had always ruled out any state 
intervention." 
 
According to Sueddeutsche Zeitung, "Opel would be an ideal election 
campaign issue, and the SPD and the CDU/CSU could have distinguished 
themselves in a competition to save Opel.  But Economics Minister zu 
Guttenberg fortunately wants to prevent such a development.  Now the 
state is to take over Opel for a few months as a trustee.  But this, 
too, is not a nice solution, because it is the state-owned, 
ramshackle regional banks that are now to give the company money 
beyond the upcoming Bundestag elections.  It is now at least 
possible to decide very calmly about Opel's future.  That future 
lies in Turin or Moscow, or if a buyer cannot be found, in Berlin." 
 
 
In the view of Frankfurter Rundschau, "the government continues to 
mess around when it comes to saving Opel.  Now it is up to a trustee 
to play a decisive role.  But why a trustee?  This has something to 
do with the dogmas of our economics minister zu Guttenberg.  He 
wants to do everything to avoid the assistance for Opel looking like 
state intervention....  It is high time that the government stops 
messing around and addresses Opel's rescue as what it really is: a 
central issue for industry policy." 
 
Handelsblatt opined: "If there is no conclusive concept on which 
politicians have a final say, then there is no trustee either.  And 
we doubt that Opel would be able to survive a bankruptcy of its 
mother company General Motors in view of pressing liquidity 
problems.  But at the last moment, the government seems to have 
straightened things out.  The government, or a trustee who will be 
commissioned by it, will take over Opel for a certain period of time 
- if an investor is waiting at the door.  The danger of a permanent 
trusteeship solution seems to have been banned." 
 
Regional daily Westdeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung of Essen argued: "The 
idea of the economics minister to give Opel into the hands of a 
trustee is good and correct.  What else should the government do? 
Watch idly as a U.S. insolvency administrator takes control?  The 
talks with investors would become dramatically more difficult.... 
But one thing is clear: more than ever, the government now has a say 
with Opel.  It will no longer be able to get rid of the political 
responsibility for a crash." 
 
 
  KOENIG