09BEIJING3071
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS, CHINA'S SPACE POLICY
Mon Nov 09 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO2986
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #3071 3130841
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 090841Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6744
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS BEIJING 003071 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON KMDR OPRC CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS, CHINA'S SPACE POLICY 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1. U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS 
 
a. "Barack Obama's visit to China cannot avoid the 'trade 
protection' embarrassment" 
 
The Shanghai-based Shanghai Media Group (SMG) publication, China 
Business News (Diyi Caijing)(11/09)(pg A4): "The U.S. recently 
launched a series of attacks against products 'Made-in-China' and 
therefore trade friction is becoming a common practice between the 
two countries.  The Chinese Consular of Commerce He Weiwen said in 
New York that Obama's stance where he enhances bilateral trade 
exchanges and opposes trade protectionism is only a strategic idea, 
which will not influence the increasing frictions.  The ups and 
downs in the relationship will last for at least six months to a 
year.  Experts indicate that in the short term the frictions will 
intensify.  Although both senior-level officials have emphasized 
trade exchanges and communication, the microeconomic industries are 
influenced by economic rules and the increasing unemployment rate in 
the United States, therefore China's exports to the U.S. will 
continue to be influenced.  China thinks that the U.S. is returning 
to protectionism and hopes that the U.S. will not launch trade law 
'421 provision' which will impose special protection tariffs on 
Chinese products.  China is concerned that this provision would be 
widely used on more-and-more Chinese products." 
 
b. "China will not lower its head to the U.S. because of the 
upcoming summit" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(11/09)(pg 1): "The U.S. government's 
behavior, collecting heavy tariffs on Chinese oil wells, has brought 
U.S.-China trade frictions to a new height.  Obama, who tried to 
please domestic voters, hasn't considered the Chinese people's 
feelings.  The Chinese Commerce Ministry's countervailing 
investigation on the American Car Industry was completely different 
from actions in the past.  China would normally try to avoid any 
conflicts before the leader's visit.  A Global Times poll revealed 
that Chinese netizens do not hold much hope for Obama's visit.  The 
Chinese expert Yuan Peng said that China doesn't need to lower its 
stance because of Obama's visit.  Compared with when former 
President Clinton visited China, the Chinese people have become more 
rational and patriotic.  They have a more comprehensive view about 
the United States.  Trade frictions are in fact the voice of 
American interest groups, aiming at gaining more benefit through 
pressuring the Chinese government during Obama's visit.  Meanwhile, 
the behavior of the U.S. ignites confrontation to certain extent, 
between the two countries' people." 
 
¶2. CHINA'S SPACE POLICY 
 
"China calls for 'harmonious airspace'" 
Saturday, November 7 
 
The Beijing-based newspaper sponsored by official intellectual 
publication Guangming Daily and Guangdong Provincial official 
publication Nanfang Daily The Beijing News (Xin Jing Bao)(11/09)(pg 
A06): "An international military forum marking the 60th founding 
anniversary of the People's Liberation Army (PLA) air force closed 
on November 7th. The forum, which focused on peace and development 
closed with consensus on increased cooperation when tackling 
challenges in airspace.  PLA Air Force Commander Gen. Xu Qiliang 
called for peaceful and harmonious use of the space and air by the 
world's air forces.  Xu called on the different countries' air 
forces to enhance cooperation, exchanges and mutual trust in order 
to ensure mutual safety.  The two air forces should reach consensus 
on issues concerning safety in both space and territorial airspace 
and to improve international laws and regulations, he said.  He also 
called attention to the environmental protection issues to organize 
and build a friendly and green airspace environment.  Military 
experts indicate that currently there are two branches in airspace 
capability development: building space troops and space war 
theories; and seeking to peacefully use outer space's capability. 
Together with other countries, China is making efforts on the second 
branch.  President Hu Jintao's speech on the forum shows that China 
is determined to always walk the road towards peaceful development 
and insists on a defensive national policy." 
 
HUNTSMAN