09BRASILIA273
SUMMIT OF THE AMERICAS: AMBASSADOR MORALES
Tue Mar 10 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO5170
RR RUEHAO RUEHCD RUEHGA RUEHGD RUEHHA RUEHHO RUEHMC RUEHMT RUEHNG
RUEHNL RUEHQU RUEHRD RUEHRG RUEHRS RUEHTM RUEHVC
DE RUEHBR #0273/01 0691353
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 101353Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3729
INFO RUEHWH/WESTERN HEMISPHERIC AFFAIRS DIPL POSTS
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 7379
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 3663C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRASILIA 000273 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/SCO AND USOAS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/09/2019 
TAGS: PGOV ENGR PREL ETRD EFIN EAGR
SUBJECT: SUMMIT OF THE AMERICAS: AMBASSADOR MORALES 
CONSULTATIONS WITH GOB 
 
Classified By: DCM Lisa Kubiske.  REASON: 1.5 (D) 
 
¶1.  (C)  SUMMARY.  On March 6, USG Summit of the Americas 
(SOA) Coordinator Ambassador Hector Morales met with a team 
from the Brazilian Ministry for External Relations (MRE) led 
by Secretary General for Political Affairs Ambassador Vera 
Machado and including Brazilian Summit Coordinator Carlos 
Duarte.  Discussion focused on the environment leading up to 
the Summit as well as approaches to unresolved portions of 
the Summit Statement, particularly those addressing trade, 
food security and biofuels.  The Brazilian side was 
optimistic about the Summit and did not believe any country 
planned to derail the process or the event.  The Brazilians 
also agreed to consider USG proposals for way forward on 
these points and promised a response before the preparatory 
meeting the week of March 16.  While the Brazilians were not 
ready to offer specific comments in Summit issues, they 
indicated a strong desire to work with the U.S. for a 
positive result and were clearly impressed by USG willingness 
to balance various country positions and demonstrate 
flexibility as well as U.S. willingness to conduct bilateral 
consultations. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (C)  Ambassador Morales framed the discussion of SOA 
issues by commenting on his visits to Chile and Argentina, 
both of whose governments had agreed that it would be 
important to complete the Declaration before the Summit. 
Given the length of the current draft, however, both 
supported the concept of a short preambular document or 
Leaders, Declaration that would give a succinct political 
statement regarding Summit priorities, particularly the need 
to work together to address the global economic crisis.  Such 
a document, however, would need to be negotiated after 
completing the main Summit Declaration.  Morales continued by 
highlighting key issues for closing more of the paragraphs of 
the Summit statement -- including energy, labor, the 
environment, trade, food security, human rights, civil 
society, democracy - and presented the Brazilians with U.S. 
suggestions for language to resolve these points as a way to 
move forward on all these points.  The Brazilian side noted 
that it would be important to work with other countries, 
particularly Venezuela, and they were prepared to do that. 
 
¶3.  (C)  The Brazilians said that they shared U.S. views 
about the importance of the SOA and that the attendance of 
President Obama had raised expectations significantly. 
Brazil can support a short declaration of Summit principles 
in addition to the main Declaration.  Ambassador Machado 
noted that Brazil remained concerned about attempts to link 
food security with biofuels and about potential increased 
protectionism in response to economic pressures.  Duarte 
added that he did not think any participating state would 
"throw bombs" or attempt to derail the Summit or the 
Declaration, but that considerable work remained to reconcile 
differing national positions.  Finally, the Brazilians 
mentioned that "someone" may raise the issue of including 
Cuba in the SOA process.  Morales responded that the U.S. 
would be prepared to address this issue when raised. 
 
¶4.  (C)  In discussing USG suggestions for closing a package 
of paragraphs for the Summit statement, Morales noted that we 
were trying to strike a balance between the priorities of 
many different countries, but in order to achieve progress, 
the paragraphs had to move as a whole.  Suggestions for 
paragraphs 7 and 7B included mention of the vulnerability of 
smaller economies without advocating special and 
differentiated treatment that would lead to exceptions from 
transparent, rules-based trade.  Similarly, he indicated that 
the U.S. would be prepared to accept language on food 
security and food crises without creating a new standard of 
"food sovereignty."  He also argues for language on biofuels 
that did not presume a social., economic or environmental 
"impact" or a link to food security.  While the Brazilians 
could not provide a coordinated position immediately, Duarte 
commented positively on U.S. combination of paragraphs and 
attempt to balance interests.  He also noted that, although 
the U.S. suggestions would not resolve everything, it was a 
welcome proposal that would create positive momentum and was 
the type of approach that needs to be taken at this stage. 
According to Duarte, the Brazilians will need to review the 
trade language carefully before accepting, but would be 
inclined to support the U.S. approach.  He noted, however, 
that "others," meaning Venezuela, might find the U.S. 
language on biofuels difficult, but he also said that our 
willingness to accept food security would certainly help 
reach consensus. 
 
¶5.  (C)  EMBASSY COMMENT.  As expected, the Brazilians were 
 
BRASILIA 00000273  002 OF 002 
 
 
cautious in their responses to U.S. proposals.  There has 
been, however, a marked increase in Brazilian focus on the 
SOA over the past weeks.  Duarte stated that there were now 
"high expectations" for a Summit to chart a course of 
hemispheric cooperation, a major shift for a government which 
in December downplayed the SOA in favor of the Bahia Summit 
of South American and Caribbean states.  Although Brazilian 
and U.S. interests coincide on most remaining issues with the 
Summit statement, the Brazilians remain cautious to engage in 
support of U.S. initiatives, i.e. the energy partnership. 
They were, however, clearly impressed by U.S. willingness to 
engage bilaterally and to consult with them on the possible 
way forward. 
 
¶6.  (U)  Ambassador Morales cleared this cable. 
KUBISKE