09BUDAPEST224
NANOTECHNOLOGY IN HUNGARY
Mon Mar 23 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Budapest
VZCZCXRO7349
RR RUEHAST RUEHHM RUEHLN RUEHMA RUEHPB RUEHPOD RUEHTM RUEHTRO
DE RUEHUP #0224/01 0821604
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 231604Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BUDAPEST
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4008
INFO RUEHZN/ENVIRONMENT SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BUDAPEST 000224 
 
SIPDIS 
 
OES/STC FOR ROBERT RUDNITSKY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TSPL TNGD TPHY TBIO ETTC ETRD PREL RS HU
SUBJECT: NANOTECHNOLOGY IN HUNGARY 
 
REF: RUDNITSKY REQUEST AT SEPTEMBER 2008 ESTH 
     OFFICER'S CONFERENCE IN BUDAPEST FOR 
     INFORMATION ON NANOTECHNOLOGY IN HOST 
     COUNTRIES 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  In February and March 2009, Post 
investigated Hungary,s nanotechnology capabilities through a 
series of meetings with experts and government officials.  We 
found that Hungary has solid scientific expertise in certain 
nanotechnology areas, but lacks a national strategy for 
nanosciences.  Hungarian researchers are engaged in a vibrant 
array of nanotechnology research.  We are aware of no limits 
to trade in products containing nanotechnology in Hungary, 
and several such products are on the market.  Nanotechnology 
as a scientific discipline is regularly presented in all 
types of media.  Although data on public opinion on 
nanotechnology is not currently available, there is no 
indication that the general public opposes this technology, 
and experts believe that the public regards it positively. 
End summary. 
 
POLICY ON NANOTECHNOLOGY 
------------------------ 
 
¶2. (U) On March 6, ESTH LES met Dr. Ferencne Mokry, head of 
the EU Relations Unit at the National Research and Technology 
Office (NKTH - an agency which distributes approximately 20 
percent of Hungarian R&D grants).  Mokry said that Hungary 
identified nanotechnology as a key technology area in its 
Science, Technology and Innovation Policy Strategy for 
2007-2013.  The strategy mandates supporting the key areas 
identified with technology platforms, knowledge centers, and 
information clusters.  According to Mokry, however, there are 
no NKTH grants exclusively dedicated to nanotechnology 
because the 
Agency,s policy is to fund only application-oriented 
research in certain priority areas including: IT, 
environment, materials science, life sciences, and others. 
However, some NKTH-funded projects include 
nanotechnology-related research. 
 
¶3. (U) Currently there are several state-supported Regional 
University Knowledge Centers focusing on all major 
disciplines where nanotechnology is involved (environmental 
science, energy research, health and medicines, IT, etc.). 
These Knowledge Centers cooperate with international partners 
and local small and medium-sized enterprises to identify 
commercial uses for their findings.  The Hungarian National 
Academy of Sciences also manages several institutions that 
conduct nanotechnology research in the fields of material 
science, nanochemistry, and nuclear science. 
 
EXPERT OPINIONS 
--------------- 
 
¶4. (U) Experts consulted by Post confirm the lack of a 
well-coordinated national nanotechnology program.  On March 
5, Laszlo Biro, Head of the Nanostructures Laboratory of the 
Research Institute for Technical Physics and Materials 
Science of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences (MTA MFA; its 
website: http://ww.nanotechnology.hu/index.html) advised ESTH 
LES that although nanotechnology has a growing importance in 
the Hungarian R&D landscape, R&D spending in the overall 
financial picture is poorly thought out and insufficient. 
According to Biro, the money that is available is not spent 
efficiently.  His research group relies on EU FP7 funds to 
provide a secure funding stream for high-level basic 
research.  Biro would like to see a National Expert Board on 
Nanotechnology, made up of renowned scientists, which could 
identify and define those nanotechnology areas that Hungary 
needs to research the most to keep up with international 
scientific developments, as well as the areas in which 
Hungary can achieve outstanding results. 
 
THE RUSSIAN CONNECTION TO THE INSTITUTE OF NANOTECHNOLOGY 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶5. (U) In 1992, using the German Fraunhofer Institute chain 
as a model, the Hungarian government created Hungary,s own 
applied research network, the Bay Zoltan Institutes.  There 
are now six Bay Zoltan Institutes, two of which are involved 
in nanotechnology.  One of these, the Institute of 
Nanotechnology (Bay Nano), established in Miskolc in 2006, is 
entirely dedicated to nanosciences (its website: 
http://www.bzlogi.hu/bzaka angol.head.page?nodeid=307). 
According to its mission statement, Bay Nano focuses on 
applied research, education in cooperation with the Miskolc 
Technical University, and helping small and medium-sized 
enterprises solve technological and logistical problems. 
 
 
BUDAPEST 00000224  002 OF 003 
 
 
¶6.  (U) According to local press, the genesis of Bay Nano 
dates back to September 2005, when Russian Prime Minister 
Mikhail Fradkov visited Hungary for talks with Hungarian 
Prime Minister Ferenc Gyurcsany.  One of the outcomes of the 
visit was an agreement between the two governments to 
cooperate on nanotechnology.  The agreement included joint 
financing for the creation and operation of a new 
nanotechnology institute to be established in the city of 
Miskolc.  The new institute subsequently set up was Bay Nano. 
 
¶7.  (U) ESTH Hub officer and ESTH LES visited Bay Nano on 
February 12.  Andras Pungor, Head of Bay Nano, indicated that 
the initial objective of Russian-Hungarian cooperation on 
nanotechnology was to test the Russian-made NT-MDT scanning 
electron microscope and co-develop improvements to it. 
Although Hungary purchased this microscope and other 
Russian-made equipment for Bay Nano, the Russian government 
has not yet contributed any funding to the institute. 
 
¶8. (U) Comment:  Laszlo Biro commented that he believes that 
the failure of the Russian Government to provide the promised 
funding implies that the Russian motivation was to sell 
Russian equipment rather than an actual interest in joint 
research.  We have no reason to doubt Biro,s judgment on 
this.  Nevertheless, regardless of Russian intent and lack of 
follow through, we believe Miskolc, with its Technical 
University as well as Bay Nano, has the potential to be a 
nanoscience research hub. 
 
COMMERCIAL DATA 
--------------- 
 
¶9.  (U) As in all EU member states Hungary,s market is open 
to all the products generally present in the EU, including 
those containing nanoparticles.  There is no database 
tracking nanoparticle content in products sold in Hungary. 
 
PUBLIC PERCEPTION OF NANOTECHNOLOGY 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (U) Andras Pungor advised ESTH on February 12 that the 
Hungarian public is generally less aware of nanotechnology 
than Western European populations, and consequently has fewer 
fears and hopes for nanotechnology.  There is currently no 
trend of negative public perception of nanotechnology. 
Laszlo Biro concurred on March 5, adding that the scientific 
community is active in science and communication and ensures 
that research results are regularly presented in all types f 
media. 
 
¶11. (U) While there is no data available at this time to 
support or dispute Pungor and Biro,s assessments, more exact 
information about the public perception of nanotechnology may 
be available soon.  Eniko Demeny, a researcher at the Central 
European University,s Center for Ethics and Law who is part 
of a research group participating in the EU-funded Nanoplat 
project, informed ESTH LES on February 24 that Nanoplat aims 
to develop a deliberate and science-based platform for a 
stakeholder dialogue in the field of nanotechnology.  To 
identify topics for further dialogue, the Hungarian team will 
interview selected stakeholders and consumer groups. 
 
¶12. (U) The Hungarian Food Safety Office has launched an 
initiative to collect information about public views on 
nanotechnology.  The Office has posted Q&As on nanotechnology 
on its website, including an invitation to interested parties 
to contact them with further questions. 
 
¶13. (U) NKTH's Ferencne Mokry told ESTH LES on March 6 that 
her office also supports science communication and science 
journalism projects to publicize all kinds of science, 
including nanotechnology.  Laszlo Biro expressed similar 
support for science communication to us on March 5, noting 
that his research group created a website 
(www.nanotechnology.hu) to make the Academy,s latest 
nanotechnology research results available to the general 
public. 
 
MAIN NANOTECHNOLOGY RESEARCH AREAS IN HUNGARY 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶14. (U) Hungarian Scientists are primarily working on 
nanosensors, microfluidics, nanoelectronics, graphene, 
nanotubes, fullerenes, nanomedicine, and nanocomposites. 
Some examples include: 
- Creation of carbon fiber reinforced aluminum matrix 
composite (Bay Nano) 
- Lyposome-encapsulated nanomedicine (Bay Nano) 
- Nanolink for inkjet printers (Bay Nano) 
- Surface modification of carbon nanotubes (Bay Nano) 
 
BUDAPEST 00000224  003 OF 003 
 
 
- Tailor-made grapheme nanoribbons (MTA MFA) 
- Bioinspried photonic crystals (MTA MFA) 
- Structural models for coiled nanotubes (MTA MFA) 
- Microstructure created and driven by light (Institute of 
Biophysics in the Biological Research Center in Szeged) 
- Fullerene-cuban composites (Research Institute for Solid 
State Physics and Optics) 
 
NANOTECHNOLOGY AN NTE IN FCS FY09 STRATEGIC PLAN 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶15. (U) FCS included nanotechnology in the initial universe 
of its New-To-Export (NTE) Emerging Technologies 
Identification Strategy.  FCS will identify two to three 
emerging R&D technologies in which there are significant 
Hungarian academic and institutional interest and activities. 
 A key element is that these sectors will benefit from 
partnering with U.S. NTE technology companies to 
commercialize and market those technologies.  Once the key 
sectors are selected, FCS will identify the universities, 
innovation centers, incubators, and companies in those 
sectors and reach out to the appropriate USEACs, State 
Development Agencies, and other USG agencies to identify and 
promote the program to NTEs.  Further, FCS will coordinate 
with the Embassy's Office of Defense Cooperation, the ESTH 
section, and Public Affairs to promote this initiative to 
their science and government contacts.  FCS has developed a 
list of leaders in each potential NTE sector and is in the 
process of meeting with them.  After those meetings, FCS will 
assess the most viable sectors and proceed to make their U.S. 
contacts. 
 
POST POINTS OF CONTACT FOR NANOTECHNOLOGY 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶16.  (U) Should the Department wish any further information 
on nanotechnology in Hungary, post POCs for this subject are 
Regional ESTH Hub Officer Camille Hill (HillCD2@state.gov, 
tel 36-1-475-4956), ESTH Hub LES Tibor Kovacs 
(KovacsT@state.gov, tel. 36-1-475-4439), and FCS LES Zsolt 
Makai (zsolt.makai@mail.doc.gov). 
Foley