09BUENOSAIRES118
ARGENTINA: SPANISH AMBASSADOR PREVIEWS CFK'S
Wed Feb 04 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Buenos Aires
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBU #0118/01 0351439
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 041439Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2967
INFO RUCNMER/MERCOSUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHLI/AMEMBASSY LISBON 0051
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID 2197
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L BUENOS AIRES 000118 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/04/2019 
TAGS: PGOV PREL ECON EFIN ETRD SP AR
SUBJECT: ARGENTINA: SPANISH AMBASSADOR PREVIEWS CFK'S 
PROBLEMATIC VISIT TO MADRID 
 
REF: MADRID 0084 
 
Classified By: Ambassador E. Anthony Wayne for reasons 1.4 (B) and (D). 
 
¶1.  (C) Ambassador met with Spanish Ambassador Rafael 
Estrella February 2 to discuss the February 9-11 visit of 
Argentine President Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner (CFK) to 
Madrid.  Estrella, a well-connected former politician, 
offered the following thoughts on the visit. 
 
¶2.  (C) Efforts to Postpone:  Estrella confided that CFK and 
her advisors, notably husband Nestor Kirchner, are very 
worried about the February visit going awry given the 
commercial tensions in the relationship.  Twice in recent 
weeks, the Spanish Ambassador had to weigh in with Cabinet 
Minister Massa to keep the visit, already rescheduled several 
times (most recently in October), from being postponed once 
again.  First, when CFK fell ill and postponed her January 
11-16 trip to Cuba and Venezuela to January 18-23, the 
Argentines tried to postpone the trip to Spain, pointing to 
the President's need not to get too tired.  Then, after her 
trip to Cuba, the Spanish Ambassador heard from his Argentine 
counterpart that CFK was going to postpone to March or later, 
expressing worry about the negative reception CFK would 
receive because of outstanding commercial disputes.  In both 
cases, Estrella weighed in with Massa to argue that 
postponing would have more negative effects than going and 
would send the wrong signals to friends of Argentina in the 
government of Spain.  He said he believes his Argentine 
counterpart also weighed in the second time, and the trip was 
salvaged.  (CFK did cancel, however, another major trip also 
contemplated for February -- to India and South Korea, the 
former because of the PM's surgery.) 
 
¶3.  (C) Spanish Business and Press Hostile: Still, Estrella 
said, CFK is worried about her reception by Spanish business 
and in the press.  This worry is well-founded.  Spanish 
business and financial organizations in Spain are very upset 
with the GOA (he noted the tremendous fall in the Madrid 
stock market when the GOA announced the nationalization of 
private pension funds).  The Spanish media is disillusioned. 
CFK's pre-election visit had raised hopes about better 
Spanish-Argentine relations, but her presidency has fallen 
far short of those expectations. Views within the Spanish 
Government, he added, are divided.  The economic side of the 
house is very upset with the GoA, while the more political 
side sees the value in maintaining dialogue and trying to 
elicit coordination with the GoA.  (Note:  CFK made headlines 
here in August when she acidly criticized the Spanish Central 
Bank for rating Argentina as a country of ""elevated risk"" for 
investment.) 
 
¶4.  (C) Limiting Exposure: To limit contact with those 
critical of CFK, her staff will allow only private meetings 
with the heads of major Spanish companies invested in 
Argentina and remarks in a carefully controlled context.  One 
of the company CEOs to meet with CFK will be Repsol, whose 
leader plans to go over the economic hardships currently 
confronting the company. 
 
¶5.  (C) Big Work Agenda: the Nationalization of Spanish-owned 
Aerolineas Argentinas and of the private pension funds 
(including the fund operated by Spanish Bank BBVA Banco 
Frances), the plight of other Spanish companies, including a 
local energy generation and distribution company and 
Telefonica, developments in the region, the G-20 process, and 
on the more positive side improved anti-narcotics cooperation 
are among the items on the agenda. 
 
¶6.  (C) Trade: The Spanish plan to explore restarting the 
Mercosur-EU trade liberalization process.  Apparently, the 
Argentine MFA would like to see this process restart, in part 
to offset the very negative stance Argentina took in the Doha 
WTO talks. 
 
¶7.  (C) Airlines: Aerolineas Argentinas compensation talks 
between the GoA Transportation Secretariat and Spanish 
company Marsans, which used to own the airlines, continue, 
but it is not clear when they might come to conclusion. 
 
¶8.  (C) Pension Funds: AFJP Nationalization left the Spanish 
investor BBVA/Banco Frances without compensation for the 
expropriation of its pension fund, ""Consolidar.""  There has 
been no progress to date in discussions with the GoA.  BBVA 
 
 
 
remains most concerned about the status of Consolidar's 3,000 
odd employees.  It seeks to ensure that most of them are 
hired by the Argentine Social Security Agency (ANSES). 
 
¶9.  (C) Energy: In addition to Repsol, which had felt 
squeezed by GoA policies for some time, Spanish-owned ENDESA 
controls three important power generators in Argentina, as 
well as the EDESUR electricity distribution company for the 
southern part of Buenos Aires city and province.  The GoA has 
been putting great pressure on EDESUR to increase production 
and investment, but so far its pressure has been low-key 
(probably because of the very public dispute over Aerolineas 
Argentina). 
 
¶10.  (C) Toll Roads: Two Spanish companies hold toll road 
concessions around Buenos Aires.  One has received a needed 
toll rate increase, and the other has not, pending a 10% 
purchase by local investors. 
 
¶11.  (C) Telephones:  Spanish telephone giant Telefonica 
faces concerns from Argentina's anti-trust authorities about 
its new ownership stakes in Italy's Telecom, which is also 
present in the country.  GoA authorities are blocking Telecom 
from acting on this option to buy out some Argentine 
investors in the local Telecom operation (Madrid 84).  So 
far, the Argentine investors (the Wertheim family) seem to 
have maneuvered to retain and perhaps expand their control in 
the local Telecom operation. 
 
¶12.  (C) Fighting Drugs: On the positive side, narcotics 
cooperation has significantly improved since the countries 
signed an MOU in 2007.  Much more intelligence is being 
shared and arrests have moved from individual smugglers to 
taking down smuggling networks. 
 
¶13.  (C) G-20: On the G-20 process, the Spanish Ambassador 
said he was hopeful that the UK would find a way to have 
Spain present at the April summit and that the Spanish 
President would likely discuss the topic with CFK.  He noted, 
however, that her presentation at the first G-20 meeting in 
November had not been very effective, and he wondered if she 
would again use the opportunity to tout the ""Argentina model"" 
rather that helping leaders find solutions. 
 
¶14.  (C) Traveling Party:  There are rumors that Nestor 
Kirchner might accompany CFK on this trip.  Also, the press 
is reporting that the head of the powerful CGT union 
confederation and the chief of the Argentine Industry 
Federation (UIA) might accompany CFK. 
WAYNE