09CASABLANCA116
NIP AND TUCK IN MOROCCO
Fri Jun 19 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Casablanca
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHCL #0116/01 1701548
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 191548Z JUN 09
FM AMCONSUL CASABLANCA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8425
INFO RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RUCNMGH/MAGHREB COLLECTIVE
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 0710
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID 3871UNCLAS CASABLANCA 000116 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR NEA/MAG 
COMMERCE FOR NATHANIEL MASON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV ECON ETRD PGOV MO
SUBJECT: NIP AND TUCK IN MOROCCO 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Lured by the country's geographic and linguistic 
proximity, Europeans are slowly taking notice of Morocco's low-cost, 
high-quality cosmetic and dental care.  Treatment in Morocco can 
cost about 25 to 45 percent less than the same procedures in Europe. 
 Several cosmetic and dental surgeons have already built European 
accredited state-of-the-art medical facilities in Casablanca and 
Marrakech, designed to attract Europe's patients.  More importantly, 
government officials believe this industry can help bolster the 
country's declining tourism while simultaneously improving its 
health care infrastructure.  Challenges remain, however, including 
the scarcity of qualified specialists and questions about the 
long-term sustainability of this industry.  End Summary. 
 
----------------------- 
Nip and Tuck In Morocco 
----------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) In recent years, Europeans have gradually taken notice of 
Morocco's low-cost, high quality cosmetic and dental care. 
Depending on the medical procedure, treatment in Morocco can cost 
about 25 to 45 percent less than the same procedures in Western 
Europe, reports Paris' Center for Policy Analysis (PCPA).  The low 
costs are attributable not just to salaries of medical 
professionals, but also to the low costs of malpractice insurance 
and minimal administrative costs, PCPA adds.  Majd Chraibi, who owns 
Marrakech's European accredited "Lipo Mince Center," says that a 
liposuction treatment that would cost USD 8000 in Europe can be done 
by a Moroccan surgeon for USD 4800.  While surgical costs in Morocco 
are generally higher than those of Southeast Asian countries known 
for medical tourism, Morocco's geographic and linguistic proximity 
make it a particularly attractive destination for European patients. 
 
 
------------------- 
A Win-Win Situation 
------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Morocco is slowly realizing the value of medical tourism, 
and "there are initiatives at the government level and at the 
individual clinic level to try to lure tourists from the U.S., 
Western Europe, and Canada," says Mohamed Guessous, one of the 
country's preeminent plastic surgeons.  Government authorities 
tasked with developing Morocco's tourism plan, in conjunction with 
the National Association of Private Clinics, are in discussions 
about potential areas of cooperation, specifically offering medical 
facilities fiscal incentives.  The incentives would include a 
corporate holiday tax during the first five years of business and 
training grants for each Moroccan employee during the first three 
years of employment. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) According to the consulting firm McKinsey and Company, 
this niche industry will likely "improve the country's health care 
infrastructure and subsequently increase its allure to foreign 
patients".  This environment also creates opportunities that 
encourage Morocco's top medical professionals to remain in country. 
Mohammed Mbarky, who operates the Oriental's regional development 
agency, said "The region is upgrading all its hospitals to European 
Union standards in order to promote medical tourism". (Note: The 
Oriental, is one of Morocco's 16 regions and occupies the northeast 
corner of the Kingdom. End Note.) 
 
----------- 
Not So Fast 
----------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Challenges remain, however.  Chief among them is the 
dearth of qualified cosmetic and dental surgeons.  Some industry 
professionals like Faad Benslimane, one of the country's leading 
plastic surgeons, warn that a business plan based on cosmetic 
surgery, including areas like dentistry and dermatological 
treatment, is likely not sustainable in the long term unless the 
country is able to retain this group of medical professionals.  To 
help with retention, private institutions like Casablanca's 
"Polyclinique Dentaire", whose clientele is mostly European, recruit 
and train Morocco's best and brightest dentists on their premises, 
and offer successful trainees employment in their clinic. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Comment: With 2009 tourism revenues currently 19 percent 
lower than 2008, efforts to diversify the country's tourism industry 
can only help Moroccan operators.  While cosmetic and dental care is 
still relatively nascent in Morocco, it is a sector with large 
potential that could also attract U.S. patients seeking low-cost 
alternatives.  More importantly, developments in this field help 
improve the country's health care infrastructure and subsequently 
retain Morocco's top medical professionals.  End Comment. 
 
ORDONEZ