09CAIRO401
EGYPT:  COUNTRY TEAM ASSESSMENT FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF FOUR
Sun Mar 08 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #0401/01 0671328
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 081328Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1814
INFO RHMFIUU/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS CAIRO 000401 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/ELA (IRWIN) AND PM (ARCHETTO) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MASS MARR EG
SUBJECT: EGYPT:  COUNTRY TEAM ASSESSMENT FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF FOUR 
(4) C-130J-30 AIRCRAFT TO SUPPORT THE GOVERNMENT OF EGYPT NATIONAL 
DEFENSE MISSION 
 
REF: A. EGYPTIAN MINISTRY OF DEFENSE LETTER OF REQUEST (08-166) FOR 
LETTER OF OFFER AND ACCEPTANCE (LOA), DATED 04 SEPT 08. 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
¶1. (SBU) Description.  In ref (a), the Government of Egypt (GOE) 
submitted a Letter of Request (LOR) for 4 C-130J transport aircraft. 
 The primary mission of the C-130 is inter and intra theatre 
transport of people, cargo and equipment.  These aircraft would 
supplement the current Egyptian Air Force (EAF) transport fleet. 
Additional airlift capability is being requested to bolster capacity 
and efficiency of air transportation for the GoE.  The C-130J-30 can 
also serve as Search and Rescue, medical evacuation, firefighting, 
weather reconnaissance, Command and Control, and 
electronic/intelligence gathering platforms.  However, none of these 
additional platform capabilities has been requested by the GoE with 
this request. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Reason and justification for customer's request.  The EAF 
already possesses transport aircraft to include 27 
C-130H's and 17 light transport aircraft.  The only aircraft 
possessed by the EAF that can provide a heavy cargo airlift 
capability is the C-130H.  Many of the EAF C-130s are undergoing 
continuous maintenance and upgrades.  Between one quarter and one 
half of the fleet is unflyable at any given time due to depot 
maintenance and modifications.  This gap in their transport 
capability would be filled by the addition of the C-130J-30. The GoE 
schedules two or three flights to the United States each month in 
order to onload mission essential parts and supplies for other 
Egyptian military programs.  They also make routine cargo trips to 
Europe and Asia.  The C-130 is a cost effective aircraft to operate 
and maintain as compared to other, larger jet cargo carriers. 
Capable of carrying 7 pallet positions, and/or up to approximately 
50,000 pounds, the C-130 is the right size for the amount of cargo 
the EAF needs moved.  The C-130J-30 would also complement the 
current logistic infrastructure already in place supporting the 
other aircraft. 
 
¶3. (SBU) System description and impact to force structure. 
Additional C-130s in the EAF fleet would have some impact on the EAF 
overall force structure.  Some additional pilots, loadmasters and 
maintainers would have to be trained to support the additional 
aircraft. The C-130J has the ability to carry more, fly farther and 
faster than the current fleet while being operated and maintained by 
the existing force.  Additional C-130s would add capacity to EAF's 
ability to airdrop airborne forces.  Airdrop training operations are 
performed primarily for the currency of aircrew and paratroopers. 
Large scale airborne operations are not attempted, and lead to the 
conclusion that the C-130Js would be used primarily for 
international cargo transport. 
 
¶4. (SBU) How the articles or services would contribute to both the 
U.S. and the recipient's defense/security goals. The C-130J-30 is 
the most recent aircraft in the C-130 lineage and is flown by many 
other countries and coalition partners around the world.  These 
additional aircraft would further Egypt's ability to operate in a 
coalition airlift operation if they so desired.  These aircraft 
would enhance the flow of parts and supplies between Egypt and the 
US sustaining numerous other Egyptian programs.  Increasing the 
Egyptian organic airlift and logistics capability contributes to 
both countries' security goals.  This increase in capability holds 
promise of Egypt's ability to join in coalition or combined efforts 
to support humanitarian missions or provide aid to many parts of the 
world.  New aircraft can easily work within the African continent 
where aid missions are constantly needed. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Justification for the type and quantity of articles or 
services requested.  The EAF currently possesses and operates 27 
C-130H model aircraft, although most were acquired in the early 
1980's.  The mission capable rate has decreased over time while 
costs to operate have increased.  Also, the airlift mission has 
significantly increased over the same number of years.  The EAF has 
requested additional airlift by repeatedly asking for additional 
C-130 H models similar to those in their own fleet. However, none 
are available in the open market or through Excess Defense Articles 
(EDA).  The Egyptian need for more airlift has driven them to forego 
looking for used aircraft and accept the higher cost of the new 
aircraft.  Four aircraft is a reasonable amount of aircraft for an 
initial purchase. The C-130J is the logical choice of airframe as 
this will meld nicely into the EAF fleet of C-130Hs due to the 
similarities between the airframes.  The additional 4 aircraft 
provide a portion of the needed additional airlift required by the 
EAF and firmly establishes a robust logistical and maintenance base. 
 The depot capability and logistical chain that exists for the 
C-130H model fleet will have some degree of commonality to the 
C-130J model, but will not be 100%.  As expected, the EAF is 
 
 
requesting the logistical and maintenance support needed to operate 
these aircraft.  The possibility exits for another 
C-130J purchase from the EAF before the production line closes. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Combatant Commander's concurrence to the introduction of a 
new warfighting capability to the nation or region.  Combatant 
Commander's concurrence will be provided separately. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Anticipated reactions of the neighboring nations. 
There is no anticipated negative response from any neighboring 
country in the region.  The C-130J is an unarmed aircraft used 
primarily for transporting goods and people.  It poses no threat to 
any neighboring country. 
 
8.(SBU) Assessment of the nation's ability to account for, 
safeguard, operate, maintain, and support the articles. The EAF has 
a history of being able account for, safeguard, operate, maintain, 
and support aircraft with respect to the fleet of 27 C-130H they 
currently posses.  They already select and train the aircrew and 
maintainers for the C-130H.  They operate from two different 
locations.  They also have a depot capability for Programmed Depot 
Maintenance (PDM), with additional part and component repair 
abilities coming online routinely.  They are also members in the 
Technical Coordination Groups (TCG), the C-130 users group, the 
Component Improvement Program (CIP), the International Engine 
Maintenance Program (IEMP).  The EAF has also requested numerous 
stateside training teams to assist them in depot field repairs, 
avionics support, and other sustainability issues. There have been 
no complaints or concerns regarding the EAFs support of its other 
C-130s for the previous 25+ years, and as they continue to conform 
to the Total Package Approach, there is no reason to believe that 
they will not continue to fully support the C-130J program. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Training required either in-country or in the United 
States and anticipated reactions resulting from the presence of U.S. 
trainers in country.  A significant amount of both in-country and 
U.S. based training is required for this airframe purchase.  All the 
aircrew and maintenance personnel would need to travel to the United 
States for initial training.  Between 10-20 aircrew members and 
approximately 40 maintenance personnel would be required to support 
a purchase of 4 C-130Js. An Extended Training Services Support 
(ETSS) team is required.  The training received in the United States 
is only preliminary training and must be followed up with extended 
in-country training via the ETSS.  No negative reaction from any 
neighboring country with regards to the training would be expected. 
Egypt currently does extensive training in the United States.  There 
are also several ETSS teams already in country, to include a 
constant presence since 1982 with the F-16 ETSS. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Possible impact of any in-country U.S. presence that might 
be required as a result of providing the article.  The impact of 
U.S. presence in Egypt is minimal.  There is already a heavy 
American footprint in Egypt supporting the US weapon systems Egypt 
possesses.  There are permanently assigned teams of long- and 
short-term contractors in-country already.  At least one F-16 ETSS 
team has been in country since 1982.  There has also been numerous 
Army TAFTs in country as well.  The amount of US personnel required 
in country for the purchase of C-130J would be a small percentage of 
the overall footprint and go virtually unnoticed. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Source of financing and the economic impact of the 
proposed acquisition.  Egypt plans to use Foreign Military Financing 
to cover all the costs associated with the acquisition, transport, 
supply, infrastructure, and training for the purchase of the 
C-130Js.  Egypt will only be able to make the purchase if the 
amortized payment schedule can fit within the FMF budget for Egypt. 
Further, Egypt will budget to fully cover the Total Package Approach 
for this acquisition and maintain the Total Package Approach for the 
other GoE programs.  The ROM cost for this acquisition is 
approximately $500M over five to seven years on the initial cost. 
Follow on support costs start after initial purchase. 
 
 ¶12. (SBU) Human rights considerations relevant to the proposed 
acquisition.  None. 
 
¶13. (SBU) A plan for end-use monitoring for sensitive and advanced 
warfighting technology and the SAO's plan for compliance 
verification.  The Office of Military Cooperation (OMC) Egypt has a 
robust Golden Sentry Program.  The Golden Sentry Program 
representative and Security Assistance Officer (SAO) responsible for 
the program will coordinate for the review and maintenance of 
required documentation.  All parties will maintain serial number 
lists of all components within the inventory or transferred and will 
conduct the mandated inspections as required.  This coordination 
will ensure that historical copies of all EUM inspection results and 
customer's physical security and accountability control plans remain 
 
 
on file.  The Egyptian military currently has 27 C-130s in country. 
Egypt has maintained accountability and security of these aircraft 
without unauthorized loss, theft, or access to date.  The GOE has 
expressed the willingness to meet U.S. guidelines for accountability 
and security of these new aircraft, and the Office of Military 
Cooperation will conduct End Use Monitoring of all required 
components if this request is approved. 
 
¶14. (SBU) Recommendation whether the USG should approve transfer of 
the article and justification.  The country team endorses the 
Egyptian procurement of 4 C-130J model aircraft.  The C-130J is a 
robust, non-kinetic airframe that would enable the EAF the 
additional airlift it requires.  This purchase would also better 
enable Egypt's ability to engage in coalition airlift operations as 
the number of other US allies, friends and partners who possess the 
C-130J increases.  This provides inherent interoperability which 
benefits both the United States and the Government of Egypt. A split 
or reduced buy of this airframe is also supported.  Additional 
aircraft can be purchased at a future date as the C-130J production 
line has no end date. The future airlift capabilities in Egypt 
depend on having a modern, robust fleet of aircraft that can fly 
internationally to be self-supporting and contribute to coalition 
efforts.  The addition of these aircraft to the EAF fleet paves a 
way forward for interoperability with the US and other allies and 
creates potential operational readiness to support humanitarian or 
other crisis response actions.