09CAPETOWN228
ZUMA PUTS AIDS DENIALISM TO REST
Tue Nov 03 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Cape Town
VZCZCXRO7531
PP RUEHDU RUEHJO
DE RUEHTN #0228 3071434
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 031434Z NOV 09 ZDK
FM AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3218
INFO RUEHSA/AMEMBASSY PRETORIA 6532
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 2191
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 3333UNCLAS CAPE TOWN 000228 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM SF
SUBJECT: ZUMA PUTS AIDS DENIALISM TO REST 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  On October 29, President Jacob Zuma delivered his 
annual address to the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) under the 
theme "Together finding solutions to achieving the goal of a better 
quality of life for all." Zuma highlighted two critical challenges, 
which have the potential to undermine the country's efforts to 
achieve a better life for the South African people: the global 
economic crisis and health care.  He said the impact of the economic 
crisis has been felt by all sectors of society and that government 
is compelled to do more with less. Zuma also acknowledged that South 
Africa was not winning the war against HIV/AIDS and that 
extraordinary measures were needed to combat the disease. By 2011 
the government wants a 50 percent drop in the rate of new infections 
and the extension of the antiretroviral program to 80 percent of 
those who need it. Zuma's speech is seen as a welcome change from 
former President Thabo Mbeki's AIDS denialism. End summary. 
 
¶2. (U) On October 29, President Jacob Zuma delivered his annual 
address to the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) under the theme 
"Together finding solutions to achieving the goal of a better 
quality of life for all." During his discussion of the global 
economic crisis, Zuma said that Finance Minister Gordhan's recent 
Medium Term Budget Statement presented a government spending program 
that places the interest of ordinary South Africans at the center of 
the government's work and that government must do more with less 
resources.  During his address which also focused on health care and 
more specifically the fight against HIV/AIDS, Zuma acknowledged that 
South Africa was not winning the war against HIV/AIDS and that 
extraordinary measures were needed to combat the disease. Zuma 
indicated that he wanted to use this year's World AIDS Day to mark 
the beginning of a massive mobilization campaign by government 
against HIV/AIDS. The President said the campaign should reach all 
South Africans and must spur them into action to safeguard their 
health and the health of the nation. He said the South African 
National AIDS Council, headed by Deputy President Kgalema Motlanthe, 
was expected to develop a set of measures that strengthen the 
programs already in place, but did not elaborate on how the 
government will accomplish this enormous task or how they will pay 
for it. By 2011 the government wants a 50 percent drop in the rate 
of new infections and the extension of the antiretroviral program to 
80 percent of those who need it. He also called for an end to the 
huge stigma surrounding HIV/AIDS.  Note:  South Africa is regarded 
as among the countries with the highest number of HIV infections. 
Some studies suggest that 57 percent of the deaths of children under 
the age of five during 2007 were a result of HIV.  The disease is 
estimated to kill 1,000 people every day and at least 5.7 million of 
South Africa's 50 million population are infected. End note. 
 
¶3. (U) Commentators here have described Zuma's speech as a welcome 
change from the stance adopted by his predecessor Thabo Mbeki. Mbeki 
drew fierce criticism after coming to power in 1999 when he 
questioned accepted AIDS science and failed to make life-prolonging 
antiretroviral drugs widely available. Both political parties and 
AIDS activists alike have welcomed the Zuma government's new AIDS 
stance. The Treatment Action Campaign (TAC) said Zuma's speech has 
put an end to AIDS denialism. The TAC welcomed what they referred to 
as "the ushering in of this new era, almost exactly ten years since 
former President Mbeki made a speech that began the era of 
Qformer President Mbeki made a speech that began the era of 
state-supported denialism."  UNAIDS Executive Director Michel Sidib 
congratulated Zuma on his bold leadership. He said, "President Zuma 
has shown extraordinary vision in prioritizing AIDS as an issue of 
national importance. His call to end denialism and embark on a 
national mobilization campaign will save thousands of lives." Mike 
Waters, the Democratic Alliance's (DA) Shadow Minister for Health 
said Zuma's speech made a welcome change from a decade of 
AIDS-denialism that has come to be associated with ANC rule. He said 
the DA was anxious to be part of the solution in the fight against 
AIDS and would do its part to monitor the progress of Zuma's 
commitment. The Independent Democrats John Gunda expressed the hope 
that Zuma would follow through on his commitment to fight HIV/AIDS. 
 
¶4. (U) Comment.  It is interesting to note that Zuma chose to stress 
the seriousness of the HIV/AIDS crisis in the same chamber (the 
NCOP) where Mbeki first articulated his view that HIV did not cause 
AIDS almost 10 years ago. By doing so the government clearly wants 
to dispel any lingering doubt that it has reversed the policy of the 
former Mbeki administration and is now fully committed to the fight 
against HIV/AIDS.  End comment.