09CAIRO1185
SCENESETTER FOR GENERAL PETRAEUS' VISIT TO EGYPT
Wed Jun 24 00:00:00 +0200 2009
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXRO7546
OO RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDIR RUEHKUK RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHEG #1185/01 1750819
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
O 240819Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2967
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYS E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 CAIRO 001185 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/22/2019 
TAGS: PREL PARM MASS MOPS IR IS KPAL PHUM KDEM
ECON, EG 
SUBJECT: SCENESETTER FOR GENERAL PETRAEUS' VISIT TO EGYPT 
 
REF: A. CAIRO 747 
     ¶B. CAIRO 448 
     ¶C. CAIRO 1114 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Margaret Scobey per 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
 ¶1.  Key Points: 
 
-- (S/NF) Since your last visit in December 2008, President 
Obama's well-received Cairo speech has reinvigorated the 
tenor of our bilateral relationship. 
 
-- (S/NF) However, a sense of renewal in our bilateral 
relationship has not yet resulted in tangible improvements in 
our mil-mil relationship, but the Ministry of Defense 
recognizes and appreciates the increased engagement with U.S. 
Central Command (CENTCOM) over the last six months. 
 
-- (S/NF) Egypt continues to view Iran as the region's 
greatest strategic threat, but is also very concerned about 
the potential for Sudanese instability.  Egyptian efforts on 
Palestinian reconciliation, a durable cease fire in Gaza, 
training the Iraqi military, and appointing a new ambassador 
to Iraq all serve Egypt's goal of reducing Iranian 
interference in regional affairs. 
 
-- (S/NF)  Egypt has reportedly increased counter smuggling 
efforts, with a focus on stopping arms before they enter 
Egypt from Sudan and other areas.  The Egyptians also report 
success in interdicting illicit funds destined for Gaza. 
 
¶2.  (S/NF) General Petraeus, welcome back to Egypt.  At first 
glance, seemingly little has changed since your last visit - 
Egyptian efforts on Palestinian reconciliation and securing a 
durable cease fire in Gaza are ongoing and Defense Minister 
Tantawi continues to hesitate expanding cooperation on 
countering arms smuggling.  The overall tone of our bilateral 
relationship, however, has warmed.  Building upon the 
cautious optimism generated by a new U.S. administration and 
President Obama's well-received June 4 speech in Cairo, we 
established a new framework for regular bilateral meetings 
with the Egyptians to explore new areas for cooperation 
through an open, frank dialogue.  We are exploring other ways 
to translate this sense of goodwill into concrete action, 
including by expanding cooperation across a wide-range of 
political, economic, and cultural issues. 
 
¶3.  (S/NF) We are hoping to leverage the tone of rejuvenation 
in our bilateral relationship to foster new discussions with 
Egypt on transforming our military cooperation beyond the 
annual flow of Foreign Military Financing (FMF).  Tantawi and 
his senior leaders recognize and appreciate increased 
engagement with CENTCOM, which will provide a strong base for 
U.S. efforts to expand the Egyptian military's mission to 
reflect new regional threats.  Egypt's renewed offer to train 
Iraqi military officials - if accepted by the Iraqis - 
provides the perfect opportunity for the Egyptian military to 
play a greater role in supporting regional security.  We have 
requested meetings with President Mubarak, Defense Minister 
Tantawi, and EGIS Chief Omar Soliman. 
 
--------------------------------- 
President Mubarak: Beware of Iran 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (S/NF)  President Mubarak will make it clear that he sees 
Iran as Egypt's -- and the region's -- primary strategic 
threat.  His already dangerous neighborhood, he will stress, 
has only become more so since the fall of Saddam, who, as 
nasty as he was, nevertheless stood as a wall against Iran, 
according to Mubarak.  He now sees Tehran's hand moving with 
ease throughout the region, "from the Gulf to Morocco," as he 
told a recent congressional delegation.  The immediate threat 
to Egypt comes from Iranian conspiracies with Hamas (which he 
sees as the "brother" of his own most dangerous internal 
political threat, the Muslim Brotherhood) to stir up unrest 
in Gaza, but he is also concerned about Iranian machinations 
in Sudan and their efforts to create havoc elsewhere in the 
region, including in Lebanon via Hezbollah (Sudanese 
instability in general is also a serious concern for the 
Egyptians).  While Tehran's nuclear threat is also a cause 
for concern, Mubarak is more urgently seized with what he 
sees as the rise of Iranian surrogates (Hamas and Hezbollah) 
and Iranian attempts to dominate the Middle East.  Mubarak 
supports the U.S. talking with Iran, but will warn against 
placing trust in Iranian promises. 
 
¶5.  (S/NF)  Mubarak hailed President Obama's June 4 Cairo 
speech to the Muslim world and has welcomed our renewed 
public focus on the Arab-Israeli conflict, including the 
frequent visits to Cairo by Special Envoy for the Middle East 
Senator George Mitchell.  You should thank Mubarak for 
Egypt's efforts to strengthen relations with the Iraqi 
government, including by naming Sherif Shaheen, currently 
Ambassador to Zambia, as the Egyptian Ambassador to Iraq. 
You should also express support for Mubarak's renewed offer 
to train the Iraqi military, which he made during a recent 
visit by the Iraqi Minister of Defense, and offer assistance 
in persuading the Iraqis to accept the offer. 
 
-------------------------------------------- 
Minister Tantawi: Counter Smuggling, End-Use 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (S/NF)  Overall, the Egyptian government continues to 
employ a wide range of military, security, intelligence, and 
diplomatic efforts to combat the flow of arms to Gaza.  Egypt 
has reported success in identifying and intercepting arms 
smuggling networks from Sudan to Cairo, as well as 
interdicting illicit funds destined for Gaza (septel).  Egypt 
has increased physical security along the Egypt-Sudan border 
with additional Border Guard Forces and increased aerial 
patrols, according to MOD officials (ref A). 
 
¶7.  (S/NF) Tantawi continues, however, to resist U.S. offers 
of additional counter smuggling assistance, such as a 
proposal by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to provide a new 
tunnel destruction capability.  Sovereignty concerns are 
likely driving his hesitation, along with concerns that FMF 
funds may be directed away from more high-profile programs 
like M1A1 tanks and aircraft.  You should encourage Tantawi 
to accept additional U.S. assistance, especially along the 
remote Egypt-Sudan border.  You should also remind Tantawi 
that no single technology can stop smuggling.  Success will 
depend on how well Egypt uses all available tools and 
resources to identity and disrupt smuggling networks.  He 
will likely reply that BTADS - once operational in February 
2010 -  and the subterranean steel wall MOD plans to begin 
installing along the Egypt-Gaza border in October 2009, will 
provide a sufficient counter smuggling capability.  As in the 
case of Tantawi's decision to sever the satellite link and 
discontinue the use of GPS technology with BTADS (ref B), his 
approach to border security likely has Mubarak's support. 
 
¶8.  (S/NF) As during your previous meeting, Tantawi will 
likely express concern over releasability issues and 
frustration with Egypt's inability to procure restricted 
weapons systems.  Since 2006, the Department of State has 
notified Congress of six potential end-use violations by the 
Egyptian military.  We are currently investigating two 
additional cases, one involving the visit of a Chinese 
military official to an F-16 facility and another involving 
civilian use of a synchrolift belonging to the Egyptian Navy. 
 The Office of Military Cooperation has begun training 
mid-level military officials on Egypt's end-use obligations, 
which has already resulted in averting a potential end-use 
violation (ref C).  Concerns of Egypt's potential violations 
has held up State Department approval for amendments to the 
M1A1 co-production agreement and the purchase of 24 F-16 
aircraft.  We hope to resolve these end-use concerns during a 
visit from State/PM at the end of July. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Soliman: Reconciliation Efforts Continue 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (S/NF) Egypt remains committed to cementing a durable 
Israeli-Hamas cease-fire and facilitating Palestinian 
reconciliation.  EGIS Chief Soliman will brief you on his 
latest efforts and stress that Gaza remains a very serious 
security threat to Egypt.  The Egyptians continue to meet 
with Israeli, Fatah and Hamas officials, including Khaled 
Mishal on June 13 and Israeli Defense Minister Barak on June 
¶21.  Soliman is seeking compromise from the Palestinian 
factions on security arrangements in Gaza as well as 
agreement on an electoral framework for the planned January 
2010 elections.  He expects to reconvene the factions in 
Cairo before July 7. 
 
¶10.  (S/NF) Soliman will likely reiterate his previous 
message that Egypt can be helpful in the Afghanistan/Pakistan 
context, especially as regards the Taliban.  He will also 
express a shared interest in bolstering the Iraqi government 
and military and coaxing Syria away from Iran and its 
interference in Lebanon. 
 
------------------------------- 
Internal Politics and Economics 
------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (C) We continue to promote democratic reform in Egypt, 
including the expansion of political freedom and pluralism, 
and respect for human rights, albeit without the public 
confrontations that had become routine over the past several 
years.  The GOE remains skeptical of our role in democracy 
promotion, complaining that any efforts to open up will 
result in empowering the Muslim Brotherhood, which currently 
holds 86 seats in Egypt's 454-seat parliament.  Upcoming 
parliamentary elections in 2010 and presidential elections in 
2011 are the focus of most domestic political discussions at 
present.  President Mubarak may well run for another 
five-year term in 2011, although nothing is certain.  A newly 
passed amendment creating 64 new seats for women in the lower 
house of parliament, the People's Assembly, has stirred 
rumors of a possible dissolution of the parliament and early 
elections. 
 
¶12. (SBU) Egypt was somewhat spared the early effects of the 
global credit crunch since Egyptian banks operate very 
conservatively, have low loan-to-deposit ratios, and have by 
and large avoided involvement with derivative investments and 
risky financial products.  The effects of the ensuing global 
economic crisis are now being felt in Egypt and growth, 
though still positive, has slowed. Egypt remains vulnerable 
as exports, Suez Canal revenues, tourism, and expatriate 
remittances -- its largest sources of revenue -- are all down 
and continue to fall. The government has taken some measures 
to stimulate domestic demand, but the effect of these 
measures is not yet clear. GDP, which had been growing at a 
6-7% annual rate has slowed to 3-4% in the current year; not 
too bad during a global recession, but insufficient to 
sustain an economy and to support Egypt's large and growing 
population. Egypt continues to suffer from widespread poverty 
affecting 35-40% of its population, particularly in rural 
areas and in Upper Egypt. Economic reform has stalled as 
Egypt's economic policymakers attempt to digest the twin hits 
of high inflation in 2008 (upwards of 20%) followed by the 
global economic crisis.  Egypt's budget for fiscal 2009/10 
projects a deficit of greater than 8% which is where it stood 
when reforms were begun in 2004.  Egyptian-U.S. trade has 
more than doubled over the last four years, reaching almost 
$9 billion in 2008.  The U.S. exports to Egypt about twice as 
much as it imports, and Egypt has become the seventh largest 
market for U.S. agricultural exports. 

SCOBEY