09CAIRO1261
U.S.-EGYPT STRATEGIC DIALOGUE: STRUCTURAL PROPOSALS
Thu Jul 02 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Cairo
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHEG #1261 1831332
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 021332Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY CAIRO
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3119C O N F I D E N T I A L CAIRO 001261 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR P, S/P, NEA, DRL 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/02/2019 
TAGS: PGOV EG
SUBJECT: U.S.-EGYPT STRATEGIC DIALOGUE: STRUCTURAL PROPOSALS 
 
REF: A. CAIRO 1220 
     ¶B. CAIRO 1197 
 
 Classified By: Ambassador Scobey for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d)
¶1. (C) Key Points: -- The recent launch of a strategic dialogue (reftels) promises a more regular exchange with Egypt on a number of common areas of concern in the region and globally. -- The formal, government-to-government nature of the dialogue does not lend itself to productive exchanges relating to internal Egyptian issues such as political reform and respect for human rights. During U/S Burns' recent visit to Cairo, civil society representatives asked whether or not they could be included in the dialogue. -- The establishment of an unofficial civil society dialogue on these issues would not take the place of regular government-to-government discussions aimed at seeking GOE consideration of steps to improve their human rights situation. But the unofficial nature of the dialogue could provide opportunity for more open discussion -- The Embassy believes that a well-structured but unofficial and off-the-record dialogue between representatives of U.S. and Egyptian organizations (with possible participation from U.S. and Egyptian government representatives) might be a useful adjunct to formal Embassy and Department demarches or discussions with GOE authorities on these matters. -- The goals of such a channel of communication would include: the development of common understandings about the direction and speed of Egyptian plans to respond to its own agenda for political reform and increased respect for human rights; the creation of a safe environment for Egyptian activists to challenge each other over the direction and content of Egyptian reform; the identification of ways the USG or other external parties could support indigenous efforts; and the development of confidence between Egyptians and Americans that could serve to mitigate the inevitable tensions that will accompany the transition of power in Egypt in the post-Mubarak era. -- Identifying an American organization that enjoys the confidence of both Americans and Egyptians to serve as convener/moderator will be important. Ambassador has had initial, very informal conversations with the Carnegie Endowment for Peace on this topic, with no commitments made or sought by either side. Consideration might be given to having the process co-sponsored by an American and an Egyptian association. -- The identification of the right participants for such a venture will be critical to the possibility of success. The only absolute requirement should be a commitment to respecting the confidentiality of the discussions. On the Egyptian side, we believe that participants should span the range of civil society, moving from regime/NDP-affiliated groups/individuals to those who advocate a less gradual approach and who have been openly critical of the current government. It should be expected, and even desired, that some of the Egyptian participants should be able to describe -- albeit unofficially -- the GOE's point of view in order to ground discussions in the reality of current conditions. On the U.S. side, participation from organizations such as NDI, IRI, and the various Egypt experts among the think tanks would be appropriate. USG and GOE participation in an unofficial setting could also assure that the two governments obtained an accurate assessment of the nature of the dialogue and its utility to the relationship. -- Carnegie already raised the question of Muslim Brotherhood participation, which might make the process unacceptable to the GOE, given the MB's proscribed status.

2.(C) Action Request: If the Department believes this initiative has merit, the Ambassador will continue to explore the issue with the Carnegie Endowment and would welcome discussions with stakeholders during her late July consultations in Washington. SCOBEY