09CAPETOWN81
FIFA 2010 WESTERN CAPE PROVINCIAL COORDINATOR
Wed Apr 01 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Cape Town
R 010652Z APR 09
FM AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 3036
INFO AMEMBASSY PRETORIA 
AMCONSUL DURBAN 
AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 
USDOC WASHDCUNCLAS CAPE TOWN 000081 
 
 
PLEASE PASS TO AF/S, JOHN MARBURG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON SA
SUBJECT: FIFA 2010 WESTERN CAPE PROVINCIAL COORDINATOR 
PROVIDES UPDATES ON 2010 WORLD CUP PREPARATIONS 
 
 ¶1.  Summary:  Fifa 2010 Western Cape Provincial Coordinator 
Dr. Laurine Platzky discussed a number of key issues 
pertaining to the Western Cape's preparations for next year's 
World Cup extravaganza at a brief meeting in Cape Town on 
March 13.  She noted that the province was already organizing 
sports and various life skills training activities for young 
people in the townships since provincial schools will be 
closed during the month-long sports event.  She further 
shared that the Western Cape is aiming to host ten national 
teams with their base camps located throughout the province. 
Platzky volunteered that two national teams had already 
visited the Western Cape to inspect accommodations, practice 
areas and security requirements for their players.  Overall, 
she appeared upbeat about her province's preparations and 
asserted that the various projects, including transportation, 
were either slightly ahead of or on schedule.  End Summary. 
 
How Do We Keep the Kids Busy? 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Dr. Platzky met with the Consul General and other 
Consulate officials on March 13 to provide an update on the 
Western Cape's preparations for next year's World Cup. 
Platzky, in response to a question, confirmed that provincial 
schools will be closed during the entire month of World Cup 
activities from June 11 to July 11, 2010.  She pointed out 
that the province was already planning to have Mass 
Participation Programs (MPP) for township youth during the 
month-long school holiday.  These programs will include 
soccer activities and other life skills training to engage 
them in constructive activities.  Dutch coaches had already 
begun soccer training in the townships, she added. 
 
A Plan to Host Ten National Teams 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  Platzky shared that the Western Cape is aiming to host 
ten national teams with their base camps located throughout 
the province.  She volunteered that since the province had 
approximately one third of the high-end accommodations in the 
country, provincial officials had decided to try to host one 
third of the thirty-two teams.  Platzky also noted that 
officials from the French and Spanish teams had already 
visited the Western Cape to look at accommodations, practice 
playing fields and security requirements. (Comment:  A 
Consulate official following the Fifa 2010 qualifying games 
predicted that the French team would not qualify to play in 
the World Cup matches.  End Comment).  She wondered, somewhat 
regretfully, why the U.S. team had only looked at one area in 
Pretoria and had not visited other parts of the country. 
Note:  Consul General Andrew Passen (Johannesburg) put Consul 
General Mayberry (Cape Town) in touch with U.S. Soccer 
Managing Director of Administration Tom King.  King promised 
to update Consulate General Cape Town on the U.S. team's 
plans for the World Cup when he visits here at a later time. 
Post will report as appropriate.  End Note. 
 
Sanguine on Transportation Projects 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  Platzky described several initiatives that the Western 
Cape and the city of Cape Town are undertaking to minimize 
potential transportation bottlenecks during the World Cup 
games.  She mentioned that officials had decided to hold 
seven of the eight Cape Town matches at 20:30 in the evening 
to avoid traffic tie-ups with rush-hour traffic.  The eighth 
match will be held at 14:30.  She also elaborated on a 
reservation scheme for domestic and international fans that 
Qreservation scheme for domestic and international fans that 
includes transportation in their travel packages.  For 
example, there are "follow-your team" and five-day city 
packages available, particularly for international soccer 
fans.  When an individual buys one of these packages, it will 
contain a ticket to the match, accommodation, and shuttle 
transportation to/from the event.  For the majority of local 
fans, who can buy tickets apart from a package, they can 
catch a train or a bus to the train station and then walk the 
fan mile to the stadium.  Incidentally, tickets purchased for 
the events will include the person's name and ID number to 
try to minimize scalping activities.  Platzky confirmed that 
there will also be shuttle buses from District Six for those 
individuals who wish to park their cars there. 
 
¶5.  The other transportation projects underway in the Cape 
Town area are on schedule, she continued.  The widening of 
the N2 route near Groot Schuur Hospital, otherwise known as 
"hospital bend," is scheduled to be finished by December 
¶2009.  Another city official indicated that the city's 
Integrated Rapid Transport (IRT) system, while still 
controversial with taxi operators, is also "fairly" on 
target.  The implementation of the inner-city IRT system from 
Castle Street to the new Green Point stadium has begun and is 
well within city timelines.  This official further noted that 
about R1 billion (USD 100 million) worth of bus ways are 
already under construction with more to follow for the new 
system.  He added that the city is going ahead with its IRT 
plans but will continue to consult with the taxi industry. 
 
Other Issues of Interest 
------------------------ 
 
¶6.  Dr. Platzky also touched on a number of other World 
Cup-related issues. 
 
    --  She asserted that the city and the province have no 
reason to believe that sex work will increase during the 
World Cup events although she agreed that young people may 
try to sell their services.  Platzky said that South Africa 
will not be able to decriminalize the sex industry by 2010. 
She further maintained that all World Cup literature and 
advertising makes abundantly clear to fans that underage sex 
is illegal and that it will not be tolerated. 
 
    --  Platzky explained the reasons for the increases in 
the cost of the Greenpoint Stadium.  The first estimate, she 
maintained, was based on the average cost of a seat with 
65,000 seats installed for the 2010 matches.  She added that 
environmental considerations had greatly increased the costs 
from R3.8 billion (USD 380 million) to its current estimate 
of R4.4 billion (USD 440 million) - an increase of fifteen 
percent.  For example, a double skin must now be put on the 
roof to cut down on noise levels.  Stade de France has also 
received a thirty-year concession to operate the stadium. 
 
    --  Besides the fans in the stadium, there will be a fan 
park with giant screens televising the matches for fans who 
cannot afford or obtain tickets.  The fan park will be 
located on Cape Town's "grand parade" near the train station. 
 
    --  Coca Cola has paid USD 2 billion for the exclusive 
sale of coke products within stadiums for three World Cups, 
including the one to be held in South Africa.  Budweiser will 
be the only beer sold at the stadiums during the matches. 
South African wine will be served in the boxes but not in the 
stands. 
 
    --  Fifty-seven new Home Affairs officials will be 
stationed at the Cape Town airport to help process increased 
visitors. 
 
¶7.  Comment:  Platzky seemed pleased with the progress to 
date on the Western Cape's preparations for 2010.  She seemed 
equally satisfied with the progress on transportation 
projects thus far.  Nevertheless, Cape Town has not seen the 
last of the taxi industry's discontent with the IRT system. 
The taxi industry's opposition to a similar bus system in 
Johannesburg led to a massive taxi strike with violence 
against bus drivers and passengers in that city on March 21. 
More consultations between government officials and the taxi 
industry will be needed to deconflict the new transportation 
system.  Until then, uncertainty over adequate transportation 
for local fans and an additional 150,000 outside visitors may 
continue to cloud an otherwise sunny forecast for Cape Town's 
2010 World Cup.  End Comment. 
 
 
MAYBERRY