09CAPETOWN152
DEBATE ON THE BUDGET VOTE OF THE PRESIDENCY
Mon Jun 29 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Cape Town
VZCZCXRO1269
PP RUEHDU RUEHJO
DE RUEHTN #0152 1801346
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 291346Z JUN 09
FM AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3138
INFO RUEHSA/AMEMBASSY PRETORIA 6445
RUEHUJA/AMEMBASSY ABUJA 0117
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 2156
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 3301UNCLAS CAPE TOWN 000152 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM SF
 
SUBJECT: DEBATE ON THE BUDGET VOTE OF THE PRESIDENCY 
 
¶1.  (U)  On June 24 Poloff attended the budget vote of the 
Presidency in Parliament.  This vote complements the State of the 
Nation debates held earlier this month.  During the State of the 
Nation Address 10 priorities for government over the next five years 
were outlined and government made a commitment to speed up economic 
growth and transform the economy to create employment and 
sustainable development for all. 
¶2.  (U)  Speaking in the National Assembly, President Jacob Zuma 
explained a number of issues that were mentioned in the State of the 
Nation address, particularly the rationale behind the new ministries 
and departments.  He said he had been questioned over why it was 
necessary to have both the Trade and Industry Department and the 
Economic Development Department.  He said trade matters would 
require a strong focus to have a direct impact on industrial 
organization and output, while the economic development portfolio 
would have a strong domestic focus and would address, among other 
things, matters of macro- and micro-economic development planning. 
He also stressed the importance of improved service delivery amongst 
civil servants, but did not have much sympathy for the concerns of 
state employees, such as doctors, who are threatening strike action 
for more money.   He said, "We have to introduce, without delay, a 
culture of hard work, courtesy and accountability by staff in the 
public service."  On an international level Zuma said South Africa 
will continue to participate in international forums and strengthen 
its relations with regions and nations of the world.  He highlighted 
South Africa's commitment to the African continent and said the 
government would continue to advance the implementation of the New 
Partnership for Africa's Development and will prioritize regional 
integration.  He said South Africa would continue to assist in 
peacekeeping operations and in the reconstruction and development of 
the African continent.  Zuma said that as the current Chair of SADC 
South Africa would continue to support the Government in Zimbabwe 
and render whatever assistance it could and urged other countries to 
assist in Zimbabwe's recovery.   He highlighted the importance of 
IBSA (policy collaboration among India, Brazil and South Africa) 
when he said "for us, the strategic partnership with India, Brazil 
and China constitutes a critical pillar of our international 
relations." 
¶3. (U)  In response to Zuma's budget speech, Democratic Alliance 
(DA) Parliamentary leader, Athol Trollip said it was imperative that 
President Zuma distance his government from the ANC's tripartite 
alliance partners -- the South African Communist Party and the 
Congress of South African trade Unions).  He said Zuma's 
administration was being haunted by the ghosts of his predecessor, 
former President Thabo Mbeki whose administration strained the 
policy consensus within the tripartite alliance.  Trollip was 
scathing in his attack and said the state presidency was being held 
hostage by the politically powerful majority ANC, noting that "the 
Secretary-General of the ANC is not the President."  Trollip accused 
Zuma of expanding the government too rapidly resulting in a growth 
in bureaucracy.  He also responded to reports in the media stating 
that the ANC would like to reorganize domestic governance by doing 
away with South Africa's provinces.  "We will not allow the ANC to 
stop us (DA) governing the province (the Western Province) we won in 
a free and fair election," Trollip said.