09CHENGDU169
YUNNAN: CHINA'S MAIN COUNTERNARCOTICS BATTLEFIELD SEES
Wed Aug 26 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO1066
RR RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0169/01 2380539
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 260539Z AUG 09
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3375
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC
RUEABND/DEA WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 4051UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CHENGDU 000169 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL AND EAP/CM 
JUSTICE FOR ICITAP AND OPDAT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR KCRM PGOV PREL CH
SUBJECT: YUNNAN: CHINA'S MAIN COUNTERNARCOTICS BATTLEFIELD SEES 
DOMESTIC SUCCESSES, FACES INTERNATIONAL CHALLENGES 
 
CHENGDU 00000169  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (U) This cable contains sensitive but unclassified 
information - not for distribution on the Internet. 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary: Narcotics control is making progress in Yunnan 
Province, the heart of Chinese drug trafficking, a senior 
provincial official told Consul General, but interdicting 
imports from the neighboring Golden Triangle remains difficult. 
The great majority of narcotics in the province are passing 
through rather than being produced or consumed in the province, 
and the number of addicts in Yunnan has fallen.  In the area of 
treatment and rehabilitation, the Kunming Treatment Center for 
Drug Addicts is a national model, the official said.  End 
Summary. 
 
 
 
Yunnan: China's Main Battlefield for Narcotics 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) Yunnan Province is the main battlefield for control of 
narcotics in China, Yunnan Narcotics Control Bureau Deputy 
Director Xu Yujiang told Consul General August 12 in Kunming. 
Noting that he had hosted the DEA Assistant Regional Director 
from Bangkok and Beijing's DEA Attache the previous day on a 
field visit to the Xishuangbanna Dai Autonomous Prefecture in 
southern Yunnan, Xu emphasized the "great harm" drugs do to 
Yunnan owing to its proximity to the Golden Triangle.  Party 
Committee and Provincial Government officials pay close 
attention to narcotics control, he said, and all branches of 
public security are involved in efforts to control narcotics. 
For 20 years, he said, Yunnan Province has given priority to 
drug prevention and control, prohibiting cultivation, 
production, use, and sales of narcotics. 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Xu emphasized that Yunnan serves as a major drug 
transshipment point and that there is little drug production 
that takes place in the province.  Asked by the CG about drug 
use in the province, Xu admitted that this does remain an issue 
owing to Yunnan's longstanding heroin problem, though the number 
of heroin addicts has decreased recently, he said.  Problems 
with increasing use of "new" drugs like methamphetamines are 
occurring mainly in China's East, he claimed, but due to 
Yunnan's relatively low incomes such drugs have not taken hold 
here. 
 
 
 
The People's War on Drugs 
 
------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Briefing CG on measures Yunnan authorities have taken 
historically to control the flow of drugs into the province, Xu 
reported that from 1982-2007, Yunnan Province handled 190,000 
drug cases, captured 155 tons of drugs, and intercepted 
thousands of tons of precursor chemicals being smuggled from 
Yunnan into neighboring countries.  More than 50 narcotics 
control officers lost their lives, he said, with more than 
another 300 injured.  From 2005-2007, Yunnan and other provinces 
in China carried out a "People's War on Drugs," and in these 
three years Yunnan Province handled 54,000 drug cases, captured 
roughly 62,000 drug-related criminals, and confiscated 28.8 tons 
of drugs, Xu said.  (Comment: officials' use here of the Chinese 
equivalent for "handled" or "dealt with" generally refers to all 
manner and status of drug cases, including perpetrators being 
fined, detained, arrested, investigated, prosecuted, sentenced, 
or sent for treatment.  Due to their lack of specificity of 
meaning these numbers are difficult to reconcile precisely with 
figures published in other sources, such as Chinese news 
reports, but they appear reasonably close.  End Comment.) 
 
 
 
Situation Improving, But Still Serious 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
CHENGDU 00000169  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) In recent years drugs entering Yunnan from the Golden 
Triangle have decreased, the number of addicts in Yunnan has 
decreased sharply, and the consumer market has shrunk greatly, 
Xu asserted.  In 2008, Yunnan handled 13,158 drug cases, carried 
out 15,018 arrests, and captured heroin, amphetamines, and opium 
totaling 6,536kg.  In that year, Yunnan authorities captured 
1,238kg of opium alone, an increase of 15.6 percent over the 
previous year. 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) Despite this progress, Xu continued, drugs entering 
China from abroad remain a serious problem, with poppy 
cultivation in the Golden Triangle continuing to increase. 
"Methods used for penetrating the border are always changing," 
he lamented.  Production of amphetamine-type stimulants (ATS), 
including drugs such as ecstasy, are also a serious problem, he 
added, noting that there were 3,078 ATS cases in 2008, with 
authorities capturing 2,251kg. 
 
 
 
Yunnan Taking New Measures to Combat Drugs 
 
------------------------------------------ 
 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) Noting the PRC's passage of national anti-drug 
legislation in 2008, Xu told CG that in order to consolidate 
recent counter-narcotics achievements, the Party and government 
were conducting a second round of the People's War on Drugs from 
2008-2010.  In Yunnan, officials are tightening measures to 
reduce cross-border flows of narcotics, increasing interdictions 
(including along land, air, and postal routes), and are 
"striking hard" at transnational and trans-border drug crimes. 
At the same time, Yunnan authorities are organizing public 
education campaigns and increasing international cooperation 
with border countries, including assisting those countries with 
crop replacement programs to help combat poppy cultivation. 
Yunnan Province is also promoting drug treatment and 
rehabilitation, and working to establish "drug-free" communities 
and to reduce the number of addicts in society.  Yunnan 
currently has 26 drug-free counties, Xu reported, and 724 
drug-free towns. 
 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) Asked by the CG about treatment centers, Xu explained 
that government treatment centers in Yunnan are managed by 
Public Security.  These "open centers" (meaning those seeking 
treatment are not sequestered from their families) primarily 
conduct education and training.  The Kunming Treatment Center 
for Drug Addicts is a model center for China, he said. 
 
 
 
¶10. (SBU) Comment: The overall picture Yunnan Narcotics Control 
Bureau officials presented to us tracks with Chinese news 
reports on counter-narcotics efforts in China, and with 
information presented in the Department's annual International 
Narcotics Control Strategy Report.  This suggests moderate 
success by the PRC in improving domestic aspects of China's 
narcotics problem, while highlighting the continued 
international challenge the country's neighbors pose for 
counter-narcotics efforts.  End Comment. 
 
 
 
¶11. (U) This cable has been coordinated with Embassy Beijing. 
BROWN