09CHENGDU288
TIBET:  RELIGION MANAGEMENT OFFICIALS EXPLAIN THEIR SYSTEM
Mon Dec 07 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO9066
RR RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0288/01 3410758
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 070758Z DEC 09
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3606
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 4317UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 CHENGDU 000288 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/CM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PGOV SOCI CH
SUBJECT: TIBET:  RELIGION MANAGEMENT OFFICIALS EXPLAIN THEIR SYSTEM 
 
REF: A. A) 07 CHENGDU 298; B) 08 CHENGDU 43; C) CHENGDU 248; 
     ¶B. D) CHENGDU 251; E) 08 CHENGDU 39; 
 
CHENGDU 00000288  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. (U) This cable contains sensitive but unclassified 
information and is not for internet distribution. 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary:  The Tibetan Autonomous Region's (TAR) Ethnic 
and Religious Affairs Bureau recently presented to Consul 
General in Lhasa the strictly Chinese government, official view 
of: the TAR's ethnic and religious composition, and regulation 
of religious affairs, including the permissions process for 
becoming a monk; the work of monastery democratic management 
committees and government working groups that do "patriotic 
education" work in the monasteries; the Panchen Lama 
controversy; and strong government support for the rebuilding 
monasteries damaged during the Cultural Revolution.  Gedun 
Cheokyi Nyima, the young Tibetan "illegally recognized" as the 
Panchen Lama by the Dalai Lama, is well.  End Summary. 
 
 
 
Ethnic Tibetans 95 Percent of TAR's 2.83 Million Population 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
 
 
¶3.  (SBU) TAR Ethnic and Religious Affairs Bureau Deputy 
Director Ngapo Jinyuan briefed Consul General October 20 in 
Lhasa on the ethnic situation of the TAR.  Although the 1959 
rebellion and the Cultural Revolution created much chaos in the 
region, Ngapo Jinyuan said, people today follow the maxims of 
the "Three Inseparables":  Han Chinese cannot be separate from 
the minority peoples; the minority peoples cannot be separate 
from the Han Chinese; and the minorities cannot be separate from 
each other. 
 
 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Ngapo Jinyuan said that ethnic Tibetans comprise 95 
percent of the 2.83 million population of the TAR.  The 
populations of the Lhopa and Monpa minorities are about 10,000 
each.  The ethnic regional autonomy system conferred rights on 
the peoples of the TAR, and thus the "Tibetans became masters in 
their own house in 1959," Ngapo Jinyuan asserted.  The TAR was 
established in 1965, but the "Law on Ethnic Regional Autonomy" 
was not passed until 1984.  [Comment and Note: This official's 
"95 percent ethnic Tibetans" is highly misleading because it 
does not include the PLA soldiers and PAP police, the "Help 
Tibet" officials from inland China, and the many hundreds of 
thousands of migrants ethnic Han migrant workers to the TAR, who 
stay for months or years at a time (refs A and B).  End 
Comment.] 
 
 
 
Rebuilt Monasteries 
 
------------------- 
 
 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Since 1979, the Chinese central government has 
invested nearly one billion RMB in the reconstruction of temples 
and other religious sites, Ngapo Jinyuan explained.  Although 
much money is still needed for economic development, the 
government continues to make large investments in the protection 
of religious sites.  People are free to practice their religion, 
but "illegal" and "separatist" activities are not allowed, he 
asserted. 
 
 
 
¶6.  (SBU) As we had heard in meetings with Vice Governor Wu and 
with the United Front Department (refs C and D) the right of 
people in the TAR to religious freedom was stressed.  Ngapo 
Jinyuan said that there are four Tibetan Buddhist schools with 
1700 religious venues and 46,000 monks and nuns in the TAR. 
There are four mosques with 4000 Tibetan Muslims and one 
Catholic Church with 700 Tibetan Catholics in the TAR.  All 
monasteries conduct normal religious activities.  Many 
monasteries were destroyed during the Cultural Revolution but 
after 1978, most of them were rebuilt and the celebration of 
over 40 religious festivals has resumed. 
 
 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The tradition of identifying reincarnated lamas has 
been resumed, Ngapo Jinyuan said.  The 11th Panchen Lama was 
 
CHENGDU 00000288  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
indentified around 1992.  Since the 1980s, the government has 
recognized the identification of 40 reincarnated lamas in the 
TAR. 
 
 
 
Process of Applying and Being Approved as a Monk 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
 
 
¶8.  (SBU) In response to a question from CG, Ngapo Jinyuan 
explained that if someone wants to become a monk or nun, they 
need to get permission from their parents,  then communicate 
their intention to the county government, and then get 
permission from their prospective monastery or nunnery.  The 
monastery or nunnery will test the candidate and put them on the 
religious candidates list for two years.  During those two 
years, if they respect the rules and regulations of the 
Democratic Management Committee (DMC), then the candidate can 
become a monk or nun.  In principle, the Communist Party of 
China gives people the freedom to practice their religion. 
However, in practice, some monasteries do not have the economic 
and intellectual capacity to accommodate many monks. 
 
 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The number of monks in a monastery depends upon how 
many monks the monastery can support and train, Ngapo Jinyuan 
asserted.  The labor of monks is lost to their village, but many 
families feel that a monk in the family brings them glory. 
Children are not allowed to become a monk or a nun before they 
complete their nine years of compulsory education.  Formerly, 
monks from outside the TAR could study in TAR monasteries 
without getting special permission, but now they need the 
permission of both their local government, and the TAR 
government, in order to do so. 
 
 
 
DMCs and Government Working Groups at Monasteries 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
 
 
¶10.  (SBU) In response CG's question, Ngapo Jinyuan said that 
the DMC is different from the "government working group."  The 
DMC is responsible for monastic religious affairs and financial 
management.  All the monasteries have DMCs, and all of its 
members are monks.  [Note: At the Gandan Monastery outside of 
Lhasa, the DMC director said that the Gandan DMC has 22 members: 
eleven monks and eleven government officials.  The 11 government 
officials do not participate however in some of the decisions 
about the internal management of the monastery.  End Note.] 
 
 
 
¶11. (SBU) By contrast, the "government working group" is not 
stationed at all monasteries, Ngapo Jinyuan explained.  These 
government working groups have been carrying out patriotic and 
legal education in the monasteries since 1994.  The "government 
working group" doesn't plan to leave the monasteries any time 
soon.  China is building a society under the rule of law and 
therefore the government working group needs to carry out legal 
education in the monasteries and nunneries so that monks and 
nuns will understand and respect the government's laws, he said. 
 
 
 
Response to Question on Dalai Lama-Recognized Panchen Lama 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
 
 
¶12.  (SBU)  In response to CG's question about the whereabouts 
and well-being of the Gedun Choekyi Nyima, the Dalai 
Lama-recognized Panchen Lama, Ngapo Jinyuan said that he is a 
young Tibetan man who was "illegally identified" as the 
reincarnation of the 10th Panchen Lama by the Dalai Lama.  The 
young man is "growing up very well, loves Chinese culture and is 
enjoying his life."  The Dalai Lama's illegal recognition of the 
Panchen Lama violated a 200-year tradition of central government 
recognition of Panchen Lamas, Ngapo Jinyuan asserted. 
 
 
 
¶13.  (SBU) In response to CG's questions on religious minorities 
 
CHENGDU 00000288  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
and arrested monks, Ngapo Jinyuan stated: 
 
 
 
-- There are about 400 Tibetan Muslims holding TAR ID cards in 
the region.  These people were originally from India, Ladakh and 
Kashmir.  Some of them settled in Gansu, Shanxi or Qinghai 
Provinces before coming to the TAR. 
 
-- About 20 people from the TAR make the pilgrimage to Mecca 
each year.  The TAR government organizes the trip, and reports 
the names of the pilgrims to the government of Saudi Arabia. 
 
-- There are no Protestant Christians holding TAR ID cards. 
Therefore, there are no plans to open any protestant churches. 
 
-- CG should ask the Justice Bureau about arrested monks.  The 
TAR Government held a press conference about people who had been 
arrested after March 14, so "You can look it up." 
 
-- There has been no change in China's religious policy since 
March 14, 2008. 
BROWN