09CHENGDU110
SOUTHWEST CHINA: PEASANTS, TITANIUM, AND HALTED DAMS
Wed Jun 24 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO7392
RR RUEHAST RUEHDH RUEHGH RUEHHM RUEHLN RUEHMA RUEHPB RUEHPOD RUEHSL
RUEHTM RUEHTRO RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0110/01 1750342
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 240342Z JUN 09
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3262
INFO RUEHZN/ENVIRONMENT SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COLLECTIVE
RUEHBJ/USDAO BEIJING
RHEFDHP/DIA DHP-1 WASHINGTON DC
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/DEPT OF INTERIOR WASHINGTON DC
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 3936
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 CHENGDU 000110 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EMIN SENV SOCI ECON CH
SUBJECT: SOUTHWEST CHINA: PEASANTS, TITANIUM, AND HALTED DAMS 
 
REF: BEIJING   00001637 
 
CHENGDU 00000110  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:   Displaced peasants, a new dam that will be 
second only to Three Gorges,  China's largest  titanium 
deposits, a sudden dam-halting order from the PRC Environment 
Ministry and the transformation of villages on Xichang's rural 
periphery are all linked to the construction of a 
vanadium-titanium production base just outside Xichang in 
southern Sichuan Province.   Hundreds of households in the rural 
Jingjiu district, 10 kilometers southwest of downtown Xichang, 
are being moved to concentrated settlements to make way for an 
18 square kilometer industrial zone that will become one of 
China's top suppliers of titanium and vanadium.   Peasants are 
also being displaced from near 14 hydroelectric dams being built 
on the Jinshajiang, Yalongjiang, and Dadu Rivers to supply cheap 
electric power to the Jingjiu Industrial Zone for 
energy-intensive processing of nearby deposits of vanadium, 
titanium, rare earth metals, bauxite and copper ores. 
According to an April 2009 press report, some peasants displaced 
by the Xiluodu dam, expected to be China's second biggest when 
completed in 2015, have been denied compensation by local 
authorities.   On June 11th, China's Environment Ministry halted 
temporarily construction of several big dams on the Jinshajiang 
since the two companies building them had not obtained the 
required environmental impact assessments.   PRC environmental 
groups have praised the decision, while criticizing construction 
companies for ignoring the law, and calling for a review of dam 
approval procedures.  End summary. 
 
 
 
Resettling Villagers Displaced by Vanadium-Titanium Project 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) While during a recent visit to southern Sichuan, 
Congenoff saw how a new industrial zone is likely to transform 
villages in the rural district of Jingjiu, about 10 kilometers 
away (an hour by road) from downtown Xichang.   Entering one of 
these villages, Congenoff saw a long line of about 60 
medium-sized trucks waiting to offload coal powder for a large 
cement plant.   Beyond the village, dust clouds appeared from 
what villagers said was a new steel plant under construction. 
After walking along the main road past green paddy fields and 
painted signs on walls "When you expand production, consider 
hiring a peasant," Congenoff turned towards a large cleared area 
beyond a field off the south side of the road where new streets 
were under construction.   An office marked the "Sichuan 
Yuanfeng Construction Project Management Co., Panzhihua Steel 
Xichang Vanadium-Titanium Resettlement Point Management Office" 
stood in front of the busy construction site.  Workers were 
laying down new roads and preparations for building new housing 
within a large cleared area were getting underway. 
 
 
 
¶3.  (U) Note:  According to recent reports from local Xichang 
media,  the Panzhihua Steel Xichang Vanadium-Titanium 
Comprehensive Utilization project began in March 2008 with the 
leveling of land at four construction sites and new building 
infrastructure such as roads, electric power, communications and 
power plants for  the zone, as well as housing  for 340 
households ( 1240 people) displaced by the project.   The 
households displaced will be resettled in two different 
locations.  On May 21 local leaders held a meeting on the 
progress of the project, which judging from a press photo, was 
attended by at least fifteen of the peasants who were being 
moved. 
 
 
 
Peasant-Construction Workers 
 
----------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Congenoff struck up a conversation with five 
construction workers who were sitting in the shade against a 
wall with their dust masks slung around their necks.  The 
workers said they were local farmers who were working on 
building new homes for local peasants, some of whom would move 
down from their plots of land in the hills.  One of the workers 
said the project was being paid for by the government and they 
come to work when agricultural duties slow down.  When asked if 
this resettlement point near the main road would make it 
inconvenient for peasants whose land was some distance away, one 
of the peasants said people in the area supported the project 
since mechanization had made it very hard to earn a living as a 
farmer.   They said the government is paying for the housing. 
One worker said that in the old days you couldn't say what you 
 
CHENGDU 00000110  002.3 OF 004 
 
 
think; "it is much better now."   He also said that peasants 
living in the hills will also be settled at this central 
location. 
 
 
 
¶5.  (SBU) An older man on a bicycle came over to join in the 
conversation.  He pointed to clouds of dust in the distance and 
said it came from a work site where a steel plant is under 
construction and complained about the dust that is everywhere 
since construction began.   Note:  a June 19, 2009 BBS posting 
complained about the dust coming out of the Jingjiu Industrial 
zone  -- online at URL tinyurl.com/jingjiu-dust 
 
 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Congenoff talked with some other workers, including a 
recent civil engineering graduate of Sichuan University, about 
the project.  According to the workers, the housing construction 
is part of the Chinese government's overall "Three Concentrates" 
(sange jizhong) urban-rural integration project aimed at moving 
peasants to create urban villages.  This will concentrate local 
rural population so that people can get better services.   This 
particular housing construction project began about a month ago. 
  The engineer said that sites had been laid out for over 30 
three-to-four story apartment buildings that will be built with 
"traditional ethnic characteristics."  Note:  Xichang is the 
capital of the Liangshan Yi Minority Prefecture.  This, one of 
four projected resettlement sites, will be completed before the 
next Spring Festival in February 2010.  The workers said that 
Liangshan is rich in rare earth metals and will become an 
important supplier of vanadium and titanium to all of China. 
 
 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Comment:   Both the rural-urban integration policy 
resettlement under the "Three Concentrates" and the resettlement 
of peasants displaced by the Jingjiu Industrial Zone appear to 
be going on simultaneously.   While the "Three Concentrates" is 
meant to apply to all rural areas, in practice, resettlement of 
peasants in Sichuan Province is often done on the margins of big 
cities where it is much easier to provide employment to peasants 
once they are resettled in a concentrated urban settlement 
pattern.  End comment). 
 
 
 
Website Outlines Titanium-Vanadium Jingjiu Industrial Zone Plans 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------------- 
 
¶8.  (U) According to the Liangshan Prefectural government 
official website, the 18.5 square kilometer, located near the 
Chengdu to Kunming railway line, is the only prefectural level 
industrial zone in Liangshan.  Abundant exploitable hydropower 
resources in the Lianshan Prefecture - over half of Sichuan's 
and 12 percent of China's - as well as abundant mineral 
resources make this an ideal area for energy-intensive mineral 
processing.  Supplying the industrial zone with power are 110 
kilovolt and 220 kilovolt power lines, with an additional line 
planned for later.  A total of fourteen hydropower plants will 
be built on three rivers (Jinshajiang, Yalongjiang,  and Dadu) 
that  will double the power available to the industrial zone 
from 4 million kilowatts to  8 million kilowatts and bring down 
electric power costs.  (Note:  the Panzhihua Steel Group 
Titanium Company is a large state- owned enterprise that is the 
largest titanium producer in China and the second largest in the 
world).   Nearby vanadium and titanium resources account for 93% 
of China's total and nearly half of the world supply. 
Liangshan also contains China's largest deposits of heavy and 
light rare earth minerals along with rich deposits of copper, 
lead, zinc and aluminum.  The Taihe Vanadium, Titanium and Iron 
Mine (1.5 billion tons of ore) is only 19 kilometers from 
Xichang. 
 
 
 
Peasants Displaced by  Dams That Will Power Jingjiu Industrial 
Zone 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------------ 
 
¶9.  (SBU) The local and national press has been reporting 
recently on the resettling of peasants displaced by Jingjiu 
Industrial Zone and the many large dams that will provide power 
to the Jingjiu Industrial Area.  To judge by these press reports 
and Congenoff's limited conversations with people in Jingjiu, 
resettlement of people displaced near the industrial zone 
 
CHENGDU 00000110  003.2 OF 004 
 
 
appears to be going relatively well.  However,  Guanghzou-based 
national newspaper  Southern Weekend (Nanfang Zhoumo) painted a 
somewhat different picture in an April 2009 report on displaced 
peasants from the village of Guazicun, in Deyang county about 
120 kilometers northeast of Xichang on the Sichuan -Yunnan 
provincial border.   [Note: Southern Weekend, which has a 
tradition of investigative journalism at the edge of the 
permissible, sells several million copies across China every 
week. ]   According to Nanfang Zhoumo, due to a sudden drastic 
breakdown of law and order in their village and the refusal of 
the local authorities to do anything about it, the 53 households 
of 220 peasants together with their village party secretary fled 
one evening in 1996 en masse to another county without telling 
the local authorities.  The reporter does not say why order 
broke down drastically,  simply juxtaposing the break-down of 
law and order, the flight of peasants, the construction of the 
dam and the refusal of authority to recognize their right for 
compensation for their collective rights to their  land, 
allowing readers to draw their own conclusions. 
 
 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Now these peasants, as described by Nanfang Zhoumo, 
will lose twice over the industrial zone project:  both the land 
they must now rent in the Jingjiu district of Xichang and 
compensation they are being denied for land in Guazicun which a 
new 12.6 million kilowatt hydroelectric plant will flood.  The 
ten-year- long Xilouodu Dam construction project, when completed 
in 2015, will be China's second largest after the Three Gorges 
Dam.  Local authorities told the peasants' village Party 
Secretary that he had been expelled from the Party and the 
villagers could not get PRC national ID cards or any 
compensation since the village they belonged to no long exists. 
 
 
 
 
 Environment Ministry Ordered Jinshajiang Dam Construction Halt 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------------- 
 
¶11.  (U) On June 11, subsequent to Congenoff's visit to the 
area, the PRC Environment Ministry Office at its press 
conference and on its website announced a halt to construction 
of dams on the middle reaches of the Jinshajiang river by two 
companies, the Yunnan Huadian Ludila Hydropower Ltd.  and 
Huaneng Longkaikou Hydropower Ltd. , that had started 
construction without authorization and without obtaining an 
environmental impact assessment.   In some cases the flow of the 
river has already been cut by dam construction.   A group of 
Chinese environmentalists wrote to the Environmental Ministry 
praising the decision and pointed out that these projects have 
already down a great deal of damage in construction, including 
resettling of peasants which has already begun in some cases, 
damaging vegetation,  putting wastewater in streams and 
threatening endangered species of fish.  The mentioned 
specifically the large Jiaba and Xiluodu dams under 
construction. 
 
 
 
¶12. (U) The environmentalists called for a review of dam 
approval procedures and criticized the overdevelopment of 
hydropower, the damage it causes and the arrogance of companies 
that start a project, figuring that they'll  "get on the bus 
first and buy a ticket later".  The letter was signed by 
organizations such as the Friends of Nature and Green Rivers as 
well as by some geologists, environmentalists and journalists. 
The environmentalists' letter, together with nine color 
photographs of Jinshajiang dams under construction in Yunnan and 
Sichuan without having obtained environmental impact assessments 
is available at URL  tinyurl.com/jinshajiang-dam-stop. 
 
 
 
Comments 
 
-------- 
 
¶13.  (SBU)  The Nanfang Zhoumo report does not make any direct 
connection between the forcing out of the peasants and the 
subsequent construction of the Xiloudu dam which will flood 
their village.  That is apparently left as an exercise for the 
reader.  In Sichuan Province, the situation of peasants and 
their treatment by government officials appears to worsen the 
deeper into the countryside you go.  On the margins of the city 
of Xichang, resettlement may be going relatively well, but the 
April 2009 article raises familiar doubts about how peasants are 
 
CHENGDU 00000110  004.2 OF 004 
 
 
treated in impoverished areas where the quality of local 
officials is usually quite low.   Now that Jinshajiang as well 
as Nujiang (reftel) hydropower dam construction projects are 
both on hold after much money has already been spent on 
construction, we shall see if the "get on the bus first, then 
buy a ticket" permissions-ignoring schemes of the dam 
construction companies will work out for them in the end. 
 
 
 
Appendix: 
 
Press Reports and Photo Links Collated by Consulate 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------- 
 
-- Report on May 21 meeting on progress of resettlement of 
peasants displaced by construction of the Jingjiu Industrial 
Zone at URL tinyurl.com/xichang-anzhidian 
 
-- Photos of a peasant resettlement point in early construction 
phase at URL tinyurl.com/jingjiu 
 
-- Complaints about blowing to Xichang from the Jingjiu 
Industrial zone online at URL tinyurl.com/jingjiu-dust 
 
-- Jingjiu Industrial Zone webpage URL at 
tinyurl.com/jingjiu-industrial-zone 
 
-- Xiluodu Hydropower Station: Location and Physical and Social 
Environment - URL at tinyurl.com/xiluodu-hydroproject 
 
 -- Displaced peasants, their village flooded by the Xiluodu 
Hydropower Station reported in April 2009 Southern Weekend - URL 
at   tinyurl.com/xichang-jinshajiang-peasants 
 
-- PRC Ministry of Environment Protection Office Letter No. 
(2009) 603 "Notice Ordering Halt of Construction on the Kaikou 
Hydroelectric Plant on the Jinshajiang"  at URL 
tinyurl.com/sepa-huanengletter and press release of June 11 
announcing that hydroelectric projects on the Jinshajiang would 
be ordered stopped. 
 
URL at tinyurl.com/sepa-jinshajiang-pressrel 
 
-- PRC environmentalists letter praising June 11 PRC Environment 
Ministry Decision to Halt Dam Construction on Middle Reaches of 
the Jinshajiang posted on the Chinese language website of the 
China Development Brief at URL  tinyurl.com/jinshajiang-dam-stop 
 
End Appendix. 
BOUGHNER