09CHENGDU11
SICHUAN QUAKE RECOVERY: CONTRASTING TWO SOUTHWEST CHINA
Wed Jan 14 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Chengdu
VZCZCXRO6397
RR RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHCN #0011/01 0141023
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 141023Z JAN 09
FM AMCONSUL CHENGDU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3061
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 1700
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 3728UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 CHENGDU 000011 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/CM 
BANGKOK ALSO FOR USAID 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SOCI ECON PGOV CH
SUBJECT: SICHUAN QUAKE RECOVERY: CONTRASTING TWO SOUTHWEST CHINA 
COMMUNITIES 
 
REF: FBS20080627234985 
 
CHENGDU 00000011  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (U) This cable contains sensitive but unclassified 
information - not for distribution on the internet. 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Eight months after the May Sichuan 
Earthquake, harder hit areas in Southwest China's Sichuan 
province face a long recovery process that may exceed the 
official target for a total recovery in three years.  Zundao, a 
town about 60 miles north of Chengdu, will need to be completely 
rebuilt; a process that may take 10 years.  Other villages are 
well on their way to recovery.  A village outside of Anxian, 
roughly 30 miles north of Zundao, has relatively little damage 
despite its close proximity to some of the hardest hit areas. 
Here much of the needed reconstruction has already been 
completed and villagers appear to feel generally optimistic. 
End Summary. 
 
 
 
Potentially Long, Slow Recovery 
 
------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) On a recent visit to Zundao, a town of about 21,000 
people under Mianzhu City, Congenoff noticed that most of the 
buildings still showed significant earthquake damage.  An NGO 
employee there, Wang Yaoyun, told us that about 90 percent of 
the town's buildings had been damaged or destroyed in the 12 May 
2008 earthquake.  Most of the retail shops had either cracked 
walls or were partially collapsed.  Houses showed similar 
damage, and only a very few buildings seemed to have escaped 
unscathed.  Wang pointed out a large liquor factory he said had 
not been damaged by the quake.  One of the town's government 
buildings still stood, although the other had collapsed.  Wang 
said both the Zundao mayor and Party Secretary died in the 
earthquake, but he did not say if they died in the collapsed 
government building. 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Rebuilding was underway, mostly by individual business 
owners or residents fixing their own houses and shops.  Wang 
said that reconstruction in much of the town had not yet begun. 
He estimated it could take 8-10 years to rebuild the town.  At 
least two large temporary housing communities are set up inside 
the town, the same kind of metal structures with a thin layer of 
Styrofoam insulation that are widely used in other earthquake 
affected areas.  Many residents apparently have chosen to stay 
in their damaged homes rather than move into the temporary 
shelters. 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Zundao's school and hospital have been completely 
rebuilt by Vanke, one of China's largest real estate developers. 
 Both buildings appeared to be well-built structures, although 
construction underway on stores and houses along the streets 
seemed less sturdy.  Congenoff watched workers at one 
street-side shop build a brick pillar to shore up the second 
floor of the building that was sagging.  Wang said that 
first-priority reconstruction projects included public 
facilities like the school, hospital, and the yet-to-be-built 
community center.  Rebuilding the collapsed government office 
building was also a priority.  Some of the government is 
currently operating out of temporary offices in the same type of 
prefabricated, one-story buildings that house many people 
displaced by the earthquake. 
 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) Jiangsu Province, like other relatively prosperous 
provinces, was ordered by the State Council in June 2008 to 
spend at least one percent of its annual budget on earthquake 
relief (see ref).  The State Council paired Jiangsu Province 
with Mianzhu City; Zundao township is subordinate to Mianzhu. 
Developers from Jiangsu province have partnered with Zundao to 
assist in the rebuilding.  Congenoff saw housing facilities for 
workers from one Jiangsu company and a vehicle with Jiangsu 
license plates.  The assistance from Jiangsu, however, is 
currently going to priority projects rather than individual 
homes and businesses, according to Wang. 
 
 
 
CHENGDU 00000011  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
 
Village Showing Comparatively Little Damage 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) A visit by Congen Management Officer to a village 
outside of Anxian, just south of one of the hardest hit areas, 
contrasted with what Congenoff saw in Zundao.  Management 
Officer noticed earthquake related damage, but few buildings 
appeared to have significant structural damage.  Buildings like 
the village community center that suffered significant damage 
had already been repaired.  The village had some temporary 
shelters, similar to those seen in Zundao. 
 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) An aid worker who has been working in the earthquake 
affected areas since May told Management Officer that residents 
in areas like Anxian were unexpectedly optimistic in their 
post-quake outlook.  She believed that most villagers saw this 
as the latest episode in China's development tradition of 
growth, destruction, and rebuilding.  She said that the only 
exception were the families that lost children in the quake. 
These families have great difficulty moving on after the quake 
and were still angry, according to the aid worker.  During his 
visit and discussions with the aid worker, Management Officer 
was surprised to find villagers relatively well dressed (winter 
coats, hats, shoes) and in good spirits.  Villagers waited 
patiently many hours to be provided relief supplies (blankets, 
long underwear, socks, and shoes) and did not exhibit any 
anxiety about their situation. 
 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) Management Officer was told by the aid worker that 
relief supplies were provided to villagers with the assistance 
of the village leader (cunzhang), and that no higher officials 
had been informed.  Villages receiving supplies from this 
particular relief effort appear to have been chosen based on 
information from personal relationships and the organizational 
ability of individual village leaders. 
BOUGHNER