09DAMASCUS825
SEEKING A PROGRAMMING SURGE IN SYRIA
Wed Nov 25 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0005
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0825/01 3291428
ZNR UUUUU ZZH (CCY ADX0E09D81 MSI5715 611)
P 251428Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7067
INFO RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 7704
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 5221
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 0798
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 0754
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV PRIORITY 2469
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 1752UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000825 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSATIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/ELA, NEA/PPD, R, ECA, IIP 
LONDON FOR LORD, PARIS FOR NOBLES 
 
*************C O R R E C T E D COPY*************** 
 
            CLASSIFICATION CHANGE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KPAO OEXC SOCI PREL PGOV SCUL SY
SUBJECT: SEEKING A PROGRAMMING SURGE IN SYRIA 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY: After nearly five years of significantly 
constrained public outreach options, Embassy Damascus is 
focused on exploiting new opportunities to engage in more 
sustained public diplomacy programmatic activity.  With a 
finite number of tools at our disposal, we hope to expand our 
ability to reach average Syrians.  Post proposes a series of 
public diplomacy initiatives centering on the critical themes 
that the Secretary identified in her November 2 speech in 
Marrakesh: job creation/employment; technology and scientific 
research and education and exchanges.  We will need both 
policy guidance and program/budget support from the 
Department to make our vision materialize.  End Summary. 
 
-------------------- 
Opportunity Knocks 
-------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Since the White House's June 23, 2009 announcement 
of its decision to return an ambassador to Damascus, Syrian 
organizations have approached Embassy Damascus to express 
interest in partnering with the Embassy.  This interest has 
come from a variety of organizations including those 
previously resistant to our efforts to cultivate contacts 
over the last half decade. This interest provides a new 
opportunity to work with government-approved institutions 
with which we have had little contact in five years, and to 
present an alternative images of the U.S. promulgated by the 
Syrian media.  Recent openings include:  cooperating with the 
Ministry of Higher Education and private universities; 
cooperating with AAMAL, the First Lady's premier organization 
for disabled children; working with SHEBAB, a quasi-NGO that 
seeks to prepare young Syrians for private sector employment; 
supporting Massar, which is creating a network of interactive 
children's museums all over Syria; and working with BESMA, 
the children's cancer organization which is training a new 
generation of nurses and doctors in this critical field.  In 
addition to these organizations, there is a steady drumbeat 
for more American culture in Syria.  60 percent of Syria's 
population is under 25 and over 57 percent of that population 
is believed to be unemployed or underemployed, with few 
prospects or options for entertainment or employment.  In 
light of these staggering statistics, the recently concluded 
OIG inspection recommended a cultural surge for Damascus.  To 
fulfill this recommendation, we will depend on the Department 
to share as many youth-focused cultural programs with us as 
possible -- even if they are only for short periods. 
 
----------------------------- 
Embassy Damascus Answers 
----------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Fulbright programs remain the most responsive tool 
currently at our disposal.  There is now a strong desire from 
Damascus University and other private universities to 
cooperate with Fulbright, especially in critical fields like 
higher education management, business, marketing and 
management.  We are already utilizing the Fulbright Visiting 
Specialist program as a way to bring American expertise to 
organizations that desperately need and want it.  AAMAL is 
chaired personally by the First Lady, and she has issued a 
clear mandate to develop a relationship with the U.S. Embassy 
to improve the quality and methods of teaching and training 
the disabled.  AAMAL's board approved cooperation with the 
Fulbright Specialist program and would like as many as five 
during FY10 (post is limited to five specialists per FY); 
AAMAL is anxious to affiliate a Fulbright Scholar, as well. 
We are also looking for ways to use the Fulbright Specialist 
Program and the IVLP to support SHEBAB, Massar and BESMA. 
Each of these "private" organizations represents real 
opportunities for the U.S. to influence key institutions in 
critical fields of education and entrepreneurship. 
 
Other projects planned for FY10 include: 
 
-- Hosting an information technology delegation organized by 
S/P to Damascus to probe interest in explaining the loosening 
of U.S. restrictions on telecoms and perhaps to explore the 
possiblity of private-sector investment to establish a 
computer training center in Syria.  IT sanctions are a major 
source of frustration inside Syria, and it would help our 
policy and PD outreach efforts to demonstrate a tangible 
benefit of Washington's decision to ease restrictions in the 
IT area. 
-- In the cultural exchanges domain, Embassy Damascus plans 
to build on its previous support for two major programs: 
raising awareness on environmental issues and sustainable 
urban development.  We hope to organize a conference around 
these and other issues in the spring of 2010.  Given that 
more than 25% of Syria's economy is based on agriculture and 
a severe drought has caused massive rural to urban 
outmigration we believe there is an important nexus between 
agriculture, agri-business, the environment and sustainable 
urban development. 
 
--  Post will again silently fund the Tanenbaum Foundation's 
participation in an interfaith dialogue forum in the second 
quarter of this year. 
 
-- Embassy participation in the 2010 DOX BOX film festival to 
be held in March, 2010.  We hope to contribute by bringing 
Jewish-American filmaker Frederick Wiseman (per the 
conference organizer's request) to screen several of his 
films, participate in Q&A sessions, and conduct master 
classes with Syrian filmakers.  We would also like to obtain 
the screening rights to the Wiseman films that will be shown, 
donate the Wiseman DVDs and rights to DOX BOX, and pay for 
the translation and subtitling of the films.  We also want to 
screen Harlan County, USA and other American films. 
 
-- For the first time ever, the organizers of the Saint Elian 
Cultural Festival in Homs requested Embassy participation in 
their March 2010 festival.  Post will request an American 
classical musician for performances and master classes at the 
university in Homs. 
 
--  Post would also like to bring a break dancing troupe to 
Syria for a series of youth-specific engagements all over the 
country. 
 
-- Post would like to undertake a series of SCPs during FY10 
to support several of the above organizations in creating 
long-term institutional linkages in the U.S. 
 
--------- 
Helping Us Over the Hurdles 
-------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Post needs Washington's help in overcoming several 
challenges to translating our vision into reality: 
 
-- Sanctions policy:  Multiple layers of U.S. sanctions apply 
to U.S activities.  In particular, we need explicit guidance 
on whether a waiver will be required for post to fully 
support the DOX BOX film festival. 
 
-- Limitations of current program options: Universities and 
other organizations are anxious to see us bring U.S. experts 
to Syria, but we do not have a program into which we can tap 
now to provide long-term academic/professional expertise in 
several of the critical fields detailed above.  We are 
coordinating closely with ECA on changes to the Fulbright 
solicitation for FY11, and we are drawing heavily upon the 
Fulbright Specialist program.  But we remain limited to five 
specialists per FY.  Post must underwrite the cost of their 
per diem and accommodations here, and the time frame is often 
not long enough for some organizations to build meaningful 
partnerships.  Post would be extremely grateful if the 
Department could identify a stop-gap program to help us meet 
the needs of local institutions until Fulbright can re-take 
center stage in Syria. 
 
-- Funding: As noted above, post would like to create SCPs - 
at least three - for key partner institutions.  We request 
additional IVLP funding to do so and we may also require 
budget support for other elements of our initiatives. 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) COMMENT: Post is eager to implement the priorities 
outlined by the Secretary in her November 2 speech in 
Marrakesh.  The thawing of bilateral relations is enabling 
the Embassy to rebuild relations after a five year freeze. 
We have a rare opportunity to re-connect with some 20 million 
Syrians and have a number of different ways in which we can 
do so.  Post appreciates Department support for its 
activities, and hopes assistance and guidance will be 
forthcoming to launch a programming surge in Syria. 
HUNTER