09DAKAR1266
Darou Mousty Homosexuals Condemned by Local Court
Wed Oct 07 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXRO4250
RR RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHDK #1266 2801227
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 071227Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3165
INFO RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS DAKAR 001266 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/W, AF/RSA, DRL AND INR/AA 
PARIS FOR AFRICA WATCHER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINS KDEM ECON SG
SUBJECT: Darou Mousty Homosexuals Condemned by Local Court 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: In an August decision the Court of Louga (in North 
central Senegal) sentenced three adults and two minors for 
"unnatural sex acts."  One adult was sentenced to five years and two 
others to two years.  As for the minors, one was found guilty but 
received no prison sentence.  He was remanded into his parents' 
custody under the supervision of the social services branch of the 
Ministry of Justice.  The case was dropped for a second minor who 
contended that he was forced to have sex by his partner who managed 
to escape arrest.  End Summary. 
 
Arrested following denunciation 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) On June 18, gendarmes patrolling in Darou Mousty (one of 
the holy cities of the Mouride Islamic brotherhood) received a 
tipoff around 20:00 indicating that a couple (male) located in the 
neighborhood of Escale were homosexuals.  The gendarmes arrested the 
couple, Amsa Gueye, 30, and Massamba Gaye, 17.  The interrogation of 
the couple by gendarmes led to the arrest of another homosexual 
couple (male), Matar Gueye, 21, and Ousmane Gaye, 24(who turned out 
to be the brother of Massamba Gaye).  They also arrested Khadim 
Gueye, 15, but his partner, Thierno Wade, escaped arrest.  The two 
minors were interrogated in the presence of their parents.  After 
the investigation by the gendarmes, the Prosecutor of the Regional 
Court of Louga charged all five with having committed "unnatural 
sex," a crime listed in Article 319 of the Criminal Code of Senegal. 
 Amsa Gueye and Matar Gueye have consistently denied the charges 
despite the testimony of Madiop Gueye, a witness who testified 
against them. 
 
Heavy Sentences 
--------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) The Court of Louga first prosecuted the adults and rendered 
a verdict on August 12, 2009.  Amsa Gueye was found guilty of 
"unnatural sex" and "enticing a minor into sexual intercourse."  He 
was condemned to five years of imprisonment.  Ousmane Gaye and Matar 
Gueye were found guilty of "unnatural sex" and condemned each to two 
years imprisonment.  The minors, as required by law, were prosecuted 
behind closed doors by a special jurisdiction for minors and their 
verdict was rendered on August 28, 2009 at the Regional Court of 
Louga.  The court dropped the case against Khadim Gueye.  The latter 
told the court that Thierno Wade had forced him to have sex and this 
was the only time he ever did.  The other minor, Massamba Gaye, was 
found guilty of "unnatural sex" but the Court did not give him a 
prison sentence and he was left in the custody of his parents under 
supervision of the AEMO (local social service run by the Ministry of 
Justice to accompany and reeducate children in difficulty). 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) This case further illustrates that when it comes to 
homosexuality, Senegal's legal authorities continue to carry out the 
will of religious groups and a conservative public opinion.  During 
the year, the former Minister of Justice and newly appointed Foreign 
Minister Madicke Niang reiterated that the government was totally 
opposed to decriminalizing homosexuality.  Thus although the word 
"homosexuality" is not in the Criminal Code, the crime of "unnatural 
sex" allows judges to condemn homosexuals and when they do they tend 
to mete out extremely heavy sentences.  Moreover, the failure by law 
enforcement to prosecute a gang of youths who disinterred a 
homosexual in the city of Thies exemplifies the reluctance of the 
government to stand up to Senegal's more conservative elements and 
their growing intolerance for the country's gay community. 
SMITH