09DAKAR1401
Senegal: Opposition launches campaign for Wade's
Fri Nov 13 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Dakar
VZCZCXRO7265
RR RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHDK #1401 3171305
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 131305Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3353
INFO RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS DAKAR 001401 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/W, AF/RSA, DRL AND INR/AA 
PARIS FOR AFRICA WATCHER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINS KDEM ECON SG
SUBJECT: Senegal: Opposition launches campaign for Wade's 
resignation 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: On November 6, Benno, the Senegalese opposition 
party coalition, staged a demonstration calling on President 
Abdoulaye Wade to resign.   The organizers denounced bad governance 
and announced that they have launched a campaign to collect 3 
million signatures (twice the number of people who voted for 
President Wade in the 2007 presidential elections) urging him to 
resign before his terms is up in 2012.  The Ministry of the Interior 
initially refused to permit the opposition to hold the 
demonstration, but then reversed course after pressure from the 
President's Office, making this one of the few approved opposition 
demonstrations of Wade's second term.  The demonstration, in terms 
of turnout, was the first successful one the opposition has held 
since Wade's reelection in 2007.  End Summary. 
 
GOS hesitates 
------------- 
 
¶2.   (SBU) On the eve of the demonstration, the Prefect of Dakar 
notified the opposition Benno coalition that their request for 
authorization to demonstrate had been denied.  The ostensible reason 
was that the Youth and Women's organizations of the ruling 
Senegalese Democratic Party (PDS) had also requested an 
authorization to demonstrate on the same day, at the same time and 
that the Prefect feared that this could lead to clashes that would 
undermine public order.  However, an hour later the Prefect reversed 
his decision and informed Benno that their demonstration was no 
longer prohibited. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) A leader of Benno told Embassy that the President's office 
had pressured the Prefect to change his mind.  He added that in any 
event, Benno had already decided to ignore the ban, citing the fact 
that Wade had organized a major political rally in Thies on November 
5, and that they did not see any reason why they should accept such 
double standards.  A leading member of the National Assembly 
confirmed to Embassy that Wade did intervene to have the Benno 
demonstration authorized and the PDS counter-demonstration 
cancelled.  He added that the counter-demonstration was the idea of 
Youth and Employment Minister Mamadou Lamine Keita who had tasked 
the PDS's youth under the MEEL (Movement of Liberal Students) 
umbrella to demonstrate.  Keita's move is being interpreted as a 
reaction to the pressure he faces within his own party as he has 
been accused of being lethargic in his attempts to recruit young 
Senegalese into the PDS. 
 
Situation may get out of control 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The demonstration was attended by close to 10,000 people, 
a major increase from the 1,000 that attended the last protest that 
Benno tried to organize.  Organizers, surprised by the size of the 
crowd, had difficulties, including inaudible speeches by the Benno 
leaders.  For El Hadj Malick Gackou, President of the Regional 
Council of Dakar, a leading member of Benno, this success reflects a 
political sea change in Senegal.  In his view, the success of the 
demonstration confirms a trend that began on March 22 when the 
ruling party lost local elections in almost all major cities in the 
country.  Another leader of Benno told Embassy that to maintain 
pressure on Wade, Benno leaders will meet on Thursday November 12 to 
set a date when they will officially launch the campaign for the 
collection of signatures demanding Wade's resignation. 
Approximately four thousand people have already signed an online 
version that can be found at http://www.wadenadem.com  ("Wade nadem" 
in Wolof means for "Wade must leave"). 
 
¶4.  (SBU) COMMENT: This demonstration is a sign that the opposition 
might finally be getting some traction in galvanizing the people to 
protest a government that is mired in corruption scandals while many 
Senegalese people are subsisting on one meal a day.  Since 2007, the 
PDS's ability to deliver on their promises and to control the 
political climate has been steadily deteriorating.  In spite of his 
best efforts, President Wade has not been able to revitalize his 
party nor settle the succession question once and for all. 
Conscious of the fact that he needs to reunite his political family, 
Wade made a call on November 4 to all PDS dissidents to return to 
work with him to end the stupor that has taken hold of the party. 
He went so far as to again publicly call specifically for his former 
prime minister and re-election campaign manager, Macky Sall, to 
return to the fold after having humiliated Sall by changing the 
constitution to force him out of his position as Speaker of the 
National Assembly.  In spite of Wade's efforts at political 
reunification, winning back the large number of disenchanted voters 
the President has lost will be a daunting task and, given the 
magnitude of the problems facing the country, perhaps Mission 
Impossible.  End Comment. 
Bernicat