09DOHA292
LIBYAN FM'S MEETING IN DOHA WITH SE GRATION
Thu Apr 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Doha
VZCZCXRO7057
RR RUEHJO
DE RUEHDO #0292 1201800
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 301800Z APR 09 ZDF
FM AMEMBASSY DOHA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9017
INFO RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE
RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVEUNCLAS DOHA 000292 
 
SIPDIS, SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM SU QA
SUBJECT: LIBYAN FM'S MEETING IN DOHA WITH SE GRATION 
 
KEY POINTS: 
--  Libyan FM Kusa told Special Envoy for Sudan Gration April 29 
that he would welcome surveillance monitoring equipment from Western 
countries to monitor the Chad-Sudan border, but that the people 
doing the monitoring should be from the area. 
 
--  Kusa said the gaps between Sudan and Chad were wide; there would 
be no quick fixes. 
 
--  At SE Gration's request, Kusa said he would phone Khalil Ibrahim 
and encourage him to return to Doha in early May for further 
mediation on Darfur. 
 
--  SE Gration and Kusa agreed to work together in areas of mutual 
concern (para. 6). 
 
End Key Points. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Libyan FM Musa Kusa told Special Envoy for Sudan Scott 
Gration April 29 that "Chadians are ready for peace" with Sudan.  Of 
course, the problem along their shared border remains, with each 
side accusing the other "of doing bad things."  Kusa said a neutral 
observer is needed to monitor border activity.  There is a role, he 
said, for Western countries, especially France and the U.S., to 
provide surveillance monitoring equipment, "but the people on the 
ground [monitoring] should be local." 
 
¶2.  (SBU) SE Gration agreed on the need for monitoring and noted 
that he would like to see a 50 percent reduction in force, 
especially in the number of vehicles, along the border.  Kusa 
responded that mutual reductions by Chad and Sudan in munitions and 
offensive vehicles along the border would help build confidence, and 
he observed that Sudan always repeats the same mistake of not 
implementing the agreements that it signs.  The gap between the two 
parties will take time to diminish; quick fixes are not possible, 
said Kusa.  A solution will take time. 
 
¶3. (SBU) SE Gration stressed that the Justice and Equality 
Movement's (JEM) support for an interim cease-fire -- especially 
given indications that JEM is about to mount a new offensive -- is 
crucial to make progress in resolving Darfur-related disputes, as 
the Qataris and Libyans are trying to do.  To this end, SE Gration 
asked Kusa for Libya's support in encouraging JEM leader Khalil 
Ibrahim to travel to Doha in early May for further discussions that 
could lead to prisoner exchanges and other confidence-building 
measures. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Kusa agreed to phone Ibrahim that evening, noting that "80 
percent of the problems would be solved" if Ibrahim were no longer 
an obstacle.  Kusa added that Libya continues to talk with Sudanese 
President Bashir in an effort to improve the situation.  Noting he 
was in Doha to help Qatar mediate between Chad and Sudan, Kusa 
reported that the talks had been delayed because the Sudanese 
delegation had not yet arrived. 
 
¶5. (SBU) SE Gration thanked Kusa for his willingness to help exert 
pressure on Ibrahim and pledged to tell Chadian President Deby in 
their upcoming meeting that the U.S. supports Libyan and Qatari 
efforts to mediate the disputes between Sudan and Chad.   Kusa, in 
turn, asked SE Gration during his stop in Cairo to press the 
Egyptians to support Libyan and Qatari mediation efforts.  Noting 
the tensions between Cairo and Doha, Kusa reported that he 
personally had told Egyptian President Mubarak of the need for 
"everyone to work together."  SE Gration said he would carry the 
same message to Cairo. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Turning to north-south issues in Sudan, Kusa said Libya 
remains concerned that the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) 
remains fragile.  To shore up the overall environment in Sudan, Kusa 
made three requests of the U.S.  First, help the Government of Chad 
in reintegrating Chadian rebels.  Second, press Khartoum to end 
support for Chadian rebels.  Third, leverage a prisoner release from 
Khartoum, which would be followed by an interim cease-fire and 
further dialogue among the Darfur parties on a draft political 
framework.  SE Gration responded that the U.S. shares these goals 
and would work closely with partners like Libya to achieve them. 
 
¶7. (U) SE Gration has cleared this message. 
 
LEBARON