09DURBAN94
LOPSIDED BATTLE FOR FUTURE OF DURBAN'S WARWICK JUNCTION
Mon Aug 31 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Durban
VZCZCXRO5334
RR RUEHBZ RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHDU #0094/01 2431637
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 311637Z AUG 09
FM AMCONSUL DURBAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1502
INFO RUCNSAD/SADC COLLECTIVE
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 0880UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 DURBAN 000094 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR AF/S, INR 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV ELTN ECON PHUM SF
SUBJECT: LOPSIDED BATTLE FOR FUTURE OF DURBAN'S WARWICK JUNCTION 
 
REF: DURBAN 37 
 
DURBAN 00000094  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: A multimillion dollar project to develop 
Durban's Warwick Junction is facing opposition from small 
traders who claim the mall will end their livelihoods.  The 
decision by the City of Durban to demolish the historic Early 
Morning Market has led to numerous confrontations between the 
city and the market traders.  Anti-Indian sentiments expressed 
by ANC politicians during a public forum stand in stark contrast 
to the ANC's multi-racial credo.  End summary. 
 
Background/History 
 
¶2. (U) The Warwick Junction is located on the fringe of Durban's 
central business district (CBD).  It was designed as a railway 
transport node at the turn of the 20th century and also 
functioned as a buffer between white people who worked in the 
CBD and black commuters who used the trains.  As early as 1890, 
Indians began trading fresh produce in the area, and in 1910 the 
Early Morning Market (EMM) was built as a permanent marketplace. 
 The junction has grown in use over the years, and over 400,000 
commuters pass through the area every day.  There are now over 
600 traders who operate at the EMM.   In the early 1990s, black 
vendors began trading informally outside the market.  It is 
estimated that over R1 billion ($122 million) in cash exchange 
hands every year in the EMM area - most of it untaxed.  Although 
Warwick Junction remains a vital transport and trading hub, it 
is has become crime ridden, treacherous for pedestrians, and 
run-down. 
 
Durban Has Ambitious Development Plans 
 
¶3. (U) The eThekwini Municipality (of which Durban is a part) 
has decided to raze the Early Morning Market as part of the 
Warwick Junction Development (WJD) plan.  According to remarks 
by Durban City Manager Mike Sutcliffe during a municipal 
presentation attended by Pol/Econ Assistant, the municipality 
and developers intend to invest R1.5billion ($186 million) into 
the area over the next two to three years.  The proposed 
development, the first private sector endeavor in the area for 
many years, will bring together under one roof a regional 
mini-bus taxi rank (stand), banking centers, a post office, and 
retail stores.  The WJD plan also aims to reduce crime in the 
Warwick area; create economic opportunities for both informal 
and formal trade; enhance the tourism potential of the area; and 
provide commuters with a safe, reliable, and efficient public 
transport infrastructure (Reftel). 
 
¶4. (U) The City of Durban argues that the area is long overdue 
for development and that all stakeholders will benefit from the 
proposed changes.  Also, developers claim that the feasibility 
study they conducted indicates strong local support for improved 
shopping and transport services.  Sutcliffe told local media 
that the 400,000 commuters who pass through the Warwick area 
every day are the city's main concern. `Every single day there 
is at least one person who is killed or injured in road 
accidents in that area.  We need to sort out how we arrange the 
trains, buses, and taxis to make it safer.  We have always 
wanted to develop this area, but the funds were not available. 
Because of the upcoming World Cup, the national government has 
made the funds available for the development of roads.' 
 
¶5. (U) Sutcliffe maintains that it is unfortunate that the EMM 
will have to be destroyed in order to make way for the new 
shopping mall, but that many traders will be accommodated in the 
new mall when it is complete.  Street traders will be 
accommodated in the new development in a public square within 
the mall with better trading and lock-up facilities, said 
Sutcliffe to local media.  During construction, the eThekwini 
Municipality plans to move traders to a location 300 meters away 
to continue trading. 
 
Traders, Civil Society, and Academics Oppose the WJD 
 
¶6. (U) Early Morning Market traders and their supporters from 
civil society (including the influential Legal Resource Center) 
argue that the WJD will end their livelihoods.  They have vowed 
to do whatever it takes to oppose the destruction of the market. 
 Chairperson of the Early Morning Market Traders Association 
(EMMAT) Harry Ramlal told a local radio station that about 5,000 
people directly and indirectly employed through the EMM stand to 
lose their jobs if the market is demolished.  Ramlal said many 
of the traders have worked in the market all their lives and 
have no other employment options.  Prominent anti-apartheid 
activist Fatima Meer has accused the City of Durban of 
infringing on the rights of the poor by being `short-sighted' 
and `undemocratic' in its decision to demolish the 100-year-old 
market heritage site.  Civil society groups in KZN including the 
 
DURBAN 00000094  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
Centre for Civil Society at the University of Natal and Centre 
for Public Participation have also spoken out against the 
destruction of the market and support the traders.  Top KZN 
academics and almost 600 others have signed a petition opposing 
the destruction of the market. 
 
¶7. (U) Amafa/Heritage KwaZulu-Natal, the province's heritage 
conservation agency, has promised to take legal action against 
the municipality should the historic market in Warwick be 
demolished.  (Note: Amafa's council is appointed by the Premier 
of KZN and the quasi-public agency is funded through a grant 
from the premier's office.)  In March, the eThekwini 
municipality applied to Amafa to demolish the EMM, but Amafa 
rejected the application.  Amafa's Built Environment Head Ros 
Devereaux explained that the application was rejected because, 
although the WJD plan was in the pipeline for two years, Amafa 
only heard from the developers in March of 2009.  Durban City 
Manager Sutcliffe has since questioned Amafa's jurisdiction in 
the matter, and the eThekwini Municipality has filed a court 
injunction to get the rejection overturned 
 
Clashes, Tough City Action, and Court Delays 
 
¶8. (U) On May 26, protesters marched to city hall and presented 
to city representatives a memorandum demanding that the EMM not 
be destroyed.  On May 30, EMMAT was granted permission by the 
City of Durban to hold a peaceful sleep-in at the EMM; but 
during the night, city police stormed in and forcefully removed 
everyone.  On June 2, city officials announced that all EMM 
traders had to carry identification and trading permits in order 
to gain access to the market.  On June 3, all traders were 
required to fill out affidavits detailing how and when they 
acquired their trading permits.  The eThekwini Municipality then 
used this information to designate as illegal those traders who 
had obtained their permits through subleases or via family 
members.   The municipality also implemented a strict one-stall, 
one-vendor policy that prevented vendors from sending in relief 
persons when ill or needing a food or bathroom break. 
 
¶9. (U) On June 12, Durban officials closed down the EMM despite 
a court interdict allowing legal traders to operate.  Vendors 
and their supporters protested for three days outside the 
market.  On June 15, police opened fire on the demonstrators, 
and nine traders were injured by rubber bullets.  On June 17, a 
court order allowed only 260 `legal' vendors to resume trading 
in the EMM, but `illegal' vendors protested and continued 
trading outside the EMM.  On June 22, KZN Premier Zweli Mkhize 
formed a Provincial Task Team (PTT) headed by MEC (member of 
executive committee, a provincial minister) for Economic 
Development and Tourism Mike Mabuyakhulu to develop a solution 
to the EMM situation.  The PTT recommended that legal trade 
continue until a final resolution was developed.  On June 24, 
EMM traders refused to sign an agreement that would have granted 
them temporary trading rights at a new site and allowed for the 
destruction of the EMM.  On July 3, city officials evicted all 
crate movers, upon whom EMM traders depend to move their goods 
in and out of the EMM.  On July 10, a court order reinstated the 
crate movers. 
 
Anti-Indian Sentiments Voiced 
 
¶10. (SBU) On July 17, eThekwini municipal leaders held a public 
meeting attended by the Pol/Econ Assistant and at least 600 
other people with the aim of allaying concerns about the WJD 
plan.  Durban Mayor Obed Mlaba opened the meeting with an 
address in Zulu and accused `certain business elements' of not 
wanting to give up control of the Warwick and of hiding behind 
the plight of poor vendors.  Chairperson of eThekwini Business 
and Market Committee Faso Majola spoke after the mayor and said 
in Zulu that, `Indians only want to protect their interests in 
the Warwick area and they don't want township people moving in.' 
Head of eThekwini Business Support and Markets Philip Sithole 
declared that, `Let us take the food from the mouths of the 
Indians!  Now is the time for Africans to be in power!  We will 
remove them all and replace them with blacks!' 
 
¶11. (SBU) The official translator for the public meeting arrived 
after Mlaba's speech, but he did not translate any subsequent 
negative comments about Indians.  When members of the Indian 
community took to the podium, audience members attempted to 
drown them out with shouts and boos.  `Go back to Bombay!' 
shouted many audience members.  Deputy Mayor and ANC stalwart 
Logie Naidoo, who is of Indian descent, was present for the 
event but claimed afterwards that he was not aware of any 
racially charged comments that were `allegedly made.' 
Opposition to the WJD plan alleged that the eThekwini 
Municipality bused in hundreds of pro-WJD supporters and 
 
DURBAN 00000094  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
rewarded them with food afterwards.   Pol/Econ Assistant noted 
that the audience members were not affected traders or consumers 
but rather people who lived in townships outside of Durban. 
When Pol/Econ Assistant asked a few of the attendees if they had 
any interest in the EMM, they said no and that they had just 
been summoned to a meeting. 
 
¶12. (U) On July 24, the eThekwini Municipality filed an 
interdict to close down the EMM effective July 31, but EMM 
traders ignored the interdict citing their own pending court 
order.  On August 12, Sutcliffe announced that the WJD mall 
would be redesigned to include a new EMM to house all legal and 
so-called `illegal' traders.  `We will regulate all the 
so-called illegal traders.  We will give [the new agreement] to 
all the illegal traders in writing that nobody will be 
unemployed or left out on the street.  We have bent over 
backwards to accommodate everyone,' said Deputy Mayor Naidoo to 
local media. 
 
Provincial Government More Conciliatory, Suggests Solution 
 
¶13.  (U)  On August 27, MEC Mabuyakhulu announced at a public 
meeting attended by over 500 people that development 
negotiations between the eThekwini Municipality and all affected 
parties must be reopened but settled by September 30, 2009. 
Specifically, MEC Mabuyakhulu recommended that: all `illegal' 
venders be given permits to trade;  developers accommodate all 
vendors in their mall design; the EMM structure be incorporated 
into the design of the new mall; the practice of subleasing 
trading stalls within the EMM end; the appeal against AMAFA's 
refusal to allow destruction of the EMM be settled; the 
already-started environmental impact assessment  be completed; 
and a memorandum of understanding between all affected parties 
be signed.  More broadly, the MEC tasked his own department with 
finalizing a province-wide informal trade policy.  Pol/Econ 
Officer and Pol/Econ Assistant noted that Mabuyakhulu was firm 
in his condemnation of the `racial overtones' that has marked 
the WJD matter.  `The task team is extremely concerned about 
this as it is divisive, and we warn against any parties who 
racialize the debate,' Mabuyakhulu stated. 
 
Comment 
 
¶14. (SBU) The anti-Indian sentiments expressed by local 
ANC-appointed leaders and supporters during the July 17 public 
meeting stand in contrast to the multi-racial ideals of the ANC. 
 The provincial level condemnation of such behavior, however, 
suggests that the party is keen to rein in such divisive forces. 
 Nonetheless, at its core, the WJD is about the displacement of 
South Africans of Indian descent by black South Africans.  The 
WJD plan is backed by the ANC, and it is simply a matter of time 
before the EMM is changed forever.  Indians are increasingly 
becoming marginalized in Durban and their political influence 
has diminished over the years.  The Indian vote does not appear 
to matter much to the ANC in the eThekwini region because of the 
KZN ANC's strong support for President Zuma, a son of the local 
soil.  And those Indians who remain loyal to the ANC appear 
reconciled to this.  No ANC member of Indian descent (with the 
exception of Fatima Meer, who is no longer active) has spoken 
out against the proposed WJD plan or any anti-Indian sentiments. 
DERDERIAN