09DUBLIN60
IRELAND LIKELY TO ACCEPT DETAINEES, BUT WHEN AND
Tue Feb 10 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDL #0060/01 0411111
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 101111Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9754
INFO RUEHUP/AMEMBASSY BUDAPEST PRIORITY 0035
RUEHLI/AMEMBASSY LISBON PRIORITY 0062
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 0323
RUEHPG/AMEMBASSY PRAGUE PRIORITY 0045
RUEHVL/AMEMBASSY VILNIUS PRIORITY 0046
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L DUBLIN 000060 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/10/2019 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER EUN EI
SUBJECT: IRELAND LIKELY TO ACCEPT DETAINEES, BUT WHEN AND 
HOW MANY REMAIN UNCERTAIN 
 
REF: DUBLIN 47 
 
Classified By: Charge Robert J. Faucher; Reasons 1.4 (B) 
and (D). 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (C) Ambassador Clint Williamson met on February 9 with 
David Cooney, Secretary General in the Department of Foreign 
Affairs (DFA), Sean Aylward Secretary General in the 
Department of Justice (DOJ), and later had lunch with Conor 
Lenihan, Minister of Integration, to explain how President 
Obama's January 22 Executive Order that the detention 
facilities at Guantanamo be closed would be implemented, and 
to stress the need for the assistance of allies and friends 
in resettling detainees.  Though Department of Foreign 
Affairs officials are cautious in making a commitment to 
resettle detainees, and the Secretary General of the 
Department of Justice still appears to be adamantly opposed, 
Minister of Integration Conor Lenihan told Williamson that 
the political leaders of Ireland had already decided to 
accept detainees and would make an announcement before St. 
Patrick's Day on March 17.  The only questions remaining, 
Lenihan said, were how many detainees would be accepted, 
which ones, and when.  End summary. 
 
Williamson: Guantanamo is a High Priority 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) During meetings with top Irish government officials, 
Williamson stressed how important resolving the issue of 
Guantanamo was to President Obama and the Secretary of State, 
saying that the President's Executive Order closing 
Guantanamo within one year had been his first foreign affairs 
directive.  Williamson noted that he was on the road so soon 
after the inauguration at the direct request of Secretary 
Clinton.  Stating that the President and Secretary understood 
how difficult the detainee issue was for other nations, he 
emphasized that there would be huge recognition by Obama 
administration of friends and allies who resettled detainees. 
 The entire political leadership in Washington, he said, 
wanted to see this issue resolved.  Williamson said that the 
Obama administration was looking for a comprehensive 
settlement of the Guantanamo situation, involving law 
enforcement, legislation, and diplomacy.  He added that the 
Executive Order had already made a significant change by 
shifting responsibility for detainee status determinations 
from the Department of Defense to the Department of Justice. 
Williamson stated that our discussions with Ireland and other 
European allies were focused on resettling the 24 (of 240) 
detainees who represented the lowest level of threat -- 
including 17 Uighurs -- but that others would likely be added 
to the list as the review process progressed. 
 
Minister of Integration Says Decision "Has Been Made" 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶3.  (C) During lunch, Junior Minister of Integration Conor 
Lenihan told Williamson that the decision to accept 
Guantanamo detainees had already been made by the Irish 
political leadership "in principle" (Ref A).  (Note: Lenihan, 
a junior Minister, heads up the Reception and Integration 
Agency, is responsible for resettling refugees, a category 
into which, he says, the detainees would fall.)  The 
remaining questions, Lenihan said, were how many detainees 
would be taken, which ones, and when.  He went on to say that 
he was pushing the Prime Minister to move "quickly and 
publicly" on the issue, and indicated that the government 
would make an announcement prior to the presumed St. 
Patrick's Day bilateral meeting between the Irish Prime 
Minister (Taoiseach) and President Obama.  In regards to the 
EU's failure to adopt a common position on resettling 
Guantanamo detainees during its January 27-28 General Affairs 
and External Relations Council (GAERC) meeting, Lenihan 
expressed skepticism that there would be a common EU position 
any time soon.  However, he indicated that the Irish did not 
see the GAERC's failure to reach consensus as forbidding 
individual member states from forging individual bilateral 
agreements.  Lenihan mentioned one caveat -- he said he was 
reluctant to accept Uighurs because of the potential backlash 
from China. 
 
Department of Foreign Affairs Remains Cautious 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶4.  (C) Cooney opened the meeting with Aylward and 
 
Williamson, saying that Ireland was excited about the opening 
of "a new era in U.S.-EU relations" and praising President 
Obama's decision to close Guantanamo.  He declared that 
Ireland considered itself a "close friend" of the U.S. and 
wanted to be as cooperative as possible.  Though he said he 
would prefer to deal with this matter within an EU context, 
he agreed that the lack of a common EU position on resettling 
detainees would not hinder Ireland from accepting detainees 
bilaterally.  Cooney, however, noted that a key component of 
an Irish decision would be how many detainees were to be 
resettled in the U.S. itself.  Williamson responded that 
ultimately the U.S. would have to bear responsibility for 
many years to come for the most dangerous of the detainees, 
since these were likely to be prosecuted and incarcerated in 
the U.S.  Otherwise, discussions on where detainees would be 
placed were still ongoing and no decisions on this had yet 
been reached.  Cooney also expressed concern about the 
reaction of China if Ireland resettled Uighurs.  (Note: The 
Chinese Embassy delivered a stiff demarche to the Irish in 
early January warning the government not to accept Uighurs. 
End note.)  Williamson responded that the Uighurs were the 
lowest threat risk of all the remaining detainees (thereby 
posing the lowest risk of long-term problems) and that the 
U.S. would be strongly supportive of Ireland in any dispute 
with China that resulted from a decision to resettle Uighurs. 
 Cooney concluded by saying that DFA officials "were not 
closed to the idea."  He said that DFA would be reviewing the 
matter "very closely in the next few weeks" in order to 
devise a solution that was palatable to the government and to 
the Irish people, while taking into account the nation's 
budget constraints.  He said that he expected the Prime 
Minister to make an announcement regarding the detainees 
before St. Patrick's Day. 
 
Department of Justice Focuses on Impediments 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (C) In contrast to the measured approach taken by Cooney, 
Aylward (who has been a consistent critic of resettling 
detainees) argumentatively voiced a litany of concerns, 
including that: 
 
-- trade and unspecified "negotiations" with the Chinese 
would be damaged (and could affect the livelihood of Irish 
citizens) if Uighurs were resettled. 
 
-- the cost of monitoring the detainees to ensure that they 
did not re-engage in terror would outstrip the government's 
ability to pay. 
 
-- Palestinian detainees might link up with other radical 
Palestinians in Ireland to plot terrorist attacks in third 
countries.  (Note: He flatly refused to consider taking 
Palestinians.  End note.) 
 
-- Ireland must act in concert with a EU common position. 
(Note: Aylward pointed to the February 26-27 EU meeting of 
Justice Ministers as the next forum for EU discussion of the 
matter.  While he said that Ireland should assist the U.S. by 
acting as an advocate within EU corridors for accepting 
detainees, he went to some length to point out that several 
EU member states had already indicated they were opposed to 
resettling detainees, and opined that there was little 
appetite within the EU for the undertaking.  End note.) 
 
-- the cost of social services and resettlement programs for 
detainees would be high.  In addition, the detainees would 
likely be followed by family members, who would create 
additional welfare and resettlement costs -- and could 
themselves become radicalized. 
 
-- detainees who had previously been "cleared" and released 
from Guantanamo to Saudi Arabia had returned to terrorist 
activities.  Williamson pointed out that these were higher 
risk individuals who had entered Saudi prisons or reeducation 
centers.  Nonetheless, he noted, even with low threat 
individuals, we could not absolutely guarantee that there 
would be no problems. 
 
-- it was possible that leftist and anti-American elements in 
Ireland would publicly display the detainees as examples of 
American aggression in order to drum up anti-American 
sentiment, though Aylward acknowledged that much of the 
Ireland's "anti-American" sentiment had been "anti-Bush 
administration" sentiment, which has now dissipated. 
 
-- "Scope for a bilateral agreement before St. Patrick's Day 
was zero." 
 
-- the U.S. would inevitably come back and ask Ireland to 
accept higher-threat individuals should Ireland accept some 
of the low-threat detainees -- a non-starter in Aylward's 
view. 
 
-- although the U.S. viewed certain detainees as low-threat, 
Aylward was skeptical that any were actually low-threat since 
they were likely to have been radicalized by their detention 
with other more militant individuals. 
 
¶6.  (C)  Nonetheless, in the end Aylward conceded that there 
had been a sea change in public opinion since Obama's 
election in November.  Before November, he said, he was 
opposed to a bilateral agreement with the Bush administration 
because he thought it would have little, if any, impact on 
the operations of the Guantanamo detention center.  Since 
Obama's election, he said, he had changed his mind.  He added 
that he was prepared to "bow to the fact" that the Prime 
Minister would "say something to President Obama" at St. 
Patrick's Day, implying that the Prime Minister would offer 
up assistance to the President. 
 
¶7.  (C)  Notably, later in the day, at the instruction of 
Cooney, Irish Political Director Rory Montgomery called the 
Charge to assure him that the largely negative views 
expressed by Aylward did not reflect the Irish government's 
position.  Montgomery said that once the final decision 
reaches the desk of the Prime Minister, he would decide to 
assist the Obama administration.  Minister Lenihan also 
discounted Aylward's naysaying, saying that Aylward's views 
were "just cover," and that we "shouldn't make too much out 
of it."  (Interestingly, Montgomery countered Aylward's 
assertion that economic negotiations with China might be 
harmed if Uighurs were resettled, saying that there were no 
such on-going negotiations.) 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8.  (C) Cooney (Ireland's former Ambassador to the UK -- and 
only on the job for a week) was clearly ambushed by Aylward, 
who dominated the meeting with his negative views.  Aylward's 
bluster aside (which is actually useful in pinpointing some 
of Ireland's concerns), it is clear that Ireland intends to 
accept some detainees -- most likely announcing the decision 
before St. Patrick's Day on March 17.  However, which 
detainees they will accept and how many remain uncertain. 
 
¶9.  This report has been cleared by Ambassador Williamson. 
FAUCHER