09HARARE307
MONITORING REPORT ON HURIDETSA G/TIP GRANT
Wed Apr 15 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Harare
VZCZCXRO0305
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSB #0307/01 1051212
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 151212Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY HARARE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4370
INFO RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HARARE 000307 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
AF/S FOR BWALCH 
DRL FOR NWILETT 
G/TIP FOR JLARSEN, RYOUSEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREF PGOV KTIP ZI
SUBJECT: MONITORING REPORT ON HURIDETSA G/TIP GRANT 
 
Ref:  08 STATE 104501 
 
¶1. (U) On March 30, poloff visited the local non-governmental 
organization Human Rights and Development Trust of Southern Africa 
(HURIDETSA) to evaluate progress on a US$300,000 grant that was 
awarded by G/TIP on September 25, 2008. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The answers below are keyed in response to questions posed 
in reftel. 
 
¶A. Political officer met with the following persons at the HURIDETSA 
office in Harare: Emma Gweshe, Executive Director; Hope-Mary Nsangi, 
Senior Program Officer; Shonhiwa Bakare, Assistant Program Officer; 
and Farai George Chiweshe, Research Consultant. 
 
¶B. This project aims to determine the extent to which corruption 
contributes to human trafficking in the SADC region with the intent 
to identify possible strategies to address the problem and to build 
capacity to fight both corruption and trafficking.  Specifically, 
the objectives of the two-year project are to: (1) conduct a 
situational analysis of the magnitude and forms of corruption that 
promote human trafficking through organized crime in the SADC 
region, (2) conduct a training needs assessment with anti-corruption 
and anti-trafficking institutions, (3) hold meetings with 
governmental and non-governmental stakeholders in anti-trafficking 
and anti-corruption to discuss the outcomes of the two studies and 
to identify ways forward, and (4) provide training - based on the 
research and consultations - for law enforcement, anti-corruption 
agencies, and anti-trafficking agencies. 
 
HURIDETSA has nearly completed its first objective, a situational 
analysis of corruption and TIP in the region.  HURIDETSA's findings 
to date indicate anti-TIP legislation in the region is weak, not 
comprehensive, and does not contain provisions that recognize the 
relationship between corruption and human trafficking.  At the time 
of our meeting, they had met with officials in Zimbabwe, South 
Africa, and Botswana and were preparing to travel to Mozambique. 
They found that officials from Zimbabwe's neighbors were fairly 
forthcoming with information on trafficking, legislation, and 
progress in rooting out corruption.  The Zimbabwean government, 
however, particularly the Zimbabwe Republic Police, has proven 
reluctant to share information on its efforts in arresting, 
charging, and prosecuting traffickers.  HURIDETSA has not been able 
to obtain statistics on trafficking in Zimbabwe. (NOTE: Post also 
requested this information for the TIP report but has not yet 
received any data.  END NOTE.) HURIDETSA staff also noted concerns 
that some immigration officials and police, particularly in 
Zimbabwe, do not understand the difference between trafficking and 
smuggling. 
 
HURIDETSA accessed its funds in October and admits it is behind its 
target dates.  The situational analysis was scheduled to take three 
months, but is now entering its sixth month, largely due to the 
difficulty in obtaining data. 
 
¶C. Obtaining information from government authorities has proven more 
difficult and time consuming than anticipated, putting the project 
back several months.  Zimbabwean government officials resist 
providing information and have demanded more details about 
HURIDETSA's funding.  HURIDETSA has not disclosed that the U.S. 
government is funding the research, preferring to say that they 
receive funding from a "basket" to which several donors contribute. 
 
Like most organizations in Zimbabwe, HURIDETSA has encountered 
challenges in preparing and following its budgets, first in a 
hyperinflationary environment and now under dollarization.  The 
Qhyperinflationary environment and now under dollarization.  The 
current budget reflects infrastructure costs that are no longer 
accurate as dollarization has caused rent and utility bills to 
skyrocket.  In addition, all but one of HURIDETSA's other projects 
have ended, leaving a shortage of salary funds.  HURIDETSA has 
several applications pending with other organizations that may ease 
some of the salary and infrastructure burdens.  HURIDETSA plans to 
submit a revised budget to G/TIP to reflect budgetary changes. 
 
¶D. The operational environment for NGOs in Zimbabwe is significantly 
improved versus a year ago.  Nonetheless, HURIDETSA remains 
cautious.  Zimbabwean authorities frequently question the source of 
its funding and HURIDETSA staff fear retribution or a further 
reduction in information if GOZ officials learn the project is 
funded by the USG. 
 
¶E. Staffing appears to be adequate both in terms of technical 
knowledge and management to carry out the project.  HURIDETSA is 
based in Zimbabwe and does not have external headquarters. 
 
 
¶F. G/TIP may consider helping HURIDETSA revise its budget and 
timeline to reflect the changing budgetary conditions and the 
 
HARARE 00000307  002 OF 002 
 
 
potential need to extend the grant with a no-cost extension at the 
grant's completion. 
 
¶G. This project advances current deficiencies by providing vital 
information on the legal framework for TIP in Zimbabwe and in the 
region, which will help lawmakers improve anti-TIP and 
anti-corruption laws and law enforcement.  Under the transitional 
government in Zimbabwe, HURIDETSA and Post hope that official 
information and statistics may be more forthcoming. 
 
¶H. Overall, HURIDETSA is making progress towards implementing this 
project.  HURIDETSA is a viable candidate for continued funding, 
although it may benefit from further assistance developing work 
plans and budgets that allow flexibility in Zimbabwe's continued 
uncertain political and economic environment. 
 
MCGEE