09HAVANA112
CUBA - MONEY LAUNDERING AND FINANCIAL CRIMES
Thu Feb 19 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
US Interests Section Havana
VZCZCXYZ0005
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHUB #0112/01 0501155
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 191155Z FEB 09
FM USINT HAVANA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4146
INFO RUCOWCV/CCGDSEVEN MIAMI FL
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RUCOGCA/COMNAVBASE GUANTANAMO BAY CU
RHMFISS/HQ USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUEKJCE/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS HAVANA 000112 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CCA, INL, S/CT, AND EEB 
DEPT OF JUSTICE FOR AFMLS, OIA, AND OPDAT 
DEPT OF TREASURY FOR FINCEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN KCRM KTFN SNAR CU
SUBJECT: CUBA - MONEY LAUNDERING AND FINANCIAL CRIMES 
(INCSR PART II) 
 
REF: A. 08 STATE 103810 
     ¶B. 08 HAVANA 952 
 
¶1.  General Assessment:  There were no significant 
developments or changes regarding Cuba's policy on anti-money 
laundering or counter-terrorist financing (AML/CTF) in 2008. 
The Government of Cuba (GOC) claims to be in full compliance 
with international counter-terrorism conventions and to have 
taken into account the recommendations of the Basel Committee 
and the Financial Action Task Force when preparing banking 
regulations.  While Cuba has developed a number of 
regulations since 1997 relating to the detection and 
prevention of movements of illicit capital, Cuba continues to 
have one of the most secretive and non-transparent national 
banking systems in the world.  We have no evidence that any 
AML/CTF measures have been implemented or if any offenders 
were prosecuted in 2008.  We are unaware of any Cuban 
government attempts to track, block, or seize money 
laundering or terrorist assets, although the authority to do 
so is contained in Law 93 Against Acts of Terrorism, as well 
as Instruction 19 of the Superintendent of the Cuban Central 
Bank. 
 
----------------- 
GENERAL QUESTIONS 
----------------- 
 
¶2.  Cuba is not considered an important regional financial 
center.  Cuban practices and U.S. sanctions prevent Cuba's 
banking system from fully operating in the international 
financial system.  The GOC released no information about any 
money laundering or terrorist financing activities within 
Cuba in 2008.  Cuba is not a member of the International 
Monetary Fund or the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), two 
of the top organizations active in fighting money laundering 
worldwide. 
 
¶3.  Ernesto Betancourt, a Cuban-American analyst who was 
former President Fidel Castro's economic adviser in the first 
year after the 1959 revolution, has long argued that Cuba's 
secrecy laws and isolation from most of the international 
banking system make it an ideal location for drug traffickers 
to launder their illicit proceeds.  In 2005, the U.S. 
Congress investigated 3.9 billion U.S. dollars converted into 
new U.S. dollars through a Cuban bank account in the Swiss 
bank UBS.  UBS previously paid a fine to the U.S. Treasury 
for fraudulently including Cuba in the cash-swap program in 
violation of U.S. sanctions.  The GOC claimed the U.S. 
dollars were legitimately collected from tourism and 
remittance receipts.  The Cuban economy operates in two 
currencies:  the Cuban peso (CUP) and the Cuban convertible 
peso (CUC).  The currencies are traded at 24:1 in government 
foreign exchange houses, but the official exchange rate of 
1:1 is used in government statistics, making it nearly 
impossible to reconcile Cuban official monetary statistics. 
 
¶4.  The U.S. Government does not have any direct evidence of 
money laundering or terrorist financing activities in Cuba in 
¶2008.  No mention of GOC complicity in money laundering or 
terrorism financing was made in the media in 2008.  It should 
be noted, however, that the media in Cuba is completely 
controlled by the state, which permits only laudatory press 
coverage of itself.  Crime is almost never reported.  The GOC 
does not routinely publish or publicize AML/CTF activities. 
 
-------------------------- 
OFFSHORE FINANCIAL CENTERS 
-------------------------- 
 
¶5.  Cuba is not considered an attractive offshore financial 
center for financial or corporate services.  Relatively few 
international businesses operate in Cuba.  Cuba has not 
licensed any offshore casinos or internet gaming sites. 
 
---------------- 
FREE TRADE ZONES 
---------------- 
 
¶6.  Cuba does not operate any free trade zones. Cuba had 
created three export zones for manufacturing, but shut all of 
them down due to lack of interest and as part of its 
recentralization policy between 2004 and 2005. 
 
------------------------------ 
LEGAL FOUNDATION OF AML REGIME 
------------------------------ 
 
¶7.  Cuba has the following laws and regulations in place in 
relation to AML/CTF: 
 
-Resolution 91 of March 9, 1997:  This resolution provides 
for the application of "Guidelines for members of the 
national banking system relating to the detection and 
prevention of movements of illicit capital". 
 
-Resolution 27 of December 7, 1997:  This resolution provides 
for the creation of the Central Risk Information Office 
(CIR), which compiles and processes information on suspected 
or actual instances of money laundering.  The resolution 
requires all banks and non-bank financial institutions to 
report such information on a monthly basis. 
 
-Instruction 1 of February 20, 1998:  Established 19 steps to 
implement the general guidelines in Resolution 91, including 
"know the client", monitoring large cash deposits and 
withdrawals, identifying company accounts as the most likely 
vehicle for money laundering, and designating a prevention 
compliance official responsible for identifying and taking 
such steps as may be necessary in connection with suspected 
money laundering activities. 
 
-Law 87 of February 26, 1999:  Added money laundering to the 
penal code. Article 346 of Chapter II of Law 87 states, "Any 
person who acquires, converts, or transfers resources, 
property or rights thereto, or attempts to carry out such 
transactions, in full awareness, or having the obligation to 
know or rationally assume, from the occasion or circumstances 
of the transaction, that such resources, property or rights 
are the direct or indirect proceeds of acts connected with 
illicit trafficking in drugs, arms or persons, or with 
organized crime, shall be liable to a penalty of imprisonment 
from five to twelve years.  Any person who conceals, or 
obstructs measures to ascertain, the nature, origin, 
whereabouts, destination, movement or true ownership of 
resources, property or rights thereto...shall be liable to 
the same penalty."  Those who commit these acts out of 
inexcusable ignorance shall be imprisoned for two to five 
years. 
 
-Instruction 2 of April 26, 2000:  Further clarified the 
guidelines from Resolution 91. 
 
-Law 93 of December 20, 2001: Law against acts of terrorism. 
In regards to the financing of terrorism, Chapter IX reads, 
"Any person who by any means, directly or indirectly, 
collects, transports, provides or has in his power financial 
or material funds or resources with the intention that they 
should be used or in the knowledge that they are to be used 
in order to carry out any of the offences envisaged in the 
Law, shall be subject to imprisonment of ten to thirty years. 
 The same penalty shall apply to any person who, directly or 
indirectly, makes funds, financial or material resources or 
financial or related services of any other kind available to 
any person or entity who uses them to carry out any of the 
offences envisaged in this Law." 
 
-Instruction 19 of May 7, 2002:  "Guidelines for the struggle 
against financing terrorism" for the purpose of enforcing the 
provisions in Cuban Law 93 of 2001, UN's International 
Covenant to Suppress Financing of Terrorism of 1999, UN 
Security Council Resolution 1373, FATF recommendations of 
2001, Cuban Resolution 91 of 1997, and Cuban Instruction 1 of 
¶1998. 
 
-Resolution 17 of March 19, 2004:  Established the Bank 
Supervision Office in the Central Bank to process information 
 
provided by the Central Risk Information Office and others 
about delicate and illegal activities, corruption, and 
possible operations for laundering money linked with the 
Cuban banking system. 
 
-Instruction 26 of July 30, 2004:  Provides new guidelines 
for the preventing, detecting, facing, and deterring 
operations of illicit capital movements (money laundering), 
and illicit operations in the collections of payments. 
 
¶8.  In addition, the Central Bank of Cuba issued Order 66 of 
June 1, 1998 on bank secrecy, which requires financial 
institutions to provide any information or documents 
requested of them by the empowered authorities (courts, tax 
authorities, inspectors of the Bank Supervisory Authority) 
relating to financial transactions or banking operations in 
cases of presumed or suspected movement of illicit funds. 
Cuban Instruction 19 of 2002 states that the legal provision 
concerning Bank Secrecy in Cuban Laws shall not be an 
impediment to collaborating with the authorities when the 
empowered authority under statutory right applies for 
information. 
 
---------------- 
FINANCIAL SECTOR 
---------------- 
 
¶9.  Every financial institution has a designated official who 
reports to the top executive of the institution and is 
responsible for identifying and taking such steps as may be 
necessary in connection with suspected money laundering 
activities.  According to Cuban Instruction 19 of 2002, banks 
are required to report immediately to competent entities of 
the Ministry of Interior and the Central Bank's Central Risk 
Information Office about any "complex transaction of an 
unusual amount" and also about those transactions that do not 
show any legal economic purpose, that demonstrates 
unquestionably that a money laundering operation is in 
progress, or when, on reasonable grounds, a suspicion arises 
that any fund is related or is going to be used in terrorist 
actions.  Furthermore, Resolution 91 of 1997 indicates a 
statutory threshold of CUP 10,000 (equivalent to USD 10,000 
at the time) to trigger a report.  The National Banking 
System should keep records for five years from the conclusion 
of the transactions.  We have no information regarding the 
capacity (staffing or otherwise) of the Central Risk 
Information Office to supervise or examine financial 
institutions for compliance with AML/CTF laws and 
regulations. 
 
¶10.  In Cuba's fifth and most recent report to the UNSC 
Counter-Terrorism Committee from June 8, 2006, the GOC said 
that the Cuban banking system does not have the authority to 
analyze financial transactions conducted outside the Cuban 
banking system.  In response to a question about whether 
there had been any studies of informal and illegal financial 
transactions conducted in Cuba, the GOC downplayed the 
informal sector's significance and even questioned its 
existence.  The GOC stated, "the Committee refers to informal 
and illegal transactions; if such transactions exist, they 
must be inconsequential compared to the millions of 
transactions, worth billions of Cuban pesos conducted by 
natural and juridical persons and handled by bank offices 
every year, or the money flows in the thousands of current 
accounts or millions of savings accounts kept by people in 
bank branches." 
 
¶11.  We are not aware of any reporting of any suspicious 
activities by any bank or financial institution.  We are also 
not aware of any protection for individuals (bankers or 
otherwise) with respect to their cooperation with law 
enforcement in regards to AML/CTF investigations. 
 
------------------ 
FIU INVESTIGATIONS 
------------------ 
 
¶12.  Cuba does not have a financial intelligence unit. 
 
 
---------------------------------------- 
ASSET FORFEITURE AND SEIZURE LEGISLATION 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶13.  We are not aware of any arrests, prosecutions, or 
convictions for money laundering or terrorist financing since 
January 1, 2008.  Banks are authorized by Instruction 19 to 
take preventive action by blocking or freezing the funds of 
other financial assets of Cuban or foreign individuals or 
legal persons under suspicion for money-laundering (including 
as the result of drug trafficking) transactions.  The penal 
code provides that anyone convicted of money laundering or 
terrorism financing will forfeit any proceeds.  The penal 
code further provides that authorities may seize not only 
financial assets but any property "instrumental to or 
resulting from the offence, to keep it and have it examined 
by experts where necessary."  We are not aware of any 
narcotics-related, terrorism-related, or other 
criminal-related financial assets frozen or seized in 2008. 
 
------------------- 
TERRORIST FINANCING 
------------------- 
 
¶14.  Cuba criminalized the financing of terrorism as required 
by the UN International Convention for the Suppression of the 
Financing of Terrorism, UNSC Resolution 1373, and FATF 
Special Recommendation 9 through Instruction 19, "Guidelines 
for the Struggle against Financing of Terrorism" on May 7, 
¶2002.  We are unaware as to whether the GOC has circulated to 
its financial institutions the list of individuals and 
entities that have been included on the UN 1267 sanctions 
committee's consolidated list, or any other UN, U.S., or 
third party list. 
 
¶15.  We are unaware of any steps the GOC has taken to 
regulate informal remittance carriers.  Cuba does not report 
estimates of funds received through remittances, but 
estimates from the U.S. General Accounting Office, 
Congressional Research Service, The Commission for Assistance 
to a Free Cuba, Cuban economists, and international 
economists range between USD 500 million and USD 1 billion. 
Most of these remittances come from Cuban-Americans and are 
delivered to family members.  Only 10-20 percent are carried 
by formal remittance carriers (i.e. Western Union) due to 
U.S. restrictions on the dollar amount and frequency of 
remittances.  The majority of funds most likely enter Cuba 
through individuals.  The use of the U.S. dollar was declared 
illegal in 2004 and the Cuban government tightly controls all 
currency exchange. 
 
¶16.  There are very few independent charitable or non-profit 
entities, mostly operating through the Catholic Church. 
Instruction 19 of 2002 states that special attention should 
be paid to operations made by the "so-called non-profit 
organizations", which can:  be used by terrorist 
organizations simulating to be legally established; use 
legitimate entities as channels to finance terrorism, with 
the purpose of preventing their assets from being frozen; or 
hide the undercover deviation of funds designed to illegal 
purposes towards terrorist organizations.  We have no insight 
into how these guidelines are enforced, but the GOC heavily 
regulates this sector. 
 
¶17.  Travelers to Cuba must fill out a Customs Declaration if 
they are carrying an amount in cash exceeding USD 5,000 or 
the equivalent in other currencies.  Travelers departing Cuba 
are only permitted to export convertible currency and other 
valuables exceeding an amount of USD 5,000 if:  the amount 
had been previously imported and declared; or the amount was 
lawfully acquired in Cuba, which shall be proven through 
presentation of the relevant bank documents. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
BILATERAL AND INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶18.  The United States has no counternarcotics agreements 
with Cuba and does not fund any GOC counternarcotics or 
counter-terrorism law enforcement initiatives.  In the 
absence of normal bilateral relations, the U.S. Coast Guard 
Drug Interdiction Specialist (DIS) assigned to USINT acts as 
the main conduit for anti-narcotics issues with the host 
country on a case-by-case basis.  Cuban authorities provided 
DIS exposure to Cuban counternarcotics efforts, including 
investigative information, debriefings on drug trafficking 
cases, and access to meet with the Chiefs of Havana's 
INTERPOL and Customs offices.  No AML/CTF cases were 
presented through DIS channels in 2008 (Ref B).  Similar 
cooperation on counter-terrorism activities does not/not 
exist. 
 
¶19.  Cuba's drug czar has raised the idea of greater 
counternarcotics cooperation with the United States. 
President Raul Castro has called for a bilateral agreement on 
narcotics, migration, and terrorism.  However, these 
approaches have not been offered with forthright or 
actionable proposals as to what the U.S. Government should 
expect from future Cuban cooperation.  In Cuba's June 2006 
report to the UNSC Counter-Terrorism Committee, the GOC 
accused the United States of "using false and irrational 
arguments (to) reject a proposal made by Cuba to establish a 
bilateral counter-terrorism program.  That proposal was made 
on 29 November 2001 and repeated on 3 December 2001, 12 March 
2002 and 17 December 2002 during the nineteenth round of the 
discussions on immigration between the two Governments." 
 
¶20.  Cuba has ratified the UN International Convention 
against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic 
Substances (Vienna Convention), the UN Convention against 
Corruption, and the UN International Convention for the 
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism.  Cuba signed but 
has not ratified the UN Convention against Transnational 
Organized Crime (Palermo Convention).  Cuba is not a member 
of any FATF-style regional body, but it claims to have taken 
FATF recommendation into consideration when drafting AML/CTF 
regulations. 
FARRAR