09HAMILTON149
BERMUDA: GANGS, GUNS, AND CRIME
Fri Dec 18 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Hamilton
VZCZCXRO1311
RR RUEHHT
DE RUEHHT #0149/01 3522121
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 182121Z DEC 09 ZFF4
FM AMCONSUL HAMILTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3940
INFO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0017
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0912
RUEHHT/AMCONSUL HAMILTON 2117UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HAMILTON 000149 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
USUNNY FOR RSO (T. SEARS AND S EMERS) 
STATE FOR EUR/WE (J. MARBURG AND N. ABBASZADEH) 
STATE FOR EUR/PPD (L. MCMANIS AND A. PIPKIN) 
LONDON FOR R. HUBER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC CASC SOCI
SUBJECT: BERMUDA: GANGS, GUNS, AND CRIME 
 
HAMILTON 00000149  001.8 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.      (SBU) Summary: Crime, in particular gang-related and gun 
crime, is increasing on the island. The Consul General met with 
the Bermuda Governor on December 16th and Bermuda and its 
citizens are uniting together to combat the violent crime 
problem. The Government is even considering imposing curfews to 
curb the violence. End Summary. 
 
 
 
¶2.      (SBU) On the morning of December 17, 2009, a man was 
gunned down in Friswells Hill; the third man to be murdered in 
13 days. (The other two shootings occurred in Somerset and 
Pembroke.) There have been 17 shootings since May when people 
have been killed or injured; no discernable pattern or location 
is evident. In a country of just over 65,000 persons, people are 
rightly concerned of this large increase in gun-crime. 
 
 
 
¶3.      (SBU) The official American community is not immune to 
the crime increase. One residence experienced a break-in and a 
few others reported attempted break-ins this summer. Just 
recently, the dependent of an American official was robbed of 
his electronics will riding the public bus home from school. 
 
 
 
¶4.      (SBU) The Governor indicated to the Consul General 
during their December 16th meeting that despite press to the 
contrary, government house and the government are on the same 
page and united in tackling the growing violent crime problem. 
At the swearing in of new Police Commissioner Michael DeSilva on 
December 16th, Minister for Home Affairs David Burch publicly 
confirmed this.  The Governor observed that the new Police 
Commissioner and his team were much more interested in overseas 
assistance and training.  The Governor noted that police would 
maintain operational control, but would check with government 
and government house on two areas: prioritization and 
presentation.  In these two areas, the Bermuda Police Service 
(BPS) needed the consensus of government and government house. 
 
 
 
¶5.      (SBU) The Governor attributed most of the violence to 
two gangs - the Park Side gang and the 42nd Street gang. 
Assistant Commissioner Paul Wright told the CG that there were 
18 gangs active on the island, but most of these gangs were 
amorphous and some of them were more akin to neighborhood 
groups.  Wright noted that the BPS had drawn up an initial list 
of 48 Persons of Interest (POI), but that list has shrunk to 38 
over the past year, as many have been shot.  Wright worried, 
however, that if Bermuda did not solve the problem, young 
Bermudians could join and the problem could mushroom out of 
control. 
 
 
 
¶6.      (U)  In a grass-roots reaction to the recent escalation 
in gang-related shootings, more than 400 people gathered 
together at a local primary school on December 9th to discuss 
ways to promote gang intervention, faith-based leadership, 
community capacity building, national mentoring and youth, 
vision and development.  An educator and three brothers - one a 
former top aid to the premier and another, the head of the 
Police media relations office - were the catalysts for the 
group, named "We Will Rise Above, Bermuda." A group spokesman 
said the community had reached a turning point where average 
people recognize the need to work together for change. 
Participants, challenged to come up with workable solutions 
within 30 days, are considering calling a gang truce and 
establishing an underground network of safe houses for gang 
members trying to leave. 
 
 
 
¶7.      (U) Bermuda police initiated Operation Safer Streets 
earlier this year, which resulted in a 60 percent increase in 
arrests, an almost 40 percent upturn in drug enforcement 
activity, and the number of serious assaults falling by 28 
percent since 2008. Police Commissioner DeSilva stated to the 
press, "In October we restructured the organization to place 85 
percent of our staff directly in the fight against crime. On 
patrol, in Criminal Investigation Unit~drug unit and serious 
crime unit." He assured that all officers will be on operational 
patrols throughout the New Year. 
 
 
HAMILTON 00000149  002.8 OF 002 
 
 
 
 
¶8.      (SBU) BPS is seeking more help in combating gangs, 
crisis management, crime scene examination, forensic pathology, 
and close protection. The FBI's Safe Street Gang Unit is coming 
to the island in early January to provide training, review 
Bermuda's plans and provide analysis in other gang-related 
areas. RSO is working with DS/ATA to identify immediate 
assistance with regards to VIP Protection training. Further 
discussions are underway to determine whether long-term 
DS-provided training can be organized. 
 
 
 
¶9.      (SBU) Comment:  Gang-related violence and petty crime 
has increased and is spilling over into the community. American 
citizens are not being targeted, however the violence is 
occurring in broad daylight and its indiscriminate nature makes 
it problematic for residents and tourists alike. Bermuda, 
although a country, is also a relatively small community; the 
government and its citizens are taking the latest events 
seriously. However with tourism and annual revenue down 
considerably over the past two years and with no sign of the 
economy improving (for example, one in six businesses in St. 
George's has closed in the last 18 months), crime will continue 
to increase. Hopefully with additional training and resources, 
the BPS will be better prepared to tackle the issues at hand.ROSHOLT