09HILLAH36
BABIL "MUD HOUSE" PERFORMANCE TAPS ANTI-CORRUPTION CHORD AND
Thu Apr 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
REO Hillah
R 301325Z APR 09
FM REO HILLAH
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 1186
INFO IRAQ COLLECTIVE
REO HILLAH 1259UNCLAS HILLAH 000036 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KCOR SCUL PINR IZ
SUBJECT: BABIL "MUD HOUSE" PERFORMANCE TAPS ANTI-CORRUPTION CHORD AND 
DESIRE FOR PULIC LIFE 
 
¶1. (U) Summary:  The April 24 and 25 performances by the "Mud 
House" troupe met with the kind of public enthusiasm associated 
with a World Cup match or a rock concert.  The performances were 
the first since  mid-2003 at the amphitheater on the Babylon 
ruins site that was constructed by Saddam Hussein.  The play, 
entitled "Sense of Democracy" addressed the issues of civil 
liberties, democracy and corruption, through comedy, and the 
audience responded enthusiastically.  End Summary. 
 
A Return of Cultural Life 
 
¶2. (U) The "Mud House" players, a very popular troupe of Baghdad 
TV actors, put on its second-ever performance of "Sense of 
Democracy" at the long-neglected Babylon amphitheater on April 
¶24.  Even though advertising posters only were put up three days 
earlier, the April 24 performance drew an audience of 
approximatly 2500 persons.  Provincial Council Chairman Kadum 
Majeed Tooman (a Sadrist) attended, as did the Deputy Governor 
Iskander Witwit (independent secular).  Both sat together with 
the PRT Leader and other PRT members.  The crowd responded 
enthusiastically to the performance, undescoring the thirst for 
a public cultural life that was lost in the course of the last 
five years, as Al-Hillah, a city of 600,000 persons, went from 
four movie theaters to none. 
 
¶3. (U) Word circulated throughout the city the following day and 
on April 25 attendance at the performance shot to aproximately 
3500 persons -- and with it the intensity of the crowd, which 
ranged somewhere between a world cup soccer match and a rock 
concert.  The PRT entered the amphitheater that evening to a 
welcoming roar from the crowd.  It was the kind of reception to 
which PRT members were unaccustomed but not unappreciative. 
Notably, nearly one dozen women at the performance were without 
headscarves, an act that would not have occurred less than one 
year ago.  Young men danced before and after the performance 
celebrating a rare opporunity for Al-Hillah's society to come 
together in a cultural event without restrictions on freedom of 
expression.  Until recently the protected ruins site on which 
the amphitheater is located was closed to the public. 
 
Anti-Corruption Theme Endorsed 
 
¶4. (U) "Sense of Democracy" deals with corruption by a public 
official.  An Iraqi Lou Costello-like actor has to navigate 
between an office manager, who wants to kill off rivals and 
offers of pay-offs, and female co-workers with romance problems. 
 The anti-corruption theme, which was central to the plot, was 
reinforced prior to the April 25 performance by the newly 
elected Governor, who gave a brief address to the crowd before 
the start of the performance.  In his remarks the Governor 
appealed for everyone to help the new provincial government 
combat corruption.  This appeal was rounded out by the 
Provincial Commissioner for Public Integrity, who gave a much 
longer speech . . .  and received less applause.  Outgoing 
Governor Salim Saleh Mahdi Al-Muslimawi did not attend either 
performance, although he had earlier indicated that he would. 
 
¶5. (U) Comment:  Several Iraqis commented that the sponsorship 
of the performance had done more than anything else in recent 
years to boost the public's perception of the PRT.  Governor 
Al-Zargani was clearly impressed with the public response to the 
performance and on the spot resolved to support the 
rehabilitation of the amphitheater to facilitate future 
performances.  Would that combatting corruption could always be 
so much fun. 
 
HILLAS