09HONGKONG461
HONG KONG'S UPDATED AVIAN INFLUENZA/PANDEMIC
Fri Mar 13 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXRO8410
PP RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHHK #0461/01 0720740
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 130740Z MAR 09
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7116
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHHI/AMEMBASSY HANOI PRIORITY 3953
RUEHJA/AMEMBASSY JAKARTA PRIORITY 1769
RUEHKL/AMEMBASSY KUALA LUMPUR PRIORITY 7603
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI PRIORITY 1391
RUEHPF/AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH PRIORITY 0836
RUEHGO/AMEMBASSY RANGOON PRIORITY 1862
RUEHGP/AMEMBASSY SINGAPORE PRIORITY 4001
RUEHPH/CDC ATLANTA GA PRIORITY
RUEHRC/DEPT OF AGRICULTURE WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAUSA/DEPT OF HHS WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY IA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 HONG KONG 000461 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR CA/OCS/EAP, 
STATE FOR M/PRI FOR ROBIN MORRITZ 
STATE FOR SES-O FOR ELIAS PARRA 
STATE FOR AAIT 
STATE FOR OES/IHA 
STATE FOR MED 
HHS FOR OGHA - STEIGER, HICKEY 
CDC ATLANTA FOR CCID AND COGH 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMED AMGT ASEC CASC KFLU KSEO KPAO TBIO HK CH
SUBJECT: HONG KONG'S UPDATED AVIAN INFLUENZA/PANDEMIC 
TRIPWIRES 
 
REF: A. STATE 6306 
     ¶B. STATE 13929 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: Post submits the following updated Pandemic 
Influenza (PI) tripwires for consideration and coordination 
in response to Department-provided guidance and action 
request (Reftel A).  These tripwires were developed as part 
of Post's ongoing efforts to ensure we are as prepared as 
possible for a pandemic event and have taken into account the 
latest available information and HKG's capabilities and 
likely responses. Per department instruction, Post is now 
working to update these tripwires in the Crisis and Emergency 
Planning Application (CEPA)(Reftel B). END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Post continues to view tripwires as prompts to 
consider options and not absolute triggers. The Department PI 
tripwires have been carefully reviewed and are incorporated 
into Post's pandemic response planning.  Post assumes that if 
Avian Influenza (AI) becomes efficiently able to transmit 
human-to-human, infections would spread quickly throughout 
the region and that Hong Kong, because of its location along 
China's south coast, dense population, and role as a regional 
transportation hub, could expect infections and exposures 
within a short period. Post's variations from Department 
tripwires reflect HKG capabilities and expected actions as 
well as provide fidelity on a range of anticipated local 
indicators and possible options. 
 
Hong Kong is Well Prepared 
-------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Hong Kong is perhaps the best prepared city in Asia 
and among the best prepared in the world to respond to a PI 
outbreak.  Building on lessons learned from previous 
outbreaks of AI and as the epicenter of the SARS outbreak in 
2002, Hong Kong has committed tremendous resources to 
building this PI response capability.  Hong Kong's first line 
of defense is a capable AI surveillance program headed by the 
Agriculture, Fisheries and Conservation Department.  Poultry 
farms and food markets are heavily monitored and both wild 
and domestic birds are tested regularly for AI.  If the AI 
virus is found, strict quarantines and protocols are 
initiated with the full cooperation of Hong Kong's citizenry. 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Hong Kong's second line of defense, the Center for 
Health Protection (CHP) and Hospital Authority, are likewise 
highly professional and has adequate resources to deal with a 
PI outbreak.  The health care system has in place detailed 
contingency plans, large stocks of anti-viral medications and 
experienced staff who are well trained and equipped.  Hong 
Kong authorities fully cooperate with the World Health 
Organization (WHO) and are well networked with U.S. medical 
authorities.  Hong Kong authorities and medical staff are 
also well linked regionally and cooperate with and support 
both Macau and mainland China authorities in routine AI 
surveillance and planning for a PI emergency.  Private 
Americans can receive prescription medications via mail and 
local hospitals will provide emergency services to all 
foreigners and then seek reimbursement. 
 
Tripwire One 
------------ 
 
¶5. (SBU) Multiple AI human infection in more than one country 
in the region; Or, Hong Kong's 3-tier response system goes 
from lowest response of &Alert8 to Level 2, "Serious"; Or, 
a significant AI outbreak in Hong Kong poultry populations or 
a confirmed AI human case in Hong Kong with potential 
widespread human health impact (no human-to-human 
 
HONG KONG 00000461  002 OF 005 
 
 
transmission). 
 
a. (U) Conduct outreach efforts with local health authorities 
and reconfirm all established lines of communications. 
 
b. (U) Review medical supply levels and Personal Protective 
Equipment (PPE) inventories; top off as needed. 
 
c. (U) Review/update warden system and F-77 report. 
 
d. (U) Closely monitor WHO, CDC, and other AI reporting and 
HKG announcements for updates and recommendations; 
disseminate relevant information and instructions to 
Consulate staff through internal e-mails and published 
announcements and to private AMCITs through newsletters and 
web-based announcements; advise AMCITs where to obtain 
up-to-date information about the situation and about 
Consulate operations. 
 
e. (U) Remind and encourage Consulate staff and AMCIT 
community to maintain first aid kits that include hygiene 
items, basic medical supplies and medications; reference USG 
recommendations to maintain sufficient emergency supplies, 
including food and some water, to last up to twelve weeks. 
 
Tripwire Two 
------------ 
 
¶6. (SBU) Dramatic increases in the number of human AI cases 
in the region; Or, reports of multiple AI infections in Hong 
Kong; Or, authoritative reports or indications of 
AI-triggered human quarantines, restrictions on travel, 
reports of imminent closures of regional borders or 
curtailment of civil aviation; Or, regional AI-triggered 
unrest/panic; Or, WHO raises Pandemic Alert Phase to level 4 
(small clusters with limited human-to-human spread) and U.S. 
Federal Government Response is raised to Response Stage 2. 
 
a. (U) Emergency Action Committee (EAC) meets to review 
situation.  EAC, in consultation with the Operations Center's 
Crisis Management Staff (S/ES-O/CMS) and, if applicable, the 
State Department Task Force, confirm that Tripwire 2 has been 
crossed. 
 
b. (U) Review with Consulate staff Post's protective, 
treatment and preventative protocols, to include social 
isolation procedures. 
 
c. (U) Review with staff designated to assist the Medical 
Unit the bio-protection protocols, duties and procedures 
necessary to assist in the triage and care for Consulate 
staff or others showing AI-like symptoms. 
 
d. (U) Re-train employees in the use of PPE and N95 masks; 
consider issuing PPE, masks, sanitizers and other supplies to 
employees for both office and at-home use. 
 
e. (U) Verify all emergency phone trees and personnel rosters 
(to include the WebPASS Post Personnel System) are updated 
and test emergency communications and notification equipment 
and procedures. 
 
f. (U) Consider convening a Town Hall and OSAC (perhaps 
virtually by internet video conference) to disseminate 
information and respond to concerns regarding pandemic 
response preparations; if conducted, ensure any information 
provided is also sent to the AMCIT community.  Information 
should emphasize that if a pandemic is declared, private 
Americans should consider departing at the earliest stage, 
while commercial options remain. 
 
HONG KONG 00000461  003 OF 005 
 
 
 
g. (U) Consider the initiation of protective/preventative 
protocols, including an intensified disinfection regime. 
 
h. (U) Consider restricting regional TDY or authorized 
regional leave travel to affected areas. 
 
i. (U) Consider additional liberal leave, flex-time and 
telecommuting policies to reduce consulate staffing; consider 
actions, such as reduced appointment times and walk-in 
services, to reduce crowding and congestion in public access 
areas of the Mission. 
 
Tripwire Three 
-------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Confirmed multiple large clusters of efficient AI 
human-to-human transmission in the region or a confirmed 
cluster of AI human-to-human transmissions in Hong Kong; Or, 
WHO declares Pandemic Alert Period 5 (larger clusters but 
human-to-human spread still localized). 
 
a. (U) EAC subsumes AIWG.  EAC, in consultation with the 
Operations Center's Crisis Management Staff (S/ES-O/CMS) and, 
if applicable, the State Department's Task Force, confirm 
that Tripwire 3 has been crossed. 
 
b. (U) Issue or re-supply staff with PPE, sanitizers and 
other supplies for both workspace and home use; initiate 
protective/preventative protocols and intensified 
disinfection regime. 
 
c. (U) Consider canceling non-essential regional TDY or leave 
travel and official visitor/delegation travel. 
 
d. (U) Issue an OCS-cleared warden message with the latest 
available AI guidance from HKG health authorities, U.S. 
Department of State, CDC and WHO. 
 
e. (U) Consider requesting authorized departures to the U.S. 
of EFM and non-essential personnel.  If granted, Department 
will issue Travel Warning, and Post will disseminate it to 
the AMCIT community.  Inform host government and other 
foreign missions of drawn status. 
 
f. (U) If authorized departure is requested but not granted, 
provide mission briefing for employees and dependents 
emphasizing procedures in the event the Under Secretary for 
Management encourages employees to exercise liberal departure 
options (SMA, R&R, etc.) 
 
g. (U) Consider advising employees to withdraw children from 
local schools and inform the AMCIT community of any decision 
to do so. 
 
h. (U) Consider reducing Consulate operating hours and 
services and in consultation with CA, consider reducing visa 
services and reducing ACS services to emergency services only. 
 
Tripwire Four 
------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Sustained/documented AI human-to-human transmission, 
evidenced by a cluster of cases in Hong Kong or clusters of 
infection in more than two countries in the region; Or, clear 
evidence of AI human-to-human transmission spread in Hong 
Kong's general population, evidenced by secondary cases 
resulting from contact with an index case. Or, Hong Kong's 
3-tier response system goes from Level 2, &Serious8, to 
Level 3, &Emergency8; Or, WHO declares a Pandemic Period 
 
HONG KONG 00000461  004 OF 005 
 
 
Phase 6 (increased and sustained transmission in the general 
population), U.S. Federal Government declares Response Stage 
3 (widespread human outbreaks in multiple locations 
overseas); pandemic situation is such that it is difficult to 
get seats on the commercial flights still operating. 
 
a. (U) EAC, in consultation with the Operations Center's 
Crisis Management Staff and the State Department Task Force, 
confirm that Tripwire 4 has been crossed. 
 
b. (U) Office and LES Consular staffing augmented to respond 
to needs of AMCIT community, but otherwise reduce staffing to 
essential operations and personnel only.  Non-essential staff 
placed on administrative leave. 
 
c. (U) Consider establishing a 24-hour working group to 
assist staff and respond to inquiries regarding treatment 
centers and welfare and whereabouts concerns. 
 
d. (U) Ensure that controlled/classified documents have been 
reduced to a less than one-hour destruct time. 
 
e. (U) Send reminders to employees about health precautions, 
as well as procedures to report an emergency; ensure the same 
information is provided to AMCIT community.  Americans should 
also be provided with information about HKG-established 
alternate care sites and given advice on how to obtain food 
and medications. 
 
f. (U) Review host government's emergency mortuary set-up and 
ensure that Post will be able to assist Americans coordinate 
with medical authorities when a body must be placed in a 
mortuary facility. 
 
g. (U) Request an update to the Travel Alert or Travel 
Warning to reflect current circumstances and Post actions; if 
the Department issues a revised Travel Alert or Travel 
Warning, Post should promptly disseminate it to the local 
AMCIT community. 
 
Tripwire Five 
------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) The pandemic situation is such that random acts of 
violence or an increase in threats are occurring; Or, the 
pandemic situation is such that the HKG cannot contain civil 
unrest. 
 
a. (U) At the Front Office level, call the State Department 
Operations Center to report on the developing situation. 
EAC, in consultation with the Operations Center Crisis 
management staff and the State Department Task Force, confirm 
that Department Tripwire 5 has been crossed. 
 
b. (U) If not already done, set up and staff a 24-hour 
control room with stable electrical supply as well as 
telephone and internet access. 
 
c. (U) Consider requesting Ordered Departure; if requested, 
provide information about potential numbers of private 
Americans departing and transportation availability. 
 
d. (U) Consider actions that must be accomplished in the 
event all employees depart Post and operations are suspended; 
be ready to initiate document destruction. 
 
e. (U) Update AMCIT community with the latest guidance 
concerning safety, travel and housing; if ordered departure 
is granted, disseminate the Department Travel Warning and 
strongly urge private Americans to consider relocating to the 
 
HONG KONG 00000461  005 OF 005 
 
 
U.S.  Warden message should note that Consulate services may 
soon become unavailable to those who stay. 
 
f. (U) Arrange administrative control of residences and 
personal property of departing U.S. Government personnel.  At 
the discretion of the Chief of Mission, in coordination with 
the Department, assistance may be extended to foreign 
nationals when humanitarian or U.S. national security 
interests dictate.  Post must obtain prior approval from the 
Department before offering departure assistance. 
DONOVAN