09HONGKONG54
ANNUAL OSAC CRIME SAFETY REPORT
Fri Jan 09 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Hong Kong
R 090004Z JAN 09
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 6609
INFO AMEMBASSY BEIJING 
AMCONSUL GUANGZHOUUNCLAS HONG KONG 000054 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/DSS/OSAC, DS/IP/EAP 
AMEMBASSY BEIJING FOR RSO 
AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU FOR RSO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC KSAC HK
SUBJECT: ANNUAL OSAC CRIME SAFETY REPORT 
 
REF: 08 STATE 132056 
 
 
¶1. The Annual OSAC Crime Safety Report for the Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region is submitted below, following the guidelines 
in reftel. 
 
¶I. OVERALL CRIME AND SAFETY SITUATION: Post is not aware of any 
specific threats against American citizens in Hong Kong.  However, 
all visitors should be aware of the current worldwide travel 
advisories before undertaking travel to the region.  Hong Kong is 
one of the safest cities in Asia.  Muggings and violent robberies 
occur occasionally, including against foreigners, but it is 
generally safe to walk around the city at any time of day or night. 
Nevertheless, travelers should exercise the same caution they would 
in any large city, and pay particular attention to personal 
belongings while in crowded areas and while traveling on Hong Kong's 
public transportation systems. 
 
Hong Kong has a highly developed and well-maintained road and 
highway network.  Driving is done on the left-hand side of the road. 
 Drivers should be particularly aware of motorcyclists, who often 
ignore lane markings.  Public transportation and taxis are abundant, 
safe, inexpensive, and reliable.  Visitors should consider using 
these forms of transportation.  Each year, approximately 20,000 
drivers, passengers, and pedestrians are killed or injured in 
traffic accidents in Hong Kong.  The use of seatbelts in vehicles, 
if so equipped, is mandatory both in the front and back seat. 
 
II. POLITICAL VIOLENCE: The threat facing Americans from terrorism, 
war, or civil unrest is low.  Public protests, demonstrations, and 
strikes occur but are seldom violent.  Demonstrations are usually 
located in the Central District near various government buildings, 
which are close to the U.S. Consulate General.  Post is not aware of 
any indigenous terrorist groups operating in Hong Kong. 
 
III. POST-SPECIFIC CONCERNS: In the late summer/early fall there is 
an increase in typhoons in Hong Kong.  Public notification of 
weather conditions is excellent.  There have been no significant 
disasters such as earthquakes, fires, or floods reported in Hong 
Kong.  There have been no large-scale industrial or transportation 
accidents, no problems involving nuclear power plants, no 
kidnappings for ransom, no drugs or narco-terrorism, or anything 
else that is a security/safety concern for U.S. businesses or 
citizens. 
 
IV. POLICE RESPONSE: The general police support and response to 
foreign victims of crime is excellent.  The Hong Kong Police are 
highly trained and professional.  There are numerous police stations 
strategically located throughout the various districts and 
communities of Hong Kong.  Their response time to emergencies is 
under five (5) minutes and under ten (10) minutes for non-emergency 
calls.  The local police emergency number is 999.  The operators 
speak English, Cantonese and Mandarin. 
 
¶V. MEDICAL EMERGENCIES: For medical emergencies, the emergency 
telephone number is 999.  Limited emergency personnel are trained to 
paramedic standards; most are trained to first responder level. 
They generally perform basic stabilization and transport ASAP to the 
nearest hospital.  The trauma centers are: Queen Mary (Hong Kong 
Island) and Queen Elizabeth (Kowloon).  There is 24-hour emergency 
care at the Adventist Hospital (Hong Kong Island). 
 
VI. TRAVEL PRECAUTIONS; HOW TO AVOID BECOMING A VICTIM:  Hong Kong 
has many of the same crime problems as other major cities. 
Pick-pockets are especially numerous in areas of high congestion, 
e.g., Mass Transit Railway (MTR), Peak Tram, Star Ferry, Central 
District, and Wanchai.  There have been numerous reports of 
robberies involving the drug rohypnol, commonly known as the "date 
rape drug."  Most reports have involved bar staff and/or prostitutes 
from bars and clubs in the popular Wanchai and Tsim Sha Tsui 
districts.  The drug is administered to unwitting victims via food 
or drink, who later awake to find all of their valuables missing. 
The drug causes the victim to lose consciousness, sometimes for over 
24 hours, and often induces short term amnesia.  Travelers are 
advised to avoid leaving drinks or food unattended, and should not 
accept food or drink from strangers or new acquaintances. 
 
Private security services and guard companies exist; are well 
established, and offer a wide spectrum of security specialties. 
 
VII. FOR FURTHER INFORMATION: Contact the following telephone 
numbers: 
Consulate General Hong Kong 852-2523-9011 
24-hour Emergency Number  852-2841-2230 
Regional Security Office  852-2841-2355 
U.S. Foreign Commercial Service 852-2521-1467 
 
VIII. The Hong Kong/Macau OSAC Country Council was established in 
¶2000.  More recently, the Country Council elected a new Steering 
 
Committee in December 2008.  The Hong Kong/Macau OSAC meets 
quarterly or as needed.  Representatives of U.S. businesses 
interested in participating in OSAC should contact the Regional 
Security Office at the number above or visit the Hong Kong Consulate 
General's OSAC website at hongkong.usconsulate.gov/osac.html. 
 
 
DONOVAN