09HONGKONG9
HONG KONG: 2008 COUNTRY REPORTS ON TERRORISM
Fri Jan 02 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Hong Kong
R 020847Z JAN 09
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 6559UNCLAS HONG KONG 000009 
 
 
DEPT TO S/CT RHONDA SHORE; ALSO PASS TO RUEILB/NCTC 
WASHINGTON DC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER
SUBJECT: HONG KONG: 2008 COUNTRY REPORTS ON TERRORISM 
 
REF: 08 STATE 120019 
 
Consulate General Hong Kong's submission for the 2008 Country 
Reports on Terrorism, per reftel request, follows: 
 
Hong Kong 
--------- 
 
Hong Kong's position as a major transit point for cargo, 
finances, and people and its open trade and financial regime 
made it a potential site for money laundering and terrorist 
financing activities. The high level of cooperation and the 
successful implementation of the Container Security 
Initiative (CSI) by Hong Kong Customs officials received 
continued praise from visiting USG delegations, which 
described it as a model for CSI implementation. The Hong Kong 
government extended the Strategic Freight Initiative (SFI) 
pilot project, originally scheduled to run through April 2008 
for an additional year. 
 
Hong Kong law enforcement agencies provided full support and 
cooperation to their overseas counterparts in tracing 
financial transactions suspected of being linked to terrorist 
activities. 
 
Hong Kong actively participated in various anti-money 
laundering and counterterrorist financing initiatives, 
including the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) and the 
Asia/Pacific Group (APG) on Money Laundering. Hong Kong is a 
member of the Egmont Group, reporting through its Joint 
Financial Intelligence Unit (JFIU, operated by Hong Kong 
Police and the Customs and Excise Department). The results of 
Hong Kong's 2007 FATF and APG mutual evaluation were 
announced in June 2008.  In response to recommendations in 
the report, Hong Kong authorities are expected to propose 
legislation to increase supervision of money changers and 
remittance agents early in 2009, but have made no plans to 
establish reporting requirements for cross-border currency 
movements. 
 
Macau 
----- 
 
The Macau Special Administrative Region is a member of the 
Asia Pacific Group (APG) and completed a mutual evaluation of 
its Anti-Money Laundering Regime in 2007. In response to 
recommendations contained in the report, Macau authorities 
have taken steps to improve compliance with suspicious 
transactions reporting requirements in banks and casinos, but 
the threshold reporting limits remain well above 
international norms.  Macau's Financial Intelligence Office 
(FIO) remains a temporary body, although its staffing 
continues to increase.  Macau has not proposed establishing 
reporting requirements for cross-border currency movements. 
 
The Government of Macau continued to exchange information 
with the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region and 
counterparts in mainland China. Additionally, Macau continued 
to cooperate internationally in counterterrorism efforts, 
through INTERPOL and other security-focused organizations 
within the Asia Pacific Region. Macau continues to consider 
information sharing mechanisms that would enable it to join 
the Egmont Group. 
 
 
MARUT