09HONGKONG2085
EXTRANCHECK: POST SHIPMENT VERIFICATION: HONG KONG NOVIKY
Fri Nov 13 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHHK #2085/01 3170421
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 130421Z NOV 09
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
INFO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8945
RHMFIUU/HQ BICE WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS HONG KONG 002085 
 
USDOC FOR 532/OEA/ MCANNER 
USDOC FOR 3132 FOR FCS/OIO REGIONAL DIRECTOR PATRICK SANTILLO 
BICE FOR OFFICE OF STRATEGIC INVESTIGATIONS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: BMGT BEXP HK ETRD ETTC
SUBJECT: EXTRANCHECK: POST SHIPMENT VERIFICATION: HONG KONG NOVIKY 
ELECTRONICS 
 
REF: A) BIS e-mail request dated October 13, 2009 (01210075) 
 
1.Unauthorized disclosure of the information provided below is 
prohibited by Section 12C of the Export Administration Act. 
 
¶2. As per reftel A request and at the direction of the Office of 
Enforcement Analysis (OEA) of the USDOC Bureau of Industry and 
Security (BIS), Export Control Officer Philip Ankel (ECO) conducted 
a post shipment verification (PSV) at Noviky Electronics, Unit 
1502-3, 15/F, Leadr Industrial Centre, 57-59 Au Pui Wan Street, 
Shatin, Hong Kong (Noviky). The items in question for this PSV are 
two shipments of civil aircraft parts exported to Noviky on or about 
September 28, 2007 and March 25, 2008.  These items are likely 
classified under Export Control Classification Number (ECCN) 9A991, 
meaning that they are controlled for anti-terrorism reasons and 
would require a license to sanctioned destinations and certain 
restricted end-uses/users.  The exporter is Aircraft Spruce 
Specialty of Corona, California. 
 
¶3.  According to the Hong Kong Companies Registry, Noviky has been 
in existence since March 2006.  Its paid up share capital is the 
Hong Kong equivalent of USD 65,000.  The Hong Kong Companies 
Registry lists mainland Chinese national Zhao, Sheng Hui as the sole 
director.  The registered address of Noviky appears to be the 
registered address of another company that is the subject of a 
pending end use check, namely J&T Electronics. 
 
¶4.  According to the company's web site (www.Noviky.com), Noviky is 
a trading company that specializes in electronic components for the 
aerospace, communication, electronic instrument and other sectors. 
 
 
¶5.  It took some time to arrange a visit to Noviky.  The contact 
person at the company stated that she was the only person running 
the company and that she was due to go on maternity leave.  She also 
claimed to have lost the documentation related to the shipment in 
question.  Eventually, she agreed to meet. 
 
¶6.  On November 9, 2009, ECO and FCS Commercial Assistant Carrie 
Chan visited the company at the address noted above and met with Ms. 
Wong (there was no signage to indicate that Noviky is located at 
this address).  Noviky appears to be collocated with another 
company, Armitech Electronics (more information at 
www.armitechhk.com although this web site lists a different 
address).  Even for this jaded ECO, the meeting was remarkable.  The 
office of the company included only a desk and several chairs.  It 
did not include any computer, phone or filing cabinets.  When asked 
to describe Noviky's customers, Ms. Wong stated that they were 
located in Hong Kong.  When asked again about Noviky's customers, 
Ms. Wong stated that they were manufacturers and trading companies 
in Hong Kong. She provided no further details.  When asked about the 
warehouse referenced in the company's web site, Ms. Wong stated that 
the company no longer has a warehouse.  When asked why the meeting 
was held in the Leadr Center (vice the ship to address), Ms. Wong 
stated that the company had recently moved.  When asked about the 
transactions in question, Ms. Wong stated that she could not recall 
(although she did not deny that they had taken place).  When asked 
whether she had any documentation regarding the order, Ms. Wong 
stated that she did not.  When asked whether she retains any 
records, Ms. Wong stated that she did not.  She stated that all of 
her orders were done verbally.  When asked why the office did not 
contain a computer, phone or fax machine, Ms. Wong stated that she 
visited her customers in person or they called her on her cell phone 
or came to her office. 
 
¶7.  When asked for an e-mail address to which ECO could send export 
control information, Ms. Wong stated that she did not have an e-mail 
address.  When ECO asked whether the e-mail on the Noviky web site 
was operational, Ms. Wong stated that it was not.  When asked about 
the phone numbers on the web site, Ms. Wong stated she did not know 
whether they were operational and that she had used numbers provided 
by the web page design group that had helped her create the web 
site.  When asked about the director of the company, Ms. Wong stated 
that he was a friend and allowed her to use his company for her 
activities.  She stated that he was unfamiliar with her activities 
on behalf of Noviky.  When asked for a business card, Ms. Wong 
stated that she did not have one.  When asked to write her name on 
ECO's business card, Ms. Wong wrote her name as May Wong.  ECO 
cannot, with any degree of certainty, be sure the person he met with 
is named Wong or May. 
 
¶8.  ECO later visited the ship-to address for the shipments in 
question.  This office (14/F Yue Choeng Centre, 1-3 Wong Chuk Yeung 
St. Fotan, Hong Kong) is presently occupied by Interine Electronics 
Pan Asia Co., Limited.  This company has been in existence since 
2000 and has the HK dollar equivalent of USD 125,000 in share 
capital.  A cursory review of SED data suggests that this company 
has received shipments from the United States including national 
 
 
security (NS) controlled electronic components classified under ECCN 
3A001. 
 
¶9.  ECO believes Noviky to be a most unsuitable recipient of U.S. 
origin technology.  In ECO's opinion, Ms. Wong is aware of export 
control restrictions on trade with sanctioned countries as evidenced 
by her evasive answers.  ECO recommends a close review of all 
shipments to Noviky (and its address) as well as a review of 
shipments to Interine Electronics Pan Asia Co., Limited and Armitech 
and their corresponding addresses.