09HONGKONG2225
COPENHAGEN CONFERENCE: HONG KONG WANTS GREATER
Mon Dec 07 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXRO9253
PP RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHHK #2225/01 3411048
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 071048Z DEC 09
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9105
INFO RUEHCP/AMEMBASSY COPENHAGEN PRIORITY 0316
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HONG KONG 002225 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/CM, EAP/EP:MACFARLANE, OES/PCI:MIRZA, OES/EGC, 
EEB/ESC/IEC/ENR:MONOSSON, S/SECC:HOUSER AND SIERAWSKI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV ENGR KGHG SOCI HK CH
SUBJECT: COPENHAGEN CONFERENCE: HONG KONG WANTS GREATER 
ROLE IN CHINA 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: Hong Kong NGOs, business executives, 
academics, and civic organizations, although hopeful that the 
UN Copenhagen Conference will produce meaningful 
international commitments to enable a smooth transition to a 
low-carbon future, are frustrated that the Hong Kong 
Government is unwilling to play a leading role within China. 
They believe that Hong Kong is missing opportunities to 
become a model urban low-carbon city. NGOs and academics 
advocate that China should adopt the "common but 
differentiated responsibilities" principle within its country 
and follow a hybrid approach to emission reduction. END 
SUMMARY 
 
¶2. (U) EconOff recently met with Hong Kong-based green NGOs, 
private sector executives, academics and civic organizations 
on Hong Kong's expectations for the United Nations Climate 
Change Conference 2009 (COP15) in Copenhagen. These included 
executives from HSBC, CLP Holdings Limited (CLP), one of the 
largest privately owned power companies in Asia, and Meiya 
Power Company Ltd, an independently owned power producer with 
several power projects in mainland China, academics from Hong 
Kong University, researchers from Civic Exchange, a prominent 
civic organization, as well as environmental activists from 
WWF, Greenpeace and Friends of the Earth. 
 
Companies Want Smooth Transition to a Low-Carbon Economy 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶3. (U) Private industry contacts cautioned against a 
"one-size-fits-all" approach to carbon reductions and warned 
against binding agreements that did not cut emissions deeply 
or fast enough. HSBC's Teresa Au, Head of Corporate 
Sustainability in Asia Pacific, stressed that concrete 
agreements and policies had to follow soon after COP15 so 
that the private sector could plan for and invest in 
long-term projects based on the new policies. The policies 
should neither adversely impact the investment climate nor 
undermine the stability of existing industries and 
investments. Dr. Jeanne Ng, Director of Group Environmental 
Affairs at CLP, said that without appropriate policies and 
regulations, the rules for existing businesses simply could 
not change enough to deliver a low-carbon future.  Ms. Au 
maintained that the financial industry was an important 
enabler for this change but that its business customers 
needed clear policies and incentives to be motivated to make 
green investments.  According to Au, HSBC had developed green 
financing products, however, these products were only 
effective in partnership with government incentive schemes. 
 
¶4. (U) Executives told EconOff that measures such as the 
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) had not been effective 
drivers for clean energy initiatives, mainly due to the 
volatility of the carbon credits market.  As an example, Dr. 
Ng noted that, although CLP currently had nine CDM projects 
in China, CDMs had not been a reliable source of revenue 
because of unstable carbon prices. Policy measures such as 
renewable energy targets, preferential electricity tariffs, 
tax breaks, subsidies and customs duty relief, were more 
effective in encouraging renewable energy investment. 
 
Hong Kong's Carbon Footprint 
----------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) Several studies have calculated Hong Kong's carbon 
footprint to be at least double the world average for carbon 
emission per capita, but the Hong Kong Government has 
maintained that it is a relatively small greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emitter compared to other developed economies.  Hong Kong has 
no energy intensive industries, so its GHG emissions come 
mainly from power plants and secondly from transportation. 
Buildings consume 89 percent of total electricity. 
Consequently, Hong Kong's efforts to reduce GHG levels have 
focused primarily on building energy efficiency, product 
energy efficiency labeling, banning of new coal-fired power 
plants, promoting electric cars, and creating incentives to 
encourage renewable energy development.  However, Dr. William 
Barron, a leading environmental researcher from Hong Kong 
University of Science and Technology's Institute for the 
Environment, believed that Hong Kong's carbon footprint was 
higher than figures quoted by the Government since the carbon 
emitted from the roughly 70,000 Hong Kong investor-owned 
factories in mainland China was not counted in Hong Kong's 
total. 
 
Calls to Adopt More Stringent Targets Falls on Deaf Ears 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
 
HONG KONG 00002225  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) Hong Kong NGOs, including WWF, Greenpeace, and 
Friends of the Earth, all expressed frustration that the Hong 
Kong Government was not taking a leading role within China. 
Despite Hong Kong's considerable economic prowess and high 
standard of living, the Government had only set a 25 percent 
energy intensity reduction target.  NGOs want Hong Kong to 
voluntarily adopt developed economies' carbon reduction 
targets and "stop hiding behind mainland China."  Business 
executives and academics also agreed that the Hong Kong 
Special Administrative Region Government (HKSARG) did not 
have the political will and feared that Hong Kong would fall 
behind the Mainland and other cities such as Singapore if it 
did not change its "complacent" mindset and become more 
competitive and leadership-oriented. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Hong Kong has repeatedly stated its desire to work 
to fulfill China's obligations under United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). In September 2007, 
Hong Kong adopted APEC's 25 percent energy intensity 
reduction target, but NGOs and academics criticized that this 
was not commensurate with Hong Kong's economic development. 
Moreover, the target now appeared to be far less stringent 
than China's new pledge to reduce its carbon intensity 40 
percent by 2020. While Hong Kong's Secretary for the 
Environment Yau gave no indication that Hong Kong would 
re-align with PRC's targets, an HKSARG Environmental 
Protection Department official separately opined that Hong 
Kong would re-align with China's carbon intensity targets or 
other targets established at COP15 after the Conference. 
 
Hong Kong Could Lead within China under "Common but 
Differentiated Responsibilities" 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶8. (U) At a recent climate change forum organized by Civic 
Exchange, Hong Kong's leading civic organization, scholars 
advocated that the principle of "common but differentiated 
responsibilities" be applied within a country like China 
where there were developed cities, such as Hong Kong, 
Beijing, and Shanghai, as well as very rural, less developed 
areas.  A hybrid approach of having higher binding targets 
for its developed cities, while still having its overall 
targets at developing country levels, would enable China to 
'save face' in the COP15 negotiations. It would also allow 
China's continued economic growth and at the same time help 
China gain respect from industrialized countries by setting 
binding targets for its developed cities.  Dr. Barron told 
EconOff that Pearl River Delta and Central PRC government 
officials with whom he had spoken were receptive to this 
concept. 
MARUT