09JAKARTA1193
INDONESIA: PROMOTING MUSLIM EXCELLENCE IN SCIENCE AND
Wed Jul 15 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXYZ0004
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHJA #1193/01 1961043
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 151043Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2828
INFO RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RHMFIUU/HQ EPA WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS JAKARTA 001193 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/MTS, IIP/STC, OES/STC, OES/PCI, ISN/CTR, STAS, AND 
S/P/GREG BEHRMAN 
NSC FOR JOSH CARTIN 
DEPT ALSO PASS TO NOAA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TSPL ID
SUBJECT: INDONESIA: PROMOTING MUSLIM EXCELLENCE IN SCIENCE AND 
TECHNOLOGY 
 
REF: A) Jakarta 399, B) Jakarta 250 
 
¶1. (U) Summary.  Embassy Jakarta welcomes the President's proposals 
for broadening science and technology engagement with 
Muslim-majority countries.  The key to success in Indonesia will be 
promoting personal scientist-to-scientist interactions.  Post 
requests Washington's assistance in: 1) maintaining momentum on the 
U.S.-Indonesia Science and Technology Agreement; 2) meeting with 
members of the Indonesian Academy of Sciences in October; and 3) 
promoting scientific programs in Indonesia that facilitate 
interpersonal interactions between American and Indonesian 
counterparts. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Battle for Indonesia's Scientific Soul 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) President Obama's June 4 speech in Cairo outlined an 
expansive and forward-leaning approach to engaging Muslims.  His 
remark that development and tradition need not be contradictory has 
resonated with many in the Indonesian scientific community.  A 
debate is currently ongoing in the country between those who espouse 
shutting the doors to international scientific cooperation and those 
who promote such cooperation as essential to independent, high 
quality scientific research.  At times, scientific inquiry in 
Indonesia has been held hostage by narrow political considerations 
fueled by nationalism.  Robust implementation of President Obama's 
engagement strategy will ensure that the doors remain open to 
collaboration. 
 
¶3. (U) Such collaboration between the United States and Indonesia is 
clearly in our strategic interest.  U.S. scientific research 
organizations have begun to seek or expand partnerships in the 
country.  They recognize that Indonesia is one of the world's great 
natural laboratories, providing unsurpassed opportunities to explore 
marine and terrestrial biology, examine the development and spread 
of infectious diseases, and track the natural forces that change our 
landscape and affect climate.  Additionally, gaining access to U.S. 
science and technology cooperation can be an important incentive for 
providing U.S. companies access to the world's fourth most populous 
market. 
 
¶4. (U) The process of collaboration is as important as the content 
of collaboration.  Face-to-face interactions between U.S. and 
Indonesian scientific counterparts are essential for building 
relationships, strengthening trust, and breaking through political 
impediments.  Post notes that recent successes on scientific 
engagement have required multiple in-person meetings to thoroughly 
discuss details.  Stationing scientists for longer-term stints 
in-country will facilitate such discourse. 
 
¶5. (U) Science and technology cooperation will be a key pillar in 
our Comprehensive Partnership with Indonesia.  The concrete 
initiatives on science and technology addressed in President Obama's 
Cairo speech will bolster our efforts in supporting those in the 
Indonesian scientific community who share our belief in the 
importance of collaboration and high-quality science. 
 
----------------- 
Cairo Initiatives 
----------------- 
 
¶6.  (U) Post offers the following responses to the science and 
technology proposals in President Obama's Cairo speech: 
 
--Fund for Technological Development:  The Indonesian science and 
technology community will greatly appreciate additional funding for 
technological development in Muslim-majority countries.  The process 
for applying and using these funds should be clear and simple.  Post 
suggests an outreach program to educate and train potential 
Indonesian partners on the process for accessing and using these 
funds, once the program specifics have been finalized. 
 
--Centers of Science Excellence:  Indonesia has dozens of research 
institutions and universities conducting high-caliber scientific 
research and working to bring the fruits of this research to market. 
 All would be appropriate Centers of Science Excellence in their 
respective fields and interest is high in partnering with U.S. 
institutions.  Post has sent our candidates to EAP for 
consideration. 
 
--Science Envoys:  Embassy Jakarta has seen the strategic value and 
tangible results of hosting scientists and will fully support envoys 
under this program.  NOAA scientists, brought to Jakarta through the 
Embassy Science Fellow Program, were instrumental in completing and 
 
implementing the 2007 agreement with Indonesia on cooperation in 
tsunami detection equipment.  Post is also working with the Science 
Initiatives Group to examine the feasibility of initiating a pilot 
project under the Global Science Corps, which would recruit U.S. 
scientists for year-long placements at research institutes in 
Indonesia. 
 
--Health Initiatives:  While there has been no polio in Indonesia 
since 2006, Embassy Jakarta continues to support global polio 
eradication efforts through surveillance and prevention.  Post will 
continue this essential work until the region is certified as 
polio-free.  Post continues to partner with the Government of 
Indonesia and local communities to address maternal and child health 
issues, particularly among the poor and underserved.  With maternal 
and child health receiving additional attention, Post will expand 
efforts and partner with a wider range of stakeholders in addressing 
high maternal and neonatal mortality rates. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Realizing President Obama's Vision 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) Post is working on several issues and projects that will 
complement President Obama's initiatives.  Taken together, these 
will form a comprehensive science and technology engagement strategy 
with Indonesia. 
 
¶8. (U) The U.S. Indonesia Science and Technology Agreement, 
currently under negotiation, will be the cornerstone of sustained, 
effective partnership.  This agreement will set the framework for 
future collaboration.  This agreement is not a final destination, 
but rather a critical first step to linking U.S. and Indonesian 
counterparts.  [Progress on the S&T Agreement negotiations will be 
reported Septel.]  The current Minister for Research and Technology 
is eager to conclude the S&T Agreement.  GOI interlocutors have 
emphasized the importance of signing the agreement before the new 
cabinet ministers are announced in early October.  In order to meet 
this deadline, Mission should aim to conclude negotiations on the 
agreement before the end of August, in advance of the Muslim fasting 
month of Ramadan.  Post appreciates Washington's continued focus on 
timely completion of these negotiations. 
 
¶9. (U) In anticipation of the success of the S&T Agreement 
negotiations, Post is proposing a voluntary visitor program for 
three leaders in the Indonesian Academy of Sciences to visit 
Washington, DC, the week of October 5-9, 2009.  During the visit, 
the delegation will identify opportunities for long-term scientific 
and technical cooperation with U.S. counterparts.  Post requests 
that the group meet with representatives from U.S. government 
agencies and the White House as well as the National Academies of 
Science, the National Science Foundation, and the American 
Association for the Advancement of Science.  Post appreciates 
Washington's assistance in ensuring a successful visit. 
 
¶10. (U) Post is working with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA) to expand activities and the Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA) to develop programs for Indonesia.  Post 
would like to host scientists from both these agencies to work on 
the ground to identify key areas for further collaboration.  [See 
Reftel A]  Such activities would directly support President Obama's 
outreach agenda to Muslim-majority nations. 
 
¶11. (U) Post will link activities under existing programs, including 
the Embassy Science Fellow Program and the Science and Technology 
Muslim World Outreach Program, to President Obama's new initiatives, 
thereby enhancing the effectiveness and raising the public profile 
of all activities. 
 
¶12. (U) Finally, Post will continue to solicit ideas on science and 
technology engagement with partners in the Indonesian government and 
important Muslim organizations including former President Habibie's 
International Islamic Forum for Science, Technology, and Human 
Resources Development (IFTIHAR).  [See Reftel B]  Post will report 
back on these discussions. 
 
HUME