09JAKARTA1971
Visit of U/S Burns and Three Aspects of a
Wed Dec 02 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHJA #1971 3361042
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 021042Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3964
INFO RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITYUNCLAS JAKARTA 001971 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM AMB HUME TO U/S BURNS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON ID
SUBJECT:  Visit of U/S Burns and Three Aspects of a 
Turning Point for Bilateral Relations 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED -- PLEASE HANDLE 
ACCORDINGLY 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Your visit will be only the second opportunity this year 
for high-level, in-depth discussion of the bilateral relationship. 
Since the 
Secretary's visit in February significant progress has been made in 
such fields as education, counter- terrorism, science and 
technology, and people-to- people exchanges.  Our scene-setter 
describes that 
progress well.  This message briefly describes three 
aspects of the relationship that provide the context 
for everything we do on specific issues. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The relationship suffers from inadequate  trust on both 
sides.  The 1990s were a difficult  period.  The U.S. side 
terminated military cooperation 
because of human rights violations, which then got 
even worse in the tumult that accompanied the end of 
the Soeharto government and the independence of East 
Timor.  The USG stood aside when Indonesia faced the 
Asian currency crisis in 1998.  As Indonesian 
democracy took its first steps, we had adequate 
reasons to put little faith in the future here.  As a 
consequence the security relationship suffered, 
business investment stalled, and people-to people ties 
dropped off.  Although the relationship is now 
enjoying a springtime, there are still too few 
Americans stepping up their activities and too many 
Indonesians who wonder if the USG should be counted on 
as a long-term partner.  Rebuilding trust is 
necessarily an effort that takes time. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The second challenge is that both sides want 
to change the character of the relationship from 
patron (or donor) to client into a real partnership. 
But the bureaucratic habits on both sides resist 
change.  We tend to ask how to judge or reward 
Indonesia, and often we design programs first and 
inform the Indonesians later.  Indonesians may try to 
imagine how to work with us in Afghanistan or to 
collaborate on climate issues, but the long-standing 
bureaucratic habit is to wait to hear what programs we 
bring from Washington.  However, to create a real 
partnership we need bilateral accomplishments rather 
than unilateral deliverables to characterize high- 
level visits.  As with trust, changing this 
relationship into a partnership is a challenge for 
both sides. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The third challenge is although we both know 
that the Cold War and the "unilateral moment" are 
past, neither side has a clear picture how the 
structures of international relations will evolve. 
Surely such change brings opportunity.  For example, 
Indonesian membership in the G-20 provides an 
opportunity for Indonesia to distance itself from Non- 
Aligned, Third World posturing and to develop a habit 
of responsible, pragmatic leadership.  SBY?s work on 
climate change and our strong cooperation on counter- 
terrorism are both good indications.  We also have a 
bundle of initiatives in the fields of education, 
health, and science and technology that aim to foster 
a culture of intellectual rigor, openness to sharing 
knowledge, and cooperation.  Such a culture could 
displace the nationalistic and ill-informed responses 
that limit Indonesia's appeal as a partner.  Working 
together can have a real impact on how Indonesia 
defines its role in the 21st century. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Your staff and Embassy Jakarta have put 
together a good program for your visit; the 
Indonesians are looking forward to your discussions; 
and, there are good odds this becomes an important 
milestone in bilateral relations. 
 
HUME