09JAKARTA1640
ADVANCING OUR AGENDA IF PRESIDENT OBAMA POSTPONES
Thu Oct 01 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXYZ0005
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHJA #1640 2740635
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 010635Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3447
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS JAKARTA 001640 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EAP A/S CAMPBELL, DAS MARCIEL 
NSC FOR AMBASSADOR BADER 
DEPT ALSO EAP/MTS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL OVIP ID
SUBJECT: ADVANCING OUR AGENDA IF PRESIDENT OBAMA POSTPONES 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  President Obama has informed President Yudhoyono 
that he must postpone his visit to Indonesia to next year, according 
to a credible Embassy contact.  The reason: the President would like 
to bring his family and spend a few days.  If true, we should find a 
way to make this news public as soon as possible, perhaps through a 
Presidential interview with an Indonesian journalist.  We must also 
continue to press for concrete progress on a number of issues: the 
Peace Corps, an OPIC agreement, the science and technology 
agreement, the MCC Compact, Environmental Protection Agency 
cooperation, trade and investment, and the Bali Democracy Forum.  A 
series of upcoming visits by senior officials provides opportunities 
to deliver these items.  End Summary. 
 
---------------------- 
Delivering the Message 
---------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) According to a businessman accompanying President Yudhoyono 
to the G20 summit, President Obama informed President Yudhoyono that 
he would not visit Indonesia in November.  President Obama 
reportedly said that he wanted to visit Indonesia next year during 
the school holidays so that he and his family could spend a few days 
in Indonesia. 
 
¶3. (SBU) If this report is correct, we must find a way to announce 
it publicly.  Rumors are already circulating that President Obama 
will not come.  Many of these rumors link the cancellation to 
security concerns.  Delay of an announcement of the postponement 
will only engender more rumors and conspiracy theories, none of 
which are likely to be flattering to the U.S.  An announcement that 
he is postponing his trip so that he can bring his family and spend 
more time here, however, will resonate positively. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The ideal announcement would come from the President 
himself, perhaps in an exclusive interview with either the VOA or an 
Indonesian television reporter.  The message should be simple:  The 
President is disappointed he can't visit in November.  Given his 
tight schedule, he would have only been able to visit Indonesian 
very briefly.  He postponed his visit until next year so he can 
spend more time and bring his family along.  We have sent to EAP a 
draft op-ed for Indonesian newspapers and would appreciate its 
clearance. 
 
------------------------- 
Managing the Relationship 
------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) The planned November visit served as a catalyst on a number 
of issues, including the Peace Corps, an OPIC agreement, a science 
and technology agreement, and the Bali Democracy Forum and on 
Interfaith Dialogue.  Despite the postponement, we must continue to 
press for progress on each of these.  We must show Indonesia that 
our overall objective is to build a partnership, not just have 
Presidential deliverables.  Indonesia places great value in 
negotiating a comprehensive partnership document.  We should agree 
on the text of this document as soon as possible. 
 
¶6. (SBU) But we must also work on specific items.  We would welcome 
a visit this fall by Environmental Protection Agency Administrator 
Lisa Jackson to announce increased partnership on environmental 
issues.  Peace Corps Director Aaron Williams plans visit Asia in 
November; we should aim to have him sign the Peace Corps agreement 
in Jakarta then.  Under Secretary Hormats plans to attend the APEC 
Summit in November; a visit here would give him the opportunity to 
look at how we can partner with Indonesian in the G20.  He may also 
be able to sign the OPIC and science and technology agreements and 
announce the placement of an MCC national coordinator in Indonesia. 
Under Secretary Burns has tentative plans to visit in December; we 
should tie his visit into the Bali Democracy Forum, use the 
opportunity to advance our new Burma approach, and continue to 
pursue an Interfaith Dialogue with Indonesia.  Finally, USTR should 
consider coming to Indonesia for the next round of Trade and 
Investment Framework Agreement talks in order to advance the 
economic pillar of the comprehensive partnership. 
 
OSIUS