09JAKARTA736
SENIOR OFFICIAL PUBLICLY ENDORSES COMPREHENSIVE
Mon Apr 27 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Jakarta
O 270940Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2205
INFO ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM COLLECTIVE
USPACOM HONOLULU HI
SECDEF WASHDC
NSC WASHDCUNCLAS JAKARTA 000736 
 
 
DEPT FOR EAP, EAP/MTS, EAP/MLS, EAP/RSP 
NSC FOR E.PHU 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV ID
SUBJECT: SENIOR OFFICIAL PUBLICLY ENDORSES COMPREHENSIVE 
PARTNERSHIP 
 
¶1.  A senior official in the Indonesian Department of Foreign 
Affairs has publicly endorsed the idea of a new partnership 
between the United States and Indonesia.  Retno L.P. Marsudi, 
Director General for America and Europe, made the endorsement 
in an opinion piece in the English-language Jakarta Post on 
April 27.  Marsudi recently returned from a week of meetings 
and consultations with U.S. and Indonesian officials in 
Washington, D.C., on this issue.  The endorsement is the 
GOI's first public statement on the issue since the Secretary 
and Foreign Minister Wirajuda jointly called for a 
Comprehensive Partnership during the Secretary's visit to 
Indonesia in February.  The following text is verbatim as 
printed in the newpaper. 
 
¶2.  TEXT OF JAKARTA POST ARTICLE 
 
"Indonesia, the US:  A New Partnership" 
Retno L.P. Marsudi 
The Jakarta Post, Monday, April 27, 2009 
 
One could say that observing Indonesia-US relations has 
become more interesting since the Obama administration came 
into power, particularly after the visit of US state 
secretary Hillary Clinton to Jakarta in February 2009. 
 
Indonesia-US relations have been and will always be a very 
important factor for both countries' foreign affairs.  As the 
largest country in Southeast Asia, Indonesia is home to the 
largest Muslim population in the world and is the fourth most 
populous country in the world. 
 
At the same time, as President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono 
mentioned during a speech at the London School of Economic 
and Political Sciences, Indonesia's history has never been an 
easy one, an epic story of survival against the odds. 
 
However, such a picture of disorder and uncertainty no longer 
captures the Indonesia of today.  Having overcome its trials 
and tribulations, Indonesia is now a resilient country that 
plays an active role in many strategic international issues 
such as climate change, interfaith dialogue, democracy as 
well as peace and security. 
 
Amid the current international financial crisis, Indonesia 
remains as one of a handful of countries that continue to 
post positive projections of economic growth. 
 
In March 2009, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development (OECD) announced that Indonesia was one of the 
best performing economies.  In addition, Indonesia has also 
recently taken the opportunity to play an active role in the 
G20. 
 
Indonesia is now the third largest democracy in the world. 
The legislative election on April 9, 2009 was on the whole a 
fair, peaceful and transparent process. 
 
Indeed, Indonesia's democracy has achieved a point of no 
return, transforming the country into a progressive force in 
the international arena. 
 
During Clinton's visit to Indonesia, she mentioned that as a 
country with the largest Muslim population, Indonesia is able 
to harmonize Islam, democracy, modernity and women's 
empowerment. 
 
For Indonesia, the US was, is and will remain an important 
partner, particularly considering the latter's significant 
role in international affairs.  The US possesses everything 
that a major power requires: a large population, a vast 
territory, a strong economy, a mighty military and so on.  In 
general, relations between Indonesia and the US have been 
positive and stable, but remain "full of surprises". 
 
Bilateral trade has increased from year to year, with figures 
reaching US$21.7 billion in 2008, which is around 17 percent 
more than the total for 2007 ($18.5 billion).  The US is also 
among the biggest foreign investors in Indonesia. 
 
Growing cooperation can also be seen in issues such as 
counter-terrorism, defense, education, and the Millennium 
Challenge Corporation.  With such growth in relations as a 
backdrop, it comes as no surprise that the US decided to lift 
its travel ban on Indonesia. 
 
During Clinton's visit to Indonesia, both governments agreed 
to develop a comprehensive partnership.  Questions did emerge 
in response to the decision to establish such a relationship: 
 
If the progress in bilateral relations in the past few years 
has been achieved without a comprehensive partnership, why 
now is there a sudden desire by both governments to broaden 
and deepen their relations through a comprehensive 
partnership mechanism? 
 
In general, a comprehensive partnership reflects a certain 
level of maturity in bilateral relations between the two 
countries.  It is a partnership that should always be based 
on equality, mutual respect and mutual benefit. 
 
Trust and transparency also become very significant elements. 
 All in all, every effort should be made to ensure that these 
requirements are in place in order for the partnership to 
work. 
 
A Comprehensive Partnership provides a framework for the 
further strengthening of bilateral relations.  It should be 
flexible, open and adjustable to dynamic and rapid 
developments in bilateral and international relations. 
 
A Comprehensive Partnership should bring added value to the 
current bilateral relations.  It should be innovative and 
capable of offering both traditional and innovative 
approaches to fulfilling the targets of the partnership. 
 
In as such, failure to attain such added value would make the 
partnership merely an example of political bureaucracy. 
Thus, deliverables become a very important element in its 
success. 
 
Priorities of cooperation could be wide ranging, from the 
climate change issue to energy security, food security, 
education, health, exchanges, economics and development, 
defense, peace and security. 
 
The election of Barack Obama as the 44th president of the US 
provides a golden opportunity for both countries to develop 
their relations.  For the first time, there is a US president 
who has certain emotional ties with Indonesia. 
 
The change in the US administration, particularly the "O 
factor", and recent positive developments in Indonesia's 
domestic situation, were indeed among reasons for Indonesia 
to be chosen as one of the countries visited by the Clinton 
during her first trip abroad. 
 
For the first time, most of Indonesia has high expectations 
for improved relations with the US.  The same could also be 
said of the Americans.  During my official visit to the US a 
couple of days ago, I sensed the same expectation and clear 
optimism that the US should have better relations with 
Indonesia. 
 
Bader, the senior director of the US National Security 
Council, mentioned that never before had Indonesia and the US 
had such a good opportunity in their bilateral relations. 
 
While good relations are seen at the government level, can 
the same be said of the relations among Indonesians and 
Americans at the grass-root level? 
 
The relations at grass-roots levels or through 
people-to-people contact remain at farer (sic) distance 
compared to those enjoyed at the government level. 
Consequently, every effort must be made to bring these two 
peoples closer. 
 
In any democratic country, civil society plays a significant 
role in shaping the government policy, reflecting the general 
interest of the people.  In the post-9/11 period, there were 
feelings of "distrust" between the two countries' peoples. 
As a pre-requisite to embarking on a new partnership, efforts 
are needed to remove such "distrust". 
 
Policies in favor of strengthening people-to-people, contact 
should be adopted in immigration, education, intercultural 
and interfaith dialogues and education cooperation, and 
exchanges should be undertaken to strengthen this contact. 
 
When receiving the visit of secretary Clinton in February 
2009, President Yudhoyono mentioned that improving 
people-to-people contact through education should become a 
priority in the bilateral relations agenda of the two 
countries. 
 
The benefits of adopting the new Comprehensive Partnership 
are obvious.  The priorities are also clearly mentioned.  It 
is now an urgent need for Indonesia and the US to seize the 
momentum - now, not later.  Momentum never lasts long; it is 
a brief opportunity that should be acted on immediately. 
 
In the mean time, special attention should also be paid to 
managing peoples high expectations.  Failure to fulfill such 
expectations would be counter-productive and the success of 
the Partnership would depend on how both countries are able 
to bring more deliverables as "the meat" of the relations. 
Otherwise, the Comprehensive Partnership would end up 
becoming yet another sleeping document. 
 
Hopes are high that the two countries' leaders would find a 
good time to officially announce the establishment of the 
Comprehensive Partnership.  Together, between the governments 
and between the two peoples, we can make it happen. 
 
END TEXT 
 
HUME