09KABUL4029
Afghanistan's Hajj 2009: Transport Ministry and Ariana
Wed Dec 16 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBUL #4029 3501046
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 161046Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4018
RHMCSUU/FAA NATIONAL HQ WASHINGTON DC
INFO RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI 0004
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 4323
RXFSNHQ/NATO HQ BRUSSELSUNCLAS KABUL 004029 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EEB/TRA, S/SRAP, SCA/FO, SCA/RA, SCA/A, NEA/ARP 
FAA FOR RAY SMITH 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: EAIR PGOV PREL AF
SUBJECT: Afghanistan's Hajj 2009: Transport Ministry and Ariana 
Execute Well But Hajj Minister Under Investigation 
 
Ref: A) 08 Kabul 2977 
     B) 09 Kabul 3346 
 
¶1.  Summary: In a marked improvement from last year's Hajj, 
logistics for the 2009 Afghan pilgrimage proceeded smoothly, due to 
extensive planning by the Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation 
(MOTCA).  State-owned Ariana Airlines transported about 35,000 
pilgrims, thanks to a last-minute deal between the Afghan and Saudi 
governments that allowed Ariana to land at Saudi airports.  Behind 
MOTCA's success, however, looms a possible scandal at the Ministry 
of Hajj and Islamic Affairs where press rumors have surfaced that 
the Minister of the Hajj is under investigation for overcharging 
Hajj pilgrims and pocketing the money.  End Summary. 
 
Hajj Pilgrims Returning 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.   As of December 14, 8,050 out of a total of about 35,000 
pilgrims have returned from the Hajj to Kabul and Kandahar airports. 
 MOTCA formed a steering committee earlier this year and tasked it 
to enhance preparations for the 2009 Hajj to avoid a disastrous 
repeat of 2008, when the previous Minister was fired for alleged 
corruption and a contracted airline struggled to transport 
Afghanistan's pilgrims to Saudi Arabia (Ref A).  The committee 
successfully advocated for round-the-clock operations at major 
airports and priority landing slots for Hajj-designated aircraft. 
When Kabul International Airport (KIA) closed to official traffic 
November 19 for President Karzai's inauguration, it remained open to 
Hajj aircraft. 
 
Saudi Government Relents on Ariana 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶3.  Although Deputy Minister of Transport Raz Alami urged the Afghan 
Government to spread profitable Hajj passengers among different 
airlines, the Cabinet ultimately named Ariana Airlines the exclusive 
carrier of Hajj passengers this year.  Ariana attempted to charter a 
Boeing 767 from rival Safi Air, but could not agree on a price and 
instead chartered an Airbus 310 from a United Arab Emirates-based 
airline (Ref B).  The charter aircraft supplemented Ariana's four 
310s, including two purchased this year with Ministry of Finance 
funding. 
 
¶4.  Ariana's new aircraft were a key point in negotiations between 
the Afghan and Saudi governments to allow the carrier into Saudi 
airports despite Saudi Arabia's recognition of the European Union 
safety "black list," including Ariana.  Alami spent several days in 
Jeddah persuading regulators to allow the carrier to land, on the 
conditions that it use only new aircraft and that engineers be 
present on all flights. 
 
¶5.  Looking ahead, Alami, who is likely to remain as Deputy 
Minister, said he wants ISAF to vacate its office and ramp space at 
KIA next year to allow for a dedicated Hajj terminal.  In addition, 
a German-funded runway improvement in Mazar-e Sharif will be 
complete in 2010 and allow for direct flights to Saudi Arabia during 
next year's Hajj. 
 
Hajj Minister Under Investigation 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶6.  The smooth logistics of the 2009 Hajj, however, has been may be 
overshadowed by scandal that threatens to erupt over the Ministry of 
Hajj and Islamic Affairs' alleged mismanagement of Hajji funds. 
Credible press rumors that high-level Hajj Ministry officials, 
including the Minister himself, were involved in overcharging Hajjis 
and pocketing the money appeared in late November.  To date, 
however, there has been no warrant issued for the Minister's arrest. 
 
 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
¶7.  This year's Hajj preparations were entirely Afghan-led and 
resulted in the first Hajj in recent memory without a serious 
mishap.  MOTCA does not publicize its accomplishments, although 
EmbOffs have encouraged DM Alami to consider holding a MOTCA 
ceremony in early January to welcome home the final pilgrims and 
highlight the ministry's role in orchestrating this major logistical 
success.  End comment. 
 
EIKENBERRY