09KABUL2451
Afghan Elections Situation Report Eight - 2100 Local,
Thu Aug 20 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBUL #2451/01 2321614
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 201614Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0966
INFO RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 7806
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 3811
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS KABUL 002451 
 
DEPT FOR AFGHAN ELECTIONS TASK FORCE 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM AF
 
SUBJECT: Afghan Elections Situation Report Eight - 2100 Local, 
August 20, 2009 
 
¶1. (SBU) The next sitrep is scheduled for 2400 local on August 20. 
 
 
------------ 
Atmospherics 
------------ 
 
¶2. (U) President Karzai addressed the nation at 6pm August 20 to 
thank the IEC and the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF) for 
making the Afghan elections a reality, noting they had prevented 
several attacks.  He thanked the Afghan people for voting, despite 
security threats from the Taliban.  He said the MOI reported 73 
security incidents in 15 provinces that caused civilian and ANSF 
casualties; however, these incidents did not stop Afghans from 
voting.  He said Afghans have taken another step towards 
strengthening Afghan democracy.  He finished by thanking the 
media-in particular the Afghan media-for reporting today.  Contrary 
to an initial report, he did not say there had been "free and fair 
elections."  The MOD, MOI, and NDS held a joint press conference 
around 7pm August 20 to highlight security successes, and report 
that the Afghans were "brave" and went to the polls. 
 
¶3.  (U) Dr. Abdullah Abdullah said in an interview with the press 
that he was pleased, overall, with the elections process.  He added 
that he would be filing complaints with the Elections Complaint 
Commission (ECC). 
 
¶4.  (U) All polling stations have now closed.  At this time, polling 
centers are counting votes, and starting to post tallies outside the 
polling station.  Diplomats observed that in the north and the 
northeast, votes for the president seemed to overshadow votes for 
the provincial council.  In the Kabul area, the German Ambassador 
saw many votes for the Presidential candidates, but noticed many 
voters chose not to vote for Provincial Council candidates. 
 
------------- 
Voter Turnout 
------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) At the UNAMA meeting with diplomats at 1900 local August 
20, DSRSG Peter Galbraith said that according to impressionistic and 
anecdotal reports from UNAMA field offices, he would guess that 
turn-out was less than 50%, and specifically said that: for the 
west, turn-out was high, perhaps greater than in 2004; the north 
will also be higher than 2004; the northeast is low in Pashtun parts 
of Baghlan and Kunduz and good in Badakhshan; central is very low in 
Wardak and Logar; Kabul was not high compared with 2004; Panjshir 
very low, possibly as a result of reluctance to choose between Fahim 
and Abdullah; Paktiya very low except the Tajik community of Gardez; 
in the south, turnout was extremely low due to security 
considerations; in the east, Nanghahar was not as good as hoped, but 
better than the south. 
 
¶6.  (U) Provincial reports by region follow: 
 
(U) Kabul: Embassy Mission Observers report that polling stations 
closed as scheduled, and the ballots were tallied according to 
established procedures.  They reported that press was present in a 
few of the polling stations.  Of the handful of polling stations 
that posted results in Kabul, either Abdullah or Karzai won with 
about equal frequency. 
 
(U) RC South, RC North and RC East:  No update since sitrep seven. 
 
(U) Jalalabad reported a drop in voter turnout in the early 
afternoon in Jalalabad city.  Voter turnout was also reported low in 
Khogyani District in the wake of the morning attack that killed the 
Deputy Police Chief there.  There was also a report of low female 
voter turnout in Goshta District, reportedly caused by too many male 
election observers, which may have intimidated females.  Insurgent 
intimidation also reportedly lowered voter turnout in southern 
Shirzad district, along the mountainous border with Pakistan. 
(U) RC West: Herat reported voting to be moderate to heavy, with 
some polling booths still having long lines as of late afternoon. 
According to the press, some polling stations ran out of ballots, 
preventing "thousands" from voting. 
 
--------- 
Security 
--------- 
 
¶7.  (U) The German Ambassador met Interior Minister Atmar at a Kabul 
polling center this afternoon.  The Minister was very satisfied with 
ANP performance, concluding the ANP has taken the right measures. 
He noted that only four ANP had been killed and eight wounded on 
 
elections day, which is actually below average compared to a normal 
day in Afghanistan. 
 
¶8.  (U) Provincial reports by region follow: 
 
(U) RC South:  Uruzgan reported that local security forces in 
Hussinea (within Khas Uruzgan district) were able to repel an early 
afternoon Taliban attack and the polling station was able to 
reopen. 
(U) RC East:  Nangarhar reports that District Governors from the 
volatile border districts near Pakistan reported generally good 
security due to the cooperation of tribal elders who have been 
providing additional security and urging high voter turnout. 
Khogyani District was the exception where the District Governor 
reported low voter turnout following the IED attack earlier in the 
day that killed the district's Deputy Police Chief.  Police arrested 
a suspect who was carrying explosives and a trigger device. 
Insurgents carried out indirect fire attacks on polling stations in 
Nazyan, Achin, Shirzad Pachir and Wa Agam districts, but there were 
no casualties and polling stations remained open.  A female suicide 
bomber in Jalalabad was arrested before she carried out her attack. 
 
RC North and RC West: No update since sitrep seven. 
(U) Herat reports that security is extremely tight in Herat city, 
with many roadblocks and checkpoints.  ANP were at every major 
intersection and are even searching motorbikes before they can enter 
the city.  The provincial ANP chief reported no major incidents in 
the province as of 1430. 
---------------------------- 
Voting & Counting Activities 
---------------------------- 
¶9.  (SBU) UNAMA preliminary and partial results suggest that 
President Karzai has done well in early Bamyan province tallies, 
Bashardost is second, and Abdullah is third.  The Indian Ambassador 
had partial results from Kabul West that suggest Hazaras are voting 
more for Bashardost in that area. 
 
¶10.  (U) At 1615 Ambassador Eikenberry called in from Qala Wazir 
polling center in western Kabul to report that the center had run 
out of ballot papers and some 400 people had been waiting in line 
for over an hour.  As he talked, word came that additional ballot 
papers had arrived. 
¶11.  (U) Provincial reports by region follow: 
(U) RC South: Uruzgan reported hearing from Governor Hamdam that 
there were over 150 women voters waiting to vote in the northern 
part of Chora district, but the lack of a female election worker 
prevented them from voting.  Gov. Hamdam immediately called Uruzgan 
IEC Chief Osmani to see what could be done to rectify the situation. 
 
(U) RC East: Jalalabad noted that IEC officials reported no major 
logistical problems during the afternoon throughout Nangarhar 
Province, but said they were having problems at many voting centers 
using their hand-held hole punch devices to mark voter registration 
cards after voters cast their ballots.  They have instead been using 
scissors to mark the cards. 
(U) RC North: PRT Baghlan reported observing at two polling stations 
in the center of Pol-i-Kumri, where voters calmly made their way 
through the various steps, displaying savvy and understanding of the 
election process.  The election staff appeared well trained and 
thorough.  Security was not thought to present a problem and 
election workers expected a strong turnout.  The only issue of 
significance reported was that some female voters were not able to 
read the ballot and, therefore, were experiencing difficulty 
identifying the candidates they wished to vote for. 
(SBU) A European Embassy has heard unconfirmed reports of 2-12 
Kunduz voters who had their finger cut off by the Taliban for 
voting. 
(U) RC West: Herat reported that voting centers were open in 15 of 
467 in Herat Province, with most of those not opening (11) in the 
Guzara district which is under the influence of local troublemaker 
Ghulam Yahya Siwashani (AKA Akbari); one center in Kohsan district 
near the Islam Qala border crossing did not open, and three centers 
in the Pashtun Zarghun district did not open.   A big achievement 
was the opening of all polling centers in Shindand district, which 
has been one of the more problematic districts in the province in 
terms of security.  State PRT Rep saw lots of observers at the 
polling centers, mostly from the candidates, but also EU observers. 
He noted that one observer identified himself as from the 
Secretariat of the Presidency in Kabul. 
----- 
Fraud 
----- 
¶12. (SBU) The SRSG DSRSG Peter Galbraith described to diplomats a 
number of irregularities that he argued made little difference: 
 
-Some said to have voted multiple times, having removed the 
"indelible" ink.  Others, never inked. 
-Some card punchers did not work. 
-Election officials are said to have directed how to vote as did 
local strongmen. 
-Reports also exist of larger scale rigging of votes in Kandahar. 
The DSRSG maintained that we will get a clearer idea if this is 
true, and a large turn-out from parts of Kandahar would be suspect. 
 
 
¶13. (SBU) Galbraith noted that he had seen candidate Dr. Abdullah 
Abdullah in the afternoon, and reminded him of the complaint 
process.  Dr. Abdullah replied that he would use the Electoral 
Complaints Commission process. 
 
¶14.  (U) Provincial reports by region follow: 
 
(U) RC East: Jalalabad noted that IEC officials reported ongoing 
problems in Nangarhar Province throughout the afternoon with 
political election observers working for particular PC candidates. 
Nangarhar IEC Director Dr. Akhtar Ajmal reported that some of these 
observers - working on behalf of specific PC candidates - have been 
interfering in the work of IEC officials at election centers and 
demanding that some polling centers be shut down, while refusing to 
give specifics about their complaints.  No centers have been closed. 
 IEC officials also reported that many election observers working 
for President Karzai and presidential candidate Dr. Abdullah 
Abdullah have been very aggressive in urging people at polling 
stations to vote for their candidates. 
 
-------------- 
Public Affairs 
-------------- 
 
In a press encounter the late afternoon of August 20, SRSG Kai Eide 
made the following points: 
A) He noted grave concerns over security existed for the past few 
days.  Today had many incidents, but the situation was better than 
anticipated due to the comprehensive efforts of Afghan and 
international security forces. 
B) The number of polling centers opened was 6200, that is the same 
as the number opened in the 2005 parliamentary elections.  This is 
another achievement. 
C) Turn-out obviously varied.  Areas of conflict had lower turn-out 
than stable areas.  That is unsurprising.  We cannot say what the 
figures are as yet, but clearly, the turn-out demonstrates that 
people wanted the elections. 
D) We have heard many stories about irregularities.  There is no 
doubt that some took place.  It is not something for me to comment 
on, but rather, for the action by the Electoral Complaints 
Commission. 
E) All in all, this was a good day for Afghanistan.  Today filled me 
with a feeling of respect for all the Afghans who organized and 
protected the elections, and for all those who went and cast their 
vote. 
F) Afghanistan is now entering a new stage.  I have a strong 
conviction and hope that the maturity demonstrated in the campaign 
period will be reflected in the post-polling period. 
The British Deputy Ambassador noted that the UK Prime Minister may 
make a statement similar to that of the U.S. Embassy. 
 
PUBLIC AFFAIRS UPDATES: 
-A combined media briefing was held with IEC Chair Dr. Ludin, 
Minister of Defense Abdul Rahim Wardak, Minister of Interior Hanif 
Atmar, National Director of Security Amrullah Saheh. 
 
-Dr. Lundin reportedly stayed on message and said the ANSF and ANP 
did a great job.  He also said that Afghans showed they do not like 
"foreign, imperialistic powers" ruling over them and their voting 
today was proof of this. 
 
-MOD's Wardak noted Afghans courageously participated with eight ANA 
killed and 25 injured.  He reported 135 total incidents today, 
including five suicide attacks.  MOI Minister Atmar also thanked 
Afghan security forces and the IEC. He added that despite threats, 
many Afghans voted but that nine ANP were killed and 14 injured. He 
added Afghans in 70 percent of the provinces voted without 
intimidation and in the remaining 30 percent, voters defied 
intimidation and voted courageously. 
 
-NDS Minister Saheh thanked media for restraint, adding the media 
blackout requested was needed so that any incidents did not 
discourage Afghans from voting.  He added that recent arrests of 
terrorists in Kabul led to information that prevented further 
attacks, especially in Herat, Kabul, Wardak, Ghazni, Takhar, Paktya 
 
and Nangarhar. 
-Statement Attributable to the Spokesperson for the 
Secretary-General of the UN Kai Eide 
 "The Secretary-General would like to congratulate the women and men 
of Afghanistan on today's Presidential and Provincial Council 
elections. He notes that, by exercising their Constitutional right 
to vote, the Afghan people have demonstrated again their desire for 
stability and development in their country. 
 
The Secretary-General commends the Independent Election Commission, 
and all other Afghan institutions and international stakeholders 
supporting the electoral process for organizing the elections in an 
extremely challenging environment. He encourages all candidates, 
their agents and supporters to continue cooperating with all Afghan 
electoral institutions during the counting of ballots and the 
results aggregation period, the complaints and adjudication process 
and the certification of results." 
Statistics: 
-6,182 polling sites opened out of 6,519 (IEC) 
-Significant incidents - 1,645 (estimated as of 6 p.m.)-ISAF joint 
operation 
AFGHAN MEDIA HIGHLIGHTS 
-A local Kunar RTA affiliate delivered a positive "Get-Out-The Vote 
message in early afternoon.  Call-in voters were positive. 
-A local Kunar RTA affiliate reported Coalition Forces preempted the 
Anti-Afghan Forces from stopping voters in Naray and Chapadara 
districts and as a result voting resumed. 
-A local Kunar RTA affiliate reported a mobile Taliban radio station 
in Sarkani District warned, "You will be punished if you vote. 
------------- 
New Messaging 
------------- 
Embassy Kabul statement: 
The American people congratulate the people of Afghanistan as this 
Election Day concludes, on the historic occasion of your nation 
leading, for the first time, democratic elections for President and 
Provincial Councils. 
 
Along with others in the international community, we await the 
announcements of official results by the Independent Electoral 
Commission in the days ahead. 
 
Washington talking points, as needed, if asked: 
-Ambassador Holbrooke, Ambassador Eikenberry and many other Embassy 
observers were in the field today. 
-We won't know the initial results of this nation-wide process until 
the Afghan Independent Election Commission releases official results 
several days from now. 
-We're still assessing the levels of voter turnout, but obviously it 
is encouraging that the turnout was significant enough for the 
Afghan authorities to extend polling hours. 
-The Afghan authorities have noted some technical irregularities and 
some allegations of fraud, which will be investigated by the 
Elections Complaints Commission. 
-So far we haven't seen any incidences of major election-related 
violence in Kabul or other cities.  Reports are still coming in, but 
right now it appears that Afghan National Security Forces capably 
handled the incidences that occurred. 
--The Afghan people have shown courage and we commend them for 
exercising their right to express their views and choose their own 
leadership in the face of threats. 
ISAF Messaging: 
ISAF forces were engaged by insurgent forces today, including 
indirect and direct fire attacks against FOBs and patrols, as well 
as IED strikes against ISAF convoys, but these engagements were not 
election-related. Indeed, insurgent violence directed against 
election sites and events was quite capably handled by ANSF. ANSF 
did not request ISAF support in any election-related security 
events. 
------------------- 
ISAF TALKING POINTS 
------------------- 
-Regarding security, the Afghan National Security Forces did a 
commendable job addressing all security issues they encountered 
today. 
- Though violence was higher than normal, the Afghan National 
Security Forces effectively prevented insurgents from affecting 
Afghan voters' access to the polls. 
- Today's security posture reflects the Afghan National Security 
Forces' successful planning and preparation efforts and demonstrates 
their professional capabilities and dedication to the future 
security of their nation. 
- ANSF capably handled all insurgent violence directed against 
election sites and events; ANSF did not request ISAF support in any 
election-related security events. 
 
 
 
 
EIKENBERRY