09KABUL424
READY TO SERVE: KABUL FEMALE POLICE GRADS,
Sat Feb 28 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO5734
RR RUEHDBU RUEHPW
DE RUEHBUL #0424 0590943
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 280943Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7518
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS KABUL 000424 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM AF
SUBJECT: READY TO SERVE: KABUL FEMALE POLICE GRADS, 
TRIUMPHANT AND PROUD 
 
 Introduction 
------------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) Triumphantly waving their diplomas in the air and 
yelling out their dedication to service, twenty-two female 
police recruits graduated from an eight week US-funded 
police training in Kabul on 2/25.  From Kabul, Herat, 
Takhar, Khost, Bamyian, and Dai Kundi, most of the women 
had prior police experience but had not previously 
completed a training program, although several were brand 
new recruits.  This training is the same course male 
recruits receive as part of the Afghan National Police 
(ANP) Focused District Development program.  Female police 
recruits are not permitted to train alongside their male 
colleagues.  The objective of this course was to provide the 
same training opportunities for female officers.  The course 
includes modules on Afghan law, investigative techniques, 
tactics, 
physical training, shooting, and emergency and forensic 
medicine. 
 
¶2. (SBU) During the graduation ceremony, a senior Ministry 
of Interior official told the graduates that Afghanistan 
faced three challenges: terrorism, narcotics, and 
corruption.  He said most people were afraid of the first 
two, but that everyone should be most afraid of corruption 
because it forms the base from which terrorism and 
narcotics thrive.  "As Muslims, Afghans, and citizens of 
the world, it is your duty to wage a strong battle against 
corruption," he urged.  The academy's director also 
commended the graduates' hard work and dedication to 
country and acknowledged US support of Afghan police 
training. INL/NAS Director told the graduates they had 
selected an 
immensely challenging and important vocation and thanked 
them for their hard work and service. 
 
Not a Quiet Group 
----------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) As the graduates received their diplomas, they 
turned and faced their classmates, raised the paper above 
their head, and screamed, "I dedicate myself to serving 
Afghanistan."  The boisterous audience cheered on their 
classmates, triumphant in their achievement.  Cameras 
snapped as students took hundreds of pictures with 
classmates, family, instructors, and government 
officials. 
 
Student Reactions 
----------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) A Kabul graduate enjoyed all aspects of the 
training and was eager to resume work.  The male police 
officers she worked with for about a year before starting 
training generally respected her as a colleague.  Now that 
she completed this rigorous training, she expects their 
respect only to deepen.  "In police work there are no men 
or women, we are police, and we accomplish our mission," 
she stated proudly. 
 
¶5. (SBU) A student originally from Khost had worked in a 
Kabul district police station for eight months before 
starting the training.  The tactical classes were her 
favorite part of the training, including learning to 
fight. 
 
¶6. (SBU) A Dai Kundi recruit most enjoyed the firearms 
training and claimed to be sharpshooter.  Her parents 
worried about her working in law enforcement, but they 
generally supported her efforts.  She is proud to bring in 
a salary and support her family just as her brothers do. 
 
Next Steps 
---------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) The next women's training starts on 3/12.  The 
graduates from the 2/25 class will return to work in their 
home police stations, as fully qualified ANP.  Completion of 
the course gives them equal status as, and permits them to 
compete for promotion with, their male counterparts. 
DELL