09KABUL3871
Funding Request for Containerized Housing Units (CHUs) in
Thu Dec 03 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO6484
RR RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL
DE RUEHBUL #3871 3371354
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 031354Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3715
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHRC/USDA WASHDCUNCLAS KABUL 003871 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SRAP, SCA/FO, SCA/A, EUR/RPM 
STATE PASS TO AID FOR ASIA/SCAA 
USFOR-A FOR POLAD 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT PGOV AF
SUBJECT:  Funding Request for Containerized Housing Units (CHUs) in 
Afghanistan to Support Civilian Uplift in the Field 
 
REF:  KABUL 3870 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: For coalition-led PRTs, Post is requesting a total 
of 21 Containerized Housing Units (CHUs) with a total estimated cost 
of $2.1 million to support the increase of U.S. civilians in 
Afghanistan.  As the civilian uplift progresses, Post may request 
additional containers at a later date, in particular to support the 
RC-N and RC-W regional platforms.  We may also consider 
pre-positioning some CHUs at the Mazar and Herat consulate sites for 
use while the new consulate facilities undergo renovation.  Due to 
the approximately 60-day delay between ordering and delivery of the 
containers and the onset of winter, Post would appreciate 
Department's timely consideration and approval of this request. 
(End Summary) 
¶2. (SBU) To accommodate the increase of USG civilians throughout 
Afghanistan, Embassy Kabul has asked coalition partners to support 
the deployment of additional U.S. civilians at coalition PRTs and 
other facilities.  In general, coalition partners have responded 
favorably, indicating a genuine interest in having additional U.S. 
personnel join their teams (reftel).  Many of the coalition-led 
facilities, however, lack sufficient housing and office space to 
accommodate additional U.S. personnel.  Post therefore proposes to 
purchase 21 containerized housing units (CHUs) to be used for 
lodging and office space at these  coalition-led facilities.  The 
estimated cost of the containers is approximately $2.1 million, 
including shipping to Kabul (costs of shipping within Afghanistan 
will vary by location and road conditions, but are not expected to 
exceed a few thousand dollars per container).  Agency reps at Post 
agree that this cost will be proportionally distributed between 
State, USAID and USDA, based on the number of personnel using the 
containers. 
¶3.  (SBU) The CHUs usually represent the best possible solution 
under the circumstances.  Coalition partners are reluctant to 
purchase or build office or living space on their facilities for 
U.S. civilians without 1) compensation and 2) a formal agreement 
outlining the terms and modalities of support.  For several years, 
coalition partners have hosted and supported U.S. civilians at 
coalition-led PRTs without any formal agreement or reimbursement. 
Some partners present U.S. civilians with monthly bills for lodging, 
food and other support; we have never paid these bills because of 
the lack of an MOU or other legal framework.  The Germans, Swedes 
and Spanish are now insisting on concluding "life support" 
agreements. 
¶4.  (SBU) Post believes the quickest and most effective approach to 
concluding such agreements is negotiating individual memoranda of 
understanding with each partner, since ISAF officials have advised 
us that a comprehensive agreement with ISAF would involve a lengthy 
negotiating and approval process.  Post has already initiated 
negotiations, and has shared a draft MOA with all coalition partners 
and offices in the Department, including L (reftel). 
¶5. (SBU) It is important to note that under the MOAs, the USG will 
be responsible for paying the life support costs of USG personnel on 
the coalition-led bases, including food, internet connection and 
housing.  We will need to pay for any improvements, building 
construction or containers needed to accommodate our personnel.  It 
will be faster and more effective to purchase items such as 
containers ourselves, rather than to ask coalition-led PRTs to 
procure them and then be reimbursed.  This will also ensure that the 
CHUs meet U.S. standards for life safety and health.  Asking 
partners to procure these items would also add layers to the 
accounting, needlessly delaying the process and increasing 
administrative costs for everyone involved. 
¶6. (SBU) Due to the approximately 60-day delay between ordering and 
delivery of the containers, as well as the onset of winter, Post 
requests Department's timely consideration and approval of this 
request.  As the civilian uplift progresses, Post may request 
additional containers, especially to support the RC-N and RC-W 
regional platforms.  We may also consider pre-positioning some CHUs 
at the Mazar and Herat consulate sites for use while the new 
consulate facilities undergo renovation. 
MUSSOMELI