09KABUL2454
Afghan Elections Situation Report Ten - 04:00AM Local,
Thu Aug 20 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBUL #2454/01 2322251
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 202251Z AUG 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0980
INFO RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 7817
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 3822
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS KABUL 002454 
 
DEPT FOR AFGHAN ELECTIONS TASK FORCE 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM AF
 
SUBJECT: Afghan Elections Situation Report Ten - 04:00AM Local, 
August 21, 2009 
 
¶1. (SBU) The next sitrep is scheduled for 08:00AM local on August 
¶21. 
 
------------ 
Atmospherics 
------------ 
 
¶2. (SBU) Provincial reports by region follow: 
 
RC-South: 
 
-- Helmand reports that voting went well in Lashkar Gah.  There were 
some problems with voters being turned away from polling stations 
that declined to remain open the extra hour, but in general the vast 
majority of those who wanted to vote in Lashkar Gah were able to. 
In the more remote districts the feeling was not as positive, as 
intimidation efforts, combined with voter ambivalence, combined to 
depress turnout. 
 
RC-West: 
 
-- In Farah, overall voting was very successful considering the 
serious attempt by the Taliban to disrupt the voting.  Although 
voting was disrupted in two districts, the majority of voters were 
able to exercise their rights. 
 
-- Chaghcharan reported that voting started off strong in the 
morning and slowed down as the day progressed. 
 
-- Badghis reported that a relaxed mood at polling centers and no 
serious incidents were reported.  At some centers, the turnout of 
women appeared to be almost equal to that of the men. 
 
-- Herat reported that young people constituted the majority of 
FEFA's domestic observers, and to a lesser extent, for the few 
political parties fielding observers.  The high number of youth 
involved in this election appears to be promising for the future. 
Many UN local staff who were apathetic and not planning to vote 
changed their minds and decided to do so after seeing the large 
numbers voting in Herat City and the long lines of their fellow 
citizens.  Almost all the domestic observers encountered had 
received the four-hour NDI observer course in Herat, and many still 
carried their NDI handbook or had pulled the check sheets out of the 
NDI handbook.  Observers agreed that there were no incidents of 
irregularity or fraud. 
 
There were three common complaints at Herat polling centers.  First, 
almost all the poll workers stopped trying to use the hole punchers, 
which did not work, and started cutting corners off the voter 
registration cards with scissors instead.  Second, voters and 
domestic candidate observers often commented on the overcrowding and 
long lines.  Third, some observers and poll workers commented that 
older, illiterate voters did not know how to vote or who to vote 
for, and in spite of the excellent IEC voting posters designed to be 
understandable by illiterates, still had problems with the process. 
 
 
RC-North: 
 
-- In Balkh, Abdullah campaign advisor Yunusi alleged that some IEC 
workers were partial to Karzai.  He said that Farhad Afghanzoi, one 
of Karzai's campaign officials in Balkh, campaigned inside voting 
centers in Mazar city in the company of two armed guards.  When an 
Abdullah observer confronted Afghanzoi, Afghanzoi reportedly 
threatened him.  The Abdullah campaign has filed a complaint against 
Afghanzoi. 
 
Yunusi also said that one Abdullah observer had accused a female IEC 
worker of campaigning for Karzai inside a voting center.  Another 
Abdullah observer told Yunusi that an IEC worker had been seen 
making marks on ballots cast for Abdullah so that they would be 
invalidated during the vote count. 
 
-- In Sheberghan, Jowzjan, General Dostum voted at a high school 
before spending the rest of the day at his guesthouse. 
 
RC-East: 
 
-- Elections were calm throughout Panjshir province.  No significant 
security incidents were reported.  PRT Director and USAID 
representative observed polling at three stations in the lower 
district of Shutul during morning hours.  IEC officials at all three 
locations followed correct procedures in the presence of PRT 
observers.  Two FEFA representatives were present at each station 
and, on average, a dozen representatives of PC candidates.  Voting 
 
was slow, with minimal crowds and no lines.  At some stations, IEC 
workers are clipping voter registration cards with scissors because 
of broken hold-punchers.  EU and U.S.-funded DI observers have so 
far visited more than 10 other polling stations in Panjshir and are 
reporting along similar lines. 
 
-- Paktia reported that some polling centers remained open until 
5:00PM, and many districts are reporting that ballots are moving to 
district centers for counting.  Several districts reported that 
residents appear pleased with the process and that both men and 
women showed up to vote. 
 
-- In Parwan, DI's international observer described the atmosphere 
in the morning in the centers he visited as "almost festive," with 
people relaxed and enjoying the process.  The consensus among 
everyone we spoke with about the process in Parwan was that it went 
very well. 
 
------------- 
Voter Turnout 
------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Provincial reports by region follow: 
 
RC South: 
 
-- Lashkar Gah, Helmand reported that Taliban intimidation ahead of 
Election Day clearly had more effect in the districts than in 
Lashkar Gah, but palpable voter apathy was probably the larger 
driver of what seems a relatively low overall turnout, especially in 
the districts.  An estimated 250 people voted in Khanashin today, 
which is pretty good number for that area. 
-- Kandahar reported that some polling stations in Kandahar City 
(KC) were still open as late as 1815 to accommodate voters who had 
been in line prior to the IEC-extended closing time of 1700.  UNAMA 
characterized voter turnout as low, citing as likely causes the 
insurgents' pre-election intimidation campaign and today's ongoing 
rocket attacks, particularly in KC. 
-- In Farah, voter turnout exceeded expectations, but was lower than 
in the previous election.   The districts of Pusht Rud and Bala 
Baluk had very weak turnout with no voter sites open except for a 
handful.   Farah City had an unexpected slow down after the morning 
but the voters returned before the closing of the polls to bring the 
numbers to a medium turnout.   The other eight districts had very 
high voter turnout exceeding local official's expectations.   Most 
sites extended their closing hours from 1600 to 1700 in order to 
accommodate the voters standing in line.  Also the afternoon saw 
many more men than women voters in all the districts. 
-- A UN contact described voter turnout in Uruzgan as both "paltry" 
and "pretty weak."   In Charchine district, the UN assessed turnout 
to be around 2 or 3 percent, with not one vote cast by a female.  On 
a positive note, Tarin Kowt and Deh Rahwod, two of the most 
populated districts, reportedly had the highest percentage turnout. 
Initial turnout appeared good but the indirect rocket attacks around 
the province likely killed any momentum that had been building 
throughout the morning. 
RC East: 
 
-- Paktika reported heavy voting in Sharana and Mata Khan, with 
steady voting in Gayan, Sarobi, Orgun and long lines in Bermel.  In 
all, solid voter turnout was observed in Paktika, notwithstanding 
the threat level. 
 
-- In Nangarhar, preliminary reports from UNAMA, election observers 
and community leaders suggest low voter turnout  - perhaps half that 
of the last election - in Jalalabad, due to security concerns and 
low voter enthusiasm.  However, police chiefs, tribal elders, and 
the IEC are reporting strong voter turnout elsewhere due primarily 
to effective pressure from tribal leaders to vote. 
 
-- In Parwan, DI's observer reported heavy turnout in the morning. 
Indications are that as the initial wave of enthusiastic voters left 
the polls, turnout also lightened as the day wore on.  UNAMA told us 
that the volume of women voters in Parwan was high. 
 
-- Bagram reported that at 1100 in 29 of the 31 districts in Kapisa, 
Parwan, Bamyan and Panjshir, people were standing in line to vote. 
 
-- Ghazni's Provincial Election Officer (PEO) Rahimi reported that 
50% of eligible voters voted, and that only two polling centers were 
closed:  Kakrak and Shawki in Jaghato district.  However, observers 
stated that significantly more - at least 24 polling centers and 
possibly even more - were not opened. 
 
-- In Khost, district administrators from several districts reported 
 
high voter turnout:  Nader Shah Kot claimed 60%; Spera estimated 
roughly 25%; Dwamanda estimated 65%; Mandozai DG believed 80% turned 
out; Tani claimed 75%; and Gorbuz believes 60%. 
-- Significant numbers of women voted in Shutul and Bazarak 
districts, in lower Panjshir.  However, Canada's female observer 
visited two women's polling stations in upper Paryon district, and 
found them staffed only by men.  No women turned up at either 
station to vote. 
 
RC-North: 
-- Kunduz reported that voter turnout was fairly low in Kunduz City. 
 Based on conversations with district managers of Archi, Aliabad, 
and Imam Saheb districts, it appears turnout was low in other areas 
as well, particularly in areas with high insurgent infiltration. 
-- In Balkh and Jowzjan, voter turnout was lower than expected at 
the nine polling centers visited by PRT.  At 1500, one polling 
station manager at a Sheberghan, Jowzjan polling center told us that 
only about half of the 600 ballots allocated to his station had been 
cast.  One Junbesh Party observer said Dostum's return had resulted 
in increased voter turnout from Junbesh supporters, but he could not 
quantify that claim.  When the State PRT officer visited a voting 
center in Khaneqa district, Jowzjan, at 1400, 760 people had voted - 
322 of them women. 
RC-West: 
 
-- Chaghcharan reported healthy voter turnout.  By 1400 lines had 
shortened drastically and by 1600 there were none at all.  At the PC 
visited by PRT reps, turnout was 67% of registered voters. 
 
-- Badghis reported that turnout appeared moderate, and most people 
got their voting done early.  By 1600, few people remained at the 
polls.  Only one voter cast a ballot at any of the polling stations 
in the troubled district of Bala Murghab during an hour-plus 
mid-afternoon observation period, and unlike the city centers of 
Qala-e-Naw and Qadis districts on election day, Bala Murghab 
appeared empty.  The District Field Coordinator for Bala Murghab 
told us that only 1-2% of the district population voted. 
 
Last month an IDLG-mandated delegation reportedly reached an 
agreement with local Taliban to permit elections.   The Taliban did 
not keep their promise to keep the roads open for voters.  Taliban 
cut off all but one access route to central polling centers until 
1000 and threatened to cut off any ink-dipped fingers and there was 
only one access route to the district center where six polling 
centers were located.  According to the DFC, IDLG Popal's ceasefire 
was only a 50% success because it brought temporary peace, but most 
could not vote.  He said that a successful ISAF/GIRoA clearing 
operation would have been better to guarantee people's right to 
vote. 
 
-- Farah reported that although voting was higher than expected it 
was low compared to the previous election.  There seem to be several 
contributing factors.  Taliban threats and attacks throughout the 
day may have dissuaded some voters from standing in line to vote 
exposing themselves to rocket attacks.   However in the districts 
the mood was much different and many voters came from faraway places 
to vote.   The most important change in Farah was the unusually high 
turnout of female voters.  Farah reports that some women have stated 
that they want to weaken the Taliban's status by voting despite the 
threats.  Many women have indicated that they would rather 
participate in an election in which they have the right to vote than 
return to the days of the Taliban where they could not vote. 
Overall the Governor and provincial officials were extremely happy 
about the turnout. 
 
-- An observer in Herat noted long lines of women and men waiting to 
vote.  There were at least 2000 voters waiting in line at 0700; some 
women had been waiting since 0430.  There was significant oversight 
by observers and candidate agents.  In one polling center alone, the 
PRT rep counted about 100 domestic observers, provincial council 
candidate agents, and presidential candidate agents overseeing the 
polls. 
 
--------- 
Security 
--------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Provincial reports by region follow: 
 
RC East: 
 
-- Bagram reported that all Bamyan, Parwan, Panjshir and Kapisa's 
495 polling sites were secured by ANSF.  There were no unscheduled 
polling site closures and just one election center attack in Kapisa 
Province.  In Kunar, Laghman, Nuristan and Nangahar, 765 of 780 
 
polling sites are secured by ANSF.  There were three unscheduled 
polling site closures and two election related attacks, with one in 
Nuristan, and one in central Nangarhar. In Wardak and Logar, 147 of 
162 polling sites were secured by ANSF.  There were 15 unscheduled 
polling site closures in the higher-threat areas.  There were five 
election center attacks - three in Wardak and two in Logar. In 
Ghazni, 358 of 368 polling sites were secured by ANSF.  There were 
36 unscheduled polling site closures, and five election center 
attacks.  In Khost, Paktia and Paktika, 393 of 401 polling sites 
were secured by ANSF.  There were no unscheduled polling site 
closures.  There were 14 polling center attacks - five in Paktika, 
three in Paktia, and four in Khost. 
 
-- Ghazni reported security challenges, including attacks on a 
polling center in a Ghazni City suburb, and on Qarabagh and 
Khogyani's district centers.   There were 14 incidents of indirect 
fire, seven incidents of direct fire, 17 attacks on District 
Centers, and four attacks on polling centers - all leading to five 
ANSF and two local nationals being injured.  There were no riots or 
examples of civil unrest during the voting period.  Referring to the 
incident earlier in the day at the polling center in Naw Abad, 
Ghazni District, the governor said that he freed the polling center 
from Ghazni MP Ali Akbar Qasimi and "his people" by deploying the 
ANA and ANP to the area. 
 
-- Paktia reported significant kinetic activity, with insurgents 
firing on locations in Jani Khel, Danda Patan and Lija Mangal 
districts, but with no casualties reported.  Eastern Paktia reports 
good turnout at madrassa and mosque sites despite periodic rockets 
hitting near villages, small arms fire, RPG and explosions in the 
distance from polling sites. 
 
-- At least nine of 65 significant insurgent attacks since polls 
opened in Paktia, Paktika and Khost were serious enough to close 
polling sites for one hour or more.  Each site reportedly re-opened 
after ANSF re-established security.  Attacks were most frequent 
between 0800 and 1230 in the P2K area.  All three provinces are 
ready to broadcast interviews with GIRoA officials and positive 
election programming on radio stations once polls have closed.  Disc 
jockeys in Dila (west Paktika) and Sabari (Khost) broadcast messages 
encouraging voters to come to polling stations to boost low turnout 
following indirect fire attacks during the day.  Several radio 
stations reported calls from the public thanking the ANSF for 
providing good security on election day. 
 
-- Khost reported that the attacks on Naka DC, Zirok COP and FOB 
Orgun-E in E Paktika are reportedly under control.  ANA and CF are 
in contact with insurgents in Bermel district in E Paktika.  Two 
suicide bombers detonated in Gardez City, Paktya; they were killed 
but there were no other casualties.  Six IEDs were found in Gardez 
City area; ANSF/CF have requested EOD assistance. 
 
-- In Nangarhar, there were no additional security incidents 
reported late in the day.  Overall, security incidents consisted 
primarily of indirect fire attacks on polling stations that did not 
affect polling station operations and resulted in few injuries.  The 
exception was the IED attack in Kyogyani that killed the district 
Deputy Police Chief and seriously injured another policeman and 
appears to have deterred voters from coming to the polls in that 
district.  A suspect was arrested in that IED attack, as was a 
suicide bomber in Jalalabad before she could carry out her attack. 
Jalalabad city was free of violence, with the exception of a small 
explosion in the morning near a polling station that resulted in no 
casualties.  The IEC and ANSF generally worked well together and 
were supported by the tribes across the province in providing 
security. 
 
-- In the 24 hours preceding the opening of polls, there were 44 
incidents in RC-East - approximately three times the norm, but only 
13 of which were directly related to the elections.  These 
occurrences, mostly small arms fire and indirect fire, have had 
minimal impact.  All were effectively countered by Afghan National 
Security Forces, backed up by Coalition reinforcements. 
 
While in the northern Tajik area of Kapisa, no security issues were 
reported, intense activity occurred in the northern Tagab and Alisay 
valleys.  A Chief of Police was wounded by machine gun fire. 
However, the attackers were defeated, the location secured, polling 
sites were opened and some elders were out encouraging people to 
vote. In Tagab, three polling centers were defended/secured by the 
ANSF from the inside.  There is one unconfirmed report of a voter 
being beheaded in this area, after INS saw that his finger was 
stained. 
 
RC-South: 
 
 
-- Lashkar Gah reported that after a morning filled with numerous 
attacks across the province, there were no security incidents of 
note this afternoon aside from a second IDF attack in Khanashin 
around noon.  Physical security at polling centers in Lashkar Gah 
was a mixed picture, with some stations having plenty of ANP to 
search voters and others having not visible security presence. 
There were, however, no security incidents at polling stations.  IDF 
attacks of this morning do not appear to have significantly affected 
turnout in Lashkar Gah. 
 
-- Farah reported that ANSF were able to secure the majority of the 
polling sites with the exception of two districts, Pusht Rud and 
Bala Baluk.  The village of Kanesk in the southern part of Bala 
Baluk district was the only polling station open in the district and 
it suffered a rocket and insurgent small arms attack.   However the 
polling center did not close and Taliban were repulsed by the ANSF. 
 
 
Farah observed that the district of Pusht Rud suffered the greatest 
fighting with pitched battles throughout the day.  Most polling 
centers were not able to open due to the heavy presence of the 
Taliban.   Ten Taliban who had fired rockets into the city were 
killed in the district with ANSF suffering three KIA.  In Khaki 
Safed four ANA were injured when they were removing voter materials 
from the village of Gardab when their vehicle struck an IED, but the 
materials were not damaged. 
 
RC-North: 
 
-- Kunduz reported that this morning's rocket attacks limited the 
activities of international observers. UNAMA, EU, NDI, and ANFREL 
all severely reduced their observation activities. 
 
-- In Faryab, the PEO reported that insurgent attacks this morning 
in the vicinity of two voting centers in Khowaja Kinti and Khowaja 
Asfalan villages in Qaysar district kept those centers from opening 
until ANP pushed back the insurgents.  IEC staff abandoned the 
centers, leaving ballot boxes unattended, according to the OCC-P 
deputy commander.  The centers reopened briefly before renewed 
fighting between ANP and insurgents forced the centers to close 
again for the rest of the day.  During the short window of time the 
centers were open, very few people came to vote. 
 
Fearing insurgent attacks on a voting center in Qasaba Qala village 
in Pashtun Kowt, Faryab the IEC ordered that the ballot boxes be 
taken to a more secure area for counting (Mingdara village) 
immediately after the polls closed at 1400. 
 
-- The Jowzjan PEO reported that insurgents fired rockets near a 
voting center in Ounchi Village, Darzab district, at 0930, causing 
would-be voters to scatter.  The center remained open, but turnout 
was depressed.  In Sher Big village, Qush Teppeh district, 
insurgents fired a rocket near the voting center there, but there 
were no reported casualties. A Swedish PRT vehicle struck an IED in 
Dardan village, Qush Teppeh district, Jowzjan province, this 
afternoon.  No injuries were sustained, but the vehicle was 
disabled. 
 
-- In Khaneqa district, Jowzjan, a group of elders voluntarily 
gathered at a polling center in the district center, in case any 
security problems should arise. 
 
-- The PEOs in Sar-e Pul, Balkh and Samangan reported no 
security-related problems. 
 
RC-West: 
 
-- Chaghcharan reported that security was tight, with plenty of ANSF 
at polling centers and elsewhere in the city.  Only one of Ghor's 
238 polling centers closed today because of violence (in Taywara 
district). 
 
-- Badghis reported that ANP forces were present at all sites 
visited, and several roads in Qala-e Now city were closed to 
traffic.  The IEC District director for Qala-e Now district reported 
that there were no security problems at the 19 centers in that 
district, and the ceasefire reached last month appeared to continue 
in effect. 
 
-- Per the UNAMA Western Region Chief, three polling centers in 
Shindand, Herat were burned by Mullahs Nasir, Ghafur, and Sadriddin, 
who reportedly were unhappy with the voting.   Their men told the 
polling staff to leave the premises and then torched the election 
materials, including the cast ballots.  The alleged centers torched: 
 
 Ali Abad Mosque in Ali Abad; Kohak Mosque, Kohak; and Darwajee 
Mosque, Darwajee. 
 
The UNAMA Western Region Chief, one PC candidate, and two domestic 
PC candidate observers all expressed concerns that the Taliban may 
employ tactics over the next few days targeting the convoys 
transporting voting results to provincial centers, mining roads near 
the voting centers these convoys will have to travel, and attacking 
polling sites in Herat province, where polling staff will be 
spending the night with ANP security and the PC ballot boxes to 
count the next day. 
 
---------------------------- 
Voting & Counting Activities 
---------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Embassy observers in Kabul noted that, by and large, the 
counting process followed the set procedures under intense scrutiny 
by FEFA observers, candidate and party agents, and international 
observers.  While the three step process of reconciliation, sorting, 
and counting was cumbersome and somewhat confusing, polling station 
workers approached the task seriously and professionally.  In 
several instances, there were questions about voter intent and 
whether the ballot could be counted for a particular candidate. 
These disputes were resolved quickly and peacefully.  Provincial 
reports by region follow: 
 
RC-North: 
 
-- Kunduz reported conflicting information regarding how many of the 
polling sites actually opened.  Observers in Kunduz were initially 
informed by IEC that all but two of the polling sites were open, but 
information from the district managers suggests that the number of 
sites which did not open today is considerably greater. 
 
-- In Balkh and Jowzjan, at least one Karzai observer was spotted at 
every voting station, but the same could not be said for other 
candidates.  The absence of other observers was glaringly evident 
during the vote count PRT officer observed at Khadeeja High School 
in Sheberghan, Jowzjan where Karzai had one observer for each of the 
seven voting stations, while Abdullah only had one observer to cover 
all seven.  The IEC vote counters often did not bother to hold the 
ballots up for inspection by the observers unless asked to do so. 
 
Karzai blew away the competition at Khadeeja High School Voting 
Center, winning nearly 65% of all male ballots cast.  One voter even 
wrote on his ballot: "Long life to Karzai Baba." Abdullah received 
only about one-seventh of the number of votes cast for Karzai. 
Bashardost placed third, and Ghani, a distant fourth, winning only 
2-3 votes at each of the seven voting stations. 
 
-- Chaghcharan reported that PRT reps witnessed the counting 
procedures at one of Chaghcharan's polling centers.  Other than 
minor procedural details, the count was orderly.  There were many 
observers from the candidates present along with a handful of 
domestic observers from FEFA. 
 
RC-East: 
 
-- Khost reported that several voting stations remained open after 
1600 to accommodate voters who remained in line.  Participants 
described their voting experience positively; people were required 
to show their registration cards, materials were on hand and voting 
was conducted efficiently.  Most people reported it took about five 
minutes to complete the process once they had entered the polling 
center. 
 
-- Nangarhar reports that polls closed an hour later than planned 
and IEC officials reported no major logistical problems throughout 
the day. Polling stations have begun counting ballots in the 
Presidential election and will begin tabulating Provincial Council 
votes tomorrow. 
 
-- In Parwan and Kapisa, DI described polling staff at all locations 
visited as professional and competent, barring one center in Kapisa, 
where he said the operation seemed to be purposefully disorganized 
and ANP were handling sensitive material and performing tasks the 
IEC should have been controlling. 
 
-- In Ghazni, Governor Usmani declared that, based on informal exit 
polling conducted by District Subgovernors (DSGs), Karzai received 
over 80% of Ghazni's votes.  Referring to a collection of polling 
centers at which 6,050 Afghans voted, he said 40 people voted for 
Abdullah, 10 voted for Bashardost, and the rest voted for Karzai. 
The governor said that in the 14 Pashtun districts in Ghazni 
 
province, more than 95% of the eligible voters cast ballots for 
Karzai. 
-- PRT officer in Panjshir estimated that Abdullah polled roughly 
90% in the provincial center of Bazarak, while Karzai took more than 
two-thirds of the vote in Marshall Fahim's hometown of Omarz. 
 
RC-South: 
 
-- Lashkar Gah reports that some polling stations remained open 
after 1600 for the extra hour while some closed as early as 1530. 
There are also many reports from the districts of people refusing to 
have their fingers inked for fear of retribution.  In Sangin, the 
IEC estimated that 15% of voters declined to vote at all when told 
the ink was mandatory. 
RC-West: 
 
-- Badghis reports there were observers from a number of parties, 
and two international observers with no procedural irregularities 
observed. 
 
----- 
Fraud 
----- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Provincial reports by region follow: 
 
RC-North 
 
-- Balkh Governor Atta told local reporters that if the elections 
were free and fair, Abdullah would emerge the winner.  He also 
claimed that the ink used in at least one voting center in Mazar 
could be washed off, thus making it possible for some voters to try 
voting more than once.  A few voters complained the IEC's election 
hotline (190) was not working.  The number, which IEC promoted 
during the voter registration campaign, was not operational back 
then either. 
 
-- In Balkh and Jowzjan, PRT officer observed IEC personnel 
frequently assisting elderly and illiterate people who did not 
understand what to do with their ballots.  Most assistance seemed 
well-intentioned.  The IEC workers made a point of calling observers 
over to the voting booth to listen to what they were telling those 
voters who had requested help.  Several voters left their marked 
ballots in the voting booth, forcing alert IEC personnel to recover 
and place them in the ballot boxes. 
 
RC-South: 
 
-- Lashkar Gah, Helmand reports that ANP arrested several IEC poll 
workers for stuffing ballots in Babaji after ANP noticed the workers 
carrying "hundreds" of completed ballots out after less than 40 
people had actually turned up to vote.  Observers report strong 
indications that these poll workers are connected to former Governor 
Sher Muhammad Akhunzada.  Also in Lashkar Gah, ANA arrested a man in 
possession of 800 fake voter cards. 
 
-- In Kandahar, UNAMA received numerous unconfirmed reports of 
election fraud, including ballot box stuffing, voters being turned 
away (due to the boxes already having been stuffed), use of fake 
registration cards, and police interference. 
 
RC-East: 
 
-- Khost reported that in Bak, Sebari, and Musa Khel districts, the 
District Governors reported that either no or very few females 
turned up to cast their ballots.  However, initial tallies indicate 
significant numbers of female votes are being counted, suggesting 
that men voted on behalf of female family members.  The Sebari 
district administrator received a report that an ANA COL (Asrar) and 
other ANA members were "strongly urging" voters to vote for Abdullah 
at the polling center in Yaqubi. 
 
The District administrator of Msa Khel, Khost indicated that some 
individuals attempted to intimidate people visiting the polls 200 
meters outside of the sole polling station in the district, telling 
them not to vote.  However, no voters were reported harmed. 
 
-- Nangarhar IEC Director Dr. Akhtar Ajmal said in a press 
conference after polls closed that there were no major cases of 
election fraud in the province.  However, some election observers 
representing PC and presidential candidates reported that some 
ballot boxes had been stuffed.  The IEC rejected the claim. 
-- International observers visited more than a third of Panjshir's 
96 polling sites, in every district of the province.  For the most 
part, voting was orderly and regular, with no evidence of fraud. 
 
However, observers encountered a number of young men throughout the 
day who appeared to be under voting age but nevertheless had their 
fingers inked.  UNAMA reps report that they were prohibited from 
entering the main voting center in Khenj district, a Marshall Fahim 
stronghold. 
 
RC-West: 
-- Badghis reported that out of 11 polling stations at four 
different polling centers in Bala Murghab, only one station had 
female election workers to assist women voters, despite IEC workers' 
claims that there were a total of four polling stations for women. 
Depending on the IEC worker interviewed, the total number as well as 
location of female-dedicated polling stations in the city center 
varied.  The deputy of Abdullah's local campaign office in Qal-e Now 
insisted that a campaign to stuff the ballot boxes in Bala Murghab 
occurred between 1500 and 1700 and requested assistance from IEC 
reps during mid-afternoon observations in the district center to 
determine whether such fraud took place.  He asserted that all 
reports he received province-wide indicated that there was 
transparency in the process in every district except Bala Murghab. 
At one female-designated polling center in Qadis district center, 
election workers confirmed they turned away three female voters who 
attempted to use voter registration cards issued to other 
individuals. 
 
-------------- 
Public Affairs 
-------------- 
 
¶7.  (U) PUBLIC AFFAIRS UPDATES: 
 
AFGHAN MEDIA HIGHLIGHTS 
 
- The leading story in Afghan media was that the vote counting 
process has started in most provinces, but it is too soon to 
announce preliminary results. 
 
- Tolo TV reported that according to an opinion poll from voters at 
three polling centers in Kandahar province, Karzai was the top 
candidate, followed by Abdullah Abdullah and Asrhaf Ghani. 
 
- BBC and RTA local stringers and other local journalists were at 
the Jibril polling center at closing time interviewing and filming 
frustrated voters and polling staff about the long lines and 
temporary lack of ballots.  Another local journalist was at a Guzara 
district polling station interviewing polling center staff and 
voters. 
 
- Governor Naseri and the ANA and ANP chiefs for Zabul Province 
recorded radio messages congratulating voters on going to the polls 
in a province heavily controlled and influenced by the enemy. 
Governor Naseri expressed gratitude for voters' courage, thanked the 
ANSF for providing security that enabled the elections and noted the 
Taliban had promised to disrupt the elections throughout the 
province, but were unable to prevent any of the 41 polling centers 
in the province from opening and operating throughout the day. 
While turnout may have been low, this message is important as it 
demonstrates the enemy lacks credibility and cannot conduct 
operations against a determined ANSF and GIROA effort. 
 
- Khost Governor Qalandarzai spoke on television and radio 
throughout the day, and at 1530, encouraged those who had not yet 
cast their ballot to get out and vote.  He also thanked the ANSF, 
tribal elders, and polling site workers for thier hard work.  Khost 
residents, interviewed on television and radio, spoke of their duty 
and pride in voting. 
 
- Afghan and Lithuanian press visited Chagcharan, Ghor polling 
centers.  The Lithuanian press will interview the PRT commander for 
live TV in Lithuania tonight at 10pm. 
 
- Governor Amin's local media chief filmed the Governor voting at 
one of the polling sites and visiting sites throughout Farah city. 
While no international press was present in Farah on voting day, 
some local Afghan print reporters and a Sada Azadi (ISAF Radio) 
reporter covered some polling sites throughout the city. 
 
- Peace Message Radio reported on its evening broadcast that one of 
its reporters had observed vote counting at three polling centers, 
two in Khost City (at the Yaqubi Mosque and Khost Hospital) and at a 
site in Mandozai District.  They reported that Karzai was the winner 
at the two sites in Khost City and that Ashraf Ghani won in Mandozai 
(with Karzai coming second). 
 
- Negah TV reported that prisoners in Pul-e-Charki prison today cast 
 
their votes and participated in the election.  Those who were 
convicted for less than ten years have a right to cast their votes, 
said an official at the prison. 
 
- Negah TV reported that presidential candidate Mirwais Yaseni 
expressed his satisfaction about the election.  Mutasim Billah 
Mazhabi, another presidential candidate, complained about the poor 
ink quality and low quality hole punches. 
 
- Shamshad TV reported that presidential candidate Sawar Ahmadzai 
believes that no candidate will be able to win the election in the 
first round and that it will be decided in a run-off election. 
 
¶8.  Messaging remains consistent with 8pm Afghan Elections Situation 
Report eight.  We will review and update as necessary for the next 
report. 
 
 
EIKENBERRY