09KABUL3066
KABUL EAC MEETING - SEPTEMBER 28, 2009
Fri Oct 02 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO9985
RR RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL
DE RUEHBUL #3066/01 2751019
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 021019Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1791
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 003066 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT ASEC AF
SUBJECT: KABUL EAC MEETING - SEPTEMBER 28, 2009 
 
¶1. (U) Sensitive but unclassified ) protect accordingly. 
 
RESIDENTIAL SECURITY 
 
¶2. (U) Assistant Ambassador convened a Core Emergency Action 
Committee (EAC) on September 28, 2009 to discuss the current 
security and housing situation in Kabul, Post Off-Compound 
Travel Policy, and to conduct a security review of PRTs. EAC 
members present included Assistant Ambassador, MGT, RSO, 
L/EMB, IPA, RAO, POL-MIL, POL, ECON, FAA, IRM, DEA, CONS, 
RMO, PA, DOJ, and AID. 
 
¶3. (U) The EAC reviewed the current housing situation for 
Camp Integrity, a compound near the Kabul airport, owned by 
private security company XE.  RSO discussed the layout of 
Integrity and continuing minor improvements and noted that 
the camp meets security requirements for putting COM 
personnel there between now and January 2010.  MGT stated 
that there will be shuttles for transport. 
 
¶4. (U) The EAC reviewed the status of the new villas being 
prepared adjacent to the embassy to house COM personnel.  RSO 
announced that security waivers are in place for six villas, 
and that all mandatory setbacks and security barriers are in 
place.  RSO also announced that static and roaming guards 
will be placed at the villas immediately.  Once occupants 
have moved in, there will be a shuttle for transport and 
Management announced that the villas will have base station 
tactical communications and panic alarms but no Embassy IVG 
phones in the near term.  It is still unclear who will occupy 
) priority will go to agencies with self-drive and weapons 
and mid-term TDY personnel. 
 
¶5. (U) RSO announced that Post has acquired new LENCO MRAPs 
for transporting Local Guard Force (LGF).  These new 
&Rhino8 style vehicles will allow LGF to more safely 
transit to and from the Embassy along Route White.  Currently 
the LGF vehicles are transiting from Camp Sullivan to USEMB 
on an unavoidably predictable schedule in high-profile 
military-style vehicles with only basic ballistic protection. 
 The new vehicle affords considerably more protection 
although the reduced capacity of each vehicle requires a 
somewhat longer convoy with a larger footprint. 
 
¶6. (U) Management briefed the current status of Camp 
Sullivan, the camp several miles from the embassy where the 
embassy guard force lives.  The camp is currently at capacity 
but still needs to expand by 150 given upcoming Mission 
expansion.  Management stated that there is the possibility 
that more residential units could be put in unused space but 
that a better option would be to lease land from MOD adjacent 
to the Embassy.  Management said that there were issues with 
this land as it was at this point still unclear whether MoD 
actually owned the land or whether another organization 
actually had title even though MoD was occupying it. 
 
¶7. (U) RSO raised the subject of an S/CRS Officer who is 
coming to Afghanistan to be under COM authority but resident 
at and attached to UNAMA.  AMB Mussomeli announced that 
Deputy Ambassador Ricciardone has approved this arrangement. 
None of the representatives of sections that might be 
expected to supervise such an officer were familiar with this 
plan.  RSO proposed a site survey of UNAMA but agreed to hold 
off until the officer,s status was clarified. 
 
OFF-COMPOUND TRAVEL 
 
¶8.  (U) RSO recommended the need to review and more carefully 
define aspects of the Off Compound Travel Policy. 
¶A.  The EAC agreed that &Official8 Travel needs to be more 
clearly defined in guidance to the Embassy and monitored by 
section heads.  RSO said COM personnel were beginning to set 
patterns by their attendance at local restaurants. 
¶B.  RSO restated the importance of traveling in smaller 
groups and avoiding the use of vans.  Vans have a high 
profile as they are both American-made and unique on the 
roads.  Also, because they carry more than just a few 
passengers, inherently offer an appealing target. 
¶C.  The EAC decided that henceforth, if unofficial travel is 
disapproved by RSO, new policy is that their section head 
must send an appeal to the Assistant Ambassador. 
¶D.  RSO announced that there is a new list of approved 
official and unofficial travel destinations. 
¶E.  RSO asked MGT to consider a policy of refusal of service 
to travel notices put in at the last minute.  MGT agreed that 
notices put in with less than an hour,s notice could 
sometimes be denied but the EAC agreed that current policies 
were acceptable at this time. 
 
¶9.  (U) RSO announced that the Embassy and ISAF have signed a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) and ISAF has drafted a 
Fragmentary Order (FRAGO) with ISAF have been signed 
 
KABUL 00003066  002 OF 002 
 
 
regarding the standards of protective gear and force posture 
required for off-compound travel of US personnel assigned to 
American-led PRTs. 
 
¶10.  (U) EAC reviewed the threats and actual actions against 
the PRTs in which COM personnel are authorized self-drive. 
The EAC decided that Baghlan, whose security condition is 
deteriorating, is worthy of further review in two weeks and 
that in the interim, RSO and IPA will confirm that the 
Embassy Rep at PRT Baghlan is coordinating all movement with 
the PRT commander.  EAC further decided that all PRTs should 
be issued Blue Force Tracker for COM personnel travel and 
that Kunduz will now be self-drive only within the city 
limits of Kunduz.  After consideration of all the other 
self-drive PRTs, the EAC deemed no changes seemed indicated 
at this time. 
EIKENBERRY