09KABUL1671
IRANIAN INFLUENCE IN AFHGAN HIGHER ED: SUBTLE BUT
Fri Jun 26 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO9737
PP RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL
DE RUEHBUL #1671/01 1771126
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 261126Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9722
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 KABUL 001671 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR SCA/PPD, SCA/A 
STATE FOR ECA, IIP 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: PREL KPAO KIRC SCUL AF
SUBJECT: IRANIAN INFLUENCE IN AFHGAN HIGHER ED: SUBTLE BUT 
SIGNIFICANT 
 
¶1. SUMMARY: Given cultural and linguistic ties between Afghanistan 
and Iran, no one is surprised that Iranian influence permeates 
Afghan higher education.  Ironically, just as Iran closes university 
access to Afghan refugees in Iran, it is becoming more deeply 
involved in Afghan higher education.  Cash-strapped Afghan 
universities have found Iran a willing economic supporter.  The real 
impact of Iranian influence in Afghan higher education lies in the 
ability to block dissemination of Western ideas and values to the 
young Afghan generation.  It is difficult to assess whether the 
motivation is benign or malicious, but in order to counter this 
influence, we must make greater financial contributions and 
establish a greater U.S. presence at the university level (see paras 
25-28).  This cable is a joint Public Affairs-PRT endeavor. 
 
FROM CONTRACTORS IN THE FIELD 
----------------------------- 
¶2. (SBU) When asked about Iranian influence in Afghan universities, 
contacts of our officers across the country give us a consistent 
response: it is significant but very subtle in approach.  The 
Iranians have a presence in nearly every university, ranging from 
providing textbooks to study abroad trips to Iran for professors, 
deans, rectors and even students.  While most Westerners believe 
Iranians' motives are political in nature, no one is sure of their 
specific objective.  Nearly every book in Afghanistan is published 
in Iran and a very large Iranian bookshop has recently opened in 
Kabul. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The real impact of Iranian influence in Afghan higher 
education lies in actions to block dissemination of Western ideas 
and values in educational materials and instruction, an area in 
which Iran has exercised great influence.  Most of their activity is 
done without publicity.  As a result, we must compete with the 
subtle but powerful cultural connections that exist between Iran and 
the universities in Afghanistan. 
 
Ministry of Higher Education Perspective: 
----------------------------------------- 
¶4. (SBU) According to a trusted Afghan American advisor at the 
Ministry of Higher Education (MOHE), the Ministry recognizes Iranian 
influence in a number of ways.  The single dominant area of 
influence comes in the form of textbooks.  Even though many are 
translations from western authors and may not contain overt Iranian 
ideology, these translations have been approved by the Islamic 
Republic of Iran to omit unsanctioned views.  Themes of democracy, 
free speech, and human rights are conspicuous by their absence. 
Iran's monopoly on the textbook market influences Afghans by the 
ideas which simply are not translated. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Our contact also complained about Iran "infiltrating and 
influencing via Afghans."  In other words, a number of professors 
and MOHE personnel who have graduated from Iranian institutions tend 
to carry back with them Iranian ideologies.  He specifically noted 
World Bank programs which are designed by individuals heavily 
influenced by Iranian ideas.  He also expressed concern at the 
number of Iranian-educated Afghans who have taken administrative 
roles at MOHE.  He also noted that once they were in civil service 
positions, it was next to impossible to get rid of them. 
 
¶6. (SBU) The MOHE has sought to balance Iranian influence by turning 
towards India and South Asian University in New Delhi.  This 
university, set to open August 2010, will offer Master's Degree 
programs.  Given the lack of Master's Degree programs in 
Afghanistan, Afghans must travel abroad to seek post-graduate 
education; the hope is that they will turn to South Asian University 
rather than to Iranian universities.  Family ties tend to pull young 
Afghans back home from neighboring countries, less likely when they 
study in Europe or the United States.  Afghanistan is expected to 
contribute a mere 3% of South Asian University's operating costs 
($150,000 the first year).  In addition, 3,500 Afghans receive 
Indian scholarships annually.  In effect, MOHE's strategy balances 
Iranian influence with Indian influence, ensuring that democratic 
values filter into the system. 
 
HERAT: GREATEST CAUSE FOR CONCERN 
--------------------------------- 
¶7. (SBU) The most significant Iranian penetration of higher 
education is in Herat.  Herat University has signed MOUs 
establishing limited partnerships with five Iranian higher education 
institutes or universities.  Most call for sending some Afghan 
faculty and students to Iranian institutes.  At least fifteen 
professors from the Law and Political Science, Agriculture, 
Economics, and Sharia Faculties reportedly are studying for Master's 
Degrees in Iranian universities.  Students go for shorter periods of 
time. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Iran has been the largest donor by far to Herat University, 
which is not surprising given the common language and geographical 
 
KABUL 00001671  002 OF 004 
 
 
proximity.  Iran established a cultural room in the Faculty of 
Education in 2007 with several thousand books.  Several Iranian 
professors taught at Herat University in 2008 in two faculties, Law 
and Political Science and Agriculture.  Several professors and 
students have gone on short study trips to Iran in recent years. 
 
¶9. (SBU) In 2008 a delegation comprised of Iranian university 
representatives and the Iranian Ambassador in Kabul visited Herat 
University.  An Afghan source who was present reported that during 
the visit, the Herat University Chancellor at the time and the 
Iranian delegation verbally agreed to send experienced Iranian 
professors to Herat University to teach Afghan professors for a 
period of two and a half years.  One month each semester, Afghan 
professors would go to Iranian universities to use their labs until 
Herat University's science labs are equipped.  Afghan professors 
pursuing Master's Degrees would thus be prepared, according to the 
Iranian delegation, to teach students in Master's Degree courses. 
The Iranian delegation also said they were ready to extend 
cooperation in cultural and research areas. 
 
10 (SBU) The previous Herat University Chancellor tells us he feels 
constantly engaged in a balancing act between increasing offers of 
assistance from Iran and a few offers of assistance from European 
and American universities or governments.  As he explained to us, it 
is a matter of economics.  Our contact in the MOHE, however, was 
openly skeptical of where his loyalties lie, given frequent trips to 
Iran. 
 
¶11. (SBU) On May 9, he was fired by the Ministry of Higher 
Education.  Currently, the head of the Economics Faculty is serving 
as the Chancellor.  Our contact in Herat did not know whether he 
might keep the position in the long term, but indicated that he is 
generally well liked and respected at the university.  How he will 
handle Iranian attempts to influence the faculty and students is yet 
unknown. 
 
AND AT OTHER PROVINCIAL UNIVERSITIES... 
--------------------------------------- 
¶12. (SBU) Herat University authorities also reportedly helped 
arrange an invitation to the Chancellor of Balkh University to 
discuss exchange and partnership opportunities with an Iranian 
university.  Balkh University has proposed sending two engineering 
instructors. 
 
¶13.  (SBU) In Mazar-e-Sharif, the most significant Iranian presence 
is not educational, but cultural.  The large, three-story cultural 
center was inaugurated on the first day of the Persian New Year. 
Additionally, Iranians donated 1,000 Farsi books to the library of 
the Information and Culture Department, the construction of which 
was funded five years ago by PRT Mazar. 
 
¶14.  (SBU) Also in the north, in Takhar province, the Iranians have 
funded two larger projects: the religious faculty building at 
Taloqan University and some of the paved roads in the northern part 
of the city.  In Kunduz, the Iranians have recently provided funding 
and textbooks to the Institute of Higher Education's 
newly-established law department.  Overall funding contribution is 
rumored to amount to about $20K.  About 15% of Kunduz's population 
is Shia, mostly Hazara. 
 
¶15.  We found significant Iranian activity even in the predominantly 
Pashtu (Sunni) city of Jalalabad.  In April, the former Nangarhar 
University Chancellor told the PRT that the Iranian consulate in 
Jalalabad has been aggressive in the past two months and believes 
its presence in Jalalabad was a strategic decision to influence the 
university.  The consulate promised furniture for the library in 
exchange for the University allowing the consulate to build a common 
building for the students on campus.  The consulate offered him a 
trip to Iran.  He refused, and the consulate has proposed that a few 
teachers travel to Iran in the future.  When asked about perceptions 
of Iranians, the Chancellor told us, "People in Nangarhar are 
thirsty for contact with any foreigners."  To date, however, the 
consulate has not given the university any money. 
 
¶16. (SBU) In Kandahar, Iran built the Ministry of Information and 
Culture building.  While the Line Director offered us space in that 
building to house a Lincoln Center (American Corner), the governor 
has adamantly refused to allow an Iranian Cultural Center there.  We 
hope to open a Lincoln Center there in the coming fiscal year. 
 
IN KABUL... 
----------- 
¶17. (SBU) At Kabul University, the Lincoln Center and Iranian 
Cultural Center are side-by-side in the library.  The Chancellor has 
given us free rein to hold teacher trainings, student meetings, 
webchats, and other activities, whereas he limits Iranian activity. 
The Iranians funded a print facility and run the large on-campus 
 
KABUL 00001671  003 OF 004 
 
 
bookstore.  An Iranian librarian recently proposed that the Iranian 
system be used to catalog and digitize Kabul Medical University's 
library.  USAID, however, had already provided funding for Arizona 
University to train the Kabul University and Kabul Medical 
University librarians in the Library of Congress system.  Of course, 
USAID turned down the library's request to fund the Iranian 
Project. 
 
¶18. (SBU) In early May, Kabul University's library held an 
international book fair.  The U.S. Embassy book exhibit displayed 
books on politics, easy readers, and college preparatory books 
available at our Lincoln Center.  We also gave away our popular 
President Obama booklets as well as "Mosques in America" calendars 
and booklets.  Eager students quickly snatched up these high-quality 
publications, which were in both Pashto and Dari or exclusively in 
English.  The Iranian exhibit was large, and included posters (in 
English) of popular religious and tourist sites in Iran, and a 
display of Iranian pottery.  On the first day, the Iranians gave 
away free tourist maps in Dari/Farsi and English.  No Iranian 
handouts were available in Pashto.  The Iranian cultural officer 
worked at the exhibit (and even took five of our "Mosques in 
America" calendars). 
 
¶19. (SBU) Thirteen local vendors were also present at the book fair. 
 Almost their entire stock was in Dari/Farsi and included many 
Western books, translated into Farsi, and published in Iran, with no 
apparent regard for intellectual property rights.  Iran reprints a 
large number of Western textbooks but intentionally omits certain 
subjects and concepts.  The textbooks gain credibility and influence 
among the professors at Kabul University because they were written 
by Western authors. 
 
¶20. (SBU) Two private educational institutes in Kabul also deserve 
mention, one, as disseminators of Iranian cultural influence, the 
other as a western-influenced Shia religious school. 
Khatam-ul-Nabieen ("Seal of the Prophet") Institute of Higher 
Education and Academy is run by Ayatollah Mohseni.  Mohseni was a 
vocal supporter of the controversial Shia personal law that was 
signed this past spring.  While exact funding sources for this 
institute cannot be verified, it is rumored that much comes from 
Iran.  The campus is certainly one of the most attractive, modern 
and well-equipped we've seen in Afghanistan.  Subjects offered 
include: Law and Jurisprudence; Qur'an and Hadith Sciences; 
Philosophy and Theology; Political Sciences; and Social Sciences. 
Their attempts to start an English Department have been stalled and 
unorganized - offering a potential opportunity for USG English 
Language programs. 
 
¶21. (SBU) The other institute is the Faiz Mohammad Kateb Institute 
of Higher Education.  The founder of the KIHE, Mohammad Ibrahim 
Qasimi, immigrated to Canada during the Soviet invasion.  His 
investment, along with tuition fees, serves as the primary source of 
funding.  Though its curriculum is based on Shia Islam, this 
institute is more secular and progressive than Mohseni's institute. 
 
 
¶22. (SBU) Polcouns called on Kateb Institute Dean Mohammad Amin 
Ahmadi on May 25.  The Institute opened in 2008, and is currently in 
its third semester.  Student enrollment is over 700, comprised of 
both full-time students, and those enrolled in evening classes.  The 
faculty is comprised almost entirely of Shia professors, including 
Ahmadi, who received their post-graduate training in Iran.  Ahmadi 
estimated the student body to be about 75 percent Sunni.  Ahmadi 
reported no tension between Shia faculty and the largely Sunni 
student body. The Institute currently offers courses in the human 
sciences (law, international relations, etc.).  The Law Faculty is 
also developing programs for future training of judges and 
prosecutors.  Ahmadi wishes to expand its curriculum offering to 
include banking, insurance, social sciences, etc. 
 
BAMYAN & KHOST - THE EXCEPTIONS 
------------------------------- 
¶23. (SBU) Iran provides no funding to the University of Bamyan and 
sponsors no programming.  Students there, a number of whom are 
returnees from Iran, generally express distrust and dislike for Iran 
(and Pakistan).  They also dismiss supporters of more fundamentalist 
interpretations of Shiism as either being from Iran or having been 
"brainwashed" by Iran, despite the fact that a number of mullahs in 
Bamyan received religious training in Iran. 
 
¶24. (SBU) The United Arab Emirates funded and built Sheikh Zaid 
University in Khost.  There appears to be little or no Iranian 
involvement or attempts to influence. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
--------------- 
¶25. (SBU) We will continue to produce materials in Dari and Pashto 
 
KABUL 00001671  004 OF 004 
 
 
to counter the almost exclusively Iranian-Farsi materials on the 
market.  IIP's AVA Collection, which provided limited runs of 
high-quality Farsi booklets, was extremely popular at the 
universities.  We will require additional resources to continue 
print runs of existing titles and to expand the collection to 
include democracy, governance, American life, economics, and other 
subjects.  We also plan to support Pashto publications in order to 
fill that vital void.  To date, all Pashto-language publications are 
post-produced.  It would be helpful if IIP could also support 
Pashto-language initiatives. 
 
¶26. (SBU) Even more productive would be a full scale U.S. Embassy 
book translation program, which would allow neglected themes of 
democracy, rights, and Western values into the mainstream.  For 
instance, the standard textbook on American Government and Politics 
is Iranian translated and published - we have no way now to 
translate and publish the original text completely. 
 
¶27. (SBU) We strongly recommend expanding educational opportunities, 
whether through the Fulbright program or scholarships to South Asian 
University, to establish more of an American imprint in Afghan 
higher education and thus build influence among the rising 
generation.  We need to foster personal relationships with 
university students, so they can better see that the United States 
is dedicated to helping Afghans rebuild their educational system and 
thus their future.  Done well, the potential impact on the future of 
Afghanistan could be powerful. 
 
¶28. (SBU) Finally, as we have urged repeatedly, we can exploit to 
great effect against both Iranian and Taliban influence a full time 
RELO, to meet the huge demand for English language learning across 
Afghanistan.  In our judgment, the current regional misallocation of 
scarce RELO resources urgently needs redress. 
 
EIKENBERRY