09KABUL2450
Afghan Elections Situation Report Seven - 1800 Local,
Thu Aug 20 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBUL #2450/01 2321334
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 201334Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0962
INFO RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 7802
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 3807
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS KABUL 002450 
 
DEPT FOR AFGHAN ELECTIONS TASK FORCE 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM AF
 
SUBJECT: Afghan Elections Situation Report Seven - 1800 Local, 
August 20, 2009 
 
¶1. (SBU) The next sitrep is scheduled for 2000 local on August 20. 
 
 
------------ 
Atmospherics 
------------ 
 
¶2. (U) The IEC confirmed that the polling stations should remain 
open to 5pm local time throughout Afghanistan.  The IEC wanted those 
affected by security issues to have an extra hour to vote.  The IEC 
further told us that Baghlan will extend until 6pm due to voter 
delays and security issues in that province. 
 
¶3. (U) So far there have been sporadic incidents of violence in 
various parts of the country-about 4 times as many incidents in the 
south, and 3 times as many in east-however, most reports conclude 
that these events have not had a real effect on the elections.  The 
situation in Baghlan has been one of the worst.  In 2004 that 
province voted in somewhat equal numbers for the top two 
candidates. 
 
------------- 
Voter Turnout 
------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) Provincial reports by region follow: 
 
RC South: 
(SBU) Kandahar reports that election observers from Democracy 
International, who visited a number of polling places in Kandahar 
City, characterized voter turnout as "low," but did not offer an 
estimate of the percentage of potential voters who voted.   ISAF, on 
the other hand, reports that polling centers in Kandahar and Helmand 
have "had good traffic." 
 
(U) Uruzgan reports that preliminary data suggests voter turnout for 
Charchine and Khas Uruzgan is around 5 to 10%.  No data is in for 
Tarin Kowt as of yet but UN sources say that female turnout was 
particularly low in Chinartu, Charchine and Khas Uruzgan districts - 
clearly depressing aggregate voter turnout numbers.  The success 
story thus far is the turnout in Deh Rahwod, reported to be roughly 
25%. 
(U) Lashkar Gah reports that turnout varies widely, with a good 
turnout reported in Garmsir but intimidation tactics having more 
effect in other districts.  Turnout was reported to be very low in 
Musa Qala, Nawa, Sangin, and Nad Ali. 
 
RC East: 
(U) Khost reports that voter turnout in Khost City and in the 
districts of Tani, Matun, Mandozai, and Jaji Maidan continues to be 
robust.  Female turnout appears to be running as high as 30-40 
percent in some districts, while virtually non-existent in others. 
 
(U) Ghazni reports that men and women in mostly-Hazara communities, 
including Qalay Shada and Naw Abad northwest of Ghazni City, are 
voting in large numbers, encouraged by the security in their 
communities.  Meanwhile, voter participation in the center of Ghazni 
City is comparatively low.  People reportedly are having difficulty 
or cannot vote in the districts of Andar, Rashidan and Khogyani and 
in Jaghato district where eight polling centers did not open due to 
lack of materials. 
 
RC North: 
(U) Kunduz reports that turnout is relatively low, even though the 
security situation had calmed down following rocket attacks in the 
morning.  As of the early afternoon, most polling stations had 
averaged about 300 voters each.  There were no lines to be seen at 
any of the stations; in quite a few stations there seemed to be more 
candidates' and parties' observers than voters.  The streets in much 
of the city were nearly empty and most shops closed, in contrast to 
election day in 2004. 
 
(U) PRT Gardez in Paktya cites reports that local residents say that 
women are voting for themselves and not voting via their husbands or 
male relatives. 
RC West: 
(U) Chaghcharan reports that as of mid-afternoon the pace of voting 
had slowed considerably, with voter lines much shorter than in the 
morning.  Logistics appeared to work well as voters, candidate 
representatives, and other observers noted few problems in the 
provincial capital.  However, many women appear uninformed about the 
candidates and voting procedures. 
--------- 
Security 
--------- 
 
 
¶5.  (U) Provincial reports by region follow: 
 
RC East: 
Khost is seeking to confirm that the sole polling center in Musa 
Khel District closed due to intimidation; two centers in Matun also 
are reported to be closing early in response to intimidation. 
PRT Gardez in Paktya reported at 1545 that Deputy Governor Mangal 
and ANP Chief, General Wardak, told the PRT that the overall 
situation had improved and there were fewer reports of AAF activity 
following a number of security incidents around the province in the 
morning.  Both said that the reports of election related violence 
were "overblown."  Contradicting reports PRT Gardez has received 
from the DFC in Chamkani, the Deputy Governor stated that only one 
person was killed in a morning attack in that district.  Initial 
reports indicate that a potential suicide bomber in Gardez City 
self-detonated after being chased while driving a motorcycle.  There 
were no other casualties.  The attacker's brother, from Zormat 
district and a member of the ASG, has been taken into custody for 
questioning. 
Ghazni reports sporadic fighting in the districts of Rashidan, Kwaja 
Omary, Andar and Giro.  In Kwaja Omary, voting was heavy in the 
morning, but has slowed to a trickle.  Insurgents reportedly 
attacked a polling center in Laghawat, Deh Yak district, and tried 
to steal the ballot boxes.  The ANP are responding.  District 
Subgovernors of Qarabagh and Andar districts say their districts are 
now quiet and that turnout has been relatively high.  The Waghez 
District Subgovernor said that there were some rocket attacks near 
the District Center earlier in the day, but they were not serious. 
The District Subgovernor was pleased with the situation so far, 
claiming that 7,000 people had already voted. 
RC Central: Chaghcharan reports that IEC closed one polling center 
in Taywara district after insurgents fired a rocket at it at 1130. 
No casualties were reported, but small arms fire followed.  PRT is 
trying to confirm if two polling centers in Dolatyar district are 
closed due to interference from PC candidates. 
RC South: 
Kandahar reports that so far there have been three security 
incidents in the province believed to be election-related: an attack 
on Khisarabad school/polling station in Nawa Barakzayhi (casualties 
unknown); a suicide attack at a girl's school/polling place in 
Kandahar City (3 reported dead); and rocket attacks on Maywand and 
Arghandab District Centers (no reported casualties). 
Uruzgan reports that Tarin Kowt is quiet at the moment, following 
earlier scattered indirect fire attacks.  The situation in Hussinea 
remains fluid, with scattered reports of attacks on the polling 
station.  ISAF air support is en route to survey the situation.  We 
have no reports of security issues/incidents elsewhere in the 
province at this time. 
RC North: 
Kunduz reports the situation at 1530 to be considerably calmer 
following rocket attacks this morning. PRT Officer visited four 
polling centers, including one where two rockets struck this morning 
at about 8 am, causing one injury. The voting process itself seems 
to be proceeding relatively smoothly, security procedures were 
generally good, and we did not observe obvious fraud or 
intimidation. 
RC West: 
Qala-e-Now reports that voting proceeded without incident at the 
four voting centers the PRT visited in the Qal-e-Now vicinity.  The 
mood was calm, and there appeared to be no major procedural or 
security issues.  The NDS reported a shooting incident in the Moqur 
district in which one civilian was wounded.  It was not clear 
whether the incident was related to voting. 
---------------------------- 
Voting & Counting Activities 
---------------------------- 
¶6.  (U) Provincial reports by region follow: 
RC South: 
(U) Lashkar Gah reports that overall the voting process appears to 
be working fairly well, and most irregularities seem to result more 
from lack of training/incompetence than malice.  There are reports, 
however, that former Helmand Governor Sher Muhammad Akhunzada's 
people are stuffing ballot boxes for Karzai, and a PRT observer 
witnessed probable ballot stuffing at one polling site; it's unclear 
whether or not this is widespread.  Some IEC staff in Nad Ali are 
wearing "Hamid Karzai" caps and badges.  There were independent 
observers  - including FEFA - at all six of the polling centers we 
visited in Lashkar Gah, though their level of effort and 
effectiveness can be regarded as uneven. 
 
RC East: 
Khost reports that polling centers in Jaji Maidan report they have 
run out of ballots; according to the Khost PEO, IEC HQ in Kabul said 
it would fly out more materials, but as of 1500, polling centers in 
 
Jaji were beginning to close, even though some voters had not had a 
chance to cast their ballots.  Some polling centers in Tani ran out 
of materials, but supplies were shifted from centers with lower 
turnout and voting resumed. 
----- 
Fraud 
----- 
¶7.  (U) Provincial reports by region follow: 
RC South: 
(SBU) The UK battle group in the Babaji area northwest of Lashkar 
Gah reported that the local ANP have detained and plan to arrest IEC 
workers for stuffing ballots.  Apparently about 35 people went to 
vote but the IEC workers carried out "hundreds and hundres" of 
completed ballots.  The ANP has coordinated th decision to arrest 
with the Afghan Security Forces' Operational Coordination Center 
Provincince (OCCP). 
(SBU) Some preliminary local reports in Lashkar Gah also note that 
Sher Muhammad Akhunzada had "his people hired" at the IEC as poll 
workers.  OCCP and local authorities are investigating. 
 
RC East: 
(U) Khost reported that at one polling center in Matun, an Afghan 
PRT employee observed a provincial council candidate and 
presidential candidate representatives engaging in illegal campaign 
activities.  At the same site, voters were witnessed completing and 
casting multiple ballots, which the polling staff failed to 
prevent. 
 
RC Capital: 
(U) Chaghcharan reports that IEC officials were seen to be not 
following procedures regarding picture-less voter id cards for 
women.  Also, two polling sites outside of town claimed to run out 
of presidential ballots early in the morning.  Plenty of ballots had 
been delivered, leading UNDP officials to speculate that local 
officials were giving voters two presidential ballots. 
 
-------------- 
Public Affairs 
-------------- 
 
¶8.  (U) PUBLIC AFFAIRS UPDATES: 
President Karzai held a press conference at 4pm, noting that free 
and fair elections took place today in Afghanistan. 
 
Shamshad TV reported that Ambassador Eikenberry visited a number of 
polling centers in Kabul city.  During the visit, Ambassador 
Eikenberry is reported to have stated that people were voting freely 
in the elections and that elections were being held in a transparent 
manner. 
 
AFGHAN MEDIA HIGHLIGHTS 
-Rockets fired on Kashkar Gah City killing 1 child, injuring several 
others. 
-Tolo TV reporter in Lashkar Gah, the capital of southern Helmand 
province, said six rockets were fired on the city Thursday morning 
and that one hit a residential house killing a child and injuring 
others.  According to the report, rockets were also reportedly fired 
on Sangin and Garem Sir districts of Helmand province late Wednesday 
night. 
-Tolo TV reporter in Alingar district of eastern Laghman province 
said he had seen boys under the voting age (18) at the polling 
stations-she said they were holding voting cards.  The reporter also 
says an armed clash had erupted between police and militants in Ali 
Shing district of the province. 
-Tolo TV in an interview with Gen. Zahir Azimi, spokesman of the 
Afghan Ministry of Defense, said police shot dead three would-be 
suicide bombers near polling stations in southeastern Pakia 
provinces.  Gen Azimi also said two other men trying to locate 
explosives near a polling station in Gardez the capital of the 
province were arrested. 
-Ariana TV reported that higher number of women than men voted in 
Zabul province.  The reports said that a big number of men did not 
vote because they believed that their vote will not make any 
difference. Shamshad TV reported that unlike the expectations, a 
great number of women voted in Helmand provinces. 
 
Other Top Stories: 
-The director of local affiliate of RTA in Jalalabad said he 
complied with prohibition of election-related violence in Nangarhar 
province.  Thus he did not report that an explosion killed the 
Khagvani Deputy police chief and an explosion near Jalalabad polling 
station. 
-"The Voice of Paktika," the provinces major radio station reported 
a strong turn out and a secure environment. 
-A caller complained to Kabul-based "Salaam Watandar" that there 
 
were not enough polling sites outside the Mata Khan district center 
and that he walk to the nearest site took two hours each way. 
Messaging remains consistent with Afghan Elections Situation from 
the previous report.  We will review and update as necessary for the 
next report. 
 
 
 
EIKENBERRY