09KABUL1528
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE JALAL: ISSUES FOCUSED PLATFORM
Mon Jun 15 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBUL #1528/01 1660829
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 150829Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 9444UNCLAS KABUL 001528 
 
DEPT FOR S/CRS 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PGOV PREL AF
 
SUBJECT:  PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE JALAL: ISSUES FOCUSED PLATFORM 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  On June 11 at his Kabul campaign headquarters, 
Afghan presidential candidate Sayed Jalal detailed his political 
platform to Ambassador Carney and identified problems he sees 
emerging with the elections process.  He requested the U.S. to 
clearly indicate its impartiality - something still ambiguous in 
Afghan eyes.  Jalal articulated a well thought out, detailed plan 
for the rebuilding of Afghanistan.  He will run on a platform of 
reconciliation with moderate Taliban, re-education of militant and 
extreme religious factions, building up of Afghan security forces, 
actively addressing corruption, acceptance of a large international 
presence for three to five years and then reduced presence for  a 
further ten to fifteen,  a greater role for women, soft diplomacy 
with Pakistan, and adherence to democratic principles  and freedom 
of speech  which he stressed is utterly non negotiable.   Jalal 
sought to undercut his opponent's contention that he is a Wahabist, 
Saudi talking horse, particularly stressing his view of equality and 
active role of women and need to moderate extremist Islam. 
 
Jalal's Political Platform 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Education of religious hardliners: Educating those who hold 
extremist religious views is a priority for Jalal.  Jalal would 
facilitate discourse between religious extremists and moderate 
religious scholars from Egypt and Jordan. and put them into the mix 
with extreme conservatives and let the discourse begin so that 
moderates can impart their interpretation of the Koran to 
hardliners.  Jalal noted that in general Afghans do not like the 
stringent brands of Islam that come out of Western Pakistan or 
Wahabism from Saudi Arabia.  Use of the media is also essential in 
this effort:  support to moderate and progressive media outlets can 
play a key role in gradually turning Afghan thoughts towards more 
modern and democratic principles. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Reconciliation with Taliban: Jalal is a strong proponent of 
reconciling with Taliban believing that "war cannot be won with 
weapons".  Jalal believes careful and honest negotiation can win 
over seventy -five percent of Taliban.  This is especially true if 
Taliban are approached by a person who they believe is a good Muslim 
and well-schooled and versed in the Koran.  Jalal said his great 
understanding of the Koran and Hadith has helped, for example, in 
his dealing with conservative ulema (Muslims trained in Islamic law) 
and in winning their support.  He recounted how he met with 300 
ulema from Helmand who, staunchly against democracy, opposed voting 
in the upcoming election.  Through patient arguing and use of the 
Koran and Hadith, Jalal was able to convince them that voting is in 
their interests.  When the ANA and ANP are ready to provide 
protection and security, the international forces can leave 
Afghanistan but all Afghans, including the Taliban, must play a part 
in this effort by supporting the government and its security forces. 
  Jalal believes these 300 ulema will support him, despite the fact 
that he was absolutely candid with them that democracy and freedom 
of speech would be absolutely non-negotiable tenets of his 
administration. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Support for Afghan Women:  Jalal said that he deliberately 
keeps ulema waiting in his ante room while he files women past who 
are meeting with him. He does this exercise  to impart to ulema his 
views that women have rights  - the right to work, freedom of speech 
- and he wants a clear understanding that this is non-negotiable. 
Once again he argues that he knows enough Koran and Hadith to argue 
an Islamic position on women's rights. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Pakistan:  Pakistan is the key nation to understand, Jalal 
said.  Fundamentally Pakistan must feel confident that Afghanistan 
will not be used by Indian intelligence against Pakistan.  Soft 
diplomacy towards Pakistan over time without alienating India will 
be central to his foreign policy.  He also stated that, as 
President, he would not advocate for a change in the Durand line. 
There are too many other important issues to take care of such as 
poverty, lack of services, security - before the government 
addresses the Durand line. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Corruption:  In seven years, we Afghans are poorer, with 
worse security and more corruption - particularly political 
corruption is far worse, Jalal said.  The Afghan people are tired of 
this and want change.  "Democracy is in danger (in Afghanistan) 
because of political corruption", Jalal  said.  He will absolutely 
not tolerate political corruption, he said. 
 
Campaign Strategy 
----------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Responding to Ambassador Carney's question on his chances, 
Jalal said  "I can win Afghans by being clear about my goals, by not 
playing politics and by not lying".  Afghan people are profoundly 
tired of lack of justice and corruption, but also of the foreign 
presence on their soil. He is  honest with Afghans that as President 
he will advocate for three to five years  of full time international 
help to build up the ANA and ANP and to help eliminate corruption 
 
within the police and intelligence services. Thereafter he will plan 
for a reduced international presence of logistical and technical 
assistance for a further ten to fifteen years. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Jalal was confident that Afghans of different ethnicities 
would support him.   He said he had met 20,000 Afghans in the last 
few months -men, women, and ulema of all ethnicities. Afghans are 
politically savvy enough to make their own choice in the coming 
presidential elections, he said.    Afghans are so ready for change 
that Jalal believes they will not vote along ethnic lines, but 
rather for a candidate like him that has a well-articulated 
pro-justice and anti-corruption campaign platform. 
 
Shortcomings in the election process 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶9. (SBU) Jalal is primarily concerned about the mixed signals coming 
from the U.S. in regard to whether or not we support a particular 
candidate.   Many Afghans believe that the U.S. and Karzai struck a 
deal involving the appointment of Khalilzad as Chief Executive. 
President Karzai has made no effort to dispel this idea and has even 
encouraged the notion as it gives him credence as "the U.S. pick." 
Jalal requested that the U.S. give a clear indication that this is 
not true and reaffirm our impartiality.  Ambassador Carney 
reaffirmed U.S. impartiality to Jalal. He mentioned a recent Tolo 
TV. interview where he commented that any political discussions 
between Karzai and Khalilzad did not and would not involve the U.S. 
 
 
¶10. (SBU) Jalal alleged that there will be 5,000 to 7,000 ballot 
boxes sequestered away in government buildings on election day 
(amounting to 3 million votes).  These will be inaccessible to 
observers or candidates agents providing ample opportunity for 
"ballot stuffing".  Ambassador Carney told Jalal he should make a 
formal complaint to the Electoral Complaints Commission. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Finally Jalal claimed that the media coverage of the 
election is biased towards President Karzai.   When Jalal arrived in 
Herat, several thousand supporters greeted him at the airport.  The 
media did not show the crowd, but rather, televised a short clip of 
Jalal leaving a mosque with about 20 people around him. In contrast, 
the media fully supports Karzai, Jalal said. 
 
EIKENBERRY