09KABUL1680
Elections Snapshot from Northeastern Afghanistan
Sun Jun 28 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO6263
RR RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL
DE RUEHBUL #1680/01 1790407
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 280407Z JUN 09 ZDS
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9738
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 001680 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SRAP, SCA/FO, SCA/A, EUR/RPM 
STATE PASS TO AID FOR ASIA/SCAA 
USFOR-A FOR POLAD 
 
C O R R E C T E D COPY (CLASSIFICATION) 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PGOV AF
SUBJECT:  Elections Snapshot from Northeastern Afghanistan 
 
KABUL 00001680  001.4 OF 002 
 
 
Electioneering in Badakhshan Leads to Criticism 
------------------------ 
 
¶1.  Controversy ensued in Badakhshan when Zalmay Mojaddedi, a Member 
of Parliament (MP) close to Karzai, used two GIRoA helicopters to 
personally distribute emergency assistance items such as tents, 
blankets and cash to flood victims in his home district of Jurm and 
neighboring areas in mid-June.  According to the Provincial Council 
(PC) members, Mojaddedi did not coordinate the distribution with 
UNAMA, the province's Disaster Response Committee, or with any other 
local officials.  The PC publicly cried foul as sees this lack of 
coordination as blatant politicking and misuse of government 
property for campaign puposes.  Waqef Hakimi from Dr. Abdullah 
Abdullah's campaign team discussed his concerns about the incident 
on Tolo TV's talk show "Election 88."  POLoffs have discussed the 
incident with the Yaseni, Abdullah, and Ghani campaigns and have 
encouraged them to report it to the Electoral Complaints Commission 
(ECC) if they feel it was a serious violation of electoral law. 
 
¶2.  PRTOff in Kabul met with Badakhshan Provincial Council member 
Gulali Akbari, a female incumbent who is running for reelection. 
Akbari is known as one of the most active PC members and has pushed 
forward many projects in support of women's employment.  She thanked 
the United States for its continuing support for a large girls' 
school opening this week in Badakhshan.  Of the elections, Akbari 
noted that the field is competitive, and that 120 candidates for the 
province's 10 seats are "wealthy."  She said she hopes voters in the 
province, especially women, will recognize the hard work she has 
done for them.  Nevertheless, she was worried that she would not 
receive a large number of votes simply by virtue of the number of 
candidates. 
 
Flood Damage May Have Effect On Voting In Takhar 
------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  Lotfollah Azizi, a PC member for Takhar Province, has advised 
residents in Takhar's northern districts not to vote out of protest 
unless the Kokcha River Bridge, destroyed by the recent floods, is 
reconstructed.  In what is perhaps the most dramatic example of the 
recent flood damage in the province, the steel framed Kokcha Bridge 
was washed out May 5, cutting off approximately 347,000 residents 
from the provincial capital.  Last week, Governor Ibrahimi visited 
Kabul partly to drum up donors for rebuilding the bridge, which may 
take up to three years to complete.  The United Nations Office for 
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) blames 17 deaths and 
1740 destroyed houses in Takhar Province alone on flooding. 
 
Rallies Begin in Baghlan 
------------------------ 
 
¶4. An estimated 1000 supporters of Mirwais Yaseni gathered at a 
public hall at the textile factory in Pul-i-Khumri on June 22 to 
rally support for their candidate.  Other public rallies have taken 
place for President Karzai and Dr. Abdullah Abdullah within the past 
week.  According to political insiders, Dr. Abdullah seems to have 
the most support in the province, possibly due to Atta's support. 
Other top runners include Karzai, Yaseni and Ashraf Ghani. 
 
 
Behind the Scene Politicking Continues in Kunduz 
---------------------- 
 
¶5.  Elders, local commanders and Governor Omar were all in Kabul 
this week for a wide range of political and security meetings. 
Early in the week, Karzai met with prominent local elders to discuss 
politics and security.  This was followed by a meeting of 60 Kunduz 
commanders called by Minister of Interior Atmar and organized by 
Deputy Minister of Interior Daoud Daoud, who retains extensive ties 
to northern commanders.  It is still unclear what the ramifications 
of this high level politicking will be.  As such, though 
presidential political allegiances may be crystallizing, most local 
political figures have yet to publicly declare their allegiances. 
One commander told PRTOff that while President Karzai has been 
working for the Afghan people for the past five years, Dr. Abdullah 
seems to be working harder. 
 
IEC In Kunduz Meets With Parties and PC Candidates June 24 
----------------------------- 
 
¶6.  Over 90 political party representatives, PC candidates, 
political figures and local press attended the information session 
by the Provincial Election Office.  Kunduz has 124 PC candidates, 
including 12 women.  Twenty-two candidates are formally aligned to a 
political party.  Although 131 PC candidates had originally 
registered themselves, four subsequently withdrew their nominations 
and three failed to qualify due to membership in illegally armed 
groups.  Some PC candidates expressed their concern about overall 
security in the province.  Both the Deputy Governor and the Deputy 
 
KABUL 00001680  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
Police Chief addressed these concerns stating that all ANSF were 
working to ensure security at the polling stations.  One PC 
candidate voiced frustration at the restrictions placed on 
campaigning at public buildings such as schools and mosques, and 
demanded public television air time.  "If you cannot campaign at 
schools, mosques or other public places, what are you supposed to 
do, stop cars at the traffic circle?" 
 
¶7.  As previously reported, at least one female PC candidate in 
Kunduz withdrew her application after local intimidation.  Media 
reported that some PC candidates were afraid to put up posters with 
their photographs due to deteriorating security in the province. 
However, public comments at the event indicated that many PC 
candidates simply cannot afford campaign posters.  A few posters of 
Abdullah Abdullah and President Karzai have begun to appear in 
Kunduz city. 
 
EIKENBERRY