09KHARTOUM1326
Preview of Sudan 2010 Humanitarian Work Plan
Mon Nov 23 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO5793
OO RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHKH #1326/01 3271234
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 231234Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4783
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 001326 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
NSC FOR MGAVIN, LETIM 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
ADDIS ABABA ALSO FOR USAU 
GENEVA FOR NKYLOH 
UN ROME FOR HSPANOS 
NEW YORK FOR DMERCADO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PREF PGOV PHUM SOCI SMIG UN SU
SUBJECT: Preview of Sudan 2010 Humanitarian Work Plan 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary:  On November 15, USAID attended a stakeholders' 
conference providing a preview of the UN and partners 2010 
Humanitarian Work Plan.  The conference, chaired by Deputy Special 
Representative of the UN Secretary-General (DSRSG) Ameerah Haq and 
Commissioner of the Government of National Unity (GNU) Humanitarian 
Aid Commission (HAC) Hassabo Abdel-Rahman, provided an opportunity 
for humanitarian stakeholders in Sudan to discuss the humanitarian 
response strategy for 2010.  The conference was scheduled in advance 
of the global launch of the Sudan Work Plan, scheduled to be held 
along with other UN Consolidated Appeals Processes in Geneva on 
November 30. End summary. 
 
--------------------------------- 
2010 Sudan Humanitarian Work Plan 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) Donors, international non-governmental organizations (NGOs), 
national NGOs, and UN representatives gathered on November 15 in 
Khartoum for a preview of the 2010 Work Plan for Sudan.  The Work 
Plan is a tool developed by aid organizations to plan and monitor 
responses to emergencies and appeal for funds cohesively, ensuring 
that humanitarian assistance is coordinated, prioritized, and 
effective.  The Work Plan is the outcome of a two-month planning 
process that included government counterparts at the national and 
local levels, donors, UN agencies, and other relevant stakeholders. 
 
 
¶3.  (U) In his opening remarks, HAC Commissioner Hassabo 
acknowledged the contributions of donors and the work of 
international and national NGOs in providing assistance to the 
people of Sudan.  Hassabo reported that the GNU line ministries were 
satisfied this year with the level of coordination with the UN in 
developing the work plan.  Hassabo also underscored the need for 
periodic updates on Work Plan progress by the UN after the launch. 
 
 
------------------- 
Funding Requirement 
------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) Sudan is home to the world's largest humanitarian operation. 
 The funding requirement for the 2010 Humanitarian Work Plan for 
Sudan totals USD 1.9 billion, with 146 organizations participating 
through 416 projects. The figure represents a nine percent decline 
from 2009 funding requirements.  According to DSRSG Haq, the planned 
budget reduction is due to additional planned budget transfers from 
the states.  Darfur projects comprise approximately 55 percent of 
the funding requirements in the 2010 Work plan, while 27 percent of 
budgeted funding is designated for Southern Sudan and approximately 
18 percent is designated for the Three Areas, the East, and the 
North. 
 
¶5. (U) According to Haq, Darfur and Southern Sudan, as well as areas 
along the north-south boundary and pockets of the East, represent 
the highest levels of vulnerability in Sudan.  Conditions in 
Southern Sudan deteriorated alarmingly in 2009, with 2,500 people 
killed and more than 350,000 displaced as a result of violence. 
Furthermore, food insecurity posed an additional threat, along with 
localized flooding, poor access to services and environmental 
degradation.  Humanitarian partners in Sudan plan to base activities 
on four over-arching strategies: saving lives and protecting 
civilians; support for recovery and peace; advocacy for the 
fulfillment of state responsibilities; and building official and 
local capacity to respond to emergencies. 
 
-------------------------- 
Strategic Planning Process 
-------------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) According to Haq, in an effort to streamline humanitarian 
assistance, this year's Work Plan includes only humanitarian and 
emergency activities, while building the foundation for recovery. 
Development and recovery are addressed in the UN Development 
Assistance Framework (UNDAF), a four year plan focusing on 
longer-term goals established in 2008.  Sector objectives for the 
year are linked to the following four goals been identified for the 
coming year's Work Plan activities: 
 
a) Saving lives, protecting civilians, and supporting recovery. 
This goal affirms humanitarian action's stated purpose, i.e. to save 
and protect life. The goal recognizes that aid should augment 
people's ability to recover from crisis in their home communities, 
in areas of displacement or return.  This requires protecting the 
 
KHARTOUM 00001326  002 OF 002 
 
 
environment and ensuring sound management of national resources. 
 
(b) Doing no harm and contributing to peace.  Aid workers are 
obliged by this goal to understand how assistance could be harmful 
and to recognize opportunities to help overcome conflict. The goal 
commits aid agencies to conducting programs supporting peace and 
reconciliation. 
 
(c) Advocating for the government to meet state responsibilities. 
This goal recognizes the primacy of government leadership in 
ensuring that state responsibilities are met.  Humanitarian action 
supports this role and covers short-term gaps when necessary. 
 
(d) Building the capacity of the government and civil society.  This 
goal reflects support for the government in achieving state 
responsibilities, as well as for Sudanese civil society in the 
attainment of humanitarian action through building local capacity to 
respond to emergencies. 
 
--------------- 
Sector Approach 
--------------- 
 
¶7. (U) The work plan is organized according to eleven sectors with 
overall responsibility for the humanitarian and early recovery 
programs in the country.  The sector structure helps ensure that 
activities are coordinated and responsibilities are clearly defined. 
 The key sectors include (1) Basic Infrastructure and Settlement 
Development (2) Common Services and Coordination (3) Education (4) 
Food Security and Livelihoods (5) Health (6) Mine Action (7) 
Non-Food Items and Emergency Shelter (8) Nutrition (9) Protection 
(10) Return and Early Reintegration (11) Water and Sanitation.  All 
sectors integrate six cross-cutting issues into their programming: 
camp coordination; early recovery; environment; gender; HIV/AIDS; 
and returns and reintegration. 
 
------------------------- 
Implementation Challenges 
------------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) Haq underscored the need for full funding of program 
requirements in order to enable humanitarian actors to provide 
adequate, timely assistance.  Such timely assistance will not only 
to alleviate suffering but also safeguard hard-won gains that have 
contributed to greater stability in the country.  Haq also 
acknowledged other elements that might contribute to the slow 
implementation of the 2010 Work Plan, such as the overall security 
situation in Darfur, which, according to Haq, has shifted from 
"formal conflict" to banditry.  The insecurity has increased 
vulnerabilities and led to displacement.  In addition, poor 
infrastructure limits the access of vulnerable populations to 
livelihoods and basic services.  Haq also noted that food 
insecurity, particularly in Southern Sudan, and the camp-based 
population in Darfur both contribute to a reliance on food aid. 
 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) USAID appreciates UN efforts to prioritize emergency and 
humanitarian activities for the 2010 Work Plan in order to build the 
foundation for recovery and longer-term goals.  The Work Plan is 
intended to refine strategic humanitarian interventions in a complex 
and dynamic environment, with wide variations in vulnerability and 
needs.  However, while GNU line ministries have expressed 
satisfaction with the consultation process in developing the 2010 
Work Plan, humanitarian agencies have noted concerns regarding 
whether the GNU will fulfill its financial commitments and have the 
ability to provide adequate support for its share of the 
humanitarian and recovery interventions.  In addition, the UN and 
other humanitarian partners must carefully consider and manage the 
level of engagement of the line ministries to safeguard the 
neutrality and independence of humanitarian response. 
 
WHITEHEAD