09KHARTOUM1046
GOSS Enters Diplomatic Compounds in Juba Sweep for Arms
Fri Sep 11 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO4900
OO RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHKH #1046/01 2541001
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 111001Z SEP 09 ZDK CTG RUEHBJ 4158 2570003
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4406
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 001046 
 
NSC FOR MGAVIN, LETIM 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
ADDIS ABABA ALSO FOR USAU 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM MOPS UNSC SU
SUBJECT: GOSS Enters Diplomatic Compounds in Juba Sweep for Arms 
 
KHARTOUM 00001046  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: Police and soldiers blocked roads and searched homes 
for illegal weapons in a disarmament operation ordered by the 
Government of Southern Sudan's (GOSS) Ministry of Internal Affairs 
conducted at dawn, September 9 in Juba.  Residents of Juba, 
including United Nations staff, were ordered to remain at home, and 
the diplomatic compounds of Egypt, the European Union and United 
Nations were entered and searched.  The drive coincided with the 
arrival in Juba of National Congress Party (NCP) delegates and 
Special Envoy Scott Gration for tri-party talks with the Sudan 
People's Liberation Movement (SPLM).  End Summary. 
 
GOSS Launches Juba Disarmament Sweep 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (U) Residents of Juba were confined to their homes and soldiers 
posted on street corners, stopping traffic, while security forces 
swept Juba on the morning of September 9.  The disarmament campaign, 
initiated in Juba, is commanded by Major General James Ajungo Mawut. 
 Kuol Diem Kuol, Spokesperson for the Sudan People's Liberation Army 
(SPLA) called the sweep "a disarmament effort to take illegally held 
guns from the people."  Kuol said the SPLA is supporting the police 
who are the forces leading this action.  All movement of vehicles 
and people was restricted until approximately 11:00 a.m. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Initial reports indicate that a significant number of 
weapons were seized, including rocket propelled grenade launchers. 
There are also reports of minor theft and violence by security 
forces involved in the operation.  An American citizen reported to 
U.S. Consulate staff that during a search of his vehicle he 
witnessed security forces taking a large sum of money from his 
driver. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) The disarmament operation continued September 10, with new 
road blocks established on the outskirts of Juba, while roadblocks 
and searches continued, although to a lesser extent, in central 
Juba.   The situation in Juba on September 10 appeared calm. 
Brigadier General Moses Majok Adol, Director of the Criminal 
Investigation Division at the South Sudan Police Service, told U.S. 
Consulate staff that operations in Juba would continue at least two 
more days, and then move to nearby villages. 
 
Diplomats and UN Searched 
------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (U) Diplomatic vehicles and compounds were not immune to the 
search.  Sources indicate that the Egyptian and European Union 
diplomatic compounds were entered and searched.  According to 
Embassy of the Netherlands Ambassador Norbert Braakhis, whose 
country is responsible for the EU compound in Juba, two of the 
guards at the latter were injured by police during the September 9 
raid.  Ambassador Braakhuis said he had already complained to GoSS 
Minister of Regional Affairs Oayi Deng about the forced intrusion 
into the EU compound.  According to Braakhis, the GoSS has a 
representative to the EU in Brussels.  Braakhis said he intended to 
ask EU Brussels to call the GoSS representative in to protest the 
raid.  U.S. Consulate staff in Juba stated that U.S. vehicles with 
diplomatic plates were stopped and searched on numerous occasions. 
Security forces also searched hotel rooms, including rooms occupied 
by U.S Consulate staff, but U.S. and British compounds were not 
searched. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) On September 9, security forces forcibly entered and 
searched a UN Agency resident compound, a UN Agency office compound 
and several international non-governmental organization compounds. 
UN activities were disrupted, and UN flights canceled and delayed. 
One UN national staff member was hospitalized after being assaulted 
by security forces at his residence in the Hai Munuki area of Juba, 
allegedly because the staff member refused to allow authorities to 
verify a weapon he claimed to own. 
 
¶7.  (U) In a diplomatic note, the GoSS apologized to the diplomatic 
community resident in Juba for its search of consulates and 
residences, stating that the searches were not sanctioned and that 
the GoSS would ensure that such actions did not reoccur.  However, 
Charge Whitehead, in Juba with Special Envoy Gration for the 
Trilateral Talks, reported additional problems occurred on September 
10, including entry into India's diplomatic compound. 
 
No Disruption of Trilateral Talks 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (U) The Tri-lateral talks were not significantly affected by the 
security situation.  NCP delegates to the talks in Juba attended 
scheduled meetings and did not report issues with security forces. 
Special Envoy Gration moved around the city accompanied by a truck 
containing SPLA soldiers.  Other vehicles used by the delegation 
 
KHARTOUM 00001046  002 OF 002 
 
 
were also afforded an SPLA escort and thereafter were not searched. 
 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Comment:  Previous disarmament campaigns in Sudan have 
generally been viewed as heavy-handed, biased, and ineffective.  At 
least initially, the current campaign appears better-managed than 
other attempts at civilian disarmament.  However, entry into 
diplomatic compounds in Juba raises concerns about the GoSS's 
respect for diplomatic immunity and its ability to control the 
actions of police and security forces. 
 
WHITEHEAD