09KHARTOUM1344
U.S. Special Envoy Gration Assesses Abyei Tensions
Tue Dec 01 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO3903
OO RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHKH #1344/01 3351144
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 011144Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4811
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 001344 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
NSC FOR MGAVIN, LETIM 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
ADDIS ABABA ALSO FOR USAU 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PBTS SU
SUBJECT: U.S. Special Envoy Gration Assesses Abyei Tensions 
 
REF: A) KHARTOUM 1165 B) KHARTOUM 1234 C) KHARTOUM 1263 D) KHARTOUM 
1135 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: On November 19, US Special Envoy to Sudan (SE) 
General Scott Gration traveled to Abyei and to Muglad, Southern 
Kordofan, to assess implementation of the Comprehensive Peace 
Agreement (CPA) and the security situation in and around Abyei.  In 
Abyei town, the Deputy Administrator described financial challenges 
and the Abyei Boundary Demarcation Committee noted halting progress 
and significant security concerns from Misseriya tribesmen on and 
near the Abyei boundary.  Joint Integrated Unit (JIU) commander 
Colonel Abu Salah downplayed security concerns while Joint 
Integrated Police Unit (JIPU) commander Colonel Mohamed Abdel Gadir 
noted that the Misseriya migration is the greatest security threat 
to Abyei.  In Muglad, Misseriya tribal leaders unanimously and 
categorically rejected the Abyei decision of the Permanent Court of 
Arbitration (PCA), Abyei boundary demarcation, and international 
interference in the matter.  SE Gration's visit to the region 
highlighted why the Abyei region remains the most contentious in 
Sudan.  End summary. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
Deputy Administrator Describes Challenges 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Deputy Abyei Administrator Rahama Abdul Rahman al Nour, a 
Misseriya from the National Congress Party, described co-existence 
conferences that included both the Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya and 
said that the situation in Abyei was peaceful.  He lamented the lack 
of development and social organization and said that the Ministry of 
Finance had not yet transferred the two percent of oil revenues owed 
the Ngok Dinka, a total of 35 million Sudanese pounds.  He expressed 
gratitude for US funding of various social and developmental 
initiatives in the area.  In response to SE Gration's query about 
formation of a joint task force to explain to all parties the 
Permanent Court of Arbitration decision on Abyei boundaries and 
access rights, Rahama admitted that this was not yet in place.  On 
the issue of voter registration, he explained that Abyei did not 
have its own electoral commission and depended upon the Warrap to 
register in the southern part of Abyei, and a commission from 
Southern Kordofan in the north. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Demarcation Committee Laments Insecurity 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) SE Gration met with Kuwal Beyong, Deputy Chair of the 
Abyei Demarcation Committee (SPLM) and two of his SPLM colleagues in 
Abyei town.  Beyong opened by complaining that the census figures in 
Abyei were inaccurate and that voter registration was going slowly 
and had been manipulated in the northern part of Abyei.  Turning to 
the subject at hand, the border committee members stated that they 
had made limited progress demarcating Abyei's western and eastern 
boundaries, but lamented that insecurity is impeding their ability 
to demarcate the northern boundary (Ref A, B and C).  They cited an 
incident in which a Sudan Armed Forces (SAF) unit stopped their work 
in the eastern part of the northern boundary near the Heglig oil 
field (Ref D) and refused them permission to leave the main road. 
They also claimed that Misseriya militias and Popular Defense Force 
troops opposed to demarcation are stationed along the central and 
western portion of the northern boundary. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Beyong confirmed that the Government of National Unity 
(GoNU) had provided two helicopters to facilitate demarcation and 
that the demarcation team had installed six marking poles out of the 
total of 28 that are to be located approximately ten kilometers 
apart along the 242-kilometer long East-North-West boundaries.  The 
team had installed marking poles on the southern end of the east and 
west boundaries, but none of the 17 markers planned for the northern 
border, including the crucial markers that identify the corners, was 
yet in place because of security concerns.  Beyong complained the 
Misseriya militias seriously outnumbered the team's JIU protection 
force, which was suspect anyway because half of the force consisted 
of Misseriya tribesmen of uncertain loyalty.  He concluded by noting 
that GoNU Presidential Advisor Idriss had not yet agreed with 
Government of Southern Sudan Vice President Machar and Minister 
Biong to form the badly needed Oversight Committee. 
 
----------------------------------- 
JIU Commander Confident of Security 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) SE Gration next traveled to JIU headquarters in Abyei town 
to meet Colonel Abu Salah, who had a much rosier view of things. 
Colonel Salah explained that the JIU was fully integrated, and was a 
model for Sudan. Salah assured SE Gration that security is in place 
 
KHARTOUM 00001344  002 OF 002 
 
 
in Abyei and that the JIUs are protecting the Abyei boundary 
demarcation committee.  When pressed for an explanation as to why 
the demarcation team feels impeded in its work, Salah replied that 
he has not seen any obstacles to demarcation.  Salah admitted that 
some Misseriya are gathering along the northern boundary, but noted 
that six demarcation poles have been successfully installed.  When 
SE Gration asked if there were problems with installation of the 
other markers, Salah initially stated that it was the UNMIS 
responsibility to protect the demarcation team outside of populated 
areas, then immediately reversed himself. 
 
----------------------------------------- 
JIPU Commander: Migration Largest Concern 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) In a visit to JIPU headquarters, JIPU commander Colonel 
Mohamed Abdel Gadir told SE Gration that the largest security 
concern in Abyei is the approaching Misseriya migration.  Gadir said 
that the JIPU, like the JIU, is composed of both Dinka and 
Misseriya.  Gadir noted that the JIPU faces financial constraints 
and that some JIPU officers remain in Khartoum.  Gadir stated that 
the JIPU coordinates its security activities with the JIUs through 
the Abyei Security Committee. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Misseriya Leaders Reject PCA Decision 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) In a November 19 meeting with SE Gration, Misseriya leaders 
in Muglad unanimously and categorically rejected the PCA's ruling 
defining the boundaries of the Abyei Special Administrative 
District.  Over one hundred Misseriya tribal leaders gathered to 
express their views to SE Gration, through four pre-selected 
speakers.  Each speaker noted that the Misseriya want peace, but 
then expressed the view that the PCA decision was an unjust taking 
of land they consider their own, without their consent or 
involvement.  The speakers vigorously rejected the idea that Abyei 
boundaries other than the one to the west should be demarcated in 
any fashion and they insisted that the Comprehensive Peace Agreement 
granted citizenship rights to both the Ngok and Misseriya.  They 
also rejected outside interference and stated that the Misseriya and 
Ngok Dinka tribal leaders could work out grazing rights and other 
issues on their own, as they had for many years.  Speakers 
complained of international bias favoring the Ngok Dinka and said 
that they do not receive equivalent development aid. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Comment. This year's migration of the Misseriya into Abyei 
is already in full swing.  The migration must go smoothly if peace 
is to prevail along Sudan's least stable fault line.  If the 
migration is peaceful, local tensions might be reduced, perhaps 
giving political actors more leeway for compromise.  It is unclear, 
however, the extent to which political actors are motivated by local 
concerns, or are in fact using local concerns as an excuse while 
pursuing control over the land and energy resources of Abyei.  End 
Comment. 
 
WHITEHEAD