09KHARTOUM857
SE GRATION VISITS KALMA CAMP AND MEETS WITH CIVIL SOCIETY
Tue Jul 21 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO2325
OO RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHKH #0857/01 2021115
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 211115Z JUL 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4124
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOA
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 0093
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 0330
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 0144
RUEHSUN/USUN ROME ITUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 KHARTOUM 000857 
 
DEPT FOR SE GRATION, S/USSES, AF A/S CARSON, AF/C 
NSC FOR MGAVIN 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
ADDIS ABABA ALSO FOR USAU 
BRUSSELS FOR PBROWN 
GENEVA FOR NKYLOH 
UN ROME FOR HSPANOS 
NEW YORK FOR DMERCADO 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PGOV PREL KPKO SOCI AU UNSC SU
SUBJECT:  SE GRATION VISITS KALMA CAMP AND MEETS WITH CIVIL SOCIETY 
AND ETHNIC LEADERS 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (U) During July 17-18, U.S. Special Envoy to Sudan Scott Gration 
traveled to South Darfur to review the humanitarian situation in 
Kalma and Kass internally-displaced person (IDP) camps and meet with 
Darfuri civil society and ethnic leaders.  A report of Gration's 
trip to Kass will be provided via septel. 
 
¶2. (U) Urging Kalma camp leaders and civil society representatives 
to look toward the future, SE Gration emphasized the importance of 
engagement in the peace process to find lasting solutions to the 
Darfur crisis.  During Gration's meetings with the South Darfur Wali 
Ali Mahmoud Mohamed (governor) and Dr. Farah Mustafa Abdullah the 
Deputy Wali, both emphasized that the security situation in South 
Darfur has stabilized, and that the Sudanese government's 
relationship with IDPs is positive, despite reports to the contrary. 
 However, the Special Envoy's visit to Kalma camp revealed 
frustrated IDPs and empty clinics.  The Government of Sudan's  (GOS) 
delay in allowing existing international non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs) to work in Kalma, and the IDPs' refusal until 
very recently to allow the latter to do so, are the causes of most 
of these problems.  In meetings with the humanitarian community, 
tribal leaders, and civil society representatives, SE Gration 
emphasized the importance of unifying disparate movements and noted 
progress in Sudanese government commitment to peace and facilitating 
assistance in Darfur.  End summary. 
 
------------------------ ---------------------------- 
Wali and Deputy Wali:  Move Along, Nothing to See Here 
------------------------- --------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) On July 17 and 18, Special Envoy (SE) Gration made his 
first visit to South Darfur, including trips to Kalma and Kass and 
meetings in Nyala, including courtesy calls with the Deputy Wali 
(governor) and Wali.  The Deputy Wali, who wields the real power in 
South Darfur's government, claimed the situation there is stable. 
He said most armed opposition groups have begun to align themselves 
with the government, and that IDPs have started to return to their 
villages due to improvements in security.  [Note:  The Wali 
explained ex-SLA/AW movement members have taken refuge in Kalma 
camps, which explains the rhetoric of conditions and demands they 
make for peace.]  The Deputy Wali stated that the government has 
been able to fill gaps following the expulsions of international 
NGOs through partnership with national NGOs.  However, the Deputy 
Wali did not repeat his late March charges that the expelled NGO 
workers were spies and thieves seeking to exploit the problems of 
Darfur.  Instead, he praised USAID, UN agencies, and the remaining 
NGOs for their support for the Darfuri people.  He added the GOS has 
recently signed technical agreements (TAs) with three international 
NGOs to work in Kalma camp.  The Wali later echoed this message. 
 
¶4. (U) SE Gration underscored the importance of the peace process in 
Doha, noting there will never be a lasting and durable peace in 
Darfur until all factions unite behind a single platform.  He noted 
U.S. efforts to that end starting with SLA/AW and SLA/Unity in the 
coming week in Chad.  The SE stressed that the USG's primary concern 
is for the next generation of Darfuris.  For this reason, it is 
crucial to resolve security problems that keep IDPs in camps.  He 
commended the South Darfur government for its recent efforts to 
support NGOs and UN agencies.  However, he emphasized that the 
humanitarian community must have greater access to camps such as 
Kalma, and that there is room for improvement in the relationship 
between the GOS and the humanitarian community. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The Deputy Wali replied that the solution would be to 
provide health, water, and education services in returnee areas now 
offered in IDP camps.  SE Gration said the USG will work with the 
GOS to bring such services to places of voluntary return, but that 
the prerequisites for such returns include respect for IDP human 
rights and adequate security for returnees.  The SE also stated that 
organizations such as the International Organization for Migration 
(IOM) need to be a part of the voluntary return process.  Deputy 
Wali expressed appreciation for U.S. support for returns.  He said 
the GOS "continues to dialogue" with IOM based on its country 
 
KHARTOUM 00000857  002 OF 004 
 
 
agreement, and plans to sign a technical agreement with IOM soon. 
[Note:  IOM has a valid 2004 memorandum of understanding with the 
GOS on verification of population movements.  It does not require a 
technical agreement with the GOS under Sudanese law.  End note.]  SE 
Gration also raised the issue of disconnects between federal-level 
agreements on the humanitarian assistance and state-level 
implementation, especially travel notification. 
 
--------------------------- 
Kalma Sheikhs:  What Future? 
--------------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) During his meeting with sheikhs (IDP leaders), youth leaders, 
and women's representatives in Kalma, the SE asked what the 
international community could do to assist in unifying the various 
rebel movements and facilitating voluntary returns by IDPs to their 
villages.  He said he wanted to hear the sheikhs discuss the future 
rather than the past.  However, the sheikhs provided a long litany 
of past injustices.  They said their villages are now occupied by 
other ethnic groups.  The sheikhs complained there was no security 
for IDPs.  Problems in Kalma camp continue:  women are raped, homes 
are looted and burned, and IDPs are threatened, tortured, and 
killed.  The sheikhs said they have no confidence in the capacity of 
the UN-African Union Hybrid Operation in Darfur's (UNAMID) to 
provide security.  Until the janjaweed are disarmed, they asserted, 
it is impossible for IDPs to return home.  For the sheikhs, 
Paris-based Fur leader Abdul Wahid (head of the Sudan Liberation 
Army/Wahid faction) is the only one who represents their interests. 
However, one sheikh admitted that the IDPs would replace Abdul Wahid 
if he failed to help them. 
 
¶7. (SBU) The sheikhs said NGO expulsions had resulted in women dying 
in childbirth and led to the deaths of more than 250 children due to 
poor medical care [Note:  This number has not been confirmed.]  The 
sheikhs claimed the GOS had allowed an existing international NGO to 
begin work in Kalma only in anticipation of the SE's arrival.  SE 
Gration expressed disappointment with the sheikhs' negative outlook 
on the situation in Darfur.  He said IDPs should be focused on 
Darfur's future and not its past.  SE Gration noted that in his 
meeting with Abdul Wahid in Paris, the latter had refused to engage 
in the Doha negotiations.  He called on the IDPs to work together 
for peace and the future of their children.  He added he was working 
to reduce tensions between Chad and Sudan to increase regional 
security. 
 
--------------------- -------------------------- 
Kalma Services:  Gaps "Filled" But Clinics Empty 
---------------------- ------------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) The day before SE Gration arrived at Kalma, USAID partner 
International Medical Corps (IMC) had received a signed TA to begin 
health services at the former International Rescue Committee (IRC) 
clinic, after nearly three months of having sought approval from the 
GOS.  IMC staff noted that the IDPs themselves had initially refused 
to allow IMC to work in Kalma. The IDPs had been encouraged to take 
this position in the vain hope that expelled NGO IRC workers would 
be allowed to return.  However, the IDPs said they were now looking 
forward to IMC's filling the gap left by IRC's expulsion.  They 
spoke of the need for basic medical care, mental health, rape 
treatment, health education, and other services.  IDP midwives and 
other former IRC workers said they maintained the clinic as long as 
possible, using their own severance payments to buy supplies.  They 
added the IRC medicines had run out.  It was urgent to restore 
services with the onset of the rainy season, when diseases increase. 
 
 
¶9. (U) The SE toured the 40-bed former IRC clinic that had only one 
patient, a young man nearing death from diabetes-related 
complications.  The SE was told the clinic lacks the medicines and 
trained staff to save the young man's life. 
 
¶10. (SBU) IMC staff informed SE Gration that they plan to re-start 
clinic operations within a week.  However, they  added the 
Humanitarian Aid Commission (HAC) had told them they could recruit 
only former IRC staff members living in the camp.  Hiring ex-IRC 
staff located outside Kalma would require their going through HAC 
 
KHARTOUM 00000857  003 OF 004 
 
 
hiring procedures, which can take up to six months.  Gration said he 
would raise this issue at senior levels to ensure a speedy 
resolution. 
 
---------------------- ------------------------------------ 
UNAMID:  Improved Security; Concerning Hostage-Taking Trends 
---------------------- ------------------------------------ 
 
¶11. (SBU) UNAMID briefed the SE on the current security environment 
in South Darfur.  Briefers noted improvements during the past year, 
but said there had also been recent  NGO staff hostage-taking. 
UNAMID reported a decline in carjacking since 2008 due in part to 
the March 4 NGO expulsions resulting in fewer high value vehicles on 
Darfur roads.  In addition, nighttime curfews forbidding use of 
UNAMID targeted vehicles and use by NGOs of unostentatious  rental 
vehicles had also contributed to the decline. 
 
¶12. (U) UNAMID staff said there were small-scale returns including 
for seasonal farming and limited permanent returns.  IDPs complained 
of a lack of security, and said they would return if their areas of 
origin were safe again.  The SE described his discussions on 
corridors of security to allow IDPs to return to certain locations 
secured by UNAMID and/or the GOS.  He said the USG is exploring the 
possibility of having NGOs provide services outside of, rather than 
inside, camps and provide incentives for peace. 
---------------------------- -------------------------- 
Tribal Leaders and Civil Society:  Impunity and Insecurity 
Continues 
----------------------------- ------------------------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) The SE also met with Arab and non-Arab tribal leaders, 
followed by a meeting with civil society representatives.  Both 
groups of tribal leaders were generally consistent in their 
messaging, noting that they still have serious concerns with the 
overall security and political situation in Darfur.  Tribal leaders 
also noted that "selected killings" are still taking place, with 
people from various ethnic groups being detained and murdered. 
 
¶14. (SBU) Arab leaders said they had been exploited by the GOS and 
neglected by the international community.  They added the GOS should 
stop arming Arab tribes.  SE Gration said all Arab factions, 
including those originally armed by the GOS, should now be engaged 
in the peace process. 
 
¶15. (SBU) Echoing concerns raised by Arab tribal leaders, several 
non-Arab representatives said the GOS had detained, and in some 
cases killed, members of tribes who had tried to unify those in the 
opposition.  The leaders added the GOS was intent on creating 
divisions rather than unity.  Many in the group called for justice 
in trying those who committed atrocities in Darfur. 
 
¶16. (SBU)  SE Gration told both groups that "Darfur must take 
control of its future," but could count on the USG for support. 
Consistent with his message to the sheikhs in Kalma, he told the 
tribal leaders to unify and have a voice at the negotiating table. 
 
¶17. (SBU) Finally, the SE met with civil society members from 
various organizations in Darfur, including those from the Darfur 
Forum, a lawyers' union, academia, women's groups, and Nyala-based 
NGOs.  In a long and rather contentious session, group members 
disparaged each others' knowledge of topics ranging from peace 
negotiations, training, and compensation issues.  The session 
underscored the need of such groups to find common ground in 
arriving at joint positions.  The SE said the U.S. would  be willing 
to support serious civil society initiatives that could be factored 
into the Doha process.  The groups all agreed on one point: they 
said UNAMID was not adequately providing protection in Darfur.  They 
also expressed disappointment that women were not, in their view, 
represented in the Doha negotiations. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Humanitarian Community: Two Realities at Work 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶18. (SBU) During a meeting with NGO and UN representatives, NGOs 
noted that although significant progress has been made in addressing 
 
KHARTOUM 00000857  004 OF 004 
 
 
the gaps left by the expulsions, the quality of programming has been 
compromised.  Agencies noted that the intense focus on gap-filling 
has left many ignoring the gaps that existed prior to the 
expulsions. 
 
¶19. (SBU)SE Gration agreed that gaps still exist, but stressed that 
in the past 100 days there had been progress in filling them.  He 
also noted that the anti-NGO rhetoric had stopped and government 
cooperation had improved.    NGOs replied that while cooperation 
might be better at the Khartoum-level, federal agreements had often 
not resulted in implementation at the field-level, and the "reality 
(in the field) is different than what you're hearing at the top". 
Many NGOs noted ongoing problems with access.  SE Gration asked NGOs 
to provide specific details of impediments that he could raise 
directly with the GOS on their behalf. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶20. (U) SE Gration's message throughout his meetings with IDP 
leaders, civil society members, and NGO and UN representatives 
remained consistent.  He stressed that he wants to be a partner with 
and advocate for civil society and NGOs in helping to improve the 
dire humanitarian and human rights situation in Darfur.  In 
exchange, Gration encouraged all local Darfuris, in civil society 
and in the camps, to commit to having their collective voices heard 
as part of the Darfur peace process so that their interests and 
concerns are ultimately reflected in any lasting peace agreement. 
 
¶21.  The Special Envoy approved this cable prior to his departure 
from Sudan. 
 
WHITEHEAD