09KHARTOUM642
CHALLENGES TO PROVIDING ASSISTANCE IN THE FORMER WESTERN
Thu May 14 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO4116
OO RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHKH #0642/01 1340928
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 140928Z MAY 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3787
INFO RUCNIAD/IGAD COLLECTIVE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 KHARTOUM 000642 
 
DEPT FOR SE GRATION, S/USSES, AF A/S CARSON, AF/E 
NSC FOR MGAVIN 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
ADDIS ABABA ALSO FOR USAU 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID PGOV PREL KPKO SOCI ASEC AU UNSC SU
SUBJECT:  CHALLENGES TO PROVIDING ASSISTANCE IN THE FORMER WESTERN 
KORDOFAN STATE 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (U) During the 21-year long north-south civil war, Southern 
Kordofan State experienced high levels of destruction and 
displacement.  Four years after the signing of the Comprehensive 
Peace Agreement (CPA), which ended the conflict, populations in 
Muglad and Lagawa localities in western Southern Kordofan, continue 
to face insecurity and insufficient resources due to limited water 
availability and deteriorating food security conditions.  In 
response, USAID's Office of U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance 
(USAID/OFDA) funds international non-government organization (INGO) 
Concern to provide water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) assistance 
in Muglad and German Agro Action (GAA) to furnish  agriculture, food 
security, and WASH assistance in Lagawa.  From April 4 to 9, 
USAID/OFDA and USAID's Office of Food for Peace field staff traveled 
to western Kordofan to meet with partners and monitor the 
humanitarian situation.  According to USAID staff observations, 
significant challenges remain in western Kordofan due to limited 
government recovery and development initiatives and insecurity 
caused by lack of disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration 
(DDR) programs for former Popular Defense Forces (PDF) youth. 
Aggravating the situation, the Sudanese government forced at least 
six national and international non-governmental organizations (NGOs) 
to leave the area as a result of the early March NGO expulsions, 
limiting the provision of assistance to vulnerable individuals.  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
---------- 
Background 
---------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Prior to the signing of the CPA in 2005, western Kordofan 
was a separate state, with El Fula as the capital.  In the former 
state, Arab ethnic groups constituted a majority of the population 
and had a significant share of power in the state government. 
However, following the signing of the CPA and implementation of the 
CPA protocols, western Kordofan was split into two states, with part 
of the state merging with Northern Kordofan and part with Southern 
Kordofan.  The majority of the former western Kordofan localities 
added to Southern Kordofan were mainly inhabited by the Misseriya 
Arabs, a largely pastoralist ethnic group, who seasonally herd 
cattle along migration routes through Southern Kordofan in search of 
grazing land and water. 
 
¶3.  (U) Due to the area's location along the north-south border, the 
more than two decade conflict between the Sudanese Armed Forces 
(SAF) n and the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) devastated 
Southern Kordofan, including the western Kordofan area.  During the 
conflict, food insecurity, fighting, and disease killed more than 
two million people throughout Sudan, forced an estimated 600,000 
Sudanese to seek refuge in neighboring countries, and displaced four 
million others within Sudan, according to the UN.  The conflict also 
significantly reduced the government's capacity to provide basic 
services to local populations. 
 
¶4.  (U) Since the signing of the CPA in 2005, and following the 
mid-May 2008 conflict in Abyei, Southern Kordofan has experienced 
significant population movements, exacerbating tensions over scarce 
resources, such as water and access to land.  Lagawa is one of the 
counties with the highest levels of returnees in the Three Areas and 
Southern Sudan.  According to the International Organization for 
Migration (IOM), by December 2008, more than 15,000 internally 
displaced persons (IDPs) had returned to Lagawa.  (Note:  Due to 
insecurity, organizations have been unable to compile return 
statistics for Muglad or El Fula.  End Note.) 
 
¶5.  (U) According to the International Crisis Group (ICG), limited 
peace dividends and lack of DDR programs for former combatants have 
led to increased insecurity and lack of reconciliation among ethnic 
groups.  In addition, conflict over land ownership and grazing 
rights has led to continuing tensions in the region between the Nuba 
Ajang of Abu Junuk and the Misseriya of El Sunut.  Since 2007, these 
tensions have led to at least ten deadly inter- or intra-ethnic 
group clashes over land, according to ICG.  In one case, interethnic 
violence during the Misseriya migration season in 2007 resulted in 
60 deaths.  Ongoing clashes, combined with desertification, have 
strained limited natural resources and threatened livelihoods and 
food security. 
 
¶6.  (U) Due to the limited number of NGOs operating in western 
Kordofan and because the UN does not maintain a permanent presence 
in the area, the population has limited access to recovery and 
 
KHARTOUM 00000642  002 OF 004 
 
 
reintegration assistance.  Exacerbating the limited coverage, the 
Sudanese government forced at least six national and international 
NGOs to leave the area as a result of the early March NGO 
expulsions.  In Fiscal Year 2009, USAID/OFDA funded Save the 
Children/U.S. (SC/US) for a significant health, food security, and 
WASH program with sub-offices in Muglad and Lagawa.  However, SC/US 
has been unable to implement the program due to the organization's 
expulsion in early March. 
 
¶7.  (U) Based on food commodity price observations, the USAID team 
reported that Muglad and Lagawa may be experiencing food insecurity 
conditions, which could deteriorate during the annual May/June to 
September rainy season.  Food insecurity in western Kordofan results 
mainly from low supply due to poor harvests during previous harvest 
seasons in nearby areas.  Communities in western Kordofan also 
import grains from as far as Gedaref State in eastern Sudan. 
However, during the annual rainy season roads are usually blocked, 
increasing demand for food and leading to escalating staple food 
prices.  In 2008, the government released grains from its strategic 
reserve to stabilize grain prices in the local markets.  However, 
community members reported that the impact was insignificant due to 
the poor quality of the commodities provided.  In 2008, CARE and the 
UN World Food Program also responded to food insecurity in the El 
Sunut/Abu Junuk areas with a food-aid distribution.  Food insecurity 
in the El Sunut/Abu Junuk areas in 2008 resulted from temporary 
displacement caused by fighting over water resources in El Sunut. 
 
------------------------- 
WASH Activities in Muglad 
------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (U) In response to assessed recovery needs for water along 
migration routes, USAID/OFDA has included Southern Kordofan in an 
ongoing initiative to provide water programs in the north-south 
border zone linked to regional peace initiatives.  In Muglad, two 
local NGOs, the Sudan Social Development Organization (SUDO) and Zam 
Zam, work with USAID/OFDA partner Concern to rehabilitate water 
yards and construct haffirs, a traditional water reservoir.  At 
present, SUDO is rehabilitating three water yards through a private 
contractor, Ma Median, who has accomplished more than 80 percent of 
the rehabilitation in one site and 50 percent in the other two 
sites.  SUDO has also sub-contracted the construction of two haffirs 
through a private contractor.  Although the contractor completed the 
excavation work on one haffir, the team was prevented from 
continuing work following the Sudanese government's early March 
termination of SUDO's agreement and subsequent seizure of some of 
the haffir supplies in Muglad.  The government has permitted the 
water yard rehabilitation to continue under close supervision from 
Concern and local authorities, particularly the Government of 
National Unity (GNU) State Water Corporation. 
 
¶9.  (U) Prior to SUDO's early March dissolution, the organization 
was also constructing 80 household latrines, or 20 latrines for each 
water yard or haffir, and four school latrines and providing eight 
training courses covering water yard operation and water facility 
management and maintenance.  Currently, all of SUDO's sanitation and 
hygiene programs have been suspended.  Zam Zam is planning to 
construct 20 household latrines and one school latrine in an 
undetermined location for water yard rehabilitation. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) One of the key challenges facing the implementation of 
the USAID/OFDA-funded grant, scheduled to finish in late July 2009, 
is the absence of SUDO, a key implementing partner.  Negotiations 
are underway between the Concern country office in Khartoum, the GNU 
Humanitarian Aid Commission (HAC), and SUDO to ensure that Concern 
can freely access money deposited into SUDO's account so that 
Concern can pay contractors to finish work prior to the start of the 
rainy season.  Concern is also considering assuming SUDO's previous 
functions, as the organization already has a presence and good 
reputation among the community and local authorities in the area. 
Concerns that Zam Zam is implementing programs too slowly pose 
another challenge to program implementation, as drilling and 
excavation should be completed prior to the start of the rainy 
season. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
Food Security, Agriculture, and WASH Programs in Lagawa 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶11.  (U) USAID/OFDA funds GAA to implement agriculture and food 
security programs targeting approximately 52,500 individuals in 
Lagawa and Unity State.  As of March, 200 beneficiaries, including 
142 women from 13 villages had participated in group vegetable 
production.  GAA had also begun training on low-cost cultivation 
 
KHARTOUM 00000642  003 OF 004 
 
 
techniques and irrigation methods and delivered vegetable seeds, 
tools, and gardening materials in eight villages following the 
establishment of ten vegetable gardens. 
 
¶12.  (U) In addition, GAA verified and trained 133 existing 
community animal health workers (CAHWs) and began procuring the 
required drugs, vaccines, and related materials and equipment to 
implement animal health programs.  Once these are procured, CAHWs 
expect to vaccinate 175,000 heads of cattle.  GAA also selected 200 
people to benefit from goat re-stocking activities in nine villages 
and 200 fishermen--constituting 150 seasonal fishermen and 50 
professionals--in both Southern Kordofan and Unity states to provide 
with fishing equipment and training on fish processing, 
preservation, and marketing. 
 
¶13.  (SBU) GAA selected 20 villages for the construction of two 
water yards, eight boreholes, and ten shallow wells.  GAA plans to 
establish and conduct training for 20 water management committees 
and 40 hygiene promoters in May.  However, GAA reported to USAID 
that the organization is planning to close-out recovery and 
development programs in Unity State in 2009 due to uncooperative 
local officials, particularly at the Southern Sudan Relief and 
Rehabilitation Commission.  (Note:  Unfortunately, it is not 
uncommon throughout Southern Sudan for NGOs to experience difficult, 
manipulative local authorities that make program implementation 
challenging.  End Note.) 
 
------------------------ 
Impact of NGO Expulsions 
------------------------ 
 
¶14.  (U) The dissolution of key national NGOs, such as SUDO, has had 
a negative impact on the provision of recovery programs and has led 
to the suspension of the organization's water projects.  In 
addition, SC/US has been unable to implement planned health and WASH 
projects in Muglad and Lagawa with USAID/OFDA funding.  Medecins 
Sans Frontieres/Switzerland (MSF/CH), which operates mobile feeding 
centers in Muglad hospital, has decided to voluntarily cease 
activities after the suspension of other MSF agencies.  The 
expulsions further restricted USAID's Office of Transition 
Initiatives partner PADCO-AECOM's programs in the area. 
 
¶15.  (U) In Lagawa, the expulsion of SC/US, CARE, and the 
International Rescue Committee (IRC), in addition to other NGOs, 
negatively affected humanitarian capacity.  In the absence of these 
agencies, support in critical sectors such as health, WASH, and 
livelihoods has diminished and will be difficult to re-establish in 
the near future, as remaining NGOs may fear future suspensions or 
lack the capacity to expand.  NGOs are cautious about expanding 
programs and areas of operation due to the Sudanese government's 
proposed strategy to nationalize humanitarian work in Sudan within 
three years.  Despite reassurances from the government that this 
process of "Sudanization" will not infringe upon the work of 
remaining international NGOs, many NGOs expressed concern that calls 
for nationalization could lead to future program suspensions or 
asset seizures. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
GNU-UN Assessment of Humanitarian Needs 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶16.  (U) On April 7, a team consisting of the UN, the Southern 
Kordofan State government, and the GNU conducted a one-day visit to 
Lagawa to meet with key stakeholders including NGOs, community-based 
organizations, community leaders, and local officials.  The purpose 
of the assessment was to identify possible gaps in assistance 
following the NGO expulsions and to assess the humanitarian 
situation in the area.  The team conducted a similar visit to El 
Fula on April 6; however, the outcome of the assessment remains 
unknown. According to some NGO staff, the assessment constitutes a 
positive step, indicating that the government realizes that the 
expulsions have created significant gaps.  However, others said that 
the government could easily manipulate the assessment results and 
politicize findings unless the UN takes a firm stand.  Although the 
team has not yet released the results, NGO staff, community leaders, 
and some government officials expressed concern about the existence 
of significant gaps in the Three Areas, including Southern Kordofan, 
due to the expulsions. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Fragile Security Situation and Lack of DDR 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶17.  (U) Since the end the north-south conflict in 2005, western 
 
KHARTOUM 00000642  004 OF 004 
 
 
Kordofan has received little or no reintegration assistance for 
ex-PDF fighters, according to community youth groups, community 
leaders, NGO staff, and government officials.  Over the past few 
months, the area has experienced increased insecurity, including 
intermittent ambushes by unidentified armed groups on cars and 
passengers on highways.  High unemployment and lack of training 
opportunities for youth means that many young people in the area 
remain idle for the majority of the year, possibly leading to 
outbreaks of violence and interethnic conflict. Accounts abound of 
the ruling NCP handing out weapons along the border areas including 
to many Misseriyya in hopes of using them in any future fighting 
against pro-SPLM tribes such as the Ngok Dinka of Abyei and Nuba. 
 
¶18.  (U) In a recent study, the Humanitarian Policy Group and the 
Oversees Development Institute, with the coordination of the UN 
Development Program, proposed medium- and long-term interventions to 
improve livelihoods and reduce the likelihood of conflict in 
Misseriya areas of western Kordofan.  The proposed interventions 
include encouraging grassroots reconciliation and local level 
discussion on natural resources, defusing tensions among youth 
through cash interventions and extension of DDR programs, promoting 
civic education, developing infrastructure to stimulate development 
in pastoralist areas, improving water sources and supporting 
livestock interventions, promoting environmental advocacy, and 
supporting income-generating activities, including agricultural 
support and youth training.  The study mentioned that communities 
expect the central and state governments, as well as oil companies, 
to take the lead in implementing the interventions mentioned above. 
 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶19.  (U) Four years after the signing of the CPA, the population of 
western Southern Kordofan State continues to encounter insecurity 
and instability, as well as limited provision of basic services. 
Combined with population movements, this situation has led to 
resource scarcity, particularly in the areas of water and 
livelihoods, and contributed to heightened tensions between ethnic 
groups.  To mitigate these tensions and meet the needs of the 
population, USAID/OFDA has included Southern Kordofan in an ongoing 
initiative to provide water programs, as well as agriculture and 
food security assistance, in the north-south border zone. 
 
¶20.  (U) In the coming months, Post will continue to monitor the 
humanitarian situation closely, particularly activities directly 
affected by the expulsions, such as the implementation of 
USAID-funded Concern projects in Muglad.  Post is also monitoring 
progress on the Three Areas assessment to review gaps in 
humanitarian assistance, as well as recommendations for future 
humanitarian operations.  Post will continue to monitor the food 
security situation in the area and how food security conditions are 
affecting the implementation of remaining projects. 
 
FERNANDEZ