09KIGALI548
RWANDA - DIASPORA ENGAGEMENT
Wed Sep 09 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kigali
P 090900Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY KIGALI
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6275
INFO AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY BUJUMBURA PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY DAR ES SALAAM PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY KAMPALA PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY KINSHASA PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY NAIROBI PRIORITY 
AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITYUNCLAS KIGALI 000548 
 
 
S/GPI MKWALKER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EFIN PREL EINV RW
SUBJECT: RWANDA - DIASPORA ENGAGEMENT 
 
REF: STATE 86401 
 
 
(U) This cable responds to State 86401.  Responses are queued 
to questions A-M in paragraph 15.  Post POC is Alexander 
Sokoloff.  Email: Sokoloffaw@state.gov 
 
¶A. (U):  Rwanda's diaspora is a well-established and clearly 
identifiable community.  The 1994 genocide galvanized 
Rwandans living abroad to provide aid to genocide survivors 
and contribute economic and human capital to rebuild Rwanda. 
According to some estimates, over 1 million of the diasporan 
community returned to Rwanda following the genocide.  The 
Rwandan Ministry of Foreign Affairs maintains a "Diaspora 
General Directorate" (DGD) to maintain contact with Rwandan 
communities abroad.  DGD organizes annual diaspora 
conferences--the next is scheduled for December 2009.  The 
Rwanda Diaspora Global Network serves as an umbrella group 
for diaspora communities with a specific objective of 
promoting solidarity and better communication among Rwandans 
living abroad.  Other diaspora organizations such as the 
Rwanda Diaspora Investment Ltd., channel diaspora funds to 
investment opportunities in Rwanda. 
 
¶B. (U)  During the 1994 genocide, most educated and/or 
professional Rwandans resident in Rwanda died or fled the 
country.  Following the genocide, Rwandans from all parts of 
the world returned to Rwanda to assist in the rebuilding of 
the country.  Fifteen years later, diasporans continue to 
play a key role in governing the country, supporting families 
in Rwanda with remittances, and actively participating in 
Rwandan civil society.  Many GOR ministers, government 
employees and private sector investors are themselves 
diasporans. 
 
¶C. (U) The diasporan community has been active in Rwanda 
since the end of the genocide in 1994 and will likely remain 
active for the foreseeable future. 
 
¶D. (U) The diasporan community is leading efforts to attract 
investment and micro-enterprise development, job creation, 
entrepreneurship and institutional capacity building.  There 
is no aspect of Rwandan economic development that does not 
include a significant involvement by the diasporan community. 
 Post expects that this level of involvement will continue 
for the foreseeable future. 
 
¶E. (U)  As noted in paragraph D, the diasporan community is 
intimately involved in Rwanda's economic development 
including working towards scientific, engineering, medical 
and educational institution building.  Diasporans with 
backgrounds in these fields have, and will likely continue, 
to welcome opportunities to engage in science diplomacy 
programs.  Until recently the Minister for Science and 
Technology in the President's Office was a diasporan 
 
¶F. (U) The Rwandan government and many in the diaspora 
community are bound together, and equally engaged, in 
conflict resolution and peace building.   This is one of the 
main reasons for the diaspora returning to Rwanda.  The 
diaspora community will likely continue to be engaged in 
these processes.  To some extent, this engagement could be 
translated to other bilateral or regional priorities provided 
the Rwandan government "buys in" to the engagement. 
 
¶G. (U) The diaspora community is actively engaged in meeting 
the health, education and welfare needs of Rwandans living in 
Rwanda.  Engagement includes financial, human capital and 
QRwanda.  Engagement includes financial, human capital and 
political support.  Prominent examples of this are the One 
Dollar Campaign and the Diaspora Mutual Fund designed to 
encourage diasporan support for Rwandan economic development 
and providing assistance to genocide survivors. 
 
¶H. (U) The primary focus of the diaspora and the Rwandan 
government is to rebuild Rwanda, provide a foundation for 
economic, social and educational development and promote 
national unity and reconciliation.  Government leaders and 
the diaspora community support good governance, 
accountability and civic education as essential components of 
economic development.  Citing Rwanda's past history of ethnic 
tensions, the government is wary of ethnic-based divisions 
that might rekindle conflict.  Its approach to democratic 
debate is cautious.  The diaspora community supports this 
approach, although a significant part of the diaspora is 
critical of, and remains opposed to, the government. 
 
¶I. (U) The Rwandan government and diasporan community 
overlap.  For example, many key members of the President's 
cabinet are diasporans.  The Rwandan Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs maintains a "Diaspora General Directorate" (DGD) 
specifically to maintain contact with Rwandan communities 
abroad.  The Commercial Bank of Rwanda offers a "Diaspora 
Banking Service" and a "Diaspora Mortgage Facility."  Rwandan 
diasporans play an active role in promoting Rwanda as a 
tourist and investment destination. 
 
J-M. (U)  As noted above, many of the diaspora community are 
currently serving in the Rwandan government.  For example, 
the Minister of Information is a diasporan who lived in 
Washington D.C for 22 years before returning last year to 
Rwanda.  The former Minister of Science and Technology is 
also a diasporan who lived for many years in Atlanta before 
returning to Rwanda to serve in the government.  In July 
2009, he returned to Atlanta for family reasons.  With so 
many diasporans taking leadership roles in Rwanda, our public 
outreach to the GOR, the private sector and Rwandan civil 
society has effectively included the diasporan community. 
Post has not initiated any programs specifically customized 
to the diasporan community living outside of Rwanda. 
 
 
SYMINGTON