09KYIV1302
GUAM'S UPS AND DOWNS
Fri Aug 07 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kyiv
VZCZCXRO7137
RR RUEHDBU RUEHLN RUEHSK RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHKV #1302/01 2190738
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 070738Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY KYIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8224
INFO RUCNCIS/CIS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KYIV 001302 
 
SENSITIVE  SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR INL/AAE, EUR/UMB, EUR/CARC AND EUR/ACE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR KCRM PGOV PREL UP
SUBJECT: GUAM'S UPS AND DOWNS 
 
Summary 
-------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) Over the past year, GUAM has seen successes, including the 
opening of an impressive new headquarters in Kyiv.  However, GUAM 
has also revealed shortcomings, most notably a lack of consensus 
among members about the orientation of the organization.  Moldova 
continues to be sensitive to Russian misgivings about GUAM and in 
2008 initiated the disbanding of the GUAM working group on military 
issues.  More recently, Azerbaijan has refused to supply biodata to 
the U.S. needed for Leahy vetting.  If not reversed, this could 
force cancellation of U.S. funded programs in key areas.  Ukraine 
and Georgia see eye-to-eye on GUAM and, from our perspective, are 
clearly the most active and committed members.  A lower level of 
commitment by the other partners is undermining the organization. 
End Summary. 
 
Azerbaijan Balks at Leahy Vetting 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) The Organization of Democracy and Economic Development - 
GUAM - consists of Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan and Moldova.  The 
GUAM Secretariat has made strides in the past two years in 
implementing the standards, methods of communication and overall 
management befitting an international organization.  Increasing USG 
assistance has supported this, largely through the US-GUAM Framework 
Program targeted at the Working Group on Law Enforcement. 
 
¶3. (SBU) However, the future of USG law enforcement assistance to 
GUAM is in doubt, due to the spillover of a bilateral issue between 
the USG and Azerbaijan related to Leahy vetting. 
Azerbaijan refuses to provide personal data required, which it 
apparently regards as intrusive.  Absent receipt of appropriate 
biodata, planned U.S.-funded training, including a two-year program 
focused on counter-narcotics and counter-trafficking and a 
long-awaited program on training for Border Guard services would 
have to be cancelled, and the funding redirected.  While the parties 
are working to resolve this issue, it highlights gaps in GUAM's 
development as an international organization. 
 
A New Headquarters 
------------------ 
 
¶4.  (U) The history of USG cooperation with GUAM dates back almost a 
decade, but only in the last 24 months has the organization taken 
ownership of its mission and future.  The Secretariat has 
implemented international accounting standards, a requirement when 
seeking additional donors, and has formalized its system of 
communication with member states.  A high-point came in February 
with the official inauguration of the Secretariat Headquarters, 
prominently located on Independence Square in the center of Kyiv. 
 
¶5. (U) The office space, provided by the GOU, is excellent and has 
allowed the organization to host a full slate of activities.  This 
included a seminar on Nuclear Terrorism sponsored by the UNODC, an 
art exhibit by member states, and virtual and face-to-face meetings 
of the eight working groups of the organization.  The USG provided 
funds for translation and telephone equipment and, most importantly, 
for DVC technology in the HQ and in all member capitals. (At 
present, Azerbaijan has not installed its equipment, as the room it 
will be located in is under renovation, limiting the effectiveness 
of the system.) 
 
Virtual Law Enforcement Center 
------------------------------ 
 
¶6. (U) For almost five years the USG has provided assistance to a 
Virtual Law Enforcement Center (VLEC), a local area network 
established in the law enforcement agencies in each capital.  The 
Center is designed to exchange information on cases and to study 
general trends.  It has been used to actively resolve at least one 
human-trafficking case, to exchange information on narcotics and 
human-trafficking cases, and to produce a report on narcotics 
trafficking in the region.  VLEC reached a major milestone in 
December on the margins of the OSCE Ministerial in Helsinki, when 
the FMs of the member states agreed on a Protocol that would allow 
the countries to exchange classified material.    Further 
information on the organization's structure can be found on the 
organization's web page: http://www.guam-organization.org 
 
Divergences on Russia, other issues 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Despite this progress, the effectiveness of the Secretariat 
is limited by its role as coordinator, and not policymaker, a 
reflection of the varying goals of the member states.  The member 
countries have strong convergence on issues like tourism and trade 
facilitation, but there has always been an underlying concern about 
the organization's role vis-a-vis Russia, which resulted in a 
decision (at the behest of Moldova) at the Batumi 2008 GUAM Summit 
 
KYIV 00001302  002 OF 002 
 
 
to disband the GUAM working group on military and political 
cooperation, and focus on economic and social issues.  This decision 
tracked with the Organization's attempts to better define their 
mission, but also illustrates the fragility of the union of the 
members. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) GUAM operates on consensus.  The organization's 
effectiveness depends on the extent to which members agree.  Ukraine 
and Georgia share similar perspectives on GUAM and, from our 
standpoint, are the anchors of the organization.   Moldova and 
Azerbaijan appear less committed.  Moldova's reticence is evident by 
the fact that it is often represented by lower-level officials at 
GUAM meetings.   Azerbaijan's refusal to pass personnel data needed 
for Leahy vetting reflects its misgivings and, as noted, may cause 
the cancellation of U.S. law enforcement assistance that would 
affect the entire organization.