09KYIV2182
UKRAINE: SPACE DEAL WITH BRAZIL UNCERTAIN
Tue Dec 22 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Kyiv
VZCZCXRO3018
RR RUEHDBU RUEHSL
DE RUEHKV #2182/01 3561422
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 221422Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY KYIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9016
INFO RUCNCIS/CIS COLLECTIVE
RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVE
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 0001
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEANAT/NASA WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 KYIV 002182 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/UMB AND OES 
COMMERCE FOR 4231/ITA/OOEENIS/NISD/CLUCYK 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 12/21/2019 
TAGS: TSPA ETRD ECON BR UP
SUBJECT: UKRAINE: SPACE DEAL WITH BRAZIL UNCERTAIN 
 
Classified By: Economic Counselor Edward Kaska for reasons 1.4(b) and ( 
d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary. During his December visit, Brazilian 
President Lula de Silva announced that Ukraine and Brazil 
would move ahead to launch the Ukrainian-designed and built 
Cyclone-4 space launch vehicle from Brazil's Alcantara 
launching pad.  Ukraine and Brazil signed a cooperation 
agreement in 2003 to conduct the first launch in 2006. 
However, lack of political will and unresolved financing and 
intellectual property issues repeatedly threw the project off 
track.  Lula de Silva's December visit has reportedly helped 
resolve issues surrounding the project, and according to 
Ukrainian President Yushchenko, the first launch now is to be 
completed in 2010.  Insiders, however, doubt that the parties 
will be able to secure a necessary agreement with Russia, 
which partners with Ukraine in building the launch vehicle, 
and do not expect the project to become operational before 
2013, if ever.  End Summary. 
 
CYCLONE-4 
-------- 
 
¶2. (C) The Cyclone is a family of space launch vehicles 
derived from the SS-9 Intercontinental Ballistic Missile. 
Originally introduced in 1967, its last flown derivative, the 
three-stage Cyclone-3 was reportedly retired in January 2009. 
 The Cyclone-4 is a new derivative, which is to be built 
specifically for Brazil's Alcantara launching pad.  It has 
three stages and can carry a payload of 1.5 tons into 
Geo-Synchronous Orbit and 5.0 tons into Low Earth Orbit.  The 
first stage engine for the Cyclone-4 is produced by the 
Russian state-owned company Energomash. 
 
UKRAINE,S SPACE POTENTIAL 
------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Ukraine has a long tradition as a major space 
industry player, chiefly based on the activities of 
Dnipropetrovsk-based Yuzhnoye Design Bureau and Yuzhmash 
Machine Building Plant.  (Note:  The two companies, often 
referred to simply as Yuzhnoye/Yuzhmash closely cooperate in 
designing and building space launch vehicles, and their 
tradition of joint work dates back to the Soviet 
Intercontinental Ballistic Missile program.  End Note.)  Yet, 
despite Ukraine's technical capabilities, the country has no 
launching base of its own and has to use other countries' 
launching facilities.  Ukraine has most often used Russia's 
Plesetsk and Kazakhstan,s Baikonur as launch sites.  The 
agreement with Brazil would allow Ukraine to diversify its 
launching bases and make better use of its space program. 
Brazil, on the other hand, strives to build out its own space 
program and make use of the advantageous position of its 
launching pad near the equator, according to Ukrainian media. 
 
 
UKRAINE-BRAZILIAN SPACE PARTNERSHIP 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) Ukraine and Brazil signed an agreement in October 2003 
to launch the Ukraine-produced Cyclone-4 space launch 
vehicles from Brazil's Alcantara launch facility.  In 2006, 
the two countries formed Alcantara Cyclone Space, a 50-50 
joint venture to spearhead the cooperation program.  With the 
help of Yuzhnoye Design Bureau, which had developed the 
Cyclone-4 along with other launch vehicles, Brazil planned to 
redesign the launching facilities at Alcantara to accommodate 
the Ukrainian rocket.  The original agreement foresaw the 
first Cyclone-4 launch in 2006.  However, the project 
repeatedly went off track as a result of political changes in 
Ukraine, lack of available financing, and unresolved 
intellectual property rights issues with Russia.  The cost of 
the project was initially estimated at $180 million, to be 
shared equally by Ukraine and Brazil.  According to press 
reports, however, the cost has since ballooned to a multiple 
of the original sum. 
 
¶5. (U) Amid rumors that the Alcantara Cyclone Space project 
may be scrapped altogether in favor of cooperation with 
Russia, Lula de Silva's visit to Ukraine in December provided 
the project with new momentum.  Both presidents announced 
that the countries successfully resolved all obstacles, and 
the project was ready to take off.  According to Yushchenko, 
the first launch of the Cyclone-4 from the Alcantara Space 
Center would take place by 2010, before the end of Lula de 
Silva's presidential term.  Brazil also reportedly agreed to 
 
KYIV 00002182  002 OF 002 
 
 
provide Ukraine with a loan to fund its part of the project. 
 
INSIDERS SKEPTICAL 
------------------ 
 
¶6. (C) Local insiders have largely dismissed the 
"breakthrough" announcement as a mere political ploy. 
According to Borys Atamanenko, the head of international 
relations of the National Space Agency of Ukraine (NSAU), the 
agreement has not brought the two countries any closer to 
implementing the project.  A launch in 2010 was not realistic 
and 2013 was more feasible, Atamanenko told us. 
 
RUSSIAN INVOLVEMENT 
------------------- 
 
¶7. (C) The issue is less Ukraine's technological prowess but 
unresolved intellectual property issues with its Russian 
partners.  According to Atamanenko, "Ukraine owns 95% of the 
Cyclone-4 design and Russia owns the remaining 5%," since the 
Cyclone-4 is the result of Soviet-era space research. 
Ukraine knows how to build the Cyclone-4 without Russia, and 
could even get required "Russian" parts from others, such as 
China, if needed.  However, a move to complete the deal with 
Brazil without Russia's acquiescence would upset Ukraine's 
space relationship with Russia, Atamanenko noted. 
 
¶8. (C) While working-level relations between Ukrainian and 
Russian scientists continue to be good, "politics often gets 
in their way," Atamanenko told us.  According to him, the 
future of Cyclone-4 is a political decision that Ukraine's 
leaders will need to weigh carefully.  Given historical and 
geographical considerations, Russia is Ukraine,s most 
important space cooperation partner, and maintaining a good 
relationship is crucial for Ukraine.  According to 
Atamanenko, Ukraine cannot afford to trade its relationship 
with Russia for a single project like the Cyclone-4. 
 
¶9. (C) Atamanenko said the Cyclone-4 project would be most 
feasible as a commercial project that would include Russia as 
a partner.  As an example of a successful commercial space 
partnership, he showcased SeaLaunch, a space launching 
venture, comprised of Russian, Ukrainian, Norwegian and U.S. 
partners.  (Note: The venture's future is uncertain as 
SeaLaunch declared bankruptcy in June 2009 and is currently 
seeking a financial backer to restart operations.  End Note.) 
 
 
¶10. (SBU) The Ukrainian Agency for International Investments 
has included the Cyclone-4 venture among the ten strategic 
projects, for which the country hopes to attract 
international investors, according to a list unveiled on 
December 21.  According to the agency's head Sergei Taran, 
"the project has been selected for consideration by the NSAU 
--- that means that (the NSAU) believes the project requires 
additional investment." 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶11. (C) The recent political announcement of the Cyclone-4 
revival may again turn out to be premature.  Until Ukraine is 
able to improve its relationship with Russia and resolve 
intellectual property rights issues left over from Soviet 
times, Russia has the ability to play the role of "spoiler" 
in Ukraine's endeavors to turn its considerable space 
research and development potential into commercial benefit. 
Ukraine well recognizes that Russia still remains Ukraine's 
most important strategic partner in the space sphere.  As a 
result, Ukraine will not likely sacrifice the partnership in 
favor of projects with other countries. 
TEFFT