09LAPAZ659
GOB IMPLICATES SANTA CRUZ LEADERS IN "TERRORISM"
Wed May 06 00:00:00 +0200 2009
SECRET
Embassy La Paz
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHLP #0659/01 1261517
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
O 061517Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY LA PAZ
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0685
INFO RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION IMMEDIATE 8991
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA IMMEDIATE 6373
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA IMMEDIATE 0347
RUEHBM/AMEMBASSY BUCHAREST IMMEDIATE 0045
RUEHUP/AMEMBASSY BUDAPEST IMMEDIATE 0039
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES IMMEDIATE 7556
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS IMMEDIATE 4603
RUEHDL/AMEMBASSY DUBLIN IMMEDIATE 0027
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA IMMEDIATE 4938
RUEHMN/AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO IMMEDIATE 6273
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO IMMEDIATE 7221
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO IMMEDIATE 1985
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO IMMEDIATE 1069
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO IMMEDIATE 2385
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RHMFISS/HQ USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL IMMEDIATE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATES E C R E T LA PAZ 000659 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/05/2049 
TAGS: PREL PTER PGOV KJUS PHUM ASEC BL
SUBJECT: GOB IMPLICATES SANTA CRUZ LEADERS IN "TERRORISM" 
PLOT 
 
REF: LA PAZ 635 AND PREVIOUS 
 
Classified By: American Presence Post Officer Debra Hevia for reason 1. 
4 b and d. 
 
¶1. (S) Summary: The government prosecutor has implicated a 
dozen top Santa Cruz leaders in supporting a "terrorist cell" 
aiming to divide the country.  A former public defender for 
one of the Hungarian defendants told us the government had 
informants within the group and a great deal of evidence to 
support its claims.  Meanwhile, Santa Cruz leaders claim the 
government's investigation is a political show, timed to 
undermine the one-year anniversary of the autonomy vote and 
to weaken the democratic opposition before December national 
elections.  The public defender expressed concerns about 
judicial irregularities and human rights abuses in the case, 
and claims the government has enough evidence that it should 
be proceeding with confidence and in conformity with the law. 
 The irregularities are inspiring conspiracy theories that 
the government has something to hide, and that some top 
government officials may have been deeply involved in the 
group's activities.  We believe it will be many months before 
the whole truth is known in this case, if ever. End summary. 
 
 
Government Links Leading Crucenos to Terrorist Cell 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
¶2. (U) On May 4, as Santa Cruz leaders were making rousing 
public speeches to mark the one-year anniversary of the vote 
approving the department's autonomy statute, the government 
prosecutor in charge of the investigation of the "terrorist" 
cell uncovered in April accused many of those same Cruceno 
leaders of supporting the terrorists' activities.  In a press 
conference, prosecutor Marcelo Sosa said evidence collected 
from the testimony of the arrested terrorist suspects and 
confiscated materials indicated that the group had the 
support of: 
--Prefect (Governor) Ruben Costas; 
--Former Civic Committee President Branko Marinkovic; 
--President of the Private Business Association Pedro Yohvio; 
--Former President of the Ranchers' Association and now Civic 
Committee Vice President Guido Nayar; 
--President of the Agricultural Chamber Mauricio Roca; 
--Civic Committee General Director Lorgio Balcazar; 
--Former Civic Committee General Director Mario Bruno; 
--Vice-President of Blooming Soccer Team Carlos Alberto 
Guillen; 
--Director for International Cooperation at the Prefecture 
Francisco Cirbian; 
--Retired Army General Lucio Anez, 
and others. 
 
¶3. (U) The Santa Cruz leadership responded with outrage and 
indignation, saying the Morales Administration was on a witch 
hunt, that the entire "terrorist cell" story was a set-up, 
and that it was an obvious attempt by the government to 
squash the democratic opposition before December 2009 
presidential elections.  Marinkovic declared, "It is no 
surprise at all that the government would choose the one-year 
anniversary of our autonomy vote to launch these false 
accusations against us."  Current Civic Committee President 
Luis Nunez called for the formation of an "Interinstitutional 
Commission" for all Santa Cruz organizations to band together 
in mutual defense.  He challenged the government to "end the 
political show, and focus instead on finding the facts, 
following proper legal procedures, and maintaining the 
principle of innocent until proven guilty." 
 
¶4. (U) Sosa told the press that an individual named Luis 
Hurtado paid the hotel bills for the group. He said the 
government investigation revealed that there were five major 
financiers behind the "terrorist" organization, and 
 
identified three of them: 
--Alejandro MELGAR Pereira, a commercial arbitration lawyer 
associated with the Chamber of Industry and Commerce (CAINCO); 
--Juan Alberto KUDELKA Zalles, director of marketing of the 
seed oil company owned by the Marinkovic family; and 
--Hugo Antonio MELGAR Acha, Bolivian Director of the 
U.S.-based NGO Human Rights Foundation, and a close embassy 
contact on human rights issues. 
 
¶5. (U) The New York-based HRF spokeswoman told press that 
"Human Rights Foundation in Bolivia has carried out 
extraordinary work denouncing human rights abuses in that 
country, and unfortunately the response of Morales comes in 
the form of insults and unfounded accusations.  Even more 
worrisome is that the escalation of attacks by the Morales 
administration is putting at risk particularly the rights of 
Bolivians who live in the four opposition departments. We 
have carried out an internal review and have found no 
evidence that Mr. Acha is linked to the group that the 
government claims is carrying out separatist activities." 
 
Public Defender: So Much Pressure, So Much Evidence 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
¶6. (S) American Presence Post Officer met May 5 with the 
former public defender assigned to alleged terrorist Mario 
Tadic, one of the two Hungarian citizens arrested in the 
April 15 raid on the Hotel Las Americas in Santa Cruz 
(reftel).  The defender had just recused herself from the 
case, saying she couldn't function in the face of so many 
judicial irregularities and so much government pressure, with 
no support from her institution.  Based on her discussions 
with her former client and her review of all the government 
evidence, she believes that the Santa Cruz leaders named by 
the government are most likely linked with the group, which 
she called "mercenaries" not "terrorists."  She said they did 
not seem to be acting out of any particular conviction, but 
Tadic admitted they had been stockpiling weapons and carrying 
out military training on rural properties outside the city of 
Santa Cruz.  She confirmed they were responsible for placing 
the explosive device in front of the Cardinal's house on 
April 14.  Tadic testified that the next target was going to 
be Prefect Ruben Costas' residence, and that Rozsa had 
advised Costas to strengthen his security gate to minimize 
the damage.  The intent in targetting the Cardinal and the 
Prefect was to make it look like MAS-supporters were carrying 
out the attacks. 
 
¶7. (S) The defense attorney said that the two members of the 
"Santa Cruz Youth Union" arrested last week for allegedly 
providing weapons to the "terrorists" were actually 
government informants (Juan Gueder and Alejandro Mendoza). 
Apparently they were originally contracted by the group to 
provide weapons, but they charged the group much more than 
the weapons were worth.  This caused a "conflict" (ring 
leader Eduardo Rozsa Flores reportedly had a violent temper), 
and after the altercation the two went to the government to 
inform on Rozsa and his group.  They are currently under 
house arrest in La Paz, and very indignant about the rough 
way they were treated during their arrests, considering that 
they were working for the government after their fallout with 
the group.  Another former Youth Union member, Ignacio Villa 
Vargas, is being treated as a "key witness" and is in hiding 
under government protection in La Paz.  Santa Cruz leaders 
consider him a "bought" voice for the government, given his 
long criminal record. 
 
¶8. (S) The defender said the second arrested Hungarian, Elod 
Toaso, was actually Rozsa's lover.  He was badly beaten 
during the arrest, but not during any interrogations.  He now 
has a private lawyer, who is planning to use the defense that 
Toaso was merely Rozsa's domestic partner, and not a member 
of the "terrorist cell."  The lawyer also said in a public 
 
statement that his client has information about the 
involvement of high-level government officials, which he will 
reveal soon. 
 
Real Human Rights Abuses 
------------------------ 
¶9. (S) The Hungarian, Irish, and Romanian government are 
demanding an explanation for why Bolivian police shot three 
men dead in their beds in the middle of the night, and a 
Spanish expert in terrorism investigations has arrived in 
Bolivia.  The public defender admitted that the 
highly-trained SWAT team could have easily arrested them in 
that condition in the middle of the night.  There are many 
conspiracy theories that the central government not only knew 
about the activities of the group, but got directly involved 
at some point to futher incriminate Santa Cruz leaders.  For 
example, the informers told the police the identity and 
location of a Paraguayan arms dealer (Alcides) that was one 
of the group's suppliers, but the government chose not to 
arrest or question him.  The defender cannot understand why. 
This is but one of the irregularities.  Another problem is 
that the government is publicly releasing testimony by its 
"key witness" Villa Vargas, but defense attorneys have never 
seen him, have no ability to question him due to his supposed 
"terminal diabetes," and the government has never presented 
evidence from a medical authority that he is too ill to 
testify in public. 
 
¶10. (S) In general, the defense attorney was appalled and 
offended by the way the government is handling the case. 
Based on what she has been shown, she said they have much 
evidence and should be acting in full confidence.  There is 
no need to be making such a political show and violating 
procedural law, and certainly no need to so blatantly abuse 
the rights of the defendants, she stated.  For example, she 
was summoned to a hearing without receiving a copy of the 
evidence the prosecutor was to present, which legally she 
should have been given 48 hours before the hearing.  She 
filed a motion to postpone the hearing, and the new time was 
set for 2:30 a.m.  She said Tadic is being kept in solitary 
confinement with no electricity, so he is in the semi-dark 
all day long and total dark at night.  He has a brother in 
Chile who is willing to help him, but the prison warden will 
not allow him contact with his brother.  He has no clothes, 
nothing for his personal hygiene, and since he was arrested 
in the middle of the night, not even his eyeglasses, so he 
cannot read anything.  The defense attorney filed a complaint 
with the social worker of the prison, asked the government to 
provide him with his personal effects from Santa Cruz such as 
clothing and eyeglasses, and also asked the Red Cross to 
provide some humanitarian assistance, but no one has provided 
any relief for Tadic and he languishes in very poor 
conditions.  In addition, she said she could not assume a 
proper defense given the procedural irregularities and the 
government pressure surrounding the case, and the frustration 
and stress caused her to recuse herself.  She was replaced by 
a public defender who is "100 percent MAS-ista" and she is 
confident Tadic will continue to be treated poorly and 
receive the maximum sentence. 
 
Comment: 
--------- 
¶11. (C) There are many unanswered questions in the 
government's investigation, and the Crucenos vehemently deny 
the accusations.  We expect the saga to drag on for many 
months.  Perhaps we will never know the full truth.  However, 
we can take small comfort in the fact that the public 
defender did not report seeing the U.S. Embassy on any list 
of potential suspects. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
URS