09LONDON566
IRAN: KHAMENEI SAID TO CONSIDER RAHIM SAFAVI AND
Tue Mar 03 00:00:00 +0100 2009
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy London
P 031952Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY LONDON
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1616
INFO IRAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITYS E C R E T LONDON 000566 
 
 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/03/2019 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PROP PTER IR UK
SUBJECT: IRAN: KHAMENEI SAID TO CONSIDER RAHIM SAFAVI AND 
TO WRITE OFF QALIBAF; VELAYATI MAY HAVE KEY ADVISORY ROLE 
 
REF: A. 08 LONDON 2659 AND PREVIOUS 
     ¶B. LONDON 451 
 
 
¶1.  (S/NF)  Summary: Expatriate broadcaster Ali Reza 
Nourizadeh sees Ahmedinejad as the current front-runner, but 
claimed to London Iran Watcher (Poloff) that Rahim Safavi is 
under consideration by the Supreme Leader as his own 
preferred candidate in Iran's June elections; Nourizadeh 
cited an unspecified regular contact of his within Khamenei's 
office whom Nourizadeh has previously claimed as a source 
(ref a). The same claimed source also reportedly told 
Nourizadeh that Khamenei has, in an elliptical fashion, told 
Qalibaf he should plan to stay on as Tehran mayor, and that 
Khamenei will not endorse Qalibaf's presidential bid. 
Countering an earlier prediction of his own, Nourizadeh 
argued Khamenei foreign affairs advisor Velayati will play an 
important advisory role in any engagement with the United 
States but is now less likely to be endorsed by Khamenei as a 
presidential candidate. 
 
¶2.  (S/NF)  Summary (continued) A XXXXXXXXXXXX (please 
protect) is planning to travel soon to Iran to make contact 
with Velayati and urge him to facilitate contact between the 
Supreme Leader's office and the USG.   End Summary 
 
Looking At Safavi 
----------------- 
 
¶3.  (S/NF) Supreme Leader Khamenei is allegedly looking more 
closely at his military advisor, ex-IRGC commander Rahim 
Safavi, despite Safavi's lack of political experience, as a 
candidate Khamenei might support, expatriate broadcaster Ali 
Reza Nourizadeh told Poloff; Nourizadeh cited an unnamed 
source he has referenced before (ref a) and claims to have in 
Khamenei's office.  Nourizadeh said Khamenei trusts few 
persons outside his immediate family or personal staff, and 
argued Safavi is the most viable potential candidate among 
Khamenei's staff or family.  He said Khamenei's (alleged) 
consideration of Safavi is still strictly internal to the 
Supreme Leader's office; Nourizadeh claimed Safavi's brother, 
Syed Salman Safavi, is overseeing a website 
(www.yahyasafavi.com) which Nourizadeh argues is promoting 
Rahim Safavi's visibility by reporting what Nourizadeh claims 
are Rahim's recently more numerous public statements and 
appearances.  In a separate conversation, a Tehran-based 
analyst told Poloff that Salman Safavi will in early March 
speak at the Caspian Institute, a leading Tehran think tank 
the analyst said is frequented by Western diplomats 
accredited to Tehran. 
 
Brushing off Qalibaf 
-------------------- 
 
¶4.  (S/NF) Citing the same unnamed source in Khamenei's 
office, Nourizadeh said Qalibaf had been told by Khamenei 
that Qalibaf should plan to remain mayor of Tehran for the 
next five years.  Nourizadeh told Poloff his source claimed 
the Supreme Leader had, when Qalibaf presented Khamenei with 
a plan for the development of Tehran over the next twelve 
months, told Qalibaf he "should be making (mayoral) plans for 
the next five years, not one year."   Qalibaf reportedly was 
visibly downcast after the meeting. 
 
Velayati: Uncharismatic as a 
Candidate, But Still Key Advisor 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (S/NF) Nourizadeh said his own previous prediction, that 
former foreign minister Velayati would be tapped, seemed more 
doubtful now -- Nourizadeh maintained that Khamenei had 
quietly vetted Velayati but had judged the former foreign 
minister to be too elderly and too widely perceived by 
Iranian voters as uncharismatic and corrupt.  He noted 
however that Velayati is still trusted by Khamenei and will 
in Nourizadeh's view likely be an important representative of 
and sounding board for Khamenei as the Supreme Leader 
prepares for direct engagement in some form with the United 
States. 
 
XXXXXXXXXXXX Plans to Meet 
Velayati, Will Urge That Supreme 
Leader Open a Channel to USG 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶6.  (S/NF) In a separate conversation, XXXXXXXXXXXX(please protect), prominent XXXXXXXXXXXX on Iran issues, a past visitor to Iran, and himself strongly pro-U.S. (ref b), told Poloff March 3 he is 
planning to travel soon to Iran to make contact with 
Velayati.  XXXXXXXXXXXX volunteered that 
while in Iran he will urge Velayati to have Khamenei permit a 
channel of communication to the USG; XXXXXXXXXXXX commented that Khamenei, not Ahmedinejad, is in his view "the correct return 
address" for any USG outreach to Iran. XXXXXXXXXXXX past comments to Poloff on Iran tend to closely track FCO estimates, that 
the West has a narrow window for effective diplomatic action 
on Iran.  Poloff reminded XXXXXXXXXXXX that during USG's ongoing 
senior level policy review, U.S. officials cannot comment or 
speculate publicly or privately on possible future courses of 
U.S. policy on Iran. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶7.  (S/NF)  Although continuing to claim Khamenei is 
examining other figures in conservative circles as possible 
candidates, Nourizadeh's singling out Safavi may reflect his 
own over-reliance on his claimed source within Khamenei's 
office.  Nourizadeh, nevertheless, still believes 
Ahmedinejad, despite his dismal economic record, has the 
inside track, and is the candidate at this point most likely 
to win.  Nourizadeh attributes Ahmedinejad's electoral 
strength to his control of voting processes, to his 
popularity  in Iran arising from his handling of the nuclear 
issue, and to his continuing populist, "every-man" image. 
Nourizadeh believes Ahmedinejad has no lasting interest in 
improved relations and argues the United States in any direct 
engagement with Iran should either delay outreach until after 
the elections so as to minimize the chances of boosting 
Ahmedinejad's prestige or, if acting before June, should use 
channels controlled by the Supreme Leader, not by Ahmedinejad. 
 
¶8.  (S/NF) XXXXXXXXXXXX contemplating the Velayati-focused 
visit to Iran has in the past been a source for Poloff of 
insights and information on Iran and on Iranians visiting the 
UK.  XXXXXXXXXXXX above comments however, were the first 
indication Poloff has had that XXXXXXXXXXXX or 
other XXXXXXXXXXXX official intends advocating with Iranian 
officials for direct U.S.-IRIG contact; XXXXXXXXXXXX's specific 
objective, of promoting a USG channel to the Supreme Leader's 
office, is likewise new information to Poloff. 
 
Visit London's Classified Website: 
http://www.intelink.sgov.gov/wiki/Portal:Unit ed_Kingdom