09LONDON2293
IMO: REPORT ON THE STANDARDS OF TRAINING AND
Tue Oct 06 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy London
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHLO #2293/01 2790927
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 060927Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY LONDON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3661
INFO RUWDQAC/COMDT COGARD WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS LONDON 002293 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EWWT IMO UK
SUBJECT: IMO: REPORT ON THE STANDARDS OF TRAINING AND 
WATCHKEEPING WORKING GROUP, LONDON, SEPTEMBER 7-11, 2009. 
 
 1) SUMMARY: The second meeting of the International Maritime Organization's ad hoc intersessional meeting of the Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping (STW) Working Group (WG) meeting on the comprehensive review of the International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers (STCW Convention) and Code met in London September 7-11, 2009, chaired by Ms. Mayte Medina (United States).  End summary.  

Comprehensive Review of STWC Convention and STCW Code --------------------------------------------- --------  

2)  Agenda items 2, 3, 4 and 7 were a comprehensive review of the STCW Convention and STCW Code. The STW Subcommittee (S/C) discussed the proposed amendments to the Convention and Code from STW 40 in February 2009, and further developed and finalized revised draft text. On Chapter 1 - General Provisions, the WG agreed: 1) to develop definitions for "certificate of competency", 2) to specify the minimum information to be included in a certificate of proficiency; 3) to develop minimum medical standards, with further discussion in STW 41; 4) to finalize requirements for effective communications on board; and 5) to finalize the draft text with minor amendments.  The WG also harmonized and clarified methods for the revalidation of certificates.  

3)  On Chapter II - the Master and Deck department, the WG agreed: 1) to pare down the mandatory training requirements for the transmission and reception by visual signaling of Morse group letter signals as advised by 55th session of Subcommittee on the Safety of Navigation (NAV 55), and 2) to replace the terms "Decca" and "Loran" with the generic term "terrestrial electronic position fixing systems" as advised by NAV 55.  

4) On Chapter III - Engine Department, the WG agreed: 1) to retain the existing propulsion power limitations in the near coastal provisions; and 2) to include training requirements for electro-technical personnel, one at the support level and one at the operational level.  

5) On Chapter VII - Alternative Certification, the WG agreed to finalize certification requirements for able seafarer deck and able seafarer engine ratings with minor amendments and have further consideration at STW 41.  

6)  Agenda items 5, 6, and 8 were a comprehensive review of the STCW Convention and STCW Code. The S/C discussed the proposed amendments to the Convention and Code emanating from STW 40 in February 2009, and further developed and finalized draft text.  On Chapter V - Special Training Requirements for Personnel on Certain Types of Shops, the WG agreed: 1) to finalize guidance regarding training of masters and officers in charge of a navigational watch for offshore supply vessels; 2) to finalize guidance for personnel operating dynamic positioning systems; 3) to include fire-fighting training for personnel on board tankers; 4) to re-format the tables of competence for tankers for consistency and clarity in regards to oil, chemical, and liquefied gas tanker training for masters, officers and ratings; 5) to finalize minor amendments for guidance regarding training of seafarers on passenger ships.  

7)  On  Chapter VI - Emergency, Occupational Safety, Medical Care and Survival Functions, the WG agreed to require refresher training for basic safety training, survival craft, rescue boats and fast rescue boats, and advanced fire-fighting in order to maintain professional competence for those areas where training cannot be conducted on board ship.  

8)  On Chapter VIII - Watchkeeping, the WG developed draft text to harmonize the STCW Convention with the International Labor Organization (ILO) Maritime Labor Convention of 2006, but significant disagreement remains concerning the proposed derogation clauses which will be discussed at STW 41.  

9) The S/C addressed all of the agenda items during the meeting. Under agenda item 9 - Any Other Business, the WG discussed arrangements for Working Groups at STW 41. The S/C decided to establish two working groups under agenda item 7 for a comprehensive review of the STCW Convention and Code. WG-1 will review chapters I, II, III, and VII of the STCW Convention and Code.  WG-2 will review chapters IV, V, VI and VIII of the STCW Convention and Code.  

10)  The S/C agreed that at STW 41 the plenary should only consider those documents which require a decision on matters of principle.  This will provide the working groups with the maximum working time possible during that session.  

Resolutions to be Proposed to the Conference for Adoption --------------------------------------------- ------------  

11)  The working group identified the following resolutions that should be submitted to the international conference for consideration and adoption:      a. Contributions of the International Labor Organization;      b. Development of guidelines on the implementation of international standards of medical fitness for seafarers;      c. Revision of model courses published by the International Maritime Organization;      d. Promotion of technical knowledge, skills and professionalism of seafarers;      e. Attracting new entrants to the maritime profession;      f. Promotion of technical co-operation;      g. Transitional provisions and early implementation; and      h. Promotion of the participation of women in the maritime industry.  

12)  The forty-first session of the STW is scheduled for January 11-15, 2010.  Visit London's Classified Website: XXXXXXXXXXXX 
SUSMAN