09MANAGUA831
NICARAGUAN FOREIGN MINISTER: U.S. BEHIND
Fri Aug 21 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0002
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #0831/01 2332148
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 212148Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4477
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUMIAAA/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L MANAGUA 000831 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/20/2019 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EAID EFIN NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUAN FOREIGN MINISTER: U.S. BEHIND 
CONSPIRACY TO BLOCK IFI LENDING TO NICARAGUA AND THE 
HONDURAS COUP 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Robert Callahan, Reasons 1.4 (b,d) 
 
¶1. (C) Summary.  On August 5, Ambassador met with Foreign 
Minister Samuel Santos to discuss the ongoing Honduras 
crisis, Nicaragua's efforts to secure international lending, 
and bilateral relations.  Santos acknowledged that 
Nicaragua's financial situation had worsened severely, 
threatening key social programs.  He accused the U.S. of 
maintaining an "unofficial policy" of blocking IFI financing 
for Nicaragua.  On Honduras, he asserted that Nicaragua has 
done everything possible to reduce tensions and encourage 
Zelaya to avoid confrontations.  He claimed that the U.S. was 
behind the coup, or at least knew of it in advance and could 
have stopped it.  He warned that any failure to restore 
Zelaya to the presidency would lead to bloodshed in Honduras 
and the U.S. would be held responsible.  End Summary. 
 
U.S. HAS "UNOFFICIAL POLICY" TO BLOCK IFI FINANCING 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶2. (C) Santos expressed serious concern about Nicaragua's 
worsening financial and economic situation.  The economic 
crisis will force the Ortega administration to revise again 
the national budget and is threatening advances in key FSLN 
social programs.  He noted that Deputy FM Valdrack Jaentschke 
had been dispatched to Europe to visit several countries to 
ask that budget support and other financial assistance, 
suspended after the fraudulent November 2008 municipal 
elections, be resumed.  Santos recited his previous claims 
that the Ortega government has made the greatest gains among 
all the countries in the region in areas of governability, 
counter-narcotics, security, and health.  All this, he 
claimed, was threatened by the cuts in aid and the inability 
to secure further financing and disbursements from the IFIs. 
 
¶3. (C) Santos then complained that the Ortega government had 
obtained "evidence" that the U.S. has an "unofficial policy" 
to block lending and disbursements from the IMF, World Bank 
and IDB.  Santos asserted that "some U.S. officials" had 
stepped up their opposition to aid to Nicaragua following 
Ortega's anti-U.S. comments on the July 19 celebrations of 
the anniversary of the 1979 revolution and as a consequence 
for Nicaragua's continued close relations with Venezuela and 
Cuba.  Santos called the supposed policy an "economic 
boycott" that threatens Nicaragua. 
 
¶4. (C) Ambassador rebutted Santos' claim of a U.S. conspiracy 
in the IFIs, noting the U.S. was interested in avoiding a 
financial crisis in Nicaragua just as much as the GoN. 
Nicaragua needs to comply with the requirements and standards 
set forth by the IFIs, but that did not amount to an 
unofficial policy to block lending.  Ambassador cautioned 
Santos that continued criticisms of the U.S. by the most 
senior officials of the GoN raised questions about what kind 
of relationship the Ortega administration wants with the U.S. 
 Public harangues against the U.S. created a negative 
perceptions in the U.S. that continue to make it difficult 
for those who want to help Nicaragua. 
 
NO NEW AMBASSADOR TO THE U.S. 
---------------------------- 
 
¶5. (C) Ambassador noted that Nicaragua remained at a 
disadvantage in Washington without an Ambassador to represent 
its interests and queried whether the GoN intended to 
nominate anyone soon.  Santos bluntly reported that his 
suggested candidates for the position had been rejected by 
the First Couple (Ortega and Rosario Murillo) and no further 
progress had been made on selecting a new Ambassador to 
Washington.  Similarly, Santos' own efforts to resign due to 
ill health had likewise been rejected by Ortega and he would 
remain Foreign Minister for the foreseeable future.  (Note. 
In a previous conversation with the Ambassador, Santos 
confided he intended to resign.  He had open heart surgery 
several months ago in Cuba and is still on a limited work 
schedule, restricted diet and exercise regimen. In the 
meeting, he appeared unhappy with the rejection of his 
resignation, noting the need to focus attention on his 
business interests now that his daughter is attending a U.S. 
university.  End Note.) 
 
U.S. BEHIND HONDURAS COUP AND IS TO BLAME IF BLOODSHED 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
 
¶6. (C) Santos claimed to have "proof" that the U.S. knew 
about and was involved in the coup.  Santos cited 
unidentified "sources" in the Honduran military that 
reportedly demonstrate the USG was aware of what was going to 
happen in advance and didn't stop it.  He also claimed that 
Costa Rican Foreign Minister Stagno told him that "someone 
from the Department of State" had called him and asked Costa 
Rica to give Zelaya refuge, proving to Santos that the USG 
was behind the effort to get Zelaya out of the country. 
Moreover, Santos claimed to "know" the Honduran mindset and 
found it impossible to believe political and business leaders 
would have taken such actions without at least the implicit 
approval of the USG.  (Note: President Ortega has 
subsequently asserted in public that the USG was involved in 
the coup, citing the fact that the plane carrying Zelaya 
stopped at the Soto Cano airbase in Honduras before departing 
the country.  End Note.) 
 
¶7. (C) Nonetheless, Santos asserted that the GoN wants the 
Obama administration to succeed in Latin America and 
particularly with the Honduras crisis.  The Ortega government 
thus has been "pushing" other ALBA countries to give the U.S. 
more space and time to deal with a resolution of the 
situation, including with Venezuela's Hugo Chavez.  Santos 
emphasized that Nicaragua has put pressure on Zelaya to step 
back from the Nicaragua-Honduras border, go on the diplomatic 
circuit, and has taken steps to re-open the border crossings 
and re-secure the frontier area.  Santos claimed that 
Nicaragua has "taken concrete steps and it is now up to the 
U.S. to act."  He dismissed the announced visa sanctions as 
insufficient and that the U.S. needed to bring its enormous 
power to bear in order to force the de facto regime to 
concede.  "Your power is the only one that can do it," he 
asserted.  Furthermore, if this problem is not resolved 
quickly, the people will lose faith in a peaceful resolution 
and will resort to violence.  If this happens, Santos warned, 
the blame will fall of the U.S. 
 
¶8. (C) Santos reported that Nicaragua will not publicly 
endorse the Arias process because it violates the UN's 
principle that Zelaya should be restored to office "without 
conditions."  However, he claimed that Nicaragua has 
privately been urging Zelaya and the other ALBA countries to 
accept the Arias plan in order to resolve the crisis quickly. 
 Again, it is now up to the U.S. to use its influence, 
including through stronger visa sanctions and economic 
measures, on the de facto regime to accept the plan and the 
immediate return of Zelaya. 
 
¶9. (C) Ambassador rebutted claims of U.S. involvement in the 
coup, noting the U.S. was as surprised as everyone else. 
Ambassador made clear that U.S. policy has been to work 
multilaterally, through the OAS, to support the Arias 
process.  Ambassador emphasized that it remains critical for 
both sides to avoid bloodshed and provocations and allow the 
process to move forward.  Ambassador noted ongoing U.S. 
efforts to strengthen the process, including our clear 
statements of support recognizing Zelaya as the President of 
Honduras.  He urged Santos to help encourage Zelaya to avoid 
impulsive and provocative actions. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶10. (C) The Ortega administration is clearly feeling 
financial pressure, in part due to the global economic 
downturn, its own mismanagement of the public sector, and the 
cut in foreign aid, particularly European budget support, 
following the November 2008 municipal elections.  According 
to our European contacts, DFM Jaentschke's European trip was 
a failure.  He refused to address electoral reform issues and 
promised only to invite European governments as "visitors" to 
monitor the 2010 regional elections.  Unfortunately, rather 
than respond to domestic and international pressure to enact 
reforms that would lead to a resumption of aid, the GoN is 
inventing conspiracies and hoping that appeals to social 
advances will break the lending logjam.  A visit by senior 
officials from the European Commission in September will 
determine whether European aid remains frozen, but the GoN 
appears to be doing little to strengthen their appeal for 
renewed assistance. 
 
¶11. (C) On Honduras, it seems clear that Ortega has grown 
weary of Zelaya and would prefer to have his activities and 
time in Nicaragua limited.  Santos' comments indicate that 
that Ortega is trying to position himself to claim victory 
regardless of how the crisis is resolved.  Should Zelaya be 
returned, it will be another victory for direct democracy and 
the ALBA states.  Should Zelaya not return to power, Ortega 
is prepared to say he and his ALBA allies did everything 
possible and lay the blame at the feet of the USG. 
CALLAHAN