09MANAGUA520
NICARAGUA'S FOREIGN MINISTRY - PATIENCE RUNNING
Fri May 22 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO1310
PP RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #0520/01 1421709
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 221709Z MAY 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4167
INFO RUEHMU/WESTERN HEMISPHERIC AFFAIRS DIPL POSTS PRIORITY
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUMIAAA/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 MANAGUA 000520 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, DRL/AWH, INR/IAA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/18/2019 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EAID NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUA'S FOREIGN MINISTRY - PATIENCE RUNNING 
OUT FOR OBAMA ADMINISTRATION 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Robert J. Callahan, Reasons 1.4 (b,d) 
 
¶1. (C) Director General for American Affairs and Protocol 
Chief Orlando Gomez met with PolCouns on May 13 to review 
Nicaragua's participation at the Summit of the Americas 
(SOA), U.S.-Nicaraguan bilateral relations, and the Ortega 
administration's foreign policy priorities.  Gomez reported 
that the region was losing patience with the Obama 
administration and expected the U.S. to move faster to change 
development policies, increase aid to the region and 
establish a path to rapidly end the "blockade" of Cuba.  In 
light of the failure of CAFTA-DR to produce real gains in 
economic growth and job creation, Gomez expected that 
cooperation with other countries such as Venezuela, Bolivia 
and Iran would deepen.  Gomez also predicted that anti-U.S. 
rhetoric from ALBA countries would continue as it was rooted 
in these countries' anti-imperialist and revolutionary 
histories.  End Summary. 
 
BILATERAL RELATIONS -- RUNNING OUT OF PATIENCE 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶2. (C) Gomez reviewed Nicaragua's long and complex 
relationship with the U.S. from the Sandinista National 
Liberation Front (FSLN) party perspective, highlighting a 
history of "difficult" experiences under previous U.S. 
administrations.  Gomez claimed there was hope that "with the 
Democratic (party) wave" sweeping the U.S., there would be a 
resulting improvement in understanding towards and relations 
with Nicaragua.  The SOA was the first opportunity for Ortega 
to meet directly with the new U.S. administration and to 
assess the opportunity for change.  Gomez claimed that other 
nations with which Nicaragua has close relations (i.e., 
Bolivia and Venezuela) had already given up on any real 
changes in U.S. policy to the region.  He claimed others, 
including Nicaragua, had "lessened their expectations" but 
felt that the region needed to give some more time to the new 
administration to turn things around.  He cautioned, however, 
"that time was running out" and the Nicaraguan people were 
losing their patience.  For example, the U.S. had failed to 
take sufficient steps to immediately end "the blockade" of 
Cuba and impatience for real action on this issue was 
growing.  The region's consensus on this issue is clear and 
the U.S. needed to display a clearer intention of how it 
intends to change its policy on Cuba. 
 
¶3. (C) Nonetheless, Gomez believed the SOA opened up new 
potential areas for dialogue. Confronting the global economic 
crisis, migration and climate change were areas where the 
U.S. and the region, including Nicaragua, could find 
agreement and work jointly.  The U.S., however, had yet to 
recognize and welcome how Central America can contribute on 
counter-narcotics, terrorism and security, and dealing with 
migration issues.  Instead, according to Gomez, the U.S. 
continues to issue reports and make critical statements that 
undermine cooperation and strengthen opponents of governments 
in the region.  Gomez cited the recently released annual 
terrorism report, which was critical of Nicaragua's lack of 
cooperation on terrorism and the harboring of FARC 
guerrillas.  Similarly, the U.S. issued statements welcoming 
the performance of the recent referendum in Venezuela, but 
then condemned the country for not cooperating on drugs. 
This criticism, he complained, helps only the opponents of 
these governments and makes bilateral relations harder. 
Gomez believed the U.S. needed to change its diplomacy and 
only raise such "controversial" issues quietly and directly. 
 
NEED TO MATCH RESOURCES TO NEEDS 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (C) According to Gomez, the Ortega administration 
perceives "a clash" between the USG's claims to want improved 
relations and cooperation with the lack of sufficient 
resources and the failure to properly address development 
needs in the Central American region.  U.S. resources are too 
limited, especially when they are spread out across the 
entire region and not focused on the areas of greatest need. 
Gomez cited counter-narcotics cooperation as the prime 
example.  It was in the U.S. interest to help Nicaragua stop 
drugs from heading north, yet the U.S. provides little to 
help in that effort despite the claims of the Merida 
Initiative.  The Ortega government, he asserted, is forced to 
divert money and resources away from social and development 
needs to fund Nicaraguan Police efforts to stop drugs headed 
to the U.S.  In exchange, the U.S. gives neither enough 
resources to help the counter-narcotic efforts nor does it 
match the resources diverted from development.  The U.S., he 
claimed, has a moral, economic and political duty to do more 
on this issue. 
 
DEEPENING TIES WITH ALBA COUNTRIES AND IRAN 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (C) Gomez expected ties with Venezuela and Bolivia and 
other ALBA states to deepen in the coming years.  In part, 
this is because free trade, particularly CAFTA-DR, did not 
deliver the expected results for Nicaragua and new models 
were needed to expand social and economic development in the 
country.  CAFTA-DR, he claimed, has not produced results in 
employment and the trade has only benefited certain sectors, 
"making only a few rich."  ALBA projects and trade, however, 
would create new sources of employment and generate other 
improvements in the productive bases of Nicaragua's economy. 
ALBA, however, should not be viewed as contradictory to or 
competitive with CAFTA-DR and U.S. trade.  In Gomez's view, 
ALBA would help develop Nicaragua in ways that trade with the 
U.S. had not, while leaving space for "continued improvement" 
with the U.S. 
 
¶6. (C) Gomez said the ALBA countries share a commitment to 
"continuing the revolutionary spirit and history within the 
region."  The new revolutions have not been and would not be 
by arms but by democratic mechanisms, as demanded by the U.S. 
and Europe.  The goal, in Nicaragua, Venezuela and elsewhere, 
is to transform the economic system and "democratize 
society."  Such efforts as improving education, ending 
illiteracy, and helping local farmers to grow food are common 
elements of this transformational effort.  A key component of 
this revolutionary effort, he claimed, was anti-imperialism 
in all its forms in order to demonstrate autonomy, 
independence and self-determination. Historically, this 
anti-imperialist tendency was manifested towards Spain but, 
especially in Nicaragua, is now directed towards the U.S. 
because of more recent history.  For example, Gomez claimed 
that the U.S. had and still is backing political groups in 
Venezuela to shape the outcome of internal political and 
economic decisions to the benefit of "the oligarchy and to 
prevent oil resources from benefiting the people." 
Therefore, it was reasonable to expect ALBA countries to 
continue to be "hyper-critical" of the U.S.  The common 
vision for social transformation among these countries, he 
claimed, promotes a common vision of the threat posed by the 
influence of the U.S. 
 
¶7. (C) On Iran, Gomez asserted the right of Nicaragua to 
develop relations "with whomever we want" as a sovereign 
country.  Building on the anti-imperialist theme, he railed 
that "we don't accept the imperialism of the U.S. to say who 
is good and who is bad."  Nicaragua would continue to pursue 
deeper relations with Iran, regardless of the U.S. position. 
 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶8. (C) Gomez is the third most senior official in MINREX and 
maintains direct communications with First Lady Rosario 
Murillo, the power behind the throne in Nicaragua.  Over the 
past year, in meetings with the Embassy, travels with 
President Ortega, and editorials released through 
pro-government media, he has risen to become one of the most 
prominent foreign policy figures within the Ortega 
government.  His comments, unusually frank and direct, 
accurately represent the skewed Sandinista world view -- 
claiming a moral right to demand more resources, without 
conditions, while at the same time denouncing the very 
countries that provide such aid.  Senior FSLN officials fail 
to recognize the consequence their actions, from lack of 
transparency to election fraud, as well as their public 
rhetoric will have on donors' willingness to continue to 
remain engaged in Nicaragua. 
CALLAHAN