09MANAGUA323
CODEL ENGEL VISITS NICARAGUA
Thu Mar 26 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO1104
RR RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #0323/01 0851759
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 261759Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3942
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUMIAAA/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 MANAGUA 000323 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/13/2019 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM NU
SUBJECT: CODEL ENGEL VISITS NICARAGUA 
 
Classified By: CDA Richard M. Sanders, Reasons 1.4 (b,d) 
 
¶1. (C) On February 18-20, Rep. Elliot Engel, Chair of the 
House Western Hemisphere Sub-Committee visited Nicaragua for 
meetings with the Nicaraguan government, opposition and civil 
society leaders, and to visit USAID assistance projects. 
Engel was accompanied by Representatives Jean Schmidt, 
Virginia Foxx, John Salazar, Mark Souder, and Ruben Hinojosa 
and committee staff.  CODEL Engel met with civil society 
leaders and opposition National Assembly Deputies, who urged 
the U.S. to remain focused on the fraudulent November 2008 
municipal elections and noted that negative impact the fraud 
will have on civic participation and the possibility of 
democratic national elections in 2011. In a nearly three-hour 
meeting with President Daniel Ortega, CODEL Engel expressed 
the hope for improved U.S.-Nicaragua cooperation and urged 
the GoN to address concerns surrounding the municipal 
elections.  For his part, Ortega defended the role of his 
government and his Sandinista National Liberation Front 
(FSLN) party in the elections and dismissed opposition claims 
of fraud.  Ortega also emphasized the potential impact of the 
world economic crisis on the country and the need for 
Nicaragua to seek economic partners other than the U.S.  End 
Summary. 
 
CIVIL SOCIETY URGES U.S. TO KEEP FOCUSED ON ELECTIONS 
--------------------------------------------- -------- 
 
¶2. (C) CODEL Engel held a roundtable with Roberto Courtney, 
Executive Director of the Nicaraguan electoral observation 
NGO Ethics and Transparency, Carlos Fernando Chamorro, a 
prominent journalist and Executive Director of the Nicaraguan 
NGO CINCO, and representatives from the International 
Republican Institute (IRI) and the National Democratic 
Institute (NDI) to discuss the November 2008 municipal 
elections, challenges facing Nicaragua's democracy and human 
rights situation, and to review U.S. assistance programs in 
these areas.  Courtney explained how the Ortega government, 
through the Supreme Electoral Council (CSE), had 
systematically violated Nicaragua's electoral laws in the 
course of the municipal elections in order to secure a win 
for the FSLN.  Courtney emphasized that the refusal to 
accredit domestic and international election observers, the 
exclusion of party-affiliated poll watchers and the failure 
to publicize detailed electoral results had fundamentally 
undermined Nicaragua's electoral process.  Elections were now 
discredited and it would be difficult to restore voter 
confidence for national elections 2011. 
 
¶3. (C) Carlos Fernando Chamorro reviewed the Ortega 
government's efforts to crack down on and intimidate NGOs, 
including his own organization which was raided by government 
officials on questionable legal grounds in September 2008. 
In effect, he stated, the government was attempting "to 
criminalize civil society."  The government is consolidating 
state and party power as an instrument of civic control and 
is trying to mobilize the one third of the country which 
supports the FSLN against the other two thirds that do not. 
Chamorro said the questions now facing Nicaragua are how far 
would Nicaraguan society tolerate this situation and whether 
civil society will have the capacity to resist the government 
pressures. 
 
¶4. (C) Both Courtney and Chamorro recommended that the USG 
"exert pressure" on the Ortega government to address the 
November 2008 municipal elections and resulting political 
crisis through its assistance programs.  Chamorro emphasized 
the need for the U.S. and Europe to work closely together to 
press the Nicaraguan government on these issues.  Without 
such pressure, Chamorro cautioned, the outlook for democratic 
change was not positive.  Chamorro noted that the problems 
facing Nicaragua's democracy were not a short-term setback 
but represented serious setbacks in the democratic process 
that warranted greater attention by the international 
community. 
 
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY DEPUTIES - ORTEGA ON PATH TO DICTATORSHIP 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶5. (C) CODEL Engel hosted a lunch with National Assembly 
Deputies Eduardo Montealegre (2006 presidential candidate and 
2008 Managua mayoral candidate and leader of the Nicaraguan 
Democratic Bancada - BDN), Maria Eugenia Sequeria (BDN), 
Enrique Quinonez (Constitutional Liberal Party and ex-Managua 
vice mayoral candidate), Enrique Saenz (President of the 
Sandinista Renovation Movement - MRS), and Victor Hugo Tinoco 
(MRS).  Montealegre and Quinonez recounted their experiences 
in the 2008 municipal campaign and reported their efforts to 
collect vote tally sheets demonstrated they had won the 
elections.  Ortega's actions to cancel political parties, 
blend the FSLN party with the institutions of government, and 
to manipulate the electoral process had gravely weakened 
Nicaragua's democracy.  Quinonez added that Ortega's efforts 
to consolidate control and manipulate the municipal elections 
were facilitated by PLC leader and ex-president Arnoldo 
Aleman, who was solely interested in increasing his personal 
political and financial power at the expense of the interests 
of the party and Nicaragua. 
 
¶6. (C) Saenz and Tinoco, former leaders within the FSLN, 
recounted how Ortega had broken with the values of Sandinismo 
and the 1979 revolution.  Ortega, Saenz said, leads "a 
deformed version of Sandinismo" and is reproducing a 
dictatorship in the style of the Somozas.  According to 
Tinoco, Ortega no longer was interested in social progress, 
but rather the concentration of his personal political power. 
 In response, Saenz and others formerly with the FSLN had 
formed the MRS to confront Ortega's dictatorial tendencies 
and to advocate for social democratic principles.  "The 
problem of poverty will not be resolved," according to Saenz, 
"if we do not resolve the problem of democracy."  Tinoco 
stated that Ortega's actions are taking the country towards 
dictatorship and that the use of Citizen Power Council to 
violently suppress opposition demonstrations had created a 
climate of fear and repression. 
 
¶7. (C) The Deputies urged the U.S. to keep pressure on the 
Ortega government and help Nicaraguans to hold the government 
accountable for the conduct of the municipal elections. 
According to Montealegre, the best thing that could happen 
for Ortega would be for the international community to 
continue relations as if nothing happened in November 2008. 
Sequeria noted that "without democracy" there could be no 
progress on other issues of concern to Nicaraguan and the 
international community.  Sequeria therefore urged the U.S. 
to "continue to invest in democracy." 
 
ORTEGA - NEED TO ADDRESS ECONOMIC NOT POLITICAL CRISIS 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶8. (U) In a nearly three-hour meeting in which all 
independent media were excluded, CODEL Engel met with 
President Daniel Ortega.  Also present in the meeting were 
First Lady Rosario Murillo, Foreign Minister Samuel Santos 
and Nicaraguan Ambassador to the U.S. Arturo Cruz to discuss 
bilateral cooperation, the municipal elections, and the 
economic crisis.  Ortega delivered a one-hour monologue 
reviewing Nicaragua's worsening economic situation and 
pledging to work with the U.S. and other countries to find a 
way out of the crisis.  While acknowledging the positive 
impact of CAFTA, Ortega emphasized that it was critical that 
Nicaragua reduce its reliance on exports to the U.S. and was 
therefore seeking to expand economic cooperation with its 
ALBA partners, especially Venezuela, but also with Russia, 
Iran, Libya and Brazil, from which Nicaragua hoped to secure 
investments in key infrastructure projects.  An economic 
crisis in Nicaragua, he warned, could lead to high 
unemployment, increased transit by narco-traffickers, and 
further migration to the U.S.  The U.S., therefore, had a 
"need" to preserve economic stability in Nicaragua.  Ortega 
blamed many of Nicaragua's ongoing social and economic 
problems on "the war forced on us" by the U.S. in the 1980s 
and the past sixteen years of "neo-liberal governments."  The 
combined effect had been to increase illiteracy, limit the 
ability of the government to increase investment in 
education, and increase levels of extreme poverty across 
Nicaragua. 
 
¶9. (U) Ortega took the initiative to raise the November 2008 
municipal elections and railed against the opposition and 
independent media for spreading false claims of fraud and 
human rights abuses.  "They say that there is a dictatorship 
in Nicaragua," he complained, "but there is still freedom of 
the press, freedom of assembly and periodic elections."  He 
argued that the FSLN did not protest in 2001 and 1996 when 
the "elections were stolen by the neo-liberals."  According 
to Ortega, the PLC manipulated the vote count in national 
elections in 1996 to secure its victory.  There were 
international observers then, but they did nothing to defend 
the interests of the FSLN. "We didn't go to the streets ... 
and we had the patience to wait sixteen years for our 
victory."  He dismissed other allegations of fraud as 
systemic problems facing elections in all of Latin America. 
 
¶10. (U) Chairman Engel responded to Ortega's comments on the 
elections by noting that the CODEL had heard criticism 
concerning the conduct of the elections.  Engel expressed the 
hope that future elections would have less controversy and 
noted that the current problem would have to be addressed in 
order to improve bilateral relations.  Engel also expressed 
his hope that the U.S. and Nicaragua could cooperate more 
closely on a range of issues, noting his support for both 
CAFTA and for more funding for the Merida Initiative in 
Central America.  Other Members of Congress also raised the 
elections issue.  Representative Foxx said the best way for 
Nicaragua to create a better investment climate would be to 
demonstrate a commitment to honorable elections and show the 
international community that it shares a common commitment to 
democratic values.  Representative Schmidt also noted that 
criticism concerning the conduct of the elections and 
encroachments on civil liberties had reached the U.S. 
Congress.  In order for the U.S. Congress to help Nicaragua 
address its pressing social and economic challenges, 
Nicaragua would have to alleviate concerns surrounding the 
2008 municipal elections. 
SANDERS