09MANAGUA941
NICARAGUAN MICROFINANCE: A SECTOR IN CRISIS
Mon Sep 28 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXRO6377
RR RUEHLMC
DE RUEHMU #0941/01 2712144
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 282144Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4598
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 1372
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORP WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUMIAAA/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FLC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 MANAGUA 000941 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC AND EEB 
STATE PASS OPIC 
TREASURY FOR SARA SENICH 
USDOC FOR 4332/ITA/MAC/WH/MSIEGELMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/27/2019 
TAGS: EAID ECON EFIN PGOV NU
SUBJECT: NICARAGUAN MICROFINANCE: A SECTOR IN CRISIS 
 
REF: A. MANAGUA 625 
     ¶B. MANAGUA 116 
     ¶C. 08 MANAGUA 1096 
     ¶D. 08 MANAGUA 1032 
     ¶E. 08 MANAGUA 0932 
 
Classified By: Ambassador Robert J. Callahan for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d ).
 
¶1. (C) Summary.  Nicaragua's microfinance (MFI) sector, a 
vital source of finance for economic development, is under 
siege.  A decline in credit availability as a result of the 
global financial crisis, the continuing and very serious "No 
Pago" (No Payment) movement, and a drought that is causing 
some crop failures have combined to present formidable 
sectoral challenges to MFIs.  An embezzlement scandal and 
high-level political assault on ACODEP, one of Nicaragua,s 
largest MFIs, cast a light on the institutional weaknesses 
that affect MFIs.  While the ruling Sandinista National 
Liberation Front's (FSLN) interests in the sector remain 
opaque, we believe they will exploit every opportunity to 
profit from the current chaos.  End Summary. 
 
Nicaraguan Microfinance:  An Overview 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (C) There are over 300 microfinance institutions (MFIs) 
operating in Nicaragua which serve approximately 490,000 
clients with a lending portfolio of $500 million.  Over 65% 
of these clients work in the agricultural sector, the 
lifeblood of the Nicaraguan economy.  MFIs extend credit to 
the poorest segments of Nicaraguan society, with some loans 
as low $100, though a typical loan ranges from $1,000 to 
$5,000.  The vast majority of Nicaragua,s MFIs are financed 
by an array of governmental and non-governmental 
international lenders and donors, including the Overseas 
Private Investment Corporation (OPIC).  While some charitable 
organizations provide funding to Nicaraguan MFIs on a purely 
philanthropic basis, the majority are investors who seek 
financial returns in addition to promoting economic 
development.  The World Bank and the Inter-American 
Development Bank have both cited the success of MFIs in 
providing access to financing for Nicaragua's rural poor. 
Full service Nicaraguan banks have historically concentrated 
their operations in Managua, making MFIs especially important 
in the countryside. 
 
Macroeconomic Challenges 
------------------------ 
 
¶3. (C) MFIs in Nicaragua, however, currently face a 
challenging macroeconomic environment.  Gabriel Solorzano, 
President of BANEX (one of Nicaragua's most successful MFIs, 
now a bank), told econoff on September 1 that Nicaraguan MFIs 
grew at an astounding rate of 74% from 2005-2008, both in 
terms of capital and lending portfolios.  New MFIs also 
proliferated during this same period.  Solorzano explained 
that much of this growth was fueled by cheap funds available 
from overseas as a result of the housing bubble in the United 
States.  MFIs expanded their lending rapidly, stressing their 
administrative capacities and in some cases leading them to 
make questionable loans.  They were ill-prepared for the 
effects of the global financial crisis.  Remittances from 
Nicaraguans working abroad (equivalent to 13% of GDP) have 
dropped by 8% so far in 2009.  Underemployment has risen 
substantially.  Further, the Ortega regime, which took power 
in 2007, decided to directly compete with MFIs through the 
creation of ALBA-CARUNA (its unofficial rural development 
bank), with offers of unrealistically low interest rates 
financed by Venezuelan funds (Ref E). 
 
¶4. (C) Adding to MFI woes is the recent lack of rainfall, 
vital for the health of the agricultural sector during the 
most productive harvest season, from September until the end 
of the rainy season in late October.  Since July, 
inconsistent and below-average precipitation across 
Nicaragua's agricultural regions threatens to lower yields. 
Given that the bulk of MFI clients are farmers, crop failures 
pose a direct risk to their ability to repay loans. 
 
No Pago Movement Closes Operations Across Nicaragua 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
 
¶5. (C) Another serious predicament for MFIs here remains the 
"Movement of Northern Agricultural Producers, Merchants and 
Wage Earners," better known as the "No Pago" (No Payment) 
movement.  The No Pago movement originated in 2008 under the 
leadership of Omar Vilchez, a former Sandinista mayor of 
Jalapa (a town in the northern Department of Nueva Segovia 
near the Honduran border).  Several sources allege that 
Vilchez fraudulently obtained loans from four different MFIs 
totaling $500,000--and he is not eager to repay them. 
Inspired by President Ortega's verbal assault on MFIs in July 
2008, when he labeled them "usurious lenders" and "banking 
terrorists" supported by "imperialist Yankees," Vilchez began 
organizing protests, many of them violent, on the premises of 
MFIs throughout northern Nicaragua (ref E).  A representative 
of FAMA, a major Nicaraguan MFI, told econoff on September 9 
in Jinotega that Vilchez created, in effect, his own 
political movement; for example, he charges No Pago members 
monthly dues of $15 in order to fund transportation and 
provide meals to protesters. 
 
¶6. (C) The northern regional manager for Banco ProCredit told 
econoff that many No Pago members are former Contra fighters 
and Sandinista guerillas from the 1980s who are well-armed, 
dangerous and experienced in sabotage operations.  Of course, 
others are simply debtors who do not wish to pay their bills. 
 These same MFI representatives in Jinotega reported that the 
Nicaraguan National Police (NNP) fear the members of the No 
Pago movement.  Local press reports estimate that the size of 
the No Pago membership is now well over 10,000. 
 
¶7. (C) Since July 2008, the No Pago movement has set fire to 
MFI offices in Ocotal and Jalapa, has kidnapped branch 
managers and MFI employees in several towns in northern 
Nicaragua, and has prevented customers from doing business 
with MFIs by physically barricading premises.  On September 
11, 2009, No Pago members in Matagalpa held 200 employees and 
customers captive in a local branch of the Fund for Local 
Development, a prominent MFI, and threatened to set the 
branch on fire with gasoline.  On September 2, the No Pago 
movement physically prevented employees of BANPRO, 
Nicaragua's largest bank, from entering or exiting their 
respective branches in Rio Blanco and Sebaco.  BANEX's 
Solorzano told econoff that death threats have been made 
against Julio Flores, the General Manager of the Nicaraguan 
Association of Microfinance Institutions (ASOMIF).  None of 
these actions has resulted in arrests or prosecution by the 
NNP.  Consequently, since September 5, almost all major MFIs 
(and even some major bank branches) have been closed for 
business in Ocotal, Jalapa, Rio Blanco, Sebaco, Esteli, El 
Rama, Nueva Guinea, and Juigalpa. 
 
¶8. (C) On September 22, twenty five major international 
providers of credit to Nicaraguan MFIs published full-page 
announcements in both daily newspapers calling on the GON to 
curb the No Pago,s violent actions.  They threatened to 
withdraw funds should this unacceptable situation continue. 
Rene Gonzales, General Manager of the Nicaraguan Development 
Finance Agency (a local MFI), told econcouns recently that 
members of the No Pago movement are coercing good clients not 
to pay their debts.  According to data from ASOMIF, default 
rates among Nicaragauan MFIs have risen from 3.7% in June 
2008 to 8.7% in June 2009. 
 
Debt Moratorium 
--------------- 
 
¶9. (C) No Pago's Vilchez is demanding that the Nicaraguan National Assembly pass a so-called Moratorium Law, which would grant a 180 day interest-free grace period for No Pago debtors. In addition, Vilchez seeks a 10-year debt "restructuring" plan for No Pago members at an interest rate of 8%, well below current MFI interest rates which average 26%. This figure, while high in absolute terms, is well within the average for microfinance lending in Latin America, according to industry representatives. The No Pago movement has protested in front of the National Assembly on a regular basis to push for approval of the legislation. On September 23 ASOMIF representatives met with the National Assembly's Economic Commission to discuss more reasonable loan restructuring options for debtors, but Vilchez has thus far taken a hard line against any compromise. (Comment: Even die-hard FSLN deputies in the National Assembly--normally devoid of any common sense concerning market economics--have stated their opposition to passage of the law. Representatives of the banking sector, including Victor Urcuyo, the Superintendent of Banks and Financial Entities, have stated categorically that passage of the Moratorium Law would bring about a collapse of the financial system here. End comment.)
 
The ACODEP Affair 
----------------- 
 
¶10. (C) As if the No Pago movement, the global financial 
crisis, and a drought do not pose sufficient challenges, the 
Nicaraguan microfinance sector is also grappling with a major 
embezzlement scandal and political assault on the Association 
for the Development of Small, Medium and Micro Businesses 
(ACODEP), one of the country,s largest MFIs (Ref A).  Since 
early 2008, ACODEP has been caught up in a nasty dispute over 
control of its Board of Directors.  In 2008, ACODEP,s Board 
removed Armando Garcia from his position as president for 
embezzlement and poor lending decisions.  In retribution, Mr. 
Garcia exploited his senior-level GON contacts to have 
himself "legally" reinstated as president for a two-month 
period in 2009.  During these two months, according to the 
current Board and its international creditors, he swindled $3 
to $5 million from ACODEP.  ACODEP subsequently filed a 
criminal complaint against Garcia with Police's Economic 
Crimes Division.  ACODEP finally succeeded in removing Garcia 
in late May 2009 by obtaining official recognition from the 
Ministry of Interior of their newly-constituted Board, but 
the financial damage done to ACODEP as a result of this 
alleged embezzlement has been catastrophic; one U.S. creditor 
recently described ACODEP as a "zombie company." 
 
¶11. (C) Most disturbingly, on September 4, Garcia attempted 
an armed takeover of ACODEP's Managua headquarters, holding 
its employees and customers hostage for more than two hours, 
an event broadcast live on one of Nicaragua's major 
television news channels. 
 
Enter Rosario 
------------- 
 
¶12. (C) Amidst the current chaos, several sources have told 
econoff that First Lady Rosario Murillo is making a play to 
take over ACODEP.  Marta Elena Espinoza, the wife of Leonardo 
Torrez, a close advisor to the First Lady, has been appointed 
to the board.  The local press has reported similar accounts. 
 BANEX's Solorzano speculated that Murillo's chief motivation 
is the desire to acquire ACODEP,s 57,000 client base, along 
with ACODEP's 40 nationwide branches.  Such a move, according 
to Solorzano, would allow the FSLN to win over ACODEP 
borrowers in arrears by offering them low interest loans 
funded by ALBA-CARUNA. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶13. (C) Solorzano's view concerning the First Lady's role in 
ACODEP is plausible.  Since his inauguration in 2007, 
President Ortega and the FSLN have eagerly sought to enter 
the MFI business, primarily via ALBA-CARUNA.  This effort has 
largely been a failure, attracting few clients.  Gaining 
control of one of the already existing largest MFIs  would 
provide a perfect platform for the FSLN to seize a 
significant portion of the market. 
 
¶14. (C) On the No Pago movement, the FSLN's position has been difficult to decipher, though it appears that these violent protests occur with at least the tacit approval of the FSLN. Back in 2008, Ortega incited MFI debtors to protest and not honor their payment terms. In January 2009, however, Ortega publicly stated that "the No Pago culture has disappeared from this country, we all have to pay," (Ref B). Finance Minister Guevara and Central Bank President Rosales made similar comments condemning No Pago. We suspect that the ultimate objective is to create a climate of fear and intimidation among local MFIs, using the No Pago movement as a proxy militia to force these institutions to do business with the FSLN on their terms. As the regional manager for Banco ProCredit in Jinotega recently told econoff, the members of the No Pago movement are "their people" and Ortega has to give them "something."
 
CALLAHAN