09MOSCOW2490
STAFFDEL BRUDER VISIT TO MOSCOW
Wed Sep 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Moscow
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMO #2490/01 2731229
ZNR UUUUU ZZH (CCY ADBB5B30 MSI4074-695)
R 301229Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY MOSCOW
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4945
RUEHXD/MOSCOW POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUCNCIS/CIS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS MOSCOW 002490 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
C O R R E C T E D COPY CAPTION 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV SENV OREP RS
SUBJECT: STAFFDEL BRUDER VISIT TO MOSCOW 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  Senate Staff Delegation Bruder visited Moscow 
August 31-September 4 to seek ways to sustain momentum in the 
U.S.-Russian relationship after the successful July 2009 
Presidential meeting in Moscow.  While Federation Council Foreign 
Affairs Committee Chairman Margelov suggested rebuilding U.S.-Russia 
trust levels via joint projects in Somalia, Sudan, or the Congo, the 
MFA urged the U.S. to form an interparliamentary group as an 
umbrella for activities at lower levels, and said Russia would 
welcome the joint development of President Medvedev's proposed 
European Security Architecture.  U.S. Civilian Research and 
Development Foundation representatives highlighted successful joint 
programs with Russia, including the establishment of Research 
Education Centers and Technology Transfer Offices at Russian 
universities.  Analysts proposed that Russian Muslims should seek 
closer ties with the West than with the Middle East, but did not 
think that Chinese migration to the Russian Far East posed a threat 
to Russia.  End summary. 
 
------------------ 
Federation Council 
------------------ 
 
¶2. (SBU) During their August 31-September 4 visit to Moscow, 
Staffdel Bruder (Senate Foreign Relations Committee Staff Member 
Jason Bruder and Senator Shaheen's Legal Assistant Chad Kreikemeier) 
met with Federation Council Foreign Affairs Committee Chairman 
Margelov, who urged the U.S. and Russia to work together in areas 
that were not in "either's backyard."  He noted that Russia was 
still in the process of nation building and therefore sought 
friendly relations with neighboring countries in order to 
concentrate on domestic issues.  Russia today was not a "new USSR" 
that wanted to impose its will on independent states or buy 
influence in foreign countries by selling cheap oil and gas, he 
added.  Claiming that a unipolar or multipolar world did not work, 
Margelov said that the U.S. and Russia instead needed to adopt a 
pragmatic, strategic orientation towards each other and global 
politics.  Noting that the U.S. and Russia shared the same goals of 
a stable, functioning and predictable African continent, Margelov 
suggested finding pilot projects in Somalia, Sudan, or the Congo, in 
which the U.S. and Russia could work together.  As the Russian 
President's Special Envoy to Sudan, Margelov lauded the "200 
percent" understanding he shared with U.S. Envoy Gration on the 
issues in Sudan, and proposed a joint U.S.-Russia resolution on 
Sudan.  On other issues, Margelov revealed that Russian and Georgian 
officials still meet in Moscow at prayer breakfasts, one of which he 
had attended that morning, and claimed that both Russia and Turkey 
could play a roll in solving the Iran nuclear problem.  Margelov 
closed by restating his open invitation to Senator Kerry to visit 
Moscow. 
 
--- 
MFA 
--- 
 
¶3. (SBU) At the MFA, Staffdel met with representatives from the 
North America Department, the Department of European Cooperation, 
and the IVth CIS Department.  North America Department Section Head 
Alexey Korzhuev indicated Russia's strong desire to refresh the 
interparliamentary connections that previously existed, giving as an 
example Senator Bill Nelson's unexplained cancelation of his yearly 
meeting with Margelov.  Korzhuev explained that the GOR needed 
formality in contacts in order to arrange meetings and visits.  As 
such, an interparliamentary group could act as an umbrella for 
propelling activities at lower levels.  However, the MFA was unsure 
about how to move forward in cooperation with the U.S. Congress. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Deputy Director of the European Cooperation Department 
Saltanovskiy agreed that more confidence building measures between 
the U.S. and Russia were needed, and said Russia would welcome the 
joint development of President Medvedev's proposed European Security 
Architecture.  Saltanovskiy also discussed ways that the NATO-Russia 
Council could be more effective. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) IVth CIS Deputy Director Alexey Dvinyanin stressed that 
the issue of restoring Georgia's territorial integrity was moot. 
Russia had no plans to absorb South Ossetia, and would defend 
Russian citizens abroad. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
U.S. Civilian Research and Development Foundation 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶6. (U) U.S. Civilian Research and Development Foundation (CRDF) 
representatives told Staffdel the Russian government was striving to 
make science more competitive, by basing government funding on 
outputs, such as publications, rather than prior years' budgets. 
Russian scientists continued to have difficulty publishing their 
research without Western co-authors.  Brain drain and aging of the 
scientific community were problems, despite government programs to 
attract and retain scientists.  CRDF staff did not believe recent 
budget cuts in science funding would adversely affect President 
Medvedev's innovation priorities, citing as an example continued GOR 
support for Rusnano, a state corporation which partners with private 
investors to commercialize nanotechnology products.  CRDF praised a 
new law allowing universities and institutes to commercialize the 
results of their R&D programs.  Some of CRDF's successful joint 
programs in Russia included the establishment of 20 Research 
Education Centers (RECs) and eight Technology Transfer Offices at 
Russian universities -- a model which the Russian government hopes 
to replicate by creating 450 additional RECs in the next three years 
-- and the Lake El'gygytgyn drilling project that will provide new 
insights into the climate evolution of the Arctic. 
 
-------- 
Analysts 
-------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Aleksey Malashenko, a recognized expert on religion and 
society at the Carnegie Center's Moscow office, claimed that radical 
Islamism was a normal tendency, not a deviation from true Islam. 
Islamic jihadism was always a reaction against something, for 
example, against the failure of reforms in Iran.  Malashenko did not 
believe Islam was compatible in society with Western values, but 
speculated that an evolution in Islam would be driven by contact 
with the West, and not arise from Islam itself.  Therefore, Russian 
Muslims should seek closer ties with the West than with the Middle 
East.  However, Malashenko contended that imposing European-style 
democracy on Islam would result in more Hamas-like organizations. 
 
 
¶8. (U) Dr. Gontmakher of the Institute for Contemporary Development 
told Staffdel that the proportion of the population that fit the 
Institute's rather restrictive definition of "middle class" had 
stagnated since 2000 at 10 percent.  He said that of the 
approximately 500 "mono-cities" (cities that depend on one company 
and massive subsidies) in Russia, 80-100 were in dire straits, while 
10-30 should be completely shut down and the inhabitants relocated. 
Gontmakher did not share the belief that Chinese migration to the 
Russian Far East posed a threat.  He noted that the migrants were 
seasonal and did not want to permanently reside in that 
"inhospitable region," while demographic pressures in China would 
abate in the coming decades.  Aside from illegal logging to feed 
Chinese demand, Gontmakher noted that an intergovernmental agreement 
with the government of North Korea allowed the clear-cutting of 
40,000 hectares of forest in the Russian Far East. 
 
RUBIN