09MUSCAT1075
INTERVIEW OF IRAN'S DEPARTING AMBASSADOR TO OMAN
Wed Dec 09 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Muscat
VZCZCXRO1479
RR RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDIR RUEHKUK
DE RUEHMS #1075 3431456
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 091456Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY MUSCAT
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1031
INFO IRAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS MUSCAT 001075 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV IR MU
SUBJECT: INTERVIEW OF IRAN'S DEPARTING AMBASSADOR TO OMAN 
 
REF: MUSCAT 847 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: In his farewell interview with the Omani press, 
Iran's ambassador to Oman discussed the Sultan's visit to Iran, the 
nuclear issue, U.S.-Iranian relations, and the Houthi rebellion in 
Yemen.  In one statement he perhaps includes himself in a grouping 
of Iranian officials who could reach out to the West.  End Summary. 
 
 
 
¶2. (U) After a posting of three years, the Iranian ambassador to 
Oman, Murtadha Rahimi, is returning to Tehran.  Prior to departure, 
he gave an interview to the private Arabic daily "al Shabiba," 
published on December 6.  "Shabiba's" English-language sister 
publication, "The Times of Oman" summarized the interview on 
December 7. 
 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) Rahimi praised the Sultan and stated that there is a 
strong link between Iran and Oman, but his only clear statement was 
that the policies of both countries are based on "respecting each 
other and ensuring a peaceful solution to any problem."  He spoke 
at length about Qaboos's visit to Iran in August (reftel).  He used 
the major part of the interview to recount the visit as covered in 
the Omani press at the time.  Rahimi reviewed in detail the seven 
bilateral agreements signed during that trip, as reported reftel. 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Responding to the interviewer's allegation that the 
Iranian nuclear program is for military purposes, the outgoing 
ambassador noted "some powerful countries try to spread such rumors 
to refute the Iranian nuclear program because they do not want the 
Iranian nuclear program to exist.  In fact, these counties have 
unlimited nuclear stores, however the world could now be sure that 
Iran does not intend to use its nuclear program for military 
purposes.  Everyone is aware now that Iran's nuclear program is 100 
percent peaceful."  He said the program is for the entire Islamic 
world.  He continued that "these countries which are standing 
against Iran are not prepared to accept the idea of the evolution 
of Islamic countries and thus Iran with its nuclear program has 
been the focus of attention of many countries." 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) On reports of Iran's support for the Houthi rebellion in 
northern Yemen, Rahimi similarly  noted that there are those who 
"distort Iran's image, instill fear in the hearts of communities 
and disseminate the distinction between Iran and other countries. 
...  What would Iran benefit from supporting Houthis?  All what 
have been stressed are just rumors and the Western media takes an 
advantage to publish it and to emphasize wrong facts." 
 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) However, when asked about America, Rahimi struck an 
interesting note: "I think that American policy has changed 
somewhat after Obama governance [sic.] ... The previous policy 
created alienation and anger among many of the communities, but now 
there is a kind of understanding."  His previous complaint was 
against "powerful countries;" he did not call the United States by 
name at that point.  [Comment: While Rahimi for the most part 
offers the standard Iranian litany, this statement places him among 
the Iranian officials who could possibly see a change in Iranian 
policy.  During his tenure in Muscat he was seen by his colleagues 
as a moderate, reasonable Iranian diplomat.  End Comment.] 
Schmierer