09NAIROBI2066
SOMALIA - Ambassador Speaks With Somaliland President
Wed Sep 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO7664
OO RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #2066/01 2730714
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 300714Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1169
INFO RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOA
RUZEFAA/CDR USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RUZEFAA/HQ USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RHMCSUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELSUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NAIROBI 002066 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM SO
SUBJECT: SOMALIA - Ambassador Speaks With Somaliland President 
Riyale 
 
REF: Nairobi 2030 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) On September 29, Ambassador Ranneberger spoke by phone 
with Somaliland President Dahir Riyale Kahin.  The Ambassador 
underscored the U.S.-Somaliland partnership and emphasized that by 
throwing out the voter registration list and the allowing violence 
to escalate, including the killing of four protestors, Somaliland is 
undermining its efforts to be a free and democratic state. The 
Ambassador urged the Somaliland President to ensure that elections 
occur as soon as possible and promised U.S. assistance, if 
necessary, with the process.  Riyale said he highly valued the 
relationship with the U.S. and looks forward to increased engagement 
to strengthen the rule of law and undermine efforts by al-Shabaab to 
gain a foothold. He said he would support the six-point agreement 
and the efforts to move the electoral process forward, including 
revising the voter registration list and changing the leadership of 
the National Electoral Commission.  Riyale stated that he stand for 
free and fair elections and a smooth transition.  The Ambassador and 
Riyale promised to continue dialogue and speak regularly about 
progress on the presidential elections.  End summary. 
 
-------------------------------- 
Re-Engagement and Frank Dialogue 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) In a September 29 phone call with Somaliland President 
Dahir Riyale Kahin, the Ambassador noted that the U.S.-Somaliland 
partnership was based on shared democratic values and mutual 
concerns, including fighting terrorism. The Ambassador told Riyale 
that by throwing out the voter registration list and allowing 
violence to escalate, including the killing of four protestors on 
September 12, Somaliland was undermining its efforts to become a 
free and democratic state. The Ambassador noted the importance of 
all parties not just agreeing to the six-point framework, but making 
efforts to break the current impasse. He urged the Somaliland 
President to play his role in ensuring that elections occur as soon 
as possible and promised U.S. assistance, if necessary, with the 
process. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Riyale said he highly valued the relationship with the 
U.S. and looked forward to joint efforts to strengthen rule of law 
and undermine efforts by al-Shabaab to gain a foothold in the 
region.  Riyale apologized for any misunderstanding that may have 
tested relations and told the Ambassador that he would like to have 
regular communication about electoral progress and current events. 
About the September 25 Guurti decision, Riyale said that it was he 
who had urged the Guurti not to unilaterally extend his term in 
office. Riyale told the Ambassador that there were many groups which 
had exerted pressure on the Guurti to do otherwise. The next steps, 
Riyale said, would be technical rather than political and begin with 
the signing of the six-point agreement, which he believed would 
happen on September 30. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Stated Commitment to the Electoral Process 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Riyale told the Ambassador he would like to finalize 
issues concerning the election as soon as possible.  He said he 
would abide by the six-point agreement and join efforts to move the 
electoral process forward, including revising the voter registration 
list and changing the leadership of the National Electoral 
Commission. He told the Ambassador that he was looking forward to 
the arrival of "qualified and credible" international experts to 
help the NEC set a timeline on the way forward.  The Ambassador said 
that with the re-constitution of the NEC, the U.S. was prepared to 
help Somaliland achieve its goal of a free and fair election. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Riyale emphasized that, although he works in a "difficult 
place," he stands for free and fair elections and a smooth 
transition.  He acknowledged that if the elections were not good, 
Somaliland could be destabilized. The Ambassador assured the 
Somaliland President that if he fulfills his pledge to support 
free-and-fair elections, the U.S. would support Somaliland 
throughout the electoral process. The Ambassador and the Somaliland 
President promised to speak regularly about progress on the 
presidential elections and other issues of mutual concern. 
 
NAIROBI 00002066  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) In our first direct communication with Riyale since 
August, the Somaliland President said all the right things.  The 
fact that he claimed credit for the Guurti decision that diffused 
the political crisis demonstrates that Riyale is willing to 
nominally support any politically expedient initiative. The Office 
of the President reached out to the Somalia Unit immediately 
following the September 25 Guurti decision. Riyale's emphasis on the 
U.S.-Somaliland partnership again demonstrated that we have 
considerable leverage. The Ambassador will engage frequently with 
Riyale and we will explore additional ways to encourage a closer 
relationship with Somaliland in order to foster democratic 
development and continued relative stability. 
 
RANNEBERGER