09NAIROBI1134
SOMALIA - Aweys Alive and Seemingly Unharmed
Tue Jun 09 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO3785
OO RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #1134/01 1600400
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 090400Z JUN 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9752
INFO RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHMFIUU/CJTF HOA
RUZEFAA/CDR USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RUZEFAA/HQ USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RHMCSUU/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FLUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NAIROBI 001134 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/E AND A/S CARSON 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PTER SO
SUBJECT: SOMALIA - Aweys Alive and Seemingly Unharmed 
 
REF: A) Nairobi 1122  B) Nairobi 1132 
 
NAIROBI 00001134  001.3 OF 002 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Contrary to press reports and rumors on June 7 that Sheikh 
Hassan Dahir Aweys was killed or injured, the leader of Hisbul Islam 
(HI) appears to be alive and well.  On the afternoon of June 8, 
Aweys held a press conference in Mogadishu and reportedly did not 
show any signs of injury.  Conflicting reports suggested that Aweys 
had been injured during fighting in the town of Wahbo, Galgadud 
region.  Aweys walked with no difficulties to the podium to address 
the press.  He discussed ongoing fighting in Mogadishu, stating that 
HI attacks against the government and African Union Mission in 
Somalia (AMISOM) are legal.  Aweys accused the United States of 
creating piracy and fomenting the violence through attempts to 
eliminate the opposition using force.  He said the U.S. has failed 
in its attempts to use force and political tactics to control 
Mogadishu.  On June 7, Prime Minister Sharmarke proposed that Yusuf 
Mohamud Siad "Inda Adde" (Hawiye/Hader Gedir/Ayr), former HI leader 
now allied with the Transitional Federal Government (TFG), be named 
Minister of State for Defense.  President Sharif has not yet signed 
off on this appointment, and it has elicited critique from 
Hawiye/Abgal clan leaders who believe their clan is 
under-represented.  At   present, there is a tenuous calm in 
Mogadishu and surrounding regions with no reports of fighting.  End 
Summary. 
 
--------------------------- 
Aweys Holds Press Conference 
Blames Conflict on the US 
--------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) On June 7, press reports, conflicting details from 
contacts and rumors suggested that HI leader Sheikh Hassan Dahir 
Aweys was either killed or injured in fighting in Wahbo, in the 
Galgadud region (Ref A).  Following these reports, Aweys reportedly 
told his close associates that he would hold a press conference to 
refute these claims.  The evening of June 7, sources at the 
presidency confirmed to us Aweys was unhurt and in Mogadishu.  On 
the afternoon of June 8, Hassan Dahir Aweys held a press conference 
in the Yaqshid area off Industrial Road in Mogadishu.  He spoke for 
approximately one hour about the fighting in Mogadishu and the 
Galgadud region and took reporters' questions. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Aweys claimed the current clashes are "programmed from New 
York" and insisted that HI is engaged in a just fight against the 
TFG.  He said the U.S. has supported warlords and Ethiopians before 
and that nobody should accept the "invaders'" intervention.   Aweys 
said the TFG leadership, who he referred to as "those claiming to be 
leaders," cannot be trusted by Somalis since they remain under the 
thumb of "invading forces" (AMISOM).  He said the fighting will stop 
after AMISOM withdraws and leaves Somalis to resolve their own 
problems.  Aweys blamed the killings and displacement in Mogadishu 
on the TFG.  He said that HI does not have control of the media the 
TFG is using media to portray his group for being behind the 
peoples' sufferings.  "We fire from AK 47s and the TFG retaliates 
with shelling in order to break our spirit by causing great human 
suffering," Aweys said.  When asked if there is any dialogue between 
HI and the TFG, Aweys said it will come, but there is no dialogue at 
the moment. 
 
------------------------------------ 
Aweys Contrasts the "Real" ASWJ 
With "Ethiopian Proxies" in Galgadud 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Aweys said he did not go to fight in Wahbo and there was 
no need for his presence because "there are others in charge of 
armed operations."  Responding to journalists' questions regarding 
rumors about his injury/death, Aweys said they were the work of the 
defeated factions of ASWJ "in an attempt to console themselves and 
divert the attention from the disgraceful defeat they suffered in 
the battle."  According to journalists at the press conference, 
Aweys showed no sign he is wounded as he walked upright without 
effort. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) At the press conference Aweys downplayed the role of Alhu 
Sunna Wal Jamaa (ASWJ) in the conflict.  Aweys emphasized that his 
group agrees with the "genuine" ASWJ on the fundamental principles 
of Islam and regards them as respectable leaders/clerics who 
distinguished themselves as freedom fighters in pre-independence 
Somalia.  Aweys offered tribute to ASWJ as a "respectable" group 
representing the majority of Somalis.  He said ASWJ leaders such as 
 
NAIROBI 00001134  002 OF 002 
 
 
Said Mohamed Abdulle Hassan, Sheikh Bashir, and Hassan Warsame never 
aided non-Muslims against Muslims as people who claim to be ASWJ are 
now doing.  Aweys contrasted the "real" ASWJ with the faction in 
Galgadud who he described as "Ethiopian agents and warlords" out to 
implement Ethiopian policies in Somalia.  He said those fighting in 
the name of ASWJ in Central Somalia are Ethiopian proxies, funded, 
armed, trained and backed by Ethiopia who makes no secret of its 
support.  (Note: ASWJ is not a monolithic group.  Although all ASWJ 
groups in Somalia have pledged support for the TFG, ASWJ factions in 
Central Somalia continue to fight al-Shabaab and Hisbul Islam, and 
ASWJ leaders in Mogadishu often describe these groups in Galgadud 
and Hiran as "militaristic" (Ref B).  End Note.) 
 
----------------------------- 
Inda Adde Named 
Minister of State for Defense 
----------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) In an unrelated development on June 7, Prime Minister 
Sharmarke announced his recommendation that Sheikh Yusuf Mohamud 
Siad "Inda Adde" (Hawiye/Hader Gedir/Ayr), be appointed as Minister 
of State for Defense.  Although Inde Adde has allied himself with 
both the TFG and al-Shabaab in recent weeks, he appears to now be 
firmly in support of the transitional government.  During the recent 
fighting in Mogadishu, Inde Adde and his militias played a key role 
in the TFG advances.  This appointment appears to be an effort to 
reward Inde Adde by offering him a formal position and cementing his 
alliance with the TFG. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) As Minister of State for Defense, Inda Adde would report 
to Minister of Defense Mohamed Abdi Mohamed "Gandi."  President 
Sharif must still approve the PM's recommendation to formally make 
the appointment.  Although some within the TFG have expressed 
concern about the optics of appointing this warlord to such a high 
position, especially after he was so recently allied with 
al-Shabaab, they expect the TFG President to do so.  This potential 
appointment has also angered Sharif's fellow Hawiye/Abgal clan 
members who claim that they are under-represented in the cabinet 
while the Haber Gedir, and the Ayr sub-clan in particular, are 
over-represented.  With the sensitivities caused by equal clan 
representation, President Sharif and PM Sharmarke are likely to face 
opposition as other sub-clans also demand new positions. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Aweys' press conference has put to rest the rumors of his 
injury/death.  In his comments, he remained staunchly opposed to the 
U.S., TFG and AMISOM, but articulated a more nuanced opinion of 
ASWJ.  If Sharif approves the appointment of Inde Adde, he would be 
the Acting Minister of Defense since Gandi is currently out of the 
country.  At present, Mogadishu remains relatively calm and there 
have been no reports of violence.  If Inde Adde assumes the TFG lead 
on defense, we may witness a new approach to strategies addressing 
Aweys, HI, and al-Shabaab. 
 
RANNEBERGER