09NIAMEY214
NIGER:  POL/ECON UPDATE FOR MARCH 2009
Fri Mar 27 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Niamey
VZCZCXRO1510
RR RUEHMA RUEHPA
DE RUEHNM #0214/01 0860617
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 270617Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY NIAMEY
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4931
INFO RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS 3491
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 0796
RUEHTRO/AMEMBASSY TRIPOLI
RUEHZK/ECOWAS COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/HQ USAFRICOM STUTTGART GEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 NIAMEY 000214 
 
DEPT FOR AF/W, AF/RSA, AND DRL/EA 
ACCRA ALSO FOR AF/WA 
PARIS FOR AFRICA WATCHER 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/W 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM SOCI SCUL KISL TBIO FR NG
SUBJECT:  NIGER:  POL/ECON UPDATE FOR MARCH 2009 
 
Ref:  a) 08 Niamey 01176, b) Niamey 00121 
 
NIAMEY 00000214  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. The following is an Embassy Niger compilation of political and 
economic highlights for March 2009 not otherwise covered in mission 
reporting.  This report covers the following issues: 
 
-- President Sarkozy to Visit Niger Briefly on March 27; 
-- Civil Society Demonstrations Occur on March 21 & 22; 
-- MNSD 18th Anniversary Rally Held; 
-- Sermons outside Mosques Curtailed by MRA; and 
-- Meningitis Update:  113 Deaths, 2662 Cases so Far 
 
President Sarkozy to Visit Niger Briefly on March 27 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶2. President Sarkozy will visit Niamey for approximately four hours 
on March 27 during a visit that includes Congo and DROC.  The visit, 
the first by a French head of state in four years, will involve 
President Tandja hosting a private luncheon, as well as President 
Sarkozy meeting with National Council for Political Dialogue (CNDP) 
representatives and participating with AREVA CEO Lauvergeon in a 
roundtable with the local chapter of the Extractive Industries 
Transparency Initiative (EITI).  As detailed in Ref D, AREVA signed 
a contract earlier this year to manage the giant Imouraren uranium 
mine in Niger's vast north, wherein Niger may move from fifth 
largest world supplier to third or fourth.  The two presidents will 
hold a joint press conference to complete the visit. 
 
¶3. Comment:  While the Government of Niger has high expectations for 
the visit, public opinion is mixed, with some wanting to see a 
"sincere visit, respectful of Niger's people and interests," and 
others considering the visit of just four hours to be too short for 
serious bilateral discussions.  End comment. 
 
Civil Society Demonstrations Occur on March 21 & 22 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶4. On March 21, three umbrella groups of civil society organizations 
- the citizens' Convergence (CC), the United Front for the 
Protection of Democratic Gains (FUSAD), and the Citizens' Movement 
for Peace, Democracy, and the Republic (MCPDR) - organized a march 
and rally in Niamey to protest the National Assembly's recent 
benefits package, the rising cost of living, the implementation of 
weighbridges at major borders, and the dilemma of contract teachers 
(Ref B). On March 22, another group, the Coalition of Niger's Civil 
Society (CSCN), also marched and held a rally to demand former PM 
Hama's release, call for an independent audit of the President's 
Special Program, protest against the rising cost of living, and 
express support for contract teachers.  The demonstrations, though 
peaceful, gathered fewer participants than previous ones. 
 
¶5. Comment:  Despite a February 26 Constitutional Court's ruling 
that the process of its adoption was compliant with the 
constitution, civil society continues to denounce the National 
Assembly's benefits package signed into law by President Tandja on 
March 13.  Some observers note that the low turnout shows that these 
demonstrations, unlike previous ones, have reached their limits, and 
suggest that civil society find new strategies.  End comment. 
MNSD 18th Anniversary Rally Held 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶6. The main party of Niger's ruling coalition, the National Movement 
for a Development Society (MNSD), held a rally in Niamey on March 21 
in celebration of its 18th anniversary under the theme of "newfound 
cohesion and unity."  The party's new leadership, chaired by Prime 
Minister Seini Oumarou, declared that the anniversary marks the "age 
of maturity." Seini Oumarou praised the MNSD's contribution to the 
achievement of the Government of Niger's socio-economic and other 
development objectives.  He underscored the need to strengthen the 
party's unity and confidence at all levels, and to promote the 
common interest "to the detriment of vested interests."  The party's 
chapters of women, youth, and cadres also took the floor to address 
the plenary session and renew their support for the party's new 
leadership. 
 
Sermons outside Mosques Curtailed by MRA 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. On March 17, Minister of Religious Affairs (MRA) Issaka Labo 
issued a statement regarding the practice of public preaching. 
Minister Labo, who spoke on national radio and television, said that 
"certain religious groups shout insults at each other through media, 
or disseminate provocative sermons and messages prone to disturb 
public order and to threaten social peace and tranquility."  He 
 
NIAMEY 00000214  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
pointed out that while Niger protects people's freedom to choose and 
practice their religion, their freedom should not infringe on that 
of others.  He stressed that "no individual or group of individuals 
can impose his or her faith on Nigerien Moslems, who have already 
adopted a tolerant Islam that cements our solidarity and national 
unity." 
 
¶8. To put an end to "the anarchy that is lurking in religious 
circles," Minister Labo decided to ban "parallel preaching" in 
mosques that occurs at the same time as their imams and authorized 
preachers as well as preaching in markets or other "inappropriate 
locations."  This ban also regards media (radio and television) 
broadcasts of any religious sermon and/or debate likely to generate 
contention or disputes, threaten public order, or undermine the 
cohesion of our country's Islamic community.  Minister Labo added 
that the Government would spare no effort to ensure that peace and 
order prevail in mosques, madrasas, and other places of worship. 
 
Meningitis Update:  169 Deaths, 4,548 Cases so Far 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶9. As of March 18, Niger has experienced 169 deaths and 4,548 cases 
of meningitis, compared to 40 and 453 respectively at the same time 
in 2008.  In response to this outbreak, the International Federation 
of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies has launched a Disaster 
Relief Emergency Fund (DREF) seeking USD 58,000 to support the Red 
Cross of Niger in reaching more than 3.9 million people through a 
health sensitization and education campaign.  This effort will take 
place through the end of May, which usually corresponds to the end 
of the meningitis season. 
 
¶10. Minimize considered. 
 
Whitaker