09OSLO748
Ambassador's Stavanger Discussions with GON and Oil
Fri Dec 04 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Oslo
VZCZCXRO7345
PP RUEHIK
DE RUEHNY #0748/01 3380643
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 040643Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY OSLO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8016
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0097UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 OSLO 000748 
 
STATE FOR EUR/NB, EEB/ESC - AGREENSTEIN 
 
SENSITIVE, SIPDIS 
 
¶E. O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: EPET EINV SENV PREL NO VE RS
SUBJECT:  Ambassador's Stavanger Discussions with GON and Oil 
Companies 
 
REF: (A) Oslo 697 (b) Oslo 718 
 
OSLO 00000748  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
(U) This document is sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect 
accordingly. 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) In meetings during the Ambassador's first visit to Norway's 
"oil city" of Stavanger, U.S. companies told the Ambassador they 
were keenly interested in access to more offshore production 
acreage, particularly in the environmentally/ politically sensitive 
area of Lofoten-Vesteralen.  The Director General of the GON's 
Petroleum Directorate highlighted the state's role in ensuring that 
society shares in the risks and benefits of offshore oil 
development.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) The Ambassador, accompanied by FCS Chief and Poleconoff, 
visited Stavanger, Norway's fourth-largest city and the center of 
the country's energy industry, between November 22 and 24.  He met 
with executives from Exxon-Mobil, Hess, ConocoPhillips, Marathon, 
Halliburton, BakerHughes and Weatherford; Bente Nyland, Director 
General of the Norwegian Petroleum Directorate; Mayor Leif Johan 
Sevland; the Stavanger Chamber of Commerce's Committee on 
Norwegian-American Relations.  The Ambassador also toured 
Stavanger's International School, spoke at a reception hosted by 
Amcham, and met with U.S. servicemen at NATO's Joint Warfare Center 
outside the city.  His visit was covered by regional newspaper 
Stavanger Aftenblad and national state-owned broadcaster NRK. 
 
Norwegian Petroleum Directorate (NPD) 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) In a November 23 briefing for the Ambassador on the state's 
role in Norway's oil and gas industry, Stavanger-based Director 
General of the Norwegian Petroleum Directorate (NPD), Bente Nyland, 
emphasized that the state does not award operating licenses on the 
basis of prices bid, but rather aims to award development work to 
groups of bidders who can provide the best value from oil for 
society as a whole.  The state typically takes a 20 percent share in 
both the investment and the return from development activities, 
though this varies from case to case.  NPD claims to take the long 
view, and is very interested in maximizing total oil and gas 
recovery. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Nyland stated that the seabed off Jan Mayen island had a 
very complicated geology which made prospects for oil and gas there 
relatively uncertain.  As a result, energy companies were not 
interested in developing the area.  She advised that energy 
companies were very interested in developing the much more 
accessible Lofoten-Vesteralen offshore blocks, but noted these were 
currently closed to exploitation.  Nyland told us that a White Paper 
on development in this area was due to be produced in 2010. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The Director General said the GON is working hard to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions in the energy sector (which generates about 
27% of Norway's CO2 emissions), despite the tradeoff between 
enhanced oil recovery and reduced emissions.  Norway is encouraging 
companies to supply their platforms with electric power from onshore 
sources and to reduce flaring of natural gas.  (Note: Norway 
prohibits flaring except to test systems at the start of operations 
or in emergencies.  End Note.) 
 
Exxon-Mobil (EM) 
---------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Managing Director Lee Tillman and his team emphasized EM's 
strong interest in obtaining new acreage for development, 
particularly in the Lofoten-Vesteralen areas.  Industry wants a 
steady, predictable opening of new acreage.  Currently open areas in 
the Barents Sea do not look promising.  The even more remote area 
around Jan Mayen island - which is not currently open - is even less 
interesting to the international oil companies (IOCs), as noted 
above.  Another concern is tough competition from majority 
state-owned Statoil, the dominant player on the Norwegian 
Continental Shelf (NCS). 
 
¶7. (SBU) If the government does not  open new production acreage, 
Norway risks losing out to other parts of the world in the 
competition for EM's investment resources, according to Tillman.  EM 
is interested in not only more, but larger projects and in actually 
operating platforms rather than merely contributing equity.  Higher 
energy production would not only supply Europe with badly-needed 
energy, but would also contribute to a better environment, given 
that Norway's oil and gas production is the least carbon-intensive 
in the world.  At the same time, Norway's stable investment regime 
is very attractive to shareholders. 
 
OSLO 00000748  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) Commenting on other markets, Tillman said that Russia's 
Shtokman project (in which Statoil and France's Total are currently 
partners with Russia's Gazprom) was struggling given current, lower 
gas prices.  On Venezuela's nationalization of EM assets, he said EM 
did not object to the nationalization but wanted to receive 
market-based compensation. 
 
¶9. (SBU) On environment issues, Tillman touted the success of 
industry's proposal to cut emissions of NOX (a nitrogen compound 
which contributes to acidification) through contributions to a fund 
rather than a NOX tax.  He also highlighted EM's investments in 
various clean technologies, while suggesting that most first and 
second generation technologies were not currently commercially 
viable. 
 
Hess 
---- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Managing Director Alf Frugard provided an overview of 
Hess' relatively limited activities in Norway, concentrated in its 
small share of the Snohvit gas development in the Barents Sea and 
its North Sea Valhall field.  He echoed EM's call for opening more 
acreage for exploration and development, especially in the 
Lofoten-Vesteralen areas.  Frugard was hopeful that the GON might 
reverse its current policy of maintaining the protected region 
closed to oil and gas development.  Hess is currently sponsoring two 
American students studying for a master's degree in petroleum 
engineering at the new University of Stavanger.  Interestingly, Hess 
claimed that the accident rate for all companies' operations on the 
NCF had increased in recent years, though he did not have an 
explanation for this phenomenon. 
 
Ambassador's meeting with Stavanger Mayor 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (U) Mayor Leif Johan Sevland highlighted strong ties between the 
sister cities of Houston and Stavanger, and also noted the large 
resident American (and specifically Texan) community in Stavanger. 
There is an annual exchange of high school students between the two 
cities, with about 100 students spending a week with a host family 
in their sister city.  Sevland, a member of the center-right Hoyre 
party, has been mayor for 14 years and is generally regarded as a 
successful booster for his city. 
 
ConocoPhillips (CP) 
------------------ 
 
¶12. (SBU) CP Country Manager (and Chair of Norway's Oil Industry 
Association) Steinar Vage generally agreed with points raised by 
other IOCs on the need for new acreage.  He stressed the importance 
of opening the Lofoten-Vesteralen areas for Norway to retain the 
IOCs.  Vage emphasized that the GON needs to develop new acreage to 
offset declining production from existing sources, given the large 
contribution of energy revenues to the state budget.  CP is also 
looking at opportunities in East Greenland.  Vage was not very 
optimistic about the prospects for the success of carbon capture and 
storage (CCS) efforts. 
 
Marathon 
-------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) Country Director Kristin Faerovik expressed the company's 
desire for new acreage, while also suggesting that Statoil's 
dominance of the NCF has been a bottleneck for development. 
Faerovik claimed that Statoil has in many cases failed to develop 
assets in a timely manner, depriving other companies of business 
opportunities and delaying revenue-generating projects for Norway. 
The validity of recent licenses is now limited in duration to 
discourage delays.  Faerovik noted Marathon's support for cancer 
research collaboration between the University of Stavanger hospital 
and the University of Texas' M.D. Anderson Cancer Center as an 
example of the company's contribution to the local community. 
 
Service Companies 
----------------- 
 
¶14. (SBU) The Ambassador met jointly with Halliburton's Country Vice 
President Jorunn Saetre, BakerHughes Country Manager Oyvind Grotmol, 
and Weatherford's Managing Director Rolf Leknes on November 24.  The 
companies reiterated their interest in more acreage, noting that 
Statoil had set up a task force to lobby the GON on this issue. 
Saetre suggested that PM Stoltenberg had left himself some wiggle 
room to change state policy on opening new acreage later in his new 
government's term of office, which runs from 2009 to 2013.  The 
representatives pointed out that developing further oil and gas 
production is not only important for Norway fiscally, but is also a 
 
OSLO 00000748  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
question of maintaining the country's industrial capabilities in 
this sector.  Halliburton expressed some concern about industry's 
current competitiveness, given the strong Norwegian currency, the 
krone. 
 
¶15. (SBU) Comment:  The oil companies were unanimous in calling for 
the government to increase the amount of acreage open for 
exploration and development, particularly in the sensitive and 
heretofore protected Lofoten-Vesteralen area.  The Ambassador raised 
this in his initial courtesy call with the Oil and Energy Minister 
Terje Riis-Johanssen on November 25 (septel), but this will continue 
to be a difficult position for the government to reverse given the 
very strong opposition of the Labor Party's two junior coalition 
partners, the Center and Socialist Left parties, based on their 
environmental concerns (see ref A). 
 
WHITE