09OSLO216

Tue Mar 31 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Oslo
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHNY #0216/01 0901443
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 311443Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY OSLO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7462
INFO RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA IMMEDIATE 3075
RUEHHE/AMEMBASSY HELSINKI IMMEDIATE 8073
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON IMMEDIATE 1542
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW IMMEDIATE 4041
RUEHRK/AMEMBASSY REYKJAVIK IMMEDIATE 0875
RUEHSM/AMEMBASSY STOCKHOLM IMMEDIATE 3384C O N F I D E N T I A L OSLO 000216

SIPDIS

E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/31/2019 TAGS: PINR PREL EINV RU NO
NATO, 
BUSINESS DISPUTE

Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission, Kevin M. Johnson for reasons 1.4 b and d

¶1. (C) Summary: During his March 24-25 Moscow visit FM Stoere clashed with FM Lavrov over the Telenor-Alfa Bank business dispute and NATO issues. On the Arctic Council, Svalbard, Afghanistan, Iran, the Middle East and energy cooperation, discussions were characterized by the normal positive atmosphere between the two ministers. Following the meetings, (TEXT REMOVED BY AFTENPOSTEN) briefed Embassy Oslo, highlighting the GONs wish for U.S. attention to the Arctic and the Secretarys participation in the April 28-29 Arctic Council Ministerial. The GON is concerned that Russia may drift in a more aggressive line and believes U.S. presence at the Arctic Council is necessary to balance this. The GON also seeks a relaunch of a U.S.-Norway High North dialogue. End Summary
Stoere objects to the Shakedown of Telenor ------------------------------------------

¶2. (C) (TEXT REMOVED BY AFTENPOSTEN) stated that despite their good personal relationship, Stoere and Lavrovs discussions over the Telenor-Alfa Bank business dispute were rough and tense. The GON-owned Telenor (53.9% state ownership) is locked in a heated dispute with the Alfa Group over control of their joint company Vimpelcom (Telenor 30% Alfa 40% share), a Russian mobile phone operator. Telenor has been in the Russian market since 1992 and in partnership with Alfa from 1998. Trouble between the partners began in 2004 over Alfas wish to expand into Ukraine, leading to a series of court cases which have not resolved the issue. Through questionable legal maneuvers conducted by a front company, Alfa won the most recent court case on March 11, resulting in the seizing of Telenors shares in Vimpelcom, currently worth about 1.8 billion dollars (11.8 billion NOK) and their possible forced sale. Under Russian law these shares could be sold before the appeal (currently scheduled for May 26) is heard.

¶3. (C) Stoere challenged Lavrov to ensure that Telenors shares are not sold before their appeal can be heard. He stressed the damage that Russias economy would suffer if it continues to be unpredictable and arbitrary. The abrupt fall in the Russian stock market on the day the Telenor verdict was announced was proof of this. Lavrov objected to Stoeres statement that the Russian economy was unpredictable and accused Telenor of stopping Russian investment into Ukraine and other former Soviet states in the interest of limiting Russian influence over these areas. Lavrov suggested the TNK-BP model of resolution where BP was forced to cede control and shares to TNK at less than market values, a solution which would not be welcome to the GON.
Real and Imagined Tensions over NATO ------------------------------------ 

¶4. (C) Pointing to the NATO meeting held in Reykjavik in January, the NATO Cold Response exercise held in February-March in Northern Norway, and a Norwegian video game, Lavrov criticized NATO for unnecessarily increasing tensions in the Arctic. Demonstrating impressive research by the Russian Embassy in Oslo, Lavrov objected to the video game Naval War: Arctic Circle, to be released in 2010 by a Norwegian company, Turbo Tape Games (which recently received a substantial grant from the Norwegian Film Institute) and which depicts Russia as the enemy in a conflict over Arctic resources. On the NATO Russia Council Lavrov welcomed new meetings but insisted that they be at the same level as before the Georgian war. He also asked why there have been no discussions on human rights violations in Georgia or NATO shipment of weapons to Georgia.

¶5. (C) Stoere responded strongly, saying that Norway and NATO have the right to rehearse military maneuvers and that Lavrov should look in the mirror before criticizing NATO military activities in the Arctic, given the substantial increase in Russian military activities in the area. Stoere also urged Russian leaders to make an effort to change Russias image of the enemy and of the West, particularly in the north where bilateral cooperation is strong. Stoere also pressed Lavrov for an explanation on why there has been no substantial progress in the NATO Russia Council.
Less Tension on High North Arctic / Svalbard Issues --------------------------------------------- ------

¶6. (C) There was only a brief mention of Svalbard, and surprisingly Lavrov did not raise any of Russias standard issues of principle. The ministers discussed Barents cooperation issues, including the implementation of visa-free travel for residents, fishing, the maritime border, and nuclear safety issues. Although agreeing on the importance of the Arctic Council, Stoere and Lavrov discussed their different views of expanding membership, with Russia objecting to a wider membership, particularly the EU.
Energy and Carbon Capture ------------------------- 

¶7. (C) In discussions over development of Shtockman Lavrov maintained that a decision on investment would be taken at the end of this year. He did not believe the financial crisis would impact this decision. Lavrov was also very interested in Stoeres explanation of the GONs carbon capture and storage program. Lavrov complained to Stoere that the European Commission had gone behind his back in making a deal with Ukraine on gas supplies before the Commission-Russia-Ukraine meeting in Brussels the week of March 16. The Norwegian MFA feels that the EU-Russia energy relationship was not good, even claiming that the Russian purposely created traffic and passport problems to ensure that Commissioner Ferroro-Waldner missed her flight during a recent visit to Moscow.
Afghanistan, Iran and the Middle East -------------------------------------

¶8. (C) Lavrov had just returned from a visit to Afghanistan and was struck by the bad security situation. He said that Russia was considering offering training and small arms assistance to the Afghan police. On Iran, Lavrov welcomed U.S. engagement and stated that Iran is ready to use its leverage in the region positively, but needs to know what they will receive in return. Without prompting, Lavrov mentioned that if Iran is brought into greater engagement with the world, Russia would even welcome the Nabucco pipeline. Lavrov also mentioned Russias intent to host a Middle East meeting in Moscow during the summer, using the Annapolis format.

Will Norway Keep their Russian Rose-Colored Glasses? --------------------------------------------- ------- 

¶9. (C) Comment: The GON is growing more concerned about developments in Russia, although they are careful to continually stress the positive developments in the bilateral relationship. The GON continues to (perhaps wishfully) explain away negative developments in Russia. The latest example was the dismissal of the long-standing governor in Murmansk, after accusations of treason for giving away resources and being too friendly to Scandinavians and Americans. This was characterized as sad, but not an attack on the Norwegian-Russian relationship and was not raised by Stoere in his meetings with Lavrov.

¶10. (C) It has taken the Telenor business dispute to slightly sharpen Norways criticism of Russia. Despite this serious dispute, the GON wishes to continue good relations with Russia possibly because it does not see any way to effectively counter Russian moves without damaging Norwegian interests. Oil and Energy Minister Riis-Johansens April 22-24 visit to Russia and PM Stoltenbergs May 19 visit to Moscow will show if the GON maintains a positive approach to Russia.


¶11. (C) Despite the generally rosy outlook, the GON is aware that the potential for trouble with Russia could be rising. The decision to directly brief the U.S. Embassy in Moscow on the Ministers meetings is indicative of the GON wish for the U.S. to counterbalance increased Russia activity in the Arctic. Norway and FM Stoere (helped by the Russians increased activity) have succeeded in raising NATO and U.S. awareness of the Arctic and Barents region but have been struggling to determine what steps they would like to see the U.S. take in the region, beside ratification of the Law of the Sea. In his April 6 meeting with the Secretary, FM Stoere will likely ask for increased dialogue with the U.S. on creative ways to engage in the Arctic and with Russia. Officials from the MFA are scheduled to visit Washington in May to speak with the State Department on a possible restart of the U.S.-Norway High North 
Dialogue, with a focus on issues such as climate, shipping, energy, 

Arctic research and resource management. End Comment. WHITNEY