09OTTAWA643
ABORIGINAL LAND CLAIMS DEFY TIMELY RESOLUTION
Fri Aug 21 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO8288
RR RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHMT RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHOT #0643/01 2331437
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 211437Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9772
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 OTTAWA 000643 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O.: 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM CA
SUBJECT: ABORIGINAL LAND CLAIMS DEFY TIMELY RESOLUTION 
 
REF:  OTTAWA 594 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  The recent imbroglio between the Canadian Border 
Services Agency and the Mohawk community of Akwesasne over armed 
agents at the crossing point on Cornwall Island, Ontario (reftel) 
highlights again the complexity, lack of clarity, and evolving 
nature of relations between the federal and provincial governments 
and Canada's aboriginal populations.  Slow progress on 
self-government and land claims pose ongoing human rights 
challenges.  As long as Canada lacks a clear legal definition of 
aboriginal titles and rights, effective mechanisms to resolve First 
Nations grievances in a timely manner will remain elusive.  End 
summary. 
A YOUNG AND GROWING COMMUNITY 
----------------------------- 
¶2. (U) According to the latest census (2006), aboriginal Canadians 
-- Indians, Inuit, and Metis (persons of mixed aboriginal and 
European ancestry)) -- number almost 1.2 million, or approximately 4 
pct of the total population.  "Status Indians" (Indians with 
federally recognized aboriginal status) constitute 60 pct of the 
aboriginal population, Metis 33 pct, and Inuit 4 pct.  The 
aboriginal population increased by 45 pct from 1996 to 2006, nearly 
six times faster than the non-aboriginal growth rate.  The median 
age of the aboriginal population is 27 years (compared to 40 years 
for non-aboriginal peoples) and 31 pct is under the age of 14. 
According to Statistics Canada, aboriginal peoples on average 
experience poorer health outcomes, worse housing conditions, lower 
rates of high school completion, and higher unemployment than the 
non-aboriginal population.  In 2007-2008, aboriginals accounted for 
22 pct of the adult incarcerated population. 
¶3. (U) The federal Department of Indian and Northern Affairs (INAC) 
recognizes 615 First Nations (Status Indian) communities across all 
ten provinces and two territories.  Canada's third territory, 
Nunavut, is an Inuit "homeland," in which 83.6 pct of the population 
is Inuit.  Approximately 60 pct of aboriginal people in Canada now 
live off-reserve, up from 58 percent in 1996.  Ontario has the 
largest aboriginal population (21 pct of the provincial population), 
but the four western provinces are home to 61 pct of the total 
aboriginal population. 
¶4. (U) The 1876 Indian Act is the principal federal legislation 
defining aboriginal status, governance, and eligibility for federal 
benefits and services.  INAC is responsible for the administration 
of the Act, along with another 58 laws relating to First Nations, 
and shares responsibility with other federal government departments 
for 17 other related statutes. 
SELF-GOVERNMENT, NOT SOVEREIGNTY 
-------------------------------- 
¶5. (U) As an alternative to federal stewardship under the Indian 
Act, Canada acknowledges self-government as an "inherent" aboriginal 
right within the meaning of section 35(1) of the 1982 Constitution 
Act.  Since 1982, the federal and provincial governments and 
aboriginal groups have attempted to negotiate a clearer definition 
of "aboriginal right" to add to the Constitution, but have failed to 
agree.  In 1995, the then-Liberal federal government began including 
(in conjunction with provincial governments) proposals for 
aboriginal self-government as part of negotiations on comprehensive 
land claims as an alternative to potentially costly litigation. 
¶6. (U) The "inherent" right of self-government does not grant a 
right of sovereignty in the sense of international law, and does not 
create sovereign independent aboriginal nation states.  Rather, 
federal guidelines underscore that First Nations exercise only 
self-government under the Constitution.  The Canadian Charter of 
Qself-government under the Constitution.  The Canadian Charter of 
Rights and Freedoms also applies fully to aboriginal governments. 
In 2005, the government of British Columbia entered into a "New 
Relationship" with its First Nations based on accommodation of 
aboriginal title and rights and acknowledgement of aboriginal titles 
over much of the province.  The B.C. provincial government 
subsequently proposed a "Recognition and Reconciliation Act," but 
has not yet tabled it in the legislature. 
¶7. (U) All self-government agreements the federal government has 
signed with First Nations differentiate jurisdiction as follows: 
-- issues that are integral to distinct aboriginal culture (e.g. 
governance, status, language, culture, education, health, social 
services, law enforcement, resource management, taxation, and 
economic development) fall under the exclusive administration of 
aboriginal governments; 
-- areas where primary law-making authority remains with the federal 
and/or provincial government if in conflict with aboriginal law 
(e.g. environmental protection, natural resource co-management, 
penitentiaries, and emergency preparedness); and, 
-- areas that are not integral to aboriginal cultures, or internal 
to aboriginal groups, and where the federal government retains its 
exclusive law-making authority, including national defense and 
security, security of national borders, immigration, and 
international trade as well as "other national interest powers" such 
as regulation of the national economy, maintenance of law and order, 
health and safety, and transportation.  In 2011, the federal 
government will also extend the Canadian Human Rights Act to First 
Nations people on reserves (including those under self-government 
agreements) for the first time. 
CHANGING THE RELATIONSHIP 
 
OTTAWA 00000643  002 OF 003 
 
 
------------------------- 
¶8. (U) Lack of a standard model for resolving comprehensive land 
claims, self-government agreements, and the absence of a clear legal 
definition of what constitutes an "aboriginal right" have resulted 
in complex multi-year negotiations, a significant claims backlog, 
and friction between aboriginal communities and the federal and 
provincial governments.  Even for completed treaties and agreements, 
litigation may still occur.  INAC is the lead department tasked with 
negotiating and implementing land claims and self-government 
agreements with First Nations on behalf of the federal government. 
In 2003, some First Nations dissatisfied with the implementation of 
their treaties formed the Land Claims Agreements Coalition.  Whereas 
the federal government regards completed comprehensive land claims 
treaties and self-government agreements as, in principle, the 
discharge of its obligations, members of the Land Claims Agreements 
Coalition have underscored that they see such agreements as not an 
end, but the beginning of new relationships, with ongoing federal 
obligations. 
¶9. (U) According to INAC officials, court rulings have been the 
principal "game-changers" in recognizing aboriginal rights and 
giving aboriginal communities greater control over their own 
decisions.  However, since 2006 the federal government under Prime 
Minister Stephen Harper has also promoted economic development and a 
more business-oriented approach as a new direction in its relations 
with aboriginal communities.  PM Harper cancelled the 2005 Kelowna 
Accord negotiated by the previous Liberal government, which would 
have mandated federal spending of C$5 billion over ten years on 
aboriginal social services.  In June 2009, the federal government 
launched a new "Federal Framework for Aboriginal Economic 
Development," promising government collaboration, private sector 
partnerships, skills development, and easier access to capital.  In 
August 2009, PM Harper used an Arctic tour to announce a new 
economic development strategy and creation of a new Canadian 
Northern Economic Development Agency (CanNor) in Iqaluit, Nunavut. 
The government's "Northern Strategy" emphasizes the role of 
aboriginal peoples in strengthening Canadian Arctic sovereignty, 
protecting the environment, and promoting economic and social 
development in the North. 
¶10.  (U) Some First Nations have also pushed to replace the Indian 
Act with more modern partnerships.  In July 2009, chiefs across the 
country elected Shawn Atleo as the new National Chief of the 
Assembly of First Nations on a platform of economic development, 
self-sufficiency, and tackling poverty.  Bands in Atleo's home 
province of B.C. have built on land claims settlements, resource 
rights, and self-government agreements to launch businesses and 
generate new sources of revenue. 
LAND CLAIMS: COMPREHENSIVE VERSUS SPECIFIC 
------------------------------------------ 
¶11. (U) Aboriginal leaders have insisted that land and control over 
its resources are the key to self-sufficiency.  There are two types 
of aboriginal land claims.  "Comprehensive claims" deal with 
aboriginal rights and titles that have not previously been settled 
by treaty or other means.  In these cases, the federal government 
negotiates new treaties.  "Specific claims" deal with First Nations' 
grievances arising from alleged non-fulfillment of federal 
obligations under existing treaties or other legal obligations, or 
from the way the federal government has managed First Nations' funds 
or assets.  Resolution may take the form of additions to existing 
treaties, transfers of land, cash, or resource rights.  In 2008, the 
Qtreaties, transfers of land, cash, or resource rights.  In 2008, the 
federal government had more than 60 separate ongoing negotiations 
for comprehensive land claims and more than 800 specific claims 
remained outstanding. 
¶12. (U) The Crown signed more than 70 treaties with First Nations 
between 1701 and 1923.  Subsequently, the federal government has 
negotiated and ratified 21 additional treaties covering 40 pct of 
Canada's land mass.  The impetus for negotiation of comprehensive 
land claims stemmed from a landmark 1973 Supreme Court of Canada 
ruling confirming that aboriginal peoples' historic occupation of 
the land gave them legal rights  not previously subject to treaties 
(principally in British Columbia, southern Alberta, and the Yukon). 
The federal government established processes to resolve 
comprehensive claims through negotiation in 1973 as an optional 
alternative to costly litigation.  It signed the first comprehensive 
land claims agreement in 1975.  The Constitution Act of 1982 
(section 35 (1)) further "recognized and affirmed" the "existing 
aboriginal and treaty rights of the aboriginal peoples of Canada." 
 
¶13. (U) In October 2008, the federal government "retooled" the 
previous specific claims process to establish a new independent 
Specific Claims Tribunal to expedite cases.  The Tribunal, composed 
of six provincial superior court judges selected in consultation 
with the Assembly of First Nations (Canada's largest aboriginal 
advocacy group), has the authority to make binding decisions on 
claims that have been rejected for negotiation, or where 
negotiations fail, on claims up to C$150 million (approximately $140 
million).  It has not yet publicly registered any judgments. 
¶14. (SBU) COMMENT: Canadian courts have been the primary drivers of 
federal and provincial efforts to resolve aboriginal grievances, 
both in imposing new obligations and in encouraging negotiations to 
preempt litigation.  However, as long as Canada lacks a clear 
definition of aboriginal rights or a uniform model for negotiations, 
 
OTTAWA 00000643  003 OF 003 
 
 
effective mechanisms to resolve aboriginal grievances in a timely 
manner will remain elusive. 
HOPPER