09OTTAWA79
COURT BOLSTERS PASSPORT DENIAL FOR TERRORISTS
Fri Jan 30 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO9669
OO RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHMT RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHOT #0079 0302055
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 302055Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9031
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS OTTAWA 000079 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PGOV PREL CA
SUBJECT: COURT BOLSTERS PASSPORT DENIAL FOR TERRORISTS 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: A Canadian appeals court has upheld the 
constitutional authority of the Foreign Minister (in charge also of 
Canada's passport agency) to refuse to issue a passport to Canadian 
citizens convicted of terrorist offences.  The decision appears to 
bolster the federal government's ability to withhold travel 
documents on national security grounds under 2004 amendments to 
passport regulations.  End summary. 
 
TRAVEL FOR TERRORISTS? 
---------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) On January 29, the Federal Court of Appeal ruled unanimously 
that the government's decision in 2006 to deny Fateh Kamel (an 
Algerian-Canadian convicted of terrorist offences in France in 2001 
-- para 3) a Canadian passport was a justifiable violation of his 
constitutional right to "enter, remain in and leave Canada."  It 
overturned a March 13, 2008 Federal Court ruling that had struck 
down as unconstitutional a 2004 amendment to the Canadian Passport 
Order authorizing the foreign minister to deny or revoke a passport 
on national security grounds.  The lower Court had found the 
amendment "vague, even nebulous," had given the federal government 
six months to rewrite the provision to conform to the Charter of 
Rights and Freedoms, and had granted Kamel a judicial review of his 
passport application.  The Appeal Court's ruling cited a key 
provision (section one) of the Charter that subjects rights to "such 
reasonable limits prescribed by law as can be demonstrably justified 
in a free and democratic society." 
 
¶3. (U) In 2001, courts in France had sentenced Fateh Kamel to eight 
years in prison for his participation in the Armed Islamic Group, a 
terrorist cell that was responsible for the hijacking of an Air 
France jet in 1994 as well as a series of bomb attacks in France in 
1995, and for supplying fraudulent passports to militants.  The 
group is also linked to "Millennium Bomber" Ahmed Ressam.  Kamel was 
released early for good behavior and returned to Canada in 2005 on a 
special single-use passport. 
 
CANADIAN PASSPORT RULES 
----------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) Under the Canadian Passport Order, Canada's passport agency 
may refuse to issue a passport to an applicant who: submits an 
incomplete application; stands charged in or outside Canada with an 
indictable offense; is imprisoned in Canada or forbidden to leave 
the country due to conditions imposed by a court or correctional 
institution; is imprisoned outside Canada or forbidden to leave a 
foreign state due to conditions imposed by a foreign court or 
correctional institution; forges, or knowingly uses, acts on, causes 
others to use, or possesses a forged passport, or makes false or 
misleading statements for the purpose of procuring or altering a 
passport; is indebted to the Crown for expenses for repatriation or 
for consular aid; already possesses a valid Canadian passport; 
and/or "if the Minister is of the opinion that such action is 
necessary for the national security of Canada or another country." 
 
 
TEST CASES 
----------- 
 
¶5. (U) The federal government officially listed national security as 
a ground for refusing to issue passports to certain individuals on 
September 22, 2004.  Prior to 2004, the government could only 
restrict passports on non-listed grounds by asking the Governor 
General to invoke the rarely used "royal prerogative" (a customary 
authority and privilege vested in the monarch and exercised only on 
the advice of the Prime Minister).  In July 2004, the then-Governor 
General invoked her prerogative to deny a passport to Canadian-born 
Abdurahman Khadr, who had admitted to participating in terrorist 
training in Afghanistan (and who is an elder brother of Guantanamo 
Qtraining in Afghanistan (and who is an elder brother of Guantanamo 
detainee Omar Khadr).  Then-Foreign Minister Bill Graham explained 
the decision as "in the interest of the national security of Canada 
and the protection of Canadian troops in Afghanistan."  Khadr 
applied for a passport a second time in 2006, but the government 
declined the application on security grounds on the basis of the 
amended Canadian Passport Order.  Fateh Kamel applied for a standard 
passport in December 2005. 
 
¶6. (SBU) According to a federal spokesperson, the ruling in the 
Kamel case "strengthens the case, when there's national security 
issues" that passport revocation or denial is justified, and "we are 
very happy" with the judgment.  However, the same official declined 
to speculate about the outcome should Kamel reapply for a passport, 
noting "that's a call for the minister."  The ruling did not 
explicitly clarify the status of applicants -- such as Abdurahman 
Khadr -- who (unlike Kamel) have never been actually convicted of 
terrorist offenses but about whom the government may have national 
security concerns.  Kamel has reportedly not yet decided whether to 
appeal the ruling to the Supreme Court. 
BREESE