09PANAMA329
PANAMA: DOMESTIC POLITICS HAUNT FTA
Thu Apr 23 00:00:00 +0200 2009
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Panama
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHZP #0329/01 1131826
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
R 231826Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY PANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3308
INFO RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDCS E C R E T PANAMA 000329 
 
SIPDIS 
NOFORN 
 
E.O. 12958: DNG: CO 04/19/2018 
TAGS: PGOV PREL ECON ETRD PM
SUBJECT: PANAMA: DOMESTIC POLITICS HAUNT FTA 
 
REF: PANAMA 300 
 
Classified By: POLCOUNS Brian R. Naranjo.  Reasons:  1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  (S//NF) As Panama enters the final stretch of its general 
election campaign season, politics has come to haunt the 
U.S.-Panama Free Trade Agreement (FTA).  "Forget about the 
FTA," governing Revolutionary Democratic Party (PRD) 
presidential candidate Balbina Herrera declared on April 19 
to law students at the University of Panama.  Meanwhile, 
Alliance for Change presidential candidate Ricardo Martinelli 
stumbled in releasing a statement of support for the Torrijos 
Administration's efforts to put the FTA on a path to 
ratification in the U.S.  While the final version of the 
Martinelli statement avowed support for Torrijos' efforts to 
secure FTA ratification, an unauthorized draft published by 
Panama City daily La Estrella put down a marker warning the 
Torrijos Administration not to commit Martinelli to any 
course of action, including specifically regarding the 
exchange of banking information.  Increasingly, Panamanian 
opinion leaders are questioning what Panama's efforts -- 
negotiations, high-level visits and engagement, and money 
spent on lobbying -- have gotten Panama.  There is still time 
to take advantage of a narrow window of opportunity in Panama 
to resolve outstanding FTA-related issues.  The Torrijos 
Administration remains committed to addressing labor concerns 
and immobilizing bearer shares.  The Torrijos Administration 
understands that it is under G-20/OECD pressure to conclude 
tax information exchange agreements (TIEAs), but does not 
have the political capital to tackle a TIEA with the U.S. 
during the less than seventy days that it will remain in 
office.  While the scenario for moving forward on these 
issues could become more difficult after the May 3 general 
elections, that scenario will only worsen after Martinelli is 
sworn in as president, as expected, on July 1. 
 
--------------------------- 
Balbina:  "Forget About It" 
--------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Speaking to law students at the University of 
Panama while President Torrijos was at the Summit of the 
Americas in Port of Spain, Herrera responded to a question 
about the FTA, blurting out, "Forget about it."  She added, 
"I am an agronomist, and I'll tell you that people are going 
to learn to love the 'countryside (campo)'," referring to 
workers in Panama's agricultural sector. 
 
------------------------------------------ 
Martinelli Stumbles with Pro-FTA Statement 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (S//NF) "We recognize the efforts of Panama's Foreign 
Minister, Samuel Lewis Navarro and our Ambassador in 
Washington, Federico Humbert . . . ," Martinelli declared on 
April 9 in a press statement entitled "Martinelli 
Congratulates the Foreign Minister."  In the version of this 
statement carried by Panama City daily La Estrella, but not 
in any other media, this opening sentence continues, stating, 
". . . and we will always support (the Torrijos 
Administration) as long as they do not commit us to take 
future actions such as the exchange of banking information 
without consulting and reaching consensus with the private 
sector and the Alliance for Change."  Martinelli's lead 
campaign advisor Demetrio "Jimmy" Papadimitriu clarified for 
POLCOUNS on April 20 that La Estrella published an unapproved 
draft of the statement.  Papadimitriu said that this opening 
sentence in the approved final version ended as follows:  " . 
. . and we will continue to support an open and transparent 
process to obtain the ratification of the FTA."  Papadimitriu 
said that the campaign's press secretary had sent the 
erroneous draft, which made specific reference to the 
exchange of banking information, to La Estrella without his 
approval.  Papadimitriu changed the final wording of the 
opening lines to underscore the candidate's support for the 
FTA and his call for "an open and transparent process." 
 
------------------------- 
FTA Exhaustion Setting In 
------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C//NF) Meanwhile, Panama's chatter-atti and commentators 
have been giving popular voice to a growing FTA exhaustion. 
Essentially, the basic expression of this exhaustion boils 
down to: a plaintive review of the litany of the efforts to 
secure a FTA -- three years and ten rounds of negotiations, 
USD 6.2 mllion spent on lobbying efforts, and numerous 
high-level delegations back and forth between Washington and 
Panama -- that concludes with the rhetorical question, "Where 
has all this effort gotten Panama?" 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Political Analyst Worried About Governability 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (S//NF)  "Martinelli's victory is going to be like a 
seismic event in Panama's political order," political analyst 
Jose Blandon told POLCOUNS on April 21.  This PRD-friendly 
analyst asserted that Martinelli's victory would touch off a 
wave of in-fighting not only within the PRD, but also within 
the Panamenista Party, Panama's largest opposition party. 
Blandon cautioned though that a Martinelli Administration 
would not be fully stood up and capable of grappling with 
tough FTA-related issues for at least one year.  (Note: 
Martinelli's lead campaign advisor Jimmy Papadimitriu 
predicted that a prospective Martinelli Administration would 
need seven to eight months to find its sea legs.  (REFTEL)) 
Blandon assessed that the PRD' electoral losses would be a 
traumatic event -- it would not only lose the presidency, 
but, he believed, lose a significant number of seats in the 
National Assembly -- that would touch off a struggle for 
control of the party among Torrijos, Herrera, Vice 
Presidential candidate Juan Carlos Navarro, former President 
Ernesto "El Toro" Perez Balladares, and National Assembly 
Deputy Hector Aleman.  In perhaps the first public move in 
the struggle to control the PRD, First VP and FM Samuel Lewis 
said in a radio interview that, once he stepped down from 
office, he would dedicate himself to his businesses and to 
grassroots political work, ostensibly to make a run for 
president in 2014.  Meanwhile, traumatized by its inability 
to secure top billing in a grand opposition alliance, the 
Panamenistas, though part of a winning Martinelli-led 
coalition, could also be torn apart by jockeying for position 
among former President Guillermo Endara (who already broke to 
form his own Moral Vanguard of the Nation party), former 
President Mireya Moscoso, Martinelli VP running mate Juan 
Carlos Varela, and former primary presidential candidate 
Alberto Vallarino.  "By scrambling the political structure of 
Panama," Blandon concluded, "Martinelli's victory raises real 
concerns about his ability to govern once he is inaugurated." 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶5. (S//NF) Panama's campaign season is coming down to the 
wire.  Trailing badly in the polls and desperate to gain 
traction and forward momentum, Herrera is trying to tap into 
nationalism and rural voters who could suffer from the impact 
of lower tariffs on U.S. agricultural products by asserting 
that Panama should "forget about" the FTA and instead 
indulging in the notion of a romantic renaissance in the 
"campo."  Martinelli, focused on maintaining his alliance's 
unity and significant momentum in the polls, is thinking 
solely about victory at the polls, not governance issues such 
as securing ratification of the FTA.  Clearly though, there 
are powerful interest groups in the Martinelli camp that 
nearly succeeded in putting the candidate on record to block 
any Torrijos Administration deals on tax havens and the 
exchange of tax information.  Our own encounters with the 
lawyers who lead powerful business organizations have 
confirmed our fear that they see a Martinelli victory as an 
avenue to shut down movement to immobilize bearer shares and 
introduce transparency into the financial sector.  We note 
with dismay that these same forces did succeed in including 
in Martinelli's published platform a plank saying Panama 
would retaliate against countries who put Panama on a black 
list by denying corporations from countries that blacklist 
Panama the ability to compete in public sector bids (such as 
bids for work on the Panama Canal expansion project). 
Candidate Martinelli himself, on the eve of the G-20 Summit, 
stated for the cameras that Panama was not a tax haven. 
While we are grateful that he stopped short of Herrera's flat 
call to forget the FTA, we underscore that progress on the 
package of issues -- labor, bearer shares, enhanced exchange 
of banking information -- will be much harder after the new 
government takes office on July 1 than it is now, and it is 
not easy now.  FTA exhaustion has well and truly set in here 
in Panama. 
STEPHENSON