09PANAMA907
Supreme Court Appointees: Panama in Mourning for Justice
Tue Dec 29 00:00:00 +0100 2009
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Panama
VZCZCXYZ0004
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHZP #0907/01 3631407
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
R 291406Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY PANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0243
INFO RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RHMFISS/COMDT COGARD WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RUEABND/DEA HQS WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA
RUEHGT/AMEMBASSY GUATEMALA
RUEHME/AMEMBASSY MEXICO 0060
RUEHMU/AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
RUEHSJ/AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE
RUEHSN/AMEMBASSY SAN SALVADOR
RUEHTG/AMEMBASSY TEGUCIGALPA 0058
RUEHZP/AMEMBASSY PANAMA
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DCS E C R E T PANAMA 000907 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 2019/12/29 
TAGS: PGOV KJUS PINR PM SNAR
SUBJECT: Supreme Court Appointees: Panama in Mourning for Justice 
 
REF: PANAMA 756 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Debra L. Hevia, Political Counselor, State, POL; 
REASON: 1.4(B), (D) 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: President Ricardo Martinelli and his cabinet's 
December 16 nomination of Alejandro Moncada Luna and Jose Abel 
Almengor as the two new Supreme Court justices sparked strong 
criticism from all major media outlets and from civil society 
organizations including the bar association and the umbrella group 
Pro-Justice Alliance (Alianza).  The nominees for "substitute" 
justices were Wilfredo Saenz Fernandez and Zaira Santamaria de 
Latorraca, and Latorraca also came under fire and was eventually 
disqualified by the National Assembly.  Not only were the nominees 
deemed to lack the professional integrity needed for the office, 
but Martinelli was harshly criticized for not following the 
credentialing commission process he himself had established. 
Assessing Martinelli's decisionmaking performance and style, most 
mainstream media and civil society groups asserted that the 
appointments undermined Panama's institution-building process. End 
summary. 
 
 
 
The Process 
 
-------------- 
 
 
 
¶2. (C) Since August, two names circulated as Martinelli's "chosen 
ones" for the court: Gerardo Solis, a former member of the 
oppposition Revolutionary Democratic Party (PRD) and current 
magistrate on the electoral tribunal, and Jose Abel Almengor, a 
former narcotics prosecutor and currently Martinelli's "security 
secretary" (ref A).    As of October, media editorials were calling 
on the president to hold true to his campaign promise of changing 
Panama's judicial legacy of corruption and cronyism, and to appoint 
non-political magistrates with outstanding records of service.  In 
response, Martinelli established a credentialing commission to 
examine the qualifications of applicants for the job, and more than 
80 judges and lawyers submitted documentation.  The credentialing 
commission found that 71 of them met the requirements to become a 
Supreme Court magistrate.  Almengor and Solis were on the list, but 
Moncada was not. 
 
 
 
¶3. (C) Martinelli was expected to suggest two names from the list 
on December 7, and it was assumed his cabinet would rubber-stamp 
his nominations.  However, the coalition Panamenista party of Vice 
President/Foreign Minister Juan Carlos Varela objected so 
strenuously to Solis that the cabinet was deadlocked.  Martinelli 
and Varela then began to suggest in the media that they would need 
to look for an alternative, as no one on the list approved by the 
credentialing commission was adequate.  Civic society groups and 
media protested that Martinelli was making a mockery of the process 
he had established to make the nomination process more transparent 
and apolitical, and publicly urged him to choose one of the 71. 
Although that list did contain questionable names, there were also 
lawyers and judges with solid records and good reputations.  At a 
dinner hosted by Martinelli for visiting CODEL Boehner on December 
13, when polcouns  mentioned the historic opportunity the 
government had to reform the court (Martinelli will name five of 
the nine justices during his five-year term), Varela answered that 
the best lawyers in the country refused to take a job on the 
Supreme Court.  Trade Minister Henriquez of Martinelli's Democratic 
Change (CD) party told polcouns, "Solis is out.  Almengor...well, 
we can't make everyone happy." 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) During the following days, Jimmy Papadimitriu rushed to 
assemble all the documentation required for Moncada's application, 
 
and Moncada and Almengor told friends and colleagues that they were 
to be the new supreme court magistrates.  On December 16, 
Presidential spokesperson Judy Meana announced the nominations of 
Alemengor, Moncada, Saenz and Latorraca. 
 
 
 
Appointees Deemed Not Up to Task 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) All major dailies and many influential television talk shows 
questioned Moncada and Almengor's integrity to serve as Supreme 
Court justices.  o The leading daily La Prensa called the candidates 
"not fit for the job," and every day from December 17 through 22 
ran a dramatic front-page black banner that read "in mourning for 
justice." The daily reminded readers that Moncada was an advisor to 
the minister of government and justice under the military regime at 
a time that ministry was censoring the press.  During the Perez 
Balladares administration, Moncada served as director of the 
investigative police (PTJ).  However, in 2000 the supreme court 
authorized then-Prosecutor General Sossa to dismiss Moncada for 
offenses of  "judicial ethics." Moncada remained a member of the 
PRD until January 2009, when he switched to CD and campaigned for 
Martinelli.  Moncada's wife works in the first lady's office. 
 
 
 
¶6. (C) Almengor spent most of his career in the public prosecutor's 
office, becoming chief narcotics prosecutor in 2005, a position in 
which he is widely viewed to have been ineffective.  For example, 
he led the 2007 investigation on money laundering charges in the 
so-called "Patriot Law" case, and all of the suspects were cleared 
of any charges.  In March 2009, Attorney General Ana Matilde Gomez 
opened an investigation against Almengor for allowing another 
suspected money launderer to flee the country.  In May 2009, 
Almengor resigned from the prosecutor's office and began working as 
a Martinelli advisor, becoming Secretary of Security in the 
Presidency in July. (Comment: This is a job with a title but no 
apparent portfolio.  Minister of the Presidency Demetrio "Jimmy" 
Papadimitriu told the Ambassador in September that Almengor was not 
handling counter-narcotics or crime-related security issues, but 
was "doing other things.")  Almengor's nomination  also met 
resistance from civil society because the Panamanian constitution 
bans anyone who holds an office with nation-wide jurisdiction from 
moving to the supreme court, to prevent past practices of naming 
sitting ministers to the court.  Many argued that as the 
president's security secretary, Almengor had national jurisdiction 
and was therefore ineligible. 
 
 
 
¶7. (S/NF) Substitute (suplente) magistrates are important, as they 
are often called in to make the most controversial (and often 
egregious) decisions as the main justices conveniently step aside 
(for example via foreign travel) to avoid sullying their names. 
Wilfredo Saenz Fernandez, who will serve as Almengor's substitute, 
had a long judicial career with decisions in many high-profile 
cases.  He was the least controversial nominee.  On the other hand, 
Zaira de Latorraca caused the most controversy of all.  She took a 
leave of absence from the judiciary effective August 1, 2009 to 
work with Salomon Shamah in the Panamanian Tourism Authority. 
(Comment: Shamah has cabinet rank and also has connections to known 
drug traffickers.)  She did not submit an application for a supreme 
court position, but was proposed and championed by Shamah.  On 
December 15, one day before the official announcement of nominees, 
Latorraca requested that her leave of absence be revoked, and she 
was reinstated in her former job as national director for common 
judicial services, thereby fulfilling the requirement that nominees 
for magistrate be active functionaries of the judicial branch. 
Most notably, when her underage daughter in 2003 killed a two year 
 
old child and maimed its mother in a hit-and-run accident, 
Latorraca first tried to cover up the accident and then arranged to 
have her daughter absolved. 
 
 
 
¶8. (U) Assessing the overall negative media coverage, Juan Carlos 
Tapia, who hosts Panama's most popular television talk show, 
rhetorically asked viewers, "When you consider the six newspapers 
and the 12 or 14 television newscasts in the country, who is wrong? 
The president or the media?" Most mainstream media agued that, by 
choosing candidates politically close to him, Martinelli wa 
undermining the nation's institution-building efforts and fueling 
negative public perceptions of the decisionmaking process in 
Panama.  La Prensa pointed out that Martinelli's promise of 
appointing two jurists with an impeccable career "did not stand the 
first test," revealing his particular style of appointing only 
close and staunch allies to key positions.  Martinelli likely "does 
not believe in or even understand the healthy separation of 
powers," and the way he carried out the appointment process may set 
back the efforts of strengthening institutions by a decade, the 
daily concluded.  o La Estrella said it was "regrettable" that 
Martinelli made up his mind about the final choice beforehand, 
thereby feeding negative public perception of the decisionmaking 
process and of the candidates. The center-right, pro-business daily 
El Panama America expressed similar views.  Taking a closer look at 
Martinelli's decisionmaking style and his pre-election pledge that 
he would do things differently from his predecessors, talk show 
host Tapia asserted that "the corruption of the system is devouring 
the candidate [Martinelli]." 
 
 
 
¶9. (U) The president of Transparency International's Panama chapter 
stressed that the appointments presented an "evident conflict of 
interest" for Martinelli, a view echoed by the Pro-Justice 
Alliance, whose spokesperson Magaly Castillo added that a 
constitutional reform regulating Supreme Court appointments is now 
clearly needed.  Martinelli responded by facetiously promising to 
nominate Castillo as a supreme court magistrate, saying it is easy 
to criticize from the comfort of a private office, and he didn't 
see any of the critics volunteering for public service.  Moncada 
and Almengor defended themselves in the media, with Almengor 
stating that he was offended by the negative public reaction, and 
both insisting they should be given a chance and only be judged on 
their performance as justices. Negative comments from readers of 
newspapers' online editions were higher than average and mirrored 
the media's criticism for Martinelli's appointments. 
 
 
 
The National Assembly as the Last Hope 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶10. (C) Public and media pressure shifted to the National Assembly, 
which ratifies presidential nominations.  Editorials urged the 
deputies "to do the right thing" for the judicial institutions by 
refusing to ratify political cronies.  The Credentials Committee 
held hearings on December 21 and 22 and accepted written 
observations on the candidates as well.  It received at least 30 
objections to specific candidates from civil society groups and 
private citizens.  However, privately legislators had been telling 
us since August that the governing coalition majority would approve 
whomever was nominated by Martinelli.  As expected, the National 
Assembly rubber-stamped the nominations of Moncada, Almengor, and 
Saenz on December 23.  On December 24th La Prensa's black banner 
"in mourning for justice" reappeared, and has been running every 
day since (currently through December 29).  The National Assembly's 
Credentials Committee did buckle to public pressure and rejected 
Latorraca as unqualified.  On December 24th, the Presidency 
 
announced that it would nominate university professor and current 
labor court judge Abel Zamorano as Moncada's substitute.  Zamorano 
was on the list of 71 original candidates, and he also vied for a 
position on the supreme court in 2005 and 2007.  His nomination 
must still be approved by the cabinet and ratified in the National 
Assembly special session which runs through December 31, but is 
expected to be non-controversial despite allegations of several 
instances of driving while intoxicated.  All the new magistrates 
will be sworn in on January 4, 2010. 
 
 
 
Comment: It's Payback Time 
 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (C) It was an incredible act of bravado by Martinelli and his 
cabinet to resist the tremendous media and societal pressure over 
this issue for months on end.  Martinelli simply does not care 
about public opinion on his court appointments.  As he told the 
Ambassador December 13, "I am going to crush the PRD."  Political 
analyst and Martinelli advisor Jose Blandon Sr. further elaborated 
for polcouns December 21 that Martinelli was determined to disable 
or if possible eliminate his political opposition, and planned to 
take down the PRD one man at a time.  He therefore chose justices 
loyal to him that would not likely be bought off by PRD leaders as 
their corruption cases work their way through appeals to the 
supreme court.  Recent arrests of two more PRD insiders on 
corruption charges in the past weeks (former education minister 
Salvador Rodriguez and former municipal engineer Jaime Salas), and 
an apparent truce with Attorney General Ana Matilde Gomez as her 
office pursues corruption cases against more PRD members including 
former president Ernesto Perez Balladares, indicate this plan is 
marching forward.  While no one questions the need to prosecute 
corruption cases, Martinelli's alleged motivation for doing so (to 
eliminate a democratic opposition party) is indeed a setback for 
Panama's institutionality. 
 
 
 
¶12. (U) Open Source Center Panama contributed to this report. 
STEPHENSON