09PHNOMPENH741
CAMBODIAN ECONOMY SHAKEN BY THE GLOBAL ECONOMIC SLOWDOWN
Tue Oct 06 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXYZ1316
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHPF #0741/01 2791209
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 061209Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1241
RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVEUNCLAS PHNOM PENH 000741 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/MLS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON PGOV EAID ETRD CB
SUBJECT:  CAMBODIAN ECONOMY SHAKEN BY THE GLOBAL ECONOMIC SLOWDOWN 
 
REFS: A) PHNOM PENH 277 
 B) PHNOM PENH 276 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  The global economic crisis continues to take a 
heavy toll on Cambodia's once vibrant economy.  Cambodia's 
narrowly-based economic growth, reliant almost exclusively upon 
garment exports, tourism, and construction, has been brought to a 
standstill by the sharp fall off in external demand and foreign 
investment flows.  Economic growth is predicted to contract by as 
much as negative 2.75% this year and a growing budget deficit could 
threaten macroeconomic stability.  End Summary. 
 
Growth Forecasts Even Gloomier 
------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (U) The global economic crisis has had a more profound effect on 
Cambodia's economy than previously anticipated.  Both the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and Asia Development Bank (ADB) 
recently revised growth forecasts downwards.  The ADB, which 
previously predicted a positive growth rate of 2.5%, now predicts a 
negative 1.5% contraction.  The IMF is predicting growth to slow to 
negative 2.75%, from the negative 0.5% contraction predicted earlier 
this year. 
 
¶3. (U) Foreign direct investment (FDI) flows have slowed as a result 
of the global downturn as well.  The IMF predicts FDI to decline 
nearly 50% in 2009.  The drop in FDI has had a significant impact on 
Cambodia's construction sector, given the sector's heavy dependence 
on foreign, primarily South Korean, investors.  Several large-scale 
construction projects have stalled or been scaled down, and fewer 
new projects have been approved. 
 
¶4. (U) During a meeting with the Ambassador September 21, David 
Cowen, the IMF's Deputy Division Chief for the Asia and Pacific 
Department, expressed concerns about the stability of the banking 
sector due to the potential for an increase in non-performing loans, 
given the extent of lending which is linked to the now stagnant real 
estate sector.  Cowen also expressed concern about Cambodia's 
macroeconomic stability, citing in particular a growing budget 
deficit which is projected to rise to 6.75% of GDP in 2009 (up from 
2.75% a year earlier).  The expanding deficit is due in part to 
large salary increases for civil servants and the military, an 
increase from 1% of GDP to 5% of GDP in 2009.  Domestic financing of 
the growing deficit could erode domestic deposits and foreign 
reserves, threatening macroeconomic stability.  The RGC has defended 
these wage increases and Cheam Yeap, Chairman of the National 
Assembly's Finance Committee, was recently quoted in local press 
affirming the government's commitment to the wage increases, arguing 
that they are necessary to raise living standards. 
 
Garment Exports Plummet 
----------------------- 
 
¶5. (U) Garment exports, a key sector in Cambodia's economy, have 
fallen precipitously.  According to figures from the Ministry of 
Commerce, in the first six months of the year, total garment exports 
declined by 24.2% year-on-year with garment exports to the U.S. 
falling 31.5%.  A total of 49 factories have closed their doors in 
the first half of the year, while 20 new factories opened during 
this same time, according to the Ministry of Commerce. 
 
¶6. (SBU) While U.S. demand for garments has fallen, the decline in 
imports from Cambodia is disproportionately large compared to the 
falloff in total U.S. garment imports, indicating that Cambodia's 
garment industry is losing market share to other regional 
competitors.  The government has responded by extending tax 
incentives to manufactures, but has thus far failed to address the 
real challenges to the competitiveness of Cambodia's garment 
industry (Ref A). 
 
¶7. (SBU) Buyers are making decisions to source elsewhere due to 
problems which plague Cambodia's industry, such as poor 
infrastructure, low productivity, strained industrial relations, and 
corruption.  For example, a deal that reportedly would have been 
worth more than USD100 million annually in orders from Japan, went 
to Bangladesh last year instead.  President of the Garment 
Manufacturer's Association in Cambodia Van Sou Ieng told Econoff 
that "informal fees" encountered during the customs clearance 
process for a sample shipment factored heavily in the Japanese 
buyer's decision to source elsewhere. 
 
Tourist Arrivals Down But Not Out 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) Accounting for 16 percent of Cambodia's GDP in 2008, and 
employing roughly 300,000 workers, Cambodia's tourism industry help 
fuel the past decade of rapid economic growth.  However, the global 
economic crisis, coupled with the political turmoil in Thailand, has 
 
taken a toll on the sector's once robust growth.  Growth slowed to 
5.5 percent in 2008, compared to the nearly 20 percent growth in 
¶2007.  According to the Ministry of Tourism's statistics, tourist 
arrivals to Cambodia declined by only 1.1 percent in the first half 
of the year, compared to the same period in 2008.  However, this 
figure does not accurately reflect the significant impact that the 
change in the types of tourists visiting Cambodia is having on the 
sector. 
 
¶9. (SBU) The IMF estimates that tourists arriving by air have fallen 
by double digits so far this year.  Ho Vandy, President of the 
Cambodia Association for Travel Agents (CATA) and Co-Chairman of 
Government-Private Sector Working Group on Tourism, told Econoff 
that long-haul tourists have decreased, replaced by visitors who 
spend less time and less money during their visit. 
According to the Ministry of Tourism, South Korean visitors, who had 
been the largest group visiting Cambodia in 2008, fell an estimated 
33% in the first six months, while tourist arrivals from Vietnam 
have increased by approximately 40% and arrivals from Laos have 
risen 141% during this same period.  (NOTE:  The increase in 
Vietnamese visiting Cambodia may in part be attributable to the 
December 2008 implementation of visa waivers between the two 
countries.  END NOTE.) 
 
¶10. (SBU) The country's foremost tourist destination Siem Reap has 
been hardest hit.  According to the Minister of Tourism, the 
majority of Vietnamese tourists visit Phnom Penh, rather than Siem 
Reap.  Many of these tourists visit Cambodia on inexpensive package 
tours, Ho Vandy explained.  Revenues generated from the increase in 
Vietnamese visitors fall short of offsetting the loss of South 
Korean or other tourists who in general spent more time and money 
per visit. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Hotel occupancy rates in Siem Reap declined 30 to 40 
percent in the first six months of this year.  Ho Vandy reports that 
approximately 7 to 8 percent of Siem Reap's 120 hotels have shut 
their doors temporarily during the low season from March to 
September, another 30 to 40 percent have suffered from profit 
losses, and some have downsized employees by 50%, contributing to 
rising unemployment in the area.  He said that roughly 2,000 workers 
in this sector have already lost their jobs or have been temporarily 
suspended until after the low season, waiting for the sector to 
recover. 
 
¶12. (U) In what may prove a positive sign, tourist arrivals 
increased in July, rising by an estimated 10 percent to offset 
declines earlier in the year, resulting in an increase of 0.63 
percent in the number of tourist arrivals to Cambodia in the first 7 
months.  Ho Vandy also told Econoff that hotel bookings have 
recently picked up for later in the year, with reservations from 
Japan, Europe, and the U.S. on the rise. 
 
Silver Lining? 
-------------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) As other key sectors of the economy are declining, the one 
positive note is growth in the agriculture sector, which the IMF 
predicts to expand by 5% in 2009.  Cambodia's longer-term prospects 
are also hopeful.  While Cambodia's economy is expected to contract 
from 2.75% to 1% in 2009, both the IMF and ADB predict growth to 
resume in 2010.  Contingent on a global economic recovery, and 
assuming that tourism-source and garment-source countries' economies 
recover quickly, Cambodia's economy is predicted to expend by 3.5% 
(ADB) or as much as 4.25% (IMF) in 2010. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶14. (SBU) The sharp decline in economic activity could have 
significant consequences for the sustainably of the government's 
budget, as revenues decline while increased spending is needed in 
priority sectors such as health, education, and infrastructure. 
Sound macroeconomic and financial policies are needed to mitigate 
the impact of the slowdown, but the government has thus far failed 
to launch a comprehensive response to the crisis. 
 
ALLEGRA