09PHNOMPENH626
Khmer Rouge Tribunal:  The Trial of S-21
Tue Aug 25 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXRO0234
RR RUEHCHI RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHNH
DE RUEHPF #0626/01 2370647
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 250647Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1109
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PHNOM PENH 000626 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/MLS, P, D, DRL, S/WCI 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM KJUS PREL EAID CB
SUBJECT:  Khmer Rouge Tribunal:  The Trial of S-21 
Interrogation Center Head Kaing Guek Eav, Week 17 
 
REF: PHNOM PENH 596 AND PREVIOUS 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  Embassy staff routinely observes the proceedings 
of the trial against the notorious Khmer Rouge torture center head, 
widely known as Duch, at the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of 
Cambodia (ECCC) (Reftel).  This report summarizes the 17th week of 
activities inside the court at the Khmer Rouge Tribunal.  More 
technical accounts of the proceedings can be found at: 
www.csdcambodia.org; www.kidcambodia.org and at 
http://socrates.berkeley.edu/~warcrime/. END SUMMARY. 
 
Emotional Week of Civil Party Testimony 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Several days of angry and emotional testimony marked Week 
17, in which civil parties again took the stand to air grievances 
over the fates of family members detained at S-21 and later 
executed.  Several civil parties were given the opportunity to pose 
questions directly to the defendant.  The overall tone of the 
proceedings was more confrontational than in past weeks.  The wife 
of an executed Cambodian diplomat called Duch's actions 
"unforgivable" and suggested he should have committed suicide if he 
truly did not want to carry out his duties as head of S-21.  New 
Zealander Robert Hamill gave some of the most emotionally charged 
testimony of the week, describing in detail how he imagined and 
hoped that Duch would suffer as Hamill's brother Kerry had suffered 
at the prison. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Herewith are observation notes for the week beginning 
August 17, 2009: 
 
Monday, August 17: 
 
Civil Parties Direct Their Anger at Duch 
---------------------------------------- 
 
Three civil party witnesses testified today in front of a full 
audience of mostly Cham men.  French witness Martine Lefeuvre 
testified regarding the death of her husband, former Cambodian 
diplomat Ouk Ket.  Their daughter, Ouk Neary, also spoke.  Ouk was a 
Cambodian embassy official in Senegal when he was called to return 
to Cambodia to help rebuild the country in 1977, after which his 
family lost contact.  Lefeuvre discovered his confession documents 
in S-21 and confirmed his death at the prison. 
 
New Zealander Robert Hamill testified regarding the imprisonment and 
execution of his brother Kerry at S-21.  Kerry Hamill had been 
sailing in the Gulf of Thailand when he was captured by the Khmer 
Rouge Navy.  Kerry was sent to S-21, tortured until he confessed 
that he was a CIA operative, and then executed.  Robert Hamill was 
very emotional during his testimony, saying angrily that he imagined 
and hoped Duch would feel the pain the Hamill family had 
experienced, and that Duch would be tortured and "smashed" like 
S-21's detainees.  At one point when he began using strong language, 
the judges had to ask Hamill to abide by the court's internal 
regulations. 
 
Tuesday, August 18: 
 
Approximately 400 observers, mostly from Kompong Thom and Kandal 
provinces, observed the day's proceedings, in which four civil 
parties testified.  The witnesses included Antonya Tioulong, 
daughter of former Cambodian Minister of National Defense and acting 
Prime Minister Nhiek Tioulong (1962), who testified regarding the 
death of her sister and brother-in-law. 
 
Although the trial process ran smoothly, one of the civil party 
witnesses seemed to have trouble understanding the translation and 
repeated her answers several times.  The Court sound system - 
usually loud and clear - did not broadcast clearly during Duch's 
remarks. 
 
Wednesday, August 19: 
 
300 observers attended the trial.  Most were from Kratie Province. 
Several complained that they had not been prepared for the trip to 
Phnom Penh and the length of the proceedings; several did not have 
money or food with them for lunch, and a Court staffer later 
provided them with bread.  (NOTE:  The ECCC Public Outreach Office 
had arranged to provide lunches for several groups transported from 
rural areas, but had inadvertently missed a group in this case.  END 
NOTE.) 
 
Civil Parties Have Trouble Keeping Focused 
------------------------------------------ 
 
Several civil party witnesses testified regarding the fates of their 
family members.  One of the witnesses had to be reminded by her 
attorney to stay focused on her testimony when she drifted off topic 
 
PHNOM PENH 00000626  002 OF 002 
 
 
to describe her 20-year marriage before her husband was executed. 
However, the dramatic culminating testimony regarding her husband's 
fate was all the more powerful for her detailed description.  The 
wife and daughter of one of Duch's former professors, who was 
detained and executed in S-21, also testified. 
 
The translators seemed to have some trouble keeping up with the 
wide-ranging and emotional witness testimony.  The audience was 
generally quiet, although several murmured to each other during one 
witness' description of her family's ordeal under the Khmer Rouge 
that everyone had suffered the same; the witness' experience was not 
unique. 
 
Thursday, August 20: 
 
The courtroom was nearly full, with a large group of students from a 
youth association in Kandal Province and a group of farmers from 
Kompong Thom Province taking up the largest sections.  The farmers 
said they had left their villages at about 2 AM to take the ECCC 
buses to the court. 
 
Three civil parties testified.  Mr. Chhum Sirath angrily testified 
regarding the detentions and deaths of his two brothers.  At times 
he veered away from the focus of the questioning as he described how 
he had suffered, drifting into discussions of history, poetry, and 
religion, until Court President Nil Nonn instructed him to stay on 
the topics of questioning.  Another civil party, Ou Savorith, 
testified via live video conference from Paris regarding the death 
of his brother at S-21.  The Defense Team requested that the civil 
party lawyers provide evidence that Ou Savorith was in fact related 
to the individual he claimed to be his brother. 
 
There were several technical issues with the translation system 
during the afternoon.  Proceedings were stopped for about 10 minutes 
mid-afternoon and then again about an hour later, forcing the Court 
to end the session early. 
 
RODLEY