09PORTAUPRINCE538
STUDENT DEMONSTRATIONS CONTINUE IN PORT-AU-PRINCE
Fri Jun 05 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Port Au Prince
P 051927Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY PORT AU PRINCE
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0003
INFO HAITI COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
HQ USSOUTHCOM J2 MIAMI FL PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L PORT AU PRINCE 000538


STATE FOR WHA/EX. WHA/CAR
STATE PASS SOUTHCOM FOR POLAD

E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/05/2019
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM HA
SUBJECT: STUDENT DEMONSTRATIONS CONTINUE IN PORT-AU-PRINCE

REF: PORT AU PRINCE 00530


Classified By: Ambassador Janet A. Sanderson for Reasons 1.4 (a,d)

¶1. (U) This message covers incidents reported on June 4 to
1300 local time on June 5.

¶2. (C) An unconfirmed number of students from several State
University faculties violently protested in downtown
Port-au-Prince reportedly to pressure President Preval to
sign the minimum wage law.  Students assaulted Haitian
National Police and MINUSTAH soldiers with rocks, glass and
other debris, and erected barricades.  Security authorities
deployed tear gas in an effort to de-escalate the situation
and deter demonstrators from causing additional
damage/injury.  Post received some reports indicating that
not all protestors are students.  One student was injured and
hospitalized.  Haiti's local commissariat currently has 24
people in custody associated with demonstrations on June 4.
Post suspects that outside elements are influencing the
violent demonstrations.

Student Protests Continue into Second Day
-----------------------------------------

¶3. (SBU) Students from the State University of Haiti's (UEH)
Faculties of Ethnology, Human Sciences (FASCH),
Administration, Management and International Studies
(INAGHEI), Teacher's College, and Medicine and Pharmacy
School continued to demonstrate June 4, demanding that the
government sign the Parliament-approved minimum salary
increase law.  Groups of protestors erected barricades near
the Faculty of Human Science and threw rocks and other debris
at  a police station located near the National Palace.
Students  reportedly attacked and disabled two government
vehicles near the Palace.  Some vehicles were set on fire
near the Ministry of Justice.

¶4. (SBU) Haiti's National Police (HNP) deployed riot police
(CIMO) and UN Police (UNPOL) used  tear gas to deter
protestors.  Police reported several protestors were assisted
by the Haitian Red Cross and treated for tear gas inhalation.
 One student from the Faculty of Human Sciences was injured
and later hospitalized.  HNP representatives reported to RSO
that twenty-four protestors were arrested.

Demonstrations Underway June 5
------------------------------

¶5. (SBU)  Demonstrations continued late morning June 5.  A
group of 100-150 protestors gathered in front of the police
station and prosecutor's office located in downtown
Port-au-Prince and demanded the release of students arrested
the previous day.  Teacher union representatives and
unidentified Parliament members visited the police station
and demanded the release of students.  The Police
Commissioner reportedly denied their requests.  RSO sources
report that police vehicles were attacked.  Haiti's leading
human rights organization (RNDDH) reported to the media that
students announced a major demonstration to demand the
release of the 24 protestors.  As of 1300 local time,
protestors reportedly threw rocks  and broke car windshields
in the Champs de Mars area near the National Palace.

¶6.  (C) Comment:  Post suspects that the demand for the
promulgation of the minimum salary law is not the only
pretext for the recent demonstrations.  Fanmi Lavalas Deputy
Sorel Francois told Poloff June 5 that the student protestors
were apparently being ''pushed'' by an outside force.  He
said the protestors' ever-changing demands concealed a more
radical agenda, and he had heard that the students planned to
go ''very far'' to push their demands.  Some student
organization leaders told Economic Specialist on June 5 that
they did not support the violence on June 4 and indicated
that the demonstrations were possibly infiltrated by other
dissidents.  Students admit that they are interested in the
minimum salary increase law because their parents are factory
workers and are generally concerned with all social issues.
Some student organizations will begin meeting June 6 to
develop their action plan.  They plan to continue mobilizing
supporters for the cause, but they would like to rally
peacefully.  Student reactions could depend on the results of
President Preval's current meeting with several members of
Parliament and private sector to discuss the minimum salary
law.  Post will report on updates septel.

SANDERSON