09PRETORIA2565
SOUTH AFRICA POLITICAL NEWSLETTER DECEMBER 7-DECEMBER 11
Fri Dec 11 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO3675
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSA #2565/01 3451351
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 111351Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0607
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
RUEHTN/AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 7432
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 1498
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 9787UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PRETORIA 002565 
 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PGOV ASEC SF POL PAS ECON
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICA POLITICAL NEWSLETTER DECEMBER 7-DECEMBER 11 
 
PRETORIA 00002565  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (SBU)  This was written in partnership with the Open Source 
Center's Pretoria Bureau.  The newsletter is open to contributions 
from officers in the Embassy or in the Consulates who wish to 
highlight political trends.  Contact Madeline Seidenstricker or 
Jonathan Smallridge for more information, or to make contributions. 
The newsletter also is available on the Political Section's blog, "A 
View from South Africa," found on intelink.gov. 
 
------------------ 
International News 
------------------ 
 
Zuma Says Long-Term Financing Package for Adaptation, Mitigation 
"Central" to Copenhagen Talks 
 
 
¶2. (U)  On December 9, Johannesburg SABC 3 Television said climate 
change also dominated President Jacob Zuma's State Visit to Zambia. 
He will reportedly advocate Africa's position in Copenhagen next 
week, seek support from peers, and insist on a commitment from 
global powers.  Zuma said the impact of global warming was 
undermining the continent's developmental agenda.  He said, "Our 
view is that an ambitious and long-term financing package for both 
adaptation and mitigation is a central element of the Copenhagen 
negotiations, and one that will have significant impact on the 
extent to which developing countries can take mitigation action." 
[English-language television channel, nominally independent but 
partially funded by government] 
 
Civil Society Groups Laud RSA's Pledge To Reduce Greenhouse Gas 
Emissions 
 
¶3. (U)  On December 9, The Durban Mercury reported the South African 
Presidency's announcement that the nation would cut emissions below 
anticipated trends by "around 34 percent by 2020 and by around 42 
percent by 2025," although this was "conditional on pledges by 
developed countries."  This is the first time that Africa's largest 
emitter has put actual emissions-reduction figures on the table, and 
came ahead of the opening of the two-week UN Framework Convention on 
Climate Change talks in Copenhagen aimed at getting a legally 
binding agreement on reducing greenhouse gas emissions.  Tasneem 
Essop, World Wildlife Fund South Africa's climate change policy 
activist, said this pledge was an "example of emerging economies 
contributing in a meaningful way to secure a successful outcome in 
Copenhagen," adding that collective offers by countries like Brazil, 
India, China, South Korea, Indonesia and South Africa on actions to 
limit their emissions growth "represent more tons of carbon 
reductions than what industrialized countries have offered thus 
far."  The report added that meanwhile, developed countries have not 
yet responded to South Africa's announcement about its intentions to 
limit growth by 2025.  [The Durban Mercury Online in English -- 
Website of regional KwaZulu-Natal newspaper, privately-owned by 
Independent Newspaper Company; URL: http://www.themercury.co.za/] 
 
Zambia, RSA Sign Six Agreements To Enhance Economic Development 
 
¶4. (U)  ZNBC Television reported that Zambia and South Africa signed 
six Memoranda of Understanding [MoU] on 8 December, which were aimed 
at enhancing bilateral economic development.  These included regular 
diplomatic consultations, trade and industrial development 
cooperation, agriculture and livestock, health, energy, and 
geological, mining, and minerals.  Zambian President Rupiah Banda 
stressed that "these MoUs have a purpose, and those purposes are to 
be implemented."  President Jacob Zuma invited Banda to visit South 
Africa to "take further" the issues discussed. 
QAfrica to "take further" the issues discussed. 
[Government-controlled national television station] 
 
South Africa Meets with Swiss Government 
 
 
¶5. (U)  Department of International Relations and Cooperation 
(DIRCO) Deputy Minister Ebrahim Ebrahim co-chaired the Second South 
Africa-Switzerland Annual consultations with the State Secretary of 
the Confederation of Switzerland Michael Amb|hl in Pretoria on 
December 7.  The consultation took place within the context of the 
North-South Dialogue and was aimed at deepening bilateral relations 
between the two countries.  The two sides discussed cooperation in 
science and technology, bilateral development, preparations for the 
2010 World Cup.  Additionally, the two countries exchanged views on 
issues related to the entire African continent.  (DIRCO Briefing, 
December 7) 
 
------------- 
Domestic News 
------------- 
 
Minister Tackles Homes Affairs Corruption 
 
¶6. (U)  Home Affairs Minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma has launched a 
 
PRETORIA 00002565  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
series of investigations into fraudulent and corrupt activities in 
the Department of Home Affairs.  Home Affairs will investigate 
fraudulent registration of births and the illegal issuing of 
identity documents and passports to foreign nationals.  More than 31 
Home Affairs officials have been suspended.  The suspended officials 
from Kwazulu-Natal, Mpumalanga, Eastern Cape and Limpopo offices, 
joined a list of 28 more officials who were fired in November.  This 
brings the total number of suspended officials since November to 59. 
 Dlamini-Zuma told reporters that corruption in Home Affairs is a 
serious threat to national security.  She noted that it undermines 
the stability of democracy and costs the state thousands of dollars. 
 More importantly, fraudulent IDs give criminals the power to apply 
for South African passports which are then used for criminal 
activities abroad, she added.  (Buanews, December 11, 2009) 
 
By-Elections in KwaZulu-Natal Favor Inkatha Freedom Party and 
Democratic Alliance 
 
¶7. (U)  The Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) and the Democratic Alliance 
(DA) won by-elections held in KwaZulu-Natal.  The IFP won two wards 
in Eshowe and Mbabazane, while the DA won one ward in the Hibiscus 
Coast, Port Shepstone.  The elections were well organized and no 
incidents of violence were reported said the Independent Electoral 
Commission (IEC) Chief Electoral Officer Mawethu Mosery.  Mosery 
reported that the DA has increased its voter base from 849 votes to 
1209 voters since the 2006 local government elections, while the IFP 
has lost voters from 5 percent in the local government elections to 
0.8 percent.  The African National Congress (ANC) also suffered a 
sharp decline from 41.4 percent to 29.9 percent in KwaZulu-Natal. 
Mosery noted that trends indicate that South Africa is moving toward 
a political landscape dominated by the ANC and the DA.  (Sowetan, 
December 10, 2009) 
 
Prosecuting Authority Supports Re-Introducing Specialized Units 
 
¶8. (U)  The National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) supports the 
government's decision to re-introduce specialised units, including 
the Child Protection Unit.  The NPA's Sexual Offences and Community 
Affairs Unit Head Thoko Majokweni told reporters that the 
specialized units worked well and that there has been a performance 
gap since the units were disbanded.  The NPA intends intensifying 
its programs to deal with human trafficking, domestic violence and 
sexual offences.  (Eyewitness News, December 11, 2009). 
 
DA to challenge Simelane's appointment 
 
¶9. (U)  DA leader and Western Cape Premier Helen Zille will lodge 
papers in the North Gauteng High Court in protest against Menzi 
Simelane's appointment as NPA head.  Simelane's appointment in late 
November was met by a storm of controversy.  The DA believes 
Simelane's appointment as National Director of Public Prosecutions 
is unlawful and improper.  Zille will lead the party's approach to 
the court to challenge the appointment.  A complaint laid with the 
General Council of the Bar against Simelane is also still pending. 
Simelane's conduct as Justice Department Director-General was 
criticized by former speaker of Parliament Frene Ginwala during the 
inquiry into whether former NPA boss Vusi Pikoli was fit to hold 
office.  (Eyewitness News, December 10, 2009) 
 
ANCYL Leader Says IFP No Longer Political Force; Provokes Buthelezi 
 
¶10. (U)  ISOLEZWE in Zulu reported on 7 December that ANC Youth 
League leader Julius Malema has provoked IFP President Dr. 
QLeague leader Julius Malema has provoked IFP President Dr. 
Mangosuthu Buthelezi "again" by saying that he was made by the ANC, 
but then went astray.  Malema said this on December 6 in Qalakahle, 
Ndwedwe, while handing over a home to the family of Mthokozisi 
Nkwanyana, who died during the August demonstrations at University 
of South Africa [UNISA].  He said that the IFP was no longer a 
political force and should stop provoking people.  Malema said that 
"KwaZulu-Natal would never return into the hands of these people, 
who did not know politics."  He added: "We do not fear the IFP." 
This is not the first time Malema took a shot at Buthelezi. He had 
previously said that when canvassing for votes, they would go 
straight to Buthelezi's home and take all his children and make them 
a part of the ANC.  The IFP in KwaZulu-Natal responded by saying 
that Malema is a person who voices any thoughts he has. 
[Mainstream independent daily newspaper focused on the Zulu 
community of KwaZulu-Natal, privately owned by the Independent Group 
of newspapers] 
Gips