09PRETORIA2103
SOUTH AFRICA POLITICAL NEWSLETTER OCTOBER 13-OCTOBER 16
Fri Oct 16 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO2188
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSA #2103/01 2891603
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 161603Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9891
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
RUEHTN/AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 7235
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 1317
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 9598UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PRETORIA 002103 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PGOV ASEC SF POL PAS ECON
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICA POLITICAL NEWSLETTER OCTOBER 13-OCTOBER 16 
 
PRETORIA 00002103  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) This was written in partnership with the Open Source 
Center's Pretoria Bureau.  The newsletter is open to contributions 
from officers in the Embassy or in the Consulates who wish to 
highlight political trends.  Contact Madeline Seidenstricker or 
Jonathan Smallridge for more information, or to make contributions. 
The newsletter also is available on the Political Section's blog, "A 
View from South Africa," found on intelink.gov. 
 
------------- 
Domestic News 
------------- 
 
RSA Muslims Fault Academic's Claim of Terror Plot Within Local 
Community in 2010 
 
 
¶2. (SBU)  Pretoria-based International Institute for Islamic Studies 
(IIIS) Professor Hussein Solomon issued a paper claiming that 
"militants" had already established terror cells in South Africa, 
ahead of the 2010 World Cup; he linked the National Intelligence 
Agency's (NIA's)recent interception of a telephone call, reportedly 
made from Khayelitsha, to a supposed Al-Qaeda-linked Al-Shabaab 
extremist group in Somalia.  Voice of the Cape Online reported on 14 
October that a Muslim academic, Dr. Rashid Omar, rejected Solomon's 
allegations.  Several VOC contributors likewise dismissed Solomon's 
claims and called on him to substantiate them. The Al Jamah Party 
said the IIIS was full of people "most hostile" to Muslims and 
lacked credibility.  However, the percentage of VOC online poll 
participants who did not agree with Solomon's claims dropped from 
82% two years ago to just under 60%.  [Website of Voice of the Cape 
radio station, reporting local and international news of importance 
to the South African Muslim community; URL: http://www.vocfm.co.za] 
 
RSA: Chief of Somali Community Denies Members' Involvement in 
Terrorism 
 
¶3. (SBU)  Spokesmen for Somalis in South Africa also rejected 
Solomon's charges.  Sheikh Abdirashid Afi Sheik, chairperson of the 
Somali Community Board in Western Cape, told Voice of the Cape on 13 
October that "Somali's were happy with the South African government 
for offering them asylum and would not abuse the privilege by 
engaging in terrorism activities."  A number of Somalis to whom VOC 
spoke "strongly denied" the allegations fearing these could "incite 
further local South Africans to act against us," in light of 
previous xenophobic attacks against them.  [Cape Town Voice of the 
Cape Online in English -- Website of Voice of the Cape radio 
station, reporting local and international news of importance to the 
South African Muslim community; URL: http://www.vocfm.co.za] 
 
NIA Spokesperson Dismisses Muslim Academic's Claim of Terror Cells 
in RSA 
 
 
¶4. (SBU)  In an interview with SAfm on 13 October, the NIA sought to 
allay fears of possible foreign terrorist attacks ahead of the 2010 
FIFA World Cup. NIA spokesperson Lorna Daniels refused to comment on 
Solomon's terror claims, saying his analysis was not based on 
accurate information.  She added that the NIA was working on "all 
threats" saying the 2010 preparations was "another major aspect" of 
the NIA's work.  [National SABC radio service, nominally independent 
but partially funded by government] 
 
RSA Paper Faults Plan To Establish White Farmers in Other African 
Countries 
 
¶5. (SBU)  The Citizen's 13 October editorial said that Agriculture 
Minister Tina Joemat-Petersen's announcement that government is 
supporting a new drive to establish white SA farmers in other 
African countries "resembles Monty Python-esque absurdity." 
Joemat-Petersen reportedly told farmers' organization AgriSA that 
QJoemat-Petersen reportedly told farmers' organization AgriSA that 
government remained committed to transferring 30% of white-owned 
farmland to blacks within five years but that "this would leave 
little room for white farmers to expand," therefore, the government 
was negotiating deals with five countries.  The paper pointed out 
that South Africa has become a net importer of food over the past 
two years and that there was "more than anecdotal evidence" that 
many black farmers were struggling to sustain production on land 
acquired by them, and that many such farms are lying fallow. 
Further, the paper added that up to 800 commercial white farmers, 
pushed by uncertainties over land claims, have already sought 
greener pastures in countries like Mozambique without government 
support. So the "sudden concern" for white farmers was "hard to 
stomach."  [Privately-owned weekday newspaper] 
 
Zuma Tells "the Left" To Give Him Space 
 
¶6. (U)  African National Congress (ANC) Secretary general Gwede 
Mantashe told the ruling party's alliance partners - the Congress of 
South African Trade Unions (COSATU) and the South African Communist 
 
PRETORIA 00002103  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
Party (SACP) - to respect the autonomy of the ANC and to give it 
space to implement its election manifesto.  During the Alliance 
Political Council meeting at Luthuli House in Johannesburg on 
October 12, the ANC leadership laid down the rules of engagement and 
told left-leaning organizations to stay out of its affairs.  The 
meeting was attended by ANC top leadership and national office 
bearers from COSATU and the SACP.  The Sowetan newspaper reported 
that the ANC delegation sought to reaffirm itself as the leader of 
the alliance, after some senior ANC leaders have accused COSATU of 
trying to take over the party.  (Sowetan, October, 13, 2009) 
 
Service Delivery Protests Continue 
 
¶7. (U)  Service delivery protests are spreading throughout 
Mpumalanga. In Bethal, community members on October 12 blockaded 
roads to prevent traffic in the Mzinoni Township, disgruntled 
residents in Kinross in Mpumalanga started gathering at the local 
sports ground waiting for Mayor Sipho Nkosi to address them, and in 
the Siyathuthuka Township near Belfast there were violent protests 
that led to the arrest of 18 people. (SABCNEWS, October, 13, 2009) 
 
White Farmers Upset in Limpopo 
 
¶8. (U)  Farmers in Mbahela have accused the Limpopo Department of 
Agriculture of using apartheid-era tactics to take farms to give to 
cronies.  Farmers say the Department "imposed" a partnership between 
the government and a company to impart skills on previously 
disadvantaged farmers, which led to some official siphoning off 
land.  Government officials claim that the farmers were warned that 
the provincial government planned to divide their farms with 
disadvantaged farmers, and spokesperson Thembi Makhuvele said it was 
a strategy the department was using to turn agriculture production 
around in the province.  (Sowetan, October, 15, 2009) 
 
------------------ 
International News 
------------------ 
 
RSA: Trade Minister Comments on 'Major' Trade Policy Challenges 
Facing Country 
 
 
¶9. (U)  Radio SAfm interviewed Trade and Industry Minister Dr. Rob 
Davies on 13 October on the major trade policy challenges facing 
South Africa.  Davies cited an "active industrial policy" as a major 
focus of South Africa's trade policies which could affect tariff 
policy for "high employment" sectors as well as the pursuit of 
developmental region integration, particularly in South Africa's 
approach to the Southern African Customs Union and the Southern 
African Development Community.  Asked how realistic were the 
Millennium Development Goals - particularly halving unemployment and 
the promise of creating half a million decent jobs - given the 
economic downturn, Davies said the government's [ANC] manifesto 
commitment was to "do everything we can to create decent work," 
adding that "we will be working energetically to create the maximum 
number of jobs" given the opportunities of the industrial sectors 
linked to the infrastructure investment program. [National SABC 
radio service, nominally independent but partially funded by 
government] 
 
Zuma Returns from Brazil 
 
¶10. (U)  President Zuma arrived back in South Africa on October 10, 
having concluded his two day State Visit to Brazil where he attended 
a Business Forum in Sao Paulo, met with Brazilian President Lula Da 
Silva in Brasilia and met with Sao Paulo Governor, Jose Serra.  He 
addressed a Business Forum organized to facilitate interaction 
between South African and Brazilian business.  The forum was 
attended by a 50-strong delegation of business representatives from 
Qattended by a 50-strong delegation of business representatives from 
South Africa.  On the trip, he was accompanied by International 
Relations and Cooperation Minister (DIRCO) Maite Nkoane Mashabane, 
Sport and Recreation Minister Makhenkesi Stofile, and Trade and 
Industry Minister Rob Davies. (The Presidency, October 10) 
 
Government Visit to Sweden a Success 
 
¶11. (U) Deputy President Kgalema Motlanthe, accompanied by Deputy 
Minister Sue van der Merwe, concluded his two day working visit to 
Sweden after attending the Olaf Palme Day Conference and other 
series of meetings with the civil society of Sweden.  Motlanthe had 
an informal lunch with the leader of the Social Democratic Party of 
Sweden, Mona Sahlin, and was the Guest of Honor at the Olaf Palme 
Day Conference.  Motlanthe also met with members of the Swedish 
Business Community, the Swedish Solidarity Groups and the Chairman 
of Stockholm Enskilda Bank. (The Presidency, October 11) 
 
Government Focused on Western Sahara 
 
¶12. (U)  DIRCO Deputy Minister Ebrahim Ebrahim held discussions with 
 
PRETORIA 00002103  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
the Speaker of the Saharawi National Assembly and Head of the 
Polisario Front delegation in the negotiation with Morocco, Mahfud 
Ali Beiba, in Pretoria on October 9.  The discussions held with 
Beiba were within the context of South Africa's continued support 
for international efforts toward Western Sahara self-determination 
in accordance with democratic principles and United Nations 
resolutions.  (DIRCO Briefing, October 9) 
 
 
South Africa, Russia to Meet in Late October 
 
¶13. (U)  The Intergovernmental Committee On Trade And Economic 
Cooperation (ITEC) with the Russian Federation will take place on 
October 26 and 27 in South Africa.  South Africa will be led by 
DIRCO Minister Mashabane, while the Russian side will be led by 
Minister of Natural Resources Yuri Trutnev.  The two sides are 
expected to discuss issues about the reform of the United Nations 
Security Council (UNSC) and the Brazil, Russia, India and China 
(BRIC) forum.  There is a standing invitation to Zuma from President 
Dmitry Medvedev to visit Russia within the next six months.  (DIRCO 
Briefing, October 13) 
 
South Africa, DRC to Meet in Late October 
 
¶14. (U)  The Bi-National Commission between the Democratic Republic 
of the Congo (DRC) and South Africa will take place on October 30. 
The meetings will be preceded by a private ministerial meeting.  A 
number of issues are expected to be on the table, including the 
progress of post-conflict reconstruction, and assistance for the DRC 
police and security forces. (DIRCO Briefing, October 13)