09PRETORIA1752
SOUTH AFRICA POLITICAL NEWSLETTER AUGUST 23-AUGUST 29
Mon Aug 31 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO4666
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSA #1752/01 2430614
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 310614Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9461
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
RUEHTN/AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 7086
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 1180
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 9452UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PRETORIA 001752 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PGOV ASEC SF POL PAS ECON
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICA POLITICAL NEWSLETTER AUGUST 23-AUGUST 29 
 
PRETORIA 00001752  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) This was written in partnership with the Open Source 
Center's Pretoria Bureau.  The newsletter is open to contributions 
from officers in the Embassy or in the Consulates who wish to 
highlight political trends.  Contact Madeline Seidenstricker or 
Jonathan Smallridge for more information, or to make contributions. 
The newsletter also is available on the Political Section's blog, "A 
View from South Africa," found on intelink.gov. 
 
------------------ 
International News 
------------------ 
 
Senior Foreign Policy Leader Meets with American Delegation 
 
¶1. (U)  Deputy Minister of International Relations and Cooperation 
Ebrahim Ebrahim met with a visiting CODEL on August 20.  The meeting 
sought to bolster the partnership between the United States and 
South Africa to deal with the priority issues of unemployment, job 
creation, rural development, Justice, energy co-operation and food 
security.   Additionally, American officials met with Gauteng 
Minister in the Executive Committee (MEC) for Finance and Economic 
Development and attended a working lunch hosted by Deputy Minister 
Andries Nel of the Department of Justice and Constitutional 
Development in Cape Town on August 21.  (DFA Briefing, 20 August) 
 
 
Outcomes of Zuma's Trip to Angola Become Clearer 
 
¶2. (U) During President Jacob Zuma's August 20-21 state visit to 
Angola, Zuma met with Angolan President Eduardo dos Santos and 
discussed a number of issues aimed at improving bi-lateral relations 
between the two countries.  The main themes included a desire to 
strengthen the ties of political, economic, technical-scientific, 
and cultural cooperation in the fields of infrastructure, trade, 
industry, agriculture, health, sport and recreation, and oil and 
gas.  Various cooperation agreements were signed, namely in the 
fields of "Regular Political Consultations," infrastructure, 
industry, trade, sport and recreation, air services and human 
settlements.  The two leaders agreed to maintain a regular, 
permanent dialogue in an effort to harmonize their position on 
issues of bilateral and sub-regional interest in the field of 
energy, taking into account the interests of both countries. 
(Presidency, August 21) 
 
Zuma in Zimbabwe 
 
¶3. (U) President Zuma visited Zimbabwe August 27-28 to speak at the 
country's farm trade show and to press for quicker action from the 
unity government there.  Zuma's trip follows a visit made by 
Zimbabwean Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai to South Africa three 
weeks ago.  Zuma discussed a number of issues with Mugabe and 
Tsvangirai over the unity agreement.  (AFP, August 24) 
 
 
SADC Military Exercise Scheduled for September 
 
¶4. (U)  Eleven Southern African Development Community members will 
commit about 6,500 troops, police and support staff to the Northern 
Cape early next month as part of a SADC joint military exercise 
called "Exercise Golfinho."  The exercise is based on a fictional 
country called the "Republic of Lohatlha," which suffers from 
internal stabilization.  Troops on land, in the air, and on the sea 
will attempt to infiltrate and stabilize the rebel group.  The 
purpose of the exercise, which will also be acted out in Namibia's 
Walvis Bay as the port of entry, is to test the SADC's abilities to 
conduct a peacekeeping mission.  (SAPA, August 19) 
 
------------- 
Domestic News 
------------- 
 
Congress of the People (COPE) Youth Angered by Purge Reports 
¶5. (U)  The Congress of the People's (COPE) youth wing is angry with 
Q5. (U)  The Congress of the People's (COPE) youth wing is angry with 
allegations that the party's interim president, Mosiuoa Lekota, was 
purging provincial leaders he suspects of supporting the parties 
deputy, Mbhazima Shilowa, for the presidency of the party. 
According to youth wing national coordinator Malusi Booi, Lekota 
visited three provinces -- the Eastern Cape, North West and Northern 
Cape last week, allegedly as part of his plan to catch his opponents 
unprepared.  A congress national committee (CNC) member told the 
Mail & Guardian that Lekota's has already expelled four provincial 
leaders -- Andile Nkuhlu (Eastern Cape), Nikiwe Num-Mangqo (North 
West), Lawrence Khoza (Gauteng) and Mbulelo Ncedana (Western Cape). 
In a presentation made to the congress working committee (CWC) last 
Monday, the Eastern Cape leadership, led by Secretary Archie Ralo, 
accused Lekota of undermining protocol through his "unpronounced, 
unknown visit" to the three provinces.  COPE National Spokesperson, 
Phillip Dexter, defended Lekota's visits, saying they were 
sanctioned by the CNC.  Dexter said "It is no secret that he is 
 
PRETORIA 00001752  002 OF 002 
 
 
visiting all provinces where the organization is functioning below 
expectations.  That includes swapping people around in leadership 
positions."  (Mail and Guardian August, 25, 2009) 
Northwest ANC MEC in Trouble 
¶6. (U) A Northwest African National Congress (ANC) MEC is in trouble 
for allegedly accusing the Zuma government of not keeping its 
electoral promise to prioritize education with adequate funding. 
Johannes Tselapedi, the provincial MEC for Education, told delegates 
at a meeting of the general council of the South Africa Democratic 
Teachers' Union (SADTU) on Friday that the ANC's Polokwane 
resolutions on public education system were unrealistic because 
there was no budget for such goals.  His statements have led the 
Congress of South African Trade Unions and SADTU in Northwest to 
call for his axing, saying he has embarrassed the ruling party.  The 
ANC last month disbanded its Northwest executive committee following 
allegations that most of its members were COPE sympathizers.  (The 
Times, August, 24, 2009) 
Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) Leader Says ANC Will Rule Forever 
¶7. (U)  Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi says 
it will be a while until the ANC is no longer in power.  Writing in 
the IFP's weekly newsletter, he commented the ANC has used its 15 
years in power wisely, thereby winning the hearts of the voters. 
Buthelezi added that it was unlikely that the Democratic Alliance 
(DA) would close the poll gap by defeating the ANC in the 2011 
elections.  His comments come as opposition parties plan to form a 
united front for the 2011 local government elections and national 
election in 2014.  (Sowetan, August 25, 2009) 
IFP Youth Brigade Nominates Musa Zondi for President 
¶8. (U)  The IFP Youth Brigade has proposed IFP General-Secretary 
Musa Zondi as presidential candidate for the party's conference. 
Brigade member Mkhuleko Hlengwa announced this at a media conference 
in Durban.  Hlengwa says Zondi is the only candidate who can 
preserve the legacy of the party.  She denied allegations that there 
are divisions among the youth members, saying everyone is 
collectively responsible of how the party performs in any election. 
(SABCNEWS, August, 26, 2009) 
Service Delivery protest in Rustenburg 
¶9. (U)  Rustenburg police fired rubber bullets and teargas to 
disperse protesters who blocked a road in Ikageng near Rustenburg on 
Tuesday.  Constable Botshelo Mothutsane reported that 200 people 
burned tires and blocked the road with stones to protest against the 
lack of service delivery in the area.  Fifty-six of protestors were 
arrested and charged with public violence. (News 24, August,25,2009) 
 
Police Brutality During Service Delivery Protests 
¶10. (U) Poloffs attended a public lectured at the University of 
Johannesburg this week where a sociology researcher from the 
university told the audience the sociology department is 
investigating cases of police brutality having occurred during the 
service delivery protests.  The researcher cited incidents in 
Balfour were police fired rubber bullets at innocent civilians.  The 
researcher then asked ANC chairperson Baleka Mbete, who was speaking 
at the lecture, why the ANC did not condemn police brutality during 
the protest.  Mbete told the audience that the party was not aware 
of police brutality but as soon as the research is completed the ANC 
must be notified so it can comment accordingly.  (August, 25, 2009) 
Gips