09PRAGUE640
VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN DISCUSSES DEFENSE ISSUES WITH
Thu Oct 29 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Prague
VZCZCXRO3714
PP RUEHIK
DE RUEHPG #0640/01 3021026
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 291026Z OCT 09 ZDS
FM AMEMBASSY PRAGUE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1867
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 PRAGUE 000640 
 
C O R R E C T E D  C O P Y - ADDING PARA 18 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
EUR/CE FOR JBERGEMANN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EUN EZ EG PGOV PREL
SUBJECT: VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN DISCUSSES DEFENSE ISSUES WITH 
CZECHS 
 
PRAGUE 00000640  001.4 OF 004 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: While much of Vice President Biden's 
discussions with Czech officials focused on missile defense, 
he also spoke in depth about Afghanistan, research 
cooperation and energy security.  Biden said the U.S. looks 
forward to Czech participation in a new phased, adaptive 
approach (PAA) to missile defense but stressed that this is a 
decision Czechs must make themselves.  Biden particularly 
highlighted USG interest in research and development 
cooperation as the PAA moves forward.  Czech political 
leaders across party lines pressed for specific ways in which 
the Czech Republic could participate in this new phased, 
adaptive approach.   Biden noted that Secretary Gates was 
discussing this with NATO Defense Ministers in Bratislava 
October 23 and called the November 6 High Level Defense Group 
the proper forum for more detailed discussions of this and 
other issues ("from Hercules to conventional help you might 
want"). 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary Continued: The Czechs also commented on the 
U.S. missile defense policy review decision.  Senators 
Alexandr Vondra and Karel Schwarzenberg expressed 
disappointment over the USG security policy review decision, 
as well as the manner in which it was announced. 
Left-of-center CSSD,s Lubomir Zaoralek express quite a 
different sentiment, however, thanking this administration 
for "the suspension of Missile Defense" and welcoming "a new 
relationship and a new opportunity." 
 
¶3. (SBU) Biden and the Czechs also discussed 
Afghanistan/Pakistan and energy security, both of which CSSD 
Parliamentarian Jan Hamacek characterized as more pressing 
issues than MD.  PM Fischer highlighted that the Czechs would 
be sending an additional 35 troops to Afghanistan.  Biden 
noted U.S. interest in working with the Czechs on energy 
security and renewable energy, and strongly advocated 
Westinghouse's bid for the Temelin tender. End Summary. 
 
---------- 
Biden to Czechs - "We're Not Going Anywhere" 
---------- 
¶4. (SBU) During Vice President Biden's meetings with Czech 
officials, Biden emphasized that the USG is tied to the 
Atlantic alliance and firmly anchored to NATO and "We're not 
going anywhere."  He focused on addressing misunderstandings, 
misrepresentations, and "understandable anxiety" concerning 
U.S. policy.  Czech Prime Minister Jan Fischer welcomed the 
meeting as an opportunity to speak "as allies and partners" 
and noted that he considers the U.S. "an exceptional ally" 
and values our "strategic cooperation."  Biden commented, "We 
are at an inflection point in history; we have a chance to 
bend the course of history and avoid the terrible violence of 
the last century. There are no answers without a stable 
central Europe." 
 
---------- 
Biden Encourages Czech Involvement in Missile Defense 
---------- 
¶5. (SBU) Biden acknowledged that the changed Missile Defense 
policy had caused anxiety in some quarters, but stressed that 
the phased, adaptive approach is more effective at countering 
the existing threat and protecting our European allies. 
Praising Czech research and development capacity, Biden said 
the USG wants Czech participation - if the Czech Republic 
chooses to do so.  Reinforcing his message of U.S. 
commitment, Biden said, "Article Five means something to us, 
and this new MD architecture is an Article Five commitment." 
 
---------- 
Czechs Ask - What are the Details? 
---------- 
¶6. (SBU)  Prime Minister Fischer and others expressed keen 
interest in participating in the new missile defense system, 
but stressed their desire to know more concretely what form 
that participation could take.  Senator and former Foreign 
Minister Karel Schwarzenberg summed up the Czech sentiment 
best when he stated to Biden, "Facta, non verba; We need to 
know in concrete and detailed terms what role the Czech 
Republic can play and what the possibilities are."  The Vice 
President commented that the ongoing Bratislava NATO 
ministerial was addressing some of those issues, and the 
November 6 High Level Defense Group (HLDG) would be the 
appropriate fora to discuss in detail the new MD 
architecture, as well as issues such as C-130s, FMF, and 
other military aid.  On these issues the Vice President 
stated, "The U.S. HLDG participants will know clearly what I 
expect them to do."  On the new architecture Biden committed 
 
PRAGUE 00000640  002.4 OF 004 
 
 
that the USG will "let you know exactly what we have in 
mind," although he cautioned in this area that, "it's going 
to take time." 
 
---------- 
PM Fischer Flags Czech Interest - C-130s, FMF, RDTE MOU... 
---------- 
¶7.  (SBU) PM Fischer also noted that the Czechs are very 
interested in acquiring C-130s.  He stated that "we want to 
negotiate the price and revisit this issue."  (Note: The 
Czechs have received a P and A initial price of USD 111 
million, which they regard as too high.  End Note.)  He also 
commented that Czechs feel they receive too little FMF in 
comparison with Poland.  With respect to research and 
development cooperation, PM Fischer stated that they would 
like this not just in the military sphere, but in a broader 
range of fields.  Fischer also noted his appreciation for the 
upcoming establishment of the Office of Naval Research (ONR) 
and said the Education Ministry could be its partner. 
Fischer also touched upon the RDTE MOU as a key step, and 
noted that the Czechs would like to finalize this legal work 
as soon as possible. 
 
---------- 
Czech Concern - Who Pays? 
---------- 
¶8. (SBU) Senator and former Deputy Prime Minister Alexandr 
Vondra noted that "I'm in favor of working with you to 
strengthen NATO and of participating in the phased, adaptive 
approach to the Missile Defense system, but I have my doubts 
about NATO's response to the U.S. call for burden-sharing." 
He indicated that he hoped this new MD plan would 
materialize, and not be a virtual system that evaporates in 
the absence of resources. Biden responded by noting that the 
USG has no false expectations on burden sharing and that we 
are not expecting money from the French or Germans.  Biden 
also assured Vondra that the USG has already covered the 
costs of the first part of this phased, adaptive approach. 
 
---------- 
Mixed Sentiments on MD's Past Handling; Interest in Future 
Architecture 
---------- 
¶9. (SBU) Czech officials, while eager for details, took 
different views of how missile defense had been handled in 
the past, particularly the public aspects. Schwarzenberg said 
that the way in which Czechs received the "message in the 
night" that MD was canceled was unhelpful, since missile 
defense had "special importance" in this part of Europe. 
Schwarzenberg relayed an anecdote comparing Czech feelings to 
that of a lover led on to believe lovemaking was imminent but 
then suddenly rejected and left frustrated.  "In spite of 
all, we are friends of the U.S.," he said.  In contrast, CSSD 
Parliamentarian Zaoralek thanked Biden for the USG 
"suspending" the radar plan.  In Zaoralek's opinion this is a 
new beginning for U.S.-Czech relations on a more balanced and 
equal level.  He and several other Czech politicians stressed 
the importance of MD's being within a NATO context.  In 
response to the way in which the decision was announced, 
Biden stated, "In one sense we owe you an apology.  I wish I 
had come before any announcement had been made." 
 
---------- 
Afghanistan - Praise for Czech Efforts; USG Not Drawing Down 
---------- 
¶10. (SBU) Biden thanked PM Fischer and others for what the 
Czechs are doing in Afghanistan and offered praise for Czech 
troops.  He acknowledged that deployments are not popular in 
the Czech Republic, the U.S. or elsewhere.  Biden emphasized 
that the USG has no intention of decreasing our presence in 
Afghanistan; the only question is how to shape the best 
policy.  Biden stressed three linked issues: stability of 
Afghanistan; elimination of Al Qaeda; and stability in 
Pakistan.  Biden characterized Pakistan as "the most 
dangerous country in the world, brimming with nuclear weapons 
and a large population of radicalized elements." 
 
¶11. (SBU) PM Fischer noted that the Czechs want to strengthen 
their presence in Afghanistan, stating "It's about not just 
numbers but also capacity."  Despite budgetary problems, 
Fischer stated that the GoCR is sending 35 more troops. 
Fischer also highlighted that his government has made a 
specific proposal on L-159s for Afghan forces, and that they 
are awaiting a response from the U.S. side.  Fischer flagged 
that the Czechs believe the L-159s would be very effective 
assets and that they wish to discuss financing of this. 
 
PRAGUE 00000640  003.4 OF 004 
 
 
 
---------- 
Russia and Energy Issues 
---------- 
¶12. (SBU) The Vice President was clear to point out that he 
has been dealing with Russia for many years and that while 
"hope springs eternal," this administration is not "naive" 
about Russia.  Christian Democrat (KDU-CSL) Pavel Svoboda 
noted that his party supported radar because it was related 
to rejecting the idea of Russian spheres of influence and 
that it is for this same reason that his party favors 
cooperation on the new MD system.  Svoboda cautioned that 
"some of the steps the US is taking with regard to Russia 
make us nervous," an idea echoed by ODS Parliamentarian 
Miroslava Nemcova. Biden responded by noting that the USG 
rejects and will not compromise on the notion of Russian 
spheres of influence. 
 
 
¶13. (SBU) On energy, the VP pointed out that if Europe could 
find alternatives to Russian sources, this could radically 
change Russian behavior.  Biden warned against letting Russia 
have a monopoly on European energy supplies and noted, "We 
don't care if you purchase nuclear power from France or the 
U.S., but if you purchase from Russia, I have to question 
your judgment."  Biden commented to the PM that he was 
surprised Europe hasn't reacted better to the threat of one 
country's being able to turn off the spigot.  Biden went on 
to note that in some areas of alternative energy Europe is 
ahead of us, and that the USG "is anxious to explore this 
with you." Prime Minister Fischer noted that the Czechs agree 
that Europe must strengthen its independence.  Fischer 
commented that Europe is looking for diverse, stable 
supplies, not just geographically but also in kind.  Thus 
nuclear capacity is important. 
 
---------- 
Temelin Tender and Westinghouse 
---------- 
¶14. (SBU) Fischer commented that Temelin is offering a 
"gigantic" tender and that the GoCR wants this to be as 
transparent as possible.  Fischer flagged Czech interest in a 
deal attractive not only monetarily, but also in terms of 
technical cooperation.  Biden commented, "Have I got a deal 
for you!  If you want to get unhooked from Russia, look to 
Westinghouse."  He questioned why the Czechs would want 
Russia to have control of Czech gas, oil AND nuclear 
supplies.  He also pointed out "Westinghouse is a quality 
company; they don't build Chernobyls."  Biden closed by 
stating, "I know your process will be fair, and I hope you 
understand that Westinghouse is making a good offer." 
 
---------- 
Biden Individual Pull-Asides with Paroubek and Topolanek 
---------- 
¶15. (SBU) Vice President Biden met with left-of-center CSSD 
leader Jiri Paroubek, who said he welcomed the MD decision. 
"I wouldn't word it like the PM, but I would say that we can 
be ready to do this as part of NATO. We are ready to 
negotiate when there is a real outline of the project."  He 
dealt briefly with global issues, noting the Czech's 
geopolitical position as a net importer of raw materials from 
Russia and a net exporter to Germany. "This is our 
geopolitical reality. But that's no reason for us to be 
closed to other countries, even if we are in NATO."  Paroubek 
also urged closer relations between his party and the U.S. 
Democratic party. He said his party had excellent relations 
with Israel as well as Arab nations and would like to help in 
the Mideast peace process. On Westinghouse's bid for Temelin 
expansion, he said that he believed France, not Russia, would 
prove to be the main competitor. 
 
¶16. (SBU) Biden also met with former Prime Minister and 
center-right leader Mirek Topolanek, who had obviously 
prepared for the meeting.  He praised Biden's Bucharest 
speech, and praised Obama for working to close the rift 
between old and new Europe. He said the U.S. is the Czech 
Republic's closest ally, welcomed the idea of a command and 
control site, but wondered how NATO would fund it. Topolanek 
appreciated Biden's remarks about a role for Czech research 
and development, recalling that it was an important element 
in the previous MD negotiations under his administration.  He 
said that the Framework and RTD and E agreements were still 
important and should be finalized. Biden said the HLDG would 
carry that forward. Topolanek also pushed for resolution on 
the C-130 issue, saying that the U.S. price was far too high, 
 
PRAGUE 00000640  004.4 OF 004 
 
 
and asked for help selling L-159s planes to Afghanistan. He 
noted that his administration tried to increase Czech 
involvement in Afghanistan, and that the current PM does not 
have a strong mandate. On Westinghouse and energy security, 
Topolanek said "Look, I know about energy security. As EU 
President I spent five hours with Putin.  Three of these were 
eye-to-eye."  He also pressed the VP on the Exxon Mobil sale 
of its shares of the TAL pipeline.  He said he fears Russia 
will buy them and said he looks to the U.S. to help give the 
Czechs a chance to bid for them, although Topolanek 
acknowledged that this is a private sector deal. 
 
---------- 
Czech Officials Appreciative of Biden Visit; Press Criticize 
Lack of Access 
---------- 
¶17. (SBU) Across the political spectrum Czech officials were 
very appreciative of the visit by the Vice President.  The 
Czechs are also now very focused on the upcoming High Level 
Defense Group, which Biden has billed as the appropriate 
forum to discuss in detail the range of defense and strategic 
cooperation issues that were not answered during this visit. 
Predictably, the Czech media were more critical, committed to 
the view that Czechs were the pawn sacrificed for strategic 
gains with Russia and disappointed at a lack of direct media 
access to the Vice President and what they regarded as a lack 
of specificity on the Czech role in the phased, adaptive 
approach to missile defense.  As a result, expectations - 
both among media and politicians - for more concrete answers 
from the HLDG are high. 
 
¶18. (SBU) The Office of the Vice President did not have a chance 
to clear this cable before it was sent out. 
 
Thompson-Jones