09PRETORIA2578
G/TIP FY07 GRANT UPDATE - WORLD HOPE INTERNATIONAL
Mon Dec 14 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
VZCZCXRO5300
RR RUEHDU RUEHJO
DE RUEHSA #2578/01 3481311
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 141311Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0626
INFO RUEHTO/AMEMBASSY MAPUTO 6185
RUEHMB/AMEMBASSY MBABANE 4601
RUEHTN/AMCONSUL CAPE TOWN 7442
RUEHDU/AMCONSUL DURBAN 1506
RUEHJO/AMCONSUL JOHANNESBURG 9795UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PRETORIA 002578 
 
SIPDIS 
 
G/TIP FOR M. FORSTROM 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM KTIP SF
SUBJECT: G/TIP FY07 GRANT UPDATE - WORLD HOPE INTERNATIONAL 
 
REF: STATE 55367 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  Per Department request (reftel), Pretoria's officer for 
Trafficking in Persons (TIP) met on December 10 with G/TIP 
grantee World Hope International (WHI) to monitor progress in 
the first six months of an 18-month $200,000 FY'07 grant. 
The funds will be used to support anti-trafficking awareness 
raising activities by WHI subsidiaries in South Africa, 
Mozambique, and Swaziland.  From Pretoria's perspective, the 
grant appears to be on track, with World Hope having 
completed the first step of general TIP training to 
representatives of diverse civil society groups, as well as 
capacity building training for its new units.  Barnard noted 
that TIP prevention training is increasingly in demand, as 
South African NGOs gear up to protect children and other 
potentially vulnerable populations during the 2010 World Cup. 
 End Summary. 
 
-------------------------- 
Ongoing Contacts with WHSA 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2.  On December 10, poloff met with Elske Barnard, Director 
of World Hope South Africa (WHSA), for a progress update six 
months into an 18-month $200,000 grant supporting 
anti-trafficking awareness raising activities in three 
countries -- South Africa, Mozambique, and Swaziland. 
Barnard has regional responsibility for all three countries, 
but within this grant she is mainly focused on developing the 
new subsidiaries in Mozambique and Swaziland, while her 
colleague Ajwang (LNU) manages the South African program. 
This conversation, while not a "site visit" (since no 
training sessions were currently taking place) built on two 
prior meetings earlier in the year, including one with G/TIP 
Ambassador CdeBaca in July and a second with visiting WHI's 
U.S.-based Director of Anti-Trafficking Programs Adeyemi 
Oshodi.  Poloff will also conduct drop-in visits to workshops 
in Pretoria on January 25-27, 2010. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Grant on Track (Foundations Laid) 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  The grant is on schedule, vis-a-vis the project 
activities outlined in the project proposal.  (Note: Barnard 
spoke from an "amended" table of activities, which she said 
was a simplified version of what poloff had received from 
G/TIP.  Poloff will scan and send to G/TIP if required.  End 
note.)  Of the project's four steps, World Hope has now 
completed the first, related to "technical and organizational 
capacity building."  This step included two-day 
train-the-trainer workshops on a general TIP curriculum, with 
one such workshop in each of the three project countries. 
(Pretoria's was held in late September.  Poloff was unable to 
attend due to a competing conference.)  While World Hope's 
South Africa subsidiary is well established, its sub-grantees 
in the other two countries are fledgling organizations which 
received capacity building training in October and November, 
in technical skills such as work planning and financial 
reporting.  The three subsidiaries have begun preparing 
monthly narrative reports, which Barnard said G/TIP will 
receive. 
 
¶4.  When asked how the first step had fared, Barnard said the 
groundwork had been "a little rough," but that now WHSA was 
well positioned to carry the project forward.  Where WHI had 
"struggled" most, she said, was on staffing the project, and 
on finding an officer to run the South Africa unit while 
Barnard focused on building the other two.  She had also 
learned the hard way that confirmed participants sometimes 
Qlearned the hard way that confirmed participants sometimes 
withdraw from workshops at the last minute, as Salvation Army 
had done in Pretoria, and she would counteract that by 
inviting a few more than the target in order to ensure a full 
quota.  Poloff's impression was of an organization that is a 
bit thin on the ground, and so has undergone some growing 
pains in order to undertake this grant, but which is 
confident it can ultimately meet the objectives.  A verdict 
on this point will be more apparent from observation of the 
workshops in January. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Next Step: TIP Prevention Training 
---------------------------------- 
 
PRETORIA 00002578  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶5.  The grant's second step, involving training workshops on 
TIP prevention activities, will take place in early 2010. 
First, in January, three-day train-the-trainer workshops will 
be conducted, with the same participants as attended the 2009 
sessions on general TIP knowledge.  In Pretoria these 
participants included officers and social workers from 
organizations such as the Human Rights Commission (SAHRC), 
Saving Grace, Amazing Grace, Sonke Gender Justice Network, 
New Life Centre, and Open Mind.  (Poloff will forward to 
G/TIP a list with descriptions of the organizations.)  The 
Embassy has also asked to add a participant from the Royal 
Bafokeng Nation, a traditional community whose stadium will 
host 2010 World Cup games and whose leadership asked the 
Ambassador for help in countering anticipated TIP risks.  The 
goal is to train 15 trainers in each of the three countries. 
From February to April, each of those trainers is then 
committed to conducting at least one one-day workshop for at 
least ten members of his or her own community. 
 
------------------------------- 
Post Supports Continued Funding 
------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  Overall, Barnard appears confident that WHSA is 
fulfilling its grant objectives.  Poloff will have more 
direct insight into the South African program from firsthand 
observations in January.  (Note: Mbabane and Maputo can speak 
for the activities of the new subsidiaries in Swaziland and 
Mozambique.  Financial reporting is being handled by G/TIP. 
End note.)  From the limited perspective of the three 
discussions thus far with WHSA in Pretoria, the project does 
indeed seem viable for continued funding. 
 
------------------------------ 
2010 TIP Efforts Proliferating 
------------------------------ 
 
¶7.  As an aside from the grant discussion, Barnard noted that 
WHSA had recently begun receiving many requests for anti-TIP 
training in the lead-up to the 2010 World Cup in South 
Africa.  "Everyone knows a bit," she said, "but wants to do 
more."  Referring to an NGO forum hosted earlier in the week 
by the Nelson Mandela Children's Fund (NMCF -- a participant 
in WHSA's G/TIP-funded workshops) to discuss child protection 
during the games (septel), Barnard said she was pleased to 
see an entity of NMCF's stature and resources taking on a 
coordinating role on this urgent issue.  While Barnard 
acknowledged that the South African government and civil 
society had been slow in mobilizing against TIP during 2010 
and were now in a catch-up mode, she felt the NMCF was 
uniquely positioned, with strong networks and backing, to 
succeed in such a campaign. 
 
GIPS