09RIYADH346
SAUDI SHIA CLASH WITH POLICE IN MEDINA
Tue Feb 24 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Riyadh
VZCZCXRO0566
OO RUEHBC RUEHDBU RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHKUK RUEHLH RUEHPW RUEHROV
DE RUEHRH #0346/01 0550714
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 240714Z FEB 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY RIYADH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0242
INFO RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUCNISL/ISLAMIC COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH IMMEDIATE 0054C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 RIYADH 000346 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT PLEASE PASS TO NEA/ARP WROEBUCK AND NEA/ARP 
JHARRIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/22/2019 
TAGS: KIRF KISL PGOV PHUM SA
SUBJECT: SAUDI SHIA CLASH WITH POLICE IN MEDINA 
 
REF: A. A) RIYADH 270 B) RIYADH 42 
     ¶B. C) 08 JEDDAH 00415 
 
RIYADH 00000346  001.3 OF 002 
 
 
Classified By: Political Counselor Lisa M. Carle 
reasons 1.4 (b), (d) 
 
¶1.  KEY POINTS 
 
-- (U) Saudi security forces clashed February 20 with between 
500 and 2000 Saudi Shi'a pilgrims in Medina after Saudi 
police denied the pilgrims access to Baqi'a cemetery opposite 
the Prophet's Mosque. 
 
-- (U) Shi'a unhappiness escalated into a confrontation 
resulting in several arrests and the use of water cannon by 
security forces to disperse the crowd. 
 
-- (C) Saudi authorities apparently tried to prevent Saudi 
media from reporting on the incident, or from identifying the 
protesters as Shi'a, and have acted to defuse a larger 
reaction among the Shi'a community in the country's eastern 
province. 
 
-- (C) Shi'a community leaders in the Eastern Province told 
post that the SAG approached the influential Qatifi Sheikh, 
Hassan al-Saffar, to request his assistance in preventing a 
public protest in Qatif.  No protests have so far taken place 
in Qatif in response to the Medina incident. 
 
 
¶2.  (C) COMMENT:  The Shi'a community's long-simmering anger 
over historical grievances (see below) occasionally boils 
over in such demonstrations (reftels).  Trusted members of 
the small Shi'a minority in Jeddah recently reported to post 
that resentment and discrimination against their community is 
on the up-tick, indicating that the Shi'a are vulnerable even 
in the usually more tolerant Hijaz (ref C).  However, the 
anger is unlikely to result in protests that the Saudi 
security forces cannot contain.  Efforts by Saudi authorities 
to play down the incident in the press and head off 
demonstrations in Shi'a communities appear to have calmed the 
situation for now.  Nevertheless, respected Shi'a community 
leaders have publicly and privately conveyed their growing 
impatience with perceived religious persecution by the SAG in 
the aftermath of the Baqi'a incident. 
 
¶3. (C) BACKGROUND:  The ancient Baqi'a cemetery, located next 
to the Prophet's Mosque in Medina, is the final resting place 
of many important figures from the early days of Islam, 
including relatives and Companions of the Prophet Muhammad, 
his daughter Fatima, the 3rd Caliph Uthman, and Hasan bin Ali 
and several other early Shi'a Imams.  The Shi'a venerate 
these graves, and hold a historical grudge against the Al 
Saud for the destruction of the tombs that occured when King 
Abdalaziz conquered Medina in 1925. The King and his zealous 
followers, the Ikhwan, considered grave markings idolatrous 
and destroyed many such tombs throughout the country.  Shi'a 
throughout the world still mourn this destruction and refer 
it as a "Day of Sorrow."   The cemetery is still used for 
burials. 
 
¶4. (U) WHAT HAPPENED (REPORTED VERSION):  A Medina police 
spokesman gave the following description of events to the 
Arabic daily Al-Watan:  "At Friday evening, and after the end 
of Baqi'a graveyard visiting hours, a group of visitors 
gathered in front of the graveyard asking for permission to 
go inside. The security guards told them that the graveyard 
is closed.  That led to a huge mess in the place including 
the raising of voices and shouting."  Al-Watan added that the 
Shi'a blocked the entrance to the Prophet's Mosque, 
inhibiting evening prayers, and that five "visitors" were 
arrested, which allowed others to enter the mosque for 
prayers.  Other newspapers reported "emergency security 
forces" formed a "human shield" to stop the protesters from 
clashing with the religious police, but that after protesters 
began throwing shoes and cans at them, the security forces 
moved to disperse the crowd. Four children were reported 
trapped in the incident and hospitalized for minor injuries. 
 
¶5. (C) WHAT HAPPENED (SHI'A VERSION):  An Eastern Province 
contact told Dhahran PolOff the confrontation began at 5:00 
PM and lasted three hours.  Following closure of the 
graveyard, the Shi'a, many of whom were women, stood outside 
considering the refusal to let them enter as an insult. 
Saudi security officers then elbowed their way through the 
women, which resulted in a scuffle and caused some of the 
women to "lose some of their coverings."  At this time, a 
security official climbed a wall to videotape the women, at 
which point the women began throwing shoes at the officer. 
Then, security forces began "waving their batons at the 
protesters, thereby prompting the women to stand up and 
confront them using their fists and by shouting denunciations 
and calls for divine interventions."  After an hour and a 
half of shouting, the security forces used water cannon (and 
according to one source tear gas) to disperse the women, and 
then arrested two women and one man, all Shi'a from Qatif in 
the Eastern Province. 
 
¶6.  (U) A video of the incident available February 23 on the 
website www.Shi'atube.net showed a man, who from his 
appearance could have been an agent of the religious police, 
standing above the cemetery gate dodging shoes and filming 
the restive crowd below. 
 
¶7.  (U) NOTHING TO REPORT HERE, FOLKS:  On February 21, the 
private Saudi organization "Human Rights Watch in Saudi 
Arabia" circulated a message via Facebook alleging that 
Interior Minister Prince Nayif sent a "note" February 20 to 
the editors of Saudi newspapers and internet sites forbidding 
them to write about the incident.  The Arabic language press 
reported the story February 21 and 22, but without 
identifying the protesters as Shi'a.  Newspapers on February 
23 carried no mention of the Baqi'a events.  Saudi Arabia's 
English daily newspapers, which are targeted at the business 
and diplomatic communities, have not carried any coverage of 
this story.  The head of the religious police in Medina has 
publicly denied his organization was involved. 
 
¶8. (C) STAMPING OUT THE SPARKS:  The blog Moltaqaa reported 
on February 21 that Shi'a leaders in Qatif were planning a 
"peaceful demonstration" to protest the Baqi'a incident, but 
subsequent reports indicate this demonstration did not take 
place, and that the Qatif police called community leaders and 
the Governor of Qatif to help stop the demonstration.  The 
blog Al-Weam.com claimed on February 22 that Shi'a leaders 
were planning protests in both Qatif and Safwa, and that the 
Interior Ministry had allowed them to take place, but post 
has no reports that any demonstrations actually occurred. 
XXXXXXXXXXXX (strictly protect), a highly respected 
Shi'a community leader in the Eastern Province, told Dhahran 
PolOff there would be protests in response to the Medina 
incident on February 22 at 3:00 PM.  He said authorities had 
approached the influential Shi'a Sheikh Hassan Al-Saffar to 
try to prevent any protests.  However, XXXXXXXXXXXX said the 
Shi'a in Qatif, and elsewhere in Saudi Arabia, remain very 
upset about the incident in Medina. 
 
¶9. (U) SAUDI BLOGS TAKE UP THE ARGUMENT:  Blogs are debating 
the cause of the altercation.  Conservative Sunni sites 
al-Saha.com, al-Weam.com, and Sabq.org supported the security 
forces' actions against the Shi'a as "just" because of the 
Shi'a's "religious and legal violations."  The Shi'a website 
Rasid.com called the incident another example of "Saudi 
government persecution against the Shi'a."  Rasid claimed 
that the government has always opposed Shi'a rituals at sites 
such as Baqi'a, which the Salafi Sunni establishment 
considers to be blasphemous idolatry.  But intolerance runs 
both ways - Rasid also recalled an episode in Baqi'a cemetery 
three years ago involving a Shi'a man who apparently relieved 
himself on the grave of Uthman, the third Islamic Caliph (AD 
644-656), who is despised by Shi'a as a usurper.  This 
defilement outraged the religious police and contributed to 
tension between Shi'a worshippers and those who protect the 
Baqi'a sites. 
 
¶10.  (U) This is a coordinated message from Riyadh, Jeddah, 
and Dhahran. 
 
FRAKER