09RPODUBAI94
IRAN REGIONAL PRESENCE OFFICE - WINDOW ON IRAN - FEBRUARY
Tue Feb 24 00:00:00 +0100 2009
SECRET//NOFORN
Iran RPO Dubai
VZCZCXRO0818
OO RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHKUK
DE RUEHDIR #0094/01 0551214
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
O P 241214Z FEB 09
FM RPO DUBAI
TO RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI IMMEDIATE 0286
INFO RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE
RUEIDN/DNI WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RUMICEA/USCENTCOM INTEL CEN MACDILL AFB FL
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW PRIORITY 0010
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA PRIORITY 0010
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RUEHDIR/RPO DUBAI 0353S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 03 RPO DUBAI 000094 
 
NOFORN 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL:  2/24/2019 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINS KDEM SNAR IR
SUBJECT: IRAN REGIONAL PRESENCE OFFICE - WINDOW ON IRAN - FEBRUARY 
24, 2009 
 
DUBAI 00000094  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Ramin Asgard, Director, Iran Regional Presence 
Office - Dubai, DOS. 
REASON: 1.4 (a), (b), (d) 

¶1. [S/NF] Russia Reportedly Provides Iran Missile Technology for 
ICBM: An Iranian businessman with strong links to 
government/security circles through his status as former IRGC 
commander in XXXXXXXXXXXX and former senior official for the 
XXXXXXXXXXXX told IRPO on February 22 that the Russians 
provided Iranian defense minister Najjar a "kit" for evaluation 
and construction of a missile with a 7,000 mile range during his 
visit last week to Moscow.   [Note: The two Russian missiles 
with this range are the SS-25 Sickle and the SS-27 Topol, both 
three-stage single warhead missiles designed at the Moscow 
Institute of Thermal Technology and entering into service in 
1988 and 1998 respectively.  Both can be deployed on mobile 
launchers.]  IRPO Officer asked contact why he thought the 
Russians would provide Iran with such a dramatically 
destabilizing technology.  He replied that "clearly, the 
Russians are looking to the US to provide them some major 
concessions" - purportedly to halt further diplomatic and 
security support for Iran.  Comment: Najjar reportedly wanted to 
finalize the deal for S-300 air defense missiles during the 
visit, and this other technology may be a consolation.  IRPO is 
unable to confirm the accuracy of this contact's claims, but is 
compelled to report this disturbing allegation. 
 
 
 
¶2. [S/NF] IRPO Contact Reports on Meeting with Khatami: A 
well-established IRPO contact with direct access to the 
reformist camp (both Khatami and Karroubi) provided a detailed 
readout of his meeting last week with former President Khatami. 
Highlights follow: 
 
 
 
What Supreme Leader Khamenei Told Khatami: During the widely 
reported meeting between the SL and former president Khatami in 
late January, the SL told Khatami that in his opinion, Khatami 
should not run for President because it would not be good for 
the country.  If Khatami chose to run and was elected, however, 
as directed in the Constitution, the Supreme Leader would work 
with him. 
 
Mousavi To Join Race to Bolster Reformist Chances: Former PM Mir 
Hossein Mousavi will formally declare his candidacy; in large 
part to deflect some hardline pressure off former president 
Khatami, but also to back him up should Khatami withdraw (either 
voluntarily or otherwise) from the race.  If Khatami survives 
the vetting process, then Mousavi will step aside in support of 
the former president. 
 
Office of First Vice President Will Gain Increased Powers, 
Candidates Will Reportedly Run on President-VP Tickets:  Khatami 
reportedly divulged IRIG plans for a change to the office of the 
First Vice President under the next government.  Under this 
plan, the office  will enjoy increased powers, more in line with 
the role of a Prime Minister or the US Vice President.  Khatami 
has selected Moussavi as his first VP, and Karroubi has selected 
former Tehran Mayor Karbashchi in this capacity.  These duos 
will reportedly run on two-man tickets as in US elections.  It 
is not clear if AN will run on a ticket with Dr. Parviz Davoudi, 
his first VP. 
 
Khatami Requests USG Help to Arrange Meeting with Swiss 
Ambassador to Iran: To help offset IRIB's broad support for AN's 
candidacy, and after the IRIG blocked his two main campaign 
websites, Khatami is seeking outlets to raise his media profile 
in advance of the election.  Along these lines, he has asked if 
Department can facilitate a meeting between Khatami and Swiss 
Ambassador to Tehran, Livia Agosti. Such a meeting would allow 
Khatami to highlight his international appeal (a key AN 
weakness) and Khatami welcomed media coverage of the meeting by 
domestic and foreign media.  Should such a meeting be possible, 
IRPO contact has asked that he be entrusted to deliver this 
message to Khatami. 
 
¶3. [S/NF] Drug Interdiction Cooperation on Afghanistan as 
Counternarcotics - Not Political - Breakthrough:  In discussions 
with Drug Enforcement Agency reps at ConGen Dubai, IRPO has 
learned that many narcotics investigations could be greatly 
enhanced by coordinating information sharing with Iranian 
counter-drug police.  DEA maintains many active leads that 
currently end in Iran - with even minimal coordination these 
leads could lead to major progress in USG efforts to fight 
narcotrafficking in the region.  Comment: Such an initiative 
would boost CT indirectly and help stabilize Afghanistan, by 
curtailing a key source of revenue for the Taliban and Al Qaeda. 
 Beyond any bilateral political issues involved, US-Iran 
counternarcotics cooperation, or more accurately, incorporating 
Iran into regional CN programs, would likely greatly increase 
their effectiveness. 
 
 
¶4. [C] Iran's Disaffected Youth So Far Tuned Out of Election: 
An Iranian journalist told us that the majority of Iranian youth 
are not likely to be politically active during the upcoming 
presidential campaign.  Many are resigned to the fact that 
Khatami's candidacy, nor much else, is likely to change the 
current system.  Most believe that Supreme Leader Khamenei will 
choose the next president, and therefore Iran's youth - a 
generation beset with unemployment, increasing repression, and 
isolation - have become apathetic and disaffected.  He estimated 
about 10 to 20 percent of Iran's students are members of the 
Basij, but only a small percentage of them are ideologically 
driven.  For others, Basij membership is a way to improve 
chances of gaining university admission or advancement.  He also 
said that at the other extreme, the hopelessness that many young 
people feel is leading to dramatic increases in drug addiction 
and other wanton behavior. Comment:  Although many pin their 
hopes on youthful activists to spearhead a reformist campaign, 
if the majority of those under 25 have consigned themselves to 
the status quo, then the reformists have already lost a key 
constituency. 
 
 
¶5. [S/NF] Reformist journalists, bloggers under pressure:  The 
journalist, who is coming to the U.S. to work on a U.S.-based, 
XXXXXXXXXXXX website, told us that the closure of Kargozaran and 
Hamshahri's evening edition and the arrests or interrogations of 
various bloggers by the IRIG has had a chilling effect among 
reformist newspapers.  Most reform-oriented publications lack 
the political connections to protect themselves.  The paper 
Etemad-e Melli is operating only because current presidential 
candidate and the paper's publisher Mehdi Karroubi, had the 
clout to resist the IRIG, he said.  As a case in point, our 
25-year-old interlocutor has chosen not to return to Iran while 
waiting to receive his U.S. visa, for fear he would not be 
allowed to leave the country again.  Comment: The IRIG's tactics 
of arrest, intimidation and indirect threats, including the 
recent creation of a special prosecutor to deal with Internet 
and text message "character assassination," have had the desired 
effect in restraining many otherwise critical voices as a 
prelude to election campaigns beginning in earnest. 
 
 
¶6. [S/NF] Speculation on Reasons Denying Visas for the U.S. 
Women's Badminton Team: Two IRPO contacts offered their 
assessments of the IRIG's decision not to issue visas to the 
U.S. women's badminton team earlier this month.  An Iranian LES 
at USINT in Tehran, who was in Dubai to pick up his visa, told 
us that the Department's announcement of the trip and subsequent 
international press coverage had "politicized" the trip in the 
eyes of some senior Iranian officials, who saw it as a direct 
challenge from the U.S. that required a tough response.  He 
recommended that future sports diplomacy programs be handled 
discretely, without publicity.  Another contact told us that he 
believed that some Iranian officials had worried that the trip, 
already receiving positive coverage, would become  a PR 
nightmare for Islamic Republic.  Coverage of U.S. athletes being 
embraced by Iranian crowds, as U.S. wrestlers had been, on the 
thirtieth anniversary of the Islamic Revolution was not the 
image the IRIG wanted to convey. Comment: Both of these 
explanations likely factored into the decision not to issue the 
visas.  What is clear, however, is that the decision was made at 
high levels in the IRIG after a preliminary decision to issue 
the visas had been made. 
 
¶7. [S/NF] Powerful Support for US-Iran Exchanges: The Iranian 
employee of USINT told us separately that in querying various 
contacts in and out of the IRIG about possible future travel of 
American exchange visitors to Iran, he had heard from Yasser 
Rafsanjani, the youngest son of Expediency Council Chair Ali 
Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, that Islamic Azad University was 
willing to host these exchanges and to provide the necessary 
political cover for them.  Comment: This information 
corroborates a separate source's information that Rafsanjani and 
Islamic Azad were receptive to the idea of working with USG and 
IRPO on various exchange and outreach programs. 
 
¶8. (U) Window on Iran is a classified weekly product providing 
Washington policy community and Iran watchers highlights of key 
developments on Iran.  It is produced by the Iran Regional 
Presence Office - Dubai.  Please direct any questions/comments 
to Kay McGowan XXXXXXXXXXXX
 or Charlie Pennypacker 
XXXXXXXXXXXX 
ASGARD