09SANAA2116
SITREP: YEMEN'S MOST VULNERABLE REFUGEES IN BASATEEN AND
Mon Nov 23 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Sanaa
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHYN #2116/01 3271446
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 231446Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY SANAA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3266
INFO RUEHDS/AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA 0297
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 1068
RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI 0467
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 0270UNCLAS SANAA 002116 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/ARP Andrew MacDonald AND PRM Janet Deutsch 
AMMAN FOR REFCOORD Rusty Ingraham 
ADDIS ABABA FOR REFCOORD Inga Heemink 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF PHUM PREL PGOV UNHCR YM
SUBJECT: SITREP: YEMEN'S MOST VULNERABLE REFUGEES IN BASATEEN AND 
KHARAZ 
 
REF: A) SANAA 1633, B) SANAA 597 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: Although still a minority segment of Yemen's vast 
and growing refugee population, the 15,000 residents of the 
UNHCR-run refugee camp in Kharaz and the 40,000 plus residents of 
the urban slum of Basateen are among the most vulnerable.  During a 
November 16 - 18 visit to these areas, CONOFF noted diminished 
levels of violence and conflict, and improvements in water 
distribution.  Nonetheless, significant health and social problems 
remain.  UNHCR and NGOs in the area struggle to provide for a 
rapidly and increasingly transient population in spite of dwindling 
funding and an often distracted international community. End 
Summary. 
Refugee Travel Routes and Demographics 
-------------------------------------- 
¶2. (SBU) The majority of this year's arrivals have been Ethiopians - 
a marked shift considering 95 percent of Yemen's estimated 600,000 
refugees are Somali. Moreover, NGO workers in Kharaz and Basateen 
noted increasing numbers of unaccompanied females and minors to the 
camps. Because these cases are more vulnerable, they require 
increased resources from aid workers (REF A). 
¶3. (SBU) The vast majority of refugees arriving in Yemen depart from 
Bossaso, Somalia and Obock, Djibouti. Whether crossing the Red Sea 
from Obock or the Gulf of Aden from Bossaso, both ports represent a 
mid-way point in larger smuggling routes from Mogadishu and various 
parts of Ethiopia. These routes continue north to the Saudi border 
as most arrivals are seeking work in the wealthier Gulf States or 
transit to Europe. Those without sufficient funds or connections to 
complete the voyage often end up stuck in Yemen. While many migrants 
are seeking refuge in Yemen, a recent UNHCR-IOM study indicates that 
the vast majority have (or had) the intention to leave the country. 
 
Kharaz and Basateen: Transitory Areas for Yemen's Most Vulnerable 
Refugees 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
¶4. (SBU) With approximately 56,000 people, the Basateen neighborhood 
(40,000) in Aden governorate and Kharaz camp (15,000) in Lahj 
governorate are home to no more than 10 percent of Yemen's refugee 
population. However, the residents of these areas are among the most 
vulnerable refugees in Yemen. Those who choose to come to these 
areas often lack the connections that allow others to settle in 
urban centers of Ta'iz, Sana'a and Aden. Basateen and Kharaz 
therefore are transition points for most. NGOs provide social, 
medical, legal and educational services that assist refugees in 
getting on their feet and adjusted to life in Yemen. New arrivals 
often are escaping extreme trauma, and are wholly unfit to cope with 
a new language, culture and environment. These areas provide the 
necessary services to acclimate them. 
Who's Who in Refugee Assistance 
-------------------------------- 
¶5. (U) Below is a brief overview of the main services of the various 
implementing partners of UNHCR in Kharaz and Basateen. 
 - Danish Refugee Council (DRC): provides registration  services. 
 - Save the Children: implements educational programming. 
 - The Adventist Development and Relief Agency (ADRA):  builds 
community and offers social services. 
 - Christian Action Research and Education (CARE): organizes 
vocational training, conflict-resolution programs, and  housing. 
 - World Food Program (WFP): feeds refugees. 
 - Organizzazione Umanitaria per L'Emergenza (INTERSOS):  protects 
refugees through counseling services, vocational  training, and 
providing shelter. 
 - Charitable Society for Social Welfare (CSSW): provides  medical 
care. 
 - Society for Humanitarian Solidarity (SHS): transports and  equips 
new arrivals from the welcome centers in Mayfa and  Ahwar. 
Basateen: Despite Improvements, Still a Slum 
-------------------------------------------- 
¶6. (SBU) Located only six miles from downtown Aden, Basateen hosts a 
population that is almost exclusively Somali. Lacking any of the 
traditional Yemeni architecture, most residents live in small tin 
huts on a dusty plain. Since the Embassy's last visit (REF B), there 
have been significant improvements in water distribution and 
registration, and reduction in levels of violence. Concerns still 
remain, however, regarding education and healthcare. 
¶7. (SBU) Residents, NGO workers, and UNHCR agree that water 
distribution in Basateen has improved with more regular deliveries. 
The neighborhood still lacks its own water supply and depends on 
UNHCR. Social programming from various NGOs and increasing 
cooperation from the local police appear to have curbed sexual and 
gender-based violence (SGBV), according to UNHCR. Yet according to 
several NGO workers, the neighborhood is still "not safe at night," 
especially for women. One American female worker at ADRA now fears 
walking around in daylight without a full face covering (niqab) due 
to several incidents of harassment and stone-throwing. 
 
 
¶8. (U) The new ROYG-operated registration center in Basateen opened 
in July and remains bustling with new arrivals. The center is open 
five days a week and processes up to 150 new arrivals each day. Upon 
registration, refugees are granted official documentation and their 
identities are recorded. The ROYG then issues them official 
identification cards and advises them of their rights in Yemen. 
Counselors from Danish Relief Council and interpreters are on hand 
to help with the interviews and identify the more vulnerable cases 
involving abuse, trauma, unaccompanied minors or people with 
disabilities. Since July, approximately 6,100 refugees have 
registered in Basateen. Note: While this is a small number in terms 
of percentage, the center remains extremely busy and these numbers 
will likely rise. End Note. 
¶9. (SBU) Access to quality health care and education now ranks among 
the primary concerns facing residents of Basateen. According to one 
doctor, malnutrition and water-borne diseases are the most common 
problems. While UNHCR provides free medicine, medical officials 
lament the constant lack of anything other than the basic medicines. 
Some residents are so desperate for treatment and food that a black 
market has developed for pregnant women's urine, which allows buyers 
access to free pre-natal care. (Note: Doctors are now trying to curb 
this practice through the use of sonogram testing. End Note.) In 
terms of education, the primary school in Basateen is extremely 
overcrowded with classes nearing one hundred students. The principal 
also noted a lack of qualified teachers. Education is especially 
important among refugees in order to promote their understanding of 
social issues. (Note: As many Somalis have come from a severely 
socially disruptive setting, they often lack a basic understanding 
of how to cope with day-to-day problems. End Note.) 
Kharaz: Violence Down, Cooperation on the Rise 
--------------------------------------------- - 
¶10. (SBU) In a one-day visit to the UNHCR-operated Kharaz refugee 
camp, CONOFF noted significant improvements in cooperation with 
local villages, access to water, and cooperation with police, and 
diminished levels of violence. While major social issues remain to 
be addressed, the various programs in the camp appear to be having a 
positive impact. Embassy officials were also duly impressed with the 
general cleanliness of the camp. 
¶11. (SBU) As a result of perceived inequity over access to water and 
other services, Embassy officials had previously noted rising 
tensions and sporadic violence between the Kharaz residents and 
surrounding villagers (REF B). Since then, two new wells have been 
built that provide adequate water to the camp and surrounding 
villages. NGOs have also increased programs in conflict mitigation 
to include the local villagers as well as to allow them access to 
health care facilities. All of these efforts have calmed many of the 
tensions between the communities. However, the villages surrounding 
Kharaz remain severely isolated and lack basic government services. 
To gain government attention, they have frequently resolved to 
carjacking UN or NGO vehicles. Four of these incidents occurred in 
the last year. Increasingly, the adjacent villages are less inclined 
to resort to such violence, but the threat remains from more distant 
villages that have not had the same access to the camp's resources. 
Overall, however, the situation remains vastly improved. 
¶12. (SBU) According to UNHCR camp director, Cleofas Mabenge, 
relations with the local police force have also improved. He notes a 
reduction in incidents of bribery and arbitrary arrests, as well as 
increased prosecution of crimes. Several workers in the camp also 
mentioned a significant decline in SGBV. 
¶13. (SBU) Health-care workers in the camp note that the most common 
ailments facing residents are gastrointestinal and respiratory in 
nature. Despite widespread myths to the contrary among the Yemeni 
populace, disease rates in the camp are the same or lower than 
comparable rates in the rest of Yemen. The medical facilities, 
however, only possess oral contraceptives and no condoms. CONOFF 
noted a disturbing rise in documented, sexually-transmitted diseases 
on one hospital poster. 
¶14. (SBU) Like many refugee camps, Kharaz residents suffer from the 
tedium of life on the margins of society. Major social woes include 
lack of marriage and divorce services for the increasing number of 
abandoned women, and the lack of job opportunities. While vocational 
programs appear to have had moderate success in the camp, Kharaz is 
an extremely isolated location and minimal opportunities exist 
within. However, UNHCR communicated increasing difficulty in 
convincing young males in particular to stay in the camp to develop 
vocational or social skills. 
Comment 
-------- 
¶15. (SBU) The Kharaz camp demonstrated remarkable improvements in 
many areas. CONOFF also noted exceptional cleanliness in the mess 
hall and toilets. Of the approximately 15,000 residents, only about 
3,000 are living in tents; most have hardened structures and more 
are being built every day. While significant social challenges 
 
 
remain, it appears that Kharaz has made significant progress in 
preparing refugees for life outside the camp. However, with rapidly 
increasing numbers of migrants, increased funding will be necessary 
to continue these programs. 
¶16. (SBU) Kharaz and Basateen are the primary transition areas for 
Yemen's most vulnerable refugees. While their numbers remain 
relatively small, their populations are in constant flux. It is 
therefore difficult to estimate the number of people who receive 
services in these areas. However, as the general security situation 
in Yemen has deteriorated to make monitoring and evaluation 
difficult, many programs have shifted to the urban areas where the 
majority of refugees reside. While these programs are certainly 
important, more aid will be needed to help the newest and most 
vulnerable arrivals. End Comment. 
SECHE