09SANJOSE692
A SNAPSHOT OF COSTA RICA'S REFUGEE COMMUNITY
Fri Aug 14 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy San Jose
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSJ #0692/01 2262018
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 142018Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1122
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 0341UNCLAS SAN JOSE 000692 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CEN; PRM/ECA KPONGONIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF PREL PHUM PREF ELAB EAID SMIG KWMNCS
SUBJECT: A SNAPSHOT OF COSTA RICA'S REFUGEE COMMUNITY 
 
1.(U) Summary: Costa Rica is home to approximately 12,000 refugees, 
the largest refugee population in Central America. The vast majority 
(roughly 10,000) of Costa Rica's refugees are of Colombian origin, 
though there are also Cuban, Nicaraguan, and Peruvian refugees, 
among others.  Many refugees have found safety and freedom in Costa 
Rica, and a number have managed to prosper economically.  The 
majority of refugees have found work through the help of a few 
organizations working on refugee issues in Costa Rica, though some 
have faced discrimination due to their refugee status.  A new 
immigration law passed in August 2009 created a separate division 
within the Department of Immigration to deal with refugee issues. 
This should improve both the speed and effectiveness of Costa Rican 
Immigration's refugee administration. End Summary. 
 
----------------- 
Refugee Community 
----------------- 
 
¶2. (U) According to the office of the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), there are approximately 11,923 
people recognized by the GOCR as refugees in Costa Rica.  Refugees 
typically live in urban areas in Costa Rica's central valley and 
meld into the local community.  The majority of refugees live in the 
Desamparados district of San Jose, Alajuela and Heredia.  Refugees 
have typically sought work in vocational areas, such as auto 
mechanics or health and beauty services; they often find work 
through family and/or friends already residing in the country.  The 
Ministry of Labor's Employment Office, working in conjuction with 
UNHCR, also assists refugees in finding local employment.  Some 
refugees have also been able to start their own businesses with the 
help of organizations such as Professional Association for the 
Promotion of the Poor and at-Risk (APRODE) by qualifying for 
microcredit loans. 
 
-------------- 
Discrimination 
-------------- 
 
¶3. (U) Refugees and those working within the refugee community often 
complain of subtle or overt forms of public discrimination. 
According to UNHCR, it is often difficult for refugees, who carry 
residency cards which clearly state their refugee status, to find 
employers willing to hire them.  The Israeli Zionist Center of Costa 
Rica conducted a poll in 2009 that asked Costa Ricans which of a 
wide group of minorities they found to be the most untrustworthy. 
Thirty-five percent of those polled stated that they most distrusted 
Colombians, double the next-highest group (Nicaraguans).  As 
one-third of all Colombians in the country are refugees, it is often 
difficult to determine whether refugees are discriminated against 
because they are refugees, or because they are Colombian. 
Adolescents, in particular, face difficulties assimilating into 
their new communities. 
 
¶4. (U) In order to help refugees integrate into their communities 
and soften Costa Ricans' feelings towards refugees, UNHCR, along 
with a local partner, is conducting an ongoing pro-refugee media 
campaign.  The campaign focuses on changing opinions towards 
refugees, and sensitizing Costa Ricans to refugee issues in the 
community.  Information about refugees has been posted on 
billboards, posters, newspapers, television ads, radio, and other 
mediums throughout San Jose and other highly populated areas. 
 
---------------- 
Refugee Response 
---------------- 
 
¶5. (U) There are a number of local or international organizations 
working to address refugee issues in Costa Rica.  UNHCR often leads 
the local and regional response by working with a number of 
different local organizations.  One of their primary local partners 
is the Association of International Consultants and Advisors (ACAI), 
a non-governmental organization.  ACAI provides free legal services, 
psychological consultation, and job-skills training to refugees. 
UNHCR works with APRODE to set up micro-credit funds targeted 
towards refugee entrepreneurs.  The United Nations Joint Programme 
on HIV/AIDS (ONUSIDA) and UNHCR also provide training on HIV 
prevention and AIDS.  They have trained more than 2,500 people in 
health camps over the past year alone. 
 
¶6. (U) The Costa Rican government also provides medical assistance, 
through their social security system, and other benefits to 
refugees.  The local government of Desamparados (which is home to 
one of the highest concentrations of refugees in the country) has 
assisted in the establishment of the House of Rights, a center where 
refugees, nationals, and migrants can come together and receive help 
in diverse areas, for free. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Additionally, Post works with the refugee community and 
their issues, highlighted by the successful implementation of a 
number of Ambassador's Fund for Refugees/Julia Taft Fund grants. 
The 2008 project created a new computer training center inside of 
the House of Rights, which continues to provide internet access, 
computer skills training, and other workshops to refugees to improve 
their job skills and employment opportunities.  APRODE has also had 
a 2009 Julia Taft Fund application approved, which will establish a 
revolving micro-credit fund for female entrepreneurs who had not 
been eligible for other APRODE funds due to the small size of their 
businesses. 
 
------------------- 
NEW IMMIGRATION LAW 
------------------- 
 
¶8. (U) On August 4, 2009 Costa Rica's Legislative Assembly 
unanimously approved a new immigration law.  The new law will not go 
into effect until six months after publication in the official GOCR 
gazette.  This law enacts a number of badly needed changes to Costa 
Rica's Immigration Department.  The refugee application process in 
Costa Rica is currently a time-consuming ordeal; the GOCR often 
takes 6-8 months to rule on an application and has a current backlog 
of 80 cases on appeal (applicants cannot legally work until their 
case is approved).  This is in part due to the lack of a standing 
refugee office within the Immigration Department, which complicates 
both funding and capacity building, as immigration officials 
frequently rotate responsibilities. 
 
¶9. (U) The new law should address some of these issues.  Chiefly 
among these is the creation of a separate office to deal 
specifically with refugee issues.  This will include the assignment 
of specific immigration officials to the refugee office, who will 
receive special training in refugee processing procedures.  The new 
office will also have its own, separate archives, to easier manage 
information regarding cases.  The law also grants certain additional 
protections to refugees and clarifies and strengthens the approval 
and appeal process.  Finally, the new law removes or lowers some of 
the financial costs involved with the refugee application process. 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Costa Rica is a natural harbor for those fleeing 
persecution in the Americas.  Its long history of political 
stability, economic success, and respect for human rights all make 
Costa Rica appealing to potential refugees, and we expect the 
country to continue to see high numbers of refugees.  However, 
despite the country's lofty record on human rights, Costa Ricans 
themselves are not immune to personal prejudices.  As such, 
continued work on refugee issues, including continued USG support of 
the refugee community remains important.  We anticipate that the 
implementation of the new immigration law will have a significant 
and lasting effect on Costa Rica's administration of the refugee 
process.  Refugees can, and often do, build a new, better life in 
Costa Rica.  However, they often need a helping hand to get there. 
 
 
BRENNAN