09SHANGHAI59
ZHEJIANG RESUMES COOPERATION WITH U.S. ON IPR
Mon Feb 02 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Shanghai
VZCZCXRO0382
RR RUEHCN RUEHVC
DE RUEHGH #0059/01 0330534
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 020534Z FEB 09
FM AMCONSUL SHANGHAI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7590
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUEHGH/AMCONSUL SHANGHAI 8220UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 SHANGHAI 000059 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
USTR FOR CHINA OFFICE - AWINTER, TWINELAND, DKATZ; IPR OFFICE - 
RBAE; AND OCG - TPOSNER 
DOC FOR NATIONAL COORDINATOR FOR IPR ENFORCEMENT - WPAUGH 
DOC FOR ITA/MAC: SZYMANSKI 
LOC/ COPYRIGHT OFFICE - STEPP 
USPTO FOR INT'L AFFAIRS - LBOLAND 
DOJ FOR CCIPS - TNEWBY 
FBI FOR LBRYANT 
DHS/ICE FOR IPR CENTER - DFAULCONER 
DHS/CBP FOR IPR RIGHTS BRANCH - GMCCRAY 
TREASURY FOR OASIA - DOHNER/CUSHMAN 
NSC FOR JIM LOI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KIPR ETRD EINV EFIN SCUL TBIO CH
SUBJECT: ZHEJIANG RESUMES COOPERATION WITH U.S. ON IPR 
 
REF: ZHEJIANG RESUMES COOPERATION WITH U.S. ON IPR 
 
SHANGHAI 00000059  001.2 OF 005 
 
 
This cable is Sensitive But Unclassified (SBU) and for official 
use only.  Not for transmission outside USG channels. 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  After nearly two years of Consulate efforts 
to revive relations on intellectual property rights (IPR), 
Zhejiang IP officials held a roundtable on January 12 on efforts 
to protect IPR in the province.  The meeting is a breakthrough 
in IPR relations, representing the first engagement on IPR 
issues with the province since the United States filed two 
IP-related cases against China in April 2007.  The roundtable 
included representatives from the Zhejiang IP Administration, 
Copyright Bureau, Administration of Industry and Commerce (AIC), 
Public Security Bureau and provincial courts, who outlined their 
respective efforts to strengthen IPR protection.  IP 
Administration officials noted the reluctance of U.S. companies 
to use the province's administrative protection system and said 
Zhejiang is trying to boost innovation through several new 
policies and by encouraging more patent filings.  AIC officials 
said the province continues to lead the nation on the number of 
trademark cases.  The Copyright Bureau emphasized its 
interagency and regional cooperation and also noted an increase 
in the number of copyright cases referred for criminal 
enforcement.  Besides outlining its caseload, PSB noted a number 
of unique initiatives it is pursing on criminal enforcement. 
Criminal and civil court judges noted criminal cases were down 
from 2007, but civil cases have increased.  The judges also said 
the courts are continuing to move forward on damage awards and 
transparency.  Separately, Zhejiang China Council for the 
Promotion of International Trade (CCPIT) representatives said 
the organization is taking a hard line on Zhejiang member 
companies that infringe IP.  Zhejiang IP officials said they 
would welcome cooperation on more IP-related programs and 
exchanges with the United States, and the Consulate intends to 
take them up on the opportunity.    End Summary. 
 
Further Cooperation with the United States Welcome 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Zhejiang IP Administration Deputy General Wu, the 
organizer of the roundtable, welcomed the opportunity to once 
again engage on IP issues and expressed his desire for further 
cooperation with the United States on IPR training, seminars and 
exchanges.  He said that Zhejiang attaches great importance to 
international cooperation on IP protection, noting several 
international roundtables the province recently held.  One 2008 
seminar was held in coordination with a number of foreign 
invested companies and was attended by 17 U.S. companies. 
Zhejiang also held an IPR forum in conjunction with the State of 
California and roundtables with delegations from Germany and the 
E.U.  In addition, Zhejiang has a joint research project on IPR 
protection with the British Embassy. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Congenoffs raised the possibility of working with 
Zhejiang on two U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) office 
programs aimed at boosting the understanding of local rights 
holders on how to file patents and trademarks both in China and 
in the United States.  (Note:  The program on patent filing has 
already received strong support from China's State IP Office 
(SIPO) and would also be co-organized with SIPO in several 
locations.)  Zhejiang IP Administration Director General Chen 
Zhijun expressed strong interest in these programs.  When asked, 
Chen also said he would consider cooperating on another IP 
enforcement program, similar as the program jointly sponsored 
with USPTO in October 2006.  He spoke favorably of cooperation 
on other exchanges, such as organizing roundtables and meetings 
with visiting Washington officials or U.S. IPR experts. 
 
U.S. Companies Not Using Administrative Protection 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Wu pointed out that the Zhejiang IP Administration had 
not received any complaints from U.S. companies over the past 
several years, suggesting that many U.S. firms are hesitant to 
take advantage of Zhejiang's administrative IP protection 
system.  He urged the Consulate to encourage U.S. companies to 
 
SHANGHAI 00000059  002.2 OF 005 
 
 
fully use Zhejiang's IP protection system.  The Zhejiang IP 
Administration would like to establish regularly contact with 
U.S. companies and industry associations. 
 
Boosting Innovation by Encouraging Patent Filing 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Wu said Zhejiang is striving to boost the innovative 
capabilities of its companies and is actively encouraging the 
registration of patents.  The province has instituted and 
published several new policies to boost innovation, including 
the "Zhejiang Action Plan on Promoting the Self-innovation 
Capability in the Area of Social Development", and the "List of 
Key Technologies and Important Products Which Zhejiang Should 
Master", and the "2008-2012 Strategic Implementation Plan on 
Intellectual Property, Standardization and Branding".  As a 
measure of the province's success in this effort, Wu enumerated 
patent filings through Zhejiang IP Administrative offices.  In 
2008, there were 89,965 patent applications filed and 52,955 
patents granted to Zhejiang rights holders.  This represents an 
increase of 30.5 percent and 25.8 percent respectively over 
¶2007.  Among the applications, 12,063 were invention patents, 
representing 26.5 percent of total applications.  Of the 
invention patent applications, 3,269 were granted, representing 
47.7 percent of total granted patents. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) On patent enforcement, patent officers in Zhejiang 
have conducted several special enforcement actions, several of 
which included trade fairs.  Zhejiang IP Administrative 
officials have received 150 complaints and checked 40,000 types 
of goods in 2008 for patent violations.  In total, 44 formal 
cases were established and 50 "non-established" cases were 
handled.  To keep pace with the case load, provincial and city 
level authorities authorized 46 district and county level 
authorities to conduct patent enforcement actions.  The goal of 
doing so is to help detect and solve patent infringement and 
dispute cases at an earlier stage. 
 
Trademarks - Highest Number of Criminal Cases in China 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Zhejiang Administration of Industry and Commerce (AIC) 
Trademark Department Director Zhou Liguo emphasized that 
Zhejiang is one of the most active jurisdictions on trademark 
protection in the country.  In 2008, Zhejiang continues to have 
the highest number of total trademark cases and highest number 
of referrals for criminal enforcement.  According to Zhou, 
Zhejiang has been ranked first for many years in China on 
trademark enforcement.  In total, the province had 7,341 
trademark infringement cases in 2008.  Among them, 3,100 cases 
were foreign related, and 822 cases had a connection with U.S. 
companies.  As a result of the cases, 140 million RMB (USD 20.6 
million) worth of penalties were imposed.  Zhejiang AICs 
referred 78 cases for criminal enforcement in 2008, accounting 
for 50 percent of country's total referred trademark cases. 
According to Zhou, Zhejiang AIC has established a contact 
network with 30 foreign companies, among which 11 companies are 
from the United States, including Nike, Johnson and Johnson, 
Starwood and GM.  Zhou said Zhejiang AIC is also actively 
encouraging local companies to establish and protect their own 
brands.  The number of Zhejiang famous trademarks ranks only 
second to those of Guangdong. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Zhou emphasized that of all of Zhejiang's cities, Yiwu 
has been particularly proactive on tackling counterfeits. 
Measures include beefing up manpower and equipment, checking 
licenses for market entrance, establishing a comprehensive 
database of trademarks, and more regular inspections.  In 2008, 
Yiwu handled 911 trademark infringement cases worth RMB 18 
million (USD 2.6 million).  Zhou said that a newly detected 
problem has emerged in Yiwu that some "middlemen" traders 
including foreigners affix counterfeit trademarks on goods after 
they purchased them from the Yiwu Small Commodities Wholesale 
Market.  This kind of illegal behavior damages the reputation of 
Yiwu's market although the market itself has nothing to do with 
the actual counterfeiting. 
 
SHANGHAI 00000059  003.2 OF 005 
 
 
 
Copyright Protection - Increasingly Hard in Bleak Economy 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Zhejiang Copyright Bureau Copyright Department 
Director Wang Shaojie outlined the province's efforts to protect 
copyrights, noting Zhejiang conducted four "special action" 
programs in 2008.  These consisted of cracking down on private 
on-line gaming services, illegally pre-installed software, 
internet infringement and the illegal broadcasting of the 
Olympic Games.  In total, Zhejiang copyright authorities handled 
82 copyright cases and referred three cases for criminal 
investigation.  Of the three referred cases, two involved U.S. 
rights holders.  Wang noted a case between Zhejiang University 
and the Association of American Publishers.  After the 
association filed a complaint against Zhejiang University for 
distributing counterfeit text books, the university was heavily 
fined.  Since that time, Zhejiang University has scrupulously 
checked all its foreign language textbooks to prevent the 
infringement from occurring again. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Wang also noted difficulties the Zhejiang Copyright 
Bureau faces when dealing with international cases.  He 
particularly noted that Zhejiang authorities have difficulty 
continuing internet-related investigations when they discover 
internet service providers are based in foreign countries, 
including the United States.  Wang added that some 
Zhejiang-based websites have requested the assistance of the 
Zhejiang Copyright Bureau to help locate U.S. rights holders to 
seek authorization to post copyrighted material.  However, both 
the Zhejiang Copyright Bureau and the website have difficulties 
tracking down the rights holders.  Wang also said that the 
financial crisis has made their work more difficult as companies 
were more tempted to cut corners by using pirated software. 
However, he vowed that the Zhejiang Copyright Bureau would 
continue to urge companies that are still in operation to buy 
legitimate software.  The Zhejiang Copyright Bureau plans to 
assist Zhejiang companies buy software with a total value of 100 
million RMB (USD 15 million) from Microsoft. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Zhejiang's internal cooperation and cooperation with 
other jurisdictions is improving, Wang said.  For example, if a 
website needs to be closed because of infringement, the 
Copyright Bureau sends a request to the Zhejiang Communication 
Bureau, which readily enforces it.  The Zhejiang Copyright 
Bureau is also partnering with Customs to improve enforcement. 
Companies that export optical disks are now required to record 
their contracts with and get approval from the Copyright Bureau 
before producing the optical disks.  The disks are not cleared 
by Customs until the exporter shows the approval from the 
Zhejiang Copyright Bureau.  Wang also praised the Shanghai 
Copyright Bureau's Yangtze River Delta Initiative, a cooperation 
framework on copyright enforcement, which is expected to greatly 
improve copyright enforcement in the region.  The cooperation 
agreement is expected to be signed later in 2009. 
 
PSB Finding Novel Ways to Strengthen Criminal Enforcement 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶12.  (SBU) The Zhejiang Public Security Bureau Economic Crime 
Investigation Division (ECID) Deputy Director He Xiaogang said 
that in 2008, the province investigated 235 IP-related criminal 
cases.  Thus far, 182 of the cases have been closed and 347 
suspects have been detained.  Among these cases, 18 involved 
U.S. rights holders.  In a novel approach to fighting web-based 
piracy, the Zhejiang PSB opened a virtual complaint center on 
the website of Alibaba, the largest business-to-business sales 
network in the world.  PSB also established a network with 
rights holders through the Quality Brands Protection Committee, 
a semi-governmental business organization that focuses on IP 
protection.  According to He, Zhejiang is also increasing 
cooperation with administrative enforcement authorities within 
and outside the province.  In 2008, Zhejiang administrative 
authorities referred 158 cases to PSB.  More than 95 percent of 
these cases resulted in a conviction.  When asked about 
internet-related cases, He said that ECID does not handle such 
 
SHANGHAI 00000059  004.2 OF 005 
 
 
cases, rather they are handled by the Public Order Management 
Department (another department inside PSB). 
 
¶13.  (SBU) Besides participating in the nationally organized 
"Mountain Eagle Action", the Zhejiang PSB also conducted some of 
its own special actions, including a crackdown on counterfeit 
auto spark plugs in Cixi and counterfeit trademarks printed in 
Wenzhou.  He also mentioned a recent action entitled "Eagle Eye" 
in which factories inside and outside of China producing 
counterfeit Viagra were shut down.  According to He, Zhejiang 
PSB has established a new criminal investigation system similar 
to the "Shanghai Initiative", which allows PSB to begin 
investigations based on credible evidence, rather than waiting 
for a rights holder to first prove a criminal threshold has been 
met.  The Zhejiang PSB now launches investigations on certain 
"important" cases after "strict approval procedures" have been 
met, even though there is insufficient evidence to establish the 
case.  He also said the Zhejiang PSB welcomes further 
cooperation with the United States on cross border IP case 
investigations, information and evidence collection, as well as 
more exchange on enforcement experience and personnel training. 
 
Judicial Protection - Trademark Cases Make Up Vast Majority 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
¶14.  (SBU) Zhejiang High Court Second Criminal Division Director 
Guan Youjun summarized Zhejiang's criminal court cases in 2008, 
saying that the province's courts adjudicated 94 IP-related 
criminal cases.  Of the total, 90 cases were trademark-related 
and the remaining 4 were trade secret cases.  Among criminal 
trademark cases, 47 cases involved U.S. trademarks, including 
those of Nike, Johnson and Johnson, HP, and Singer.  He added 
that there were other IP-related cases not adjudicated under 
criminal laws involving the infringement of IPR, but rather they 
were adjudicated under other charges.  There were 138 IP-related 
criminal cases brought under "illegal business operations" and 
67 IP-related cases brought under "producing and selling 
counterfeit and spurious goods".  Guan said the number of 
criminal cases in 2008 decreased compared with the 112 cases in 
2007, but he offered no explanation why.  According to Guan, 
most cases occurred in areas where the economy is relatively 
developed such as Yiwu, Cixi and Cangnan.  The buyers of the 
counterfeit goods came from abroad in many cases.  Guan also 
mentioned that the Zhejiang High Court had sent a delegation to 
Europe for a 3-week study of IPR issues.  He welcomed a similar 
opportunity to work with the United States. 
 
Civil Cases Increase Substantially Over 2007 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶15.  (SBU) Zhejiang High Court Third Civil Division Director 
Zhou Gencai said Zhejiang had 1,634 civil IPR cases in 2008, an 
increase of 25.6 percent over 2007.  Among these cases, 150 
cases involved foreigners, including rights holders from Hong 
Kong, Macao and Taiwan.  From 2006 through 2008, there were 102 
first instance civil IP cases involving US companies in Zhejiang 
- 45 of which were in Ningbo alone.  According to Zhou, the Yiwu 
Court on July 1, 2007, established an IPR tribunal combining the 
adjudication of civil, criminal and administrative cases.  Thus 
far, the special tribunal had adjudicated 118 IPR cases.  Among 
these cases, 65 were civil case, 50 were criminal cases and 3 
were administrative cases.  Zhou said there are currently 140 
IPR judges in Zhejiang.  Half of them hold a masters degree, and 
some of them have backgrounds in technology. 
 
¶16.  (SBU) Zhou noted that all judgments of civil IPR cases in 
Zhejiang are published on the internet.  The courts in Zhejiang 
have also used live internet broadcasting to allow public access 
to some IP-related cases.  According to Zhou, Zhejiang courts 
are "creative on damage calculations."  (Comment:  Based on 
Shneider's experience, this "creativity" is not necessarily a 
good thing.  End comment.)  For example, a plaintiff was 
recently awarded damages against a defendant for a second 
infringement.  The amount of the award was based on an agreement 
signed during the settlement of the first infringement case. 
According to the agreement, the defendant promised to pay a 
 
SHANGHAI 00000059  005.2 OF 005 
 
 
certain amount for second infringement if it occurred. 
According to Zhou, Zhejiang courts have adjudicated about 15 
cases with which the damages awarded were higher than RMB 10 
million (USD 1.5 million).  (Note:  In 2007, there was a case 
involving a French company, Schneider Electric, in which the 
Wenzhou Intermediate Court ordered Schneider Electric to pay RMB 
335 million(USD 48 million) to a local Chinese company, Chint 
Group, for patent infringement in 2007.  Many foreign rights 
holders viewed the excessively high amount of damages in 
relation to the value of the case as local protectionism.) 
 
Zhejiang CCPIT Also Speaks Out on IPR Protection 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶17.  (SBU) Separately, Tie Jianshe, Chairman of the Zhejiang 
Chamber of Commerce and China Council for the Promotion of 
International Trade (CCPIT) Zhejiang Sub-council also emphasized 
that Zhejiang is working hard to increase IP protection in the 
province and welcomed more exchange with the United States on 
the issue.  He noted that Zhejiang CCPIT held a conference with 
the U.S. Chamber of Commerce on IP protection in early 2008.  It 
was the third time Zhejiang CCPIT held a conference on IP 
protection in conjunction with a foreign organization.  The 
event was attended by a large number of Zhejiang provincial 
officials as well as China Customs officials and provided an 
opportunity for them to interact with local and foreign 
companies.  In addition, Yiwu's small commodities market has 
established an IP protection office to increase IP awareness and 
manage IP infringement cases. 
 
¶18.  (SBU) According to Tie, Zhejiang CCPIT is also taking a 
hard line on IP violations.  One of its major responsibilities 
is to coordinate and administer overseas exhibitions from the 
province - over the past five years, it has arranged for over 
50,000 companies to attend exhibitions around the world.  If a 
member company is found to have infringed a rights holder's IP, 
it affects the company's standing in the organization and 
participation in events. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶19.  (SBU) Since the spring of 2007, Zhejiang's Foreign Affairs 
Office routinely denied IP-related meeting requests from 
Washington, Embassy, and Consulate officials.  Even when the 
request was part of a visit on a broad range of issues, the IPR 
component was singled out for denial.  The ban not only included 
provincial level meetings, but also extended down to all 
municipal level meetings.  Consulate officials were also no 
longer invited to industry IP seminars and other meetings that 
were held in conjunction with the Zhejiang Government or 
municipal governments.  We believe the January 12 roundtable, 
initiated at the Consulate's request, represents a real 
breakthrough in the stalemate that existed with Zhejiang on IPR 
for nigh two years.  Zhejiang's about-face is likely due to 
Consulate officials persistently raising the issue with high 
levels of the Provincial Government, often pointing out that 
Jiangsu and Shanghai have remained open to cooperation, while 
Zhejiang lagged behind.  Given the history, we are cautiously 
optimistic about future cooperation with the province and intend 
to seize this opportunity to once again build strong relations 
on IP with a province that has the fourth largest provincial 
economy in China and is an important trading partner with the 
United States 
CAMP