09STATE118784
CIVIL NUCLEAR INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT IN THE
Tue Nov 17 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0003
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #8784 3212238
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 172232Z NOV 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUEHKU/AMEMBASSY KUWAIT PRIORITY 0000
RUEHMK/AMEMBASSY MANAMA PRIORITY 0000
RUEHMS/AMEMBASSY MUSCAT PRIORITY 0000
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 0000
INFO RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 0000UNCLAS STATE 118784 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AORC KNNP ENRG TRGY KU BA SA MU
SUBJECT: CIVIL NUCLEAR INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT IN THE 
GULF 
 
REF: A. 09 KUWAIT 647 
     ¶B. 09 MANAMA 647 
     ¶C. 09 RIYADH 1393 
     ¶D. 09 MUSCAT 575 
 
¶1. (U) This is an ACTION REQUEST:  Please see para 3. 
 
¶2. (SBU) In February 2008, an Ambassadorial-level U.S. 
delegation including Jackie Wolcott, the former Special Envoy 
for Nuclear Nonproliferation, visited Saudi Arabia and 
Bahrain to discuss potential areas of cooperation aimed at 
the development of infrastructure for civil nuclear power. 
In June 2008, a similar Wolcott-led delegation visited Kuwait 
for discussions.  In September 2008, Ambassador Wolcott met 
with an Omani delegation during the IAEA General Conference. 
In March and May 2008, the U.S. concluded Memoranda of 
Understanding on the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy with 
Bahrain and Saudi Arabia, respectively.  Due to the change in 
Administration, and due to indications that plans for civil 
nuclear power in these countries have recently evolved 
(reftels), Department recommends renewed civil nuclear 
consultations at the expert-level. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Department requests that Posts contact appropriate 
officials in host governments to explain that the United 
States supports the responsible development of civil nuclear 
power and has taken note of host governments' interest. 
Department further requests that Posts provide a brief 
overview, drawing from the below key themes, of the types of 
technical cooperation that could be available to help host 
governments develop civil nuclear infrastructure.  If raised, 
Post can explain that the vast majority of the technical 
cooperation described below can take place without conclusion 
of a 123 Agreement for civil nuclear cooperation.  (A 123 
agreement is required for the transfer of U.S. nuclear 
materials, reactors, or major reactor components, but not for 
information or personnel exchanges.)  Finally, Posts are 
requested to inquire into host governments' interest in a 
detailed briefing on such cooperation by U.S. experts 
travelling to the region.  (Note:  Nuclear experts from the 
USG are planning a visit to Cairo, tentatively scheduled for 
January 2010.  End Note.) 
 
BEGIN KEY THEMES: 
 
-- In his April Prague speech, President Obama stated that 
"we must harness the power of nuclear energy on behalf of our 
efforts to combat climate change, and to advance peace and 
opportunity for all people." 
 
-- Since nuclear power is the only proven source of 
low-carbon, baseload electricity, the United States believes 
that it will be an important element to the world's energy 
mix in the coming decades. 
 
-- On the other hand, nuclear power is accompanied by a 
unique set of safety and security concerns.  Similarly, the 
production of nuclear fuel poses risks in terms of nuclear 
weapons proliferation. 
 
-- Therefore, we strongly encourage all civil nuclear users 
to develop the robust infrastructure needed to meet the 
highest global standards of safety, security, and 
nonproliferation. 
 
-- Last year, a U.S. delegation led by our former Special 
Envoy Jackie Wolcott consulted with representatives from 
(host country) to provide a high-level overview of U.S. civil 
nuclear cooperation.  (FOR MANAMA: Following this visit, we 
concluded a Memorandum of Understanding on the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy in March 2008, opening the door to deeper 
civil nuclear cooperation.  FOR RIYADH: Following this visit, 
we concluded a Memorandum of Understanding on the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy in May 2008, opening the door to 
deeper civil nuclear cooperation.) 
 
-- During this consultation, Ambassador Wolcott explained 
that several agencies of the United States Government can 
offer, subject to the availability of resources and 
commensurate with need, a broad range of technical 
cooperation aimed at the development of human resources and 
other civil nuclear infrastructure. 
 
-- The Department of State (DOS) coordinates civil nuclear 
cooperation policy; leads the negotiation of civil nuclear 
cooperation agreements; supports the implementation of 
international nuclear conventions on nuclear safety, 
security, safeguards, and liability; and contributes to 
infrastructure development through programs at the 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). 
 
-- The Department of Energy (DOE) collaborates with other 
countries through bilateral and multilateral cooperation 
approaches to support the safe, secure and peaceful use of 
nuclear energy. The Infrastructure Development Working Group 
of the Global Nuclear Energy Partnership provides useful 
information sharing to participant countries in the areas of 
human resource development, small and medium sized reactors, 
infrastructure readiness assessments, and radioactive waste 
management. 
 
-- The National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) of the 
Department of Energy collaborates with partners on topics 
such as legal and regulatory issues related to international 
safeguards, safeguards training and equipment, intermediate- 
and low-level waste management, environmental monitoring, 
emergency management, research reactor operations, health 
physics, and radiation protection. 
 
-- The Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) can provide legal 
and technical advice in the areas of nuclear-related 
legislation and regulations, nuclear safety and security, 
nuclear reactor and facility licensing, design certification, 
operations, maintenance, and decommissioning. 
 
-- The Department of Commerce (DOC) works closely with U.S. 
industry to facilitate cooperation efforts with civil nuclear 
consultants, engineering firms, reactor vendors, and fuel 
service providers.  Recent nuclear-sector efforts have 
included trade missions for U.S. nuclear industry to states 
with emerging and expanding nuclear energy programs. 
 
-- A team of civil nuclear experts from the United States is 
planning a visit to the region in early 2010, and would be 
interested in meeting with appropriate (host government) 
officials to discuss these opportunities in greater detail. 
 
-- (IF RAISED): Note that the vast majority of the technical 
cooperation just described can take place without a 123 
Agreement for civil nuclear cooperation.  A 123 Agreement is 
required for the transfer of U.S. nuclear materials, 
reactors, or major reactor components, but not for 
information or personnel exchanges. 
 
-- (IF INTEREST IN A 123 AGREEMENT IS EXPRESSED): We will 
report your interest in a 123 Agreement back to Washington 
for appropriate consideration. 
 
END KEY THEMES. 
 
¶4. (U) Department thanks Posts for their assistance in this 
matter.  Department points of contact for civil nuclear 
cooperation in the Middle East are Marc Humphrey (ISN/NESS) 
and Ariel Stukalin (ISN/RA). 
CLINTON