09STATE5430
SECURITY COUNCIL CONSULTATION ON GAZA, JANUARY
Wed Jan 21 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0012
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #5430 0212029
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 212020Z JAN 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000UNCLAS STATE 005430 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL IS LE KPAL
SUBJECT: SECURITY COUNCIL CONSULTATION ON GAZA, JANUARY 
21, 2009 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action message.  USUN is authorized to draw 
from points in para 2 below in consultations on the Middle 
East scheduled for January 21, 2009. 
 
¶2. (U) Talking points. 
 
-- I thank the Secretary General for his insightful briefing 
on the situation in Gaza and wish to register the deep 
appreciation of the United States for his untiring efforts in 
support of the implementation of Resolution 1860.  We 
recognize as well the dedicated and courageous work carried 
out in Gaza by UN agencies, UNRWA in particular. 
 
-- The United States welcomes the cease-fire in Gaza and 
calls on all parties to act so as to protect the Palestinian 
and Israeli civilian populations as called for in Resolution 
¶1860. 
 
-- We appreciate deeply the efforts of international and 
regional partners -- in particular the Government of Egypt -- 
in helping to bring about the restoration of calm.  The 
United States supports Egypt's continued efforts towards a 
durable ceasefire, fully respected by all parties. 
 
-- The collective goal of the international community must be 
to achieve full implementation of resolution 1860.  This 
entails: 
 
-- an end to all violence and hostilities directed against 
civilians and all acts of terrorism, including rocket and 
mortar attacks and any other form of terrorist attacks by 
Hamas and other elements from Gaza into Israel; 
 
-- the end of illicit smuggling of arms and ammunition into 
Gaza by Hamas and other armed groups, supported by 
intensified efforts by Member States to provide arrangements 
and guarantees, such as the Memorandum of Understanding 
signed by the United States and Israel; and 
 
-- the reopening of crossing points on the basis of the 2005 
Agreement on Movement and Access between the Palestinian 
Authority and Israel. 
 
-- We welcome the statement by the Government of Israel that 
it has fully withdrawn its forces from Gaza. 
 
-- The United States is profoundly concerned about the 
humanitarian situation in Gaza and urges all parties to 
ensure the secure and continuous provision of humanitarian 
supplies to the innocent people of Gaza. 
 
-- In addition to the almost $600 million the United States 
provided in assistance to Palestinians last year -- including 
$185 million for UNRWA -- we sent an additional $85 million 
to UNRWA on December 30, in support of its General Fund and 
Gaza Flash Appeal, to help with the provision of food, 
temporary shelter and non-food items. 
 
-- In addition, since the beginning of the conflict, through 
USAID and its NGO partners on the ground in Gaza, the United 
States has provided millions of dollars for the procurement 
and delivery of food, medicine and other essentials. 
 
-- We urge all parties to work together, in coordination with 
President Abbas and the Palestinian Authority, so that future 
economic assistance from the international community will 
benefit all those in Gaza so terribly effected by the recent 
violence. 
 
-- Resolution of the situation in Gaza will require the 
restoration of legitimate Palestinian Authority control, and 
ultimately a resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. 
In this regard, we call for renewed efforts to realize the 
two-state solution, consistent with UN Security Council 
Resolution 1850, and the establishment of an independent and 
viable Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza.  Lasting 
peace can only be based on an enduring commitment to mutual 
recognition, freedom from violence, incitement, and terror, 
and the two-State solution, building upon previous agreements 
and obligations. 
 
-- Finally, on a related issue, it is important that we 
credit efforts by the Government of Lebanon and the United 
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) to ensure that the 
conflict in Gaza did not spread to other areas.  Their 
response to rocket attacks launched on January 8 and 14 from 
Lebanese territory by terrorist elements -- attacks which we 
join the Lebanese government and the Secretary General in 
strongly condemning -- were timely and appropriate. 
 
-- However, the fact that such attacks could take place at 
all underscores that the Council not lose sight of the need 
for full implementation of Resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 
(2006), even as we deal with the aftermath of fighting in 
Gaza. 
 
-- This will entail our continued support for the efforts of 
UNIFIL working in cooperation with the Lebanese Armed Forces; 
our strong support for the sovereignty, territorial 
integrity, unity and political independence of Lebanon within 
its internationally-recognized borders; an end to the 
smuggling of weapons across those borders so that there will 
be no weapons within Lebanon without the consent of its 
Government; and the disbanding and disarmament of all militia 
groups, including Hizballah and others, so that there will be 
no authority in Lebanon other than that of the Government. 
 
End talking points. 
BURNS