09STATE47188
CHAD: TALKING POINTS AND VOTING INSTRUCTIONS FOR
Fri May 08 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0018
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #7188 1281751
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 081738Z MAY 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS STATE 047188 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL PHUM SU CD XA ZF
SUBJECT: CHAD: TALKING POINTS AND VOTING INSTRUCTIONS FOR 
MAY 8 "EMERGENCY SESSION" 
 
¶1.  USUN is instructed to seek the changes in paragraph 2 to 
the French drafted PRST (paragraph 3) on the Chadian rebel 
incursion from Sudan into Chad.  USUN may delivery the 
statement in paragraph 4, if the May 8 "emergency session" is 
open.  USUN may draw from the talking points in paragraph 5, 
if the "emergency session" is in closed chambers. 
 
¶2.  USUN is authorized to vote in favor of the French drafted 
PRST as is, if necessary, but should also seek the following 
changes to the PRST: 
 
-- Paragraph 3, first line, change "pacify" to "normalize." 
-- Paragraph 3, first line, add "Chadian and Sudanese" before 
armed groups. 
-- Paragraph 4, change typo in the title of MINURCAT to 
accurately reflect its name. 
 
¶3.  Begin French text of PRST: 
 
The Security Council expresses its serious concern at the 
renewed military activity in eastern Chad of Chadian armed 
groups supported from outside the country and coming from 
Sudan. 
 
The Security Council condemns this activity and stresses that 
any attempt at destabilization of Chad by force is 
unacceptable. It recalls the terms of the declaration of its 
president dated of 4 February 2008 (S/PRST/2008/3). It 
reiterates its commitment to the sovereignty, unity, 
territorial integrity and political independence of Chad. It 
demands that rebel armed groups cease violence immediately 
and calls on them to engage dialogue in the framework of the 
Sirte agreement of 25 October 2007. 
 
The Security Council calls on Sudan and Chad to respect their 
mutual commitments, in particular in the Doha Agreement of 3 
May 2009, to pacify their relations and cooperate to put an 
end to cross-border activities of armed groups. The Council 
expresses its concern at the cooperation between elements of 
the Sudanese Armed Forces and Chadian armed groups, as 
reported by the last Secretary General's report on UNAMID 
S/2009/201, and calls for an immediate end to such support. 
 
The Security Council reiterates its full support for the 
United Nations Mission in Chad and the Central African 
Republic (MINURCAT), which is mandated to contribute to 
protect vulnerable civilians including refugees and 
internally displaced persons, to protect United Nations and 
associated personnel and to facilitate the delivery of 
humanitarian assistance. 
 
The Security Council calls on all parties to abide by their 
obligations under international humanitarian law, in 
particular to respect the security of civilians, humanitarian 
workers and United Nations personnel. 
 
¶4.  Begin statement for open "emergency session": 
 
Thank you Mr. President. 
 
I would like to thank A/S Mulet for his comments and for 
coming to brief the Council on short notice. 
 
Mr. Mulet's description of the situation in Chad is most 
worrisome.  Like other members of the Council, the United 
States condemns current attacks by Chadian rebels coming 
across the border from Sudan. 
 
Mr. President, we regret that the Governments of Chad and 
Sudan continue to support expatriate rebels in a "proxy war" 
against each other.  We call on the Governments of both Chad 
and Sudan to disarm and demobilize these rebels and to stop 
supporting them.  There are reports that the Chadian rebels 
have sustained heavy casualties and their ability to continue 
fighting is in question.  Still, we call on any remaining 
Chadian rebels to desist from all offensive operations, to 
renounce violence, and to enter into negotiations with the 
Government of Chad to re-enter Chadian society.  We call on 
the Government of Sudan to disarm any Chad rebels that 
present themselves at the border, or to refuse them entry if 
they do not comply.  We urge the Government of Chad to 
exercise restraint in restoring stability and order to 
eastern Chad and along the border with Sudan. 
 
The humanitarian situation for the refugees, internally 
displaced persons and local populations in Eastern Chad 
continues to be cause for concern.  We hope that the new 
rebel offensive will not bring further suffering to these 
vulnerable populations.  We call on all parties to avoid any 
actions that could put in danger these populations or those 
protecting and providing services to them, and we remind the 
parties of their obligations under international humanitarian 
law, including those related to captured armed combatants. 
 
We call on the Governments of Chad and Sudan to renew efforts 
to reduce tensions, normalize relations, and to adhere to 
bilateral accords they have signed, including the accord 
signed in Doha on May 3, 2009. 
 
Finally, Mr. President,  we  commend the UN Mission in the 
Central African Republic and Chad and assure the staff of the 
mission, as well as the NGOs working in Eastern Chad , our 
full support. 
 
End statement. 
 
¶5.  Begin talking points for closed session: 
 
-- Thank you Mr. President. 
 
-- I would also like to thank A/S Mulet for coming to the 
Council to brief us on short notice. 
 
-- I would also like to state my government's support for the 
staff of MINUCAT and NGOs in Eastern Chad, who are working 
under difficult circumstances to protect vulnerable 
civilians. 
 
-- The Secretary General and members of the Council have 
repeated their concerns in recent days about the 
deteriorating relationship between the governments of Chad 
and Sudan. 
 
-- The United States is particularly concerned by the 
cooperation between the Sudanese armed forces and Chadian 
armed groups detailed in the last SYG's report. 
 
-- The renewed military activity in eastern Chad by Chadian 
rebels based in Sudan is most worrisome, particularly in 
light of the agreement signed by Chad and Sudan in Doha on 
May 3, 2009. 
 
-- We note reports that the Chadian rebels have sustained 
heavy casualties and may not be in a position to continue 
fighting, but we are still concerned about this latest 
incursion escalating into further violence and retaliation 
orchestrated by the Governments of Chad and/or Sudan. 
 
-- We know the problems in Darfur will not be resolved until 
Chad and Sudan improve their relations.  We commend the 
efforts of  Libya, Qatar and others  to assist the two 
parties in improving their relations but regret that more 
progress has not been made. 
 
 
-- The humanitarian situation for the refugees, internally 
displaced persons and local populations in Eastern Chad has 
always been tenuous at best, and we are concerned that the 
new rebel offensive will bring further suffering to these 
vulnerable populations. 
 
-- We think that it is important for the Council to speak 
with one voice regarding the need for Chad and Sudan to abide 
by their commitments, including their most recent agreement 
in Doha and to abide by their obligations under international 
humanitarian law. 
 
-- My delegation therefore supports the draft PRST presented 
by the French delegation. 
 
End talking points. 
CLINTON