09STATE26720
SOMALIA: UNSC PRESS STATEMENT
Thu Mar 19 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0018
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #6720 0782215
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 192158Z MAR 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 5344UNCLAS STATE 026720 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL SO XA XW
SUBJECT: SOMALIA: UNSC PRESS STATEMENT 
 
 ¶1.  USUN is instructed to join consensus on the UN Security 
Council press statement on Somalia to be adopted on March 20 
(para 2).  USUN should refer any further substantive changes 
on the press statement to the Department prior to joining 
consensus for adoption. 
 
¶2. Begin statement: 
 
The members of the Security Council welcome the positive 
political developments and progress made in the Djibouti 
peace process in Somalia including the establishment of an 
inclusive Parliament, the election of President Sheikh Sharif 
Sheikh Ahmed and the subsequent formation of unity government 
led by Prime Minister Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke. 
The members of the Security Council further commend the 
efforts of President Ahmed for his efforts at reaching out to 
the parties outside the Djibouti peace process and 
reestablishing security and the rule of law in Mogadishu and 
the rest of the country. 
The members of the Security Council reiterate their call for 
the peaceful resolution of the Somali conflict as the best 
viable option to a durable peace and genuine reconciliation 
and call upon all parties that have not yet joined the 
political process to do so. 
The members of the Security Council commend AMISOM for the 
valuable contribution it has made towards efforts for the 
return of peace and stability to Somalia and call upon the 
members and international community to provide the additional 
resources for it to better fulfill its mandate. 
The members of the Security Council express their grave 
concern at the continued insecurity in some parts of the 
country, violations of human rights and the precarious 
humanitarian situation. They commend the sacrifice of 
humanitarian personnel who are working in very difficult 
conditions to provide assistance to the Somali people. 
The members of the Security Council further express their 
concern for the continued acts of piracy off the coast of 
Somalia. They commend the efforts of the Transitional 
Government of Somalia and the international community to 
fight piracy while reiterating the need to address the root 
causes of piracy on the mainland. 
The members of the Security Council express their support for 
the Government and people of Somalia and encourage the 
international community extend financial and technical 
support to the government in its efforts towards rebuilding 
of vital institutions especially in the areas of security and 
the rule of law and in enhancing its capacity for the 
provision of basic services. 
CLINTON