09STATE110433
WHA: INSTRUCTIONS FOR 2009 TIP INTERIM ASSESSMENT
Mon Oct 26 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO0620
PP RUEHAO
DE RUEHC #0433/01 2992316
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 262254Z OCT 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUEHBE/AMEMBASSY BELMOPAN PRIORITY 3326
RUEHWN/AMEMBASSY BRIDGETOWN PRIORITY 1564
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES PRIORITY 7852
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS PRIORITY 1689
RUEHGE/AMEMBASSY GEORGETOWN PRIORITY 5909
RUEHGT/AMEMBASSY GUATEMALA PRIORITY 0287
RUEHMU/AMEMBASSY MANAGUA PRIORITY 0007
RUEHDG/AMEMBASSY SANTO DOMINGO PRIORITY 8270
RUEHAO/AMCONSUL CURACAO 6804UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 STATE 110433 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM KTIP KWMN PGOV PHUM SMIG AR BH DR GT GY NU XL
VE, NL 
SUBJECT: WHA: INSTRUCTIONS FOR 2009 TIP INTERIM ASSESSMENT
 
REF: NONE 
 
1.(U) This is an action cable; action request in paras 5 and 6.
 
2.(SBU) The Trafficking Victims Protection Act, as amended in 
2003, requires the Secretary of State to submit a "Special 
Watch List" of countries on the TIP Report that either 1) had 
moved up a tier on the TIP Report over the last year or 2) 
were ranked on Tier 2 but a) had not shown evidence of 
increasing efforts to address severe forms of TIP from the 
previous year, b) were placed on Tier 2 because of 
commitments to carry out additional future actions over the 
coming year, or c) had a significant or significantly 
increasing number of victims of severe forms of TIP. 
 
3.(SBU) The "Special Watch List" has been submitted to 
Congress, as required, along with the President's 
determinations for sanctions of Tier 3 countries.  The TVPA, 
as amended, now requires the Secretary to submit to Congress 
an Interim Assessment on the Special Watch List countries no 
later than February 1, 2010. 
 
4.(SBU) The Interim Assessment, which the Department plans to 
release on January 5, 2010, will serve as a narrowly-focused 
progress report, assessing only a country's key deficiency(s) 
highlighted in the June 2009 TIP Report.  Measuring progress 
or lack of progress in addressing these deficiencies (the 
basis for which the country was placed on the Watch List 
initially) is the main purpose of the Interim Assessment. 
This will not/not serve as a large-scale analysis of 
anti-trafficking efforts in the relevant country.  Similarly, 
it will not describe the trafficking problem in that country 
(readers can refer to the 2009 TIP Report for that). 
Finally, it will not mention Tiers or allude to progress in 
achieving a higher tier or, conversely, forecast a fall to a 
lower tier. 
 
5.(U) Action Request for Action Addressees:  Please answer 
the questions addressed to your Post in para 6 in concise 
analytical terms, citing examples of the progress (or lack 
thereof) sparingly.  Post's submission should not exceed four 
or five paragraphs.  The final Interim Assessment will 
include a narrative of no more than half a page on each 
country's progress.  Please provide these responses to the 
Department via front-channel cable -- slugged for WHA/PPC and 
G/TIP -- no later than November 16. 
 
¶6. (U) Interim Assessment Requirements: 
 
¶A. FOR EMBASSY BELMOPAN:  Please summarize the progress, or 
lack thereof, the Government of Belize has made in: 
(a)Increasing efforts to investigate and prosecute 
trafficking offenses and convict and punish trafficking 
offenders, including any allegedly complicit officials; 
(b)increasing law enforcement efforts against forced labor; 
(c)continuing to improve victim services and assistance; and 
(d) increasing penalties for sex trafficking crime so they 
are commensurate with penalties for other grave crimes. 
Please report on any other significant developments. 
 
¶B. FOR EMBASSY BRIDGETOWN (ST. VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES): Please summarize the progress, or lack thereof, the Government of St. Vincent and the Grenadines has made in: (a) developing and implementing a comprehensive anti-trafficking law; (b) investigating allegations of the commercial sexual exploitation of children; (c) utilizing existing legal statutes to prosecute cases of women or children forced into commercial sexual exploitation; and (d) providing protective services to children rescued from commercial sexual exploitation. Please report on any other significant developments.
 
¶C. FOR EMBASSY BUENOS AIRES: Please summarize the progress, 
or lack thereof, the Government of Argentina has made in: (a) 
implementing the new anti-trafficking law; (b) intensifying 
law enforcement efforts to dismantle trafficking networks; 
(c) increasing judicial and prosecutorial efforts to 
investigate, prosecute, convict and punish trafficking  
offenders, including corrupt public officials who may 
facilitate or be involved with trafficking; (d) increasing 
investigations of forced labor and domestic servitude crimes; 
(e) dedicating more resources for victim assistance(f) 
sustaining anti-trafficking training for law enforcement, 
judges, and other public officials, including labor 
inspectors; and (g)improving data collection on trafficking. 
Please report on any other significant developments. 
 
¶D. FOR EMBASSY CARACAS:  Please summarize the progress, or 
lack thereof, the Government of Venezuela has made in: (a) 
amending existing laws to prohibit and adequately punish all 
forms of trafficking in persons, particularly the internal 
trafficking of men and boys; (b) intensifying efforts to 
investigate and prosecute trafficking offenses, and 
convicting and punishing trafficking offenders; (c) 
investigating reports of trafficking complicity by public 
officials; (d) providing greater assistance and services to 
trafficking victims; (e) designating a coordinator to lead 
the government,s anti-trafficking efforts; and (f) improving 
data collection for trafficking crimes. Please report on any 
other significant developments. 
 
¶E. FOR CONSULATE GENERAL CURACAO:  Please summarize the 
progress, or lack thereof, the Netherlands Antilles have made 
in: (a) enacting legislation criminalizing all forms of human 
trafficking; (b) vigorously prosecuting and convicting sex 
and labor trafficking offenders throughout the Netherlands 
Antilles; (c) establishing formal procedures to guide 
officials in the proactive identification of trafficking 
victims and referral of thee victims to service providers; 
and (d) considering ways to educate clients of the sex trade 
and beneficiaries of forced labor about the causes and 
consequences of trafficking. Please report on any other 
significant developments.  (NOTE:  Although the Consulate 
General is being asked to collect and report anti-TIP data 
for the Netherlands Antilles, the Interim Assessment will 
note that the Antilles are part of the Kingdom of the 
Netherlands, and the assessment of the Antilles in the 2010 
TIP Report will be part of the assessment of the Kingdom of 
the Netherlands, as was the case in the 2009 TIP Report.  END 
NOTE) 
 
¶F. FOR EMBASSY GEORGETOWN:  Please summarize the progress, or 
lack thereof, the Government of Guyana has made in: (a) 
vigorously investigating and prosecuting trafficking 
offenses, and convicting and sentencing trafficking 
offenders;(b) proactively identifying trafficking victims 
among vulnerable population such as women and children in 
prostitution; (c) protecting trafficking victims throughout 
the process of criminal investigations and prosecutions; (d) 
assigning more judges and court personnel to handle 
trafficking cases in the country,s interior regions; and (e) 
expanding anti-trafficking training for police and 
magistrates. Please report on any other significant 
developments. 
 
¶G. FOR EMBASSY GUATEMALA:  Please summarize the progress, or 
lack thereof, the Government of Guatemala has made in: (a) 
Implementing and enforcing the new anti-trafficking law; (b) 
increasing efforts to investigate and prosecute trafficking 
offenses, and convicting and punishing trafficking offenders, 
including public official complicit with trafficking 
activity; (c)pursuing suspected cases of forced labor and 
domestic servitude crimes, in addition to suspected cases of 
adult sex trafficking; (e) improving victim services and 
assistance; (f) increasing anti-trafficking training for 
judges and police; and (g) increasing funding for 
anti-trafficking efforts, particularly for the country,s 
dedicated prosecutorial and police units. Please report on 
any other significant developments. 
 
¶H. FOR EMBASSY MANAGUA:  Please summarize the progress, or 
lack thereof, the Government of Nicaragua has made in: (a) 
increasing efforts to investigate and prosecute trafficking 
offenses, and convicting and punishing trafficking offenders, 
including government officials who may be suspected of 
complicity with trafficking activity; (b) increasing law 
enforcement efforts against forced labor; (c) dedicating 
additional resources for victim assistance; (d) providing 
adequate care for adult trafficking victims; and (e) raising 
public awareness about human trafficking, particularly among 
young Nicaraguan seeking gainful employment. Please report on 
any other significant developments. 
 
 
¶I. FOR EMBASSY SANTO DOMINGO: Please summarize the progress, or lack thereof, the Government of Dominican Republic has made in: (a) Intensifying efforts to prosecute and punish trafficking offender, especially public officials complicit in or facilitating human trafficking; (b) increasing investigation into potential labor trafficking situations; (c) continuing to increase victim assistance and shelter services; (d) providing greater legal protections for undocumented and foreign trafficking victims; (e) increasing prevention and demand-reduction efforts; (f) increasing efforts to identify and care for all trafficking victims; and (g) increasing anti-trafficking training for government and judicial officials. Please report on any other significant developments.
CLINTON