09TAIPEI73
Taiwan Biotech: 2009 Outreach Proposals
Tue Jan 20 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXRO0426
PP RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHIN #0073/01 0200916
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 200916Z JAN 09
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0769
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEHRC/USDA FAS WASHDC 2722
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 000073 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO AIT/W AND EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PD, R, ECA/PE/V/F, 
EEB/TPP/ABT 
EEB/TPP/ABT FOR MARCELLA SZYMANSKI AND JACK BOBO 
STATE PASS USTR/ERIC ALTBACH AND JARED RAGLAND 
USDA FAS FOR OSTA - Mike Henney and Melissa Clarkson 
USDA FAS FOR OCRA - Lori Smith 
USDOC FOR 4430/ITA/MAC 
 
TAGS: EAGR ETRD KPAO OEXC OIIP SENV TBIO TW
SUBJECT:  Taiwan Biotech: 2009 Outreach Proposals 
 
Ref: 08 STATE 129940 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request. See paragraphs 6, 7, and 12. 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Taiwan is the U.S.'s sixth-largest agricultural export 
market.  In 2007, the United States exported more than USD 3.2 
billion of agricultural, fish and forest products to Taiwan, half of 
which was biotech products.  Although most Taiwan consumers are 
unaware of how many biotech agricultural products they use daily, 
public polling shows most Taiwan people are comfortable consuming 
biotech products. 
 
¶3. (SBU) However, ongoing public concern over melamine-tainted 
imports from the PRC has made the Taiwan public more concerned about 
food safety issues, and has undermined public faith in Taiwan's food 
safety authorities.  The melamine scandal exposed flaws in Taiwan's 
risk communication and risk management capabilities, which may 
hamper both further public further acceptance of biotech products, 
and local biotech commercialization initiatives. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) AIT believes Taiwan has the potential to become one of the 
world's early adopters, commercializers, and exporters of 
biotechnology.  Taiwan has committed significant resources to 
domestic biotechnology research, and has also shown regional 
leadership by developing a biotechnology training course for 
government officials and regulators from across Southeast Asia that 
was co-sponsored by AIT, National Taiwan University, the Council of 
Agriculture, and several regional agriculture institutes. 
 
¶5. (SBU) A biotech-friendly Taiwan would serve as a showcase to 
other emerging markets of the potential benefits of biotechnology in 
agriculture, while also avoiding costly disruptions to Taiwan of 
imports of U.S. biotech products. 
 
¶6. (SBU) To help achieve this goal, post would like to use USD 
30,200 of funds available under the 2009 EB Biotechnology Outreach 
Strategy to improve the Taiwan authorities' risk management and risk 
communication capabilities, and increase awareness of the benefits 
of developing a stronger biotech industry among Taiwan's key 
policy-makers, scientists, agricultural producers, and general 
public. 
 
Program One: Risk Communication Strategies 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶7. (U) Proposal: Co-sponsor with local research institutes and 
universities a two-day seminar covering effective strategies for 
biotech risk-communication and risk-management, plus three days of 
on-island visitor programming. 
 
¶8. (U) Cost: USD 15,100.  Including: 
 
--No cost for the seminar venue, which we could hold at the AIT/PAS 
American Culture Center (ACC) or other co-sponsoring entity 
facilities. 
 
--No extra cost for seminar lunch and refreshments, which would be 
covered by the co-sponsor. 
 
--USD 1500 for interpretation services for seminar and other 
activities. 
 
--USD 500 for publications and small commemorative gift, such as 
pens or mugs, which usually cost about USD five per set.  Such gifts 
are customary in Taiwan, and not giving out some small commemorative 
item to the attendees would be unusual. 
 
--USD 13,100 for one speaker from the U.S., which includes USD 
10,000 for one business-class airline ticket, USD 150 for a 
materials allowance, USD 1200 for USD 200 honorarium per day for six 
days, USD 140 for on-island travel, and $1610 for six days of 
lodging and MI&E. 
 
¶9. (SBU) The target audiences: 20-30 agricultural researchers at key 
universities and institutes; 10-20 key policymakers at the 
Department of Health and the Council of Agriculture; 10 participants 
from regional agriculture institutions; and local health officials. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Specific ag biotech issues to be addressed: Proven risk 
communication and risk management strategies concerning future 
 
TAIPEI 00000073  002 OF 002 
 
 
biotech events from the U.S. FDA and CODEX perspective; positive 
outlook for future growth of Taiwan's indigenous biotech research 
industry; benefits of biotech products for Taiwan's food producers; 
benefits of low-pesticide biotech products for Taiwan's environment 
and public health; benefits of agricultural biotechnology and the 
adoption and development of biotechnology in other countries; 
helping Taiwan researchers and regulators improve the 
commercialization of research. 
 
¶11. (SBU) U.S. policy objectives: Our overall effort is focused on 
giving Taiwan a stake in risk-based biotechnology regulation and 
thereby reducing the likelihood of trade disruptions due to concerns 
about biotechnology.   Encouraging Taiwan to commercialize some of 
its promising biotech research may ensure Taiwan's active support of 
biotechnology in the WTO and other fora. 
 
Program Two: Economic Growth and Opportunity 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶12. (U) Proposal: Co-sponsor with a local pro-growth economic 
organization a one-day seminar on the importance of biotech to 
Taiwan's future economic growth and global leadership, plus four 
days of related on-island visitor programming. 
 
¶13. (U) Cost: USD 15,100.  Including: 
 
--No cost for the seminar venue, which we could hold at the AIT/PAS 
American Culture Center (ACC) or other co-sponsoring entity 
facilities. 
 
--No extra cost for seminar lunch and refreshments, which would be 
covered by the co-sponsor. 
 
--USD 1500 for interpretation services for seminar and other 
activities. 
 
--USD 500 for publications and small commemorative gift, such as 
pens or mugs, which usually cost about USD five per set.  Such gifts 
are customary in Taiwan, and not giving out some small commemorative 
item to the attendees would be unusual. 
 
--USD 13,100 for one speaker from the U.S., which includes USD 
10,000 for one business-class airline ticket, USD 150 for a 
materials allowance, USD 1200 for USD 200 honorarium per day for six 
days, USD 140 for on-island travel, and $1610 for six days of 
lodging and MI&E. 
 
¶14. (SBU) The target audiences: Broad audiences of business leaders, 
local business groups, agricultural researchers at key universities 
and institutes, food-safety regulation experts, local and mid-level 
government officials, agricultural associations, influential 
scientists, university students, the general public, and the media 
sector. 
 
¶15. (SBU) Specific ag biotech issues to be addressed: Proven risk 
communication and risk management strategies concerning future 
biotech events from the U.S. FDA and CODEX perspective; positive 
outlook for future growth of Taiwan's indigenous biotech research 
industry; benefits of biotech products for Taiwan's food producers; 
benefits of low-pesticide biotech products for Taiwan's environment 
and public health; benefits of agricultural biotechnology and the 
adoption and development of biotechnology in other countries; 
helping Taiwan researchers and regulators improve the 
commercialization of research. 
 
¶16. (SBU) U.S. policy objectives: Our overall effort is focused on 
giving Taiwan a stake in risk-based biotechnology regulation and 
thereby reducing the likelihood of trade disruptions due to concerns 
about biotechnology.   Encouraging Taiwan to commercialize some of 
its promising biotech research may ensure Taiwan's active support of 
biotechnology in the WTO and other fora. 
 
Post POCs 
--------- 
 
¶17. (U) Post responsible officers and contact information: Economic 
Officer Matthew O'Connor (o'connorme@state.gov), FAS Officer Chris 
Frederick (Chris.Ferederick@fas.usda.gov), and Cultural Affairs 
Officer Scott Robinson (RobinsonSA@state.gov). 
 
YOUNG