09TELAVIV171
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Wed Jan 21 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #0171/01 0211105
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 211105Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0127
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 4884
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 1483
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 5322
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 5690
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 4916
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 3360
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 5696
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 2541
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 0754
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 9473
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 6967
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 1913
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 5976
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 8001
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH PRIORITY 0804
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 1221
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 000171 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Mideast  - BLOCK QUOTES ONLY 
 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
Senior columnist Nahum Barnea wrote on page one of the 
mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "One of the first stops 
in the Obama administration's foreign policy will be the talks with 
Iran.  This is also the most pressing issue from Israel's 
standpoint.  If Obama succeeds by diplomatic means in closing down 
the Iranian nuclear project-more power to him.  If he fails, his 
willingness to act by less diplomatic means will be tested..." 
 
Senior diplomactic commentator Ben Caspit wrote in the popular, 
pluralist Maariv: "We don't know yet.  A special and compelling man 
[Obama]who is meant for great things and will become one of the most 
brilliant American presidents in the new age, or a rock star who 
accidentally reached politics, a talented and charismatic 
rhetorician who lacks any real experience or ability, someone who 
made history by reaching his post but will not make a mark and will 
not stop America's decline." 
 
Dov Weissglas, close associate of former PM Sharon, opined in the 
the mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: ""Israel's 
opposition to the establishment of a Palestinian state-which is the 
only means of ending the oppression and occupation-is rooted, 
mainly, in the inability (or unwillingness) of the Palestinians to 
prevent and refrain from terror." 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Herb Keinon wrote in the conservative, 
independent Jerusalem Post: "His [Obama]two top priorities are the 
economy and the hot wars the US is involved in, in Iraq and 
Afghanistan, the only two foreign countries he mentioned by name in 
his address... He didn't mention Iran, China, Russia, any of the 
European countries - or Israel. Which doesn't mean that he has 
forgotten us - just that we are down on his list of priorities..." 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: "Precisely at a 
time when Israel is drunk on power after Operation Cast Lead in 
Gaza, it should listen to Obama's sober words: "Our power alone 
cannot protect us, nor does it entitle us to do as we please ... our 
power grows through its prudent use; our security emanates from the 
justness of our cause." Israel should internalize Obama's call for 
restraint as an attribute of security, as well as his approach that 
favors dialogue and seeking paths toward understanding with 
yesterday's enemies." 
 
Aluf Benn, senior diplomatic correspondent for the left-leaning, 
liberal Ha'aretz wrote: "Israel, like the Gazan state of our day, 
has suffered since its inception from economic boycotts and wars 
with its neighbors. But unlike Hamas, Israel relied on a UN 
resolution and took care to obtain recognition from the superpowers. 
This was the basis for its establishment, and solidified its 
international status despite its hostile environment. Hamas, too, 
could obtain international recognition, if it would agree to 
recognize Israel and previous Israeli-Palestinian agreements..., But 
for now, Khaled Meshal and Ismail Haniyeh prefer to be the 
neighborhood bullies who conduct their foreign policy via rockets 
rather than diplomacy" 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
I."Yes, He Can" 
Senior columnist Nahum Barnea wrote on page one of the 
mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (1/21):"Every American 
president promises in his inauguration address to lead his country 
and the world into a new, good and benevolent age, but coming from 
Barack Obama it sounded different.  It was not the words that made 
his inauguration such a significant event, it was the context.... 
The wondrous story of Obama's election as president is not only the 
story of the Black minority in the United States.  It inspires hope 
in every person whose path to fulfilling a dream is blocked due to 
his belonging to a minority....  However, he sought to convince the 
Muslim world that he was headed for a new dialogue based on mutual 
respect.  These are not empty words: One of the first stops in the 
Obama administration's foreign policy will be the talks with Iran. 
This is also the most pressing issue from Israel's standpoint.  If 
Obama succeeds by diplomatic means in closing down the Iranian 
nuclear project-more power to him.  If he fails, his willingness to 
act by less diplomatic means will be tested...   Nothing significant 
is expected to happen on the Israel-Obama front until after the new 
government is formed in Israel at the beginning of March.  Since it 
is reasonable to assume that the next government will be more right 
wing than the current government, it is doubtful whether it will 
feel as comfortable in Washington as the Sharon and Olmert 
governments felt....   The ability of the Obama administration to 
bring about a positive turn in the Middle East depends first and 
foremost on his success at home.  Only a strong president who has 
coped with the economic crisis will be able to overcome the problems 
posed by the Middle East, from Afghanistan to Gaza." 
II. "The End of Romance" 
Ben Caspit, senior diplomatic commentator wrote in the popular, 
pluralist Maariv (1/21): " ...   What is he [Obama]?  We don't know 
yet.  A special and compelling man who is meant for great things and 
will become one of the most brilliant American presidents in the new 
age, or a rock star who accidentally reached politics, a talented 
and charismatic rhetorician who lacks any real experience or 
ability, someone who made history by reaching his post but will not 
make a mark and will not stop America's decline.  In other words, is 
Obama a talented coacher who knows how to make speeches and give 
advice, or is he a real bulldozer who can extricate the semi-trailer 
from the mud?  All answers are possible.  America is waking up this 
morning from the romance to real life.  The party is over, now comes 
the hangover....Unlike many others, Obama has built a professional, 
opinionated, high-quality team.  A team of people who will not be 
afraid of him, will not pull any punches and will tell it to him as 
they see it.  This can succeed, and it can also crash.... " 
III. "Yes, We Can?" 
Dov Weissglas, close associate of former PM Sharon, opined in the 
the mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (1/21): "...the 
essence of our expectation of President Obama is this: Understanding 
the Israeli position on the Middle East conflict and support of it 
requires patience.  A great deal of patience.  The overt equation is 
simple: An occupied and oppressed people versus an occupying and 
oppressing people.  Israel's opposition to the establishment of a 
Palestinian state-which is the only means of ending the oppression 
and occupation-is rooted, mainly, in the inability (or 
unwillingness) of the Palestinians to prevent and refrain from 
terror.  President Bush had a great deal of patience for us; he 
understood this well.  He is the creator of the road map-the 
diplomatic formula according to which the Palestinians are first of 
all required to eradicate terror and reform their government, and 
only then will they receive a state of their own.  This is a 
diplomatic order of advancement that is the main guarantee for 
preventing a state of chaos and terror.  When the Obama 
administration announces its support for such a diplomatic order, 
and reaffirms its opposition to establishing a Palestinian state 
without this precondition being upheld-we will know that we can 
rejoice in his election." 
 IV: "Glimpses, Sans Poetry, into his Program" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Herb Keinon wrote in the conservative, 
independent Jerusalem Post (1/21): "To a nation, and indeed a world, 
accustomed by now to the soaring oratory of US President Barack 
Obama, his inaugural speech probably won't be remembered as his 
finest... But Obama's inaugural address didn't live up to some of 
his better stump speeches... But those speeches were delivered when 
he was candidate Obama, when he was selling the country a vision. 
Now he is President Obama, and the weight of the world has shifted 
to his shoulders. Obama has to present a program, and programs are 
far less poetic than visions. The world, including Israel, was given 
a glimpse into the Obama program Tuesday night, and it largely 
matched expectations... His two top priorities are the economy and 
the hot wars the US is involved in, in Iraq and Afghanistan, the 
only two foreign countries he mentioned by name in his address... He 
didn't mention Iran, China, Russia, any of the European countries - 
or Israel. Which doesn't mean that he has forgotten us - just that 
we are down on his list of priorities... 
 
 V: "Not for Peace Alone" 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: "...In addressing 
the international community, Obama spoke about a new strategy that 
rests on international cooperation and adherence to values, and uses 
force only prudently and wisely.... Obama called for a new 
relationship between America and the Muslim world, one based on 
common interests and mutual respect. He warned corrupt rulers who 
oppress their people that they are on the wrong side of 
history....As to leaders who blame the West for their countries' 
ills, Obama warned that they will be judged "on what you can build, 
not what you destroy." ...Israel was not mentioned in the speech, 
but its leaders need to listen carefully to the message that went 
out from Washington yesterday. ...The new president intends to speak 
with states and leaders that were boycotted during the Bush era such 
as Iran and Syria. Like other governments worldwide, the new 
government in Jerusalem after the elections will be judged by its 
ability to integrate into the processes Obama will lead and its 
willingness to cooperate with him. In short, on its success in 
building, not destroying....Precisely at a time when Israel is drunk 
on power after Operation Cast Lead in Gaza, it should listen to 
Obama's sober words: "Our power alone cannot protect us, nor does it 
entitle us to do as we please ... our power grows through its 
prudent use; our security emanates from the justness of our cause." 
Israel should internalize Obama's call for restraint as an attribute 
of security, as well as his approach that favors dialogue and 
seeking paths toward understanding with yesterday's enemies. And 
Israeli voters would do well to remember Obama's words when the time 
comes to decide for whom to cast their ballots." 
 
 VI: "A made-to-order State" 
 
Senior diplomatic correspondent for the left-leaning, liberal 
Ha'aretz wrote (1/21): "The cease-fire in the Gaza Strip offers a 
good opportunity to reexamine the central idea behind the 
Israeli-Palestinian diplomatic process - an idea whose title could 
be "a made-to-order state" or "a designer state."  From Oslo to 
Annapolis, via the interim agreements and the road map, with 
encouragement from the Beilin-Abu Mazen plan and the Geneva 
Initiative, all the agreements, understandings and proposals focused 
on drafting a detailed plan for the establishment of a Palestinian 
state in the territories, with a democratic constitution and a 
detailed list of its authorities and responsibilities....  There is 
only one problem: All these pieces of paper had trouble coping with 
reality... No agreement can cope with developments such as dozens of 
suicide bombings or Hamas' rise to power. ....When the carefully 
designed model collapsed in the West Bank, an alternative model 
developed in Gaza - one of building a state "from the bottom up," 
without negotiations and without an agreement. The cease-fire, which 
ensures Hamas' continued rule in Gaza, creates a sort of Palestinian 
independence there, albeit under harsh conditions of physical 
destruction, economic blockade and bitter hostility on the part of 
its neighbors...."Hamastan" is not the first state in the region to 
arise without an agreement, following a unilateral withdrawal by the 
previous ruling power. It was preceded by Israel, which was 
established after the British announced their abandonment of the 
Mandate for Palestine/Land of Israel....Israel, like the Gazan state 
of our day, has suffered since its inception from economic boycotts 
and wars with its neighbors. But unlike Hamas, Israel relied on a UN 
resolution and took care to obtain recognition from the superpowers. 
This was the basis for its establishment, and solidified its 
international status despite its hostile environment. Hamas, too, 
could obtain international recognition, if it would agree to 
recognize Israel and previous Israeli-Palestinian agreements..., But 
for now, Khaled Meshal and Ismail Haniyeh prefer to be the 
neighborhood bullies who conduct their foreign policy via rockets 
rather than diplomacy. Maybe the war just finished will make them 
understand that the way to consolidate the independence they have 
achieved in Gaza is through a diplomatic move." 
 
CUNNINGHAM