09TELAVIV2701
Global Context Section of the QDDR - ISRAEL
Fri Dec 11 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #2701/01 3451356
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 111356Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4589UNCLAS TEL AVIV 002701 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/IPA for Goldberger 
S/P for T. Andrews 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EAID PREL SOCI IS
SUBJECT: Global Context Section of the QDDR - ISRAEL 
 
REFS: A) STATE 120172 
  B) TEL AVIV 2563 
  C) TEL AVIV 653 
 
¶1.  Embassy Tel Aviv offers the following responses to queries posed 
in ref A regarding the trends in Israel that will most likely affect 
the conduct of diplomacy and the execution of development programs 
over the next ten to twenty years.  The challenges that Israel will 
face diplomatically will depend significantly on the progress of 
peace efforts and its ability to have normal relations with its 
neighbors.  Regional conflicts and the supreme need to guard its 
security may well be the enduring context of the next decade and 
currently color the country's approach to the global questions of 
empowerment through technology, relations with rising powers, 
resource scarcity and climate change. 
 
Technology as tool for civil society 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Israel is a fully wired society and technology plays a 
significant role in civic life for the majority of its citizens. 
Israeli research helped found the internet, and Israeli software 
innovations continually help refine it.  As home to many internet 
and IT research and development centers (Intel, Cisco, Microsoft, 
IBM, etc.), the country's economy has a major stake in the high-tech 
sector and policymakers are keenly aware of its importance as 
competition from other emerging high-tech centers grows.  Israelis 
are empowered technologically, with nearly 75 percent of citizens 
accessing the internet and more cell phones than people.  Many NGOs 
and civil society groups harness the power of the internet to spread 
their message and the government has not obstructed the expansion of 
access to social networks and other tools. For example, groups that 
support the settler movement as well as the more left-leaning NGOs 
like Peace Now both use the internet and text messaging extensively 
in their outreach and to mobilize their constituencies.  As mobile 
devices that can access the internet become cheaper and even more 
widespread, private companies, individuals, and groups wishing to 
promote themselves or their causes will do so via social networking 
tools.  When personalized advertising becomes feasible, businesses 
will assume a larger role in social networking. 
 
¶3.  The Israeli government also employs social networking sites. 
The MOD, MFA, and IDF are currently connected to social network 
tools to varying degrees, with the IDF spokesman's office setting 
the pace in these areas with a YouTube site.  The Israeli government 
sends updates from its official website (Gov.il) to twitter and the 
MFA maintains very active Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, and Flicker 
sites.  The Israeli President's Office just launched a YouTube site. 
 All have hosted internet chats and the Israeli Consulate in New 
York hosted a twitter based briefing during the Gaza Offensive. 
Finally, the current government created a new Ministry to improve 
the delivery of government services through the internet.  Post is 
working closely with the new Ministry to share U.S. best practices 
delivering government services via the internet. 
 
Relations with Rising Powers 
---------------------------- 
 
¶3.  Overall Israeli relations with the rising powers or big emerging 
markets like China, India, and Brazil, is forward looking and 
positive.  The GoI recognizes these countries as major future 
markets for Israeli technology exports and engages them with trade 
missions and high-level visits.  While competition exists and is 
likely to grow, for example with India in IT development and 
assembly work, where some Israeli firms have invested in production 
facilities, the benefits of collaboration with such large economies 
are understood by the private sector here.  Israeli expertise in dry 
land agriculture, agronomic research, and water management 
technology is appreciated in Brazil, India and elsewhere in the 
developing world.  Strong ties of Jews in Israel with those in the 
diaspora bring many Israelis in contact with the citizens of BEM 
(big emerging markets) countries, and these countries can be a 
source of immigration. 
 
¶4.  Israeli relations with key international players are varied and 
growing, partly from an effort to counter the influence of perceived 
anti-Israeli sentiment, but also the need to develop an appreciation 
in these organizations for what the country offers - among them, 
democratic values and a vibrant, first-world economy.  The country's 
drive for OECD membership is evidence of this.  Israel is eternally 
in quest of support in IOs such as the UN, and cultivates a 
plurality of links across many issue areas, although the Israeli 
government has only recently begun to recognize that its influence 
in international organizations would be enhanced if Israel were to 
be perceived to be politically useful to others within those 
organizations rather than exclusively focused inward on the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. 
 
Climate Change and Resource Scarcity 
------------------------------------ 
¶5.  Israeli's concern with climate change is real, but so too are 
its problems in addressing it.  With a developed economy and high 
standard of living, Israel has a high GHG emissions level comparable 
to that of Western European countries (see ref B.)  Nonetheless, the 
country also has a younger demographic profile and a high GDP growth 
rate more like that of developing economies.  In combination, these 
dynamics project a near doubling of emissions by 2030 without major 
policy changes.  GoI concern about global warming is genuine for 
several reasons.  First, the country already struggles with an arid 
climate and substandard rainfall.  Water and food self-sufficiency 
for Israel, a cherished goal in its hostile geopolitical situation, 
becomes even harder to attain.  Second, a water scarcity due to a 
changing global climate aggravates relations with neighboring states 
and complicates settlement of the Palestinian issue.  Third, the 
rise in sea levels, now projected at up to 1.4 meters, would 
seriously impact Israel's land area; half of the population lives on 
the coast, and any land area lost is critical given that Israel is 
smaller than New Jersey. 
 
¶6.  As always, security is the principal concern driving Israeli 
policy.  Previously simple decisions, however, are now rendered more 
complex by interlinked problem.  The GoI is acutely aware of the 
nation's lack of resources, particularly water, energy and land.  To 
address its vulnerability from dependence on foreign energy sources 
as well as to check the country's CO2 emissions growth, the Cabinet 
has endorsed policies aiming to produce 20 percent of its energy 
from alternative sources by 2020.  Last month, the Prime Minister 
spoke of the need for Israel to ultimately free itself from 
dependence on energy imported from foreign, hostile sources.  At the 
same time, the Cabinet is pressing for investment in massive 
desalinization facilities to free the country from dependence on 
natural fresh water sources.  The energy-intensive water objective 
will conflict with the energy conservation and CO2 reduction goals, 
leading to difficult policy and budgetary decisions in the future. 
The GoI also faces a major challenge in returning its education 
system to its prior quality, after years of under-investment and 
erosion in standards (see ref C.)  Israeli leadership knows that in 
its resource-poor environment, the country's intellectual capital is 
its chief strength.  The government hopes that Israeli ingenuity in 
technology innovation will address these contradictions. 
 
Backsliding on Democratic values 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  Israel largely stays true to its democratic principles, but 
questions of equality and fairness of treatment for local minorities 
continues to plague the society.  The Arab-Israeli population, 
religious minorities, as well as recent immigrants from countries 
like Ethiopia, do not fare as well as native-born Jewish Israelis on 
many scales - education, earned income, and political 
representation.  Presumably, equalizing factors, such as the spread 
of internet access and technology to these underserved populations, 
will facilitate their engagement in Israeli politics.  The question 
will be what a stronger voice for these minorities portends for the 
Israeli political system.  We would expect a rise in already 
existing tensions between those wanting to see Israel as a liberal 
and democratic state with equal citizenship for all, and those who 
want to give priority to Israel's Zionist identity as a 
fundamentally Jewish state.  The implications of demographic shifts 
in Israel's constituent ethnic and religious groups are immense. 
Regarding the perception of backsliding on democratic values in 
other countries, Israel does see it as within its interest to 
support democratic developments elsewhere in the world.  Israel's 
Center for International Cooperation, MASHAV, supports community 
development, poverty reduction, and gender equality in several 
developing countries. 
 
CUNNINGHAM