09TELAVIV647
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Thu Mar 19 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #0647/01 0781052
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 191052Z MAR 09
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1021
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 5168
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 1763
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 5667
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 5976
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 5206
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 3713
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 6018
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 2834
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 1044
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 9753
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 7254
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 2218
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 6255
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 8293
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH PRIORITY 1083
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 1674
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 000647 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Iran 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
HaQaretz quoted sources close to PM-designate Benjamin Netanyahu as 
saying yesterday that the Likud leader will make his first working 
visit to Washington on May 3, pending an official invitation from 
President Obama. 
 
Maariv quoted senior Hamas figure Mahmoud Zahar as saying that a new 
list of prisoners that the organization wants released in exchange 
for Gilad Shalit will be much more painful to Israel.  Zahar warned 
that Hamas will abduct further soldiers.  Israel Radio quoted Hamas 
sources as saying that the IDF has arrested political leaders from 
the organization in the West Bank.  The media reported that 
yesterday the Special Ministerial Committee for Examining the 
Condition of Hamas Prisoners considered making conditions worse and 
reducing privileges for Hamas prisoners.  The Jerusalem Post 
reported that an Egyptian Foreign Ministry spokesman told the 
newspaper yesterday that Egypt has been urging Europe and the U.S. 
to deal with whatever government is agreed on by the rival 
Palestinian factions negotiating in Cairo. 
 
Israel Radio reported that the IAF killed two Islamic Jihad 
militants in Gaza. 
 
HaQaretz quoted soldiers who fought in Operation Cast Lead as saying 
that that Israeli forces killed Palestinian civilians during the 
offensive under permissive rules of engagement and intentionally 
destroyed their property.  Their testimony runs counter to the IDFQs 
claims that Israeli troops observed a high level of moral behavior 
during the operation.  Other media cited the phenomenon.  Leading 
media quoted the IDF Spokesman as saying that the army is not aware 
of the events and that it will investigate. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that Avigdor LiebermanQs possible 
appointment as IsraelQs new foreign minister is receiving a chilly 
greeting from some on Capitol Hill, with sources saying it could 
dampen the enthusiastic support Israel has historically received in 
Congress.  HaQaretz reported that Yasser Rida, the Egyptian 
ambassador to Israel is threatening to boycott the ceremony marking 
30 years of relations between the two countries, as a protest 
against LiebermanQs pending appointment. 
 
Makor Rishon-Hatzofe reported that the French weekly Le Nouvel 
Observateur cited a classified EU document stating that the GOI is 
planning to separate East Jerusalem from the West Bank.  HaQaretz 
reported that a document recently uncovered in Ottoman archives in 
Ankara confirms that Palestinians are the owners of disputed land 
and houses in the Sheikh Jarrah neighborhood of East Jerusalem.  If 
an Israeli court accepts the document's validity, Palestinian 
families could be saved from eviction. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that Knesset members and Palestinian 
lawmakers failed to agree on a draft joint declaration aimed at 
promoting cooperation, peace, and reconciliation, at a meeting with 
European parliamentarians in Paris on Tuesday. 
 
HaQaretz quoted a senior Foreign Ministry source as saying that 
Israel rejects the latest draft of the "Durban 2" anti-racism 
conference closing statement.  While all direct references to Israel 
and the Israel-Palestinian conflict have been removed -- in an 
attempt to keep the European Union from boycotting -- it still 
implicitly singles out Israel. 
 
Yediot and The Jerusalem Post reported that Netanyahu will ask 
President Peres for more time to form his coalition.  Leading media 
quoted DM Ehud Barak as saying yesterday that the Labor Party should 
"seriously consider" Netanyahu's offer to join the government 
coalition, putting him on a collision course with at least half of 
the party's faction -- who reject the proposal.  Maariv reported 
that Labor is Qabout to split.Q  Next Tuesday the Labor convention 
will debate the idea of joining Netanyahu in a national unity 
government.  Netanyahu reportedly offered Barak five portfolios, 
including Defense, Industry and Trade, Agriculture and two others, 
in addition to deputy DM for Knesset Member Matan Vilnai and the 
chair of a Knesset committee.  HaQaretz quoted Labor 
Secretary-General MK Eitan Cabel as saying that most Labor MKs would 
oppose joining the far right parties that Netanyahu has teamed up 
with, which opposed U.S.-sponsored talks with Palestinians for a 
two-state solution.  Leading media reported that the right-wing 
party The Jewish Home is splintering. 
 
Leading media reported that Syrian President Bashar Assad told the 
Italian daily La Repubblica that PM Ehud Olmert agreed to withdraw 
from all the Golan Heights during indirect talks with Damascus. 
Assad was quoted as saying that it was too soon to speak of a 
Qhistoric shiftQ in U.S. foreign policy. 
 
The Jerusalem Post and Makor Rishon-Hatzofe cited Russian media as 
saying that his country has signed an agreement with Iran to sell 
anti-aircraft missiles.  The Jerusalem Post reported that Israeli 
officials downplayed those reports.  Dr. James Zogby, founder and 
president of the Washington- based Arab American Institute, was 
quoted as saying in an interview with HaQaretz that QIranQs target 
is not Israel, but regional hegemony.  Israel is a tool, a game that 
Tehran is using to enlist Arab support and export extremism to the 
Persian Gulf. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that the Defense Ministry told the 
newspaper yesterday that talks on installing further Israeli systems 
in the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter are still on. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that, fearing a spate of killings 
following threats to the Yemenite Jewish Community, the umbrella 
body of North American Jewish federations will evacuate almost half 
of YemenQs Jewish community -Q 110 souls -- to the U.S. over the 
next two weeks.  The operation will reportedly take place in 
conjunction with the State Department. 
 
Israel Radio reported that the High Court of Justice has authorized 
the holding of a 100-strong march around the Israeli-Arab town of 
Umm el-Fahm.  Far-Right activists Baruch Marzel and Itamar Ben-Gvir 
will be leading the rally. 
 
Yediot reported on a planned Qreality TV version of the peace 
processQ: Six Palestinians and six Israelis, all aged 18, will be 
closeted in a villa in France and filmed.  French director and 
filmmaker Mohammed Waled, who is working on a project proposal for 
the QFrench Broadcasting Authority,Q is hoping to recruit the 12 
participants by this coming summer, and trying to provide as much 
diversity as possible, including boys and girls, religious and 
secular. 
 
Maariv reported that American investors have recently bought 
GOI-issued bonds to the tune of $12 billion -Q 24 times the expect 
amount. 
 
Makor Rishon-Hatzofe cited the belief of Likud MK Benny Begin, the 
former head of IsraelQs Geological Institute, that a lethal 
earthquake will soon hit Israel and the neighboring countries, and 
that regional cooperation will be needed to cope with it. 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Columnist and former IDF Intelligence chief Shlomo Gazit wrote in 
the popular, pluralist Maariv (3/19): QIsraeli capitulation to 
HamasQs demands [in a deal to release Gilad Shalit] would ... give 
Hamas a victory in the internal Palestinian political arena. 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: Q[The] 
scandalous behavior [of IDF troops in Gaza] did not stem from the 
policy of the senior commanders.... It would be appropriate to 
investigate the problems from outside the IDF and root them out 
before the rot destroys the IDF and Israeli society. 
 
Columnist Ari Shavit wrote in Ha'aretz: QWe urgently need a new 
idea.  The paradigm of the right is obsolete, but neither is the 
center-left's paradigm relevant any longer. 
 
Middle East affairs commentator Dr. Guy Bechor, a lecturer at the 
Interdisciplinary Center, wrote in the mass-circulation, pluralist 
Yediot Aharonot: QAssad can now move in two ostensibly opposite 
directions: diplomatic negotiations or a military offensive.  There 
is not much difference between them: They both make use of Israel to 
relieve the pressure. 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
 
¶I.  QOlmert Is Right 
 
Columnist and former IDF Intelligence chief Shlomo Gazit wrote in 
the popular, pluralist Maariv (3/19): QIsraeli capitulation to 
HamasQs demands [in a deal to release Gilad Shalit] would ... give 
Hamas a victory in the internal Palestinian political arena.  At 
stake is the question of the balance of power between the Fatah 
leadership and Hamas, and what they consider the preferred policy 
towards Israel.  Following Operation Cast Lead, popular support by 
West Bank residents for Hamas already increased.  An Israeli 
capitulation to HamasQs uncompromising conditions for a deal would 
give them and their path a great advantage.  With a bit of 
imagination, one can imagine what the Hamas members would 
undoubtedly say to Fatah: QLook what you achieved in three years of 
Sisyphean negotiations between Ehud Olmert and Tzipi Livni with Abu 
Mazen and Abu Ala, and what we achieved by means of struggle and 
thanks to one Israeli POW that we seized.Q   In the plaza opposite 
the Prime MinisterQs Residence, there is a third camp missing -- the 
camp of PA Chairman Abu Mazen.   The interests of this camp are a 
central consideration in the negotiations that we are conducting. 
It is unthinkable for IsraelQs considerations to focus only on the 
question of how many prisoners and which ones would be released in 
exchange for the Israeli POW.  It is important for Abu MazenQs 
position to be heard and taken into account in any round of talks 
pertaining to ShalitQs release. 
 
II.  "The Lead Is Cast" 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (3/19): 
QOperation Cast Lead ended two months ago in a show of arrogance by 
Israeli leaders: Hamas had been dealt a crushing defeat that would 
deter it from firing rockets, and if it continued to smuggle weapons 
into Gaza the entire international community, from Washington to 
Cairo, would rally together to intercept them.   The price paid by 
Gaza's civilian population ... was presented as an unfortunate, but 
necessary, result of the combat methods required to protect IDF 
soldiers.... [In an internal newsletter,] soldiers [now] describe 
the killing of innocent civilians, pointless destruction, expulsions 
of families from homes seized as temporary outposts, disregard for 
human life and a tendency toward brutalization.  This scandalous 
behavior did not stem from the policy of the senior commanders.  It 
resulted from the disconnect between the battalion commanders and 
higher officers, versus their subordinates in the companies, 
platoons and houses where the soldiers waited for fighting to resume 
after Hamas retreated from the crowded urban battlefield.  When the 
soldiers had no one to fight, they fought what was there.  The IDF's 
internal investigations, which are moving ahead very slowly, are not 
enough.  The army is absorbing more and more religious extremism 
from the teachings of the IDF's rabbinate.  It would be appropriate 
to investigate the problems from outside the IDF and root them out 
before the rot destroys the IDF and Israeli society. 
 
III.  "Thinking outside Two Boxes" 
 
Columnist Ari Shavit wrote in Ha'aretz (3/19): QWe urgently need a 
new idea.  The paradigm of the right is obsolete, but neither is the 
center-left's paradigm relevant any longer.  A two-state solution is 
the right slogan, but not a plan of action.  It can't be implemented 
in the real world.  Instead of repeating the dogma religiously, its 
fundamental assumptions should be examined.  Lessons should be 
learned from the repeated failures to make it happen.  Ideas are not 
taboo; perhaps a hudna [truce] with Hamas, if it forgoes military 
power and full sovereignty.  Perhaps Egyptian-Jordanian patronage 
over areas of the Land of Israel, from which Israel withdraws. 
Perhaps an international umbrella over a long-term, deep process of 
Palestinian nation-building.  Perhaps an Ireland plan, perhaps the 
Tony Blair approach, perhaps an idea that has not yet been born.  In 
any case, it's clear: The time has come to think outside the box. 
The time has come to think outside two boxes.  That will be the new 
government's task. Along with dealing with Iran and the economy, it 
will have to lead a national process of rethinking possible 
solutions to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. 
 
IV.  "President in the Gun Sights" 
 
Middle East affairs commentator Dr. Guy Bechor, a lecturer at the 
Interdisciplinary Center, wrote in the mass-circulation, pluralist 
Yediot Aharonot (3/19): Q[Following international demands that the 
assassination of former Lebanese PM Rafiq Hariri be investigated,] 
the regime in Damascus is now in a very sensitive situation and 
fears that opposition organizations in Syria or outside it will take 
advantage of the situation against it.  The response could be aimed 
at Israel, as is accepted in the Arab world.  Assad can now move in 
two ostensibly opposite directions: diplomatic negotiations or a 
military offensive.  There is not much difference between them: They 
both make use of Israel to relieve the pressure.  On the diplomatic 
level, SyriaQs price is dropping now, and whoever wants to conduct 
negotiations with Damascus can dare to demand more, since Syria has 
to negotiate with Israel.  On the military level, the IDF must 
understand that we are entering a sensitive period, despite the fact 
that as of now, the Syrian regime has no interest in clashing with 
Israel.  Such a step can be reserved for moments of severe 
embarrassment to the regime, as the trial continues to progress. 
Assad will try in the coming months to reach a kind of formula with 
the United States, in which he pays prices and receives things in 
return.  For example, calming down Iraq in exchange for alleviating 
the pressure in his international criminal trial.  This option may 
appeal to the Obama administration, to which it is very important to 
pull out of Ira while maintaining stability.  Will we also know hw 
to fit into such a deal, from the aspect of Hibullah and Hamas?  I 
believe that this is theoreically possible, and requires 
coordination with te U.S.  We are entering an unstable period 
versu Syria, whose senior officials could find themselvs in the 
dock similarly to the Serb Milosevic orthe President of Sudan. 
This is not easy for a sate that has based its entire worldview on 
the premise that Israel is a terrorist state. 
 
--------- 
¶2.  Iran: 
--------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Intelligence affairs correspondent Yossi Melman wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: QThe differences between the 
Israeli and the U.S. assessments are smaller than one might think 
and are based largely on geographical proximity.  Israel, which 
feels itself threatened by Iran, has more reasons for concern than 
the U.S. 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"What We Mean When We Talk about Iranian Nukes" 
 
Intelligence affairs correspondent Yossi Melman wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (3/19): QTwo clocks are ticking, 
one in Jerusalem and one in Washington.  These are the clocks that 
measure the Iranian nuclear threat.  Apparently these do not show 
the same time.... Israel believes Iran is no more than a few months, 
perhaps a little over a year, away from putting together its first 
nuclear device.  According to U.S. estimates, on the other hand, 
even if Iran takes the political decision to manufacture a bomb it 
would not be ready until 2013 or perhaps even 2015.... In any case, 
the differences between the Israeli and the U.S. assessments are 
smaller than one might think and are based largely on geographical 
proximity.  Israel, which feels itself threatened by Iran, has more 
reasons for concern than the U.S. 
 
CUNNINGHAM