09TELAVIV854
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Tue Apr 14 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #0854/01 1041011
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 141011Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1406
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 5288
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 1880
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 5801
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 6099
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 5326
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 3848
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 6141
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 2954
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 1162
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 9869
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 7374
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 2338
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 6372
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 8415
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH PRIORITY 1199
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 1834
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 000854 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
Please note: The Israel Media Reaction report will not appear on 
Wednesday, April 15, due to the second Passover holiday. 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  U.S.-Israel Relations 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Maariv cited tension among Israeli diplomatic sources regarding the 
upcoming visit of U.S. special envoy to the Middle East George 
Mitchell, following the argument between the two countries over the 
notion of a two-state solution.  Maariv reported that PM Benjamin 
Netanyahu views this meeting with Mitchell as a preparatory meeting 
before his May 4 meeting with President Obama.  Maariv quoted a 
Netanyahu adviser as saying that Netanyahu is interested in a 
Qstrong [Keith] Dayton and a [Tony] Blair on steroids,Q i.e., 
strengthening the PAQs security forces and economy, in line with his 
Qeconomic peaceQ outlook. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that the U.S. decision to begin 
negotiations with Tehran is likely to come up during discussions 
later this week with Mitchell, with Israel expected to urge the U.S. 
to set a short time limit for the talks.  The Jerusalem Post 
reported that on Friday, Zalman Shoval, a top foreign policy adviser 
in Netanyahu's transition team, told a group of some 40 ambassadors 
that Netanyahu's position regarding U.S. engagement with Iran was 
one of acquiescence, even though he held out little hope for 
success.  However, Shoval was quoted as saying, the feeling in the 
Netanyahu camp was that it was important for there to be a definite 
time limit, otherwise the Iranians would continue with their nuclear 
program, even as the talks continued.  Shoval was quoted as saying 
that while Israel was in favor of a short period, something along 
the line of two months, there were voices in the U.S. advocating 
more time.   Shoval reportedly said that it would be a mistake if 
the talks were postponed until after June's elections in Iran, and 
then until a new government there was formed, because that would 
merely buy the Iranians that much more time.  This morning Israel 
Radio quoted the New York Times as saying that the U.S. might give 
up its demand that Iran stop enriching uranium before starting the 
bilateral talks. 
 
Maariv reported that on Friday Deputy Russian FM Alexander Saltanov 
will meet with FM Avigdor Lieberman.  The newspaper said that 
Saltanov expects to get an official, final answer regarding IsraelQs 
participation in the peace conference Moscow plans to hold in the 
second half of this year, which will focus on the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.  Media said that it is in effect a 
continuation of the Annapolis Conference.  Maariv quoted diplomatic 
sources in Jerusalem as saying that Lieberman is expected to accept 
RussiaQs invitation. 
 
HaQaretz reported that Philippe Vasset, editor of Intelligence 
Online, told the newspaper yesterday that foreign intelligence 
services -- including the CIA and Israel's Mossad -- provided 
Egyptian authorities with intelligence that contributed to the 
uncovering of a Hizbullah-run terrorist ring and led to the arrest 
of dozens of suspects.  Meanwhile, HaQaretz reported that yesterday 
Egyptian sources upped the tone of the charges against Hizbullah by 
claiming that the aim of the underground activity was not limited to 
plans for terrorist attacks against tourist areas frequented by 
foreigners, but also against targets in the Suez Canal.  Yediot 
quoted an Egyptian source as saying that the ring had targeted 
Eilat.  The media quoted President Peres as saying yesterday: QThey 
[Arabs] are quarreling without us; this is a good thing.Q  The 
Jerusalem Post also quoted Peres as saying: QSooner or later, the 
world will realize that Iran wishes to take over the Middle East and 
that it has colonial ambitions. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that, in the face of Iran's continued 
pursuit of nuclear capability, Israel and the U.S. will hold an 
unprecedented and massive exercise later this year to jointly test 
three different ballistic missile defense systems.   The exercise - 
the latest Juniper Cobra maneuver --will be held in Israel and will 
include the newly developed Arrow 2, as well as America's THAAD 
(Terminal High Altitude Area Defense) and the ship-based Aegis 
Ballistic Missile Defense System.  The upcoming exercise is planned 
to be the most complex and extensive yet.  News of the scheduled 
exercise was revealed in testimony Missile Defense Agency director 
Lt.-Gen. Patrick J. O'Reilly gave to the House Appropriations 
Committee's subcommittee on defense earlier this month.  Israeli 
defense officials were quoted as saying yesterday that the purpose 
of the exercise was to create the necessary infrastructure that 
would enable interoperability between Israeli and American BMD 
systems in case the US decided to deploy these systems here in the 
event of a conflict with Iran, like it did ahead of the Gulf War in 
Iraq in 1991. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted diplomatic sources as saying that the U.S. 
is likely to wait until the last moment before deciding whether to 
hold to its original decision to with draw from the UNQs anti-racist 
conference (QDurban 2Q), which opens this coming Monday in Geneva. 
 
Israel Radio quoted Lebanese media as saying that a former Lebanese 
Army officer was arrested in Beirut.  He confessed to having 
collaborated with Israel for over a decade. 
 
HaQaretz and Maariv reported that Kazakhstan's Deputy Defense 
Minister Khazimurat Mayermanov was arrested yesterday as local 
security service KNB issued a public statement accusing several 
other senior officers and officials in the ministry of purchasing 
flawed military equipment from Israel.  Mayermanov is reportedly 
suspected of accepting bribes in his position as responsible for 
weapon purchases for the state.  Israeli businessman Boris 
Sheinkman, a former Soviet army colonel and an agent of Israeli 
defense firms Soltam and Israel Military Industries, was arrested in 
Kazakhstan several weeks ago. 
 
Leading media reported that incoming Public Security Minister 
Yitzhak Aharonovitch (Yisrael Beiteinu) has named Maj. Gen. Uri 
Bar-Lev Israel Police representative in Washington.  The move 
follows disputes between Bar-Lev and the policeQs top brass, and 
threats of his dismissal from the force. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Conservative international Jewish leader Isi Leibler wrote in the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post: QNetanyahu understands the 
U.S. and is better equipped to negotiate a realistic accommodation 
with Obama than any other Israeli politician.... Still, to retain 
credibility and be able to ... avoid needless confrontations or 
diversions into counterproductive debates over a currently 
inconceivable two-state solution. 
 
Military correspondent Amos Harel and Palestinian affairs 
correspondent Avi Issacharoff wrote on page one of the independent, 
left-leaning HaQaretz: QIn Israel's eyes, a high-profile 
confrontation between Egypt, Iran, and Hizbullah is good news.  But 
even now, it is best to keep in mind that Egypt is hardly working in 
Jerusalem's best interest. 
 
Military correspondent Yaakov Katz wrote in The Jerusalem Post: 
QWhat is just as worrying [as attacks on Israeli targets in the 
Sinai], or possibly even more so, are the cell's plans to attack the 
regime and undermine President Hosni Mubarak's hold over Egypt. 
 
Author and former staffer Daniel Gavron wrote in The Jerusalem Post: 
QAfter four years of Bibi-Barak, Israelis might well be ready to 
vote for a party that combines a genuine drive for peace with 
socially responsible economic policies. 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
 
¶I.  QNetanyahu and the Two-State Solution 
 
Conservative international Jewish leader Isi Leibler wrote in the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post (4/14): QPresident Barack 
Obama has yet to fully show his hand, but his policy of engaging 
with jihadists is likely to encourage efforts to pressure Israel 
into additional unilateral concessions to the Arabs that will need 
to be vigorously resisted.  Much will depend on our prime ministerQs 
ability to maximize the objectives we share in common and set aside 
the rhetoric and differences over inconsequential issues.  This 
applies above all to the recent brouhaha over the two-state 
solution.... Instead of becoming involved in provocative arguments 
over a two-state solution, we should be urging those who criticize 
the Netanyahu government to take account of the criminality and cult 
of martyrdom which to this day dominates Palestinian society, and 
should be insisting that it is high time that Mahmoud Abbas and his 
associates begin demonstrating a willingness to live side by side 
with a Jewish state.... Netanyahu understands the U.S. and is better 
equipped to negotiate a realistic accommodation with Obama than any 
other Israeli politician.  He can be relied upon to show 
flexibility, but unlike his predecessors will refuse to compromise 
the nationQs basic security.  Still, to retain credibility and be 
able to adopt an effective approach to the major issues confronting 
us, including the existential threat posed by a nuclear Iran, he 
must avoid needless confrontations or diversions into 
counterproductive debates over a currently inconceivable two-state 
solution. 
 
II.  "Lines in the Sand" 
 
Military correspondent Amos Harel and Palestinian affairs 
correspondent Avi Issacharoff wrote on page one of the independent, 
left-leaning HaQaretz (4/14): QOne possible explanation for 
Hizbullah's actions is that its leader became a victim of his own 
hubris.  After blatantly intervening in Palestinian affairs, he took 
de facto control of Lebanon and openly threatened Egypt during 
Israel's Gaza offensive for supposedly siding with the QZionist 
enemy.Q  Perhaps he erred in believing he could go toe-to-toe with 
Mubarak, and even hoped the move would bolster support of his 
organization ahead of Lebanese elections in two months.... In 
Israel's eyes, a high-profile confrontation between Egypt, Iran, and 
Hizbullah is good news.  But even now, it is best to keep in mind 
that Egypt is hardly working in Jerusalem's best interest.  Egypt's 
rage at Nasrallah will not necessarily translate into comprehensive 
steps against weapons smuggling to Gaza, or to warmer relations with 
Israel. 
 
 
III.  QIranian Threat to Egypt is Nothing New -Q But the Tactics May 
Be Changing 
 
Military correspondent Yaakov Katz wrote in The Jerusalem Post 
(4/14): QOfficially, the Israeli political and defense establishment 
is keeping quiet, and except for President Shimon Peres's statement 
on Monday that it is good that others are fighting and not Israel, 
no one is speaking publicly about what is happening to Israel's 
south.  Behind closed doors, and when speaking off the record, 
though, defense officials are rubbing their hands with glee since 
the news coming out of Cairo in recent days is an important 
demonstration to the world that the threat posed by a nuclear Iran 
and its proxy Hizbullah is not just to Israel but to the entire 
Middle East and specifically the most populous Arab country - 
Egypt.... While the Egyptian intelligence agencies have impressive 
capabilities, they are perceived to be mostly applicable to events 
inside Egypt, not overseas.  Israel as well as other Western 
countries could help Egypt fill that void.  If that happened in this 
case, we will likely not immediately know.  While Jerusalem is 
concerned that Hizbullah terrorist cells are operating in Egypt to 
strike at Israeli vacationers, what is just as worrying, or possibly 
even more so, are the cell's plans to attack the regime and 
undermine President Hosni Mubarak's hold over Egypt.  If Mubarak is 
assassinated or his government falls, Israel could find itself 
facing an Egyptian military consisting of US-made Abrams Tanks, 
Apache Helicopters, F-16 fighter jets and Harpoon Missiles in the 
hands of the radical Muslim Brotherhood, the official founding 
father of Hamas. 
 
IV.  "Chance for an Inclusive Israeli Left" 
 
Author and former staffer Daniel Gavron wrote in The Jerusalem Post 
(4/14): QThe early demise of the new government of Benjamin (Bibi) 
Netanyahu is being confidently predicted in the media. I disagree. 
I think it will survive for quite long -- maybe even the whole four 
years.  Bibi has artfully constructed an almost indestructible 
administration, locked together by the self-interest of the parties 
that make it up.  Moreover, he will be careful not to rock the boat. 
  He is unlikely to launch daring peace initiatives. He is even less 
likely to make war with the Palestinians, Iran, or anyone else.  He 
has enlisted Defense Minister Ehud Barak for that very purpose. It 
is no secret that Barak was the main force holding back the decision 
to go to war in Gaza recently.  Caution is Barak's middle name, and 
his military record can be counted on to neutralize the screams of 
frustration on the part of those of us thirsty for battle.... After 
four years of Bibi-Barak, Israelis might well be ready to vote for a 
party that combines a genuine drive for peace with socially 
responsible economic policies.   Even if this is not the case, and 
the present government retains its popularity, there should be an 
alternative for the future.  The creation of a new, attractive, 
left-wing party is not only important to those of us with liberal 
dovish views.  It is in the interest of Israeli democracy as a 
whole. 
 
-------------------------- 
¶2.  U.S.-Israel Relations: 
-------------------------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Senior columnist and longtime dove Yoel Marcus wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: QIsrael's leaders take as a 
given that relations with the U.S. are symmetrical.  They are not. 
Bibi himself believes that this is a different America, a president 
with a different agenda, and he knows he will have to act 
differently. 
 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"Life with Obama" 
 
Senior columnist and longtime dove Yoel Marcus wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (4/14): QFor years, U.S.-Israeli 
dialogue has gone beyond what is reflected in the media.  The Obama 
administration has doubtless made clear to us that the two-state 
track is the key to the solution of the Israeli-Palestinian 
conflict.  These are the facts of life.  Either you continue with 
the American plan or you come out against it, and then we will have 
to get along in an extremist Islamic world, with America and the 
European Union against us.  As the saying goes, if you're not at the 
table, you're on the menu.  Israel's leaders take as a given that 
relations with the U.S. are symmetrical.  They are not.  Bibi 
himself believes that this is a different America, a president with 
a different agenda, and he knows he will have to act differently.... 
It can be said that terror seized us when Obama announced a solution 
to the Iranian issue through dialogue, and Iran agreed.  See again 
how QBibi's people,Q who did not open their mouths about Annapolis, 
provided HaQaretz with the major headline that Israel does not 
oppose multilateral dialogue between the West and Iran.  First of 
all, who asked us whether we agree or not?  Second, what is behind 
this generous pronouncement?  Only a few days ago, Maariv reported 
that Bibi had met with the heads of the security establishment and 
was very pleased with the plans to attack Iran.  What about our 
diplomatic solution?.... [Anyway,] the destruction of Iran's nuclear 
power is a task too big for us. 
 
CUNNINGHAM