09TELAVIV912
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Thu Apr 23 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #0912/01 1131057
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 231057Z APR 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1502
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 5322
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 1913
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 5835
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 6133
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 5360
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 3887
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 6176
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 2988
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 1195
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 9902
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 7407
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 2371
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 6405
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 8449
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH PRIORITY 1232
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 1881
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 000912 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
Please note: The U.S. Embassy in Tel Aviv will be closed on Friday, 
April 24, 2009. 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Iran 
 
¶3.  U.S.-Israel Relations 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Yesterday HaQaretz quoted FM Avigdor Lieberman as saying in an 
interview with the Russian newspaper Moskovskiy Komsomolets that the 
Obama administration will put forth new peace initiatives only if 
Israel agrees.  Yesterday Maariv quoted Lieberman as saying that the 
Arab peace initiative is a recipe for the annihilation of Israel. 
All media reported that last night FM Avigdor Lieberman met with 
Egyptian intelligence chief Omar Suleiman in Jerusalem, despite 
declarations from Lieberman's Egyptian counterpart earlier this 
month that Cairo would not deal with him, nor would he be welcome in 
the Arab nation, until his attitude changed.   Leading media 
reported that Suleiman invited Lieberman to visit Cairo.  The media 
cited the Foreign MinistryQs statement that, during the meeting, the 
FM "expressed his respect and appreciation for Egypt's leading role 
in the region and his personal respect for Egyptian President Hosni 
Mubarak and Minister Suleiman."  Israel and Egypt will continue 
their vital cooperation to ensure stability, security and peace in 
the Middle East, the statement said.  Maariv and other media 
reported that, responding to LiebermanQs rejection of the Arab 
initiative, DM Ehud Barak said that it will be promoted in 
coordination with the U.S. 
 
Yesterday Yediot cited a report presented to Secretary of State 
Hillary Clinton by Gen. Paul Selva, which states that Israel is 
evading its Roadmap obligations. 
 
The media reported that the IDF found in five separate 
investigations into alleged international law violations that there 
were no intentional attacks on civilians during Operation Cast Lead. 
 
 The investigations found in several instances that operational 
mistakes caused civilian deaths, but Deputy Chief of Staff Dan 
Harel, who presented the findings, called these cases "isolated." 
The most noteworthy operational mishap mentioned was the strike on 
the Al-Daya family home in the Zeitoun neighborhood, in which 21 
family members were killed.  The Air Force had intended to bomb a 
home that intelligence believed was being used to store Hamas 
weapons, and residents of that building were called beforehand to 
warn them an attack was imminent.  According to the investigation, 
the Al-Daya home was several dozen meters away from the intended 
target.  The error occurred because the pilot was given mistaken 
coordinates.  The IDF described the incident as "saddening," but 
emphasized that it stemmed from "a professional mistake that could 
happen during intensive fighting."  Another operational mishap 
occurred when the air force struck a truck near a rocket launcher 
and a rocket making workshop.  The army thought the truck was 
transporting long-range rockets, but following the attack it learned 
it was carrying oxygen canisters.  The attack killed eight 
Palestinians, including four Hamas members.  The probe into the use 
of phosphorus munitions, which Palestinian and international sources 
claimed caused dozens of civilian casualties, concluded that the IDF 
used "illuminating" phosphorus munitions, fired from mortars and 
naval vessels in order to "mark" positions.  In one instance, 
phosphorus munitions were used to burn vegetation hiding tunnels 
used to launch attacks.  The probe found that such munitions never 
were used in populated areas.  Artillery shells containing 
phosphorus were also used to create smoke to cover troop movement. 
The IDF says such shells are used by all western armies, and that 
they cause no more than minor burns. The media reported that Israeli 
and international human rights organizations rejected the results of 
the army probe. 
 
Yesterday, bannering QOn the Way to a Confrontation [with the 
U.S.]?,Q Yediot reported that, before the U.S. elections, 
presumptive Israeli ambassador to the U.S. Michael Oren criticized 
Barack Obama and supported John McCain.  Yediot quoted sources close 
to the Obama administration as saying that OrenQs nomination is a 
strange choice.  Today Maariv reported that White House Chief of 
Staff Rahm Emanuel privately praised Oren. 
 
Yesterday Israel Hayom reported that President Obama invited PM 
Benjamin Netanyahu, PA President Mahmoud Abbas, and Egyptian 
President Hosni Mubarak to separate talks in Washington. 
 
HaQaretz reported that the foreign policy of the Netanyahu 
government, which deems unacceptable the two-state solution to the 
Israel-Palestinian conflict as an outline for negotiations with the 
Palestinians, has damaged Israel's relations with the European 
Union.  HaQaretz cited an internal Foreign Ministry document last 
week that stated that following Operation Cast Lead, diplomatic 
bodies in a number of European countries have called for a freeze on 
the upgrade of relations with Israel, citing the pressure of 
domestic public opinion.  Four European states have already said 
that if Israel did not agree to a two-state solution, they would 
oppose upgrading relations.  Under such circumstances, the upgrade 
would have to be shelved since a unanimous vote is required to 
implement it. 
 
Leading media reported on Secretary ClintonQs testimony before the 
House Foreign Affairs Committee yesterday.  Yediot bannered her 
description of Pakistan as a Qmortal threat to the security and 
safety of our country and the world."  The media also quoted Clinton 
as saying that the U.S. was laying the groundwork for "crippling 
sanctions [on Iran] that might be necessary in the event that our 
offers are either rejected or the process is inconclusive or 
unsuccessful".  The media also quoted Clinton as saying that the 
U.S. will not deal with a Palestinian unity government that would 
include an unreformed Hamas. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that Israeli officials will tell Chinese 
FM Yang Jiechi, who started a three-day visit to Israel yesterday, 
that ChinaQs oil and natural gas imports from Iran could be 
jeopardized in the future if pressure does not increase on the 
Islamic Republic to cease its nuclear program and a military 
confrontation ensues.  The Jerusalem Post quoted Israeli expert on 
China Prof. Yitzhak Shichor as saying that Chinese officials are 
Qdeeply embarrassedQ by Hamas and HizbullahQs usage of Chinese-made 
weapons. 
 
HaQaretz reported that PM Benjamin Netanyahu is developing a 
"laundry list" that he will present to President Obama when they 
meet next month in Washington.  According to HaQaretz, the Israeli 
premier will present Obama with a three-part plan involving halting 
Iran's nuclear program, closer relations with moderate Arab states, 
and dealing with the Palestinian issue through several channels. 
Netanyahu will tell Obama that he will not recognize a nation-state 
providing Palestinian self-determination if the Palestinians don't 
recognize Israel as the nation-state of the Jewish people. 
 
Yediot reported that DM Ehud Barak is offering a gesture to the PA: 
more Palestinian policemen. 
 
The Jerusalem Post and other media reported that yesterday Deputy FM 
Danny Ayalon denied a report that Israel will not move ahead with 
diplomatic talks with the Palestinians until the U.S. places more 
pressure on Iran to stop its nuclear weapons program.  He was 
responding to a Washington Post story published on the same day. 
 
Yesterday Yediot quoted The New York Times as saying that an Israeli 
figure promised Jewish Congresswoman Jane Harman (D-CA) to obtain a 
promotion for her in exchange for an action on her part to reduce 
the sentence of senior AIPAC members suspected of conveying 
information to Israel.  Today Maariv and The Jerusalem Post quoted 
Harman as saying in a series of interviews that she did not do any 
thing wrong and that Congress members always talk with lobbyists. 
The Jerusalem Post and Makor Rishon-Hatzofe reported that the 
prosecution in Washington is considering dropping the AIPAC 
espionage case. 
 
Jewish-American businessman Daniel Abrams, who served as former PM 
Ehud OlmertQs informal diplomatic envoy, was quoted as saying in an 
interview with Maariv that Netanyahu will bring peace with the Arab 
world. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that Dr. Izzeldin Abuelaish, the Gazan 
doctor who in January lost three of his daughters when IDF soldiers 
fired tank shells on his home, will share the (American) Niarchos 
Prize for Survivorship with Nomika Zion from Sderot. 
 
The media reported that yesterday Labor Party Chairman Ehud Barak 
dismissed the partyQs secretary general Eitan Cabel, who responded 
by saying that Barak is Qa dictator who tries to get rid of anyone 
who disturbs him.Q  While Cabel associates were quoted as saying 
that Barak has split the party, Barak associates said that Cabel 
does not respect the majority vote in the party in favor of entering 
the government coalition.  Media reported that the partyQs 
convention members will meet to discuss the situation. 
 
HaQaretz cited the results of a poll commissioned by the Konrad 
Adenauer FoundationQs Israel office: More than 75% of Israeli Jews 
would like Israel to join the EU. Forty percent of the Arab 
population support the idea.  As a whole, 60% of Israelis view the 
EU favorably. 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: Q[Avigdor 
Lieberman] apparently is not impressed by the positions of U.S. 
President Barack Obama.... [LiebermanQs] positions should cause 
concern to anyone who supports a peace process based on compromise 
and the normalization of Israel's status in the Middle East. 
 
Middle East affairs commentator Dr. Guy Bechor, a lecturer at the 
Interdisciplinary Center, wrote in the mass-circulation, pluralist 
Yediot Aharonot: QAuspiciously, after over sixty years, the 
educational process of peace with the Arab world is beginning. 
 
Columnist Ari Shavit wrote in HaQaretz: QIt is out of the question 
for Israel to recognize the Palestinian people's right to 
self-determination in advance, while the Palestinians refuse to 
recognize the Jewish people's right to self-determination. 
 
Liberal columnist Uzi Benziman wrote in the popular, pluralist 
Maariv: QThere are definite signs that NetanyahuQs second term might 
be a repeat of his first one. 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "LiebermanQs Illusory View" 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (4/23): QThe 
appointment of Avigdor Lieberman as foreign minister has not led him 
to moderate his diplomatic positions or to soften his belligerent 
approach to solving the country's problems.... He apparently is not 
impressed by the positions of U.S. President Barack Obama, who is 
demanding confidence-building steps from both sides and stated two 
days ago that talk without action would not be enough.... Currently, 
Lieberman has the right to veto any of Netanyahu's diplomatic 
initiatives.  Therefore his positions should cause concern to anyone 
who supports a peace process based on compromise and the 
normalization of Israel's status in the Middle East.  Lieberman's 
repeated statements prove that his appointment as foreign minister 
was a mistake that is causing damage to Israel's diplomatic 
interests. 
 
II.  "The Two Sides of the Coin" 
 
Middle East affairs commentator Dr. Guy Bechor, a lecturer at the 
Interdisciplinary Center, wrote in the mass-circulation, pluralist 
Yediot Aharonot (4/23): QAt least in talkbacks on the Arab Internet, 
an initial debate has just taken place: Does Israel exist, should it 
exist; furthermore -Q as a Jewish state?  This is the wisdom of the 
motto Qtwo states for two states.Q  Yes, the Jewish people are a 
people; without the concessions of the failed Oslo agreement.  For 
this reason, Israel must insist on both sides of the motto, as Prime 
Minister Netanyahu is wisely doing.... Until now [the Arabs] have 
claimed that Israel is racist, but by rejecting the Jewish peopleQs 
formula they are in fact being exposed as racist themselves.... 
Auspiciously, after over sixty years, the educational process of 
peace with the Arab world is beginning.  It will be long and 
arduous, like a true educational process.  But it canQt be avoided. 
There are no shortcuts; reality requires it. 
 
III.  "The Two Nation-State Solution" 
 
Columnist Ari Shavit wrote in HaQaretz (4/23): QThe 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict is three-tiered: It is a conflict about 
1967, about 1947, and about 1917.  However, what underlies this is 
the fact that the Jewish national movement did not recognize the 
Palestinian people or its rights to this land, and that the 
Palestinian national movement did not recognize the Jewish people 
and its rights to the same land.... It is out of the question for 
Israel to recognize the Palestinian people's right to 
self-determination in advance, while the Palestinians refuse to 
recognize the Jewish people's right to self-determination.  That 
asymmetry will not lead to peace; sooner or later, it will lead to a 
blood-drenched all-out war.  Benjamin Netanyahu is now trying to 
implement Livni's meta-principle. Expectedly, the left is ridiculing 
the attempt.  The imagined peace community is trying to sabotage it. 
 However, in this specific case Netanyahu is right.  On this issue 
of principle he is expressing the firm opinion of the Israeli 
majority.  If there is a chance for an Israeli-Palestinian peace, it 
must be a peace of two nation-states. 
 
IV.  "The Same Known Noises" 
 
Liberal columnist Uzi Benziman wrote in the popular, pluralist 
Maariv (4/23): QWhen [Netanyahu] shapes his policy on the 
Palestinian issue, he encounters situations in which he appears as 
someone who was forced to give up his positions; when he tries his 
find his way with the Egyptians, his daunting foreign minister 
stands behind him, blowing a trumpet that disturbs his moves; when 
he looks for a candidate for the post of ambassador to the United 
States, he creates expectations and rivalries among several people 
whom he -Q or his associates -Q solicits simultaneously; when he 
tries to draw an initial outline to solve the economic crisis, his 
fresh government talks in multiple voices.  Thus, there are definite 
signs that NetanyahuQs second term might be a repeat of his first 
one. 
 
--------- 
¶2.  Iran: 
--------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Former Editor-in-Chief Moshe Ishon wrote in the editorial of the 
nationalist, Orthodox Makor Rishon-Hatzofe: QIf [Ahmadinejad] 
continues to reject ... the existence of the Jewish state in the 
Land of Israel, there will be no room for the U.S. to hold talks 
with that nation. 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"The Incitement Continues" 
 
Former Editor-in-Chief Moshe Ishon wrote in the editorial of the 
nationalist, Orthodox Makor Rishon-Hatzofe (4/23): QIf [Ahmadinejad] 
continues to reject the existence of the Jewish people and opposes 
the existence of the Jewish state in the Land of Israel, there will 
be no room for the U.S. to hold talks with that nation.... It must 
be assumed that the White House understands this.... [The United 
StatesQ] assessments are accepted in the diplomatic and security 
arenas.  In the aftermath of the Durban [II] conference, gazes are 
focusing on Tehran. 
 
-------------------------- 
¶3.  U.S.-Israel Relations: 
-------------------------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Correpondent Shmuel Rosner wrote in the popular, pluralist Maariv: 
QWhat started as a lethal assault on the QLobbyQsQ fortified citadel 
has ... turned into embarrassing harassment. 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"This IsnQt Meant for the Phone" 
 
Correpondent Shmuel Rosner wrote in the popular, pluralist Maariv 
(4/23): QThe mid-ranking officials of U.S. intelligence agencies do 
not have a particular love for Israel or its many friends in 
WashingtonQs corridors of power.  Exhausted agents are constantly 
looking for the QIsraeli spyQ -Q theyQre convinced that heQs there, 
leaking, and assisting, because it would be impossible to explain 
IsraelQs influence otherwise, and its continuous presence at the 
diplomatic crossroads of decisions that havenQt calmed down since 
Jonathan Pollard.... But what started as a lethal assault on the 
QLobbyQsQ fortified citadel has ... turned into embarrassing 
harassment.... It is no wonder that the administration is now 
considering giving up the [AIPAC] trial.... The increasing number of 
IsraelQs critics in the U.S. capital are more encouraged by the 
phone conversation [between Congresswoman Jane Harman and an alleged 
Israeli QagentQ] than by Avigdor LiebermanQs appointment to the post 
of foreign minister. 
 
CUNNINGHAM