09TORONTO12
Ontario and the Fight Against TIP:
Fri Jan 09 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Toronto
VZCZCXRO3659
RR RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHMT RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHON #0012/01 0091858
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 091858Z JAN 09
FM AMCONSUL TORONTO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2721
INFO RUCNCAN/ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE
RUEADRO/HQ ICE DRO WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TORONTO 000012 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CAN AND G/TIP (BARBARA FLECK) 
DHS FOR ICE HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATORS AND PUBLIC SAFETY INVESTIGATIONS 
DHS CIS OFFICE OF REFUGEE, ASYLUM, AND 
INTERNATIONAL OPERATIONS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KTIP KCRM KFRD KWMN PHUM PREF
CVIS, SMIG, PGOV, CA 
SUBJECT: Ontario and the Fight Against TIP: 
Better than Most, but Still Could Do More 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: A review of trafficking in persons (TIP) issues in 
Ontario shows that the anti-TIP effort here has shown real 
improvement from previously and is better than many abroad that our 
officers have observed.  Still, the anti-TIP effort here still faces 
three problems that limit the efficacy of groups combating human 
trafficking.  First, no Provincial agency has the lead on addressing 
human trafficking, nor are there social programs or services 
specifically targeting trafficking victims.  Second, trafficking 
victims lack sufficient information about their rights, human 
trafficking laws, and entitlements such as the Temporary Residence 
Permit (TRP).  Third, there is inadequate communication and 
collaboration among NGOs, local government, and law enforcement.  On 
the plus side, the RCMP and municipal law enforcement are making 
strides in terms of training and raising awareness 
among law enforcement officers; individual police 
divisions are taking the initiative to create their own programs to 
help trafficking victims; and Ontario NGOs are a ready resource to 
help local government and law enforcement agencies tackle the 
problem.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) Consulate staff and a visiting G/TIP officer 
recently met with representatives of Ontario's Ministry of Justice, 
Ontario Victim Services Secretariat, and the Ministry of Community 
Safety and Correctional Services.  Although they did not speak 
directly to Ontario Government policies, they told us about recent 
criminal cases involving human trafficking and services available to 
trafficking victims.  These offices currently have no projects 
addressing the issue of human trafficking nor do they have any 
partnerships with NGOs or the police services.  Services for 
trafficking victims are available through programs established for 
other groups such as domestic violence victims. 
 
¶3. (U) Starting in 2006, persons claiming to be 
trafficking victims have been able to apply to Canadian immigration 
authorities for a 180-day Temporary Residence Permit (TRP).  During 
the 180 days, TRP holders may decide to return home or stay in 
Canada to assist in the investigation and prosecution of 
traffickers.  Additionally, trafficking victims who hold a TRP may 
apply for a Canadian work permit and are eligible for federal 
assistance and support services for trafficking victims.  According 
to our RCMP contact, there have been only sixty-one applications for 
Temporary Resident Permits (TRPs), with twenty-six 
issued in all of Canada since the inception of the TRP. 
 
---------------------------- 
Law Enforcement Moving First 
---------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) Canadian federal law enforcement and some local police 
services are becoming more proactive in 
combating trafficking in persons.  The Royal Canadian Mounted Police 
(RCMP) has taken the lead on the police effort in Ontario, providing 
anti-trafficking training to local police services.  The training is 
a full-day law enforcement workshop and includes a briefing from 
Canadian Border Services Agency (CBSA), human trafficking case 
studies from throughout Canada, and presentations from police 
services that have experience in prosecuting these cases.  In 2008, 
the RCMP conducted seven workshops, mostly in smaller cities where 
police might face TIP problems but be less acquainted with how to 
deal with it.  For 2009, the RCMP has 10 workshops planned in the 
GTA.  Demand for the courses has steadily increased. 
 
 
¶5. (U) Peel Regional Police, which provides policing 
services to some 1.2 million people in the western part of the GTA, 
has been ahead of others on this issue. This year, they obtained the 
first two human 
trafficking convictions for domestic trafficking in 
Canada.  They also currently have an additional 10 
cases with human trafficking charges in the courts. 
Previously, many cases would have been prosecuted under other 
criminal codes, such as "pimping" laws. (Note: In Ontario, police 
lay criminal charges and do not conduct pre-charge consultations 
with the government prosecutors (known as Crown attorneys).  In more 
complicated cases, police may decide to consult with Crown attorneys 
prior to laying charges but they are not bound to follow the 
advice.)  The officers responsible for these cases explained that 
since the inception of the anti-trafficking laws in 2005, their 
police service has been proactively seeking out possible victims in 
brothels, massage parlors, and escort services.  Moreover, the Peel 
Police recently launched an initiative called "New Beginnings" in 
which officers in the unit secure community partnerships where 
business owners donate their time and/or services to assist 
 
TORONTO 00000012  002 OF 002 
 
 
trafficking victims. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Trafficking Victims Lacking Information 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (U) Representatives of NGOs providing services to 
trafficking victims explained that in their view a lack of 
information about the trafficking laws and the TRP is the reason 
many more victims choose to not come forward and instead apply for 
refugee status.  Moreover, immigration lawyers advise their clients 
that it is safer to claim refugee status because refugee status, if 
approved, provides permanent status whereas a TRP may be revoked at 
any time without appeal. 
 
¶7. (U) Despite improvements in police training, NGO reps we talked 
to said that inadequate training also still plays a role in the 
reluctance of many trafficking victims to come forward.  Some police 
officers not familiar with human trafficking stigmatize the victims 
and are unable to build the rapport necessary to earn their trust. 
Inadequate training also impedes some officers from recognizing the 
signs of human trafficking.  This is especially detrimental in cases 
of international trafficking where gaining the ictim's trust can be 
more difficult because traffickers often threaten their victims' 
families back home with harm. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------NGOs Tackling 
Trafficking and Seeing Increase in Domestic Cases 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶8. (U) One organization, FCJ Refugee Centre, claimed that in the 
past year they saw about eight trafficking victims coming through 
their doors.  As a result, it has expanded its services to provide 
shelter and legal assistance to trafficking victims.  Another group, 
Streetlights Support Services, runs a program called "Choices" which 
helps prostitutes find options to exit the sex trade.  Among the 
over 700 sex trade workers it assisted this past year, it suggests 
that perhaps five were domestic trafficking victims.  The FCJ 
Refugee Centre co-director told us that she has heard of similar 
numbers from other NGOs across the city.  These NGOs we met told us 
they rarely have opportunities to provide input to local authorities 
on the creation of policies and programs to reach out to the 
victims. 
 
¶9. (U) NGOs say they are seeing a rising trend in domestic 
trafficking incidences, including more cases involving aboriginal 
youth trafficked from rural reservations to big cities in Canada and 
the U.S.  RCMP and Peel Regional Police confirmed that local police 
services are finding more domestic trafficking than international 
cases.  One RCMP officer told us that he just did not see 
international cases in the GTA 
 
¶10. (U) Comment: While Ontario seems to have the resources to 
effectively combat both international and domestic trafficking in 
persons, a lack of coordination among the different groups has 
created a less than fully effective system.  The numerous 
organizations and police officials with whom we met confirmed that 
distrust of authorities and a lack of information about available 
resources keeps some trafficking victims from coming forward.  NGOs 
found that when foreign trafficking victims do come forward, they 
are often advised to seek refugee status instead of using the TRP 
process.  At present, anti-trafficking efforts in Ontario are mostly 
carried out by the police and a number of relatively small groups 
acting independently and rarely collaborating.  The provincial 
government up to now has not taken a leading role nor has it 
coordinated efforts to combat trafficking.  We sense that upper 
echelon leadership in the Provincial government is necessary if 
Ontario is to take its anti-TIP efforts to the next level. 
 
 
BYSFIELD