09USUNNEWYORK55
A/SYG MULET BRIEFS COUNCIL ON DARFUR VIOLENCE
Thu Jan 29 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO7525
PP RUEHGI RUEHMA RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0055/01 0290217
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 290217Z JAN 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5691
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 USUN NEW YORK 000055 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KPKO UNSC SU
SUBJECT: A/SYG MULET BRIEFS COUNCIL ON DARFUR VIOLENCE 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary:  On request of the United States, A/SYG 
Mulet provided the Security Council a detailed factual 
chronology of events in Darfur beginning with the January 10 
movement of JEM forces into South Darfur and the ensuing 
aerial bombardment by the Government of Sudan.  He said that, 
although the peace precess continues "at a very rudimentary 
state, these events are undoubtedly a setback."  France, in 
its capacity as Council President, orally briefed the press 
afterwards, condemning the escalation of violence, calling on 
all parties to cease hostilities and engage in an inclusive 
political process, strongly supporting UN/AU mediator Bassole 
and UNAMID, and expressing an intent to follow closely the 
situation on the ground in Darfur in the upcoming weeks. 
Members expressed opinions in line with their well-known 
positions.  End Summary. 
 
Mulet Briefs the Council 
------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (SBU) The Assistant Secretary General for the Department 
of Peacekeeping Operations, Edmond Mulet, briefed the Council 
on January 28 on recent fighting in Darfur.  Mulet noted that 
the cycle of violence began on January 10, when Justice and 
Equality Movement (JEM) forces amassed in South Darfur, close 
to Muhajeriya.  Mulet stated that UNAMID confirmed that the 
GOS bombed Khor Abeche that evening, and two days later 
bombed Muhajeriya.  Mulet also pointed out that the GOS 
accepted responsibility for the bombing and stressed that its 
objective was to target JEM forces.  Mulet said that UNAMID 
had confirmed GOS bombing raids in Muhajeriya from January 22 
to 24, which led to an estimated 1,000 civilians taking 
refuge at a UNAMID camp. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Mulet described rebel movements outside the 
Muhajeriya area as well, noting that JEM vheicles were seen 
on January 18 patrolling areas east and south of Nyala, in 
Labado and Geraida.  Mulet said that the GOS informed UNAMID 
of its decision to deploy forces to Geraida, allegedly at the 
request of the rebel group Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minawi 
(SLA-MM).  On January 22, Mulet noted, fighting between the 
GOS and SLA/MM broke out, and the GOS took control of 
Geraida, claiming a JEM attack was imminent.  Mulet said that 
UNAMID had received unconfirmed reports that the GOS 
conducted aerial bombardments in North Darfur in areas west 
of Haskanita and south of Um Kadada and will investigate this 
incident. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Mulet further noted that on January 26, the GOS 
advised UNAMID that a column of 100 JEM vehicles was 17 
kilometers outside El Fasher, approaching the city center, 
and that the GOS would respond through a ground and air 
offensive targeting rebel positions.  Mulet said that the GOS 
closed El Fasher airport for the day, but noted that the 
airport has subsequently reopened.  Mulet closed his briefing 
by characterizing these developments as an extremely worrying 
trend, signaling an investment in conflict rather than a 
commitment to peaceful negotiations. 
 
P-5 Views 
--------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Ambassador DiCarlo noted that the U.S. requested 
the briefing in order to have an accurate report from the UN 
on recent attacks that have been widely reported in the 
media.  DiCarlo expressed extreme concern with both the GOS 
bombing campaign and the incursion of JEM into areas 
controlled by SLM/MM in South Darfur, which precipitated the 
upsurge in violence.  She noted that the bombing campaign was 
in violation of existing Council resolutions and stressed 
that the Council must closely watch events in Darfur in the 
coming weeks.  The UK called upon parties to cease 
hostilities and called for an effective monitoring mechanism 
in light of the increasing violence.  France said that, while 
the context for recent violence in Darfur may be the 
impending International Criminal Court (ICC) decision, ICC 
action must not be a pretext for such violence.  France 
reiterated its prior position that impunity cannot be 
tolerated and urged the Council to remain vigilant and to 
present a unified message to all parties. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Russia stressed that the GOS had responded to armed 
provocation, and urged member states with influence over 
rebel groups to increase pressure on the rebels to engage 
with Bassole.  Russia requested an update from Mulet 
regarding the Qatar initiative.  Russia also discussed its 
appointment of a Special Envoy for Darfur, and noted that as 
the ICC prepares to issue a verdict, the Council must 
carefully follow events in Darfur.  China characterized the 
escalation of hostilities as entirely the responsibility of 
JEM, a group that China said had refused to participate in 
the peace process and deliberately provoked a signatory to 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000055  002 OF 002 
 
 
the Darfur Peace Agreement.  China also noted that any action 
taken by the ICC should not be allowed to have an impact on 
the worsening situation in Darfur, and urged the Council to 
make greater efforts to support the peace process. 
 
New Council Members Weigh In 
---------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Both Uganda and Japan expressed appreciation for 
the U.S. initiative in seeking a briefing.  Japan accused JEM 
of starting the "cycle of violence," acknowledged broad areas 
of agreement among Council members and urged the President to 
make a statement to the press on these elements.  Both Mexico 
and Austria flagged the Panel of Experts' (POE) inability to 
travel to Sudan due to the GOS refusal to issue a visa to its 
expert on weapons evaluation. 
 
Other Member Views 
------------------ 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Libya stated that the GOS has a sovereign right to 
protect its civilians and asserted that JEM is trying to 
seize control of the entire country.  Libya characterized GOS 
efforts as stabilizing, with aerial bombardment a necessary 
tool to avoid JEM's efforts to destabilize the region. 
Burkina Faso, Vietnam, Croatia, and Costa Rica made general 
statements deploring the violence and urging all parties to 
commit to peaceful settlement. 
 
Conclusion 
---------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Mulet responded to Russia's question concerning the 
Qatar initiative by noting that Bassole had nearly finalized 
a framework agreement which would establish a detailed 
approach to political negotiations.  Mulet urged members to 
strongly support Bassole. The Council engaged in brief debate 
over the press elements.  Austria pushed to add a point on 
the POE visa issue.  China, Libya and Russia opposed this 
addition.  After Russia agreed to engage bilaterally with the 
GOS on the issue, Austria withdrew its request, urging all 
member states to press the GOS to issue the visa. 
Rice