09USUNNEWYORK926
SUBJECT: U.N. GENERAL DEBATE CONCLUDES SEPT 29: ERITREA AND DJIBOUTI RIGHT OF REPLY EXCHANGE, CLOSING REMARKS BY GENERAL ASSEMBLY PRESIDENT TREKI AND OTHERS
Mon Oct 19 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO3665
RR RUEHPA RUEHPB RUEHROV
DE RUCNDT #0926/01 2921608
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 191608Z OCT 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7373
INFO RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 1668
RUEHAE/AMEMBASSY ASMARA 1798
RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0040
RUEHBP/AMEMBASSY BAMAKO 0126
RUEHWN/AMEMBASSY BRIDGETOWN 0214
RUEHCH/AMEMBASSY CHISINAU 0065
RUEHCP/AMEMBASSY COPENHAGEN 0281
RUEHDJ/AMEMBASSY DJIBOUTI 0005
RUEHOR/AMEMBASSY GABORONE 0073
RUEHJA/AMEMBASSY JAKARTA 2285
RUEHPC/AMEMBASSY LOME 0056
RUEHMU/AMEMBASSY MANAGUA 0144
RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 1191
RUEHNY/AMEMBASSY OSLO 0939
RUEHPL/AMEMBASSY PORT LOUIS 0144
RUEHPB/AMEMBASSY PORT MORESBY 0153
RUEHPA/AMEMBASSY PRAIA 0027
RUEHROV/AMEMBASSY VATICAN
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 0115
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 3887UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 USUN NEW YORK 000926 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNGA ECON PGOV PREL AORC KPKO ER GJ NU NO
ID, DJ, CV, VC, MD, GR, DA, SE, PP, VT, BC, TO, ML, SO 
SUBJECT: SUBJECT: U.N. GENERAL DEBATE CONCLUDES SEPT 29: ERITREA AND DJIBOUTI RIGHT OF REPLY EXCHANGE, CLOSING REMARKS BY GENERAL ASSEMBLY PRESIDENT TREKI AND OTHERS
 
¶1.  SUMMARY: The final session of the 64th General Assembly 
general debate focused on non-proliferation, climate change, 
multilateralism, Security Council reform, the financial 
crisis, and sustainable development. Several countries 
reflected on the importantance of preventing piracy on the 
high seas and ensuring that the situation in Somalia is 
stablized. The President of the General Assembly Ali Treki 
(Libya) offered final remarks in which he reflected 
positively on the role of the United States in the 
Palestinian-Israeli peace process. A right of reply at the 
close highlighted tensions between Djibouti and Eritrea.  The 
following countries spoke: Grenada, Nicaragua, Norway, 
Indonesia, Djibouti, Cape Verde, St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines, Moldova, Greece, Denmark, Seychelles, Papua New 
Guinea, the Holy See, Batswana, Togo, and Mali. Full text of 
statements available at www.un.org/ga/64/generaldebate; video 
archives are at www.un.org/webcast/2009.html.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. GRENADA:  Minister of Foreign Affairs Peter David 
condemned the United States trade embargo on Cuba and 
portrayed the U.S. as responsible for the "failed state" of 
the Palestinian Authority. He contended that in both 
situations, the actions of the United States "violate the 
spirit and letter of international law." He noted 
appreciation for President Obama's work on nuclear 
disarmament in the Security Council, but reminded the 
audience that Grenada's chief concern is small arms trade in 
the Caribbean. 
 
¶3. NICARAGUA: Minister of Foreign Affairs Lopez praised the 
leaders from Cuba and Venezuela before criticizing developed 
countries for problems ranging from the economic crisis to 
climate change. He expressed support for Puerto Rican 
independence and called for Israeli withdrawal from Syrian, 
Lebanese and Palestinian territories.  He declared that the 
invasions into Iraq and Afghanistan were unjustified and 
decried the "establishment of military bases in Colombia 
under the pretext of fighting drug trafficking."  He noted 
that Fidel Castro referred to these military bases as the 
"seven daggers in Latin America" and commented that the 
objective of the bases is "to salvage the death-bound 
economic and political system with which capitalism flaunts 
its power, through hemispheric control of water, oil and 
biodiversity." 
 
¶4. NORWAY:  Foreign Affairs Minister Store focused attention 
on climate change, stating that "the pace of negotiations 
must increase" before the Copenhagen Summit.  He called on 
developed countries to set economy-wide reductions of 
emissions. He reported that Norway would be increasing its 
Overseas Development Assistance, particularly in the health 
sector.  He bemoaned the effects of rape and sexual violence 
of women on societies throughout the world. 
 
¶5. INDONESIA:  Minister of Foreign Affairs Wirajuda spoke 
about the economic crisis, climate change and food security. 
He called for increased regulation and supervision of the 
world economy and urged more  developing country involvement 
in decision-making, and called for deep cuts in emissions. 
Wirajuda pointed out that, thanks to investments in 
agriculture, Indonesia is a net exporter of rice and is 
playing its part to help increase global food security.  He 
called on Israel to halt the "illegal settlements" and to 
work toward a two-state solution. 
 
¶6. DJIBOUTI:  Permanent Representative Olhaye concentrated 
his remarks on the Eritrean occupation of Djiboutian 
territory.  He requested the Security Council to resolve the 
situation via resolution 1862 (calling for Eritrea to  
withdraw its forces).  He pointed out the destabilizing 
nature of hostilities in Somalia.  On the Israel-Palestine 
issue, Olhaye called on Israel to stop its "business as 
usual" policy of building settlements and its refusal to 
address the final status issues.  He advocated an African 
permanent seat on the Security Council. 
 
¶7. CAPE VERDE: Permanent Representative Lima condemned the 
recent killings in Guinea.  He bemoaned organized crime in 
West Africa and increasing regional drug-trafficking.  On the 
financial crisis, he spoke about the effects of declining GDP 
growth in his nation, which he attributes to causing a rise 
in unemployment and hunger.  On climate change, Lima stated 
that this is a time for action, echoing similar statements by 
other island nations on the effects of rising seas. 
 
¶8. ST. VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES:  Permanent Representative 
Camillo Gonsalves agreed with President Obama's assessment 
that multilateral unity is "rooted in a discontent with the 
status quo."  He characterized St. Vincent as being 
"globalized, climatized, and stigmatized," having lost its 
competitive advantage in bananas and its coral reefs and 
beaches succumbing to climate change. He bemoaned his 
country's loss of tax haven advantage, which he attributes to 
the actions of the G-20 and OECD.  Gonsalves called for 
Member States to seal the "right" deal at the Summit on 
Climate Change in Copenhagen.  He urged the United States to 
end its embargo on Cuba and suggested that Taiwan ought to be 
included in United Nations activities. 
 
¶9. MOLDOVA: Permanent Representative Alexandru Cujba argued 
that a reformed United Nations and expanded Security Council 
- specifically the addition of a non-permanent seat for the 
Eastern European group - would be better able to react to 
peace, security, development, and climate change challenges. 
Cujba advocated for non-proliferation and disarmament.  He 
reported that his country is working on a solution to the 
Transnistrian secessionist problem through increased 
negotiation and third party mediation. 
 
¶10. GREECE: Permanent Representative Anastassis Mitsialis 
affirmed Greece's support for the Millenium Development 
Goals, a comprehensive climate change agreement, 
non-proliferation, and expanded human rights.  He highlighted 
four specific goals: 1) the establishment of neighborly 
relations, 2) full integration of South Eastern European 
countries into European organizations, 3) deepening of 
regional cooperation, and 4) strengthening cultural 
interaction and bonds with neighboring states.  Mitsialis 
criticized Macedonia for its choice of name and Turkey for 
interfering in Cyprus, but went on to note that Greece is 
"the most sincere supporter of Turkey's accession to the 
European Union." 
 
¶11. DENMARK: Permanent Representative Carsten Staur listed 
three main goals for the December 2009 Summit on Climate 
Change in Copenhagen: 1) agree on targets for CO2 emission 
reduction, 2) agree on a roadmap for achieving these targets, 
and 3) develop appropriate policies and measures to reach set 
goals.  He welcomed United States/Russian Federation 
cooperation on disarmament and noted support for 
non-proliferation and disarmament.  Staur called on Iran and 
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to enter 
negotiations and for an immediate halt of their nuclear 
programs (as per Security Council mandates).  He expressed 
the need for a peaceful resolution of the election process in 
Afghanistan, democracy in Pakistan, a strengthening of the 
Middle East Peace Process, and Security Council reform. 
 
 
¶12. SEYCHELLES:  Seychelles Permanent Representative Ronald 
Jumeau focused his speech on piracy and climate change. He 
proposed strengthening the rule of law in Somali, ensuring 
that piracy is not economically viable, and providing 
adequate military deterrence in the region.  He likened the 
battle against climate change to a battle for survival and 
said Copenhagen would only be a success if an agreement 
establishes stringent measures for the reduction of 
greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
¶13. HOLY SEE: Permanent Observer Archbishop Celestino 
Migliore urged the United Nations to find a "prompt solution" 
to the situation in Honduras, but never directly registered 
support for the Zelaya government.  Migliore urged leaders to 
take a firm stand on climate change and emphasized that the 
issue, "requires that environmental issues are taken as a 
moral imperative and translated into legal rules." He also 
pushed for the United Nations to engage in "responsible 
development", to fulfill its goal of protection, and to 
consider structural reform, including within the Security 
Council. 
 
¶14. BOTSWANA: Permanent Representative Ntwaagae noted the 
importance of development and poverty alleviation, but 
cautioned the audience not to engage in work that "could 
endanger the very lives we want to uplift." He stressed the 
importance of combating HIV/AIDS and urged countries to 
provide the necessary resources to allow global eradication 
efforts to have a maximum impact. He stressed the need for 
leaders to hammer out meaningful climate change measures in 
Copenhagen. He discussed regional conflicts, emphasizing the 
importance of the crisis in Somalia, while commending Burundi 
and Uganda for their peace-keeping efforts. Ntwaagae noted 
support for the decision of the Southern African Development 
Organization to suspend Madagascar's United Nations 
membership, and condemned the various coups in Honduras, 
Guinea-Bissau, Guinea, and Mauritania. 
 
¶15. TOGO: Permanent Representative Kodjo Menan asked leaders 
to support multilateralism and to strengthen the United 
Nations institutions through Security Council reform. He 
urged the European Union and the Bretton Woods Institutions 
to help Togo's economic recovery. Menan noted Togo's support 
for a two-state solution to the Israel-Palestinian conflict. 
Menan also discussed his country's tireless efforts to 
strengthen the rule of law and bring about constitutional 
reform.  Menan emphasized the importance of youth, 
educational programs, human rights, and development efforts. 
 
¶16. MALI: Chairman of the Delegation Oumar Daou spoke on the 
themes of development and poverty alleviation. He bemoaned 
the difficulties that Mali faces as a land-locked country and 
urged leaders to "revive global partnerships, to ensure 
conditions for poverty reduction, better health care and 
education, and gender equality." He stressed the need to 
reform financial institutions. Daou praised Libyan President 
Gaddafi for his speech and referred to him as a leader 
"committed to just causes." 
 
¶17. PRESIDENT OF THE ASSEMBLY'S CLOSING WORDS: Following the end of the general debate, President Ali Treki offered a few closing remarks, inviting leaders to embrace the opportunity of multilateralism and noting that "I am encouraged by the efforts of the President of the United States to promote a just, lasting and comprehensive solution to the conflict in the Middle East." He called on leaders to support the critical role of the United Nations in building peace and security, commenting on the disarmament agenda as central to its mission. He emphasized the importance of building effective development schemes, addressing the financial crisis, strengthening institutions, and reforming the Security Council.
 
¶18. ERITREA/DJIBOUTI RIGHT OF REPLY EXCHANGE: Delegates from Eritrea and Djibouti sparred during two right of reply exchanges. The delegate from Eritrea rebutted earlier claims, stating that Eritrea had not occupied Djibouti and had no territorial ambitions there. He also requested a United Nations fact finding mission into the charge. The delegate from Djibouti accused Eritrea of inciting regional hostilities. He said that the "facts speak for themselves" and stated firmly that "my country has always been convinced that no nation can disrespect international law." He affirmed interest in having a dialogue with Eritrea on the issue, implying that Eritrea has not shown much willingness to do so. However, he did go on to say that the Eritrean delegate's language encouraging calm and dialogue might imply a change of direction.
Wolff