09USUNNEWYORK328
UNSC: MIDDLE EAST OPEN DEBATE HIGHLIGHTS LACK OF
Fri Mar 27 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO2695
OO RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0328/01 0862226
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 272226Z MAR 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6213
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 USUN NEW YORK 000328 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC KWBG KPAL IS PA LE SY EG IR
SUBJECT: UNSC: MIDDLE EAST OPEN DEBATE HIGHLIGHTS LACK OF 
PROGRESS AND ISRAELI ACTIONS IN GAZA 
 
REF: STATE 28850 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: On March 25, the Security Council held its 
first Open Debate on the Middle East in 2009.  In addition to 
a briefing by the Under Secretary-General for Political 
Affairs covering recent events, which he termed a "situation 
of impasse and uncertainty," all 15 Council members spoke, as 
well as Israel, the Palestinian Observer, and 25 other 
delegations.  Most reiterated calls for the implementation of 
a durable cease-fire in Gaza and the opening of Gaza's 
crossings to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian 
assistance and reconstruction.  Many pressed for Palestinian 
unity and a commitment by the next Israeli government to the 
two-state solution.  Most delegations referred to the 
Secretary-General's decision to appoint a UN Board of Inquiry 
to investigate specific incidents that occurred in Gaza with 
respect to UN facilities and said they looked forward to the 
results of that inquiry.  A number of delegations spoke 
extensively about Israeli violations of international law in 
Gaza and recent Israeli press reports of soldier misconduct 
toward Gazan civilians.  A number of delegations defined 
these actions as war crimes and crimes against humanity and 
pressed for greater accountability, including by the Security 
Council.  End summary. 
 
UN Secretariat Briefing: 
"situation of impasse and uncertainty" 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  On March 25, Under Secretary-General for Political 
Affairs Lynn Pascoe briefed the Council at the start of its 
Open Debate on the Middle East.  He led by emphasizing that 
two months after unilateral cease-fires were declared in Gaza 
"we face a worrying situation of impasse and uncertainty" and 
very little progress has been made on the key issues of UNSC 
resolution 1860.  He stressed the need for both Israeli and 
Palestinian governments that are "clearly committed to the 
two-state solution" and a continuation of negotiations; an 
implementation of commitments on the ground; and a "strategy 
for de-escalating tensions and addressing the urgent 
humanitarian needs in Gaza." 
 
¶3.  (SBU) He then reviewed the events over the last month. 
He noted that Palestinian reconciliation talks in Cairo had 
made progress on certain issues but had adjourned without an 
agreement and are expected to reconvene April 1.  He said USD 
4.5 billion in humanitarian and economic relief had been 
pledged at the March 2 Palestinian Economy and Gaza 
Reconstruction conference in Sharm al-Shaykh but key 
challenges remain on how to channel the funds pledged and how 
to address the overall framework for economic growth in the 
West Bank and Gaza.  He highlighted the "intolerable 
situation at Gaza's crossings" which remain a "key impediment 
to bringing help and hope to the people of Gaza."  With the 
weekly average of truckloads entering Gaza only at 727 and 
roughly 85 percent of all imports consisting of food and 
medical supplies, he said "the quality and quantity of 
imports are insufficient compared to needs."  He noted 
Special Coordinator Serry's visit to Gaza that day which had 
underscored the "desperate need for a new approach to Gaza 
based on a cease-fire, open crossings, rejuvenation of the 
private sector, and Palestinian reconciliation." 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Pascoe voiced concern that, despite Egyptian 
efforts, no cease-fire regime is in place and there is no 
breakthrough in efforts to secure the release of CPL Shalit 
and several hundred Palestinian prisoners. He noted the IDF 
arrest of 10 Hamas leaders in the West Bank after the March 
17 announcement that there was no Shalit deal.  He also 
referred to the March 22 Israeli cabinet decision to "remove 
privileges not mandated by legal requirements or treaty 
obligations for Hamas and Islamic Jihad prisoners."  He noted 
that more than 100 rockets and mortars were fired into Israel 
over the last month from Gaza and there were 12 Israeli air 
strikes.  He called for an "end to all acts of violence and 
for respect of international humanitarian law by all parties. 
 He said four UN Mine Action Teams continue working in Gaza 
to remove and deactivate unexploded ordnance.  He noted that 
there have been no developments regarding the return or 
location of the unexploded ordnance which went missing in 
February before disposal.  He voiced concern over actions by 
"de facto Hamas authorities in Gaza purporting to assert 
control over the Palestinian Authority Department of External 
Medical Treatment" and said if not reversed it could prevent 
future referrals of patients abroad for treatment. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Pascoe said the UN Board of Inquiry established by 
the Secretary General to investigate specific incidents that 
occurred in Gaza has returned from the region and will submit 
its report to the Secretary-General when he returns to New 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000328  002 OF 007 
 
 
York in early April.  He noted the allegations emerging that 
Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) soldiers had engaged in improper 
conduct towards civilians in Gaza but that the IDF Military 
Advocate General had instructed the military police on March 
19 to probe these allegations. 
 
West Bank: Settlement activity 
must be frozen 
------------------------------ 
 
¶6.  (SBU) On the West Bank and Jerusalem, he called on the 
Israeli government to stop house demolitions in East 
Jerusalem and generally to refrain from unilateral actions 
that may prejudge final status issues.  He referred to 
Quartet Representative Blair's comments on the need for 
change in the permit system for Area C or "Palestinians will 
be prevented from improving their standard of living and from 
developing their land."  He noted that Israeli security 
forces had disrupted a Palestinian celebration on March 21 
marking East Jerusalem as the capital of Arab culture. 
Referring to the Israeli Defense Ministry's approval of 
construction plans for a settlement near Hebron, he 
underscored, "Israel's obligations under the Road Map are 
clear.  Settlement activity, including so-called natural 
growth must be frozen and outposts must be removed."  He did 
note that Palestinian security forces continue to operate in 
urban areas in the West Bank but no new deployments have 
taken place since reconciliation talks began.  He said the 
IDF continues its raids in the West Bank on a daily basis, 
with operations more than doubling since the end of the Gaza 
crisis.  He referred to the two Israeli policemen killed in 
the Jordan Valley and the large car bomb that was defused in 
Haifa on March 21. 
 
SYG to press Arab Summit on 
Palestinian Unity and importance 
of Arab peace Initiative 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Turning to the region, Pascoe confirmed that the 
Secretary-General would attend the Arab Summit on March 30 
and encourage Arab unity in support of Palestinian unity 
under President Abbas and the importance of the Arab Peace 
Initiative (API).  He said the Secretary-General continues to 
support the holding of the Moscow conference in the near 
future.  He noted the visit of U.S. officials to Damascus and 
hoped there would be progress on the Israeli-Syrian 
negotiations track this year.  On Lebanon, he reiterated the 
Secretary-General's condemnation of the killing of Deputy PLO 
Representative Kamal Medhat and hope that the perpetrators 
would promptly be brought to justice.  He noted that 
campaigning is already underway for the June 7 legislative 
elections but candidates have until April 7 to register.  A 
fifth session of the National Dialogue took place March 2 and 
participants agreed to develop proposals for a national 
defense strategy and ensure that the elections are conducted 
in a calm and peaceful atmosphere.  The next National 
Dialogue session will take place April 28.  The Lebanese 
Embassy was inaugurated in Syria on March 16 and President 
Sleiman accepted the Syrian Ambassador to Lebanon's 
credentials on March 24. 
 
Palestinian statement: "dramatic 
deterioration on all fronts" 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) In a more than 30-minute statement, preceded by the 
theatrical move to place a framed photo of a blinded 
Palestinian youth in front of him throughout his 
presentation, Palestinian Observer Mansour described the 
period since the last Open Debate in December 2008 as "a 
dramatic deterioration on all fronts" as compared to the 
guarded optimism last December.  He said the international 
community had witnessed yet again "Israel's blatant 
disrespect for the Council, the peace process, and all legal 
norms, demonstrated by its savage war against the Gaza Strip, 
launched in disregard for all standards of military conduct 
and human decency and with disastrous humanitarian and 
political consequences."  He raised the photo of the 
Palestinian youth injured during the Gaza conflict whom he 
had visited in a hospital in Cairo.  He said the young boy 
had asked him to pose the following question to Israel: "Why 
did you cause me to lose my eyesight and to ruin my future?" 
Mansour called for holding accountable "the criminals who 
carried out these crimes and for ensuring that they face the 
justice they so deserve."  He voiced appreciation to Egypt 
for hosting the donor conference in Sharm al-Shayhk and to 
all those who pledged support.  While calling for a 
permanent, durable cease-fire, he also called for the lifting 
of the "inhumane Israeli blockade of Gaza."  He said, "If 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000328  003 OF 007 
 
 
Israel continues the punitive blockade on the movement of 
persons and goods into and out of Gaza, it will only ensure 
an increase in the poverty, despair, indignation, and 
frustration of the Palestinian people and the peoples of the 
region." 
 
Need Israeli accountability and to 
uphold its peace process commitments 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Mansour called for "serious steps to pursue 
accountability for Israel's crimes against the Palestinian 
civilian population."  He called on the international 
community and the Security Council "to investigate the grave 
breaches of international law committed by the occupying 
forces in Gaza."  All crimes, "including the willful killing 
of civilians, willfully causing great suffering or serious 
injury to body or health and extensive destruction and 
appropriation of property" must be investigated and the 
perpetrators prosecuted, he said.  On Palestinian 
reconciliation efforts, Mansour said, "we remain hopeful of 
achieving unification of the Palestinian political factions" 
and that arrangements are being made for a transitional 
government and elections.  He urged the international 
community "to engage diplomatically with a unified, 
representative Palestinian leadership." 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Mansour raised Israeli military raids and arrest 
operations in the West Bank, its "settler colonization 
campaign," its "Judaization" of East Jerusalem, all in breach 
of international law, UN resolutions, and in contradiction of 
the peace process.  He said that the Palestinians have 
repeatedly called on the Council to uphold its 
responsibilities and to act to compel the occupying power to 
comply with its legal obligations and bring these activities 
to an end.  He said "colonization and the peace process 
cannot coexist."  He called on the international community 
and Quartet to realize that "continued declarations or mild 
appeals to Israel will no longer suffice."  He said, "Israel 
must be compelled to cease immediately all settlement 
activities ... and abide by its obligations under 
international law" and "affirm its respect for Road Map 
obligations and other peace process commitments in both word 
and deed."  He expressed serious concern with the positions 
of the next Israeli government and said, "We therefore 
emphasize that demands must be made upon Israel to not only 
talk of peace, but to actually act for peace, just as the 
Palestinian leadership has done over the past 15 years since 
the start of the peace process, including by upholding its 
Road Map obligations." 
 
Israeli statement: Iran 
is greatest threat 
----------------------- 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Israeli Perm Rep Shalev began her statement 
emphasizing the threat posed by extremists, especially Hamas 
and Hizballah and their patrons Iran and Syria.  She said, 
"Iran continues to threaten to wipe Israel off the map, and 
its development of nuclear capabilities should sound alarms 
across the globe.  Iran is indeed the real danger to our 
region, the world and the future."  Then she turned to the 
peace process and stressed Israel's commitment to a peace 
process based on the Quartet's three principles: recognition 
of the state of Israel, renunciation of terrorism and 
violence, and adherence to previous agreement between Israel 
and the Palestinians.  She noted the increases in the West 
Bank economy and its trade with Israel and noted the recent 
removal of ten roadblocks in the West Bank, despite the 
murder of the two Israeli police officers and the car bomb 
that was defused in Haifa. 
 
Crossings will not be fully 
opened until Shalit is released 
------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  (SBU) Turning to Gaza, Shalev said over 100 rockets and 
60 mortars have been fired from Gaza into Israel since 
January 18 and stressed that "Israel will not tolerate a 
return to the status quo ante."  She then addressed the 
Palestinian Permanent Observer directly and said that 
civilians on both sides have borne the burden of the conflict 
and referred to a young Israeli football player who had lost 
his leg to a Qassam rocket and had moved once but was still 
threatened by rocket fire.  Referring to the recent London 
conference on how to interdict arms shipments to Gaza, she 
said that "while we are encouraged by the willingness of 
members of the international community to tackle the 
smuggling of military capabilities, tangible measures must be 
taken against smuggling, as only concrete action will help to 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000328  004 OF 007 
 
 
stabilize the region."  She reminded the Council that CPL 
Shalit continues to be held hostage  and that Hamas has been 
"raising the price of his release during negotiations ... 
exploiting in a most cynical way Israel's sensitivity for 
human life."  She then reminded the Council that during the 
Gaza conflict the "true targets of Israeli actions were Hamas 
terrorists, not the citizens of Gaza."  She stressed that 
Israel is "not indifferent to the humanitarian situation of 
Gaza's population" but she underlined "expanded activity at 
the crossings will be discussed upon the release of Gilad 
Shalit." 
 
¶13.  (SBU) On Lebanon, Shalev recognized the work of UNIFIL 
and the Lebanese Armed Force in southern Lebanon but 
underscored Israel's concerns about Hizballah's ongoing 
military build-up and joined the international community in 
calling for "robust action against arms smuggling along the 
Syrian-Lebanese border" in accordance with the 
recommendations of the Lebanon Independent Border Assessment 
Team. 
 
Council members: Need 1860 implemented 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶14.  (SBU) Most Council members called for a durable 
cease-fire, as envisioned in UNSC resolution 1860. (Note: 
Ambassador Wolff delivered the U.S. intervention drawn from 
reftel. End note.)  The Vietnamese, French, Mexican, and 
Costa Rican Perm Reps all condemned Israel's military 
activities and air attacks against Gaza and the rocket 
attacks against Israeli civilians.  Most Council members 
called on Israel to open its crossings with Gaza to 
facilitate humanitarian materials and access and the 
reconstruction and recovery efforts. 
 
¶15.  (SBU) The British Political Coordinator urged Israel to 
"allow free and unfettered access for humanitarian aid and 
materials into Gaza" and commended the "UN framework for the 
provision of humanitarian assistance in Gaza," saying it 
would "allow a broader range of material to enter Gaza in 
such a way that is monitored to ensure that it reaches only 
its intended recipients."  The French Perm Rep reiterated the 
European Union's readiness to relaunch the EU Border 
Assistance Mission in Rafah as soon as the conditions allow 
and to extend assistance to other crossings, if security 
there is guaranteed.  The Costa Rican Perm Rep noted the need 
to put a halt to the illicit traffic of weapons and 
ammunition and prevent their entry into Gaza.  He commended 
the London meeting and the action plan to combat the 
smuggling of arms into Gaza.  The UK, France, and Croatia all 
noted the continuing captivity of CPL Shalit, and the UK 
noted the recent attempted car bombing in Haifa. 
 
Need Israeli and Palestinian 
partners committed to peace process 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶16.  (SBU) Many Council members specifically referred to 
Israel's demolition of Palestinian homes and continuing 
settlement activity and called for both to stop.  The French 
Perm Rep said, "The settlements policy, by rendering the 
prospects for a Palestinian state more difficult, does not 
contribute to Israeli security, but on the contrary, 
increases the dangers." The Austrian and Burkinabe Perm Reps 
and the UK Political Coordinator all called on the future 
Israeli government to show a commitment to the peace process 
and the two-state solution.  The Russian Deputy Perm Rep 
emphasized that progress on the peace process will depend 
upon how the future Israeli government "conducts itself."  He 
stressed that "negotiations with the Palestinians must not be 
resumed from scratch; they should be pursued taking all 
previous achievements and agreements into account."  He also 
said that the next Israeli cabinet must "stay the course of 
settling the crisis on the basis of the concept of a 
two-state solution" and resolving itself to the necessity of 
freezing settlement activity.  He noted that Russia continues 
to make preparations for the Moscow conference which will 
"provide renewed impetus to the peace process and ensure its 
comprehensive character." 
 
¶17.  (SBU) Most noted that a durable solution to the conflict 
can be only achieved through negotiations between the parties 
and noted the need for unity amongst the Palestinians.  The 
Turkish Perm Rep said the Palestinian cause would be best 
served if the "Palestinian factions settle their differences 
and join hands."  He said Turkey commends President Abbas for 
"his tireless efforts to achieve that vital goal" and he 
noted that Turkey maintains "contacts with and guidance to 
different Palestinian groups" in order to encourage them to 
settle their differences.  The French Perm Rep said France 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000328  005 OF 007 
 
 
"will be ready to work with a government of national unity 
that will abide by the fundamental principles of the peace 
process and will accept to resume negotiations with Israel in 
order to achieve the two-state solution." 
 
Continued calls for SYG to report 
on UN Board of Inquiry's findings 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶18.  (SBU) Many Council members, including Vietnam, China, 
Costa Rica, Austria, Burkina Faso, France, Japan, Mexico 
commended the Secretary-General's decision to convoke a UN 
Board of Inquiry and said they looked forward to learning the 
results of the inquiry.  Some specifically called on the 
Secretary-General to report the findings to the Council.  The 
Costa Rican Perm Rep stressed the importance for the 
credibility of the UN for all acts of hostility against its 
installations and personnel to be investigated and "that the 
responsibility for such acts be assigned."  The Austrian Perm 
Rep said, "All allegations of violations of international 
humanitarian law, by whomever they may have been committed, 
must be thoroughly investigated."  The Mexican Perm Rep 
referred to the importance of implementing resolution 1502 
related to the protection of humanitarian and UN personnel in 
areas of armed conflict; urged the Israeli government to 
continue its own investigations into violations of 
international humanitarian law; and called for an 
investigation of alleged human rights violations by Hamas. 
 
¶19.  (SBU)  The Libyan Perm Rep used his entire intervention 
to rail against Israeli violations in Gaza, many of which 
"rise to the level of war crimes and genocide under 
international law and international humanitarian law," and 
its settlement practices.  He drew extensively and in detail 
from recent New York Times and Haaretz press reports on 
allegations of misconduct by Israeli soldiers during the Gaza 
conflict.  He referred to others' calls for investigations 
into the "crimes committed in Gaza" but did not himself make 
a specific call for such an investigation.  He did draw 
parallels between Israeli actions in Gaza and Israeli 
settlement practices in the West Bank.  He said: "These 
practices show that those who rule Israel are no more than a 
gang of criminals and that the organizations and states of 
the international community must make their position clear on 
the crimes committed by Israel against the Palestinian 
people.  If they fail to do so, they should be considered 
accomplices to these crimes and co-conspirators against the 
occupied Palestinian people." 
 
Regional issues: Call for calm 
during elections in Lebanon and 
to resume Israeli-Syrian track 
------------------------------- 
 
¶20.  (SBU) On Lebanon, Council members noted that UNSC 
resolution 1701 is not fully implemented but welcomed the 
exchange of Ambassadors between Lebanon and Syria.  Most 
condemned the assassination of Kamal Medhat and called for 
all parties in Lebanon to ensure calm and stability during 
the electoral period.  The French Perm Rep welcomed the 
establishment of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon on March 1 
and recalled the importance of states continuing to cooperate 
with the Office of the Prosecutor, as requested in UNSC 
resolution 1852.  On the Israeli-Syrian track, the Turkish 
Perm Rep said that Turkey is ready to assist with the 
"resumption of indirect talks...if the parties so desire." 
Several other states echoed Turkey's calls for a resumption 
of the Israeli-Syrian track and were encouraged by U.S. 
engagement with Syria. 
 
Sharm donors conference pledges 
------------------------------- 
 
¶21.  (SBU) Most Council members lauded Egypt's role in trying 
to mediate and welcomed the Sharm al-Shaykh donors conference 
and the solidarity the international community showed with 
the Palestinian people.  The majority of Council members 
called on all countries who made pledges to honor them.  The 
Turkish Perm Rep confirmed Turkey's pledge in Sharm of USD 50 
million for specific reconstruction projects in Gaza and 
noted another USD 50 million from the Turkish public also for 
reconstruction projects.  The UK Political Coordinator 
reaffirmed the British pledge of a further USD 44 million to 
help rebuild schools, homes, and hospitals, bringing total 
British assistance in response to the Gaza crisis to USD 70 
million.  The Japanese Perm Rep confirmed Japan's pledge of 
USD 200 million.  The Mexican Perm Rep said that Mexico is 
contributing to the World Food Program's Operation Lifeline 
Gaza and to UNRWA. 
 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000328  006 OF 007 
 
 
Non-Council Members: Press for Accountability 
on Israeli violations of international law in Gaza 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶22.  (SBU) 25 delegations spoke after Council members with 
many (Egypt, Cuba, the Czech Republic for the European Union, 
Brazil, Morocco, Jordan South Africa, Norway, Australia, and 
the Republic of Korea) echoing the same points that most 
Council members did.  A significant number of states 
continued to loudly call for accountability on Israeli 
violations of international law in Gaza during the conflict. 
The Egyptian Perm Rep suggested there would be no question of 
whether there would be accountability, saying "the need to 
effectively address these incidents will be imposed upon the 
international community, and the Security Council in 
particular."  The Cuban Perm Rep, on behalf of the 
Non-aligned Movement (NAM), called for a thorough 
investigation of crimes and violations committed by Israel in 
Gaza.  The South African Perm Rep stressed the importance of 
an independent investigation of events in Gaza and full 
accountability for any violations.  The Qatari Perm Rep said 
Israeli violations included the use of forbidden chemical 
weapons and the targeting of densely populated buildings. 
 
¶23.  (SBU) Other delegations devoted almost their entire 
interventions specifically to this single issue.  The 
Lebanese Perm Rep referred at length and in detail to recent 
Haaretz new reports of Israeli soldiers' misconduct towards 
civilians in Gaza and questioned Israel's right to invoke 
self-defense under Article 51 of the Charter since it still 
controlled access to Gaza and was therefore technically the 
occupier.  The Malaysian Perm Rep called from the creation of 
a war crimes tribunal to investigate and prosecute those 
responsible for war crimes in Gaza.  He also said it was 
strange for the international community to "foot the bill of 
Gaza reconstruction" while the perpetrator who had caused all 
the damage and destruction "got off scot-free." 
 
¶24.  (SBU) The Syrian Perm Rep, who moved to later in the 
speaking order so as to not have to sit next to the Israeli 
delegation, called upon the international community and the 
Security Council to hold Israeli leaders accountable for 
their continuing crimes which he said were legally described 
as war crimes and crimes against humanity.  He then said 
Israel was engaged in the "true Holocaust" and pointed to 
recent Israeli actions in East Jerusalem, including home 
demolitions, saying that the fines imposed on Palestinians 
whose homes were demolished was akin to asking the 
Palestinians to pay for the bullets that would kill them. 
The Iranian Perm Rep said there was now more than enough 
evidence for international judicial mechanisms to move 
expeditiously to bring Israeli war criminals to justice. 
 
¶25.  (SBU) The Pakistani Perm Rep pontificated on the history 
of the Jewish people and how "to retaliate with the might of 
an empire and kill thousands in reprisal was all the more 
regrettable because it had been done by a people known for 
their fortitude, resilience, and courage."  The Venezuelan 
Perm Rep said that Israel could not be allowed to behave with 
impunity and that it was important to establish 
responsibility for its criminal nature so that the Council's 
credibility would not be lost.  He then was careful to note 
that the Venezuelan government's position and expulsion of 
the Israeli Ambassador during the Gaza crisis should not be 
mistaken for anti-Semitism since the Venezuelan government 
respected its local Jewish community. 
 
Israel, Syria, and Iran reply 
----------------------------- 
 
¶26.  (SBU) The Israeli representative exercised his right of 
reply at the end of the meeting to respond to the 
interventions of Iran and Syria.  He said that it was 
astonishing that countries which actively supported terrorism 
and sabotaged the peace process should lecture Israel on the 
peace process and its moral values.  He urged them to dig 
into their own human rights records, noting that Israel was 
proud of its tradition of self-criticism.  The Syrian 
representative also exercised his right to speak again and 
said the Israeli statement contained misleading claims that 
were part of its campaign to distract the attention of the 
international community from its actions in the occupied 
Palestinian territories.  He referred to the 
Secretary-General's reports that there had been no 
discoveries of weapons smuggling into Lebanon and that 
Israel's statements would not change the fact that it had the 
"largest record of terrorism and needed a museum to archive 
it."  The Iranian representatives also exercised his right of 
reply, rejecting Israel's "baseless allegations" which were 
made to distract the international community from its 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000328  007 OF 007 
 
 
atrocities and crimes.  He also said that Israel has 
displayed a "very clear example of state terrorism by a 
regime that possesses nuclear weapons" and so poses one of 
the greatest threats to the region and the international 
community. 
 
¶27.  (U) Note: A verbatim record of the meeting is available 
on the Security Council section of the UN website, 
www.un.org, under "Meetings." 
Wolff