09USUNNEWYORK741
SOMALIA: SRSG OULD-ABDALLAH URGES INTERNATIONAL
Mon Aug 03 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO9992
OO RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHBZ RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDF RUEHDU RUEHFL RUEHGI
RUEHIK RUEHJO RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHMA RUEHMR RUEHNP RUEHPA
RUEHPOD RUEHRN RUEHROV RUEHSK RUEHSL RUEHSR RUEHTRO RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUCNDT #0741/01 2151111
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 031111Z AUG 09 ZDK
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7021
INFO RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 USUN NEW YORK 000741 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF, IO, PM, AND USUN/W 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER PHUM MARR MOPS KPKO UNSC SO
SUBJECT: SOMALIA: SRSG OULD-ABDALLAH URGES INTERNATIONAL 
SUPPORT FOR SOMALIA 
 
REF: A. USUN 00709 
     ¶B. USUN 722 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000741  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY.  On July 28, SRSG for Somalia Ould-Abdallah 
called for the international community to continue its 
support for the TFG and AMISOM, reporting that while 
insurgent attempts to overthrow the Somali government have 
failed, the security situation remains fragile.  African 
Union Commissioner Lamamra praised the TFG's improvements in 
governance and emphasized the regional implications of the 
conflict - stating that it provides fertile ground for both 
foreign fighters and the illegal arms trade.  Somali Foreign 
Minister Omaar emphasized the TFG's commitment to the peace 
process, and said that Somalis will achieve reconciliation if 
external forces working to undermine the government can be 
overcome. Council Members unanimously voiced support for the 
TFG, called for a strengthening of AMISOM and urged donors to 
fulfill their financial pledges.  Members called on 
opposition groups to join the Djibouti Peace Process, and 
many deplored reports of foreign interference in Somalia. 
Humanitarian issues were also at the top of Council Members 
agendas, with many citing the growing number of IDPs and need 
for additional food aid.  In closed consultations following 
the briefing, the Somalia Sanctions Committee Chair stated 
that he had received a list of nine names and two entities 
including those believed to have violated measures imposed in 
resolutions 1844 and 1853.  The UK, France, US, Uganda said 
that they support sending a clear message to opposition group 
members who contribute to the destabilization efforts and 
increase violence in Somalia. END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) In his July 29 address to the Security Council, UN 
Special Representative for Somalia, Ahmed Ould-Abdullah, 
reported that although the security situation "remains 
fragile," the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) is 
resisting and repelling insurgent efforts to overthrow it. 
Ould-Abdullah stated that the Djibouti Agreement remains open 
to all peaceful opposition groups and noted the TFG's 
engagement of Ahlu Sunnawa Al Jamma in the reconciliation 
process.  Ould-Abdullah acknowledged the continuing suffering 
of ordinary Somalis and condemned recent abductions, as well 
as looting of UN offices carried out by insurgent groups.  He 
called for continued international support for the TFG and 
AMISOM and the establishment of a Green Zone in the capital, 
suggesting that this would allow the relocation of UN 
agencies-including his own-from Nairobi to Mogadishu. 
Finally, he urged the international community to continue its 
anti-piracy efforts and recommended the creation of a Somali 
Coast Guard. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security 
Ramtane Lamamra characterized the security situation in 
Somalia as "volatile," but not "desperate or insurmountable." 
 Lamamra praised the TFG's improvements in governance 
including greater transparency, inclusiveness and 
responsiveness.  He lamented that armed efforts by opposition 
groups to destroy the peace and reconciliation process are 
ongoing, and emphasized that the conflict in Somalia is a 
regional problem that provides fertile ground for foreign 
fighters and illegal arms trade.  Lamamra called for the TFG, 
AMISOM and the international community to present a coherent 
front against groups opposed to peace and reconciliation and 
he stated that TFG control should be expanded beyond the 
capital for both strategic and symbolic reasons. 
 
 
Somalia MFA Emphasizes Commitment to Peace 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia Mohamed 
Abdullahi Omaar emphasized that Somalia's problems must be 
solved by Somalis themselves, and stated that it was time to 
end the "continuous reinvention of the wheel" inherent in 
repeated international conferences and rebuild an 
institutional base and operational State.  Omaar stated that 
his government is willing and ready to incorporate into the 
Djibouti Peace Process any party that agrees to the 
reestablishment of the rule-of-law, and pointed to a recent 
agreement with Ahlu Sunna-wa Al Jamma as proof of this goal. 
Omarr urged the Council to view Somalia within a subregional 
context, calling Somalia a "cornerstone," for regional peace 
and stability, and pointed to piracy as an example of an 
issue felt "far beyond the boarders of Somalia."  He said 
that Somalis can achieve peace and reconciliation if 
"external interference and vested external interests" that 
wish to sustain the conflict are squelched. 
 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000741  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
Permanent Member Views 
---------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU)  In the U.S. statement to the Council, Ambassador 
Wolff condemned the continuing military offensives against 
the TFG and urged donors to fulfill their pledges to AMISOM 
and the Somali government, while lamenting the country's 
worsening humanitarian situation.  Pointing to reports of 
Eritrea's support for insurgent groups operating Somalia, 
Wolff stated that the "window is rapidly closing" for Eritrea 
to move toward improved regional relations.  Ambassador Wolff 
also expressed concern at the "exponential increase" of 
piracy activity and underscored the USG policy on offering no 
concessions to hostage-takers and on not paying ransoms. 
 
¶6. (SBU) The UK focused on the four areas it views as 
priority:  tackling the humanitarian crisis, building the 
Djibouti Peace Process, improving the security situation and 
addressing piracy.  The UK, France, China and Russia stated 
that the Somali security forces must be strengthened, and 
France announced that the European Union will send a mission 
to the region in mid-August to assess the forces' training 
needs. On sanctions, France said that it would engage 
actively in the Somalia Sanctions Committee ("751 
Committee"), and the UK urged the Sanctions Committee  it to 
"act quickly and decisively" in designating those individuals 
and entities recommended by the MG. 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) Russia and China both called for the full staffing 
and equipping of AMISOM, with China urging the United Nations 
to provide a logistical package in support of the mission. 
Russia noted that it is, "difficult to talk realistically 
about expanding the UN presence in Somalia," at this time as 
the international community's primary goal should be ensuring 
security.  China confirmed its support of the continuation of 
reconciliation talks, urged countries in the region to exert 
their influence on the peace process, and welcomed a recent 
meeting of the Joint Security Committee in Mogadishu.  On 
piracy, Russia called for the creation of a legal structure 
to prosecute those responsible, and suggested the 
incorporation of legal assistance from countries neighboring 
Somalia. 
 
Other Member Views 
------------------ 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Council members unanimously deplored the continuing 
attacks on the TFG and condemned the July 19 raids and forced 
closure of UN offices in the south of Somalia.  Members 
welcomed the TFG's efforts to reach out to opposition groups, 
including Ahlu Sunna-wa Al Jamma, and called on armed groups 
to embrace the Djibouti Agreement.  Members called for a 
strengthening of AMISOM and the Somali security forces, and 
expressed hope that reinforcements announced by African Union 
member States would shortly arrive.  Turkey announced that it 
had already transferred half of its pledge to AMISOM and is 
preparing to train peacekeepers and police in cooperation 
with the United Nations.  Many members pointed to piracy as a 
critical destabilizing factor and lauded efforts such as the 
European Union's "Operation Atalanta."  Mexico favored the 
creation of an additional working group within the Contact 
Group to consider counter-piracy initiatives, and Turkey 
noted its contribution of two brigades to assist.  All 
members addressed the deteriorating humanitarian situation in 
Somalia, and most expressed concern about the recruitment of 
child soldiers by insurgent groups. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Both Mexico and Burkino Faso asked the SC to take 
into account the African Union's call for the establishment 
of a "no-fly" zone to support the TFG, and Mexico said that 
creation of a security zone including ports will be a 
fundamental factor for success.  Libya focused on the World 
Food Program's $136 million shortfall required for the three 
million Somalis in need of food aid, and stated that illegal 
fishing by foreign companies has depleted Somali marine 
resources and must end. 
 
Consultations on Somalia Sanctions 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶10.  (SBU) After the open briefing on Somalia, Council 
Members moved to the consultation rooms for an update on the 
Somalia Sanctions Committee's activities.  In his 120 day 
report to the Security Council, Mexican Ambassador Heller and 
Chair of the Somalia Sanctions Committee primarily focused on 
the Committee's adoption of revised guidelines on May 11 and 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000741  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
the MG's last report. Heller stated that the MG, the group of 
experts mandated to monitor and improve the implementation of 
sanctions, submitted a draft list of eleven names including 
persons and entities believed to have violated measures 
imposed in resolutions 1844 and 1853, and recommended a 
number of procedural enhancements to the Committee.  (REFTEL 
USUN 00709, USUN 722). 
 
¶11.  (SBU) The UK, France, U.S., Uganda all supported sending 
a clear message to opposition group members who contribute to 
the destabilization efforts and increase violence in Somalia. 
The U.S. condemned the involvement of external governments in 
assisting in the destabilization efforts in Somalia and urged 
committee members to cooperate in order to hold those 
accountable for their actions.  The UK urged the committee to 
work expeditiously on sanctions designations, particularly 
against Eritrea, and left open the possibility of an arms 
export ban on Eritrea.  France stated its readiness to 
designate the two individuals associated with piracy but need 
more time to consider the other names on the MG's list. 
Austrian stated willingness to work with members of the 
committee on implementation of the sanctions resolution but 
cautioned against any actions as it would close already 
limited channels of communication with Eritrea.  No other 
member took the floor. 
 
RICE