09USUNNEWYORK493
UNSC: MIDDLE EAST MINISTERIAL STRONGLY BACKS
Wed May 13 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO2737
OO RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHKUK RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0493/01 1330035
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 130035Z MAY 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6538
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 USUN NEW YORK 000493 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PTER KPAL UNSC LE SY IS
SUBJECT: UNSC: MIDDLE EAST MINISTERIAL STRONGLY BACKS 
COMPREHENSIVE PEACE, ADOPTS PRESIDENTIAL STATEMENT 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary.  The Security Council on May 11 convened a 
ministerial-level meeting to encourage Israel, the 
Palestinians, and the international community to move forward 
on their commitments toward a comprehensive peace agreement. 
Sergei Lavrov, the Russian Foreign Minister, opened the 
meeting (in Russia's capacity as this month's Security 
Council President) and said the most important immediate 
goals were the rapid resumption of negotiations and the 
reaffirming of the two-state solution.  UN Secretary-General 
Ban said the challenge is to launch "an irreversible drive to 
achieve an Israeli-Palestinian agreement," with the ultimate 
objective to create an independent, democratic and viable 
Palestinian state.  All delegations voiced support for the 
Arab Peace Initiative and called on Israel to cease its 
settlement activity.  Most urged Israel to end its blockade 
of Gaza to allow delivery of humanitarian and reconstruction 
assistance and to a lesser extent called for an end to arms 
smuggling into Gaza and rocket attacks against Israel.  A 
number mentioned the Gaza Board of Inquiry and welcomed its 
investigation; the Libyan PermRep said his delegation had 
prepared a draft resolution based, in part, on the 
conclusions of the Board of Inquiry.  Following statements, 
the Council adopted a presidential statement, though some 
delegations said they were unsatisfied with its content.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU)  The Security Council on May 11 convened a 
ministerial-level meeting to encourage Israel, the 
Palestinians, and the international community to move forward 
on their commitments toward a comprehensive peace agreement. 
Sergei Lavrov, the Russian Foreign Minister whose delegation 
called for the Council's ministerial format, opened the 
meeting and said the most important immediate goals were the 
rapid resumption of negotiations and the reaffirming of the 
two-state solution.  He urged the Council and regional actors 
to support the Arab Peace Initiative, the Roadmap principles, 
and the Madrid Conference, and he called on the parties to 
reject any unilateral activities, such as settlement 
activity, that undermined a viable two-state solution. 
Lavrov said the presidential statement (PRST) to be adopted 
at the end of the meeting confirmed these goals, and he said 
the planned conference in Moscow later in the year was the 
next step in the diplomatic process.  (Most Council members 
subsequently thanked Russia for organizing the Moscow 
conference and voiced their support.) 
 
3 (SBU) UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said he hoped the 
ministerial meeting would provide direction and momentum to a 
process that had achieved no progress on implementing 
Security Council resolutions 1850 and 1860.  He said the 
parties' upcoming bilateral meetings President Obama, a 
proposed meeting of the Quartet and consultations with the 
Arab League aimed to "kick start a renewed and irreversible 
drive to achieve an Israeli-Palestinian agreement."  Ban 
lamented the "crisis of confidence" among ordinary people on 
the ground, saying that Palestinians experience house 
demolitions, intensified settlement activity, settler 
violence, restrictions on movement and the construction of 
the barrier, and he urged Israel to "fundamentally change its 
policies."  He said Israelis continue to seek reassurance 
that a future Palestinian state will guarantee their right to 
peace and security, and he called on the Palestinian 
Authority to create an effective security structure that, 
inter alia, would end rocket attacks against Israel.  Ban 
also emphasized Arab countries' commitment to the Arab Peace 
Initiative, which "offers Israel the opportunity for 
acceptance and security within the region on the basis of 
land for peace." 
 
Multiple Calls to End Israeli 
Settlements and Gaza Blockade 
----------------------------- 
¶4. (SBU) Among the most common themes expressed during the 
meeting were calls for Israel to end its settlement activity 
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem and to lift its 
restrictions on humanitarian and reconstruction assistance to 
Gaza.  French Foreign Minister Kouchner said the situation in 
Gaza is alarming and Israel's blockade makes reconstruction 
impossible.  Kouchner also said Israeli settlement activity 
is producing "facts on the ground" that will split the West 
Bank and undermine a viable Palestinian state.  Turkish 
Foreign Minister Davutoglu said Jewish settlements and 
restrictions on Palestinians' movement run contrary to 
Israel's obligations and the spirit of Annapolis.  UK Foreign 
Secretary Miliband said the Palestinians want to see an end 
to settlements in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, open 
borders and an adequately funded government.  In that 
context, Miliband made the day's only reference to Iran's 
role in the conflict by saying, "Iran's exploits the misery 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000493  002 OF 003 
 
 
of the Palestinian people for its own goals." (Note:  The 
Iranian Mission to the UN subsequently circulated a letter to 
the Security Council calling the UK's accusations "baseless". 
End note.)  Ambassador Rice stated that Israel must halt 
settlement activity and dismantle outposts erected since 
March 2001. (The full text of Ambassador Rice's statement can 
be found at http://www.usunnewyork.usmission.gov.) Mexican 
PermRep Heller "deplored the practice of colonization, 
demolition, and settlement activity that threatened the peace 
process."  Representatives of Austria, Burkina Faso, Croatia, 
Japan, and Uganda expressed concern that despite the more 
than $5 billion pledged at the Sharm el-Sheikh donors 
conference, little could be effectively dispersed because of 
the border closures.  Costa Rican Foreign Minister Stagno 
said it was "sad" that the only democratic Arab state lives 
under occupation. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Criticism of Hamas' rocket attacks against Israel 
did not garner the same attention as did Israeli actions. 
However, Ambassador Rice stated that all UN member states and 
those in the region must ensure the cessation of arms and 
ammunition into Gaza.  France, the UK, Japan, Croatia, Mexico 
and Uganda made references to ending rocket attacks and the 
trafficking of arms into Gaza. 
 
The Arab Peace Initiative 
------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Almost all delegations made references in support of 
the various peace initiatives--Quartet principles, Madrid, 
Annapolis, and the Roadmap, but it was the Arab Peace 
Initiative that featured as the predominant peace initiative 
mentioned.  Lavrov was the first speaker to urge support of 
the Arab Peace Initiative, among others.  Burkinabe PermRep 
Kafando recalled the Madrid and Arab Peace Initiatives as the 
most important frameworks for peace.  Miliband said, "The 
Arab Peace Initiative is finally getting the attention it 
deserves," and he thanked Saudi King Abdullah for his 
initiating this process and Jordanian King Abdullah for 
promoting it.  Ambassador Rice said states in the region must 
create an atmosphere to foster negotiations, which is one 
reason why the U.S. intends to integrate the Arab Peace 
Initiative into its approach.  Japanese Foreign Minister Ito 
welcomed the active role of Arab states in finding a solution 
and backed the Initiative.  Stagno of Costa Rica said the 
Roadmap was a "roadmap to nowhere," and opined that its 
principles should be considered in reverse--that is, the 
ultimate goal of a two-state solution should be enshrined 
first rather than contingent upon met objectives. 
 
Gaza Board of Inquiry 
--------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Almost half the Council members welcomed the results 
of the Secretary-General's findings into the Gaza Board of 
Inquiry and looked forward to further investigation into 
Israel's actions.  Kouchner was the first delegate to mention 
the BoI.  He said the Security Council cannot avoid such an 
investigation, and he said France backed the BoI's work and 
will support any independent, objective investigation into 
the conflict in Gaza.  Miliband said it was contingent on the 
Israeli government to look into each of the BoI's conclusions 
about Israel's conduct during the conflict.  Although not 
mentioning the BoI directly, Austrian Foreign Minister 
Spindelegger said allegations of violations of international 
humanitarian law must be investigated and Austria welcomes 
further investigation.  Mexico, Uganda and Vietnam welcomed 
the BoI's report.  Libyan PermRep Shalgham said that while 
Libya welcomed the BoI's work, his delegation had prepared a 
draft Security Council resolution to hold Israel accountable 
for its actions.  Moreover, Shalgham said Libya anticipated 
the results of the Human Rights Council's own investigation 
of Israel's actions in Gaza. 
 
Presidential Statement Adopted 
With Some Reservation 
------------------------------ 
 
¶8. (SBU) The Council adopted by consensus the Russian-drafted 
Presidential Statement (PRST), which urges a reinvigoration 
of diplomacy toward a comprehensive peace, supports the 
Quartet's efforts toward a two-state solution, and calls for 
assistance to the Palestinian Authority.  Most delegations 
expressed appreciation for Russia's drafting of the PRST, but 
some criticized it for falling short on some elements.  The 
Libyan PermRep said Libya agreed with little of the PRST's 
content because it did not deal with Israeli settlement 
activity, the Golan Heights, or Sheba'a Farms, but in 
deference to its relationship with the Russian Federation and 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000493  003 OF 003 
 
 
to protect the unity of the Council Libya supported it. 
Kouchner pointed out that the PRST would have been stronger 
if it had contained a call to end settlement activity. 
Stagno of Costa Rica said his delegation would have preferred 
a clearer endorsement in the PRST of the Arab Peace 
Initiative. 
Rice