09USUNNEWYORK932
U) U.N. GENERAL DEBATE CONTINUES (SEPTEMBER 24,
Tue Oct 20 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
USUN New York
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUCNDT #0932/01 2932335
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 202335Z OCT 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7393
INFO RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION 0001
RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD 0703
RUEHJL/AMEMBASSY BANJUL 0091
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 0391
RUEHDR/AMEMBASSY DAR ES SALAAM 0325
RUEHGE/AMEMBASSY GEORGETOWN 0126
RUEHLG/AMEMBASSY LILONGWE 0066
RUEHLJ/AMEMBASSY LJUBLJANA 0107
RUEHRA/AMEMBASSY RIGA 0052
RUEHSJ/AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE 0228UNCLAS USUN NEW YORK 000932 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CS ECON GA GY IZ LG MI PA PGOV PREL SI TZ
UNGA, VE 
SUBJECT: (U) U.N. GENERAL DEBATE CONTINUES (SEPTEMBER 24, 
PM) 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: Speeches in the afternoon session of the 
second day of the UNGA General Debate (September 24) 
continued with some familiar topics.  Latin American leaders 
from Venezuela, Costa Rica, and Paraguay all condemned the 
coup in Honduras.  Most of the speakers called for reform of 
the United Nations with a focus on the Security Council. 
Climate change was also raised.  Both Slovenia and Guyana 
called on the United Nations to organize a new Bretton Woods 
conference.  Most also addressed the need to solve the 
Palestinian problem.  Full text of statements is available at 
un.org/ga/64/generaldebate, video archives are at 
un.org/webcast/2009html.  End Summary 
 
¶2. (U) Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez began by promoting a 
new film by Oliver Stone, "South of the Border."  Chavez 
encouraged everyone to see the film-if the capitalist theater 
monopolies do not keep it from being shown.  For the balance 
of the speech, Chavez extolled the unique virtues of 
Bolivarian Socialism.  At one point, he complimented 
President Obama and said he prayed God would protect him. 
After receiving a large round of applause for this comment, 
Chavez added that the dais no longer smelled like sulfur, but 
now smelled like hope.  However, Chavez asked several times, 
"How many  Obamas, are there?"  Chavez explained that there 
are, in fact, two "Obamas"-the one who spoke at the United 
Nations and called for international cooperation, and another 
who built bases in Colombia and maintains an embargo on Cuba. 
 He asked the Obama who spoke at the United Nations to "come 
over to the socialist side" and "join the axis of evil." 
Chavez condemned the coup in Honduras and claimed that it was 
initiated by the Pentagon, which he said operates 
independently around the world outside the control of the 
U.S. Government.  Chavez concluded by saying that capitalism 
caused climate change and that the world needs an entirely 
new system. 
 
¶3. (U) Slovenian President Danilo Turk stated that the world 
needs a comprehensive strategy to address climate in 
accordance with the principle of common, but differentiated 
responsibilities.  He called on the United Nations and the 
G-20 to lead the way to financial stability and insisted the 
Bretton Woods organizations be adjusted.  Turk also described 
four issues facing the United Nations: structural change 
(especially Security Council reform), a strengthened U.N. 
role in peacekeeping operations, 
disarmament/non-proliferation, and the United Nations, 
continued role as a forum for international consultations. 
He described the situation in Afghanistan as an example of a 
crisis where the United Nations can play a vital role. 
 
¶4. (U) President Bharat Jagdeo of Guyana said the global 
financial crisis hit small Caribbean nations harder than most 
because of their dependence on commodities.  He called for a 
global commission to restructure debt and for the United 
Nations to hold a new Bretton Woods conference.  Jagdeo 
lastly addressed climate change and warned that the world 
must stop deforestation now, as opposed to waiting until 
¶2030. 
 
¶5. (U) Costa Rican President Oscar Arias Sanchez regretted 
the evils of defense spending and the international arms 
trade.  He said that money and human resources currently 
spent on defense should be refocused on the problems facing 
the world, such as climate change.  He claimed that national 
militaries serve no purpose but to suppress their own people. 
 He diagnosed that developing countries in Latin America face 
three national challenges: strengthening their democracies, 
developing their people through arms reduction, and creating 
a new international order to combat climate change.  Arias 
said that Latin America's civil structure is hollow and needs 
to build democratic institutions. 
 
¶6. (U) President Fernando Mendez of Paraguay struck much the 
same tone as the President of Costa Rica.  He spoke about the 
evils of defense spending and the international arms trade, 
claiming that war and defense spending enrich developed 
nations but harm developing nations.  Mendez described the 
need for a new economic world order that would strengthen 
small economies, develop democratic institutions, end 
criminal aggression against the environment, find peaceful 
solutions to conflicts, and eliminate gender discrimination. 
 
 
He also called for the end of the United States, embargo 
against Cuba and condemned the coup in Honduras.  Mendez 
concluded by expressing his fears of an arms race in Latin 
America. 
 
¶7. (U) Tanzanian President Jakaya Kikwete pressed for 
agricultural technology assistance for Africa as a means to 
address climate change.  He extolled the virtues of youth 
employment programs in Africa, noting that unemployed youths 
feed violence.  He commended progress (but wanted to see 
more) on the Millennium Development Goals and publicized the 
meeting on maternal and child health and the African Leaders 
Malaria Alliance.  He expressed support for a two state 
solution for the Palestinians and asked that the people of 
Western Sahara be allowed to choose their own future.  He 
further called for reform in the Security Council.  Kikwete 
closed by asking for assistance with Tanzania,s refugee 
problem and support for developing democratic institutions in 
Africa. 
 
¶8. (U) Latvian President Valdis Zatlers said the world must 
focus on the three crisis "E's" (energy, economy, and 
environment) and the three crisis "F's" (finance, food, and 
fuel).  He said that countries must not work strictly for 
self-interest and extolled the virtues of the Millennium 
Development Goals.  Zatlers stated that each nation should 
contribute to the fight against climate change according to 
its own capabilities.  He called for continued support for 
peace and stability in Afghanistan and the Middle East.  He 
reiterated Latvia's support for Georgia and complained about 
human rights abuses in Iran after the elections.  Zatlers 
reaffirmed support for the Geneva Convention and the 
International Criminal Court.  He reminded the General 
Assembly of the review of the Human Rights Council in 2011 
and said it would be a good time to strengthen the 
organization.  He also called for Security Council reform and 
said that the United Nations must prioritize its budget and 
make it more transparent and disciplined. 
 
¶9. (U) The President of Malawi, Bingu Mutharika, called for 
strengthened multilateralism and expressed the need to reform 
the structure of the United Nations (particularly the 
Security Council), spur international action on food 
security, and bolster international cooperation in addressing 
climate change.  Mutharika closed by calling for a global 
dialogue on democracy and its institutions. 
 
¶10. (U) Iraqi President Jala Talabani spoke about political 
and economic progress in Iraq.  He requested that nations 
currently hosting Iraqi refugees enable and encourage them to 
return home.  He said the Iraqi government has already 
started creating a welcoming environment at home.  He said 
that the real threat to Iraq is external, and he requested a 
Security Council investigation into the August 19 Baghdad 
bombings.  Talabani asked that the current Security Council 
resolutions against Iraq be removed because Iraq is working 
to address its needs bilaterally, so the resolutions are no 
longer necessary.  He requested that the United Nations 
increase its engagement in Iraq.  Talabani endorsed the 
struggle of the Palestinian people and called for the Middle 
East to become a nuclear free zone. 
 
¶11. (U) Gambian President Yahya Jammeh blamed Africa,s 
problems on large western multi-national corporations and 
debt.  He said that the lack of development in Africa is not 
Africa's fault and that Africa can do little to help itself. 
Jammeh cautioned that there will be consequences if the 
situation does not improve.  He called for a speedy 
resolution of the plight of the Palestinians, Taiwan's 
inclusion in the United Nations, the lifting of the U.S. 
embargo on Cuba, support for Morocco's plan in Western 
Sahara, and Security Council reform. 
 
 
 
Wolff