09VLADIVOSTOK103
EUR/RUS DIRECTOR KYLE SCOTT VISIT TO VLADIVOSTOK
Wed Oct 14 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Vladivostok
VZCZCXRO9354
RR RUEHCHI RUEHDBU RUEHFK RUEHHM RUEHKSO RUEHLN RUEHNAG RUEHPB RUEHPOD
RUEHYG
DE RUEHVK #0103/01 2870644
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 140644Z OCT 09
FM AMCONSUL VLADIVOSTOK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1217
INFO RUEHXD/MOSCOW POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHZU/ASIAN PACIFIC ECONOMIC COOPERATION COLLECTIVE
RUEHVK/AMCONSUL VLADIVOSTOK 1322UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 VLADIVOSTOK 000103 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR EUR/RUS DIRECTOR KYLE SCOTT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV ECON ECIN RS
SUBJECT: EUR/RUS DIRECTOR KYLE SCOTT VISIT TO VLADIVOSTOK 
 
VLADIVOSTO 00000103  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
------------- 
Summary 
------------- 
 
¶1.    During his visit to Vladivostok on October 2, Primorye 
Region authorities gave EUR/RUS Director Kyle Scott an economic 
overview of the region, pointing out: the continuous youth 
out-migration; complicated transportation routes between the 
RFE, Primorye in particular, and the USA; and "non-favorable 
U.S. visa regulations" for non-Vladivostok residents.  Scott 
also discussed the impact that the 2012 Asia-Pacific Economic 
Cooperation Summit (APEC -2012) is expected to have on the 
Primorye Region:  new large projects and construction, on one 
hand, while, on the other, possible cuts in social programs from 
the local budget in order to finance APEC-2012 construction. 
End Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Big Investments, Big Projects 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Oleg Shcheka, Head of Foreign Economic Relations and Tourism 
Department, at the Primorye Regional Administration briefed 
Director Scott about the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation 
(APEC) Summit preparations and the various development projects 
associated with the Summit.  He mentioned major billion-dollar 
projects with Vladivostok airport renovation, the construction 
of two bridges and preparations for construction on Russkiy 
Island. 
 
¶3.  Shcheka also pointed out that the Russian Far East (RFE), 
and particularly the Primorye Region, now have the highest level 
of Federal support funds in their history.  In fact, he said the 
Far East is getting more attention now than at any time from 
Moscow, including during the Czarist and Soviet days.  Gas 
pipeline and ESPO oil pipeline construction are under 
construction.   Gazprom, Rosneft, and Transneft are all 
investing capital in the RFE.  Up to 2 trillion Rubles will be 
invested into RFE economy by 2013 and an extra 1 trillion Rubles 
will be invested by 2020.  Shcheka stated that in total USD 100 
billion will be spent for the RFE development.  These tremendous 
Russian investments are evidence of serious Federal interest to 
this part of Russia and a welcoming sign for foreign business, 
he said. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
Trade Profile, Business Opportunities 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶4.  Describing the region's trade and investment patterns, 
Shcheka noted that currently Primorye's main trading partners 
are China (39% of total turnover in 2008), Japan (34%), and the 
Republic of Korea (10.5%), while the USA had only 3.7% of total 
turnover in 2008.  Shcheka mentioned that only adventurers 
invest their money without a good deal of care; smart investors, 
such as South Korean businessmen, account for their risk and 
profit in advance.   He added that the Japanese Mitsui Company 
made wind speed tests before constructing wind power facilities 
in Russkiy Island in partnership with RusHydro.  Nevertheless, 
Shcheka emphasized that all sectors of Primorye economy are 
attractive for investors: agriculture, marine cargo 
transportation, telecommunications, energy sector, tourist 
infrastructure. 
 
¶5.  The main obstacle for foreign business presence is an 
absence of direct air routes between Russia and the USA.  Strict 
visa interview demands and less flexibility in Russian-U.S. 
relations work in favor of dynamic development of the Russian 
relations with China and ROK.  Businessmen look toward the 
region's Asian neighbors for future business because visa 
regulations in these countries are easier than the U.S.   The 
lack of good transportation links between the RFE and the US are 
another issue that focus business attention away from the U.S. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
Socio-Economic Difficulties and Challenges 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶6.  During Scott's call on Viktor Gorchakov, Primorye Kray 
Legislative Assembly Chairman, Gorchakov said that economic 
strategies and initiatives of the 1990s never succeeded. 
Proposals made by local politicians and economists for further 
regional development as Russia's front along  the Pacific Rim 
economy and Russia's point for Pacific integration did not work 
out due to a lack of support from Moscow.  After numerous 
attempts to attract Moscow's attention to Primorye's problems, 
the federal center finally heard Primorye.  Moscow's and 
Primorye's points of view began to synchronize and ended with 
the APEC-2012 idea, offered by a local economic expert in 2006. 
 
 
VLADIVOSTO 00000103  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶7.  Speaking about social-economic issues in Primorye, Gorchakov 
stated that the local defense industry is in ruins and 
conversion plans were unsuccessful.  Primorye, moreover, still 
has a lot to do to improve the quality of medical treatment, to 
improve the quality of housing and utilities, and to find means 
to keep its youth in Primorye, for example through giving 
apartments for young families. On the other side of the ledger: 
despite continuous migration out of the region (mainly youth), 
retired senior officers have begun to stay in Primorye, whereas 
earlier most of them were moving out of Primorye at the end of 
their Army/ Navy service.   Gorchakov pointed out that "even 
though Russia is a democratic country, we still look for Moscow 
prior to doing anything."   Regarding political unrest, and the 
popular movement TIGR (Comradeship of Initiative Citizens of 
Russia), Gorchakov noted that Primorye is largely "stable" but 
he wryly added that "there is always an opposition." 
 
¶8.  Touching on APEC-2012, Gorchakov mentioned that several 
construction projects will be implemented through Federal and 
Regional co-financing.  This co-financing approach is a threat 
to the Region's budget and may result in regional social program 
reductions.  Moscow's primary objective is readiness for the 
event even at the expense of social spending, whereas the main 
goal for Regional deputies will be to protect social programs 
for the next several years.  Nevertheless, the Regional 
administration will be tempted to ignore social spending in 
order to promote a better image in Moscow's eyes.  Governor 
Darkin wants to show the Federal center that the Region will 
fulfill its obligations in the APEC construction plan.  Since 
Primorye is one of numerous subsidiary regions in Russia, local 
revenues are limited and Moscow subsidizes around 30% of the 
Regional budget. 
 
--------------- 
Comment 
--------------- 
 
¶9.   As was clear in the discussion with Gorchakov, It appears 
that some political leaders already recognize that APEC-2012 may 
be a double edged sword having a negative impact on the people 
of Primorye region if some important social programs (such as 
drug-prevention) are cut.  It is true that Regional deputies may 
not resist the governor's desire to show Moscow that APEC 
preparations are more important than social spending.  End 
Comment. 
ARMBRUSTER