09WARSAW217
POLAND - 2009 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
Fri Feb 27 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Warsaw
VZCZCXRO5099
RR RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA
RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHNP RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSK RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHWR #0217/01 0581522
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 271522Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY WARSAW
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 7873
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEAWJB/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RHMFIUU/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 17 WARSAW 000217 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR G/TIP, EUR/PGI, EUR/CE, INL/HSTC, DRL/IL, PRM 
STATE PLEASE PASS USAID 
LABOR FOR ILAB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KTIP KCRM PHUM KWMN SMIG KFRD ASEC PREF
ELAB, PL 
SUBJECT: POLAND - 2009 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT 
 
REF: A. 08 STATE 133137 
      ¶B. 08 STATE 132759 
     ¶C. 09 STATE 5577 
     ¶D. 09 WARSAW 18 
     ¶E. 09 WARSAW 24 
     ¶F. 09 WARSAW 113 
     ¶G. HALL/BANKS E-MAIL - 02/09/2009 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY.  Poland is a country of origin, 
transit, and destination for victims of trafficking in 
persons (TIP).  The majority of victims were trafficked 
to work in the sex industry, but Poland is increasingly 
becoming a destination country for forced labor. 
Government officials at the highest levels have 
acknowledged trafficking is a serious problem and 
demonstrated a strong commitment to combat it, including 
through development and implementation of a national 
anti-TIP strategy.  Cooperation between the government, 
police, NGOs, academics, and international organizations 
is strong and continues to improve. 
 
¶2. (SBU) The impact of the global financial crisis 
notwithstanding, during the reporting period the GOP took 
action long advocated by NGOs and the USG:  it stepped in 
to provide a significant increase in government funding 
for victim assistance programs.  In addition, the GOP 
continued to provide training to improve prosecution of 
traffickers and victim identification.  The national and 
local governments conducted several multi-faceted 
trafficking awareness campaigns.  Although there are 
still problems with the number of prosecutions and 
severity of sentences, the GOP has stepped up efforts to 
raise awareness among judges and prosecutors about how to 
handle TIP cases and there is an increasing sense among 
both the government working groups and NGOs that there is 
momentum in the right direction.  END SUMMARY. 
 
EMBASSY CONTACT AND WORKLOAD 
---------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Embassy point of contact is Political Officer 
Jared Banks (telephone: 48-22-504-2621, fax 48-22-504- 
2613, e-mail banksj@state.gov). 
 
¶4. (U) Staff hours spent in preparation of this report 
are as follows: 
 
-- Deputy Chief of Mission - FE-OC: 2 hours 
-- Political Counselor - FS-01: 2 hours 
-- Deputy Political Counselor - FS-02: 10 hours 
-- Political Officer - FS-04: 30 hours 
-- Political Specialist ? LES-08: 80 hours 
 
¶5. (SBU) Following are responses keyed to questions in 
paragraphs 23-29 of refs B and C. 
 
POLAND'S TIP SITUATION 
---------------------- 
 
23.A. SOURCES.  The main sources for information and 
statistics contained in this report are international and 
local NGOs, OSCE/ODIHR, and Polish ministries, including 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Interior 
Affairs and Administration, Ministry of Justice, Border 
Guards, and the Polish National Police.  All have proven 
to be reliable sources of information in the past.  (See 
24.D for further actions to document human trafficking in 
Poland.) 
 
23.B. VICTIMS.  Poland is a country of origin, transit, 
and destination for trafficking of men, women and 
children. Poland is becoming a destination country for an 
increasing number of victims, particularly from countries 
of the former Soviet Union. Persons are trafficked to and 
through Poland primarily from countries to the east and 
southeast, including Ukraine (sexual exploitation and 
labor), Bulgaria (sexual exploitation and begging), 
Romania (underage begging) and Belarus. Other groups of 
trafficked persons were Chechen women from refugee camps. 
Groups from Tajikistan and Uzbekistan were reportedly 
trafficked for labor exploitation.  A group of women from 
Mongolia was also trafficked for the purpose of forced 
labor and labor exploitation. During the reporting 
period, one person was trafficked from Vietnam and one 
 
WARSAW 00000217  002 OF 017 
 
 
person from China. A growing number of victims came from 
Africa, including Sudan, Senegal, Kenya, Djibouti and 
Uganda. According to the leading anti-trafficking NGO in 
Poland, La Strada, some of the women from Africa may have 
been in transit to Western Europe when they were 
identified, or escaped from their captors, in Poland. 
 
Countries of destination were primarily in Western 
Europe, including Germany, Italy, and the Netherlands. 
The illicit nature of trafficking in persons makes it 
difficult to determine the number of victims, 
particularly those of Polish citizenship, and estimates 
vary substantially. 
 
There were also some cases of trafficking within Poland's 
borders, especially of women trafficked for sexual 
exploitation. 
 
A few new trafficking trends or developments were 
identified during the reporting period.  At least one 
African victim was trafficked to Poland on a sports visa, 
and later sexually exploited.  The case of a Ugandan 
woman being trafficked to Western Europe, who escaped 
from her captors in Warsaw's central train station and 
was rescued by the police, received significant media 
attention.  A Chinese woman trafficked to work in the 
sewing industry was identified as being in debt bondage, 
reportedly as the result of a Border Guard intelligence 
lead.  The Nobody's Children Foundation reported that the 
number of unattended minors applying for refugee status 
in Poland continued to decrease.  However, Nobody's 
Children expressed a growing concern about reports of 
teenage girls and boys engaged in "weekend prostitution," 
particularly in Germany.  One NGO said there were reports 
of "thousands" of Vietnamese forced to work in debt 
bondage; one Vietnamese victim was identified during the 
year and agreed to testify.  There were also unconfirmed 
reports of Vietnamese victims traveling to Poland via 
Ukraine on foot who fell victim to other crimes en route. 
There were unconfirmed reports that Russian and Ukrainian 
authorities were unresponsive to signals from the Polish 
government about the problem.  Post continues to 
investigate the case of a group of 12 Tajik and Uzbek 
truck drivers who came to Poland with official visas and 
work permits, but then found themselves living and 
working in poor conditions.  Post will provide additional 
information on these and other cases as it becomes 
available. 
 
23.C. TRAFFICKING CONDITIONS.  The conditions into which 
victims are trafficked vary depending on the form of 
exploitation. In the case of trafficking for labor 
exploitation, victims are often trafficked into poor 
living and working conditions, e.g., they are not given 
sufficient funds to buy food, receive no or very low 
wages, are obliged to sign fake contracts and/or are 
placed in debt bondage. In the case of trafficking for 
sexual exploitation, the physical living conditions may 
be better; however, victims are often forced to endure 
sexual exploitation, psychological and physical violence, 
and a threatening environment.  Many are placed in debt 
bondage. 
 
23.D. VULNERABLE GROUPS.  The most vulnerable groups are 
women, teenage girls and boys, ethnic minorities, 
refugees, and persons coming from regions of conflict or 
poverty. Generally, groups that exist on the margins of 
society for economic and social reasons are the most 
vulnerable. This also includes uninformed and unprepared 
migrant workers who are looking for employment. According 
to the Interior Ministry, most victims are young females 
between 16 and 20 years of age.  They tend to be 
unemployed, with limited financial means, and no 
education beyond the primary school level. 
 
23.E. TRAFFICKERS AND THEIR METHODS.  Traffickers in 
Poland are both individuals and organized criminal 
groups. Non-Polish victims are often approached by 
friends of friends or members of the same local community 
who offer them prosperous jobs abroad. Cases of 
trafficking by family members are rare. False documents 
are used infrequently, especially within Europe, since 
Poland's 2007 accession to the EU's Schengen zone. Most 
TIP victims enter Poland legally, but after arrival are 
 
WARSAW 00000217  003 OF 017 
 
 
exploited under conditions of forced labor, isolation, or 
debt bondage. The Polish National Police observed that 
after Poland's entry into the Schengen zone, traffickers 
from non-Schengen countries began to arrange visas for 
victims to stay in Poland; the trafficker then violates 
visa rules by taking the victim to other Schengen 
countries, generally in Western Europe. Trafficking is 
often related to other crimes, most often to drug 
trafficking or trafficking in weapons. 
 
NGOs report that Poland's accession to the Schengen zone 
has made it more difficult for Border Guards to detect 
trafficking victims.  Although the Border Guards no 
longer check documents -- and Customs officials do not 
conduct related inspections -- at former border crossings 
with neighboring Schengen countries, the Border Guard 
continues to conduct roving patrols throughout the 
country, particularly along international transit routes, 
to detect illegal activity, including trafficking. 
 
GOVERNMENT ANTI-TIP EFFORTS 
--------------------------- 
 
24.A. GOVERNMENT POSITION.  Polish government officials 
at the highest levels acknowledge the seriousness of the 
trafficking problem in Poland, and are taking action to 
address the problem.  In January 2009, the Interagency 
Working Group adopted the third National Action Plan for 
Combating and Preventing Human Trafficking for 2009-2010, 
which follows on and strengthens the previous National 
Action Plans from 2003-2004, 2005-2006, and 2007-2008. 
The new Action Plan includes goals in three areas: 
prevention and information gathering, enhanced support 
for law enforcement activities, and victim/witness 
protection. 
 
The Interior Ministry held its third national conference 
on combating and preventing human trafficking on October 
22 (see ref D).  The conference was attended by 
approximately 120 people, including representatives of 
Polish ministries and central government institutions, 
law enforcement officials, lawyers, NGOs, academics, 
social workers and researchers.  The conference reviewed 
successes of the past year and focused on three main 
areas of concern:  forced labor, trafficking in children, 
and enhanced effectiveness of law enforcement. The 
recommendations proposed during the conference were 
reflected in the tasks written into the 2009-2010 
National Action Plan. The conference has become a regular 
annual activity sponsored by the government and coincides 
with EU-wide Anti-Trafficking Day which falls on October 
¶16. 
 
24.B. GOVERNMENT AGENCIES.  The Interior Ministry is the 
lead coordinator of the Inter-Ministerial Anti- 
Trafficking Team, which was established in accordance 
with the Prime Minister's Regulations issued in March 
¶2004.  An Undersecretary of State (Deputy Minister) in 
the Interior Ministry chairs the team, which includes 
members from the Ministries of Education, Labor and 
Social Policy, Justice, Foreign Affairs, Health, and 
Interior, as well as the Office of the Prosecutor 
General, the Office for Foreigners, Chief Labor 
Inspectorate, Polish National Police, and the Border 
Guards. The team also includes NGO representatives active 
in assisting TIP victims (La Strada, ITAKA, Nobody's 
Children Foundation, and Caritas). The role of the group 
is to assess the implementation of the National Anti- 
Trafficking Plan, prepare new proposals and opinions on 
strategies aimed at effective anti-TIP efforts, and 
facilitate cooperation between the central government, 
local governments, and NGOs in combating trafficking. 
 
Parallel to the team, an inter-ministerial working group 
was established, which meets regularly to work on anti- 
trafficking efforts. The work of the Interagency Team and 
Working Group is supported by the Unit for Trafficking in 
Human Beings, which was established in 2007 within the 
Migration Policy Department of the Interior Ministry. Its 
main tasks are to support the work of the Interagency 
Team, monitor the implementation National Anti- 
Trafficking Plan, and to implement the Witness/Victim 
Protection Program for foreigners. 
 
 
WARSAW 00000217  004 OF 017 
 
 
In addition to the Inter-Ministerial Anti-Trafficking 
Structures, the National Police has a Central Anti- 
Trafficking Unit to combat human trafficking, pedophilia 
and pornography. This unit currently has five full-time 
police officers and 1 civilian employee (currently two 
positions are vacant), and it serves as liaison for 17 
regional police units around the country. These regional 
units employ a total of 46 individuals and are 
established in all 16 provinces around Poland and in the 
city of Warsaw. 
 
On June 18, 2008, the National Border Guard established a 
central specialized team, which consists of specialists 
from different Border Guard departments and serves as 
liaison for regional Border Guard coordinators who were 
set up in all 12 regional Border Guard Units around the 
country. 
 
In addition, in 2007 regional prosecutorial offices that 
handle appeals cases around the country appointed TIP 
consultants to assist prosecutors with trafficking cases 
and, when the case is particularly complicated, to assume 
lead responsibility for the TIP case. 
 
24.C. PRACTICAL LIMITATIONS.  The primary limitations are 
the lack of a legal definition of trafficking, 
implementation of already established standard operating 
procedures for investigations and prosecutions, the need 
for wider use of victim identification techniques, 
funding for victim assistance. 
 
Poland still does not have a legal definition of 
trafficking. Poland's criminal code outlaws human 
trafficking, but does not specifically define it. NGOs 
and university experts claim that the absence of such a 
definition in national law is problematic because 
prosecutors and (especially) judges are not sufficiently 
well informed or aware of the offense. As a result, 
traffickers are often prosecuted under different 
violations of the criminal code, e.g., rape, sexual 
assault, which have similarly stringent penalties.  The 
Interagency Working Group once again ranked amending the 
criminal code to incorporate the Palermo Protocol 
definition as a major priority of the new National Action 
Plan for 2009-2010. 
 
While Poland has developed sophisticated, detailed 
standard operating procedures for victim referrals / 
assistance and trafficking investigations / prosecutions, 
implementation has been lacking.  According to La Strada, 
the government has developed comprehensive guidelines and 
standard operating procedures for law enforcement dealing 
with trafficking victims. However, that information is 
not always properly distributed to lower level officers. 
Similarly, the guidelines for prosecutors, including the 
application of the requirement to allow victims a 
"reflection period" to decide whether to press charges 
and/or cooperate with criminal investigations are not 
properly utilized in regional units. 
 
Funding for victim assistance has been insufficient and 
unstable in the past.  The only specialized shelter for 
TIP victims has been funded primarily through foreign and 
EU sources; the shelter was on the verge of closing down 
at the end of 2008 because of a funding shortage. 
However, the Prime Minister's Chancellery allocated 
reserve funds to the Interior Ministry to keep the 
shelter running until the end of 2009 (see Ref F.)  The 
government has allocated funds to transform this new 
funding mechanism into a stable funding basis for TIP 
victim assistance (see 26.C). 
 
Proper identification of victims of trafficking is 
another problem, especially because most TIP victims 
cross Poland's borders legally, because non-law 
enforcement officials do not have adequate training to 
detect migrants working under exploitive conditions, and 
because of the large number of victims who transit 
Poland.  Despite increased training for police and border 
guards and new mandates for the labor inspectorate, many 
victims continue to go unidentified. 
 
Although corruption within the police force is generally 
a problem in Poland, NGOs reported that police corruption 
 
WARSAW 00000217  005 OF 017 
 
 
did not contribute significantly to the problem of 
trafficking in persons.  Instances of corruption and 
serious criminal misconduct are investigated by the 
Polish National Police's Internal Affairs Office. 
 
24.D. GOVERNMENT MONITORING.  The Interior Ministry 
systematically gathers information on trafficking in 
persons. In February 2008, the Ministry published its 
first comprehensive report on trafficking; the material 
was also posted on the website, 1000 copies were printed 
and 200 CDs produced. Parts of the report were translated 
into English. The second edition of the report is 
scheduled for early 2009. 
 
The Interior Ministry collects statistical information on 
the number of investigations and the way they were 
concluded (e.g. indictment act or closure of the case). 
The statistical data also covers the number of victims 
assisted by La Strada, the number of victims granted 
police protection and the number of cases in which the 
"reflection period" was applied. 
 
The Office for Combating Organized Crime in the National 
Prosecutor's Office collects, on an annual basis, 
information on the analysis of criminal proceedings 
against traffickers, including the number of 
investigations initiated and concluded, number of 
indictment acts against traffickers, and number of 
victims. The Ministry of Justice also collects 
information on the number of convictions under anti- 
trafficking provisions of the criminal code. 
 
In 2008 the Interior Ministry joined a project run by the 
International Center for Migration on Trafficking in 
Human Beings -- "Data Collection and Harmonized 
Information Management Systems" -- which is scheduled to 
run from May 2008 to October 2009. The main goal of the 
project is to establish uniform guidelines for collecting 
statistical information which will be applied in the 
countries participating in the project (i.e. Poland, 
Portugal, Slovakia and the Czech Republic). The project 
is jointly carried out by experts from police, Border 
Guard, Ministry of Justice, National Prosecution and La 
Strada. 
 
INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
25.A. CRIMINAL LAW ON TRAFFICKING.  Polish law prohibits 
forcing individuals into prostitution, trafficking in 
human beings, and pimping. The relevant sections of the 
criminal code are Articles 253 (sexual and non-sexual 
trafficking); Article 204, para 4 (abduction into 
prostitution); and Article 203 (forced prostitution) 
effective September 1, 1998. 
 
-- Article 253 para 1 of the Criminal Code states that 
whoever "traffics in persons, even with their consent, is 
subject to a sentence of imprisonment for a period of 
time not shorter than 3 years." 
 
-- Article 204 para 4 states that a perpetrator whoever 
"entices or abducts a person into prostitution abroad 
shall be subject to a sentence of imprisonment for a 
period of time from 1 to 10 years." 
 
-- Article 203 states that "whoever, by force, illegal 
threat or deceit, or by abusing a relationship dependence 
or by taking advantage of a critical situation, subjects 
another person to practice prostitution, shall be subject 
to the penalty of imprisonment for a term between 1 and 
10 years." 
 
The laws cover both internal and external trafficking, 
and do not require proof that the victim was coerced in 
order to secure a conviction. 
 
Poland has adopted the UN Protocol on Trafficking in 
Persons (Palermo Protocol). The National Prosecutor's 
Office uses this definition of trafficking in its 
prosecutions and states that its prosecution efforts have 
not been adversely affected by the absence of a specific 
definition in Polish national law; however, the National 
Prosecutor's Office concedes that judges sometimes choose 
 
WARSAW 00000217  006 OF 017 
 
 
to issue convictions on the basis of articles other than 
253, as it is easier to provide evidence in support of 
other offenses.  NGOs and law enforcement officials claim 
the lack of a definition negatively impacts effective 
prosecution and discourages judges and prosecutors from 
prosecuting under article 253 (trafficking). 
 
On November 17, 2008, Poland ratified the 2005 Council of 
Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human 
Beings. The Convention will enter into force in Poland on 
March 1, 2009 (ref D). 
 
25.B. CRIMINAL PENALTIES FOR SEX TRAFFICKING.  The 
maximum penalty for (sexual and non-sexual) trafficking 
in persons is 15 years' imprisonment under Article 253 of 
the Criminal Code (minimum of three years' imprisonment). 
Article 204, section 4 of the Code provides for up to ten 
years' imprisonment for trafficking involving 
prostitution. This article is not often used, as 
prosecutors use Article 253 in most trafficking cases. 
Article 203 also provides for imprisonment from 1 to 10 
years. Most sentences are shorter than the maximum, with 
the most severe sentences reserved for those convicted of 
trafficking minors for the purpose of prostitution or 
luring/abducting adults into prostitution abroad. 
 
25.C. CRIMINAL PENALTIES FOR LABOR TRAFFICKING.  Cases of 
trafficking for labor exploitation are prosecuted under 
Article 253 (described above) or organized crime 
statutes, as appropriate. 
 
The Polish Constitution guarantees the freedom to choose 
and pursue an occupation and to choose the place of work. 
It places an obligation on the state to supervise the 
conditions of work, prohibits the employment of children 
younger than 16 years of age, and obliges the state to 
set minimum wages and maximum working hours. 
 
Poland has ratified and incorporated into national legal 
regulations the international conventions governing 
forced labor and employee exploitation, including the 
1957 ILO Convention on the Abolition of Forced Labor, the 
1950 European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental 
Freedoms, and the 1999 ILO Convention on the Prohibition 
and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst 
Forms of Child Labor. 
 
The Polish criminal code has special provisions on crimes 
against the rights of employees: 
 
-- Article 218 (malicious violation of rights): "A person 
shall be subject to a fine, deprivation of liberty, or up 
to 2 years' imprisonment if he maliciously or 
persistently violates employee rights granted under an 
employment contract or social insurance while carrying 
out activities involving the labor code and social 
insurance regulations?. 
 
-- Article 220 (putting an employee at risk of death or 
severe injury):  "A person who is responsible for health 
and safety shall be liable to 3 years' imprisonment, if 
he fails to comply with the relevant duties and by doing 
so puts the employee at direct risk of death or severe 
injury". 
 
The Polish Labor Inspectorate is the main government body 
responsible for supervising and auditing employers, 
including work and safety conditions, legality of 
employment (both Poles and foreigners), right to 
remuneration and other work-related benefits, e.g., 
working hours, etc.  The Labor Inspectorate also monitors 
and supervises the activities of private employment 
agencies that recruit people to work abroad. 
 
In accordance with the labor code, a victim of forced 
labor can file employment-related claims in a labor court 
for failure to comply with health and safety regulations, 
the right to annual leave, and the lack of remuneration 
for work performed.  Under the civil code, an individual 
may file a civil suit and demand compensation if the 
terms of a labor contract signed with the employer are 
not fulfilled. 
 
25.D. CRIMINAL PENALTIES FOR RAPE AND SEXUAL ASSAULT. 
 
WARSAW 00000217  007 OF 017 
 
 
According to Criminal Code Article 197, using violence, 
threat, or deceit to force a person to have sexual 
intercourse is punishable by two to twelve years' 
imprisonment.  Using such means to force a person into 
other sexual activity is punishable by six months' to 
eight years' imprisonment. In cases involving more than 
one perpetrator, the punishment cannot be shorter than 
three years. In cases involving excessive cruelty, the 
punishment ranges from minimum five years up to twelve 
years imprisonment, compared to up to fifteen years for 
trafficking under Article 253. 
 
25.E. LAW ENFORCEMENT STATISTICS.  According to the 
National Prosecutor's Office, in 2008 prosecutors 
concluded 53 investigations; there were also 51 
investigations pending at the end of the year, some of 
which were initiated in 2008 and some in 2007. Of the 53 
concluded investigations, there were 28 indictments 
involving a total of 78 individuals.  Of the 78 
individuals indicted, seven were foreigners (five 
Bulgarians and two Germans).  Four investigations were 
discontinued due to the failure to locate the offender, 
and 21 were discontinued because prosecutors were unable 
to confirm that an offense took place. A total of 315 
victims were involved.  In 2008, four victims were 
granted police protection.  Of the 315 victims, five were 
17 years old and two individuals were 16 years old. 
 
According to the Statistics Bureau of the Ministry of 
Justice, there were 18 convictions under Article 253 and 
28 convictions under Article 203 of the penal code in 
¶2008. These sentences were issued by courts of first 
instance and are subject to appeal. Statistics for 
convictions under Article 204 are not yet available. Post 
will submit complete conviction and sentencing data 
(post-appeal) for 2008 when such data become available. 
 
Final (post-appeal) data for 2007 shows that there were 
three convictions under Article 253 (human trafficking), 
of which one was suspended; there was one conviction 
under Article 204 (forced prostitution abroad), which was 
suspended; and 15 convictions (including one case of a 
minor) under Article 203 (forced prostitution), of which 
nine were suspended.  These sentences were upheld by 
appellate courts, and they are final. Of the 19 prison 
sentences, there were four one-year sentences, seven one- 
to-two year sentences, six two-year sentences, and two 
three-five year sentences. Of the individuals convicted 
17 were Polish citizens and two were foreigners (Belarus 
and Moldova). 
 
The number of new police investigations related to 
trafficking increased in 2008. According to the Central 
Anti-Trafficking Police Unit, police initiated 18 new 
investigations of human trafficking under Article 253 of 
the Criminal Code in 2008. As a result of these 
investigations, police identified 60 trafficking offenses 
and forwarded 59 cases to prosecution for indictment. 
Police managed to identify 62 victims, including 14 
foreigners. In addition, police identified three cases of 
forced prostitution under Article 204, which included 
four victims. Police forwarded two cases to the 
prosecution office for indictment. Police also initiated 
19 new investigations under Article 203 (forced 
prostitution), which resulted in identifying 35 offenses. 
Thirty-four cases were forwarded to prosecution for 
indictment. These cases included the total of 28 victims, 
including two foreigners.  According to the Ministry of 
Interior, in 2008 the Border Guard initiated three new 
investigations into trafficking and referred six victims 
to the Witness/Victim Protection Program. 
 
25.F. TRAINING.  The government, in cooperation with 
NGOs, foreign missions, the EU, and international 
organizations, provides specialized training in how to 
recognize, investigate, and prosecute trafficking.  Some 
examples are provided below. 
 
In April, the Interior Ministry, in cooperation with the 
Human Trafficking Studies Center of the Warsaw 
University, organized training of police and border guard 
instructors (train-the-trainer) on trafficking in 
persons. The training was co-funded by the Interior 
Ministry and the European Commission. The training was 
 
WARSAW 00000217  008 OF 017 
 
 
addressed to instructors from police and border guard 
academies and representatives of provincial police 
headquarters who deal with human rights violations on a 
regional level. 
 
In June, the National Border Guard Headquarters organized 
a three-day training session for coordinators who deal 
with trafficking issues in provincial police 
headquarters, Border Guard units and prosecution. The 
training covered legal status of foreigners, travel 
documents, case studies of trafficking cases, and 
sensitivity to the psychological condition of trafficking 
victims. The Border Guard Headquarters also organized an 
advanced three-day training session for Border Guard 
officers who work in investigation and border traffic 
departments or oversee the monitoring of foreigners. The 
training will be continued in 2009. In addition, the 
Border Guard Training Academy organized a viewing for all 
students at the officer level of a Polish-made movie on 
trafficking ("My name is Justine"), which was preceded by 
a lecture on trafficking in persons. 
 
In May and November, the Ministry of Labor and Social 
Policy, in cooperation with La Strada, organized 
specialized training for employees of Crisis Intervention 
Centers (see 26.B).  The training focused on victim 
identification, sensitive handling of trafficking 
victims, provision of victim assistance in accordance 
with the 2007 revision of the Law on Social Assistance 
(see 26.A), crisis intervention, and principles of 
cooperation with other countries.  The first training 
took place in May 2008 and covered social workers from 
Poland's eight eastern provinces. The second training 
took place in November and was addressed to the staff of 
the Crisis Intervention Centers from the eight western 
provinces. A total of 60 social workers were trained. 
 
As a follow-up to the 2007 training program for judges, 
in 2008 the British Embassy, Interior Ministry, Ministry 
of Justice and La Strada cooperated in providing a 
training program on trafficking for prosecutors. The 
first training session was held in December and was 
attended by 30 prosecutors. The second session for the 
same group is scheduled for April 2009. The training is 
delivered as part of the National Anti-Trafficking 
Program.  The goal of this training was to expand the 
knowledge of prosecutors on the definition of human 
trafficking, in particular in the context of Polish 
domestic law, characteristics of the phenomenon of 
trafficking and the specific situation of victims. Part 
of the training concerned the identification of both 
underage and adult trafficking victims. 
 
In September, the Central Bureau of Investigations (CBI) 
organized two-day training session for CBI officers, 
which focused on efforts undertaken and challenges facing 
law enforcement in combating trafficking. 
 
The Interior Ministry prepared a special module about 
trafficking in children for directors of orphanage homes 
and representatives of provincial government offices 
which supervise those institutions. 
 
The NGO Nobody's Children provided training to a mix of 
approximately 500 social workers and law enforcement 
officials throughout the country on child trafficking 
issues.  The NGO also published and distributed awareness 
campaign flyers and an information booklet in cooperation 
with the Interior Ministry. 
 
Training on human trafficking is included in the 
curriculum of all soldiers and police officers who are to 
be deployed for peacekeeping missions abroad (see 27.G). 
 
There were also training sessions and conferences on the 
regional level. In May, the Provincial Police 
Headquarters in Krakow organized a three-day training 
session for police officers from criminal and prevention 
divisions on standard operating procedures when dealing 
with trafficking offenses. In September, the Krakow 
regional police also organized a one-day training session 
for officers of police, border guard and municipal guards 
on preventing and combating trafficking for the purpose 
of begging. In June, the Provincial Police Headquarters 
 
WARSAW 00000217  009 OF 017 
 
 
in Radom together with Mazovia Social Policy Center held 
a conference "Let's not traffic in people," which was 
addressed to police officers from prevention and criminal 
bureaus of the Mazovia Police Garrison. In October, the 
District Police Unit in Strzelce Opolskie and a Regional 
Center of Social Policy organized a two-day conference on 
"Modern-day Slavery," which was devoted to trafficking in 
persons (including, children, organs and forced labor). 
The conference was attended by officers of the prevention 
and criminal bureaus of the Opole police garrison. 
 
The NGO La Strada participated in the majority of 
training sessions organized by government institutions in 
Poland, either as an organizer (full involvement), 
partner (partnership with other institutions), or by 
providing guest speakers, lecturers, or trainers. La 
Strada co-organized three training sessions for higher- 
level personnel of refugee centers with the Office for 
Foreigners, UNHCR, and the Interior Ministry. La Strada 
also organized two training sessions on gender-based 
violence in Lublin and Warsaw refugee reception centers 
and training for social workers. On an international 
level, La Strada organized three train-the-trainer 
training sessions for Ukrainian police under a British 
Council project. 
 
25.G. INTERNATIONAL LAW ENFORCEMENT COOPERATION.  The 
government cooperates with other governments in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking case, 
especially with its closest neighbors.  The Polish 
National Police participate in several bilateral task 
forces that share information, track the movements of 
traffickers and victims across borders and coordinate 
repatriations and casework.  Bilateral efforts include 
Polish task forces which work jointly with Czech, German, 
and Swedish Police forces, and one multilateral task 
force that coordinates efforts among Polish and Baltic- 
nation Police forces on anti-trafficking efforts. 
 
In 2008 the Police National Headquarters began work on 
establishing a Joint Investigation Team (JIT) with German 
Police. Although a framework was agreed upon for 
establishing the JIT, the team has not been created yet 
due to differences between Polish and German criminal 
law.  Nevertheless, during investigations on individual 
trafficking cases, regional police headquarters establish 
direct contact with Liaison Officers of interested 
countries.  Police usually exchange information with the 
countries of destination (Italy, Germany, Spain, United 
Kingdom), and countries of origin (Ukraine, Belarus, 
Bulgaria, Romania and Moldova). 
 
Polish officials also actively participate and co-sponsor 
international trafficking conferences.  The Ministry of 
Interior hosted a November 17-22 workshop on combating 
organized crime for officials from Ukraine's Interior 
Ministry. Part of the workshop focused on international 
and interagency cooperation in combating human 
trafficking. Police officers from the Central Anti- 
Trafficking Unit participated in two seminars on human 
trafficking organized by the European Police Academy 
CEPOL (in Lithuania and the Czech Republic). In May, 
police officers participated in a meeting of the Task 
Force against Trafficking in Human Beings, which is 
established at the Council of the Baltic Sea States. The 
meeting was followed by a seminar which was attended by 
NGOs that provide assistance to trafficking victims. 
Polish police also participated in a research project 
"Polish-German exchange and workshop for police units 
which combat human trafficking", carried out by a 
Hannover-based advocacy center for TIP victims in 
cooperation with La Strada. The Anti-Trafficking Team of 
the Interior Ministry organized a research project on: 
"Polish-Moldovan exchange of best practices and 
expertise." The project included a seminar on combating 
human trafficking hosted by the Police Academy in 
Szczytno.  The project was funded by the Polish Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs. A similar project, also funded by the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, was organized for Ukraine. 
Police officers also attended an EU-funded international 
conference devoted to the analysis of criminal phenomena, 
including human trafficking, which occur on the territory 
of the EU member states. 
 
 
WARSAW 00000217  010 OF 017 
 
 
According to police statistics, in 2008 foreigners were 
involved in committing approximately 60-70 trafficking- 
related offenses; the majority of those cases involved 
cooperation and an exchange of information with foreign 
governments. The Central Police Unit for Combating Human 
Trafficking and Child Pornography regularly exchanges 
information with Europol, Interpol and Police of other 
countries in the area of human trafficking, child 
pornography, and pedophilia. 
 
25.H. EXTRADITIONS.  The Polish criminal code allows for 
the extradition of Polish citizens to other EU countries. 
In 2008 there was one extradition procedure initiated 
involving a Ukrainian citizen.  There were no cases of 
extradition of Polish citizens related to human 
trafficking. 
 
25.I. GOVERNMENT INVOLVEMENT.  Mission Poland has no 
evidence indicating that the government is involved in or 
tolerates trafficking. 
 
25.J. COMPLICITY.  Mission Poland has no evidence that 
governmental authorities condone or are otherwise 
involved or complicit in trafficking. To date, there have 
been no cases of law-enforcement officials punished for 
trafficking-related corruption. 
 
25.K. LEGAL SITUATION OF PROSTITUTES. While prostitution 
is not criminalized, pimping, recruiting, or luring 
persons into prostitution carry penalties of up to 10 
years in prison. According to the Interior Ministry, the 
police regularly screen escort services in cooperation 
with the Polish Labor Inspectors. In addition, in 2008 
the Polish Labor Inspectorate signed an agreement with 
the Border Guard to conduct joint screening of escort 
services. In the first half of 2008, police closed 57 of 
565 escort services operating in Poland. In the second 
half of the year, police closed 69 agencies out of the 
530 in operation during that six-month period. 
 
Under the current version of the Polish criminal code, 
the legal age of consent to sexual activity is 15. 
Poland has ratified the Palermo Protocol, the Optional 
Protocol to the UN Convention on the Rights of Children 
(of May 25, 2000), and the EU Convention on the Rights of 
Children. All of these documents prohibit prostitution by 
individuals less than 18 years of age.  According to the 
Polish Constitution (Art. 87) and international law, the 
provisions of these documents automatically become part 
of Polish law and act to prohibit child prostitution as 
therein defined.  Full implementation of the protocols 
and Convention will require changes, inter alia, in the 
Polish Criminal, Family and Labor Codes. The prosecutor's 
office states that anyone (including a parent) assisting 
a person under the age of 18 to engage in prostitution 
would be assumed to be benefiting financially from this 
assistance and would be investigated and prosecuted 
accordingly. 
 
25.L. INTERNATIONAL PEACEKEEPING.  According to the 
Military Prosecution Office, no Polish nationals deployed 
abroad as part of a peacekeeping mission engaged in or 
facilitated any form of trafficking, nor were there any 
known cases of exploiting trafficking victims. 
 
25.M. CHILD SEX TOURISM.  According to the Government and 
NGOs, child sex tourism is not a significant problem in 
Poland. 
 
PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
------------------------------------ 
 
26.A. VICTIM AND WITNESS PROTECTION.  Polish law allows 
foreign victims to remain in Poland legally during the 
investigation and trial of their traffickers. At the end 
of 2005, the Law on Aliens was amended to provide for a 
"reflection period" during which foreign trafficking 
victims are allowed to stay legally in Poland while 
deliberating whether or not to participate in the 
prosecution of their traffickers. The Law on Aliens was 
further revised in October 2008 to extend the reflection 
period to three months. This new provision entered into 
force on January 1, 2009. During 2008, two victims used 
the reflection period. 
 
WARSAW 00000217  011 OF 017 
 
 
 
 
Videoconference testimony from abroad is permitted and 
regularly used. 
 
The revised Law on Social Assistance, which entered into 
force on April 1, 2007, provides that all foreign victims 
of trafficking are entitled to the same type of social 
welfare benefits as Polish citizens. The revised law also 
gives foreign victims the right to access crisis 
intervention assistance, shelter, food, clothing and 
living allowance, and entitlement to stay at Crisis 
Intervention Centers. 
 
26.B. VICTIM CARE FACILITIES.  There is one specialized 
shelter in Poland for victims of trafficking. Located in 
Warsaw, the shelter is operated by La Strada and funded 
until recently primarily through foreign and EU funds. 
The shelter is available only for adult women without 
children. The law on social assistance provides that all 
victims (both Polish and of foreign nationality) have 
access to social assistance, including financial and non- 
financial support (e.g., crisis intervention, shelter, 
food, necessary clothing). Child victims of trafficking 
are placed in orphanages and foster families. There are 
no specific shelters for male victims so they are placed 
either in homeless shelters or half-way houses for 
recently released prison inmates. 
 
Trafficking victims may also stay in specialized Crisis 
Intervention Centers for victims of domestic violence. 
There were 37 such centers operated by local governments 
and funded by central government. These Crisis 
Intervention Centers provide social, medical, 
psychological, and legal assistance to victims. (See 25.F 
for details on capacity building for the Crisis 
Intervention Centers). 
 
26.C. GOVERNMENT PROVISION OF VICTIM ASSISTANCE SERVICES. 
The government provides trafficking victims with access 
to legal, medical and psychological services in 
cooperation with NGOs and international organizations. 
The assistance has been funded by the government, the EU, 
international organizations, and foreign missions. 
 
In 2008 the Interior Ministry continued funding the 
Program for Support and Protection of Victim/Witness of 
Trafficking in Human Beings (see 26.D). This 
Witness/Victim Protection Program, implemented by La 
Strada, provides the following assistance: crisis 
intervention (medical and psychological assistance, safe 
transportation and shelter, food, clothing, lodging 
support and counseling); legal counseling when contacting 
law enforcement and judiciary, assistance in legalizing 
the stay in Poland and/or organization of safe return to 
the country of origin. In 2008 the Government allocated 
USD 38,000 (PLN 143,000) for the implementation of the 
Witness/Victim Protection Program. The amount for 2009 is 
USD 40,500 (150,000.00 PLN). 
 
In 2009 the government allocated an additional USD 
190,000 (700,000 PLN) to establish and operate the new 
National Intervention-Consultation Center for Victims of 
Trafficking. The Center should begin operation in April 
and will include: 24/7 hotline for victims and witnesses, 
crisis intervention, consultation point for local 
government and central authorities on working with TIP 
victims, preventive activities, and running the shelter 
for trafficking victims. Until recently, government 
funding for these types of activities through La Strada 
covered less than 10 percent of La Strada's operating 
expenses. In 2008, La Strada's shelter was funded partly 
by the Interior Ministry (USD 13,500, or 50,000 PLN), 
Mazovia regional authorities (USD 16,200, or 60,000 PLN) 
and EU funds (USD 13,500, or 50,000 PLN).  In addition, 
La Strada also continued to receive a grant from the 
Norwegian government, which covered legal assistance and 
other services, including legal counseling, social 
workers, case managers and hotline consultants.  The 
Interior Ministry is preparing a public tender for the 
new center and La Strada will likely be awarded the grant 
because of its high-level of expertise (Ref E). 
 
Other local organizations, such as Nobody's Children 
 
WARSAW 00000217  012 OF 017 
 
 
Foundation, Halina Niec Center for Legal Assistance, 
Catholic Church-affiliated Caritas, and the Association 
for Assistance to Women and Girls, also provide victim 
assistance.  Nobody's Children Foundation is funded 
mainly through an international philanthropy foundation 
called the Oak Foundation, and through small private 
donations 
 
Since 2005, the International Office for Migration (IOM) 
has worked with Interior Ministry on assisting 
trafficking victims through a voluntary return program. 
According to IOM representatives, they assist 4-5 victims 
per year in voluntary return to the country of origin. 
Also, in 2008 the Warsaw-based Office of Democratic 
Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) and the OSCE 
provided a small grant to La Strada to provide assistance 
to 12 Uzbek and Tajik men, who are being handled as 
possible victims of forced labor (see 23.B). 
 
In 2008 the Ministry of Labor and Social Policy allocated 
USD 1.2 million (4.42 million PLN) to open new Crisis 
Intervention Centers and expand operations at existing 
centers (see 26.B). 
 
26.D. ASSISTANCE FOR FOREIGN VICTIMS. The government 
assists foreign trafficking victims.  The Victim/Witness 
Protection Program is initiated if the foreign victim 
agrees to break all contacts with the traffickers. The 
program allows for a three-month period during which the 
victim is granted full assistance and may decide on 
whether she/he would like to cooperate with law 
enforcement. If the victim decides against testifying, 
he/she can voluntarily return to the country of origin. 
If the person decides to testify, their legally 
authorized presence in Poland may be extended.  After the 
trial, the victim is offered a safe return to their 
country of origin and informed about victim assistance 
programs offered by the NGOs in their country. There were 
no reported cases of deportations of trafficking victims 
during the reporting period. 
 
26.E. LONG-TERM BENEFITS AND REINTEGRATION.  Although 
there is no special government program for reintegration 
of victims, all victims (both Polish and foreign) are 
entitled to government assistance. Victims of trafficking 
have access to a number of social benefits, including 
psychological assistance, social and legal counseling, 
and shelter. The victim may also receive permanent or 
temporary welfare benefits, assistance in kind, housing, 
food, clothing, employment-related training, and 
specialized care. Foreign victims have a right to apply 
for permission for residence for up to 3 months and can 
join the Program for Support and Protection of 
Victim/Witness of Trafficking in Human Beings. 
 
Following the March 2008 conclusion of IRIS -- an EU- 
funded project operated by La Strada in cooperation with 
the Women's Promotion Center, Social Assistance Center, 
Warsaw Labor Office and the Ministry of Labor and Social 
Policy to provide for the social and professional 
reintegration of TIP victims -- a model for social and 
professional integration of marginalized groups was 
created. Between January and June 2008, the model was 
presented in training programs for social workers, labor 
offices and NGOs.  A total of 100 people were trained. 
In addition, a handbook was created on developing a 
comprehensive system of support and professional training 
for victims of trafficking who want to return to the 
labor market. The manual was distributed to all social 
workers trained in trafficking issues, social policy 
departments of regional offices, social policy centers 
and Crisis Intervention Centers. In 2009 the Ministry 
will continue promoting and distributing the model of 
reintegration of victims to social workers and NGOs. 
 
26.F. VICTIM REFERRAL PROCESS.  The government has a 
referral process to transfer victims detained, arrested 
or placed in protective custody by law enforcement 
authorities to institutions that provide victim 
assistance.  The referral process was established in a 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) developed by the 
Border Guard and police. The SOP consists of rules and 
procedures which officers are obliged to follow if they 
identify a trafficking victim and includes instructions 
 
WARSAW 00000217  013 OF 017 
 
 
on how to refer a victim to an appropriate institution or 
NGO. In the first quarter of 2008, the Anti-Trafficking 
Working Group established a group of experts which 
expanded the SOP to include procedures for Polish 
victims. In April 2008, the new version of the SOP was 
distributed among the police and Border Guard. 
 
26.G. STATISTICS ON VICTIMS.  According to the National 
Police Central Anti-Trafficking Unit, 62 persons were 
identified as trafficking victims under Article 253, four 
were identified as victims under Article 204 (forced 
prostitution abroad), and 28 were identified as victims 
under Article 203 (forced prostitution). 
 
In 2008, 22 adult victims and two child victims 
participated in the Victim/Witness Assistance Program (18 
new clients and four from the previous year). All of them 
were referred to the program by law enforcement officers 
(i.e., police or Border Guard). It was the first year 
that the program provided assistance to men (2) and 
children (2). The victims who joined the program in 2008 
came from Bulgaria (6 persons), Mongolia (4), Romania 
(3), Belarus (2), Nigeria (1), Djibouti (1), Moldova (2), 
Germany (1) and Ukraine (2). Victims were mainly 
trafficked for sexual exploitation (11) and forced labor 
(6). In four cases foreigners were forced to beg and one 
person was sexually harassed. Out of the 22 victims, 21 
decided to cooperate with law enforcement. 
 
In 2008 La Strada provided assistance to 308 persons who 
were victims of trafficking (including 100 victims from 
previous years). Fifteen percent were male. Less than 20 
percent of the victims were foreigners. Of all the 
victims, 60 percent were trafficked for purposes of 
sexual exploitation (e.g., forced prostitution), 20 
percent for labor exploitation and forced labor, and 20 
percent for begging and petty crimes.  In 2008 La Strada 
assisted 24 persons in its shelter (both Polish and 
foreign nationals). 
 
26.H. VICTIM IDENTIFICATION.  The government recognizes 
the need to improve victim identification and continued 
to expand its training programs to increase the capacity 
of law enforcement, immigration, and social services 
personnel to identify victims of trafficking, especially 
among high-risk persons with whom they come in contact. 
The Interior Ministry, National Police, and NGOs are 
generally satisfied with new training efforts in place to 
address this concern and with the degree of cooperation 
between law-enforcement and victim assistance providers. 
The police and border guard have an SOP for dealing with 
trafficking victims (see 26.F). There is no legalized or 
regulated sex industry in Poland (see 25.K). 
 
26.I. VICTIMS' RIGHTS.  The rights of victims are 
generally respected. Standard operating procedures for 
Border Guard and police officers provide detailed 
instructions on how to deal with victims to ensure that 
their rights are properly protected. Border Guard and 
police officers are instructed to inform the victim about 
the right to a "reflection period" and about the 
Witness/Victim Protection Program. La Strada observed a 
considerable improvement among Border Guard in terms of 
their understanding of trafficking. According to the 
National Prosecution Office, in 2008 there were no cases 
in which a victim was prosecuted for a violation of other 
laws. In one case, it was revealed that a victim provided 
a false testimony about alleged trafficking for sexual 
exploitation. The case was first discontinued but now the 
case is further investigation on false testimony about a 
crime which was not committed. 
 
On February 20, 2009, the Minister of Justice and 
Prosecutor General sent out a set of guidelines to all 
prosecution offices around the country with instructions 
on how to deal with victims of crimes to make sure that 
their rights are properly protected when in contact with 
law enforcement. The main goal of these guidelines is to 
enhance the position of victims in relation to police, 
prosecutors and courts. Although the guidelines do not 
focus specifically on trafficking victims, they are 
expected to contribute to better protection of TIP 
victims 
 
 
WARSAW 00000217  014 OF 017 
 
 
26.J. VICTIM PARTICIPATION IN INVESTIGATIONS AND 
PROSECUTIONS.  The government encourages and facilitates 
victim participation in the investigation and prosecution 
of trafficking (see 26.A). In 2008, 21 foreign victims 
agreed to participate in the prosecution of their 
traffickers. La Strada assisted nine victims/witnesses in 
court proceedings against their traffickers. In nine 
court proceedings, La Strada participated as a social 
representative. In addition, La Strada also monitored 
five cases under a special project to monitor long-term 
prosecution cases.  Victims may file civil suits against 
traffickers but there were no such cases in 2008.  The 
victims may also receive financial compensation through 
legal action in a form of adhesion proceedings as part of 
the criminal proceedings against traffickers. However, La 
Strada expressed concern that prosecutors do not 
adequately incorporate the compensation or restitution 
process into criminal proceedings, e.g., by securing 
assets of perpetrators or estimating the amount of 
compensation or damages to which victims are entitled. 
 
26.K. TRAINING.  The government provides specialized 
training for government officials in identifying 
trafficking victims and in the provision of assistance to 
trafficked victims, including the special needs of 
trafficked children (see 25.F).  A questionnaire 
developed in 2007 by Warsaw University at the request of 
the Interior Ministry serves as an identification tool 
used by police and border guard officers.  It is now 
included in the Standard Operating Procedures for law 
enforcement and is also used as an instruction tool in 
all victim identification training for law enforcement 
officers. 
 
The government also provides formal training on victim 
identification and assistance to personnel at its 
embassies and consulates in destination or transit 
countries.  The MFA included a special module on 
trafficking in a basic training for all consular 
officers. In 2008, one of the priorities for Polish 
consuls was to respond to all cases of persons cheated by 
unreliable employers and job agencies.  They cooperated 
with local organizations and local institutions which 
provide assistance to victims of trafficking.  Polish 
consuls also supported the establishment of local 
information centers in the Netherlands, Spain and the UK, 
which operate at municipal level, Polish centers, NGOs 
and trade unions, where Polish citizens could get 
information and necessary assistance in the Polish 
language.  The MFA does not collect statistics on the 
number of Polish victims Polish consulates and embassies 
assisted abroad because this assistance is considered 
part of general consular service provided to Polish 
nationals. 
 
26.L. VICTIM ASSISTANCE FOR POLISH NATIONALS.  All 
victims of Polish nationality have the right for 
assistance under the revised Law on Social Assistance 
which entered into force on April 1, 2007. Polish victims 
are entitled to social assistance, including financial 
and non-financial support (i.e. medical and psychological 
care, shelter, meals, clothing). 
 
26.M. INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS.  The government 
cooperates with international organizations and NGOs, 
e.g., IOM, UNHCR, OSCE/ODIHR, La Strada (see 26.C). 
 
PREVENTION 
---------- 
 
27.A. ANTI-TRAFFICKING INFORMATION AND EDUCATION 
CAMPAIGNS.  The government carried out a number of 
education and anti-trafficking information campaigns 
during the reporting period.  For example: 
 
-- A campaign addressed to Poles seeking work in the EU 
member states, including information on possible threats 
related to working abroad which was posted on two popular 
websites: Orbis (tourist agency) and Pracuj.pl (website 
for job seekers). In a booklet called "Employers 
2008/2009" the Interior Ministry included a poster with 
similar information. 
 
-- In cooperation with the British Embassy, the Interior 
 
WARSAW 00000217  015 OF 017 
 
 
Ministry published press advertisements in two 
periodicals: "Working and Studying Abroad" (50 thousand 
copies in Poland) and "Working and Living Abroad" (70 000 
copies in Poland and 3,000 in the UK), which warn against 
trafficking for forced labor. 
 
-- In cooperation with IOM and AmEmbassy Warsaw, the 
Interior Ministry organized the first mobile exhibit of 
18 posters which presented photographs of victims and 
statistical information about trafficking.  This 
traveling exhibit was on display at Warsaw's central 
train station for one week before circulating to six 
other major train stations around the country, including 
Poznan, Lodz, Katowice, Krakow, Wroclaw and Gdynia. 
Since October 23, 2008, the exhibit was also posted on a 
website (www.stophandelludzmi.pl), which offered readers 
the chance to present their opinions in an open forum. 
 
-- In 2008, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs published the 
next issue of the "Pole Abroad" guidebook, which includes 
warnings against making hasty decisions on leaving Poland 
to work abroad or to use unreliable employment agencies. 
The 2008 edition of the guidebook includes information on 
the types of assistance which can be granted by Polish 
consuls abroad. The guidebook is also available on the 
MFA website. 
 
-- In an effort to provide better protection for economic 
migrants, the MFA continued its program "Closer to Work, 
Closer to Poland" initiated in 2007. Under this program, 
information on trafficking was posted on the websites of 
Polish embassies. 
 
-- NGOs La Strada and Caritas Warsaw carried out TIP- 
related information campaigns during a summer rock music 
festival concert for young people. 
 
-- An information campaign was addressed to foreigners 
looking for work in Poland, which included distributing 
approximately 140,000 leaflets through Polish consulates 
in Ukraine, Belarus, Russia, Central Asia, and the 
Caucasus.  The leaflets were attached to passports during 
the visa processing procedure. These activities will be 
continued in 2009-2010. 
 
-- The Interior Ministry reprinted a leaflet on 
trafficking in Polish (1,000 copies) and English (200 
copies). These publications, together with other 
prevention materials (Travel Compass, leaflet on 
trafficking in children, materials for the Program of 
support and protection of victims/witnesses of 
trafficking, leaflets for trafficking victims in six 
languages) were distributed to police units, police and 
Border Guard schools, NGOs and university research 
centers and libraries. 
 
-- In November 2008 the Department for Women, Family and 
Counteracting Discrimination in the Ministry of Labor and 
Social Policy published 100,000 copies of the cartoon 
book "You Are Not for Sale," which was originally 
produced by the Council of Europe. It was translated by 
the Interior Ministry and will be part of a national 
prevention campaign aimed at young people, which will be 
carried out through schools. 
 
-- In 2008 the Appeals Prosecution Office in Szczecin 
held a prevention campaign (leaflets and posters) for 
people interested in working abroad. The website "This 
Train Does Not Go to Hollywood" was funded by the West 
Pomerania province and included practical information for 
persons who are going to work abroad. The information 
describes methods of recruitment of victims and also 
practical advice on what to do in case one falls victim 
to such a crime. 
 
There were also events focused on prevention of human 
trafficking, organized on a regional level, including the 
November 20-21 conference on "Crisis Intervention for 
Trafficking Victims" organized in Poznan for employees of 
Crisis Intervention Centers and family assistance 
centers; an international conference in October on 
"Modern-Day Slavery" organized by the regional and local 
governments and the Police Academy in Legionowo for 
teachers, police officers and social workers in the 
 
WARSAW 00000217  016 OF 017 
 
 
Strzelce Opolskie region; a conference on "Prevention of 
Human Trafficking ? support for persons threatened by 
violence and cyber bullying, " organized by Tomaszow 
Mazowiecki regional authorities and addressed to police 
officers, teachers, school headmasters and social 
workers. 
 
27.B. GOVERNMENT MONITORING OF IMMIGRATION PATTERNS.  The 
Government monitors immigration and emigration patterns 
to identify possible new trends in trafficking (see 24.D 
and 25.G).  In 2008, for the first time, the Central 
Anti-Trafficking Unit in the Police and Border Guard 
headquarters carried out special analyses with a focus on 
new trends in human trafficking. The results of these 
analyses will be included in the second edition of the 
report on trafficking to be published by the Interior 
Ministry later this year. 
 
27.C. INTERAGENCY AND INTERNATIONAL COORDINATION.  The 
government coordinates communication between various 
agencies, internal, international, and multilateral 
agencies and NGOs on trafficking-related matters (see 
24.B). 
 
27.D. NATIONAL PLAN OF ACTION.  In January 2009, the 
Interagency Working Group concluded its preparation of 
the fourth two-year National Action Plan for Combating 
Trafficking, which will cover 2009-2010 (see also 24.A). 
All government agencies and major NGOs involved in anti- 
trafficking efforts participated in drafting the Action 
Plan.  This same process has been followed since the 
first plan was prepared in 2003-2004. The Action Plan is 
now pending final approval by the Council of Ministers. 
 
After the Action Plan is approved by the government, it 
is distributed among all institutions in the Inter-Agency 
Working Group responsible for implementing the Action 
Plan. In addition, it is circulated during the annual 
national conference on trafficking organized by the 
Migration Policy Department of the Interior Ministry. It 
is also available on the Interior Ministry website in 
Polish and English. 
 
27.E. DEMAND REDUCTION CAMPAIGNS.  According to the 
Interior Ministry, the government ran no programs or 
campaigns related to specifically reducing the demand for 
commercial sex acts. As noted above, the police regularly 
monitor and, when necessary, shut down escort services 
(see 25.K). 
 
27.F. CHILD SEX TOURISM.  Government officials and NGOs 
assess that there is not a significant problem in Poland 
related to international child sex tourism.  The Nobody's 
Children Foundation, a leading Polish NGO dealing with 
trafficking in children, agreed that sex tourism is not a 
problem, but noted that trafficking in children for 
sexual exploitation remains a problem. There were reports 
of Polish teenage girls and boys engaged in "weekend 
prostitution," particularly in Germany. As noted (see 
25.F), the government and NGOs continued to provide 
training in identification, protection, and provision of 
assistance to child victims of trafficking. 
 
27.G. INTERNATONAL PEACEKEEPING.  According to the 
Interior Ministry, training on human trafficking is 
included in the curriculum of all soldiers and police 
officers who are to be deployed for peacekeeping missions 
abroad.  The Ministry of National Defense does not 
organize its own specialized courses or trainings on 
human trafficking but actively participates in those 
offered by other countries and/or organizations, e.g., 
NATO. Both military and civilian personnel are trained in 
the specifics of the mission as well as any potential 
criminal activities which may occur during the mission. 
For the military, human trafficking is part of the 
Standard Generic Training Module, which is prepared by 
the UN.  The module covers topics related to sexual 
abuse, protection of children and human rights, which 
include the problem of human trafficking. 
 
TIP HERO 
-------- 
 
¶28. Stana Buchowska is the co-founder of La Strada 
 
WARSAW 00000217  017 OF 017 
 
 
Poland, an NGO which in September 2008 celebrated 
thirteen years of regional leadership and activism in the 
fight against trafficking in persons in Central and 
Eastern Europe. Stana Buchowska is a long-time Embassy 
contact and widely respected for her courageous work. 
 
La Strada's Shelter - Stana Buchowska and her staff, 
comprised of a few dedicated full-time employees and many 
volunteers, continue to run the only shelter in Poland 
exclusively for trafficking victims trying to rebuild 
their lives.  La Strada provides trafficking victims, 
regardless of nationality, with psychological counseling, 
medical attention, reemployment training, access to legal 
representation, and countless other services under the 
auspices of their crisis prevention and social 
rehabilitation programs. 
 
Government and NGO Cooperation - Stana Buchowska is both 
a skilled, attentive practitioner and an effective 
lobbyist for her cause.  For many years she has advocated 
the need of creating a good system of assistance and 
support for trafficking victims, and that lobbying is 
paying dividends. She works tirelessly with the other 
members of the Polish interagency Anti-Trafficking 
Working Group on developing plans and operating 
procedures and implementing them. She works on a daily 
basis with Polish law enforcement officials who identify 
trafficking victims and deliver them to her capably 
equipped staff.  As reflected in our TIP report this 
year, La Strada is the government's primary partner in 
the provision of TIP assistance.   La Strada is also the 
"go-to" organization for Crisis Intervention Centers and 
nascent NGOs around the country who are involved in TIP 
assistance programs or awareness campaigns. 
 
Training in Poland and the Region - Ms. Buchowska travels 
extensively throughout the region to La Strada partner 
organizations, regional conferences, and to conduct 
training in Poland's neighboring countries. La Strada has 
long been considered a primary Polish source of 
information on trends, statistics, and other trafficking 
in persons-related issues.  Her organization reaches out 
to other countries and offers its expertise and know-how 
through various training in other countries of Central 
Europe, including Ukraine, Hungary, and Slovakia. 
 
NOTE: Stana Buchowska's name, date of birth, and 
nationality were cleared by Embassy RSO, CONS, and 
LEGATT. No derogatory information has been found. 
 
BEST PRACTICES 
-------------- 
 
¶29. In October 2008, the Interior Ministry and IOM, in 
cooperation with Embassy Warsaw, inaugurated a new 
trafficking in persons public awareness campaign called 
"Human Trafficking Has No Borders".  The campaign 
consisted of a traveling exhibit of 18 posters which 
presented photographs of victims and statistical 
information about the phenomenon.  The exhibit was on 
display in a prominent location at Warsaw's central train 
station for one week before circulating to six other 
major train stations around the country, including 
Poznan, Lodz, Katowice, Krakow, Wroclaw and Gdynia.  The 
goal of the display was to present the problem of 
trafficking to the widest possible audience. The exhibit 
is part of the Polish government's national plan to raise 
awareness of this problem in Poland was rolled out 
immediately preceding Poland's Third National Trafficking 
in Persons Conference held on October 22, 2008. The 
display received positive media attention. 
 
QUANRUD 
QUANRUD