10ANKARA222
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Wed Feb 10 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO0587
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0222/01 0411428
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 101428Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2083
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0299
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6936
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4489
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7786
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7701
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4304
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000222 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 10, 2010 
 
Media Highlights 
US Embassy Ankara - Turkey Media Reaction - February 10, 2010 as 
prepared by the Public Affairs Information Office 
 
How the US is Playing 
 
Ambassador Jeffrey Visits Tarsus (Hurriyet online) 
Mainstreams Aksam, Haberturk and Hurriyet online report Ambassador 
Jeffrey, accompanied by his wife Gudrun, paid a visit to the Tarsus 
American High School in south Turkey.  Aksam and Hurriyet say 
Ambassador Jeffrey did not comment on internal developments such as 
military coup allegations and the 'Ergenekon' investigation.  On the 
developments in the Middle East, Jeffrey said, "Turkey will play an 
important role not only in the Middle East, but in the areas from 
the Balkans to Asia, from Asia to Africa, especially in the Middle 
East and India.  Because Turkey is the most successful and the 
leading country in this vast region.  It is a member of NATO, and 
has become a temporary member of the UN Security Council.  Turkey is 
big, and plays a useful role for us; it will continue playing this 
role in the future." 
 
On Israel:  Hurriyet quotes Jeffrey as saying, "I want the problems 
Turkey has with Israel resolved.  Diplomats are doing whatever is 
necessary for the resolution of tensions.  There can be a problem 
between Turkey and Israel every week, what matters is being able to 
resolve these problems."  Jeffrey also noted cooperation between the 
US, Turkey and Israel was essential for the resolution of terror 
problems in the Middle East. 
 
"Obama Thanks for Al-Qaeda Captures" (Haberturk) 
In an unconfirmed report, mainstream Haberturk writes that President 
Obama phoned Prime Minister Erdogan to express his gratitude for the 
security operations against al-Qaeda suspects, staged recently in 20 
Turkish provinces.  Police have captured 140 suspects in the 
operations, who allegedly were plotting attacks on the US bases and 
American war vessels in Turkey.  Police have also captured six 
al-Qaeda militants who fired shots at the US Consulate in Adana last 
week to protest the widespread operations against the terror 
organization, says Haberturk. 
 
In the Headlines 
 
Sargsian: "Time For Progress in Turkey-Armenia Rapprochement" 
(Vatan) 
Mainstream Vatan reports that Armenian President Serge Sargsian sent 
a message to President Gul regarding the protocols, while flying to 
Britain over Turkish airspace.  In a  written, official statement, 
Sargsian said "I extend my good wishes to you and to the Turkish 
people.  The foreign mediation efforts to normalize relations 
between Turkey and Armenia are useful.  However, that should not be 
overplayed and the final step mutually should be taken by our 
administrations and by our people.  Ttime is running against us.  If 
we continue to lose time, the process between us will lose its 
meaning.   Moreover, hostile rhetoric and actions along with 
opposition to the process may emerge.  Neither country will benefit 
from such development.  Today, is the time to move forward for 
Turkey and Armenia." 
 
Op-Eds on Armenia-Turkey 
Several columnists comment on a possible Armenian Genocide 
Resolution in the US Congress.  Veteran columnist Sami Kohen in 
mainstream Milliyet hopes for a  last-minute intervention by 
President Obama: "Just like every year, Armenian lobbies are working 
very hard for AGR in the Congress, however President Obama is 
believed to be making a last minute efforts to stop the process even 
as it passes from the Congressional committee.  Turkey is of growing 
strategic importance and Washington appreciates that value."  In 
English language Today's Zaman, Amanda Paul is advising both Turkey 
and Armenia to work for finalizing protocols: "Allowing the 
protocols to remain in a desk drawer forever would be a terrible 
tragedy -- not just for Turkey and Armenia but for the entire 
 
ANKARA 00000222  002 OF 004 
 
 
region. Turkey's ambitious foreign policy, with its goal of becoming 
the key power in its region, would face a serious setback and, with 
a fresh Armenian genocide resolution to be taken up by a US 
congressional panel early next month, throw Turkey's relationship 
with the US into jeopardy. Turkey and Armenia need to finish what 
they started. They need to take new brave steps and they need to 
take them now." 
 
Iran:  Danger of War (Milliyet) 
In "Tehran Pushes the Button," leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet points 
out "despite the warnings of Western nations and even of Russia," 
Iran is going ahead with its 20 percent enrichment process." 
Mainstream Milliyet calls it "Danger of War," and highlights "Russia 
pointed to the danger of war while President Obama said new 
sanctions will be imposed over the next several weeks." In "Iran 
Challenges, Russian Supports the US," liberal Radikal reports "Iran 
faces new UN Security Council sanctions due to its uranium 
enrichment work that Western nations believe is designed to develop 
a nuclear bomb. Gates signals new sanctions in a couple of weeks 
while Russia warns of a possible war."  Mainstream Hurriyet's Cuneyt 
Ulsever wonders if Iran is serious about Turkey's mediation or using 
it as a tactical way to maintain its nuclear program on the side: 
"At this point FM Davutoglu's upcoming trip to Tehran becomes more 
important than ever, and we shall see whether he can persuade the 
Iranian regime to lower its enrichment ratio on the eve of possible 
sanctions."  In liberal Radikal, Akif Beki observes a "power game" 
between Tehran and Washington: "Both sides are willing to sit and 
negotiate but they are in a power game and reshuffle their cards 
before starting to play."  Islamist Yeni Safak opines: "There is a 
deliberate effort by Israel and others to disseminate fear about 
Iran.  The Iranian nuclear program is under IAEA supervision while 
Israel rejects to even sign NPT -- but nobody remembers that."  In 
"Basij Militants Attack Italian Embassy," CNNTurk reports that 
some100 members of Iran's religious Basij militants had tried to 
attack Italian embassy in Tehran, but Iranian media described the 
incident as a student protest and did not mention any violence. 
Italian Foreign Minister Franco Frattini said "militants dressed as 
civilians tried to assault the embassy shouting 'Death to Italy' and 
'Death to Berlusconi'." 
 
Afghanistan 
Turkish media extensively report on the press tour for some 40 
Turkish journalists to Kabul by the Turkish military General Staff 
(TGS), zeroing in on comments by ISAF's Kabul Regional Commander 
General Levent Colak that Turkey has no plans to send combat troops, 
but  "if arms are pointed at us, then it is our right to use weapons 
to defend ourselves."  Colak noted Turkey's 1700 troops in 
Afghanistan but said "it's not how many, but what we do here."  In 
"We Are Not Engaging in Hot Pursuit," leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
says "General Colak emphasized that Turkish forces in Afghanistan do 
not engage in combat, mine sweeping or anti-narcotics missions. 
They go on joint patrolling missions with the Afghan army, but would 
never point their weapons at people.  Their weapons are always 
pointed down."  Mainstream Sabah highlights "the US uses Turkish 
forces as a model to prevent clashes between the local forces and 
the people of Afghanistan and, as a result, now forbids 'warning 
shots.'" 
 
A Turkish TV Drama Receives Penalty 
Turkey's Radio Television Supreme Board (known as RTUK) has issued a 
warning penalty against the producers of  popular Turkish television 
drama "Ask-i Memnu" (Forbidden Love) for "undermining moral values 
by picturing adultury as an acceptable form."  This becomes a second 
penalty for Kanal D, which airs the drama, was before cited because 
of the movie pictures a "deep on-screen kiss."  "Forbidden Love" is 
a modern day adaptation of Turkish author Halit Ziya Usakligil's 
1923 novel.  Several columnists in mainstream Hurriyet criticized 
the Board's decision.  Tufan Turenc asks the board to "remember that 
this is only a movie" and warns: "Have you ever considered the 
consequences of your action?  Where is Turkey going to with this 
kind of mentality?"  Yalcin Dogan also asks "if this is going to be 
 
ANKARA 00000222  003 OF 004 
 
 
the dominant approach for moral values, we will never ever catch up 
to EU standards." 
 
A Theatre Closed After Its Play Received Threats for Indecency 
Authorities in Istanbul closed a theatre running an off-Broadway 
kind of play this week, under the guise that it was the target of 
threats from religious fanatics.  "Theatre was closed, while actors 
seek police protection" says Hurriyet.  Aksam headlines "A stage 
play stirs controversy."   The play "Lick It but Don't Swallow" is 
certified for audiences age 18 and above, and centers around the 
transition of a former porn star into an angel.  The play has been 
facing criticism from fundamentalist circles and in ultra-Islamist 
media groups.  As a result, players applied for police protection 
due to security threats.  Meanwhile Beyoglu Municipality, which 
closed the theatre, said "the theatre did not have fire escapes" and 
"the closure decision is not related to ongoing criticism." 
 
TV Spotlight (CNN Turk) 
 
The relatives of intellectuals and prominent figures assassinated 
over the last 60 years demand the establishment of a parliamentary 
investigation committee to probe the murders. 
 
PM Erdogan strongly rejected CHP allegations that former French 
President Chirac had asked Erdogan to not bring his wife to Paris on 
a formal visit.  French Embassy in Ankara, too, denied CHP's 
allegations. 
 
PM Erdogan has denounced a ruling of the Council of State (Danistay) 
to suspend a government regulation that brought advantages to the 
graduates of theology (Imam-Hatip) high schools in university 
entrance exams. 
 
Deputy PM Cemil Cicek said the government would narrow the scope of 
the regulation regarding children facing trial for throwing stones 
at the police. 
 
In the third day of his visit to India, President Gul said Turkey 
was planning to open three new consulates in the country. 
 
On Wednesday, Foreign Minister Davutoglu will visit Kazakhstan to 
meet his Kazakh counterpart Kanat Suadabayev. 
 
On Wednesday, the Turkish Parliamentary Foreign Affairs Committee 
headed by the AKP MP Murat Mercan will visit Sweden. 
 
Prime Minister Erdogan will visit Qatar on February 13-14 as the 
guest of Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Hamad bin Jasim bin 
Jabir al-Thani. 
 
Opposition CHP leader Baykal has offered to pay 300-lira monthly 
wage to the unemployed.  PM Erdogan said the proposal was 
"unrealistic." 
 
Kurdish BDP leader Selahattin Demirtas says the AK Party attempts 
for constitutional reforms was a move to influence voters. 
 
The US House of Representatives senior Senator John Murtha passed 
away at the age of 77.  Murtha was known for his support of 
immediate US withdrawal from Iraq and his objection to the Armenian 
Genocide issue to be included in the House agenda. 
 
The Serbian and Bosnian foreign ministers, Vuk Jeremic and Sven 
Alkalaj, who have met in Ankara for the fifth time with the 
mediation of FM Davutoglu, agreed to restore diplomatic relations, 
with Bosnia-Herzegovina to open an embassy in Serbia. 
 
Belgium prepares to ban the wearing of chadors over concerns of 
security risks. 
 
A German dentist has apologized for having refused to treat a 
 
ANKARA 00000222  004 OF 004 
 
 
16-year-old Turkish teenager because his first name was Cihad (Holy 
War, Jihad). 
 
JEFFREY