10ANKARA35
Iranians Pine For Relief As GOI Tightens Grip
Fri Jan 08 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXYZ0004
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHAK #0035/01 0081452
ZNR UUUUU ZZH (CCY AD09C213 MSI8625-695)
P 081452Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1638
INFO RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6724
RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS ANKARA 000035 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
C O R R E C T E D COPY CAPTION 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: CVIS PREL PINS PGOV PHUM SOCI SCUL TU IR
SUBJECT: Iranians Pine For Relief As GOI Tightens Grip 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: CONOFF surveyed Iranian non-immigrant visa (NIV) 
and immigrant visa (IV) applicants from mid-December to early 
January 2009 to gain insight into Iran's current economic and 
political climate.  Applicants report a bleak economic outlook due 
to continued corruption and mismanagement, paired with dramatic 
inflation over the past years and uncertainties at the prospect of 
additional sanctions.  Applicants further report that since the June 
2009 elections, the Iranian government has taken measures towards 
increased state control over the economy to the detriment of private 
businesses.  They added that the few who control the government are 
diverting the country's oil money into their own pockets in order to 
buy loyalty at home and to fund militant groups abroad.  Most 
applicants state they believe that in the distant future the 
government will collapse if it does not compromise.  Others warned 
that the threat of military force or sanctions would only harm the 
opposition by giving the government an excuse to more harshly crack 
down as it did in the Iran-Iraq war.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Due to soaring prices and stagnant incomes, applicants 
said they have to work at least two jobs to make ends meet.  As one 
Tabrizi woman noted, her son works in a tractor plant from morning 
to afternoon and runs a gift shop from afternoon to evening. 
Applicants attribute price increases to rampant corruption, 
especially among the bazaaris.  One recently retired Iranian 
diplomat explained that leading bazaaris periodically meet to set 
prices artificially high.  Other merchants follow their lead and set 
prices accordingly.  The bazaaris would rather let their products 
rot than sell atreduced prices.  He added that the Bazaar has great 
political influence through the Motalafeh party headed by Habibollah 
Askar-Oladi Mosalman.  He claimed that it was not in the interest of 
the Bazaar to open relations with the United States as that would 
put at risk their oligarchic grasp of the economy.  A wealthy 
Khuzestan-based bazaari confirmed that the Bazaar has great economic 
clout and sets prices, but dodged questions about its political 
influence. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) A civil engineer from Hamadan voiced concerns about the 
Iranian government's push to eliminate all subsidies by 2011.  He 
said that in contrast to privatization efforts since the 1979 
revolution, the government now is trying to crush private enterprise 
and centralize control over the economy.  He fears eliminating 
subsidies will cause massive inflation, especially for energy 
prices.  He added that eliminating the subsidies will take money out 
of public view so that it can be used for clandestine purposes at 
home and abroad. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Based on applicant reports, inflation in Iran has rapidly 
increased in the past four years.  One applicant said the government 
claims a current inflation rate of 12%, but most applicants report 
the annual rate of inflation at around 20%.  One Tehrani claimed 
that in the past three months grocery prices have quadrupled.  A 
Tehrani businessman said that the current savings interest rate at a 
government bank is 15% for a one year deposit or 19% for a five year 
deposit.  Applicants quoted average loan interest rates as anywhere 
between 17% to 28%.  A retired National Bank employee noted that 
stocks have more or less been sluggish.  He attributed this to 
Ahmadinejad's efforts to harm private business in order to increase 
state control.  He differentiated the Bazaar from other private 
businesses as being older religious establishments, which support 
the government in suppressing free markets. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Applicants additionally attribute Iran's economic woes to 
unemployment, mismanagement, and unchecked corruption.  Many retired 
applicants still hold jobs to make ends meet, yet applicants report 
continuing signs of unemployment problems.  One Karaji factory 
worker said the government forced him to retire early as enough 
factories have not been built to provide jobs for the increasing 
worker population.  A Tehrani civil engineer said that over the past 
few years he noticed a significant increase in the number of beggars 
on the streets.  He said that some highly educated youths are forced 
to leave the country to find jobs.  A Baha'i lab technician said 
that as the government and Islamic Republic Revolutionary Guard 
Corps (IRGC) have taken control of the private sector, it has been 
much harder for Baha'i's to find non-government work.  A Tabrizi 
mechanical engineer said that incompetent factory managers are 
ruining Iran's industry.  He cited managers as impulsive with no 
concern for advanced planning.  An applicant said the situation is 
so unregulated that prices increase arbitrarily on a weekly basis. 
A Tehrani city contractor noted that corruption is so rampant that 
the government sometimes fails to pay for his services.  A 
hydro-electric contractor working in Tajikistan explained that those 
engaging in illegal activity profit the most.  He said, for example, 
the government puts high tariffs on cigarette imports, but does 
nothing to counter the sale of illegally imported cigarettes on the 
black market. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Applicants report another protest will occur on February 
11, Islamic Revolution Day.  Some applicants said that in addition 
to increased use of detainment, torture, and rape after the December 
2009 Ashura protest, the government has blocked BBC and VOA 
broadcasts, and increased its filtering of internet web sites and 
communications.  One applicant explained that the opposition 
 
movement has support in cities around the country, but is strongest 
in Tehran as it is easier to evade authorities in its immense 
population.  He said in other cities it is much easier for 
authorities to monitor and suppress opposition activities. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Although most applicants are not overly enthusiastic about 
the recent opposition protest movement, many said they believe the 
current regime will not survive in the long term without 
compromising.  All applicants voiced anger over the June 2009 
elections and said the government had lost legitimacy.  An applicant 
from Khuzestan reported that a famous Iranian singer recently said, 
now "the regime can only control the people, it cannot manage the 
people."  He claimed that 99% of the people dislike the regime and 
only a few thousand people at the top support it.  He said only 
25-30 mullahs make the decisions.  He labeled the current regime a 
military government which only has legitimacy through the force of 
the IRGC.  He explained that the government recently forced 
students, factory workers, and government employees to demonstrate 
in support of the regime by threatening them with the loss of their 
enrollment or jobs.  He cited one reason more people do not come out 
in support of the protesters is fear of the instability like that 
seen in Iraq and Afghanistan. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) A Ministry of Health employee from Abadan noted that many 
former American Embassy hostage-takers came out and said it was a 
mistake to have taken the U.S. Embassy in light of the results. 
Many applicants expressed their love of America and Americans and 
they hope that America supports their efforts towards achieving 
freedom.  A few explained that America should not be afraid of being 
seen as interfering by supporting their rights as most Iranians have 
forgotten or forgiven the past and in fact prefer the past to their 
current situation of repression and international isolation.  A few 
noted that Russia and China are especially hated due to their 
protection of the current regime.  Applicants warned that any 
military attack would only strengthen the regime's ability to crack 
down on the opposition much like they did in the Iran-Iraq war.  One 
Tehrani banker said that current sanctions have not effected the 
government as they find loopholes around them.  A Tehrani artist 
said that increased sanctions may only place more burdens on the 
people.  He added that an embargo on the country's oil may be 
effective as it is the only source of government income; however, he 
feared China would block any proposed embargo due to major 
investments they have made in Iran. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) COMMENT: In the past month, CONOFFs observed that with a 
few exceptions, most applicants state they dislike the regime and 
prefer change, but are not willing to take risks in supporting the 
opposition.  At the same time, many applicants believe if the 
economy worsens, repression increases, and international isolation 
continues, the public will not be able to tolerate the current 
system any longer.  Many note that the government cannot survive 
unless it compromises with the opposition.  America's options to 
halt Iran's nuclear program must carefully be weighed in light of 
how they might affect the government's ability to justify increase 
centralization of power and government pressure on the opposition 
movement.  END COMMENT. 
 
SILLIMAN