10ANKARA229
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Thu Feb 11 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1309
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0229/01 0421223
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 111223Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2093
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0303
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6943
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4493
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7790
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7705
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4308
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000229 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 11, 2010 
 
Media Highlights 
 
US Embassy Ankara - Turkey Media Reaction - February 4, as prepared 
by the Public Affairs Information Office 
 
How the US is Playing 
 
General McChrystal: "We Take Turkish Soldiers as an Example" 
(Milliyet, Radikal) 
Mainstreams Hurriyet, Milliyet, Aksam, Sabah, Vatan, liberal 
Radikal, and conservative-nationalist Cumhuriyet's defense 
correspondents continue reporting from Afghanistan within the 
framework of a press tour arranged by the TGS.  The papers cover 
General McChrystal's comments delivered during his visit to Turkish 
Forces Headquarters.  Hurriyet quotes General McChrystal as saying 
"Our goal is to protect the Afghan people and to allow the country 
to develop in a secure and stable atmosphere.  We want to help 
people.  In the past, maybe our goal was same but there were 
mistakes in the implementation.  We might have made some mistakes. 
There are so many threats against the Afghan people.  We are trying 
to minimize our mistakes while we are trying to help the Afghan 
people.  If the Turkish troops and the other coalition forces were 
not here, would Afghan children be able to go to school?  Would 
elections take place?  We should ask these questions.  It is 
necessary to show respect to the families, schools and the values of 
the people.  Now, we are aware of all these and I hope things will 
be better.  Not only us but, all other coalition forces learned a 
lot from the Turkish forces."   Vatan cites an AP International 
report that "Turkish soldiers' guns are always turned downward while 
they are patrolling because Turks want to give an open message to 
the Afghan people: 'We didn't come here to fight.'" 
 
Liberal Radikal Columnist Nuray Mert does not quite agree with the 
current role of Turkish soldiers in Afghanistan.  She thinks the 
fact that Turkish soldiers have started patrolling with Afghan 
forces in the streets of Kabul might be part of a big plan: "In the 
new world order, upcoming wars will be taking place between radical 
and moderate Islamic countries.  What Turks are doing in Kabul is a 
clear example of this plan implemented and we should not be 
overwhelmed by flattering statements about us.  The US and other 
western countries are trying to put moderate Islamic forces before 
radical elements to fight, thus they hope to eliminate growing 
anti-western sentiment." 
 
Iran Nuclear Issue "All Eyes Turn to Turkey on Sanctions" (Milliyet) 
 
In "Both Carrot and Stick to Iran," leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
highlights "while the US offers to help Iran purchase medical 
isotopes, on the other hand, it threatens with a huge package of 
sanctions."  In a side story, Cumhuriyet notes in "Sanctions from 
the US," that "the US government sanctions four Iranian construction 
companies tied to Iranian Revolutionary Guards." Mainstream Milliyet 
in "All Eyes Turn to Turkey for Sanctions," expresses concern over 
"Turkey's attitude at the UN Security Council regarding voting as 
new sanctions on Iran are expected to be imposed in several weeks." 
Pundits continue to focus on Iran's uranium enrichment decision and 
comment on possible consequences.  Erdal Guven of liberal Radikal 
and Kadri Gursel of mainstream Milliyet both agree that the 
enrichment will strengthen Tehran's capacity to produce atomic 
bombs, although each writer makes different predictions on next 
steps.  Radikal's Erdal Guven sees hope: "Neither the US nor Iran 
have fully closed the negotiation door.  Cards are being reshuffled 
for the next step of the game."  Milliyet's Kadri Gursel observes 
that a strike against Iran is inevitable even if the UNSC approves 
sanctions: "In order to legitimize the game plan, UNSC sanctions 
should be the first step even though the Western countries are aware 
they are of no use.  This process will end up as a strike against 
Iran, which means war, one way or the other because Iranian nuclear 
capacity has a potential to trigger nuclear race in the region." 
 
Iran - Demonstrations 
 
ANKARA 00000229  002 OF 003 
 
 
In "Civilian Life is Under Basij Control," liberal Radikal says "as 
Iran marks the 31st anniversary of the Islamic revolution in a tense 
atmosphere, arrests of the opposition have already started upon 
demonstrations.  Meanwhile, Iranian President Ahmadinejad brought a 
proposal to expand the political voice of the civilian militia corps 
called Basij. The Basij will be in force not only in universities 
but also in every ministry." NTV carries live coverage on the 
anniversary celebrations in Iran under the headline "Tense 
Celebrations in Iran." 
 
In the Headlines 
 
Sargsian: Turkey Should Ratify the Protocols First (Zaman) 
Media outlets report Armenian President Sargsian addressed the 
Chatham House in London, saying the normalization protocols with 
Turkey would be submitted to the Armenian Parliament on Wednesday, 
noting however that Turkey would have to approve it first.  Sargsian 
said he was confident that the Armenian Parliament would approve the 
protocols, as long as the Turkish Parliament approved it without any 
conditions.  Sargsian recalled Turkish officials have said in the 
past that the result of the voting in the Turkish parliament could 
not be predicted, and that the parliament was politically 
independent.  Sargsian wants to avoid a situation where Armenia 
approves the protocols while Turkey rejects it.  Sargsian also said 
he would invite Azerbaijani President Aliyev to the ceremony if the 
Armenian-Turkish border opens, report papers. 
 
European Parliament Approves Resolution on Turkey Progress Report 
Media outlets report that the European Parliament approved by a 
large majority a resolution on Turkey's progress in 2009 which calls 
for Turkey to withdraw its troops from Cyprus and allow Greek 
Cypriot access to the ghost city of Varosha (Maras).  The resolution 
expressed concern over the alleged criminal network 'Ergenekon,' and 
a suspected military plot to overthrow the government, popularly 
dubbed 'the Sledgehammer.'  While observing that "the cases offer an 
opportunity to boost confidence in the functioning of democratic 
institutions and the rule of law," the resolution expressed dismay 
over the closure of the Democratic Society Party (DTP).  The 
resolution called for the reform of Turkey's judicial system, which 
it said was "of crucial importance for the country's modernization 
process."  It criticized the rejection by the Constitutional Court 
of an amendment that cleared the way for trial of military personnel 
at civilian courts, saying the ruling dealt a serious blow on 
Turkey's reform efforts.  According to papers, the resolution also 
called on the Turkish government to resume work on a new 
constitution that would strengthen human rights and basic freedoms 
in the country. 
 
Meanwhile, Turkey's chief EU negotiator Egemen Bagis said yesterday 
it was not possible for Turkey to accept the sections regarding 
Cyprus in the Turkey report of European Parliament, stressing, 
"Turkey does not have a plan or opinion to withdraw troops from the 
island." 
 
TGS Chief, Naval Commander on Accusations against Military 
Speaking to mainstream HaberTurk, the Chief of the military General 
Staff (TGS) General Ilker Basbug said "For many months various 
accusations against the military were mentioned.  Many officers were 
accused of having been involved in different coup plans and 
scenarios, but none of them proved to be true or more detailed 
information came to the surface.  Who will be held responsible for 
the production of these allegations?  There is a serious damaging 
campaign against the military.  We are running out of patience about 
these issues.  In fact damaging the military officers and the 
military is not an individual issue, it is a problem for the whole 
country." 
 
Meanwhile, media outlets report Naval Forces Commander Admiral Esref 
Ugur Yigit yesterday attended the funeral of Captain Berk Erden who 
committed suicide in Izmir.  Reacting to various allegations about 
the reasons behind the Captain's suicide, Yigit said "It is not 
 
ANKARA 00000229  003 OF 003 
 
 
possible to keep silent.  Various allegations were mentioned about 
him.  Before accusing people, one shall turn to himself and ask what 
he would do if he was falsely accused of such an issue." 
 
Poll: Single Party Government Unlikely after Elections (Vatan) 
Mainstream Vatan carries the results of a survey conducted from 
January 14-30 by AKAM based on interviews with 15,620 people from 
all provinces.  If elections were held today, the distribution of 
votes among parties would be as follows: AK Party 30.2 percent, CHP 
26.8, MHP 18.7, DP 7.3, and BDP 7.0. 
According to the survey, the DP and the BDP would not be able to 
pass the 10 percent election threshold, so Vatan expects the BDP to 
use the tactic of the disbanded DTP and enter the parliament as 
independent lawmakers.  The paper notes that the AK Party will not 
have the necessary majority for a vote of confidence, and the total 
seats to be taken by CHP and MHP will be slightly above 276, the 
votes needed for parliamentary approval. 
 
Education Ministry Sees Missionary Activity as a "Threat" 
(Milliyet) 
Mainstream Milliyet reports the Association of Protestant Churches 
in Turkey said in its "monitor report" for 2009 that missionary 
activities were characterized as a "national threat" in Turkish 
schoolbooks, and that the Education Ministry has declined to erase 
the expression from the schoolbooks despite the requests of the 
Protestants.  Milliyet recalls that three Protestant Bible 
publishers were killed in the city of Malatya in 2007. 
 
TV Spotlight (CNN Turk) 
 
CHP leader Baykal said the responsibility for defusing tensions in 
Turkey fell on PM Erdogan and his party. 
 
A group of women workers from Turkey's former state-owned alcohol 
and tobacco monopoly, or Tekel, visited the PM's wife Emine Erdogan, 
requesting her to convince the PM to find a solution to their 58 
days of desperation. 
 
Two people are arrested in connection with an attack on the Kurdish 
BDP office in Ankara. 
 
Businessman Mehmet Emin Karamehmet is given 11 years and eight 
months prison sentence for irregularities in defunct Pamukbank. 
 
Prime Minister Erdogan will host Thursday a luncheon for the 
ambassadors of EU countries. 
 
Prime Minister Erdogan will travel on February 13 to Qatar on an 
official visit. 
 
Foreign Minister Davutoglu says France never hinted that the wife of 
PM Erdogan was not wanted in Paris. 
 
European leader have agreed on a plan for bailing out Greece in debt 
crisis. 
 
Three Turks are convicted in Switzerland for denying Armenian 
genocide claims. 
 
Israeli warplanes hit Gaza's disused Yasser Arafat airport near the 
border town of Rafah. 
 
JEFFREY