10ANKARA191
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Thu Feb 04 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO6000
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0191/01 0351215
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 041215Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2009
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0288
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6913
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4474
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7775
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7690
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4293
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000191 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 4, 2010 
 
Media Highlights 
 
US Embassy Ankara - Turkey Media Reaction - February 4, as prepared 
by the Public Affairs Information Office 
 
How the US is Playing 
 
Police Arrest Six after Shots Fired at US Adana Consulate (Hurriyet) 
 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet, mainstream Hurriyet online and 
several television channels report police arrested six suspects 
Wednesday, believed to be members of al-Qaeda, over shots fired at 
the US Consulate in the city of Adana "with long range weapons" on 
Monday evening.  Police found documents belonging to al-Qaeda in the 
suspects' homes, says Hurriyet. 
 
General Odierno's Visit 
In "Reminding General Odierno of Concrete Action," mainstream 
Hurriyet reported that Interior Minister Besir Atalay during the 
meeting with the General, reminded the US to take concrete actions 
for the elimination of the PKK presence in Iraq and extradition of 
PKK leaders to Turkey.  The paper adds that during the meeting at 
the Interior Ministry, Odierno was briefed about Turkey's 
preparations for the evacuation of the Makhmour Camp.  Mainstreams 
Milliyet, Vatan and Aksam in similar headlines referred to the 
General as sack "Sack Commander".  Aksam notes that after meeting 
the Turkish officials to discuss the evacuation of Makhmour camp, 
elimination of PKK activities in Northern Iraq, the situation of US 
Forces in Northern Iraq and future deployment plans, Odierno left 
Ankara in the evening for Iraq.  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak 
headlines "Makhmour Activity of US Commander" and after referring to 
the General as the architect of the "sack crisis," reports that 
Odierno met with the Turkish officials to discuss Makhmour Camp. 
While the other papers do not mention it, leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet reports that General Odierno met with FM Davutoglu in the 
evening hours. 
 
Fikret Ertan in Islamist/pro-government Zaman characterized General 
Odierno as an "iron fist" and focused on his personal profile: 
"Turkey has to know this strong man in Iraq very well, as he is not 
only in charge of ending the PKK activity in Iraq, but he is also 
fully responsible for the US withdrawal.  When a similar meeting was 
organized two years ago to discuss methods for eliminating PKK 
presence in Iraq, Turkish officials did not express contentment, and 
it remains to be seen what concrete results will come out this 
time." 
 
Ambassador Jeffrey: "The Coup Syndrome, Like Turkey, Has Changed" 
(Sabah) 
Mainstream Sabah under the headline above, published the second part 
of columnist Nur Batur's extensive interview with Ambassador 
Jeffrey.  Responding to a question regarding Turkish military's role 
in the politics and the coup syndrome in Turkey, Ambassador Jeffrey 
said "Turkey is a very stable country now.  The need for the 
military to follow internal issues strongly has decreased.  General 
Basbug is a democratic leader."  Responding to a question on whether 
anti-Americanism has increased in Turkey, Ambassador said "I don't 
really think so.  Turkish media's attitude towards us is much better 
than that of many other allies.  In general, I cannot say that there 
is anti-Americanism in Turkey.  Turks are usually skeptical about 
the big and powerful partners which they have close defense ties 
with.  Because this means mutual dependency.  We are very close and 
dependent on Turkey.  Likewise, Turkey is dependent on the US.  That 
is why we are getting lots of criticism.  Because, we have a lot of 
mutual expectations."  Regarding the religious leader Fethullah 
Gulen's 'Green Card' issue, the Ambassador said "Gulen did not 
receive his green card by the government's decision but by US Court 
decision.  He was not protected by the US government.  When the US 
government rejected his request for a green card, he, personally, 
went to a US court and got his green card with the court decision." 
 
 
ANKARA 00000191  002 OF 003 
 
 
 
"Holbrooke Praises Turkey's Unique Role in ISAF" (Hurriyet online) 
Mainstream Hurriyet online highlights US Special Representative for 
Afghanistan and Pakistan Richard Holbrooke's Foreign Press Center 
event and his remarks about Turkey's role in ISAF: "I cannot think 
of any country other than Turkey who plays an important role in ISAF 
regarding operations in this country.  Turkey is certainly one of 
the countries with legitimate security and strategic interests in 
Afghanistan." 
 
Yildiz Hosts American, Iranian Guests (Sabah); US Wants to Build 
Nuclear Plant in Sinop (CNN Turk online) 
Mainstream Sabah says that on Wednesday, Energy Minister Taner 
Yildiz conducted "energy diplomacy" by meeting first with Ambassador 
Jeffrey and then visiting Iranian FM Manuchehr Muttaki.  During his 
meeting with Yildiz, Ambassador Jeffrey reportedly said the US was 
interested in building a nuclear plant in Sinop, and added the US 
government would encourage American companies to participate if 
Turkey announces a contract.  Following the meeting, Jeffrey told 
reporters the US was not "warm" to Turkey's energy cooperation with 
Iran "as long as the problems stemming from Iran's nuclear program 
continue."  In response to a question, Jeffrey said "Azerbaijan, 
Turkmenistan and Iraq" could be the "suppliers" for the Nabucco 
project. 
 
Iranian FM Muttaki held a meeting with Foreign Minister Davutoglu to 
discuss Iraq, Palestine and Afghanistan as well as the latest 
regarding Tehran's nuclear program following his meetings with 
Energy Minister Yildiz.  At a joint press briefing with the Iranian 
FM, Davutoglu said Turkey defended Iran's right to develop peaceful 
nuclear technology, but reiterated Turkey's opposition to nuclear 
weapons in its region.  Liberal Radikal notes Muttaki came to Turkey 
when the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) approved a 
formula for sending 3.5 percent enriched Iranian uranium abroad in 
return for research reactor fuel rods.  Diplomatic sources said a 
Turkish delegation would go to Tehran soon to discuss storing 
Iranian uranium in Turkey, says Radikal. 
 
US Sends Its Izmir-Experienced Diplomat to Damascus (Hurriyet) 
Mainstream Hurriyet reports Robert Ford will soon be the US 
Ambassador to Syria and reminds its readers that Ambassador Ford 
began his career in Turkey, served in Izmir in 1985 and speaks both 
Arabic and Turkish.  Damascus is expected to give its consent to his 
appointment, the report adds. 
 
Al-Qaeda Makes CIA Chief Lose Sleep (Milliyet) 
Mainstream Milliyet and leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet report that 
"US intelligence chiefs" said they believe it was inevitable that 
al-Qaeda will attempt an attack on the US over the next three to six 
months.  Papers report that the CIA and FBI chiefs as well as the US 
National Intelligence Director and other intelligence officials 
responded to Senators' questions in a hearing held at the US Senate 
Intelligence Committee. 
 
In the Headlines 
 
Iran For the First Time Welcomes Nuclear Deal (Radikal) 
Liberal Radikal highlights recent developments on Iran: "Iranian 
President Ahmadinejad says Iran's enriched uranium could be 
processed outside the country, a deal Iran once rejected. The US and 
Western countries are wary of the offer." In "Both Compromise and 
Threat from Iran," leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet emphasizes that 
"Iran has declared its openness to accepting an enriched-uranium 
deal but also its readiness to act alone if the promises are not 
kept."  Mainstream Aksam reports there is a "Green Light to Uranium 
Exchange." Meanwhile, mainstream Hurriyet notes "Turkey Becomes a 
Strong Option for Iran's Uranium Delivery" and says "it was 
noteworthy that the Iranian President's statement on the nuclear 
deal was on the agenda of Iranian FM Mottaki's meeting with Turkish 
FM Davutoglu.  Turkish media have fun with the news that Iran sent 
up its first rocket with animals on board, underlining the fact that 
 
ANKARA 00000191  003 OF 003 
 
 
the fate of the animals is unclear."  Hurriyet headlines "Iran Fires 
A Turtle into Space," while mainstream Sabah calls it "Rats and 
Worms into Space." 
 
MFA: Ambassador Celikkol Will Remain in Tel Aviv (Cumhuriyet) 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports Turkish Foreign Ministry 
(MFA) Spokesman Burak Ozugergin told reporters yesterday that 
Turkey's Ambassador in Israel, Oguz Celikkol, would remain in Tel 
Aviv, and that the Ambassador did not request appointment elsewhere. 
 
 
Iraq Gives Ankara 8 Diplomatic Notes in 4 Months (Sabah) 
Mainstream Sabah notes the intensity of diplomatic note exchange 
between Iraq and Turkey due to Baghdad's discomfort and complaints 
about the "Turkish military's artillery shots and air raids in Iraq 
border areas."  Quoting Bayazid Hasan, a member of Iraqi Parliament, 
the story says that "In a statement he released, Hasan said Iraq 
gave 8 notes to Turkey in the January 12, 2009 to May 4, 2009 period 
because there were 57 border violations by Turkish military in the 
Kurdistan region." 
 
TV Spotlight (CNN Turk) 
 
On Thursday, two million public servants and workers will go on 
general strike countrywide.  The Civil Servants' Trade Union, 
Memur-Sen, has announced they will not participate in the 
countrywide strike. 
 
The parliament will debate Thursday a draft for the establishment of 
Public Order and Security Undersecretariat. 
 
Turkey-Eurasia Business Council meeting will be held in Ankara on 
Thursday with the participation of Foreign Minister Davutoglu, 
Energy Minister Yildiz and State Minister Caglayan. 
 
President Gul will visit India and Bangladesh from February 7-13. 
 
Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA) Spokesman Burak Ozugergin said Turkey 
wanted the EU to exempt Turkish nationals from visa requirements, 
not to just facilitate visa procedures. 
 
Outgoing European Commissioner Gunter Verheugen has sent warm 
messages to Turkey, saying that the EU needs Turkey more than Turkey 
needs the EU. 
 
Bulgarian Parliament has ratified the intergovernmental agreement on 
the Nabucco Project, which was signed in Istanbul last year. 
 
Israel has launched air strikes on southern Gaza. 
 
Haitian PM Bellerive said "more than 200,000" people died in the 
catastrophic January 12 earthquake. 
 
Iranian opposition leader Karroubi called for peaceful 
demonstrations in Iran on the 31st anniversary of the Islamist 
revolution. 
 
A White House spokesman said Iran's launch of a rocket capable of 
carrying a satellite was a "provocative act." 
 
US General Petraeus said a military strike on Iran could have the 
unintended consequence of stirring nationalist sentiment to the 
benefit of Tehran's hard-line government. 
 
JEFFREY