10BAGHDAD385
2010 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS INFORMATION FOR IRAQ
Mon Feb 15 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO3586
OO RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDH RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #0385/01 0460502
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 150502Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6607
RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI 0005
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 2331
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 0696
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS 0023
RUEHDO/AMEMBASSY DOHA 0110
RUEHKU/AMEMBASSY KUWAIT 0668
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 0271
RUEHYN/AMEMBASSY SANAA 0031
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 BAGHDAD 000385 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: TIP LAURA PENA INL DRL PRM NEA RA KTIP
KCRM, PHUM, KWMN, SMIG, KFRD, ASEC, PREF, ELAB, KMCA 
SUBJECT: 2010 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS INFORMATION FOR IRAQ 
 
REF: A. STATE 02094 
     ¶B. BAGHDAD 2886 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary: This is post's summary of trafficking in 
persons activities for the period of mid- February 2009 to 
mid-February 2010.  Despite numerous issues facing the 
Government of Iraq (GOI) during this reporting period, it has 
taken decisive steps towards addressing the issue of human 
trafficking.  While the GOI struggled to prepare for March 
2010 elections and cope with ongoing difficulties with 
establishing rule of law and improving security, it formed an 
interagency committee to combat trafficking, began a public 
awareness campaign at youth centers and schools, and drafted 
legislation to increase the penalties for those engaged in 
trafficking and to assist trafficking victims.  In January 
2010, the GOI's comprehensive anti-trafficking draft 
legislation experienced some movement and is soon to be 
passed to the Committee for Human Rights and Committee for 
Legal Affairs in the Council of Representatives.  While 
formidable political, social, and cultural challenges to 
substantively addressing trafficking in persons in Iraq 
remain, GOI entities, led by officials in the Ministry of 
Human Rights, are actively trying to make progress on raising 
awareness of TIP, while NGO and civil society actors focus on 
assisting victims.  End summary. 
 
 IRAQ'S TIP SITUATION 
---------------------- 
 
 2A.  (SBU)  Post stresses that while there have been 
isolated, generally single-source, media reports describing 
instances of trafficking for the purpose of sexual 
exploitation in Iraq, as well as the related issues of 
prostitution, forced marriage, honor killings, and child and 
bonded labor, there has been no sustained or in-depth 
reporting by any source on the issue of trafficking in 
persons in Iraq.  While anecdotal information collected from 
NGOs, judges, GOI contacts, and media reports indicate that 
trafficking in persons is a hidden problem, Embassy Baghdad 
has no way to verify information or estimates of trafficking, 
or to identify trends.  Anti-trafficking draft legislation 
prepared by the GOI in 2009 called for the formation of an 
interministerial committee to prepare reports on human 
trafficking.  The legislation also included a provision for 
the formation of sub-committees in each Iraqi province to 
submit information and recommendations on human trafficking 
to the central committee. 
 
 ¶B.  Iraq is both a country of origin and destination for 
men, women, and children trafficked for the purposes of 
commercial sexual exploitation, forced and bonded labor, and 
other slave-like conditions.  There were no official 
statistics, and few non-governmental organizations monitored 
or reported on TIP activities.  According to our limited 
sources, residents of Iraq are trafficked both within Iraq as 
well as abroad to Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Kuwait, UAE, 
Turkey, Iran, and possibly Yemen for these purposes.  Under 
the guise of a work contract in Kuwait, Jordan, or another 
Gulf State, non-Iraqi individuals were reportedly brought to 
QGulf State, non-Iraqi individuals were reportedly brought to 
Iraq from Thailand, Philippines, India, Pakistan, Indonesia, 
and Sri Lanka.  Over the past year, 14 Ugandan women were 
trafficked into Iraq for the purposes of labor exploitation. 
These women were told that they would work on U.S. military 
bases, although no USG contractors or sub-contractors were 
involved in bringing them to Iraq.  Based on information 
provided by their employer, Uganda Veterans Development, the 
company sent more than 100 persons to Iraq to work as 
domestic laborers from April 2008 to June 2009.  During the 
reporting period, Embassy Baghdad received information from a 
GOI contact that Iraqi boys have become a source for organ 
transplants, and that Baghdad hospitals do not question the 
"voluntary" donation of such organs from the boys because 
often the father of the boy is present to consent to the 
procedure.  On a visit to Karada detention facility in 2009, 
Embassy Baghdad's DCMAT met two girls who became part of a 
 
BAGHDAD 00000385  002 OF 008 
 
 
terrorist group that planned to use them as female suicide 
bombers.  While it is not possible to determine the extent to 
which trafficking victims are recruited for the purposes of 
organ trafficking and terrorism, these isolated experiences 
suggest that there may be connections between trafficking and 
these other issues. 
 
 ¶C.  Trafficking victims and NGO sources report that victims 
have been subjected to sexual exploitation, rape, physical 
abuse, starvation, and forced and temporary marriage. 
Trafficking victims who were brought to Iraq for the purpose 
of labor exploitation reported the seizure of their passports 
and official documents by their employers, a refusal to honor 
employment contracts, and threats of deportation.  Some women 
and girl trafficking victims face the risk of abuse, 
abandonment, or honor killings if their families learn that 
they have been raped or forced into prostitution. 
 
 ¶D.  Limited data suggests that women and young girls are 
more at risk of being trafficked for the purposes of 
commercial sexual exploitation, though both males and 
females, juvenile and adult populations have been targeted by 
traffickers.  NGO contacts stated that the selling price of a 
young girl exceeds that of a young boy, which further 
supports this idea.  While it is not possible to quantify the 
relative susceptibility of particular demographic groups to 
trafficking, the Iraqi population contains several vulnerable 
groups, including widows, orphans, internally displaced 
persons, and the extremely destitute, all of which figure 
prominently in anecdotal accounts of trafficking in Iraq. 
 
 ¶E.  Traffickers include both large crime groups and small, 
family-based groups, as well as employment and contracting 
agencies.  While anecdotal data suggests that traffickers 
appear to be predominantly male, some individuals are sold or 
trafficked through forced marriages by female family members 
in order to escape poverty or debt.  A Baghdad prosecutor 
revealed that networks of women have been involved in the 
trafficking and sale of male and female children for the 
purposes of commercial sexual exploitation in Kurdistan and 
other Iraqi provinces.  This contact also stated that Iraqi 
males have taken advantage of the traditional institution of 
muta'a (temporary marriage) to traffic multiple women into 
other Iraqi provinces or neighboring countries for the 
purposes of commercial sexual exploitation.   NGO contacts 
relate that cross-border trafficking into neighboring 
countries relies on an organized network of document forgers, 
fixers, and traffickers, and there have been isolated cases 
of Iraqi border forces intercepting older men and young girls 
attempting to travel together out of Iraq using fake 
documents.   These contacts postulate that criminal elements 
perceive cross-border trafficking as less risky than moving 
victims between Iraqi provinces, where there is a greater 
likelihood that they will be seen by relatives or 
acquaintances. 
 
THE GOI'S ANTI-TIP EFFORTS 
QTHE GOI'S ANTI-TIP EFFORTS 
--------------------------- 
 
 3A.  (SBU)  As evinced by their critical first steps toward 
addressing TIP issues, many GOI stakeholders acknowledge that 
human trafficking is a problem in Iraq.  In July, 2009, after 
the publication of the 2009 Trafficking in Persons Report for 
Iraq, the Ministry of Human Rights (MOHR) and the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs (MFA) responded to Embassy Baghdad with a 
diplomatic note in which the GOI highlighted its actions to 
address the issue and stressed the seriousness with which 
Iraq views its cooperation and coordination efforts with 
regional and international players to fight human trafficking 
in Iraq.  Strong advocacy, both by MOHR officials as well as 
NGOs and key COR members, has established significant, if 
occasionally stymied momentum on this issue.  Post received 
word from GOI contacts that the GOI's comprehensive 
anti-trafficking draft legislation had made its way out of 
the Shura Council, an advisory body that shapes legislation 
 
BAGHDAD 00000385  003 OF 008 
 
 
for the Council of Representatives, and was soon to be passed 
to the Committee for Human Rights and the Committee for Legal 
Affairs in the COR for debate. 
 
 ¶B.  The anti-trafficking draft legislation prepared by the 
GOI in 2009 includes a provision for the formation of The 
Supreme Committee to Combat Human Trafficking in the General 
Secretariat of the Council of Ministers.  This proposed 
committee will be headed by the MOHR and includes 
representatives from the MFA, Ministry of Labor and Social 
Affairs, and the Ministry of Interior.  Upon passage of the 
bill, this Committee will be responsible for securing 
appropriate funds to implement the anti-trafficking 
mechanisms and initiatives included in the legislation.  The 
Ministry of Human Rights currently has the lead in 
anti-trafficking efforts. 
 
 ¶C.  The GOI's lack of capacity to identify and assist 
victims, the ongoing challenge of adequately policing Iraq's 
numerous, porous borders with neighboring countries, and 
formidable obstacles to enforcing security and rule of law 
throughout the country limit its ability to address human 
trafficking in Iraq.  This reporting period was a 
particularly critical time for the GOI, as it struggled to 
pass an election law and prepare for national elections, a 
challenge that diverted attention and resources from other 
issues.  During the reporting period, explosions targeted the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of the Interior, 
the Ministry of Justice, and the Ministry of Labor and Social 
Affairs, all of which play a critical role in shaping the 
GOI's response to TIP issues.  Despite this significant 
setback, GOI contacts stated that they do not foresee 
political obstacles to the passage of anti-trafficking draft 
legislation.  These contacts expressed confidence that when 
the anti-trafficking draft legislation is enacted, most 
likely in the year following the March, 2010 elections, the 
GOI's inter-ministerial TIP committee will ensure adequate 
funding to execute the programs and support mechanisms 
described in the draft legislation. 
 
 ¶D.  In late 2009, the Supreme Committee to Combat Human 
Trafficking, an interministerial group set up by the GOI to 
address the issue, sent surveys to each of Iraq's provincial 
governments in order to quantify the scale and extent of 
trafficking across the country.  Nearly all the provincial 
authorities responded to these surveys by stating that there 
were no instances of trafficking in their respective 
provinces.  A GOI contact on the interministerial committee 
to combat trafficking told Poloff that the Committee's survey 
revealed problems of ignorance and denial regarding TIP, and 
the need to focus more efforts on conducting public awareness 
on trafficking to explain the issue to the Iraqi public.  To 
this end, the Committee is channeling its efforts toward 
increasing its programming and training efforts. 
 
 ¶E. The MOI's Directorate of Travel and Nationality issues 
the Haweea Shaessea Iraqea (Iraqi ID Card), which provides 
Qthe Haweea Shaessea Iraqea (Iraqi ID Card), which provides 
the date of birth and the names of both parents, in addition 
to marital status.  This card is reissued at key points in a 
person's lifetime, and has various security features to 
discourage fraud.  The Directorate also issues the Shehadat 
Jinseea(Iraqi Nationality Certificate), which is issued once 
during a person's lifetime, generally during adolescence. 
These two official forms of documentation are the primary 
measures the GOI has taken to establish the identity of local 
populations.  In Northern Iraq, these two forms of 
documentation are issued by the Kurdish Regional Government 
(KRG) Directorate of Nationality and Civil Identification. 
 
 ¶F. The GOI does not currently have a method or requirement 
for gathering data required for an in-depth assessment of law 
enforcement efforts.  The rudimentary nature of rule of law 
and law enforcement infrastructure in Iraq poses a 
significant challenge to undertaking this type of effort. 
 
 
BAGHDAD 00000385  004 OF 008 
 
 
INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF TRAFFICKERS 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
4A. Various provisions of current Iraqi law apply to 
trafficking. The 2005 Iraqi Constitution prohibits forced 
labor, slavery, slave trade, trafficking in women and 
children, and sex trade.  Several provisions of the Penal 
Code, dating from 1969, criminalize unlawful seizure, 
kidnapping, and detention by force or deception. 
 
-- Article 37(3) of the Iraqi Constitution prohibits "forced 
labor, slavery, slave trade, trafficking in women or 
children, and sex trade".  It is not specific in its 
application to various forms of trafficking. 
 
-- Trafficking is not directly addressed in the 1969 Iraqi 
Penal Code, but there are at least two articles that could be 
applied in certain circumstances.  Article 399 of the Penal 
Code punishes "any person who incited a boy or girl under the 
age of 18 to indulge in fornication or resort to prostitution 
as a profession or assists him or her to do so." 
 
-- Article 421, 422, and 423 of the Penal Code prohibit 
unlawful seizure, kidnapping, and detention.  Article 425 
punishes "any person who provides a location for unlawful 
detention or imprisonment while being aware of the fact." 
 
-- Article 320 of the Penal Code punishes "any public 
official or agent (...) who employs slave labor", but the 
intent of the law was to punish misuse of public funds by 
government officials. 
 
Since the last TIP report, the GOI has completed drafting 
comprehensive, anti-trafficking legislation that imposes 
specific penalties on those who commit acts of human 
trafficking, announces the formation and duties of an 
inter-ministerial committee to address human trafficking, and 
describes mechanisms for providing support for victims of 
human trafficking.  While the legislation is still in draft 
form, its proposed penalties for human trafficking are worth 
noting.  Depending on the nature of the act, prison penalties 
will range from temporary to life imprisonment and fines will 
range between ID 5,000,000 and ID 250,000,000  (USD 4,335- 
USD 216,715).  In instances where the act of trafficking 
leads to the death of the victim, the proposed punishment for 
the trafficker is the death penalty. 
 
¶B. Article 399 of the Penal Code specifies a prison sentence 
not to exceed ten years for "Incitement to Prostitution and 
Fornication" when the victim is under the age of 18.  Article 
393 lists aggravating factors, such as the victim's age, the 
number of perpetrators, the victim's virginity, the 
relationship between the offender and the victim, and whether 
the victim died, became pregnant, or contracted an STD as a 
result of the act.  If such factors exist, it appears that 
the court has the authority to increase the sentence. The 
prescribed penalty for kidnapping and detention by force or 
deception is up to seven years in prison and up to 15 years 
if the victim is a minor and force is used. Although not 
specific to trafficking for sexual exploitation, Articles 
421, 422, and 423, which cover unlawful seizure, kidnapping, 
Q421, 422, and 423, which cover unlawful seizure, kidnapping, 
and detention, could have implications for traffickers. 
Sentences called for in these articles vary depending on the 
age and gender of the victim, but generally range between 
10-15 years maximum.  Aggravating circumstances, such as 
deception, can increase the sentence, and any case involving 
sexual intercourse with the victim can result in life 
imprisonment or death.  Article 425 calls for a period of 
imprisonment not to exceed seven years for anyone who 
provides a location for unlawful detention. The prescribed 
penalty for sexual assault or forced prostitution of a child 
is 10 years' imprisonment. 
 
¶C. There are no laws that specifically cover labor recruiters 
or labor agents.  The Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG), in 
 
BAGHDAD 00000385  005 OF 008 
 
 
response to allegations of labor trafficking of Filipinos, 
ordered a few companies to cease activities because of these 
allegations.  The KRG also forced all Kurdish companies to 
have direct contracts with the countries from which foreign 
laborers originate in order to allow them to contest their 
salary within their home court system. 
 
¶D. Rape was prohibited by Article 393 of the Penal Code; its 
penalty is life imprisonment or a period determined by the 
Iraqi court.  This penalty is stricter than that for sexual 
exploitation violations. 
 
¶E. There is no data on the number of investigations, 
prosecutions, convictions, plea bargains, fines, or sentences 
imposed against human trafficking offenders.  As the GOI's 
anti-trafficking draft legislation has not yet been enacted, 
human trafficking offenders who were prosecuted by the GOI 
were investigated under a variety of different laws relating 
to crimes such as kidnapping, rape, or prostitution.  No 
reliable estimates of these figures exist, since the GOI does 
not disaggregate trafficking-related violators from other 
offenders. 
 
¶F. The GOI does not provide any specialized training for law 
enforcement and immigration officials on identifying and 
treating victims of trafficking or on investigating and 
prosecuting trafficking cases. 
 
¶G. During the reporting period, the GOI attempted to work 
with the Government of Uganda (GOU) for the purposes of 
obtaining travel documents for 14 Ugandan women who were 
trafficked to Iraq in order to facilitate their repatriation. 
 This process proved cumbersome given that the GOU does not 
currently maintain an embassy in Iraq.  To facilitate the 
process, Embassy Baghdad and Embassy Kampala served as a 
go-between for the two governments, and temporary travel 
documents acceptable to both governments were obtained with 
the assistance of the International Organization for 
Migration (IOM) through the International Committee of the 
Red Cross (ICRC). 
 
¶H. The comprehensive anti-trafficking bill not yet ratified 
into law by the Council of Representatives, contains a clause 
that empowers the GOI to extradite persons back to Iraq for 
criminal proceedings.  For Arab countries, there is an 
established agreement called the "Arab Agreement for Judicial 
Cooperation" that includes extradition provisions for all 
types of crimes, including human trafficking.  According to a 
contact in the Shura Council, the GOI is unable to provide 
any specific information on the number of extraditions the 
GOI has participated in, and the contact stated that he is 
not aware of any cases involving trafficking offenders to the 
United States. 
 
¶I. There is no evidence to indicate that GOI officials were 
involved in trafficking during the reporting period, though 
Iraq's trafficking situation remains a controversial topic in 
political circles.  GOI contacts theorize that some 
politicians avoid discussing TIP because it is an issue on 
which the GOI has a weak record, and thus could be used 
against politicians in the run-up to elections.  These 
Qagainst politicians in the run-up to elections.  These 
contacts further elaborated that some politicians whose 
parties have a religious affiliation avoid discussing 
divisive topics such as trafficking because they find its 
associations to the sex trade morally objectionable. 
 
¶J. This question does not apply to the TIP report for Iraq. 
 
¶K. This question does not apply to the TIP report for Iraq. 
 
¶L. This question does not apply to the TIP report for Iraq. 
 
PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
------------------------------------ 
 
 
BAGHDAD 00000385  006 OF 008 
 
 
5A. The GOI is unable under existing law to provide 
protection for victims and witnesses of trafficking. 
Nevertheless, the anti-trafficking draft legislation awaiting 
consideration by the Committee for Legal Affairs does include 
a provision that obligates the GOI to help the victims of 
human trafficking and respond to the needs of children, by 
the following means: referring the victims to a specialist 
doctor to examine their health status; providing language 
assistance to  non-Iraqi victims; providing legal assistance 
and advice and instructional information, ensuring the 
victims contact their families or their countries of 
nationality or NGOs to obtain required assistance; providing 
necessary protection for both victims and witnesses; 
maintaining the confidentiality of the information related to 
the victims and respecting their privacy; providing financial 
assistance and temporary residence for the victims; 
rehabilitating victims socially, psychologically, and 
physically by establishing specialized rehabilitation centers 
or care houses; providing training and education, 
facilitating victims' stay in Iraq by giving them visas to 
reside temporarily in Iraq and, if necessary, travel 
documents; and providing diplomatic support for non-Iraqi 
victims to facilitate their return to their original 
countries. 
 
¶B. Iraq has NGO-run victim-care facilities and shelters 
accessible to trafficking victims, though many of these safe 
houses are in hidden or secret locations for the safety and 
security of victims.  Child trafficking victims also 
sometimes utilize the services of these facilities, and 
sometimes are placed in shelters, orphanages, foster care, or 
juvenile detention facilities.  NGOs such as the Asuda 
Foundation have shelters that are specifically designated for 
victims of trafficking.  These facilities are operated 
primarily by NGOs and international organizations.  Post is 
not aware of any publicly funded shelters. 
 
¶C. The GOI does not provide trafficking victims with access 
to legal, medical, and psychological services.  The 
anti-trafficking draft law currently under consideration by 
the Iraqi legislature contains provisions for these services. 
 
¶D. Currently the GOI does not assist foreign trafficking 
victims by providing temporary or permanent residency status, 
or other relief from deportation.  The GOI's draft 
legislation on TIP does include provisions to assist foreign 
trafficking victims by providing them visas to reside 
temporarily in Iraq or travel documents and diplomatic 
support to facilitate their return to their original 
countries. 
 
¶E. The GOI does not provide longer-term shelter or housing 
benefits to victims or other resources to aid the victims in 
rebuilding their lives. 
 
¶F. The GOI has a referral system in place to transfer victims 
detained, arrested, or placed in protective custody by law 
enforcement authorities to institutions that provide short or 
long-term care. 
 
¶G. There are no official estimates of the total number of 
trafficking victims in Iraq. 
Qtrafficking victims in Iraq. 
 
¶H. The GOI does not have a single, formalized process for law 
enforcement, immigration, and social services personnel to 
proactively identify victims of trafficking among high-risk 
persons with whom they come in contact.  There may be 
informal processes within the GOI's numerous departments and 
ministries about which Post is unaware. 
 
¶I. In cases where a trafficking victim willingly participates 
in trafficking in order to illegally enter a country of 
commit some other offense, there are criminal charges and 
penalties under the current GOI penal system, depending on 
the particular offense.  These persons' rights are respected 
 
BAGHDAD 00000385  007 OF 008 
 
 
and they are afforded all the appropriate human rights 
protections. 
 
¶J. The GOI does not encourage victims to assist in the 
investigation and prosecution of trafficking. 
 
¶K. The GOI does not provide any specialized training for 
government officials in identifying trafficking victims and 
in the provision of assistance to trafficked victims. 
 
¶L. The GOI does not provide assistance, shelter, medical aid, 
or financial help to its nationals who are repatriated as 
victims of trafficking. 
 
¶M. Several NGOs and international organizations, as well as 
some smaller locally-based grassroots groups, work with 
trafficking victims.  Many of these organizations run 
shelters and provide various types of assistance to 
trafficking victims.  The MOHR and the Supreme Committee to 
Combat Human Trafficking both consult with certain NGOs on 
trafficking issues. 
 
PREVENTION 
---------- 
 
6A. The MOHR engaged in a public awareness campaign on 
trafficking during the reporting period.  It held workshops 
at facilities managed by the Ministry of Youth and Sports, 
targeting children.  More workshops are planned in the coming 
months in various provinces throughout Iraq and an agreement 
was reached with the Minister of Education to do similar 
activities with Iraqi schools and universities. 
 
¶B. The GOI does not consistently monitor immigration and 
emigration patterns for evidence of trafficking, but there 
are reports of isolated instances in which Iraqi border 
security forces prevented older men and young girls traveling 
together from leaving Iraq using fake documents. 
 
¶C. The MOHR is trying to prepare a database on trafficking 
that would provide the GOI with a better sense of where to 
target its anti-trafficking efforts, but contacts stated that 
the difficulties of obtaining good information on the problem 
are a significant challenge. 
 
¶D. The anti-trafficking draft legislation presented by the 
GOI during this reporting period includes a national plan for 
assisting trafficking victims, prosecuting those convicted of 
trafficking, and preventing trafficking through the 
dissemination of training and public awareness programming. 
 
¶E. Beyond its attempts to enforce penalties against 
prostitution and solicitation, the GOI has not taken specific 
measures during the reporting period to reduce the demand for 
commercial sex acts. 
 
¶F. This question does not apply to the Trafficking in Persons 
Report for Iraq. 
 
¶G. This question does not apply to the Trafficking in Persons 
Report for Iraq. 
 
PARTNERSHIPS 
------------ 
 
7A. The Supreme Committee to Combat Human Trafficking 
consults with a small group of NGOs and civil society groups 
to further its initial inquiries into Iraq's TIP situation. 
There are several international and NGO groups, some of which 
receive USG funding, that interact with the GOI on TIP 
issues.  Organizations such as The Protection Project and 
Heartland Alliance have received USG funding to work with the 
GOI in crafting and advocating for the passage of the 
comprehensive anti-trafficking legislation that is soon to be 
Qcomprehensive anti-trafficking legislation that is soon to be 
passed to the Council of Representatives. 
 
BAGHDAD 00000385  008 OF 008 
 
 
 
¶B. The GOI does not provide dedicated international 
assistance to other countries specifically to address TIP. 
 
¶8. (SBU) COMMENT: The GOI continues to face significant 
challenges in its efforts to establish rule of law and 
security throughout Iraq.  Throughout much of the reporting 
period, the GOI struggled to confront the challenge of 
continuing terrorism throughout the country, pass an election 
law, prepare for elections, and rebuild over half a dozen 
ministries that suffered serious damage in terrorist attacks 
during the latter half of 2009.  Despite these setbacks, the 
GOI still managed to achieve movement on comprehensive 
anti-trafficking draft legislation, set up an 
interministerial committee on TIP that meets monthly, and 
conduct various training and public awareness campaigns at 
youth centers and schools to educate the Iraqi public about 
trafficking.  While these developments might not seem notable 
in a different setting, the modest achievements of the GOI on 
TIP issues are very significant in light of the trying 
circumstances under which it operated, and the overwhelming 
volume of pressing issues on its agenda during the reporting 
period. END COMMENT 
FORD