10BEIJING414
EMBASSY BEIJING WELCOMES S/R BOSWORTH, S/E KIM
Tue Feb 23 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXYZ0004
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBJ #0414/01 0540133
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 230133Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8181
INFO RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL IMMEDIATE 1476
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO IMMEDIATE 0206UNCLAS BEIJING 000414 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA AMGT KNNP JA KN KS PREL MNUC CN
SUBJECT:   EMBASSY BEIJING WELCOMES S/R BOSWORTH, S/E KIM 
AND DELEGATION TO CHINA FEB. 24-25, 2010. 
 
REF: STATE 16093 
 
¶1. (U) Embassy Beijing warmly welcomes the visit of Special 
Representative for North Korea Policy Stephen W. Bosworth and 
Special Envoy for Six-Party Talks Sung Kim and their 
delegation to China Feb. 24-25, 2010 for consultations 
related to North Korea policy. 
 
Additional Members of Delegation: 
 
Daniel R. Russel, NSC Director for Asia 
Jennifer L. Roque, DPRK Desk Officer 
 
¶2. (U) Control Officer: 
Nancy Leou, Political Officer 
Home:  (86-10)6539-3027 
Office: (86-10)8531-3189 
Cell: (86)139-1023-4347 
Fax: (86-10)8531-3525 
Unclass E-mail: LeouNW@state.gov 
 
Control officer will meet travelers at the airport and take 
them to their hotel. 
 
¶3. (U) Hotel reservations have been made at the St. Regis 
Hotel. 
No. 21 Jianguomenwai Dajie, Chaoyang District 
Ph: (86-10)6460-6688 
 
------------------------------ 
Security and Threat Assessment 
------------------------------ 
 
¶5. (U) The threat level for all China posts is considered low 
for crime and medium for terrorism. 
 
¶6. (U) The Regional Security Office is not aware of any 
specific threat directed against any U.S. person or traveling 
delegation.  Should such information be developed, the 
Chinese security services are committed to advise the Embassy 
of pertinent information and to provide necessary security 
coverage. 
 
¶7. (U) China experiencQa moderate rate of crime, including 
recent incidents ranging from petty theft to murder. 
Pickpockets are particularly active in crowded markets, and 
foreigners are often sought out as primary targets.  Petty 
theft from hotel rooms is uncommon, but visitors are advised 
not to leave valuables lying loose or unattended in their 
rooms.  It is the policy of this Mission that employees, 
their family members and official visitors to China must not 
knowingly purchase counterfeit or pirated products during 
their stay in China.  Also, foreigners may be approached in 
tourist areas by individuals seeking to exchange U.S. dollars 
or to sell pirated or fake products, such as compact discs, 
in violation of intellectual property rights laws.  These 
transactions are illegal, violate Post policy, and must be 
avoided. 
 
¶8. (U) All U.S. citizen personnel serving under Qef of 
Mission authority in a temporary duty status of 30 days or 
more must complete appropriate overseas personal security 
training prior to travel (04 State 66580).  Employees who 
have completed the Security Overseas Seminar Course at 
State's Foreign Service Institute (FSI) after June 1, 2000, 
meet this requirement.  All other TDYers must either 1) 
complete the approved four-day seminar at FSI entitled 
"Serving Abroad for Families and Employees (SAFE) or 2) have 
their agency certify to the State Department Bureau of 
Diplomatic Security that the employee has undergone 
equivalent security training.  The contact for this 
certification is Assistant Director of Training, DS/T, at 
telephone (703) 205-2617.  Country clearance will not be 
granted for any traveler with planned TDY in excess of 30 
days if this information is not stated/certified.  POC for 
additional information is DS RSO, Beijing at: 
ds rso Beijing@state.gov. (Note: Travelers from DHS/CBP, DIA, 
FBI, DOD and the Peace Corp have been pre-certified by their 
agencies with DS.) 
 
¶9. (U) All/all official visitors are required to obtain a 
pre-departure, country specific counterintelligence briefing 
from their parent agency before departing for China. 
Visitors should contact the security office of their parent 
agency.  If the parent agency is unable to give the briefing 
or needs assistance/guidance, the visitor shouldQntact the 
Bureau of Diplomatic Security's Division of 
Counterintelligence (DS/ICI/CI) at 571-345-7641, 3966, or 
3968 to schedule a briefing.  HQ DS/CI is located at SA-20, 
1801 Lynn St., Rosslyn, Virginia 20522-2008.  Department of 
 
State personnel should contact the DS/ICI/CI directly to 
schedule a briefing. Qficial visitors may also be required 
to attend a Post-specific security briefing upon their 
arrival in country.  The type of briefing is contingent on 
the length of the planned visit.  Upon arrival in Beijing, 
all TDY personnel should contact the Regional Security Office 
at 6532-3831, ext. 6036, to determine level of briefing 
required. 
 
¶10. (U) Visitors are reminded to take necessary precautions 
in safeguarding sensitive material and information.  All 
non-USG facilities must be considered technically compromised 
and may not be used to discuss, process, or store classified 
information.  Telephone calls, e-mail, and Internet usage are 
routinely monitored and hotel rooms searched. 
 
¶11. (U) All TDY U.S. citizen employees of the U.S. 
Government, civilian or military, who are under the authority 
of the Chief of Mission are subject to the reporting 
requirement stated in 12 FAM 262 regarding contact reports, 
i.e. any initial (non-business related) contact with a 
national from a country with a Critical threat 
(counterintelligence) post, as listed on the Department's 
Security Environment Threat List (SETL), must be reported. 
In general, employee reporting should occur within one 
business day after such contact has occurred.  If unable to 
report within this time frame, or unsure about the need to 
report at all, employees should contact the RSO or PSO as 
soon as practicable.  If the RSO/PSO is unavailable, notify 
the Management Officer or the Deputy Chief of Mission. 
 
¶12. (U) Per 12 FAM 262, this reporting requirement generally 
applies whenever: 
 
(1) Illegal or unauthorized access is sought to classified or 
otherwise sensitive information. 
 
(2) The employee is concerned that he or she may the target 
of actual or attempted exploitation by a foreign entity. 
 
(3) That national attempts to establish recurring contact or 
seems to be actively seeking a close personal association, 
beyond professional or personal courtesies. 
 
¶13. (U) Travelers should be aware that previous visitors have 
reported that their unattended computers have been subjected 
to tampering.  The efforts may be directed toward obtaining 
information on the computers, but problems ranging from 
viruses left on their systems to hard drives, that are no 
longer functional have been reported.  Hotels and private 
Chinese Internet providers have in some cases given hotel 
guests "free" thumb drives for use with their computers.  The 
source and quality of these devices are unknown.  Such 
devices could contain malicious codes and viruses and should 
not be used on government coQters.  Official visitors are 
reminded that non-inspectable electrical/electronic 
equipment, i.e., cellular telephones, laptop computers, 
personal digital assistants (PDAs), etc., may not be brought 
into the controlled access areas of the Chancery.  If a 
visitor intends to travel with USG-owned computers and 
equipment for use within the Chancery, please contact the 
Regional Security Officer at 86-10-8531-4111, or 
GormanB2@state.gov or MooreBM@state.gov, for information and 
guidelines. 
 
¶14. (U) Additionally, all classified and sensitive materials 
must be secured at the Embassy upon arrival in country.  All 
classified material must be brought into China via diplomatic 
pouch. 
 
¶15. (U) Travelers must contact the Embassy or nearest 
Consulate General upon arrival in China and provide telephone 
and address information while in country. 
 
¶16. (U) Passports and visas are required.  Americans 
arriving/transiting without valid passports and Chinese visas 
are not permitted to enter China and may also be subject to 
fines.  Visas are required to transit China on the way to and 
from Mongolia or North Korea.  Those visitors traveling to 
China on a single-entry visa should be reminded that trips to 
Hong Kong or Macau Special Administrative Regions are treated 
as a visit outside Mainland China.  If the traveler is 
planning to return to Mainland China after a visit to one of 
these two destinations on the same single-entry visa, they 
will be denied entry.  Visitors facing this dilemma will be 
required to apply for a new visa at the Chinese Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs Office in Hong Kong to gain re-entry into 
Mainland China. 
 
HUNTSMAN