10BERLIN209
MEDIA REACTION: AFGHANISTAN, NATO, MIDEAST, U.S.-CLIMATE,
Wed Feb 24 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
VZCZCXRO2032
RR RUEHAG RUEHLZ
DE RUEHRL #0209/01 0551328
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 241328Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6606
INFO RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVE
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 2048
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0777
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 1296
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 2794
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 1819
RUEHVEN/USMISSION USOSCE 0971
RHMFIUU/HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
RHMFISS/HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
RHMFISS/CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
RUZEADH/UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BERLIN 000209 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/CE, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR AF NATO XF KGHG XM TK EMS XT
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: AFGHANISTAN, NATO, MIDEAST, U.S.-CLIMATE, 
WESTERN HEMISPHERE, TURKEY, EU-GREECE, NORTHERN-IRELAND;BERLIN 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
¶2.   (Afghanistan)   Karzai takes Control over Electoral Watchdog 
¶3.   (NATO)   New Strategic Concept 
¶4.   (Mideast)   Peace Process 
¶5.   (U.S.)   Climate Policy 
¶6.   (Western Hemisphere)   Summit of the Americas 
¶7.   (Turkey)   Alleged Coup Plot 
¶8.   (EU-Greece)   Euro Crisis 
¶9.   (Northern Ireland)   Bomb Attack 
 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
 
The Berlin papers led with a report by Deutsche Bahn on the 
shortcomings of its public transportation network in Berlin, while 
Frankfurter Allgemeine led with a report on Environmental Policy 
under the Obama administration headlined: "America Postpones Climate 
Protection."  Sueddeutsche focused on the problems of the CDU in 
North Rhine-Westphalia and Die Welt on the leader of the German 
Protestant Church who was caught driving drunk in a church-owned 
vehicle.  ZDF-TV's early evening newscast heute opened with a report 
on the end of the Lufthansa strike, while ARD-TV's early evening 
newscast Tagesschau led with a story on the report by Deutsche Bahn 
on problems with Berlin's public transportation system. 
 
¶2.   (Afghanistan)   Karzai takes Control over Electoral Watchdog 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine (2/24) editorialized on President Karzai's 
decision to take control over the election watchdog: "Hamid Karzai 
would have enjoyed a clear election victory if there had not been 
the annoying electoral complaint commission....  According to 
Western standards, the legitimacy of his election is dubious.... 
The influence the UN and even the U.S. Ambassador have on Karzai 
seems to be diminishing.  This is disastrous because the foreign 
troops are in Afghanistan to support his government: a discredited 
president also discredits the mission." 
 
¶3.   (NATO)   New Strategic Concept 
 
Sddeutsche (2/24) editorialized: "Hillary Clinton has listed the 
ideas of her government and we can assume that no unacceptable 
things will be presented as of now....  But will this suffice?  Will 
the strategy be strong enough to keep the diverging alliance 
together?  Will the members have a similar sense for threats and 
obligations?  We can have doubts about this.  Political priorities 
can be measured best by looking at budgets...  NATO will only be 
taken seriously again if it becomes the central means of security in 
every member state.  More important than the strategy is therefore 
the reform of the rigid apparatus and the allied military 
organization.  NATO has become heavy-headed and its force structure 
is not up to date.  This is the biggest problem." 
 
Tagesspiegel (2/24) reported that the "U.S. views NATO missions like 
in Afghanistan as the new normal- and Germany as applying the 
brakes."  The paper added: "Germany is facing new differences of 
opinion with the U.S. government.  In the debate over NATO's new 
strategic concept, which is supposed to be decided by the end of the 
year, the ideas about the tasks are very different.  This had become 
apparent during the Munich Security Conference.  Secretary Clinton's 
speech on Monday evening at the beginning of a senior international 
conference on the alliance's new concept in Washington confirmed 
this.  According to the notion of the U.S. and other NATO partners, 
out of area operations, like in Afghanistan and against pirates off 
the coast of Africa are normal, not an exception....  According to 
American NATO experts, Germany is perceived as a brakeman in the 
development of the concept." 
 
¶4.   (Mideast)   Peace Process 
 
BERLIN 00000209  002 OF 004 
 
 
 
In a front-page editorial, Frankfurter Allgemeine (2/24) commented: 
"Since the Gaza War ended a year ago, it has been unusually quiet in 
Israel and the Palestinian territories.  The last suicide attacks in 
Jerusalem and Tel Aviv happened years ago.  Building construction is 
busy in Ramallah and the economy is growing.  This is progress. 
However, the political standstill poses the greatest danger.  Doing 
nothing means leaving the initiative to those who are not interested 
in achieving a fair compromise....   Constructive impetus from 
outside cannot be expected in the near future.   President Obama is 
powerless in the Middle East without partners who can act in concert 
with him.  Arabs and Palestinians celebrated his Cairo speech, but 
did not act upon his calls....  All we can do is try to overcome the 
political standstill, for instance, by indirect negotiations the 
American Mideast mediator George Mitchell is hoping to bring about 
in the coming days." 
 
¶5.   (U.S.)   Climate Policy 
 
In an editorial, Frankfurter Allgemeine (2/24) noted: "This is the 
diagnosis of the winter: the American Congress is paralyzed, the 
Republican Party is trying hard to prevent initiatives of the 
Democrats and the President, and Obama is not the magician who can 
easily come up with agreements beyond the party lines.  It might be 
too pessimistic to interpret the mounting difficulties of 
Washington's government as a serious crisis.  However, so much is 
right: President Obama's most important legal projects are 
threatened to fail the closer they get to the real world.  At least 
he has taken the initiative himself in the reform of the healthcare 
system.  It remains to be seen whether this is enough to persuade 
some of the obstructive Republicans.   Meanwhile, he faces problems 
on climate policy in his own camp.  Democrats from states with 
primary industries do not want the EPA to regulate the emission of 
greenhouse gases - saving jobs in difficult times is the current 
argument.  The trick of bypassing Congress will not work.  We are 
facing the next disappointment." 
 
¶6.  (Western Hemisphere)   Summit of the Americas 
 
Several papers carried reports on the Latin America summit in 
Canc#n.  Sueddeutsche headlined: "Solidarity with Argentina," while 
Tagesspiegel headlined: "Summiteers Back Argentina in Falkland 
Conflict." 
 
die tageszeitung (2/24) carried a lengthy report under the headline: 
"America Without the U.S.," and wrote: "The Latin American and 
Caribbean countries want to set up a new union of states.  But this 
would weaken the Organization of American States (OAS).  The hosts 
declared this second continental meeting without the United States 
and Canada a 'Summit of Unity,' and the 26 government leaders were 
able to demonstrate unity in the rekindled conflict between London 
and Buenos Aires....  Argentina's President Kirchner said: 
'International politics continues to be determined solely by a 
balance of powers.'  With respect to Honduras, this seems to be true 
because it was the U.S. role that was decisive for the putschists' 
plan to come true.  Under U.S. orchestration, elections took place 
in 2009.  The Brazilians emphasized that the example of Honduras 
should not set a precedent.  But under Barack Obama, the United 
States is again playing a more offensive role on the sub-continent. 
U.S. forces used the earthquake in Haiti to demonstrate their power, 
and right now the U.S. is extending its power at 13 bases in 
Colombia, Panama, Aruba and Curaao.   Formally, the 'Latin American 
and Caribbean Community' will be launched in one or two years, 
predicted Brazilian government advisor Marco Aurelio Garcia.  It is 
a widespread hope that, with this community, the OAS would be 
weakened and thus the U.S. influence be pushed back." 
 
Under the headline: "Bol 
 
BERLIN 00000209  003 OF 004 
 
 
var's Demons," Sueddeutsche Zeitung (2/24) 
editorialized: "Since Monday, the Latin American leaders have been 
trying to set up a new community that should become nothing less 
than a pendant to the EU, as Mexico's President Calder"n said.  As a 
matter of fact, Latin America could use greater unity.  Trade is 
being impeded by anachronistic obstacles, and drug trafficking could 
be fought more easily if the states in the region improved their 
cooperation.  But since Simon Bol 
var's death, there have been many 
attempts to reach an agreement on such a union.  The United States 
and Canada are to be excluded from this new alliance which would be 
reserved to the Latin American states.  These states have gained new 
self-confidence.  They have stabilized their democracies and 
sentenced many previous dictators.  The uniform condemnation of the 
coup in Honduras showed that they do not tolerate a return to the 
past.  But this new union of states has one basic flaw:  Colombia's 
President Uribe and his conservative colleagues consider it a vision 
of the left-wing countries.  They feel that the leaning to the left 
will soon be a chapter in the history books.  In Chile, a right-wing 
candidate won and this is very likely to be the case in Argentina 
and Brazil, too, and this new guard of politicians will again make 
overtures to the United States.  Bol 
var's dream is not yet over but 
it can become a reality only if the goals remain realistic and no 
one is marginalized.  The United States is too close and too 
powerful and cannot be ignored." 
 
¶7.   (Turkey)   Alleged Coup Plot 
 
Many papers (2/24) carry reports on the arrest of leading Turkish 
members of the armed forces.  Die Welt headlined: "Turkish 
'Sledgehammer' - Generals in custody,"   Berliner Zeitung reported 
Under the headline: "Turkish Officers Planned Coup d'tat - Arrest 
Because of 'Operation Sledgehammer.'"  Tagesspiegel carried a dpa 
report under the headline; "Military Officials Cross-Examined 
Because of Coup Plans," while Sueddeutsche Zeitung headlined: 
"Justice is Striking Back" and reported: "In an action that has thus 
far been unique in turkey, Turkish justice authorities arrested 50 
members of the military, among them former commanders of the air 
force and the navy.  The military leadership declined to comment on 
the arrests....  Only recently, the Turkish Constitutional Court 
said by referring to the Turkish Constitution that members of the 
military should be tried only by military courts." 
 
Under the headline: "Turkish Break of a Taboo," Sueddeutsche Zeitung 
(2/24) editorialized: "For the first time, conspiracies have been 
uncovered and conspirators prosecuted.  For the first time, coup 
plots are considered a crime - and not a patriotic duty.  People who 
are suspected of having planned the killing of civilians wanted to 
wage a war with a neighbor, and all this to create chaos and to 
topple the government in Ankara, would be put on trial in a normal 
country.  But in Turkey this has been impossible because those 
people wear uniforms and were considered untouchable.  Thus far. 
The arrest of the alleged putschists is a great moment.  It produces 
a step forward in the wrestling between democrats and non-democrats. 
 But this does not mean that democracy has won.  To the same extent 
to which the armed forces lose influence, the judiciary is turning 
into the last bastion of the ancient regime.  It is not committed to 
abiding by law and justice but by its own power and the holy 
principles of the past century.   Yes, Premier Erdogan made many 
mistakes...but at the moment, his government is showing the resolve 
that it lacked so often before.  It seems to have realized that the 
time for radical reforms has come." 
 
Die Welt (2/24) carried an editorial under the headline: "Settling 
old Accounts with the Military," saying: "The power struggle in 
Turkey between the secular military and the Islamic government has 
reached a new peak....  It is right and important that the justice 
 
BERLIN 00000209  004 OF 004 
 
 
authorities want to investigate the affair.  But what is worrying is 
the partisanship of the investigations.  All of a sudden people are 
arrested who are accused of having criticized the government. 
Premier Erdogan initiated a democratization of the country.  But he 
should now not copy the methods of the Kemalist elites and dominate 
the state and its institutions to the same degree as happened in the 
past.  Then the democratization would only be an end to justify the 
seizure of power." 
 
According to die tageszeitung (2/24), "the AKP...has initiated many 
reforms in Turkey on paper.  But behind the scenes, Turkey continues 
to be governed by an alliance made up of bureaucrats and military 
officials.   It should be no surprise to learn that this alliance 
tried to oust Premier Erdogan.  In addition, there are other 
cardinal sins such as the rapprochement with Armenia, the naming of 
the Kurdish problem, and concessions in the Cyprus conflict.  With 
these policies, the Turkish government stretched the views of quite 
a few Turkish nationalists over the past few years....  Turkey's 
path to democracy has many obstacles but the current government has 
turned out to be tough, robust, and resolute....  With its moves 
against the old guard in the armed forces and bureaucracy, Turkey is 
now also processing its most recent history.  Only after it finishes 
this process, will it arrive in Europe.  And what is even more 
important: with its model, it will be able to initiate democratic 
reforms in Islamic countries." 
 
¶8.   (EU-Greece)   Euro Crisis 
 
Several papers (2/24) carried reports on the most recent 
developments about the Greek debt crisis.  Only one paper carried an 
editorial.  Die Welt (2/24) judged under the headline: "Don't 
Slaughter Your Cows" and said: "It would be absurd to tell the 
Greeks, but also the Spaniards and Italians, to cut their salaries 
by 20 to 25 percent.  Their economies would then face a downward 
spiral and drag down the entire Monetary Union.   It would be as 
nonsensical for the Germans [to increase their salaries] thus 
risking their competitiveness and role as engine of growth in 
Europe.  The path out of the current budget misery is not only 
through stricter budgetary discipline.  No one really thinks that 
Greece will be able to cut its state budget by ten percent of the 
GDP.  Instead of presenting budget goals that are not credible, 
bigger issues must be on the agenda of the EU finance ministers. 
They include structural reforms that help make the national 
economies more competitive again.  And the euro zone must develop a 
credible mechanism regarding what to do with deficit sinners. 
Instead of a Europe that tries to make savings to keep itself 
healthy, we would then have a dynamic internal EU economy that is on 
the offensive again in the global economy and will set new trends." 
 
¶9.   (Northern Ireland)   Bomb Attack 
 
Under the headline: "Bombs Into the Political Vacuum," Sueddeutsche 
Zeitung (2/24) judged: "Politicians in Belfast, London, and Dublin 
may have been shocked at the most recent attack on the shaky peace 
process but it was hardly a surprise that secessionist 
Republican-Catholic splinter groups detonated a bomb in front of a 
court.  It will depend on the elected politicians in Belfast whether 
the terrorists will succeed.  The people in Northern Ireland, 
irrespective of whether they are Catholics or Protestants are 
longing for normalcy after years of violence.  They are much further 
than some of their representatives in parliament, who continue to 
fight old battles instead of dealing with the real problems: jobs, 
investments, school curricula or fees for waste disposal.  If they 
pigheadedly block any agreement, they will disappoint not only the 
voters but involuntarily they will also support the terrorists." 
 
MURPHY