10CALGARY38
Signs of Life for Northern Canadian Gas Through the
Tue Feb 16 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Calgary
VZCZCXYZ0010
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHGA #0038/01 0472351
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 162348Z FEB 10
FM AMCONSUL CALGARY
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0060
INFO RHEBAAA/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHGA/AMCONSUL CALGARYUNCLAS CALGARY 000038 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR OES, EB/ESC, WHA/CA 
DOE FOR INT'L AND POLICY AND IE-141 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EPET ENRG EINV SENV CA
SUBJECT: Signs of Life for Northern Canadian Gas Through the 
Mackenzie Pipeline 
 
¶1. Summary:  The contents of a long-delayed regulatory report on 
the proposed Mackenzie Valley natural gas pipeline has brought some 
optimism back to project proponents.  The pipeline would bring 1.2 
billion cubic feet (bcf) of northern Canadian gas per day from the 
Northwest Territories' Mackenzie Valley to Alberta and on to North 
American markets.  The project has been postponed for three decades 
pending settlement of aboriginal land claims and development of a 
Joint Review Panel (JRP) report examining the potential 
environmental, socio-economic and cultural effects of the project. 
Finally issued in December 2009, the JRP report was positively 
received by project proponents, including ExxonMobil and 
ConocoPhillips.  As Canada's National Energy Board prepares to 
launch in April its six-month regulatory review, the spotlight is 
on negotiations with Ottawa for federal fiscal support, without 
which proponents say the project cannot move forward.  While the 
companies will not make a final investment decision until all 
regulatory hurdles are cleared and economic analyses completed, 
they argue that the North American market needs gas from the 
Mackenzie pipeline to complement the shale gas coming on line.  End 
Summary. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
Mackenzie Valley Pipeline Proposal - Decades in the Making 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
 
 
¶2. A Mackenzie Valley pipeline was first proposed more than forty 
years ago, but was shelved after the federal government accepted a 
1977 report, released by Justice Thomas Berger, recommending that a 
pipeline be postponed for ten years until aboriginal land claims 
had been settled. 
 
¶3. In October 2004, Calgary-based Imperial Oil (70% owned by 
ExxonMobil), the lead partner in the proposal, finally filed its 
application to build the 1,200 km pipeline with an initial capacity 
to transport 1.2 bcf of gas per day.  The pipeline would run from 
Inuvik, Northwest Territories (NWT), along the Mackenzie River 
valley to a point just inside the Alberta border where it would 
interconnect with TransCanada Pipeline's Alberta system providing 
access to North American markets.  A separate natural gas liquids 
pipeline would transport up to 4,000 cubic meters per day of 
natural gas liquids from Inuvik to Norman Wells, NWT where it would 
join an existing oil pipeline to southern markets. 
 
¶4. In addition to Imperial, project partners include the Mackenzie 
Valley Aboriginal Pipeline Group, ConocoPhillips Canada, Shell 
Canada and ExxonMobil Canada.  The companies have interests in the 
three anchor fields: Taglu (Imperial); Parsons Lake (ConocoPhillips 
and ExxonMobil); and Niglintgak (Shell). The anchor fields 
initially would produce a total of 823 million cubic feet (mmcf) 
per day. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
Long-Awaited Initial Regulatory Report Finally Completed 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----------- 
 
¶5. One of the biggest stumbling blocks to the project turned out to 
be the Joint Review Panel (JRP), a board of seven independent 
members appointed in August 2004 by then-federal Environment 
Minister Stephane Dion.  Intended to combine aboriginal and federal 
regulators with oversight over the pipeline route, the JRP took on 
a life of its own.  Unrestricted by deadlines, members repeatedly 
postponed their report, eventually issued in December 2009.  The 
cost of their work was reportedly more than $18 million (cdn). 
 
¶6. The panel examined the potential environmental, socio-economic 
and cultural effects of the project and concluded that, provided 
its 176 recommendations are fully implemented, the adverse impacts 
of the project and associated northwest Alberta facilities "would 
not likely be significant" and the project and those facilities 
"would likely make a positive contribution towards a sustainable 
northern future." 
 
----------------------------------------- 
 
Report Contains "Nothing Insurmountable" 
 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. Project proponents welcomed the report's conclusion that the 
project should move forward along the lines of project description 
 
 
and original routing filed in Imperial's application. 
Representatives of Imperial Oil and the Aboriginal Pipeline Group 
characterized the recommendations as "nothing insurmountable" and 
something they "could absolutely work with."  Proponents were 
required to submit by late January comments on the report to the 
National Energy Board (NEB) - the lead federal regulator - and 
those comments largely focused on procedural issues. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
 
Next Steps Culminating in Final Decision 
 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶8. The NEB has set dates of April 12-25, 2010 to hear final 
arguments on applications to construct the pipeline and related 
facilities.  During the final argument phase, applicants or 
intervenors in the NEB hearing process will have the chance to make 
their case to the NEB either for or against the project.  Final 
arguments must be based on evidence that has already been presented 
to the NEB relating to the engineering, safety and economic aspects 
of the project.  The NEB plans to release its final decision in 
September - just under six years after the project application was 
filed. 
 
¶9. Meanwhile, negotiations with the federal government for fiscal 
terms that started under the previous Liberal government have moved 
slowly and are cloaked in secrecy.  The companies say costs for the 
pipeline have soared from $7 billion to $16.2 billion (cdn) during 
the six-year review process.  Company representatives tell us that 
they have targeted federal support in the "hundreds of millions of 
dollars" in some combination of loan or other fiscal guarantees 
that lower the cost of capital; funding for infrastructure 
development; and some assurances aimed at offsetting regulatory 
uncertainty (e.g., compensation if regulatory approval is denied). 
 
¶10. Before the NEB launches final arguments in April, the project 
proponents hope the federal government will pledge sufficient 
government assistance to get them through the regulatory and 
project cost development phase - approximately three years at a 
cost of around $400 million dollars (cdn).  A definitive investment 
decision in 2013 will depend on final micro and macro economic 
analyses, the real and projected costs of inputs such as steel and 
labor, projected gas demand and prices, and the amount of 
government support going forward.  If the project proceeds, 
construction would stretch over four winter building cycles. 
 
------------------------ 
 
But Do We Need More Gas? 
 
------------------------ 
 
¶11. Project proponents tell us they are convinced that natural gas 
from both the Mackenzie pipeline as well as the proposed Alaska 
North Slope pipeline is necessary over the next 25-40 years to 
compensate for declining conventional gas production, even 
considering significant amounts of North American shale gas coming 
on line.  They enumerate the benefits of the proposed project to 
the Northwest Territories and Canada in terms of employment, 
training, economic development, and consolidation of what many 
refer to as Canadian sovereignty over the north.  They also point 
out that the Joint Review Panel recommended that the government 
engage with industry in a revenue-sharing agreement.  One of the 
interested companies told us they are encouraging supportive 
Aboriginal leaders to voice publicly the importance of resource 
development to their communities' interests and the need for 
government support for this project. 
 
------- 
 
Comment 
 
------- 
 
¶12. Over the past eighteen months, many Canadian forecasters had 
ceased factoring in possible shipments through the Mackenzie 
pipeline due to the repeated delays in issuance of the Joint Review 
Panel report, low natural gas prices, and increasing unconventional 
North American gas supply.  Given the largely positive nature of 
the JRP report, project proposals are now expressing cautious 
optimism (although some analysts still question the need for 
Northern gas at this time).  As portrayed by industry, the clincher 
will be the willingness of the federal government to provide fiscal 
and regulatory assurances - a tough sell in the current budgetary 
environment.  If the project goes forward and runs smoothly (which 
 
 
the project's history shows is no sure thing), first gas could be 
seen as early as 2017. 
LOCHMAN