10DAKAR226
Senegal Registers First Lab Confirms cases of H1N1
Fri Feb 12 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Dakar
R 121033Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY DAKAR
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 0070
INFO ECOWAS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS DAKAR 000226 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINR ECON SG
SUBJECT: Senegal Registers First Lab Confirms cases of H1N1 
 
¶1. Senegal has seen its first official cases of H1N1 after some 14 
were reported in the papers and then confirmed by Minister of 
Health Modou Diagne Fada. Seven of the cases were reported in the 
Dakar suburb of Pikine, six were reported in Diourbel and one in 
Touba.  Both Diourbel and Touba were recently host to over one 
million pilgrims from the Mouride Brotherhood as part of their 
celebration of the "Grand Magal" in Touba. According to the 
Director of the National Pharmacist Association (PNA), Dr. Pape 
Ndiaye, Senegal does not yet have the specific vaccine available 
for the H1N1 but the PNA has 10,000 doses of Tamiflu. 
 
¶2. During his press conference on February 8 Health Minister Fada 
claimed that the H1N1 epidemic "is under control and that people 
should not panic because medication is available and free of 
charge."  He tried to allay peoples' fears by saying that this 
pandemic "was far from being a deadly one."  He went on to say that 
Senegal has enough resources to face the swine flu indicating that 
kits and surgical masks have been distributed throughout Senegal's 
various city and municipal health structures and that medical staff 
were on standby in 11 regions.  Minister Fada confirmed that none 
of the people who had been infected had died.  The Minister then 
said that, "the World Health Organization has promised to offer us 
more vaccines by April." 
 
¶3. Comment: According to Embassy Dakar's medical personnel, H1N1 
vaccine is not available either commercially or in the public 
health sector in Senegal.  The ambiguous statement from the 
Minister aims to calm fears, but should not be construed to mean 
that Senegal will be able to inoculate the population.  At this 
stage, Senegal cannot prevent people from getting H1N1, but the 
country's medical infrastructure seems ready to be able to cope 
with an outbreak, as long as it remains a minor one.  End comment. 
 
 
BERNICAT