10HARARE170
ZANU-PF Peacefully Protests Sanctions In Front Of U.S.
Wed Feb 24 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Harare
VZCZCXRO2209
OO RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSB #0170/01 0551554
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O R 241553Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY HARARE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0133
INFO SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HARARE 000170 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
AF/S FOR BWALCH 
DS/IP/AF, DS/TIA/ITA 
DRL FOR SMORGAN, MMITTELHAUSER, AND TDANG 
DOL/ILAB FOR SHALEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL ASEC ZI
SUBJECT: ZANU-PF Peacefully Protests Sanctions In Front Of U.S. 
Embassy 
 
REF: HARARE 74 
 
--------------- 
SUMMARY 
--------------- 
 
 
 
¶1. (U) A ZANU-PF organized group protested peacefully in downtown 
Harare and in front of the U.S. Embassy on February 24.  The 
protesters, who were allegedly bused in from outside Harare, 
shouted anti-sanctions slogans and appeared to have been paid at 
ZANU-PF headquarters after the march ended.  Although the group 
reportedly intended to present petitions at the U.S. Embassy and at 
the headquarters of the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC), 
neither has received such a petition.  The police escorted the 
well-organized protesters but did not inform the Embassy in 
advance.  Police briefly detained and released one journalist. 
There are no other reports of arrests or injuries.  END SUMMARY. 
 
 
 
------------------------------ 
March on the Embassy 
------------------------------ 
 
 
 
¶2. (U) At around 10:30 local time, approximately 1,000 ZANU-PF 
supporters gathered in downtown Harare for a protest march against 
sanctions.  According to the MDC, ZANU-PF brought the group to 
Harare from nearby rural areas in buses and trucks.  The protesters 
wore t-shirts that said "sanctions are criminal" and carried 
professional-looking posters with slogans such as "We will defeat 
sanctions to realize your dreams," "Sanctions are catastrophic to 
us," and "Pirate radio stations are stealing our sovereignty."  The 
group chanted anti-sanctions and pro-ZANU-PF slogans as it was 
escorted by police through town. 
 
 
 
¶3. (U) At approximately 11:00 the group arrived on Herbert Chitepo 
Avenue, about a block east of the chancery.  The crowd, following 
directions from its leaders, peacefully marched in front of the 
Embassy, pausing for about three minutes to boo, pump fists, and 
sing ZANU-PF songs.  The group also shouted anti-American and 
anti-U.S. government slogans, directing some of their comments at 
our locally employed guard force.  The comments included: "Don't 
you want land? What are you getting from the Americans?"; "We know 
where you live, we shall get you one by one";  "We want war with 
you Americans we are not afraid of you"; "Charles Ray must go, he 
is responsible for sanctions"; "You are responsible for our 
problems."  After jeering for a few moments, the crowd peacefully 
moved down the street.  While stopped in front of the chancery, a 
few in the group attempted to stand on barricades in front of the 
entrance but stopped when told to do so by Zimbabwean police. 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) After moving away from the Embassy, the group returned to 
ZANU-PF's headquarters, where it appeared protesters entered the 
building in turns, possibly to receive payment for participating. 
Although it was rumored throughout the day that the group was going 
to present petitions at the Embassy and at MDC headquarters 
downtown, no one submitted a petition at either location. 
Beginning at approximately 15:00, the group was loaded into buses 
in downtown Harare.  It appeared that some of the protesters 
commandeered some public transport, but the crowds quickly 
dissipated when it began to rain heavily. 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Although the police succeeded in ensuring the march in 
front of the Embassy was peaceful, no one in the Embassy received 
advance notice of the protest.  The Embassy only learned of it at 
10:45 from a civil society contact who heard about it from an MDC 
official.  The Embassy is still without regular protection by the 
Zimbabwean police (reftel). 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------- 
Journalist Detained, Released 
--------------------------------------- 
 
HARARE 00000170  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) Before the march began, plainclothes police detained 
freelance journalist Andrisson Manyere for about 15 minutes. 
According to Manyere, the police objected to his taking photos 
without having first sought permission from the police or ZANU-PF. 
According to another journalist in the area, Manyere was 
photographing the ZANU-PF youths scrambling for free t-shirts in 
front of ZANU-PF's headquarters.  Manyere was taken to the nearby 
ZANU-PF headquarters building,  where  ZANU-PF officials and 
officers of the Central Intelligence Organization recorded  his 
details and forced him to delete all of the photos from his camera. 
(NOTE: Manyere has been a frequent target of the police.  He was 
arrested on January 18 in Harare while filming a march by Women of 
Zimbabwe Arise.  Manyere was abducted in December 2008 and held 
incommunicado for several weeks by security agents who tortured 
him.  He remained in prison until April 2009 and still faces 
charges of participating in bombings of police stations.  END 
NOTE.) 
 
 
 
--------------- 
COMMENT 
--------------- 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) Today's protest came as a complete surprise, despite our 
slowly improving communication with ZANU-PF and the police.  Our 
contacts in civil society, who usually hear of large events in 
advance, were also caught off guard.  Although the rhetoric 
expressed by the protesters is nothing new, it is evidence that 
ZANU-PF is once again exploiting rural youth to do its bidding, 
using enticements of free food, t-shirts, and a trip to Harare. 
This was one of the largest protests in Harare in recent memory and 
the first to take place in front of the Embassy in at least three 
years.  END COMMENT. 
Dhanani