10JAKARTA27
NOAA Administrator's Indonesia Visit Drives Climate,
Mon Jan 11 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXRO4476
RR RUEHCHI RUEHCN RUEHDT RUEHHM
DE RUEHJA #0027/01 0110708
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 110708Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4258
INFO RUEHZS/ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS COLL
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/DOD WASHDC
RHHJJPI/PACOM IDHS HONOLULU HI
RUEHBK/AMEMBASSY BANGKOK 8953
RUEHPB/AMEMBASSY PORT MORESBY 4204
RUEHDT/AMEMBASSY DILI 1055
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 JAKARTA 000027 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR OES, EAP AND STAS 
DEPT PASS TO OSTP JASON RAO 
DEPT PASS TO USAID FOR ANE, EGAT 
COMMERCE FOR NOAA 
BANGKOK FOR RDM/A 
 
E.O. 12598: N/A 
TAGS: SENV KGHG EFIS TSPL PREL ID
SUBJECT: NOAA Administrator's Indonesia Visit Drives Climate, 
Science, Ocean Priorities 
 
JAKARTA 00000027  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: NOAA Administrator Dr. Jane Lubchenco's first 
visit to Indonesia advanced Administration priorities on climate 
change, science and technology, food security, and ocean policy. 
She emphasized President Obama's commitment to a deeper partnership 
with Indonesia, and previewed Science Envoy Bruce Alberts' upcoming 
visit as evidence of this commitment.  Dr. Lubchenco received 
enthusiastic high-level Indonesian support for the planned ocean 
exploration expedition by the NOAA ship OKEANOS EXPLORER with the 
Indonesian ship BARUNA JAYA IV.  This joint ocean exploration 
expedition planned for June 2010, she noted, reflects a true 
partnership of equals and highlights the potential for enhanced 
bilateral collaboration across the board.  GOI interlocutors viewed 
Dr. Lubchenco's visit as the first in a series of high-level visits 
that will build toward a POTUS visit in 2010.  Media coverage was 
extensive and positive.  End Summary. 
 
Background 
---------- 
 
¶2. (U) Dr. Lubchenco, Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and 
Atmosphere and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administrator (NOAA) 
Administrator, paid her first official visit to Indonesia January 
3-5.  She started with a January 3 site visit - to a tuna monitoring 
station - and an informal lunch in Bali with Indonesian Marine 
Affairs and Fisheries Minister Fadel Muhammad.  The lunch dialog 
highlighted Minister Fadel's interest in a new ocean policy for 
Indonesia, his commitment to the Coral Triangle Initiative (CTI) and 
interest in sustainable fisheries and seafood and aquaculture as 
integral to food security.  This was followed by a series of 
meetings and events in Jakarta on January 4-5 with senior officials, 
scientists, students and civil society representatives. 
 
Ocean Policy and Ocean Exploration Priorities for Fadel 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶3. (U) In their formal meeting, Minister Fadel Muhammad stated his 
strong support for the U.S.-Indonesia ocean exploration partnership 
and appreciation for other existing collaborative efforts, including 
USG support for CTI and ocean/climate observations.  He and Dr. 
Lubchenco committed to deepen the positive relationship between NOAA 
and the Ministry of Marine Affairs and Fisheries (MMAF).  Both were 
enthusiastic about opportunities for marine scientific 
collaboration, recognizing its importance for sustainably managing 
marine resources, ensuring food security, and understanding climate 
change's effect on the ocean.  Dr. Lubchenco highlighted coral 
reefs, ocean acidification, ocean current circulation and upwelling 
as "perfect" areas for collaborative research. 
 
¶4. (U) Dr. Lubchenco welcomed the news that the Government of 
Indonesia (GOI) had cleared the research permit for the OKEANOS 
EXPLORER's voyage.  She and Muhammad recognized the importance of 
the voyage of NOAA's OKEANOS EXPLORER this June to kick off 
long-term scientific collaboration in ocean exploration.  Dr. 
Lubchenco stressed that public-private partnerships and education 
are critical to maximizing mutual benefit from scientific 
collaboration.  Dr. Lubchenco highlighted the upcoming visit to 
Indonesia by Presidential Science Envoy Dr. Bruce Alberts as an 
important opportunity to connect U.S. and Indonesian scientific 
communities. 
 
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment could Bolster GOI Climate Change 
Adaptation Strategy 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶5. (U) The Coordinating Ministry for People's Welfare focuses on 
achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and views its top 
priorities of climate change, disaster relief and prevention 
capacity, education and health through the MDG lens.  Dr. Lubchenco 
explained to Dr. Indroyono Soesilo, Secretary to the Minister, the 
work of the United Nations' Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (MEA), a 
one-time scientific study addressing how changes in the environment 
impact human well-being.  The MEA complements the IPCC process. 
Soesilo noted that such a study would help Indonesian leadership 
make better choices regarding resource mobilization and multi-sector 
approaches to addressing environmental challenges.  He asked for 
follow-up meetings in the U.S. with NOAA in February, and suggested 
jointly hosting an MEA seminar in Bali in the future.  The concepts 
 
JAKARTA 00000027  002.2 OF 004 
 
 
and scientific information in the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment 
(www.MAweb.org) Dr. Lubchenco described were of keen interest to 
other ministries as well. 
 
Aboard NOAA's Ocean Exploration Partner Vessel 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶6. (U) Dr. Lubchenco's tour of the Indonesian research vessel BARUNA 
JAYA IV successfully built momentum for the June joint voyage.  The 
ship is one of four Agency for Assessment and Application of 
Technology ocean research vessels.  It will accompany and conduct 
research alongside the OKEANOS EXPLORER during the June ocean 
exploration expedition.  Dr. Lubchenco's visit mirrored an 
Indonesian visit to the OKEANOS EXPLORER she hosted in the U.S. last 
July.  The ship visit was covered extensively by Indonesian press 
including an all-news format station (Metro TV) and the 
largest-circulation daily newspaper (Kompas). 
 
"Avoid the Unmanageable and Manage the Unavoidable" 
--------------------------------------------- ------ 
 
¶7. (U) In a scientific and policy lecture and discussion hosted by 
the Indonesian Association of Oceanologists, Dr. Lubchenco spoke 
with over 150 students and scientists about climate change and the 
ocean.  She highlighted changes being seen in acidity, temperature, 
and currents, noting that these changes set the stage for non-linear 
disruptions to ocean processes, with serious consequences to human 
well-being.  Dr. Lubchenco emphasized that even without climate 
change impacts, overfishing, habitat destruction, and pollution have 
severely compromised ocean health.  Mitigation should focus on these 
controllable stressors while adapting to inevitable climate change 
impacts.  The lecture emphasized many proactive steps that can be 
taken and was well-received by the audience, which included senior 
GOI officials and the press. 
 
At Dinner: "Did the U.S. Do Enough in Copenhagen?" 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶8. (SBU) At a dinner hosted in honor of Dr. Lubchenco by Ambassador 
Hume, leading Indonesian science policymakers and advisors voiced 
their disappointment over what they considered inadequate U.S. 
climate change leadership in Copenhagen.  Dr. Lubchenco highlighted 
the many significant efforts in clean energy investment, fuel 
standards, promotion of clean energy, and legislative initiatives 
that the Obama Administration achieved during its first 10 months. 
She stressed that the most accurate way to describe the Copenhagen 
outcome is that the Accord lays a good foundation for future 
progress.  She noted U.S. leadership behind the scenes was 
invaluable in managing COP-15's volatile political dynamics in a 
fashion that was not obvious to many observers.  Ambassador Hume 
added that the view of U.S. "failure" is unjustified, considering 
that all but four of the many countries with obligations under the 
Kyoto Protocol have failed to meet Kyoto's binding targets-and 
without consequences. 
 
Ocean Exploration and Dr. Alberts: Symbols for Ministry of Science 
and Technology 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Minister Suharna Surapranata stated his appreciation for 
the ocean exploration partnership and his support for increased S&T 
cooperation with the United States.  He also expressed his hope that 
cooperation on capacity building and technology transfer could be 
expanded.  Dr. Lubchenco reiterated the U.S. commitment to advancing 
the scientific partnership, pointing to the joint ocean exploration 
expedition and Dr. Alberts' upcoming visit.  The Indonesians 
expressed excitement about Dr. Alberts, and indicated they would 
invite him to speak at both the Indonesian Academy of Sciences and 
at the Presidential Palace.  Surapranata and his staff were 
optimistic the remaining Ministry of Defense approval for the 
OKEANOS EXPLORER's voyage would be issued shortly. 
 
Vice President Boediono Endorses S&T Partnerships 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Vice President Boediono was supportive of the OKEANOS 
EXPLORER visit and the broader ocean exploration partnership.  He 
 
JAKARTA 00000027  003.2 OF 004 
 
 
also expressed his interest in meeting Science Envoy Dr. Alberts. 
Dr. Lubchenco reemphasized President Obama's commitment to 
partnering with Indonesia in the field of science and technology. 
In keeping with the spirit of scientific exploration, she noted, all 
data collected during the expedition would be freely shared.  Vice 
President Boediono agreed that closer science and technology 
cooperation would benefit both countries.  Dr. Lubchenco informed 
Boediono that Dr. Alberts' focus would be to promote scientific 
capacity building and scientific partnerships, and advance science 
education at all levels.  She also noted that items that could be 
advanced ahead of the POTUS visit included the Science and 
Technology Agreement and a second Tropical Forest Conservation Act. 
Boediono replied that "we support these and I know the Ambassador is 
working hard on these with us." 
 
"A Healthy Environment Enables a Healthy Economy" 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶11. (U) Deputy Chief of Mission Ted Osius hosted a lunch for NGO 
partners of the Coral Triangle Initiative. Participants also 
included a private sector corporate social responsibility 
representative.  An active discussion focused on the need for envoys 
like Dr. Lubchenco to stress to Indonesia leaders that a healthy 
economy depends on a healthy environment.  They also identified 
potential opportunities for the private sector to promote ocean 
issues - including ocean exploration - with Indonesian school 
children and the public.  Discussions highlighted the productive 
partnerships between NGOs, local governments and national government 
in the Coral Triangle as models for expansion.  The importance of 
science education, local leadership, scientific capacity building 
and sustained engagement and support were highlighted. 
 
Climate Change Adaptation One Tree at a Time 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶12. (U) The mangrove restoration event at a site on Jakarta's 
northern shoreline drew extensive media coverage, with Dr. Lubchenco 
and students up to their elbows and knees in mud, planting almost 
1000 seedlings.  The event - themed "Indonesia and the U.S: 
combating climate change one tree at a time" - was organized by a 
public-private consortium focused on mangrove restoration.  Dr. 
Lubchenco highlighted the importance of local conservation efforts 
and developing science capacity in the Muslim world. 
 
Climate as an Element of "Total Defense" 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) Dr. Lubchenco also briefed Defense Minister Purnomo 
Yusgiantoro on the OKEANOS EXPLORER's planned visit.  She 
underscored President Obama's commitment to scientific partnerships 
based on the principles of equality and mutual benefit.  The OKEANOS 
EXPLORER visit would demonstrate the benefits of United 
States-Indonesia scientific cooperation, she noted.  She explained 
that the ship's communication technology will be able to send 
high-definition underwater video in real time from a Remotely 
Operated Vehicle to shore; connecting the ship and its discoveries 
live with audiences in Indonesia and around the world. Yusgiantoro 
agreed the OKEANOS EXPLORER visit would further scientific and 
technological cooperation, and committed to providing the necessary 
approvals from the Defense Ministry.  He also named a senior 
Indonesian Navy point of contact for NOAA to facilitate the 
process. 
 
¶14. (SBU) During the meeting, Dr. Lubchenco praised President 
Yudhoyono's leadership on climate change and stressed the importance 
of oceans in understanding and adapting to the phenomenon.  From his 
perspective as the former Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources, 
Yusgiantoro noted that President Yudhoyono (SBY) had committed 
Indonesia to a 26 percent reduction in emissions or a 41 percent 
reduction with external assistance.  SBY, he explained, planned to 
press other tropical forest countries (the F-11) to make similar 
commitments.  SBY believed that climate change could affect 
Indonesia's national security and must be addressed as part of 
"total defense" - with a holistic focus on forests, oceans and 
people combined.  Dr. Lubchenco agreed that climate change was a key 
national security issue, and underscored the importance of United 
States-Indonesia cooperation on the matter. 
 
JAKARTA 00000027  004.2 OF 004 
 
 
 
¶15. (U) Under Secretary Lubchenco cleared this message. 
 
HUME