10KHARTOUM72
Port Sudan Union Protest: Harbinger of Election Activism?
Wed Jan 13 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO6764
OO RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHKH #0072/01 0131237
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O R 131235Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0013
INFO IGAD COLLECTIVE
UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/CJTF HOAUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KHARTOUM 000072 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
NSC FOR MGAVIN, LETIM 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR/SUDAN 
ADDIS ABABA ALSO FOR USAU 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM ELAB EINT SU
SUBJECT: Port Sudan Union Protest: Harbinger of Election Activism? 
 
REF: A) 09 KHARTOUM 1033 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: 250 members of a politically-influential union 
of dockworkers operating in Port Sudan were arrested during a 
peaceful demonstration at the offices of Governor (Wali) al-Tahir 
Ella on 10 January.  Union organizers had previously attempted to 
call a general assembly to discuss speculation that the Government 
of Sudan (GoS) had entered into negotiations to sell the port to a 
multi-national Arab company, but a local government entity that 
regulates the activities of trade unions and other Sudanese 
Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) failed to provide the 
necessary permit for the union to assemble.  Numerous political 
experts are watching trade unions with interest as the elections 
approach, with some speculating that, at least in Eastern Sudan, 
trade guilds such as the Stevedores' Union could take a leading 
role in mobilizing and organizing voters in the April elections. 
End Summary. 
 
 
 
----------------------------------- 
 
Arrest and Release of Demonstrators 
 
----------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶2.  (SBU) On 10 January, a group of 250 dockworkers were arrested 
during a peaceful demonstration in front of the offices of Red Sea 
State's governor, Wali al-Tahir Ella.  According to protest 
organizers, the demonstrators were arrested for disturbing the 
peace and assembling in public without a permit.  Union leaders 
have confirmed that the arrestees were treated decently while 
detained, and all were released within hours.  Sudanese media 
outlets have indicated that both the Sudan People's Liberation 
Movement (SPLM) and the Communist Party helped to organize the 
protest.  A leading member of Sudan's Communist Party, Babakir 
al-Shafa'e, confirmed the presence of party members at the 
incident, but stated that the Communist Party "supported, but did 
not engineer" the protest, which he characterized as "apolitical." 
 
 
 
 
---------------------- 
 
Assembly Permit Denied 
 
---------------------- 
 
 
 
¶3.   (SBU) Those arrested were all members of the 
opposition-aligned, 2160-member Stevedores' Union in Eastern Sudan, 
who had gathered to petition Ella to allow the union to convene its 
General Assembly, after the local government had failed to process 
the necessary permits to hold the meeting.  While all parties agree 
that no assembly permit was issueed, it is unclear whether the 
fault lies with the local government for failing to process the 
necessary paperwork, or whether the Stevedores' Union neglected to 
turn in all of the required documents, as National Congress Party 
(NCP)-aligned Union leader al-Tahir Adroub has intimated.  (Note: 
Many have reported that the GoS routinely exploits bureaucratic red 
tape as a means of restricting political activity of opposition 
groups (reftel). End Note.) 
 
 
 
¶4.   (SBU) By all accounts, the Stevedore's Union is a powerful 
group with significant financial resources and strong political 
ties to opposition parties.   According to Union leadership, 
members are required to pay annual dues, and contribute a small 
amount for each shift worked.  These moneys are then pooled by 
Union leadership into cooperative investments, with port 
infrastructure playing a significant part in the investment 
portfolio.  Rumors that Port Sudan's facilities had been, or would 
soon be, privatized and sold to a multinational Arab corporation 
triggered concerns within the Stevedores' Union over the 
disposition of its assets, and prompted the demand for a general 
assembly to call for a stop to privatization.  Protest organizer 
Mohammed Oson said that, while the Stevedores' Union had concerns 
about the possibility of privatization, the protest that ensued was 
 
KHARTOUM 00000072  002 OF 002 
 
 
directly related to the interference of a local governmental body, 
the Registrar of Cooperative Societies, which refused to issue the 
permit allowing the General Assembly to convene. 
 
 
 
--------------------- 
 
Protests May Continue 
 
--------------------- 
 
 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The Union maintains that it has the right to assemble to 
discuss internal financial matters, and claims that, in denying the 
necessary permits, the local government illegally interfered with 
this right.  Mohammed Oson has announced that the GoS must allow 
the General Assembly to convene within the next three days, or face 
continued demonstrations. 
 
 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Comment: While the dispute between the Stevedores' Union 
and the government of Red Sea State is rooted in financial 
concerns, the political implications of the protest and arrests 
cannot be ignored.  The Communist Party has claimed only limited 
involvement, but union leaders have nonetheless taken this incident 
as an opportunity to direct recriminations at the NCP and the 
national government.  Numerous political experts are watching trade 
unions with interest as the elections approach, with some 
speculating that, at least in Eastern Sudan, trade guilds such as 
the Stevedores' Union will take a leading role in mobilizing and 
organizing voters in the April elections.  End Comment. 
WHITEHEAD