10MEXICO690
Scenesetter for Ex-IM Chairman Fred Hochberg
Wed Feb 24 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Mexico
VZCZCXRO2316
RR RUEHRS
DE RUEHME #0690/01 0551758
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 241757Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY MEXICO
TO ALL US CONSULATES IN MEXICO COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0620UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 MEXICO 000690   

SENSITIVE  
SIPDIS  
SIPDIS  
STATE/TREASURY PASS TO EX-IM BANK   

E.O. 12958: N/A 
 TAGS: ECON EFIN ETRD MX OVIP
SUBJECT: Scenesetter for Ex-IM Chairman Fred Hochberg 

  1. (SBU) Summary. Your visit comes at a crucial moment in our  efforts to deepen our bilateral relationship with Mexico, our third  largest trading partner after Canada and China. As we  institutionalize our security agenda we will also need to give more  attention to the economic and social agendas in a country whose  economic and social well-being affects ours directly. The United  States' global competitiveness depends increasingly on a more  competitive Mexico. Efforts to strengthen our mutually beneficial  competitiveness in 2010 will focus on spurring innovation, creating  jobs on both sides of the border, building a modern 21st century  border, encouraging the requisite regulations and infrastructure,  and supporting a sustainable energy and environment agenda. All  these are top priorities for the Calderon administration and offer  huge potential for future U.S. investment and economic development.  Mexico's and our economic recovery go hand in hand, and U.S.  export-led successes depend increasingly on partnering with  Mexico's lower-cost manufacturing capability. President Calderon  is personally devoted to the issue of climate change and renewable  energy, opening the possibility for trade and investment  opportunities that benefit both countries. End Summary.     

Political Context 
  -------------------- 

    2. (SBU) Present Calderon enters the last three years of his  six-year term facing a complicated political and economic  environment. His PAN party emerged seriously weakened from a  dramatic 2009 mid-term election in which the opposition (PRI)  gained control of the Mexican Congress. His popularity numbers  have dropped 10-points since the beginning of last year, yet they  still hover solidly over 50 percent. He is by no means a lame  duck. Still, the opposition PRI party is in the ascendancy,  cautiously managing its illusory unity in an effort to dominate the  ten gubernatorial contests that are up in the coming year, and to  avoid any missteps that could jeopardize its front-runner status in  the run-up to the 2012 presidential elections. In addition, the  public's deepening economic worries have begun to counterbalance  their concern about security. 

    Economic Context   
----------------------     

¶3. (SBU) Following the 2009 electoral setback, Calderon made  creating jobs and eradicating poverty his top two priorities for  2010, sharing the agenda with security issues that have become  acutely sensitive in the past weeks due to the persistent violence  in Ciudad Juarez. It is important that Calderon succeed in making  real progress on the economy and security in the last three years  of his term. The economic and security agendas are time-sensitive  and volatile, and the more momentum that can be achieved now, the  greater the prospect for continuity into a new administration.  However, the complexities of pushing viable economic reforms  through an opposition Congress complicate advancing such an agenda.  If Calderon is unable to strengthen Mexico's competitiveness in  order to promote jobs and eradicate poverty, the United States will  also feel the impact through immigration pressures and greater  volatility in high-violence cities that have been the battleground  for narco-traffickers. A stable and growing Mexico is in both our  security and economic interests. 

    4. (SBU) The oil sector is a crucial component of Mexico's economy  and is the largest source of export earnings for the country,  accounting for 10 percent of all export earnings. However,  Mexico's oil production has declined rapidly from a peak of 3.4  million barrels per day in 2004 to a projected 2.5 million barrels  per day in 2010. Despite some optimistic GOM forecasts, there are  no realistic options for reversing this decline in the short to  medium term. Mexico has relied heavily on the Cantarell oil field,  one of the largest in the world. Despite nitrogen injection and  other enhanced oil recovery techniques, the Cantarell field has  entered a stage of long-term decline with production falling by  more than 70% from its peak of over 2 million barrels a day in 2004   MEXICO 00000690 002 OF 004    to less than 650,000 barrels per day in 2009.     

¶5. (SBU) The Mexican government's reliance on oil revenue to  finance over one third of the federal budget has deprived Mexico's  state owned oil company, PEMEX, of much needed capital for  exploration, production, and infrastructure projects. As a result  of decades of underinvestment, PEMEX today finds itself without  alternative oil fields which could compensate for Cantarell's  decline. PEMEX accelerated the development of the giant  Chicontepec oil basin in 2009, investing $2 billion with the goal  of increasing production from 29,000 to 90,000 barrels in 2009.  With 750 new wells drilled over the past year, overall production  remains stagnant and production per well has fallen dramatically.  Although the Chicontepec fields are estimated to contain almost 9  billion barrels of reserves, Chicontepec is a complex reservoir  which involves technical challenges and significant operational  costs. Exploiting Chicontepec will require high-risk investments  and the drilling of a large number of wells for relatively small  returns. Many experts believe that even with substantial  investments, PEMEX will have a difficult time reaching its 600,000  barrel a day production goal by 2021. Other fields Mexico is  currently exploiting include Ku Maloob Zaap, which has reached peak  production levels; Crudo Ligero Marino and other smaller fields in  the south which are largely enhanced oil recovery projects will do  little to reverse Mexico's production decline.     U.S. 

Exports to Mexico 
  ----------------------------     

¶6. (SBU) Mexico is the U.S.'s 3rd largest trade partner and 2nd  largest export market for U.S. products. U.S-Mexico bilateral  trade increased from USD 88 billion in 1993 to USD 301.87  (projected) in 2009. Mexico depends heavily on trade with the U.S.  with the U.S. supplying as much as 60% of total Mexican imports.     

National Infrastructure Plan (NIP) 
  ----------------------------------------     

¶7. (SBU) The National Infrastructure Program (NIP) was launched by  Mexican President Calderon in July 2007 to dramatically increase  infrastructure investment, in energy, transportation and the  environment. The NIP is being financed using public-private  partnerships, with significant Mexican public sector investment.  The NIP aims to increase infrastructure investment by 50 percent  that, if sustained, according to Mexican government officials could  place Mexico in the world's top 20 countries for infrastructure  competitiveness by 2030. Mexico currently ranks of 68 out of 125  countries worldwide in infrastructure. 

    8. (SBU) However, the economic crisis has impacted availability of  financing and many projects have been delayed. In an effort to  invigorate the program and generate interest among U.S. investors  and exporters in key NIP projects, Mexico's Secretary of Finance,  Agustin Carstens, (he is now President of the Central Bank) led a  group of Mexican government officials including, BANOBRAS Director,  Alonso Garcia, to New York in November 2009. The group made a  formal presentation that included distribution of a list of  priority infrastructure projects that Mexico is pursuing. 

    BANOBRAS   
-------------- 

    9. (SBU) BANOBRAS, Mexico's public works bank, provides financing  and technical assistance for infrastructure projects or public  services directly or through concessions, permits or operating   MEXICO 00000690 003 OF 004    contracts with private companies. BANOBRAS financing reached  approximately USD 5 billion in 2009. In 2010, it will be over USD  3 billion. FONADIN (Fond Nacional de Infraestructura) was  established in February 2008, by the decree of President Calderon,  for infrastructure development in communications, transportation,  water, natural resources and tourism. FONADIN is attached to  BANOBRAS, which in turn reports ultimately to the Secretariat of  Finance. 

    Pension Funds and Capital Development Certificates   --------------------------------------------- ------------------- 

    10. (SBU) Institutional investors such as pension funds have  recently entered the infrastructure project finance game with eased  restrictions and the development of Capital Development  Certificates (Cecades). In October 2009, President Calderon  announced that this new debt instrument will make a total of USD 10  billion available for infrastructure projects by the end of his  presidency in 2012. Soon after the announcement, Goldman Sachs  Infrastructure Partners sold a 6.55 billion peso (USD 477.3  million) stake in a toll road concession to Mexican pension funds.  The purchase made institutional investors a 32% stakeholder in Red  de Carreteras de Occidente, or RCO, which operates four toll roads  in central Mexico.     

¶11. (SBU) Australian investment bank, Macquarie, followed with the  creation of the Macquarie Mexican Infrastructure Fund with  approximately USD 408 million in initial commitments from Mexican  pension funds, FONADIN and Macquarie. This fund is the first  peso-denominated fund solely focused on investment opportunities in  Mexican infrastructure projects. FONADIN's current commitment to  the fund is USD 80 million of the total. 

    12. (SBU) The involvement of pension funds (with USD 100 billion  under management), is an important attempt by the Mexican  government to stimulate investment in infrastructure given the  shortfall in international financial markets. Ex-Im Bank's  proposed Memorandum of Understanding comes as the Mexican  government is aggressively pursuing financing sources.     

USG support of the NIP   
----------------------------     

¶13. (SBU) Since the announcement of the NIP the U.S. Embassy in  Mexico has coordinated USG resources including USTDA, EX-IM Bank,  USDOC to name a few in support of NIP projects. Specifically, the  U.S. Embassy has facilitated on-going discussions between Ex-Im  Bank and FONADIN toward the establishment of a closer working  relationship. The MOU that you will sign with BANOBRAS during your  visit is a significant statement of USG support for Mexico's  Infrastructure development.     

¶14. (SBU) Overall, your visit comes at a critical time as project  and export financing is needed to support the development and  completion of the projects identified in the NIP. It is also  important to keep in mind that increased investment in Mexico's  infrastructure supports regional competitiveness and furthers  economic development of both the United States and Mexico.     

Renewable Energy   
----------------------     

¶15. (SBU) Advancing bilateral cooperation on renewable energy,   MEXICO 00000690 004 OF 004    energy efficiency and the environmental agenda has been a top  priority for both President Obama and President Calderon since  their first meeting January 2009. This agenda was formalized when  the Bilateral Clean Energy and Climate Change Framework was  announced during President Obama's April 2009 visit to Mexico. On  January 25-26 a senior level working group met in Washington to  discuss pragmatic steps to advance this collaboration. The working  group agreed to establish a bilateral task force which will work to  create a renewable energy market between Baja California and  California. The task force will consider standards, transmission  capacity, regulatory issues and financing. This pilot project  could be able more broadly across the border, creating significant  opportunities for U.S. companies to export green technology to  Mexico. The January 25-26 meeting also helped advance cooperation  on the Framework Convention on Climate Change 16th Conference of  the parties (COP-16) which Mexico is hosting in late 2010.     

¶16. (SBU) You could also stress President Obama's personal  commitment to advancing a joint agenda on climate change and  renewable energy. As well, your interlocutors would benefit from  hearing the administration's commitment to use all available policy  and financial tools, drawing on DOE, EPA, State, TDA, USAID, OPIC,  Ex-Im, and USTR to create a viable renewable energy market between  both countries. 
 FEELEY