10NDJAMENA99
MINURCAT TRANSITION -- IMPACT OF PKO DRAWDOWN ON
Tue Feb 16 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ndjamena
VZCZCXRO4354
PP RUEHBC RUEHBZ RUEHDH RUEHDU RUEHGI RUEHJO RUEHKUK RUEHMA RUEHMR
RUEHPA RUEHRN RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNJ #0099/01 0471140
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 161140Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY NDJAMENA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7706
INFO RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 0004
RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE
RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVE
RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/HQ USAFRICOM STUTTGART GE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 NDJAMENA 000099 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR AF/C 
STATE ALSO FOR S/USSES 
STATE ALSO FOR PRM/AFR 
NSC FOR GAVIN 
GENEVA FOR RMA 
LONDON FOR POL - LORD 
PARIS FOR POL - BAIN AND KANEDA 
ADDIS ABABA FOR AU 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREF ASEC PREL PHUM SU CD
SUBJECT: MINURCAT TRANSITION -- IMPACT OF PKO DRAWDOWN ON 
HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE IN EASTERN CHAD 
 
REF: N'DJAMENA 0096 
 
-------- 
SUMMARY 
-------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) The GOC's objection to the renewal of MINURCAT's mandate in 
Chad has caused deep concern within the international community as 
to the impact the departure of the PKO's military and UNPOL actors 
will have on the provision of humanitarian services to the 420,000 
refugees and IDPs in eastern Chad.  Discussion centers on whether 
MINURCAT's only partially-deployed military forces have facilitated 
humanitarian access, improved security for aid workers, and might 
eventually create an 
environment that would allow IDPs to return to their areas of 
origin.  The future contribution of the DIS, the Chadian police 
force created to provide security in the camps and IDP sites, and 
its UNPOL mentors is debated as well. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Post believes that MINURCAT's departure will have a direct 
impact on humanitarian and NGO mobility in the field, to the extent 
that armed escorts have been at least somewhat effective in 
deterring carjacking and kidnapping.  The removal of air and 
tactical ground transport assets implies that aid workers deployed 
deep in the field will lose a key means for evacuation should 
wide-spread violence require departure from field bases.  The 
withdrawal of UNPOL mentoring and financial support to the DIS could 
derail this increasingly useful initiative.  The dominant impact of 
the departure of MINURCAT will likely be a "vacuum effect" in 
humanitarian space.  The sum of these effects would be the need for 
humanitarian agencies to reduce their staff exposure in the field, 
with the likely impact of ensuring only critical life-saving 
services to vulnerable populations.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------- 
BACKGROUND AND ASSUMPTIONS: 
PROTECT WHOM FROM WHICH THREAT? 
------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) The GOC's objection to the renewal of MINURCAT's mandate in 
Chad has caused deep concern within the humanitarian community. 
Discussion centers on whether MINURCAT's only partially-deployed 
military forces have facilitated humanitarian access, improved 
security for aid workers, and might eventually create an environment 
that would allow IDPs to return to their areas of origin. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The complexities of the Chadian security context have 
largely been lost in this discussion, in preference to a simplified 
set of questions:  Does MINURCAT provide security to humanitarians? 
Is that security critical to humanitarian activities?  Will 
humanitarians be safe if MINURCAT leaves?  Such simplification does 
not allow one to consider other questions: Security from WQMv?d" their activities, not on whether the beneficiaries 
have benefitted from MINURCAT, the biggest single humanitarian 
project in the country. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Given the level of insecurity in eastern Chad, a withdrawal 
of MINURCAT is assumed to not bode well for the humanitarian 
community remaining behind.  The conditions that have produced 
rampant criminality in eastern Chad - weakness of judicial 
structures and resulting impunity, lack of societal consensus as to 
the utility of humanitarian interventions that exclude host 
populations, idle rebel groups, extreme poverty and poor harvests, 
etc - are not within the control of MINURCAT.  It is however 
routinely assumed that a fully-deployed UN mission could mitigate 
the effects of these conditions on humanitarian operations. 
 
 
NDJAMENA 00000099  002 OF 004 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) MINURCAT as designed was created to confront threats other 
than those now of concern.  The original threats were inter-ethnic 
violence, and somewhat later, combat operations between Chadian and 
armed opposition forces.  The threat of current concern is violent 
criminality.  The threat down the road may be instability in Sudan 
following elections in April -- or for that matter, the same in Chad 
in November.  Full deployment of peacekeeping troops, as opposed to 
the partial deployment that is now on the ground, will arguably have 
only a limited effect on criminality, but MINURCAT and the DIS serve 
a deterrent purpose and could well help to deal with a renewal of 
spillover instability and violence from Sudan, should the situation 
there deteriorate.  Should the GoC insist on military withdrawal, as 
it says it will, the immediate humanitarian situation would be 
affected more by the "vacuum effect" than by a loss of an 
appropriate security response to the violent criminal threat now 
faced. 
 
--------------- 
FIELD MOBILITY 
--------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) MINURCAT's presence - along with the Chadian Detachement 
Integre de Securite (DIS) with its UNPOL mentors - has provided a 
simple instrument in the service of humanitarian work: armed escorts 
from field offices to camps and sites, and back.  Such escorts have 
been developed during the course of MINURCAT's existence in response 
to the threat to aid workers of violent criminal attacks and 
kidnappings.  Escorts with tactical  vehicles in close quarters with 
humanitarian convoys have almost never been attacked, though the 
resources required to service all humanitarian needs in this manner 
would exceed even full MINURCAT deployment -- and should there ever 
be even one attack, it would undermine this security tactic. 
"Road-running", where MINURCAT or DIS units patrol a road ahead of 
humanitarians, has had less success, with criminals understanding 
that the civilian convoy is vulnerable once the security element 
passes through the attack zone. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Unfortunately, the militarization of humanitarian 
activities has already generated the most feared consequence, that 
of increasingly militarized attacks on vehicle convoys targeted by 
criminal gangs, including those escorted by DIS units, as distinct 
from convoys under MINURCAT military protection.  DIS units are seen 
as increasingly responsive in breaking up acts of criminality and 
responding to attacks after the fact, though less as a deterrent 
force -- they are also subject to direct attack, on the road and in 
their bases.  Chad has very few essential elements of judicial 
process after the moment of arrest, with impunity the usual result. 
 
 
---------------- 
MASS EVACUATION 
AND QRF 
---------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) In the past, when attacks into Chad by armed opposition 
groups were seen as the primary threat, MINURCAT's air and ground 
transport assets and large, secure base compounds were seen as the 
foundation for mass evacuation of humanitarian staffs.  It has been 
assumed that in the likelihood of such a need, MINURCAT would make 
good somehow on its repeated assertions that it would ensure the 
safety and ultimate evacuation of exposed staffs.  Assumed, because 
no MINURCAT or UNDSS officials have provided NGOs with a defined 
evacuation plan from deep field locations -- in fact no plan has 
been forthcoming from UN DPKO in New York either.  UN POL, a 
civilian element of MINURCAT's overall presence, has refused 
deployment to any area where MINURCAT Quick Reaction Forces (QRF) 
were more than two hours distant.  NGOs were especially keen to 
believe that they would receive sanctuary and air lift in an 
outbreak of combat; departure of the MINURCAT forces would leave 
humanitarian agencies with few effective options for evacuation over 
great distances. 
 
------------------- 
SECURING THE 
HUMANITARIAN SPACE 
------------------- 
 
NDJAMENA 00000099  003 OF 004 
 
 
 
¶11. (SBU) Criminal activity targeting humanitarian workers has been 
on the rise in eastern Chad since the apparent withering of Chadian 
armed opposition groups after the failed attacks of mid-2009.  No 
force, including a fully-deployed MINURCAT, can impose an end to the 
many forms of crime facing the humanitarian community.  Criminal 
activity is already having a direct impact on freedom of movement in 
"humanitarian space" and access to refugees, internally displaced 
persons (IDPs), and other conflict-affected persons. 
 
¶12. (SBU) For example, in some areas humanitarian organizations have 
reduced their geographic coverage or pulled out entirely when the 
unwillingness of their host communities or GoC security services to 
provide security-through-acceptance has resulted in staff murders 
and kidnappings.  These decisions had nothing to do with MINURCAT, 
however -- neither MINURCAT nor the DIS had access to the specific 
areas where NGOs have closed operations. 
 
¶13. (SBU) The early withdrawal of MINURCAT nonetheless appears 
likely to create a vacuum in the response to the threat of violent 
criminal activity.  MINURCAT's footprint, even at half-deployment, 
seems to have had a partial deterrent effect, especially against 
crimes committed by GoC security elements.  The withdrawal of both 
deterrence and convoy escorts could mean that killings and 
kidnappings could spread to areas with larger NGO populations, 
resulting in additional reductions in humanitarian coverage. 
 
¶14. (SBU) In the last weeks of 2009, MINURCAT appeared ready to 
consider greater coordination of activities with those of 
humanitarians, primarily through links with UN agencies like the 
Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the 
Office of the Coordinator for Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), although 
less so with NGOs.  Specific MINURCAT activities that have become 
facilitative elements of the humanitarian operation include 
transport and security of food and non-food item freight shipments 
for remotely located humanitarian operations like those benefiting 
the new CAR refugees in Daha, and security in camps for large 
exercises like refugee registrations, in addition to escorts.  As 
per its mandate, MINURCAT is currently assisting the GoC and UNHCR 
in preparing the relocation of Oure Cassoni refugee camp away from 
the Chad-Sudan border. 
 
----------------------- 
DO IDPS WANT TO RETURN? 
----------------------- 
 
¶15. (SBU) The impetus for the deployment of MINURCAT and its 
predecessor, EUFOR, was violent inter-communal conflict (including 
Darfur spillover) that was happening in eastern Chad, primarily in 
the Sila and Assoungha Departments.  This violence peaked in late 
2006/early 2007, causing the IDP numbers to treble from about 60,000 
to 180,000.  Most violence had ended by the time the first EUFOR 
troops arrived. 
 
¶16. (SBU) Although MINURCAT has no track record in this area, a 
possible future role for international military forces, should they 
be allowed to stay, would be in facilitating the return of IDPs.  As 
in Darfur, IDPs in Chad cite security as the biggest factor 
preventing their return home.  Without a national government (or UN 
Mission) that can provide the necessary security umbrella in Sila 
and Assoungha, the many steps to facilitating returns (supporting 
reconciliation, addressing land occupation, providing assistance in 
villages of origin, etc.) will be extremely difficult and slow. 
 
¶17. (SBU) Beyond security concerns, factors militating against IDP 
returns include socio-economic factors in their current sites. 
There, IDPs are benefitting from a kind of accelerated urbanization, 
where they receive clean water and primary health care services they 
could never have dreamed of having before, and which will not be 
available to them in the areas they fled through the agency of the 
Chadian authorities.  Life in IDP sites also provides a much more 
highly monetized economy, more freedom and rights for women and 
youth, and the possibility of education for children.  The impact on 
all this should MINURCAT leave would be hard to predict, but the 
assumption that MINURCAT's staying, and building up to full troop 
strength, would naturally encourage IDPs to return home strikes us 
 
NDJAMENA 00000099  004 OF 004 
 
 
as having complications. 
 
---------------------------------- 
THE DIS AND JUDICIAL SECTOR REFORM 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶18. (SBU) The international community spent nearly $22 million on 
the DIS in 2008/2009 and has pledged or contributed another $17.9 
million in 2010.  The DIS after one year in operation has begun to 
have a positive impact on security within the refugee camps, and has 
the potential to improve the ability of NGOs to travel securely 
between towns and the camps.  It can be hoped that, through 
UN-sponsored training and mentorship, the DIS can one day be a 
vehicle for exposing Chadian police forces and gendarmes to higher 
standards of professionalism and ethics.  For the first time, 
refugees and IDPs have begun to access this focal point through 
which criminal acts can be reported and investigated.  This has been 
especially evident in the DIS's increased capacity to respond to the 
widespread issue of gender-based violence through its cadre of 
female officers.  Of great concern is the possibility that, should 
the international community's interest in the DIS end, the 
protective force could quickly fall apart.  Programs through UNDP 
and MINURCAT's civilian elements are also making an effort to build 
the capacity of Chad's judiciary and to combat gender-based 
violence, but these will founder also if MINURCAT leaves. 
 
BREMNER