10OSLO82
Child Abduction Case Strains Norwegian - Moroccan Relations
Wed Feb 10 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Oslo
VZCZCXRO0507
RR RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHLN RUEHLZ
RUEHNP RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSK RUEHSL RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHNY #0082/01 0411252
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 101251Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY OSLO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0027
INFO EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHCL/AMCONSUL CASABLANCA 0001
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT 0002UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 OSLO 000082 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KOCI MO NO
SUBJECT: Child Abduction Case Strains Norwegian - Moroccan Relations 
 
¶1.   Summary:  Scrutiny of the Norwegian MFA and MoD involvement in 
a high profile Norwegian - Moroccan child custody case has 
increased dramatically following the revelation by Norwegian 
centrist newspaper Verdens Gang (VG) January 30 that off-duty 
Norwegian Special Forces had assisted the mother in bringing her 
children from Morocco to Norway, without the consent of the 
children's father.  Questions have been raised as to how much the 
Norwegian government knew about the operation, with the Norwegian 
Minister of Defense Grete Faremo and Chief of Defense Harald Sunde 
stating February 1 that Special Forces involvement was unacceptable 
and under investigation.  Moroccan Minister of Foreign Affairs 
Taieb Fassi Fihri said February 3 that he holds the Norwegian 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs responsible for the incident.  The case 
has made headlines news in both Norway and Morocco, but while 
unlikely to have major ramifications for the Norwegian-Moroccan 
relationship it has raised questions in the media regarding 
Norwegian military networks acting outside of MoD authority.  End 
Summary. 
 
 
 
Off-Duty Special Forces Involved in Child Abduction 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------------------- 
- 
 
 
 
¶2.  Norwegian mother Anne Cecilie Hopstock and Norwegian father, 
the Moroccan born former Olympic champion Khalid Skah, entered into 
a custody battle for their two children after they failed to return 
to Norway after visiting their father in Morocco in 2007.  In 2008 
a Norwegian court gave custody of the two children to Hopstock 
while a Moroccan court gave custody to Skah.  The two children fled 
from Skah's residence July 19, 2009 and sought refuge in the 
Norwegian embassy in Rabat.  After three days they were driven by 
Norwegian Police Attach???? Stein Haugen from the embassy to a place 
where the two children changed cars and were taken to a boat dock, 
where the Norwegian mother and off-duty Norwegian special forces 
picked up the children and sailed to Spain and onwards to Norway. 
 
 
 
¶3.  While the press picked up on the "Skah Case" last summer, it 
came back into the spotlight again January 30 after VG ran a story 
revealing the involvement of off-duty Norwegian special forces, 
speculating that  the that Norwegian authorities knew of the plans 
to bring the children back to Norway.  Norwegian Ministry of 
Defense Grete Faremo convened a press conference February 1 to deny 
MoD involvement, saying that the Special Forces had acted on their 
own initiative without MoD approval and were now being 
investigated.  In the same press conference Norwegian Minister of 
Foreign Affairs Jonas Gahr Stoere denied the Norwegian government 
knew of the plans to transport the children out of Morocco. 
However, Stoere said that he would investigate the media 
allegations. 
 
 
 
Media Frenzy 
 
------------------- 
 
 
 
¶4.  The two children told Norwegian independent television channel 
TV2 February 2 that they had feared for their lives in Morocco and 
did not want to return.  Skah invited Norwegian media to a press 
conference February 4 in Rabat where he stated that he wishes to 
seek a solution in cooperation with Norwegian authorities. 
Furthermore, Skah said he had information that that would turn the 
case into a "Norwegian Watergate."  When asked to produce such 
evidence he declined, saying he had subsequently been advised 
against it.  Norwegian Charg???? d'affaires in Morocco Embassy Hans 
Fredrik Lehne stated February 5 that he had received a number of 
threats from Khalid Skah and his relatives, including a threat to 
fire-bomb the embassy. 
 
 
 
Reactions critical in Rabat - modest in Oslo 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
 
 
¶5.  Morocco's Foreign Minister Taieb Fassi Fihri stated February 3 
 
OSLO 00000082  002 OF 002 
 
 
in Rabat that Skah's children were kidnapped and that Norway had 
disregarded Moroccan laws.  He noted that the children are also 
Moroccan citizens and that their father had custody of the children 
under Moroccan law.  The Moroccan Ambassador to Norway Yahdih 
Bouchaab told independent online newspaper Nettavisen February 2 
that given the Norwegian Police Attach????'s involvement in the case 
violates international law.  Bouchaab also said that he had 
provided several documents on the case to the Norwegian MFA last 
fall, and received no response. 
 
 
 
¶6.  Most Norwegian experts on law and diplomacy agree that the case 
will soon blow over with negligible impact on the Norwegian - 
Moroccan bilateral relationship.  Research Director at the 
Norwegian Institute of International Affairs (NUPI) Ivar Neumann 
perceived the media reactions to be out of proportion, stating that 
a number of similar cases go unreported, and the attention was due 
to the Special Forces involvement and Khalid Skah's status a former 
Olympic Champion.  Political reactions from the opposition have 
been fairly modest, asking that the case be debated in Parliament 
and that military officers not be used as scapegoats.  Additional 
fall-out from the Skah case includes speculation in the media about 
certain segments of Norway's military, such as the Special Forces, 
acting as an independent network and taking assignments outside of 
their military duties. 
WHITE