10OTTAWA49
Transforming the Canadian Forces: The Spirit is Willing...
Thu Feb 04 00:00:00 +0100 2010
CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO6319
RR RUEHSL
DE RUEHOT #0049/01 0351608
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 041558Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0336
INFO ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE
NATO EU COLLECTIVE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 OTTAWA 000049 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
NOFORN 
STATE FOR WHA/CAN,  EUR/RPM, AND INR 
AMEMBASSY BELGRADE PASS TO AMEMBASSY PODGORICA 
AMEMBASSY ATHENS PASS TO AMCONSUL THESSALONIKI 
AMEMBASSY MOSCOW PASS TO AMCONSUL YEKATERINBURG 
AMEMBASSY OTTAWA PASS TO AMCONSUL QUEBEC 
AMEMBASSY OTTAWA PASS TO APP WINNIPEG 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 2020/02/04 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MOPS MARR CA
SUBJECT: Transforming the Canadian Forces: The Spirit is Willing... 
 
REF: 08 OTTAWA 649; 09 OTTAWA 196; 10 OTTAWA 29 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Scott Bellard, Political Minister Counselor, 
Department of State, Political Section; REASON: 1.4(B), (D) 
 
¶1. (C/NF) Summary.  The Canadian Forces are severely stretched and 
the ambitious goals set by the Canada First Defence Strategy 
continue to encounter delays and budget constraints that will limit 
the scope of the projected transformation of the forces.  The 
government of Prime Minister Harper may refocus available military 
resources closer to home, at the expense of future expeditionary 
missions such as Afghanistan, despite concern that Canada's 
influence on the world stage will diminish significantly 
post-Afghanistan.  End summary. 
 
 
 
""Canada is Back"" - or is it? 
 
 
 
¶2.  (C/NF)  The ruling Conservative Party of Canada under Prime 
Minister Stephen Harper has made military modernization a core 
campaign pledge in its successful 2006 and 2008 elections, while 
failing to win a majority of seats in the House of Commons in 
either election.  The party's slogan of ""Canada is back"" 
nonetheless resonated well with voters, and pride in the Canadian 
Forces (CF) is high, despite declining support for Canada's combat 
mission in Afghanistan, now slated to end in 2011 according to the 
terms of  a March 2008 House of Commons bipartisan motion. 
 
 
 
¶3. (C/NF)  The ambitious ""Canada First Defence Strategy"" (CFDS), 
first announced in May 2008 (ref b), was designed to increase the 
readiness of the CF by providing greater resources for training and 
maintenance, as well modernizing CF equipment with USD 15.4 billion 
in major new procurement programs.  Parliament approved CN 5.2 
billion in July 2009 to renew the army's fleet of land combat 
vehicles, after the Chief of the Land Staff, Lt. General Andrew 
Leslie, publicly claimed that the army was at its breaking point 
and might need to take a one-year operational break at the 
conclusion of the Afghanistan mission.  High casualty rates among 
Canadian Forces in Afghanistan had been attributable in part to 
inferior armored vehicles and the absence of helicopter medivac for 
wounded soldiers.  General Leslie subsequently retracted his 
one-year time-out proposal, citing successes in procurement of key 
items, including helicopters. 
 
 
 
¶4. (C/NF)   According to media reports, leaked documents from the 
Department of Public Works and Government Services to the 
Department of National Defence (DND) recently announced that a 
multi-billion dollar purchase of Close Combat Vehicles (CCV) for 
the army had been put on hold.  This is the latest in a string of 
delays, setbacks, and shifting budget priorities that have beset 
the government's plan to transform and modernize the CF.  These 
delays in procurement and shifts in priorities come at a time when 
the Canadian Forces are severely overstretched by missions in 
Afghanistan and Haiti as well as  major security operations in 
support of the Vancouver 2010 Olympics.  There is speculation that 
the CCV program was put on hold in part because some within DND see less need for it now, given the impending end of the Afghanistan 
mission.  DND is reportedly scrambling to find over CN 400 million 
in savings in order to fund other, higher priority projects. 
 
 
 
¶5. (C/NF)  The CFDS had also pledged major purchases of C-17 
strategic and C-130J tactical airlift aircraft, as well as CH-47 
Chinook helicopters, 1300 medium-sized logistic trucks (down from 
an earlier goal of 2300), and Joint Support Ships and Arctic 
Offshore Patrol Ships for the Navy. The latter program is an 
example of a requirement driven by political rather than military 
imperatives, since the Navy did not request these patrol ships. 
The Conservatives have nonetheless long found domestic political 
capital in asserting Canada's ""Arctic Sovereignty"" (ref c).  On the 
positive side of the CFDS ledger, the C-17, C-130J, and CH-47 
 
OTTAWA 00000049  002 OF 002 
 
 
procurements have been executed.  The C-17s have been delivered, 
and C-130J and CH-47 programs are underway.  The first C-130J 
delivery to Canada will occur in May 2010. 
 
 
 
¶6. (C/NF) Severe budgetary constraints are likely to continue to 
plague CFDS programs.  The strategy was predicated on a steadily 
increasing funding stream over a 20-year period, which is likely to 
prove unsustainable.  Personnel costs constitute 52 percent of the 
CF's budget.  While this figure is lower than some other NATO 
militaries, it limits funds available for R&D and equipment 
purchases. 
 
 
 
Manpower issues 
 
 
 
¶7.  (C/NF)   Manpower and recruitment targets set by CFDS have been 
steadily revised downward.  The latest goal is to increase the size 
of the regular forces from the current 66,000 to 70,000 and the 
reserves from 25,000 to 30,000.  Even the most optimistic 
projection predicts an increase of 1000 personnel each for the 
regular forces and the reserves by 2011-12, for a total force size 
of 95,000.   However, current rates of attrition, especially within 
the NCO ranks, remain high (over 9 percent in 2008-9), and 
recruitment continues to lag behind target figures.  The present 
overstretch within the CF is such that troops recently rotated out 
of Afghanistan are being reactivated for deployment to Haiti, even 
though the units were in their mandated 12 months of  ""dwell time"" 
between deployments.  Cuts in intake of new recruits were announced 
at the end of the year as part of the DND effort to cover budget 
shortfalls.  Training of those recruits who do join is constrained 
by the deployment to Afghanistan of experienced NCOs devoted to 
training the Afghan Security Forces. 
 
 
 
¶8.  (C/NF)  According to LTG Angus Watt, former Chief of the Air 
Staff, there are currently only 1350 trained and available pilots 
of a desired manning figure of 1600 in late 2008; he lamented this 
""pipeline air force.""  While the Air Force has made some progress 
in closing this gap, the immediate demands of the Haiti mission 
meant there were insufficient numbers of trained pilots available 
to fly the airlift missions required for the next rotation of CF 
units into Afghanistan, potentially reducing the operational 
effectiveness of the CF.  Depending upon its duration and scope, 
the Haiti relief mission could exacerbate the already-high 
operational tempo of the forces, contributing to strains on 
personnel and potentially worsening the attrition problem. 
 
 
 
Comment 
 
 
 
¶9. (C/NF)   PM Harper has set an assertive course for Canadian 
foreign policy, declaring that ""Canada is back"" on the world scene. 
However, his ambitions for Canada may exceed his grasp, however, as 
changes in demography, economic constraints, difficulties in 
procurement, and competing priorities combine to limit his 
government's ability to achieve this sweeping military 
transformation.  The effect is likely to be that military resources 
will be redirected,  defending ""sovereignty"" in the Arctic and 
other Canadian interests, at the expense of future post-Afghanistan 
expeditionary missions.  Senior Canadian military officials as well 
as media pundits have already begun to express concern at a likely 
loss of Canada's influence with the U.S. and NATO after the end of 
Canada's Afghanistan mission, but so far this concern does not 
appear to be on the Prime Minister's or the Conservative Party's 
radar scope. 
JACOBSON