10OTTAWA152
CANADIAN COURT INTERVENES OVER TAMIL RELEASE
Mon Feb 08 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXYZ0006
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHOT #0152/01 0392018
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 082018Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0347
INFO ALL CANADIAN POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHLM/AMEMBASSY COLOMBO 0001UNCLAS OTTAWA 000152 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PTER PHUM PREF CA CE
SUBJECT: CANADIAN COURT INTERVENES OVER TAMIL RELEASE 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: A Federal Court decision has underscored the 
federal government's responsibility to exercise due diligence in 
determining the admissibility of individuals to Canada on security 
grounds, overturning an Immigration and Refugee Board (IRB) order 
to release a Tamil male whom the government had alleged was a 
suspected terrorist.  The individual is one of 76 asylum seekers 
who arrived off the coast of British Columbia in October 2009 
(reftel).  The case is the first to clarify the limited scope of 
the IRB's authority to release an individual over the objections 
of the federal government whenever the government has a 
"'reasonable suspicion" that the individual is inadmissible on 
grounds of security or violation of human or international rights, 
or when a federal probe into their admissibility remains ongoing. 
The Federal Court's ruling is a major victory for the government in 
its anti-terrorism efforts, to which Canadian courts have not 
always been sympathetic.   End summary. 
 
 
 
TAMILS: ASYLUM SEEKERS OR TERRORISTS? 
 
 
 
¶2.  (U)  On February 2, the Federal Court of Canada overturned a 
release order by the IRB for one of 76 Tamils who arrived in 
October 2009 off the coast of British Columbia.  On October 17, 
2009, Canadian authorities had intercepted the freighter Ocean Lady 
off the coast of British Columbia.  The vessel contained 76 Tamil 
males allegedly fleeing the conflict in Sri Lanka; all made refugee 
claims upon arrival.  Authorities detained the men pending an 
investigation to verify their identities and their admissibility to 
Canada under the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (IRPA). 
Reports alleged that the migrants had possible links to human 
smuggling or to the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTEE), which 
Canada has designated as a terrorist organization.  Authorities 
detained the men subject to regular detention reviews. 
 
 
 
IRB SATISFIED, BUT FEDERAL GOVERNMENT NOT 
 
 
 
¶3.  (U)  The IRB had ordered the release of all 76 of the migrants, 
including at least one individual (whose identify is banned from 
publication) whom the federal government suspected as a member of 
the LTEE.  Authorities have already released 48, but the federal 
government contested the release of others, pending the outcome of 
an ongoing investigation into their admissibility to Canada.  In 
December 2009,  the government applied to the Federal Court to 
overturn the IRB order.  The Court heard the appeal in Vancouver on 
January 7 and rendered its judgment on February 2 in Ottawa.  The 
individual (and the other 27) remain in custody. 
 
 
 
¶4.  (U)  In support of its release order, the IRB had reported that 
it had found the respondent "credible" and the government's expert 
witness (Dr. Gunaratna) "not credible" because of his links to the 
government of Sri Lanka.  The IRB accepted that the Ocean Lady 
"possibly" was an LTEE-controlled ship, that "perhaps ... several" 
LTEE members were on board, and that Canadian authorities had found 
traces of explosives on the vessel.  However, it asserted that "at 
this point" there was "nothing whatsoever" to tie the respondent to 
past or present membership in the LTEE.  It further questioned the 
necessity and quality of the federal government's continued probe 
into the respondent's admissibility, judging that the probe was "no 
more than a fishing expedition" that was likely to turn up "nothing 
further of value."  It concluded that while "a suspicion" remained 
that the respondent was inadmissible on security grounds, this was 
only "a mere possibility," and the suspicion was "no longer 
reasonable."  In ordering the individual's release, it asserted 
that "detention is to be seen as a last resort" and that people in 
Canada are not detained on such mere possibilities." 
 
 
 
¶5.  (U)  In response, the federal government contended that the IRB 
had erred in law by failing to recognize limitations under 
sec.58(1)(c) of IRPA requiring the IRB to defer to the government's 
assessment of the evidence and the need for further investigation 
when the government had "reasonable suspicion" of inadmissibility 
on security grounds. 
 
 
 
PRIORITY OF PROTECTING CANADIANS AND BORDERS 
 
¶6.  (U)  The Federal Court unequivocally upheld the government's 
argument and confirmed that the IRB's decision had "effectively 
usurped" the government's role in investigating national security 
threats.  It judged that the IRB was "misconstruing the scope of 
its authority" under sec.58(1)(c) of the IRPA and rebuked the IRB 
for its "rather simplistic" view of the complexity of the 
investigation into the migrants' backgrounds, adding that "it was 
wrong" of the IRB to decide for itself whether the government had 
done enough to verify the individual's status.  While it 
acknowledged that "the importance of not unduly detaining such 
persons cannot be forgotten," it underscored that "'the protection 
of Canadians and Canada's pressing interest in securing its borders 
are also worthy considerations" and that the government was 
entitled to a "reasonable time" to complete its investigation.  The 
full text of the Court's decision is available at 
http://decisions.fct-cf.gc.ca/en/2010/2010fc1 12/2010fc112.html 
 
 
 
¶7. (U) The Court gave the IRB until February 9 to submit additional 
written arguments and the federal government until February 16 to 
respond to them before the Court's ruling becomes final.   An IRB 
spokesperson said the Board is "studying the decision with 
interest." 
 
 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  Comment:  The Federal Court's ruling is a major victory 
for the government in its anti-terrorism efforts, to which Canadian 
courts have not always been sympathetic.  The legal battles in this 
case are probably not over yet, however. 
JACOBSON