10PORTAUPRINCE136
Haiti USAID/DART ASSESSMENT IN LEOGANE, PETIT GOAVE, AND
Sun Feb 07 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Port Au Prince
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHPU #0136/01 0380047
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 070045Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY PORT AU PRINCE
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0110
RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0326
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA IMMEDIATE
INFO HAITI COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RHMFISS/HQ USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL IMMEDIATE
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEHDG/AMEMBASSY SANTO DOMINGO IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
RUEHPU/AMEMBASSY PORT AU PRINCEUNCLAS PORT AU PRINCE 000136 
 
AIDAC 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID ECON PGOV PINR PREL PREF HA
SUBJECT: Haiti USAID/DART ASSESSMENT IN LEOGANE, PETIT GOAVE, AND 
GRAND GOAVE 
 
REF: PORT A 0054; PORT A 0058; PORT A 0060 
 
¶1.  Summary. On February 3 and 4, an assessment team from USAID's 
Disaster Assistance Response Team (USAID/DART) and USAID/Haiti 
visited the earthquake-affected cities of Leogane, Petit Goave, and 
Grand Goave in West Department.  According to the team, the 
provision of food and shelter assistance and poor sanitation 
conditions remain critical challenges to the humanitarian response 
in the areas assessed.  The team confirmed that parts of Petit 
Goave sustained heavy earthquake damage, with approximately 60 
percent of buildings in the downtown area destroyed or damaged. 
The USAID assessment team noted that U.N. agencies are largely 
absent in Petit Goave and Grand Goave In addition, no local cluster 
system has been established to facilitate coordination between 
relief agencies.  End summary. 
 
 
 
----------------- 
 
Visit to Leogane 
 
----------------- 
 
 
 
¶2.  On February 3, the USAID team visited Leogane, one of the most 
severely earthquake-affected areas, to assess humanitarian 
conditions.  [Note:  Reftel 0098 reports on a previous USAID/DART 
assessment visit to Leogane.  End Note.]  At a spontaneous 
settlement at the city stadium, which currently accommodates 
approximately 6,000 people, residents reported sufficient water 
availability through relief agency efforts.  However, the USAID 
team notes that poor sanitation conditions have likely contributed 
to an increased incidence of diarrhea in the settlement.  USAID's 
Office of U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance (USAID/OFDA) 
implementing partners Save the Children/US (SC/US) and the Agency 
for Technical Cooperation and Development (ACTED) have begun 
latrine and shower construction at the site, with a combined target 
of 120 latrines.  USAID staff noted SC/US efforts to address 
protection concerns through the installation of lighting at latrine 
and shower locations.  SC/US and ACTED also reported plans to 
implement additional emergency sanitation programs at the city 
stadium and in other spontaneous settlements in the Leogane area. 
 
 
 
¶3.  USAID staff report that settlement residents have started to 
construct temporary housing with salvaged materials, including wood 
and corrugated iron sheeting.  However, shelter assistance remains 
a critical need at the city stadium, as most families are living 
under bed sheets and plastic sheeting of poor quality, according to 
the USAID team.  Residents expressed concern regarding shelter 
conditions once the rainy season begins. 
 
 
 
¶4.  USAID staff report that ACTED is distributing U.N. World Food 
Program (WFP)-provided food at the city stadium settlement, where 
the team also observed families cooking.  In addition, the 
Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC) reported plans to set up kitchen 
units to provide hot meals for the settlement, as part of an 
agreement with WFP.  NRC has the capacity to provide hot meals for 
up to 10,000 people per day. 
 
 
 
¶5.  The USAID team also visited the Leogane field hospital operated 
by SC/US, which is serving as the primary local referral hospital 
for x-rays and surgical procedures.  Hospital staff reported a 
prevalence of diarrhea, respiratory infections, and infected 
wounds, as well as several cases of malnutrition.  Hospital staff 
highlighted the need for medical supplies and support in augmenting 
disease-reporting capacity.  Hospital staff members were unfamiliar 
with the system of free medical supplies available through the Pan 
American Health Organization (PAHO)-supported Government of Haiti 
(GoH) Ministry of Health (MOH) warehouse PROMESS. 
 
 
¶6.  Approximately 2,500 displaced persons are utilizing the grounds 
of the SC/US-managed field hospital as a spontaneous settlement. 
USAID staff report that the site has not received food or relief 
commodity assistance to date. 
 
 
 
------------------------------------- 
 
Visit to Petit Goave and Grand Goave 
 
------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶7.  On February 3 and 4, the USAID team visited Petit Goave and 
Grand Goave, evaluating humanitarian conditions in seven displaced 
person settlements, including the largest settlement in Petit 
Goave, which is located on the grounds of Ecole des Freres and 
hosts between 1,700 and 1,800 people.  The number of families 
living in settlements visited range from approximately 50 to 560. 
The team also assessed conditions throughout both cities, reporting 
few settlements sites overall, with many people camping as close to 
their houses as possible - whether damaged or not.  The assessment 
team notes widespread damage in downtown Petit Goave, with 60 
percent of buildings destroyed or severely damaged, and severe 
damage in the city's Petit-Guinee and Tapion neighborhoods as well. 
 
 
 
 
------------------------------- 
 
Food, Shelter, and Livelihoods 
 
------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶8.  According to the USAID team, residents and relief organizations 
in Petit Goave and Grand Goave identified food as a priority need. 
Some settlements have received sporadic distributions of meals 
ready-to-eat (MREs) and humanitarian daily rations (HDRs) through 
the U.S. Military, while others are receiving food from faith-based 
organizations.  Individuals in some sites reported buying food from 
the market.  However, both individuals and organizations noted that 
resources and cash to purchase food are either dwindling or have 
already been depleted.  A representative from a faith-based 
organization who has worked in Grand Goave for several years noted 
that although food is available in the market, prices have 
increased significantly.  The USAID team recommends that WFP and 
other food aid agencies conduct an assessment in Petit Goave, Grand 
Goave, and rural areas to determine the most appropriate food 
assistance response. 
 
 
 
¶9.  The USAID team notes that in the seven settlements sites 
visited in Petit Goave and Grand Goave, the majority of residents 
require shelter assistance to supplement self-constructed 
structures made of bed sheets, sticks, poor-quality plastic 
sheeting, and, in some cases, salvaged wood and corrugated iron 
sheeting.  At Grand Goave's settlements in the Servants of All 
Ministries orphanage and the central square, some residents have 
benefited from a limited distribution of high-quality reinforced 
plastic sheeting provided by the Servants of All Ministries 
organization and Medecins Sans Frontieres, respectively.  However, 
the quantities provided remain insufficient for the settlements' 
entire population.  In addition, provision of emergency relief 
supplies, including hygiene kits and kitchen sets, has been limited 
in the majority of settlements to date. 
 
 
 
¶10.  Residents at several sites reported an unconfirmed number of 
displaced persons from Port-au-Prince residing with host families 
in Petit Goave and Grand Goave - both in houses and in displaced 
persons settlements. 
 
 
¶11.  According to settlement residents interviewed by the 
assessment team, most families living in Petit Goave and Grand 
Goave depend on small-scale commerce for livelihoods.  In Grand 
Goave, residents indicated that the financial situation for most 
was challenging prior to the earthquake and requested jobs, 
particularly for the youth.  In rural areas outside cities, 
families primarily depend on agriculture or small-scale commerce 
for livelihoods.  However, families require seeds and tools to 
prepare for the upcoming agricultural season, as most have eaten 
saved seed stocks. 
 
 
 
------------------------------------- 
 
Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH) 
 
------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
¶12.  The USAID/DART WASH advisor reports inadequate coverage of 
water needs in spontaneous settlements in Petit Goave and Grand 
Goave with relief agencies distributing a limited quantity of 
bottled water and filling a small number of water bladders. 
Outside settlement sites and city centers, however, the WASH 
advisor estimates that community water access is comparable to the 
pre-earthquake period. 
 
 
 
¶13.  The WASH advisor reports ongoing efforts to assess piped 
networks and determine necessary repairs.  With no timeline 
provided for the completion of repairs, however, relief 
organizations are advocating for short-term solutions to increase 
water availability and access.  To this end, Oxfam is coordinating 
WASH partners and helping to treat spring water, while other 
agencies in Petit Goave and Grand Goave reported plans to increase 
water tankering capacity and the number of water bladders serving 
spontaneous settlement sites in and around the cities. 
 
 
 
¶14.  The USAID/DART WASH advisor identified two wells with 
motorized pumps and large storage tanks in Grand Goave city center, 
which are currently not functioning due to power outages.  The WASH 
advisor notes that using generators to temporarily re-establish 
power to the wells would significantly improve conditions in 
downtown Grand Goave.  [Note:  Prior to the earthquake, Petit Goave 
and Grand Goave, as well as Miragoane, had 24-hour electricity, due 
to the recent installation of a new power plant in Petit Goave. 
According to Grand Goave residents, the earthquake did not damage 
the power plant, but some electrical lines and poles have fallen 
down.  The UAID team was not able to corroborate these reports. 
End note.] 
 
 
 
¶15.  Staff at an orphanage in Grand Goave reported that the U.S. 
Navy had tested a number of hand-pumped wells for bacteria and 
identified some contamination, including at the orphanage.  The 
WASH advisor emphasized the need for aquatab or water guard 
distributions, in addition to further bacteria testing due to 
groundwater contamination concerns. In addition, households in 
assessed areas did not follow water treatment practices prior to 
the earthquake, suggesting a need for agencies to educate 
beneficiaries on the use of treatment products. 
 
 
 
¶16.  The WASH advisor observed a minimal number of latrines in 
spontaneous settlement sites in and around Petit Goave and Grand 
Goave, but noted sufficient space and plans to expand construction 
of latrines and sanitation facilities, where needed.  Residents in 
downtown areas reported latrine access for approximately 80 percent 
of households, although many people remain fearful of entering 
houses - many of which sustained damage in the earthquake.  Several 
organizations have already commenced latrine construction in areas 
of Petit Goave and Grand Goave, including USAID/OFDA partner 
Samaritan's Purse.   The WASH advisor recommends that construction 
of additional latrines and sanitation facilities be accompanied by 
hygiene promotion activities to help reduce diarrheal rates in 
settlements. 
 
 
 
¶17. The WASH advisor also observed moderate quantities of refuse in 
assessed areas, in contrast to the large quantities of refuse at 
overcrowded sites in Port-au-Prince.  The assessment team also 
observed trucks and work crews working to remove refuse piles 
throughout the cities.  The exception is Gaston settlement in Petit 
Goave, where approximately 1,850 people live on a refuse dumping 
area. 
 
 
 
¶18.  The USAID assessment team notes shortages of water containers, 
hygiene kits, and soap in many areas, with only limited 
distributions by aid agencies in both cities reported to date. 
While soap is available in the market, individuals lack adequate 
resources to purchase hygiene supplies and likely prioritize food 
purchases.  According to the USAID team, Oxfam plans to distribute 
emergency relief supplies to approximately 1,500 families this 
week, including buckets with a lid and spigot, plastic sheeting, 
wood, and hygiene kits. 
 
 
 
------- 
 
Health 
 
------- 
 
 
 
¶19.  The USAID team notes that limited U.N. presence in Petit Goave 
and Grand Goave is hampering coordination, medical referrals, and 
availability of medical supplies in the area.  The USAID/DART 
Health advisor highlights that the large number of short-term 
medical volunteers operating in the region requires enhanced 
coordination.  Volunteer doctors and military medics on short-term 
rotations are largely addressing current gaps in health care, but 
likely leaving new health care coverage gaps in coming weeks and 
months that will require expanded mobile clinic services. 
 
 
 
¶20.  According to the USAID/DART Health advisor, shortages of 
medicines, although not severe, are more widespread in Leogane, 
Petit Goave, and Grand Goave than in the Port-au-Prince area. 
Hospital staff also had limited familiarity with the system of free 
medical supplies available through the PROMESS warehouse. 
According to the Health Cluster, PROMESS had provided more than 250 
organizations with medicines and medical supplies as of February 4. 
 
 
 
¶21.  To augment coordination and health service availability, the 
USAID team recommends an expansion of U.N. agency presence, 
including PAHO, the U.N. Office for the Coordination of 
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), and the U.N. Children's Fund (UNICEF), 
to western areas outside Port-au-Prince.  The assessment team also 
identified the need for enhanced outreach and messaging in the 
region to increase awareness of the PROMESS system.  In addition, 
the team notes the utility of potentially establishing a 
sub-warehouse in the western region of West Department to 
facilitate the provision of supplies to health facilities in the 
area. 
 
 
 
¶22.  USAID staff note that clinics and field hospitals in Leogane, 
Petit Goave, and Grand Goave have reported elevated cases of 
diarrhea, with significant increases in recent days.  USAID staff 
highlight the need to augment currently limited reporting and 
surveillance mechanisms in the region. 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
Debris Removal and Cash-for-Work Activities in Petit Goave 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
 
 
 
¶23.  USAID/Haiti partner CHF International commenced cash-for-work 
activities in Petit Goave on February 1 and was employing 429 
people in 35 sites by February 5.  CHF plans to rapidly increase 
the number of people participating in the program.  USAID staff 
observed work crews wearing t-shirts with GoH, USAID, and CHF logos 
cleaning and removing debris and rubble from streets throughout 
Petit Goave.  CHF pays beneficiaries 200 gourdes (approximately USD 
5) for each eight-hour work day.  CHF is prioritizing rubble and 
debris removal in the following order: streets and roads, public 
buildings, and private residences. 
 
 
 
¶24.  USAID/Haiti partner the International Organization for 
Migration (IOM) is also conducting cash-for-work activities in 
Petit Goave.  As of January 5, IOM was employing 1,110 people in 
six sites. 
 
 
 
------------ 
 
Coordination 
 
------------ 
 
 
 
¶25.  The USAID assessment team noted that U.N. agencies are largely 
absent in Petit Goave and Grand Goave.  As a result, coordination 
among relief agencies remains challenging.  Although WFP provided 
MREs and HDRs, which the U.S. Military is distributing in 
coordination with local government councils and community-based 
organizations, WFP does not have representatives in the area. 
Currently coordination structures have been established only in 
Leogane, however, OCHA has stated that additional localized 
coordination mechanisms are needed for Petit Goave and Grand Goave. 
 
 
 
 
¶26.  While no formal cluster system exists in Petit Goave and Grand 
Goave, the USAID team reported increased coordination between 
relief agencies in Petit Goave, with IOM assuming a lead role and 
CHF supporting with information management.  However, relief 
agencies operating in the area continue to advocate for the 
establishment of OCHA presence to facilitate coordination.  The 
USAID team strongly encourages the U.N. to further develop the 
cluster system outside Port-au-Prince, including an OCHA presence 
in Petit Goave and Grand Goave. 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
Rural Areas around Petit Goave and Grand Goave 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
 
 
¶27.  Oxfam International reported to the USAID team that two of 
Grand Goave's 12 municipality sections are inaccessible due to road 
damage. These two sections are rural, requiring a 20 km walk from 
the point where vehicles must stop to where people are living.  As 
a result, limited relief supplies have reached these remote 
locations.  Occasionally, residents from these municipality 
sections walk to other areas in an attempt to obtain supplies.  No 
known assessments have been conducted in these two sections due to 
location and inaccessibility.  According to Oxfam, houses in the 
isolated municipality sections are built with rocks, wood, and some 
concrete, with residents living with extended families in compounds 
composed of small buildings.  Oxfam reports that some of the area's 
houses have likely collapsed, requiring the provision of shelter 
materials prior to the rainy season will be essential.  In 
addition, Oxfam reports that Petit Goave's 10 rural and remote 
municipality sections have not received emergency relief supplies. 
 
 
MINIMIZE CONSIDERED 
MERTEN