10QUITO188
Ecuador: S/GWI Project Proposals
Thu Feb 18 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Quito
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHQT #0188/01 0491631
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 181608Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY QUITO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0992
INFO RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS
RUEHGL/AMCONSUL GUAYAQUIL
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITOUNCLAS QUITO 000188 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KWMN KPAO PHUM AID EC
SUBJECT: Ecuador: S/GWI Project Proposals 
 
REF: STATE 132094; STATE 12531 
 
¶1.  Embassy Quito submits the following two proposals for 
consideration by the Secretary's Office of Global Women's Issues 
small grant initiative.  Both proposals were submitted by respected 
local organizations with the capacity to achieve the stated goals 
and meet USG requirements for accountability and reporting and meet 
the requirements listed in reftel.   The proposals below are copied 
from the original documents submitted by each organization and have 
not been edited by Post, other than re-formatting for cable 
transmission.  The first proposal responds to a well-defined need 
among indigenous women working in mountainous areas of the country 
to understand and respond to climate change in the fragile 
ecosystems of their high-altitude farms.  Indigenous women are 
traditionally a marginalized group by almost every measure, and 
giving them the skills and knowledge to respond to changing 
environments will help keep both the communities and ecological 
systems protected, while empowering women to take charge of the 
environmental and economic changes that will impact their 
livelihoods.  This project dovetails with current efforts at Post, 
defined in the FY2010 Mission Strategic Plan (MSP), to promote 
economic growth and sustainable development, including efforts to 
promote environmental protection. 
 
 
 
¶2. The second proposal is also targeted to marginalized indigenous 
women, but the target groups are located in the eastern Amazon 
provinces.  Building on previous development efforts to promote 
cultural preservation and economic self-sufficiency, the program 
will enable women to commercialize and market their traditional 
handicrafts, which will help provide sustainable livings and 
encourage their participation in the economic life of their 
communities.  This project also serves the FY2010 MSP goal of 
promoting economic growth and sustainable development. 
 
 
 
¶3. If the proposals received funding, the grants can be issued at 
Post by warranted grants officers in the Public Affairs Section, 
with the grants officer responsibilities held by the human rights 
officer in the Political Section. The Political Section will take 
the lead in grants monitoring and reporting the information to the 
grants officer at Post and to S/GWI.  Both sections understand the 
requirements for both mid-term and final reporting and 
accountability for project funds. NOTE: both organizations 
submitted proposals that met the guidelines in reftel, but cable 
formatting by Post has changed the layout and formatting 
significantly.  The originals will be emailed toQGWI separately. 
 
 
 
¶4.  Proposal 1: Organization: FONAG (www.fonag.org.ec) 
 
 
 
Title: CLIMATE CHANGE, A CHALLENGE FOR PARAMO WOMEN 
 
 
 
¶1. PROBLEM: 
 
 
 
The rural, indigenous communities where the project will be located 
are found within the cantons of Quito, Mejia, Cayambe (in the 
Pichincha province), and El Chaco (in the Napo province). These 
communities exist above 3,000 meters altitude in what is uniquely 
known as a paramo ecosystem. The paramo is a tropical mountain 
ecosystem located between the limits of Andean forests and the 
snowline. 
 
A large portion of each protected area where the Fund for Water 
Protection (FONAG) works (Cayambe Coca Ecological Reserve, 
Antisana, Ilinizas and Cotopaxi National Park) encompasses this 
classification of ecosystem which benefits Andean populations with 
numerous environmental services, especially water, due to its 
primary function in water regulation. Thanks to these 
contributions, 70% of water consumed within the Metropolitan 
District of Quito is attributed to the paramo. 
 
The main productive activities of these communities are agriculture 
and livestock which, given its intensity and extent, have resulted 
 
in the advancement of the agricultural frontier. This has not only 
detrimentally affected the vegetation cover and biodiversity within 
these regions but also has a direct effect on soil and water 
quality. 
 
Aside from local impacts produced by intensive agricultural and 
extensive livestock activities, there exists a global threat to 
paramo ecosystems, which are especially vulnerable to climate 
change. Since this ecosystem is restricted to high mountain areas, 
any variation in temperature poses a threat to local species, soil 
properties, and unique climate characteristics. 
 
"The climate is no longer the same as before," say the people in 
paramo communities. Significant decreases in annual rainfall, 
persistent droughts, and increasing frost cover have directly 
impacted the quantity and quality of locally grown crops as well as 
the food cycles that sustain these agricultural communities. In 
turn, these factors have intensified the poverty in which the 
communities live. 
 
A large portion of agricultural practices are currently inefficient 
in the paramo due to the inappropriate usage of seeds, 
monocultures, poor soil care, misuse of water, and insufficient 
pest control among others issues. Additionally, paramo inhabitants 
depend on rain cycles and favourable conditions within the 
ecosystem for the provision of water. In turn, this strongly 
emphasises the importance of conservation within protected areas 
that provide potable water to a large human population. 
 
The local families have already sought alternatives in order to 
adapt to changing climate. Women have formed watch groups for frost 
prevention by implementing traditional Andean techniques used to 
protect crops. Other families have chosen to search for and select 
resistant seed strains and promote agro-biodiversity. However, for 
many families the only option is migration and land abandonment. 
 
Women living in the communities where the project will be 
implemented are responsible for roughly 50% of food production used 
for domestic consumption. In practice, these women play a majority 
role in the management and utilization of the local natural 
resources, making them the most vulnerable group to the effects of 
climate change and local environmental issues. 
 
Linked to the problems described above is also the issue of 
historical and cultural gender inequality. Traditionally, a woman's 
role focuses more on the production aspect and not on product 
management and/or decision making regarding proper resource 
management. 
 
 
 
¶2. PROPOSAL SUMMARY 
 
 
 
This project seeks the involvement of paramo women as guardians of 
traditional practices and resource conservation, taking into 
account that these are the people facing climate change as a 
current reality. The women of the paramo, given the opportunity, 
stand to create harmonious development within their communities and 
provide appropriate access and usage of the resources which they 
manage. Through this integrated process, women will be given the 
chance to improve and demonstrate practical skills, exercise their 
rights, and enhance their role in finding appropriate solutions to 
environmental issues. 
 
The project also presents the challenge of consolidating, promoting 
and developing adaptive activities related to climate change and 
creating spaces that allow women located in the paramo to 
strengthen their abilities and balance their role in the community 
- whether social, economic or environmental. 
 
Additionally, the project seeks to be a link for women from the 
four protected areas and their buffer zones to establish spaces for 
learning, discussion, and proposal regarding environmental, social, 
and economic issues. This, in turn, coincides with the conservation 
of protected areas. 
 
The strategies of this proposal are: 
 
¶1. Capacity building for women in paramo communities located within 
protected areas and/or their buffer zones in the following themes: 
climate change adaptation, conservation, gender rights, 
organization, and production development. 
 
¶2. Development of alternative products adapted to climate change 
led by women. 
 
¶3. Recuperation, recovery, and socialization of knowledge and 
practices of women living in protected areas within the paramo and 
its buffer zones in relation to climate change. 
 
 
 
¶3. SUSTAINABILITY 
 
 
 
FONAG is a private equity fund with a lifespan of 80 years and, 
through a trust fund, has been operating since January, 2000. It is 
regulated by the Securities Markets Act. FONAG's equity capital is 
comprised of mixed contributions from local businesses as well as 
private and international institutions. 
 
FONAG aims to lead processes and consensus through dialogue, 
appropriate decision making, strengthening of research, and the use 
of appropriate technology to achieve Integrated Water Resources 
Management, where active, responsible, and caring participation 
from human beings will lead to the indefinite, sustainable 
management of the resource. 
 
The trust is an economic financial mechanism that is permanent and 
stable. It uses income from assets to co-finance activities, 
projects, and rehabilitation programs. It also works to conserve 
and manage the watersheds which supply water for human usage and 
productive activities in the Metropolitan District of Quito and its 
area of influence. 
 
To achieve its objective, FONAG has developed a series of programs 
and projects that seek to rehabilitate, care for, and conserve 
water sources which are supplied to the Metropolitan District of 
Quito and its areas of influence. 
 
Seven of every ten liters of water consumed by residents of the DMQ 
(Metropolitan District of Quito) comes from the nature reserves of 
Cayambe-Coca, Antisana, Los Ilinizas and Cotopaxi National Park as 
part of the National System of Protected Areas (SNAP) administered 
by the Ministry of Environment. 
 
In 2004, FONAG promoted the birth of the Surveillance and 
Monitoring Program designed to last 20 years. One of the challenges 
promoted by the program is to integrate the various community 
actors currently interfering with protected areas or their buffer 
zones to protect their natural resources through capacity building, 
generating suggestions through participatory means, and the 
development of alternatives which take into consideration the 
sensitivity of the environment. 
 
Since 2006, twenty community projects have been implemented with 
approximately 350 families who are involved in the conservation of 
the natural environment of the paramo. These projects work to 
develop and strengthen human capabilities while integrating 
productive activities that are linked to resource protection. 
 
Previously developed projects have focused on various 
eco-productive activities such as agro-ecology, integrated farms, 
the processing of medicinal plants, ecotourism, and pasture 
improvement, among others. 
 
There is a common characteristic within the projects developed by 
the program: 80% of the participants in all activities are women. 
These are women who take responsibility for disseminating knowledge 
through conversations with friends and family and who have an 
invested interest in the land and the products which it generates. 
This involvement has signified the undertaking of new challenges 
that also strengthen their role in decision making and the 
exercising of power. 
 
FONAG's input and experience will contribute to the posterior 
actions of the project in its search for sustainability and 
replication. However, it is the exercising of women's power, 
acquiring of knowledge, and linking of strategies with productive 
commercial sectors that will allow each community to create 
sustainable conditions for responsible and opportune development 
regarding climate change. 
 
¶4. OBJECTIVES, OUTPUTS, & INDICATORS 
 
 
 
Project Strategy 
 
 
 
General Objective: 
 
To implement effective strategies and practices for adaptation to 
climate change in terms of capacity building of women's groups in 
paramo zones 
 
 
 
Indicators: 
 
 - 18 months in four communities located in protected areas and/or 
their buffer zones. At least 100 women will have strengthened their 
capabilities in the training axes identified by the project: rights 
 
 
 - At least 60 women in four protected areas or their buffer zones 
have the capacity to develop productive projects that take into 
account environmental protection and climate change adaptation. 
 
 - At least 60 families of four protected areas and/or their buffer 
zones will have been involved in a project linked to a community 
adaptation strategy that improves the economic conditions of 
households headed by women 
 
 
 
Verification: 
 
Monitoring Plan and Participatory Evaluation , Progress Reports, 
Photos of the process 
 
 
 
Specific Objective 1. 
 
 
 
Developing the skills of Ecuadorian women living in four protected 
areas or in their buffer zones in the exercising of their rights, 
appreciation of their culture, and self-esteem. 
 
 
 
Indicators: 
 
 - In 18 months at least 100 women from four communities living in 
protected areas or their buffer zones will have been involved in a 
process of discussion, exchange and training in the following 
areas: women's rights, organization, productive development, 
climate change and conservation 
 
 
 
Verification: 
 
Socialized document regarding training in rights, culture and 
self-esteem 
 
Reports of training events, Photography,  Evaluation of events 
 
 
Result 1.1. The capacities of women in four communities of 
protected areas will be strengthened in local adaptation strategies 
regarding climate change, development of sustainable, productive 
projects and organization. 
 
 
 
Indicators: 
 
 - At least 100 women will have participated in a training process 
on climate change strategies and conservations regarding protected 
areas over the course of at least 3 workshops in their communities. 
 
 
 - At least 60 women will have participated in two integration 
 
forums of between women of the 4 protected areas to share their 
experiences, challenges and opportunities as women regarding 
climate change. 
 
 - At least 100 women will have strengthened their organizational 
abilities and will be able to develop eco-productive projects as a 
strategy to adapt to climate change. 
 
 
 
Verification: 
 
Organizational training plan - economic and environmental Memories 
of planning and deveQpment of events  Lists of attendees  Event 
Evaluation 
 
 
 
Result 1.2. These women will have strengthened their ability to 
exercise their rights, culture and self-esteem as women living in 
communities in the four protected areas and/or their buffer zones. 
 
 
 
Indicator: 
 
 - At least 100 women from four communities living within protected 
areas or their buffer zones will have participated in 4 events: 
rights training, cultural self-esteem, and strengthening their 
communities 
 
 
 
Verification: 
 
Socialized document of training plan regarding rights, culture, and 
self-esteem, Memories of training events, Photography, Event 
evaluation 
 
 
 
Objetivo specific 2. Implement and/or strengthen productive 
initiatives for adaptation to climate change led by Ecuadorian 
women in four communities located in four protected areas 
 
 
 
Indicator: 
 
 - Over the course of 18 months, there will have been four 
environmental projects - productive adaptation to climate change 
led by women from four communities in priority protected areas with 
food sovereignty 
 
 
 
Verification: 
 
Project proposals approved, Operational plans, Project 
participation, Project progress 
 
 
 
Result 2.1 Participating women will have been developed and/or 
expanded four productive and sustainable community alternatives in 
order to adapt to climate change 
 
 
 
Indicator: 
 
 - In 18 months, participating women will have been identified and 
implemented four proposals for the development and/or strengthening 
of productive activities as an initiative of ecological adaptation 
to climate change. 
 
 - At least 60 women will be appropriately linked to an 
eco-productive project in four communities in protected areas 
and/or their buffer zones. 
 
 - Participating women will have identified at least one company 
and/or local and/or national institution that works with a logic of 
fair trade and where there is feasibility of negotiation and 
involvement within their value chains 
 
Verification: 
 
Community diagnostics, Bimonthly Progress in operational plans, 
Community project maps indicating local actors, List of actors, 
Photos of the process 
 
 
 
OE3. Systematize knowledge and practices to recognize and value the 
roles of women in adaptation strategies regarding climate change 
and the protection of natural resources 
 
 
 
Indicator: 
 
 - In 18 months, four experiences will have been systematized with 
women from protected areas and/or their buffer zones for the 
conservation of protected areas and measures for adaptation and 
mitigation of climate change 
 
 
 
Verification: 
 
Publication of documents and video collection of women's 
experiences. 
 
 
 
Result 3.1. The knowledge and practices of participating women will 
have been systemized within the four protected areas and their 
buffer zones 
 
 
 
Indicator: 
 
 - A respectful and participatory methodology will have been 
developed through this community experience which will allow for 
systemizing and documentation the participating women's knowledge 
and practices as well as their roles and challenges with respect to 
conservation in protected areas and climate change. 
 
 - At least four experiences will been documented through video and 
through a publication on women, protected areas, and climate change 
 
 
 
 
Verification: 
 
Experimental methodology on communal living  for collection and 
documentation of the information, Reports on project progress, 
Document inventory of the experience, Video inventory of the 
experience 
 
 
 
¶5.  Project timeline:  18 months. (Note: FONAG included a graph 
with their activities plan.  Post will forward the entire formatted 
project to S/GWI via email.) 
 
 
 
¶6. Budget: 
 
 
 
Project Strategy                               Unit 
Amount                   US/Unit 
 
Specific objective 1. 
 
Result 1. 1. 1. 
 
A.1.1.1 Community Training: adaptation strategies and challenges of 
Climate Change 
 
Workshop 
 
16 
 
410,00 
 
A.1.1.2. Integration Forum between women of the 4 protected areas 
to share the experiences, challenges and opportunities of women 
regarding climate change 
 
Forum 
 
2 
 
1.450,00 
 
Result 1. 2 
 
 
A.1.2.1 Our right to all rights 
 
Workshop 
 
4 
 
410,00 
 
 
A.1.2.2. "Field trip" to a cultural landmark: Rights of indigenous 
womens groups and strengthening the culture 
 
Trip to Rural Countryside 
 
4 
 
350,00 
 
 
A.1.2.3 The right to live in right relationships: caring and 
affection in our living spaces 
 
Workshop 
 
4 
 
410,00 
 
 
A.1.2.4 Women's organization and participation 
 
Workshop 
 
4 
 
410,00 
 
 
A.1.2.5. Women living and strengthen their leadership 
 
Workshop 
 
4 
 
410,00 
 
 
A.1.2.6. Workshop on the Development of Productive Ecological 
Projects 
 
Workshop 
 
4 
 
810,00 
 
 
Specific Objective 2. 
 
 
Result 2.1. 
 
 
A.2.1 Participatory diagnostic: social, economic, environmental and 
productive communities 
 
Consultation 
 
1 
 
8.000,00 
 
 
A.2.2. Submission of proposals for productive projects such as 
ecological adaptation strategies to climate change 
 
Workshop 
 
4 
 
205,00 
 
 
A.2.3. Development Projects: productive ecological adaptation to 
climate change 
 
Project 
 
4 
 
9.500,00 
 
 
A.3.4. Monitoring and Evaluation 
 
Thesis 
 
2 
 
3.060,00 
 
 
Specific Objective 3 
 
 
Result 3.1. 
 
 
A.3.1. Experiential methodology to systematize and document the 
knowledge and practices of women, their roles and challenges with 
respect to conservation in protected areas and climate change 
 
Workshop 
 
4 
 
810,00 
 
 
A.3.2. Presentation and approval of proposals for documentation of 
experiences 
 
Workshop 
 
4 
 
205,00 
 
 
A.3.3 Script shots made and approved 
 
Consultation 
 
1 
 
4.000,00 
 
 
A.3.4. Video and Document Editing 
 
Consultation 
 
1 
 
4.000,00 
 
 
A.3.5. Review of video and document drafts 
Qnsultation 
 
1 
 
800,00 
 
 
A.3.6. Review and approval of video and document 
 
Consultation 
 
1 
 
800,00 
 
 
Coordinator 
 
                     18 
 
           600,00 
 
 
Subtotal 
 
 
Visibility: FONAG & USG 
 
 
2% 
 
 
 
 
 
    Total 
100.021,20 
 
 
 
 
 
¶5.  Proposal 2: Organization: Sinchi Sacha (www.sinchisacha.org) 
 
 
 
Title: INDIGENOUS WOMEN, TRADITIONAL CRAFTS AND MARKET CONCEPT 
PAPER 
 
 
 
¶1. SUMMARY 
 
 
 
Project Title 
 
Indigenous women, traditional crafts and market 
 
 
Location 
 
Ecuadorian Amazonia 
 
Project Duration 
 
18 months 
 
Total Budget 
 
USD$ 100,000.oo 
 
Programme Sectors 
 
Economic opportunity 
 
Beneficiaries 
 
50    omen leaders and 250 people 
 
 
 
¶2. BACKGROUND 
 
The Ecuadorian Amazonia is characterized by its ecological 
fragility, ethnical diversity, and extraordinary biodiversity. It 
is precisely those, the ancestral indigenous territories, the ones 
considered to be in good condition, with more than 6 million 
Hectares of native forest, representing 50% of the country's 
forests. Indigenous women are the mainstay to give continuity to 
the traditional ways of living, of which the main characteristic is 
conservation of natural resources. 
 
 
 
Sinchi Sacha Foundation (www.sinchisacha.org 
 ) has promoted cooperation relations 
with indigenous populations in the Amazonia, particularly women, 
for some 15 years now, fostering the development of artisanal 
production initiatives under the concept of Fair Trade. 
 
 
 
Family production units got involved in a range of activities which 
promoted artisanal production and commercialization, recovery of 
cultural heritage of these peoples, their symbols, representations 
of daily life, and identity values, with training strategies to 
improve product designs and quality. It is their work which has 
given aggregate value to traditional production. 
 
 
 
During all these years, they created their own commercialization 
spaces, from which they generated possibilities to improve 
products, determine prices, formalize the legal status of artisans 
(invoices, taxes, etc.), as well as a gradual integration to the 
formal market, among other aspects. These activities were carried 
out within the framework of the execution of USAID-funded projects, 
such as CAIMAN. 
 
 
 
As a result of these processes, there are now artisanal production 
networks in operation across the entire Ecuadorian Amazonia. From 
all of them, three peoples of particular characteristics stand out: 
 
 
 
 
-          Cofan craftswomen 
 
-          Kichwa women ceramicists of Pastaza 
 
-          Huaorani craftswomen 
 
 
 
In each territorial space, women leaders have been in training and 
acting as local promoters in product identification, training in 
artisanal design, articulation and representation with 
socio-organizational structures, among others. Nevertheless, they 
do not have defined commercialization mechanisms, this segment 
being one of their main weaknesses. 
 
 
 
Summing up, they have an interesting production base, experience in 
creating products; they have achieved some visibility in 
socio-organizational structures within communities, but continue to 
have deficiencies in commercialization mechanisms. These are the 
issues addressed by the project. 
 
 
 
 
¶3. PROJECT OBJECTIVES 
 
 
 
 
General objective: Consolidate commercialization systems of 
artisanal products made by craftswomen organizations of the Cofan, 
Kichwa of Pastaza, and Huaorani nationalities, located in the 
provinces of Sucumbios, Orellana, and Pastaza. 
 
 
 
Specific objectives: 
 
a.       Consolidate artisanal production initiatives of indigenous 
women organizations 
 
b.      Train indigenous women in traditional management and fair 
trade 
 
c.       Develop product promotion, diffusion, and marketing 
activities 
 
 
 
 
¶4. METHODOLOGY AND SUSTAINABILITY 
 
 
 
 
Each Amazonian people has its own life story and experiences in 
different production segments. A piece of craft is a cultural 
product remaining characteristic of each people, representative of 
specific cultural traditions. Therefore, the project proposes a 
general methodology, with specific approaches for each people: 
 
 
 
  - The general methodology is based on the active participation of 
women in the design, formulation, and execution of the project. 
Therefore, a basic register of women leaders of each production 
group has been carried out, which will be completed until it 
reaches a total of 50 craftswomen. 
 
 
 
 - Handmade products have multiple meanings which must be expressed 
and communicated in each one of the pieces of craft. Thus, 
gathering the aggregate value of culture and the way of making the 
products. 
 
 
 
 - Pieces of craft of the Amazonia contain some environmental and 
cultural characteristics, this being the reason why they cannot be 
massively produced. They have a very high market niche within our 
own country, if we take into consideration the number of tourists 
entering the country each year (around one million), they promote 
the installation of a local market dynamic and the propagation of 
these cultural products at the local level, which inspires an 
aesthetic valorization of our own selves. 
 
 
 
 - The art of crafting has to be in constant development and 
improvement, along with the development, transformation and 
resignification of the imagination and culture, therefore various 
and diverse training is needed. Craftswomen will receive training 
on these and other related topics, to promote relatively stable 
markets for them to sell their products, in viable, simple, and 
effective operation schemes. 
 
 
 
From the particularity of interventions, we propose the following 
specific methodological criteria: 
 
 
 
For Cofan craftswomen 
 
 
 
       As we may know, the Cofan people are settled in disperse 
territories and, in all of them, the production of pieces of craft 
is generalized, for it is a complementary economic activity, 
particularly for women. 
 
 
 
Adding up all territorial spaces, we have established a 
participation margin of up to 15 women leaders, who at present act 
as local promoters in product identification, training in artisanal 
design, articulation and representation with socio-organizational 
structures, among other activities. 
 
The Ecuadorian Federation of Indigenous Organizations of the COFAN 
Nationality (FEINCE) will act as the local partneQwithin the 
project, represented by the official delegate of the organization. 
 
 
 
For Kichwa women ceramists of Pastaza 
 
 
 
In the province of Pastaza, women ceramists make their products in 
partnership with others, as well as with their family. From the 
direct market experience carried out by the Sinchi Sacha Foundation 
and its fair trade network, we have observed that mucahuas made in 
Pastaza are a product which is very appreciated by tourists and 
always have a high demand. 
 
 
 
The methodologiQ criteria consist on the selection of 15 
craftswomen, both from organized groups and family production 
units. The work with this segment will be focused on providing 
training to women leaders to improve their ability to fulfill 
market orders, specific training in product size and design. 
 
 
 
For Huaorani Women 
 
 
 
The Waorani Women's Association of Ecuador (AMWAE) has been in 
operation in the Huaorani territory for several years. It groups 
more than 200 women leaders from 36 communities, who live distant 
from each other in a territorial extension of 678,220 Hectares. 
 
 
 
The AMWAE has its headquarters in Puyo and has a craft shop that 
has consolidated over time. They demand an improvement in artisanal 
production lines, promotion and commercialization. The Association 
has selected 20 women leaders, 15 of who will specialize in 
artisanal design, production, and orders; and the 5 remaining will 
provide training in the communities, on promotion and 
commercialization. 
 
 
 
 
¶5. ACTIVITIES 
 
 
 
 
a. Consolidate initiatives of artisanal production of indigenous 
women organizations 
 
Three participation workshops on artisanal production chains 
 
Provide support for technical administration in Cofan and Huaorani 
craft shops 
 
Packaging techniques and attachment of informational tags on 
products 
 
 
 
b. Train indigenous women on artisanal management and fair trade 
 
Six workshops on artisanal management: size, price, and orders 
 
Six workshops on training for fairs and trade 
 
Exchange of experiences on craft fair trade 
 
 
 
c. Develop product promotion, diffusion, and marketing activities 
 
Print 500 documents of Cofan, Kichwa and Huaorani ethnical art for 
sale 
 
Print of Cofan, Kichwa and Huaorani art brands 
 
Design and printing of 3 artisanal catalogues 
 
Participation in 3 national fairs, including a fair to present 
results 
 
 
 
 
¶6. OUTCOMES 
 
 
 
 
6.1  Indigenous women organizations have strengthened family 
initiatives of craft production and partnership 
 
a)      Fifty women have received training on artisanal production 
chains 
 
b)      Two craft shops have improved their technical and 
commercial management 
 
c)      All three organizations (Cofan, Kichwa, and Huaorani) have 
received training on packaging techniques and elaboration of 
informational tags. 
 
 
 
6.2   Train indigenous women on artisanal management and fair trade 
 
 
a)      Fifteen women leaders have been trained on artisanal 
management: size, price, and orders 
 
b)      Fifteen women leaders have been trained on participation in 
fairs and artisanal trade 
 
c)      Six women leaders now know how to put fair trade in 
practice through an exchange of experiences 
 
 
 
6.3 Develop product promotion, diffusion, and marketing activities 
 
a)      500 documents of Cofan, Kichwa and Huaorani ethnical art 
have been printed for sale 
 
b)      Cofan, Kichwa, and Huaorani crafts are commercialized under 
their own artisanal brands 
 
c)      Three organizations of indigenous craftswomen have their 
own catalogues of artisanal products. 
 
d)     They have participated in 3 national fairs, one of them 
dedicated to present the final results of the project 
 
 
 
 
¶7. BUDGET 
 
 
 
 
ACTIVITIES / OUTCOMES 
 
BUDGET REQUESTED 
 
PARTNER 
 
 
 
Indigenous women organizations have strengthened family initiatives 
of craft production and partnership 
 
a) Fifty women leaders have received training on artisanal 
production chains 
 
10.000,00 
 
1,000.00 
 
 
b) Two craft shops have improved their technical and commercial 
management 
 
25.000,00 
 
2,000.00 
 
 
c) All three organizations (Cofan, Kichwa, and Huaorani) have 
received training on packaging techniques and elaboration of 
informational tags 
 
10.000,00 
 
 
 
 
Train indigenous women on artisanal management and fair trade 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a)  Fifteen women leaders have received training on artisanal 
management: size, price, and orders 
 
16.000,00 
 
800.00 
 
 
b) Fifteen women leaders have been trained on participation in 
fairs and artisanal trade 
 
16.000,00 
 
800.00 
 
 
c)   Six women leaders now know how to put fair trade in practice 
through an exchange of experiences 
 
16.000,00 
 
1,500.00 
 
 
Develop product promotion, diffusion, and marketing activities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a) 500 documents of Cofan and Huaorani ethnical art have been 
printed for sale 
 
1.000,00 
 
 
 
 
b)  Cofan, Kichwa, and Huaorani crafts are commercialized under 
their own artisanal brands 
 
1.000,00 
 
 
 
 
c) Three organizations of indigenous craftswomen have their own 
 
catalogues of artisanal products. 
 
1.000,00 
 
 
 
 
d) They have participated in 3 national fairs, one of them 
dedicated to present the final results of the project 
 
4.000,00 
 
 
 
 
TOTAL 
 
100.000,00 
 
6,100.00 
 
 
 
 
 
¶8. TIMETABLE AND  INDICATORS 
 
 
 
ACTIVITIES / OUTCOMES/Timeline 
 
Indigenous women organizations have strengthened the family 
initiatives of craft production and partnership 
 
a. Fifty women leaders have received training on artisanal 
production chains; Month 1-3 
 
b. Two craft shops have improved their technical and commercial 
management; Month 4-6 
 
c. All three organizations (Cofan, Kichwa, and Huaorani) have 
received training on packaging techniques and elaboration of 
informational tags; Month 6-8 
 
 
 
Train indigenous women on artisanal management and fair trade 
 
a. Fifteen women leaders have received trained on artisanal 
management: size, price, and orders, Month 3,6,9 
 
b. Fifteen women leaders have been trained on participation in 
fairs and artisanal trade; Month 4,7,10 
 
c. Six women leaders now know how to put fair trade in practice 
through an exchange of experiences, Month 9 
 
 
 
Develop product promotion, diffusion, and marketing activities 
 
a. 500 documents of Cofan and Huaorani ethnical art have been 
printed for sale; Month 5 
 
b. Cofan, Kichwa, and Huaorani crafts are commercialized under 
their own artisanal brands, Month 6 
 
c. Three organizations of indigenous craftswomen have their own 
catalogues of artisanal products; Month 9 
 
d. They have participated in 3 national fairs, one of them 
dedicated to present the final results of the project; Month 9-12 
HODGES