10RIODEJANEIRO10
The Brazilian Mining Sector: Opportunites and Obstacles
Wed Jan 06 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Rio De Janeiro
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHRI #0010/01 0061839
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 061838Z JAN 10
FM AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0092
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0001
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULOUNCLAS RIO DE JANEIRO 000010 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO USGS AGURMENDI 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO TREASURY MKACZMAREK 
STATE PLEASE PASS TO COMMERCE LFUSSELL 
EEB/ESC/IEC 
WHA/EPSC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EMIN ECON EIND EINV PGOV EXIM SENV CH BR
SUBJECT: The Brazilian Mining Sector: Opportunites and Obstacles 
 
REF: RIO DE JANEIRO 452 
 
SUMMARY 
 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Brazil is one of the leading producers of minerals in the 
world, and minerals accounted for 53 percent of the Brazilian trade 
balance in 2008.  Iron ore - the key feedstock for steel - accounts 
for 60 percent of mineral production value in the country, and 
output is expected to nearly double over the next five years. 
Brazilian mineral production and Chinese demand for steel and other 
alloys are inextricably linked, and analysts predict Chinese 
industrialization and urbanization will continue to spur minerals 
investment and production here for years to come.  The Brazilian 
Geological Service believes there will still be substantial mineral 
deposit discoveries in Brazil and is undertaking a project to 
geologically map the entire country.  However, dramatic changes to 
the current mining law may be coming that many leading Brazilian 
industry insiders fear will negatively impact competition and 
investment in the mining sector.   Furthermore, some mining 
companies complain that stringent environmental licenses, lack of 
infrastructure, and high royalty requirements are obstacles to 
market entry and prevent them from maximizing production.  End 
Summary. 
 
 
 
SNAPSHOT 
 
 
 
¶2. (U) Brazil is one of the leading producers of minerals in the 
world, and minerals accounted for 53 percent of the Brazilian trade 
balance in 2008.   Brazil markets 80 mineral commodity products, 
valued at 28 billion USD in 2008, five times greater than in 2000. 
Of this number, approximately 78 percent are metals, 20 percent 
nonmetallic, and 2 percent are coal, diamonds, and/or gems.  Brazil 
is the world's largest producer of key steel and aluminum feed 
stocks, such as high-content iron ore and niobium, and the second 
largest producer of bauxite and manganese, also key materials in 
steel production. 
 
 
 
HIGH PRODUCTION GROWTH RATES, IRON ORE LEADING 
 
 
 
¶3. (U) Iron ore - the key feedstock for steel - accounts for 60 
percent of mineral production value in the country, and is expected 
to nearly double over the next five years.  In 2008, Brazil 
produced 390 million metric tons (Mt) of iron ore (with 265 Mt of 
iron content), up from 212 Mt of iron ore (146 Mt of iron content) 
in 2000. The Brazilian Institute for Mining (IBRAM), an association 
that represents 182 mining companies in Brazil, forecasts 2009 
production to be 350 Mt of iron ore, about 10 percent less than in 
2008, due to the global economic downturn.  Over the next five 
years, however, IBRAM estimates tremendous production growth, with 
output reaching 670 Mt by 2014 based on 30 billion USD in current 
iron ore investment projects.  The association also predicts total 
minerals investment between 2008 and 2013 to exceed 100 billion 
USD, with high production growth rates projected in nickel, used 
for stainless steel, and copper, a mineral with extensive 
applications in energy and infrastructure.  (Note: Brazil is a 
major exporter of nickel, bauxite, tantalum, manganese, and imports 
coal, potassium, copper, and zinc.  End Note.) 
 
 
 
THE CHINA CONNECTION 
 
 
 
¶4. (U) Brazilian mineral production and Chinese demand for steel 
and other alloys are inextricably linked.   Mining giant Vale S.A. 
(CVRD), privatized in 1997, produces over 70 percent of all 
Brazilian iron ore production - including in pelletized form - and 
 
exports over one-third of its total output to China.   According to 
Vale sales executives, the company's exports of iron ore, nickel, 
and manganese to China increased from 15 Mt in 2000 to 130 Mt in 
¶2009.  Citing unparalleled Chinese economic growth rates and a 
steady urbanization of China's 800 million rural residents, IBRAM's 
Economic Data Manager Antonio Lannes told Econoff that even with 
China's 600 Mt of annual domestic iron ore production, China still 
required 400 Mt of imports per year to meet demand.   He said such 
high Chinese demand spanned all metallic minerals. 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) China also serves as a financer, supplier, and competitor 
for Vale.  Earlier this year, Vale signed a contract with a Chinese 
shipbuilder for the delivery of 12 iron ore carriers, each which 
can carry 400,000 Mt of iron ore, the largest such capacity of any 
ship.  The company financed the purchase through the Chinese 
Export-Import Bank (Note: During an October 5 meeting with Charge 
d'Affairs, Vale's Corporate Finance Director Guilherme Cavalcanti 
said he wanted to buy more equipment from U.S. suppliers using U.S. 
Ex-Im Bank financing, but noted that MARAD obligations, which 
mandate the use of U.S. shipping lines to transport the products, 
made such deals cost-prohibitive.  Vale's discussion with Ex-Im 
Bank is ongoing.  End Note.)   Chinese firms are also competing 
with Vale for mineral rights, especially for coal, in Africa. 
"They are going everywhere, even Afghanistan, Sudan, Myanmar," 
Christian Perlingiere from Vale said. "Lower profit is not an issue 
to them." 
 
 
 
BRAZILIAN GEOLOGICAL SERVICE PREDICTS MORE BIG DISCOVERIES 
 
 
 
¶6. (U) The Brazilian Geological Service (CPRM) believes there are 
still substantial mineral deposits to be discovered in Brazil. 
With only one-third of the country's territory mapped, CPRM is 
managing a program involving 300 geologists to map the entire 
country's geologic formations.   CPRM's Maria Glicia da Nobrega 
said the chances were "high" of finding first class poly- metallic 
deposits, such as the massive Carajas deposit, especially in the 
Amazon region.  (Note: The world's largest iron ore mine, Carajas 
in Para state, holds an estimated 1.5 billion iron ore reserves and 
turns out about 100 Mt per year.   Vale expects its output to rise 
to 130 Mt of iron ore per year by 2012.  The deposit also holds 
high amounts of manganese, copper, nickel, and gold.  End Note. ) 
Nobrega also complained that mineral exploration accounted for only 
four percent of total mineral investment, stating this number 
should be much higher considering the potential for new 
discoveries. 
 
 
 
SECTORAL CHALLENGES 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) Even with abundant reserves and increasing demand, 
international companies and industry associations highlight notable 
obstacles, such as environmental licenses, that affect the sector. 
According to Luciano Ramos, Chief Operations Officer for London 
Mining, the long and uncertain process of obtaining environmental 
licenses was one of the reasons his company sold off its Brazilian 
operations. "In Brazil, it takes years to get a license, and even 
then, you might not get it at all," he said. "In Chile, it only 
takes months."  The current environmental licensing system is 
divided into three steps: A preliminary license required during the 
planning stage, an installation license prior to any construction, 
and an operational license required before beginning mining or 
processing operations.  While the time total time may vary, IBRAM's 
Lannes said the industry average was three years.  Vale Business 
Development Manager Jessica Carvalho complained that difficulties 
in obtaining environmental licenses threatened the company's 11 
billion USD "Carajas Southern Hill" project.  The operation, slated 
to be the largest greenfield investment in the history of iron ore 
mining, would increase Vale's iron ore production by 90 million 
tons per year. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Mining companies also face high tax and royalty rates on 
production.  London Mining's Ramos referenced an Ernst and Young 
study that demonstrated iron ore was taxed at 19.60 percent in 
Brazil, including all royalties and taxes, compared to 15.40 
percent in Australia.  In potassium, the tax reached 41.60 percent, 
compared to only 18.24 percent in Canada.  Vale's Corporate Finance 
Director Cavalcanti also complained about high taxes, explaining 
his company was the largest taxpayer in the world, compared to 
other mining companies. 
 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) Lack of infrastructure also constitutes a significant 
challenge, especially for small-to-medium sized mining companies. 
According to Zuileica Castilhos of the Brazilian government's 
Center for Mineral Technology (CETEM), for example, relatively 
smaller companies simply cannot compete in iron-ore production, not 
only because of the large economies-of-scale involved, but also due 
to a lack of highways and independent rail systems.  In the case of 
London Mining, for example, with no other viable transport options, 
the price offered by Vale for access to its railway was 
prohibitively high for the company to justify exercising its 
mineral rights in Minas Gerais State.  And, while some companies 
explore alternate logistical routes, other obstructions often 
arise.  For example, UK-based mining group Anglo-American has run 
into considerable delays constructing a 350 mile pipeline to carry 
iron ore slurry, i.e. iron ore concentrate mixed with water into a 
liquid form, due to staunch opposition from local landowners. 
 
 
 
MORE GOVERNMENT CONTROL ON THE WAY? 
 
 
 
¶10. (SBU) The Brazilian government has proposed a regulatory 
framework for minerals to replace the existing code, in order to 
provide more sovereign control over mineral resources (reftel). 
Similar to the regulatory framework for the Pre-salt oil and gas 
reserves in spirit, the proposal aims to alter the current 
concession model, create new government bodies to administer 
deposits, and increase government royalties on production. 
Speculation even exists that the Government might require all 
foreign companies to include Brazilian joint ventures, under 
certain circumstances.  While some report this new minerals 
framework to be a priority for the Government, industry is 
concerned the Government is not taking sufficient time or steps to 
allow for debate of the proposal. 
 
 
 
THE STATE AND VALE 
 
 
 
¶11. (SBU) President Lula's public statements aimed at Vale also 
suggest more government involvement in the development of Brazil's 
mineral resources.  For example, earlier this year President Lula 
called on Vale to create more jobs by opening steel mills and 
purchasing Brazilian-manufactured iron ore carriers, instead of 
Chinese-made ones.  Vale, however, has no plans to go into the 
steel business, beyond its minority share in a dedicated steel 
manufacturer's mill, due to concern of turning customers into 
competitors.  "We have been pressured to build steel by the 
government, "Vale's Calvalcanti stated, "but they seem appeased 
that we invested over a billion dollars in a steel mill." 
According to researchers at the Brazilian government's Center for 
Mineral Technology, President Lula also "demanded" that Vale 
produce more potassium chloride - a key feedstock for fertilizer 
production, and projected for depletion by 2020.  (Note: This 
center is also undertaking research to create an alternate 
fertilizer feedstock from salts, such as magnesium.  End Note). 
HEARNE