10SANAA381
S/GWI PROJECT PROPOSAL - YEMEN
Tue Feb 23 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Sanaa
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHYN #0381/01 0541401
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 231401Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY SANAA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3892
INFO RUEHZM/GULF COOPERATION COUNCIL COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SANAA 000381 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA/ARP FOR ANDREW MACDONALD 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KWMN PREL KPAO PHUM AID CDC COM TRSY YM
SUBJECT: S/GWI PROJECT PROPOSAL - YEMEN 
 
REF: STATE 12531 
 
¶1.  Embassy Sana'a submits two projects for the Secretary's 
Office of Global Women's Issues' Small Grants Initiative 
(S/GWI) to fund projects that promote women's political, 
economic, and social advancement.  The proposals detailed 
below address the themes of education, specifically, health 
education, and economic opportunity. 
 
¶2.  A summary of each proposal is provided below, and 
additional, more detailed information is available upon 
request.  Embassy Sana'a will be responsible for project and 
financial oversight and for project monitoring and evaluation 
through its small grants committee.  Embassy Sana'a's point 
of contact is Colleen Traughber (TraughberCM@state.gov). 
 
Project 1: Early Breast Cancer Detection Awareness Program 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶3.  Problem: Breast cancer is one of the most serious 
cancerous diseases affecting Yemeni women.  According to a 
clinic in the Republican Hospital in Sana'a, the major cause 
of women reaching that stage is ignorance and lack of 
awareness of the importance of early detection of breast 
cancer.  In an attempt to develop local government national 
strategy in spreading awareness and supporting specialized 
health centers, ATHAR Foundation (otherwise known as the 
Impact Institute for Development) proposes to conduct an 
awareness program for early detection of breast cancer. 
 
Proposed Program: This project intends to: 1) raise awareness 
about the risk factors that may increase the likelihood of 
the disease, its symptoms, and the benefits of screening for 
the early detection of breast cancer; 2) train targeted 
groups on how to do the periodic check; 3) develop protocols 
and guidelines dealing with all standard procedures for 
detecting and diagnosis; 4) train specialized staff to do 
outreach at the level of health centers in major cities; and 
5) target actors in the governmental sector and civil society 
who are involved in breast cancer awareness. 
 
Project Description: The project will establish an intensive 
program for women and girls to provide them with basic health 
information on how to do periodic examinations.  It will also 
raise awareness of the dangers of breast cancer and how to 
prevent it. 
 
Outcomes/Performance Measures: The project targets high 
school and university students from 15 years old and above as 
well as women's groups and housewives in Sana'a and Hodeidah. 
 The duration of the project would be eight months from the 
beginning of the project. 
 
Budget: USD 89,320 
 
Recipient Organization: Impact Institute for Development 
(also known as the Athar Foundation) is a local NGO that 
focuses on women's development.  Impact has received limited 
support in the past from international donors, including USG 
funds through the Middle East Partnership Initiative Program 
(MEPI).  Past experience has shown its ability to complete 
projects in a timely and transparent fashion.  Post believes 
that the Impact Institute has the appropriate level of 
technical and management capacity. 
 
PROJECT 2: WOMEN'S ECONOMIC EMPOWERMENT 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  Problem: Yemen is one of the least developed countries in 
the Middle East and North Africa region with a predominantly 
rural population, facing enormous economic and social 
challenges.  While there are opportunities for small business 
owners, the owners are typically male.  Women make up only 3 
percent of entrepreneurs.  Women have less formal education 
than men, limited technical skills, less business exposure, 
and less access to information about financial and business 
services.  Recognizing the needs and the opportunity to make 
a difference, Athar Foundation (otherwise known as the Impact 
Institute for Development) would like to continue its program 
for women's economic empowerment. 
 
Proposed Program:  This project intends to: 1) provide a 
culturally acceptable business environment for women; 2) 
offer training in business management, accounting, and 
marketing classes; 3) provide women with the required skills 
to be competitive in the modern business environment, 
assisting them to start and retain their businesses; and 4) 
support the management performance of female-owned and 
managed small and medium enterprises. 
 
Project Description: The project will set up training for 
women in glass painting in Sana'a.  Low income women and 
girls will be trained in how to make their own projects such 
as colored vases, painted pictures, and other traditional 
paintings.  The project will also offer administrative, 
financial, and marketing training which will be conducted in 
order to help women entrepreneurs start their own businesses. 
 After the completion of the training, Impact will hold an 
exhibition of the trainees' products. 
 
Outcomes/Performance Measures: The project will train 50 
women in Sana'a who are interested in starting their own 
businesses.  It will target women who are from a low-income 
background and who also have artistic skills.  The duration 
of the project would be eight months from the beginning of 
the project. 
 
Budget: USD 43,549 
 
Recipient Organization: Impact Institute for Development 
(Please see description above.) 
SECHE