05PARIS6756
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - International Terrorism -
Mon Oct 03 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 006756 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - International Terrorism - 
Bali European Issues - Turkey 
PARIS - Monday, October 03, 2005 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
International Terrorism - Bali 
European Issues - Turkey 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
The overwhelming majority of today's front pages anticipates 
on tomorrow's day of general strikes and devotes their lead 
stories to the degree of chaos commuters will be facing and to 
PM Villepin's first test of social unrest since taking office 
as Prime Minister. "Test by Fire" is the headline chosen by 
both economic papers Les Echos and La Tribune, while popular 
France Soir titles: "Villepin in the Eye of the Storm." 
Liberation headlines: "If It's Tuesday, It Must Be Conflict." 
Le Parisien headlines "Black Tuesday" and L'Humanite 
announces: "74 Percent of the French Support the Day of 
Protest." Le Figaro chooses to concentrate on the tug-of-war 
between Corsican unions and the government over the 
privatization of the SNCM Ferry company, always in light of a 
"a difficult social week" for the government. 
 
Catholic La Croix differs with a front page and editorial 
devoted to "Europe's Hesitations Over Turkey." Editorialist 
Dominique Quinio suggests Europe needs to re-assess its own 
definition, while in Le Figaro political analyst Luc de 
Barochez concentrates on the "clandestine relationship between 
Paris and Ankara." (See Part C) Le Journal du Dimanche 
interviews former French President Valery Giscard d' Estaing 
who reiterates his position: "I want Europe to establish high 
level and mutually satisfying relations with Turkey - as with 
Russia. These can be called a `privileged partnership'. But 
inviting Turkey to participate in Europe's political 
institutions is not desirable." 
 
The terrorist attack in Bali is the object of two editorials 
in Liberation and Le Figaro. While Liberation contends that 
international terrorism "has not achieved its objective of 
changing the West's habits" Le Figaro comments: "These attacks 
have nothing in common with attacks by al-Qaeda. Attacks from 
Jemaah Islamiyah are sporadic attacks on symbolic dates. They 
are acts of war." (See Part C) 
An interview with Hamid Karzai in Le Figaro is titled: 
"Karzai: `Unifying International Forces in Afghanistan.'" 
"Afghanistan continues to work hand in hand with the U.S. in 
the fight against terror. But the Bonn process is now over. 
Maybe we should consider giving our cooperation a political 
dimension. Fighting terrorism involves fighting against its 
financing and training in Afghanistan and neighboring 
countries. In time we will have a single command of the two 
operations underway in Afghanistan placed under the NATO 
banner." 
 
Separately Le Figaro devotes a full page to France's new Rapid 
Reaction Force Headquarters, "where American officers will be 
welcomed with open arms" and the role France will be able to 
play in NATO operations. Arnaud de La Grange comments: "In the 
midst of the diplomatic guerrilla war over Iraq, achieving 
this feat was not easy. Pentagon civilians, like Rumsfeld, 
dragged their feet, while American generals appreciated 
France's growing military strength." 
 
Left-of-center Liberation reports on a new transatlantic 
network, the "Committee for a Strong Europe" being developed 
in Washington by neo-conservatives of the PNAC think tank. 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
International Terrorism - Bali 
 
"The Asian Front" 
Pierre Rousselin in right-of-center Le Figaro (10/03): "In 
Asia, the emerging middle class is engaged in a wild consumer 
race which goes hand in hand with the Westernization of its 
values. But the majority of the population cannot escape 
poverty and is the target of underground Islamization efforts. 
Indonesia is threatened by the Balkanization of its society. 
Saturday's terrorist attack reminds us that terrorism does not 
target only the West and the Arab world. Asia, where the 
biggest changes are operating and where our future lies, is 
also a primary target. We must stop Al-Qaeda from fomenting 
anti-western resentment in this region of the world, so 
crucial for our survival. And the Indonesian authorities must 
be more determined in dealing with terrorists." 
 
"In Vain" 
Patrick Sabatier in left-of-center Liberation (10/03): 
"Djihadists have no choice but to incessantly repeat their 
deadly attacks but with decreasing results. Their strategy and 
methods are well-known. Yet this mechanical repetition leads 
them nowhere. They have not managed to change the West's 
habits, to keep tourists away or to topple local regimes. 
Their propaganda has not awakened new martyrs among the 
Muslims. While we must not underestimate them, neither should 
we give in to the temptation of a `war of civilizations' which 
the terrorists are trying in vain to provoke." 
 
European Issues - Turkey 
 
"Fragile Foundation" 
Dominique Quinio in Catholic La Croix (10/03): "Until the end 
Europe will have been divided on Turkey. These last minute 
discussions illustrate the hesitations of many governments, 
not only Austria, and the reticence of many a public opinion 
on Turkey's EU membership, which is not a given. Many 
arguments are put forward against Turkey, including its 
position on the Armenian genocide and Cyprus. But many fear 
the membership of a Muslim country: without it being said, it 
is a fact that people fear Islam. The EU-25 has learned the 
hard way that Europe's expansion, if implemented too quickly 
and without consulting public opinion, exposes them to 
dangers. But mostly the questions surrounding Turkey's 
membership reveal Europe's psychological fragility: its 
foundation is not strong enough to absorb Turkey. If Europe 
were stronger, more united about a joint project, it would see 
Turkey's membership as a wonderful and peaceful challenge. 
Because Europe has not reached this point it needs more time. 
And so do the future potential candidates." 
 
"The Clandestine Relationship Between Paris and Ankara" 
Luc de Barochez in right-of-center Le Figaro (10/03): "Never 
has France's diplomacy been so out of tune with its public 
opinion. And rarely has France's foreign policy been decided 
by only one man, the President, as it is today. Is France 
encouraging the negotiations with Turkey in good faith? France 
continues to be Turkey's major ally within the EU. But like a 
forbidden relationship, the relationship between Ankara and 
Paris remains discreet. Chirac continues to believe that the 
West's interests, Europe's role in world affairs, and its 
relationship to Islam. will be better served with Turkey. Yet, 
officially, nothing is being stated. And Istanbul and Ankara 
do not appreciate this lack of clarity. Turkey's elite is 
distancing itself from a partner it no longer fully trusts. 
France's previous attitude towards Poland led to a loss of 
credit in Poland. The same could happen today with Turkey." 
STAPLETON