05PARIS8610
UNESCO: Cultural Diversity Convention:
Thu Dec 22 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

221429Z Dec 05UNCLAS PARIS 008610 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
FROM USMISSION UNESCO PARIS 
 
E.O. 12958:     N/A 
TAGS: UNESCO SCUL ETRD CJAN TBIO FR SU AF
SUBJECT:  UNESCO: Cultural Diversity Convention: 
Proponents Proceed With Ratification Strategy 
 
REF:  A) Paris 8280; B) Paris 6814; C) Paris 7715 
 
¶1.  (SBU) The Cultural Diversity Convention's 
proponents continue to carry out a multi-faceted 
ratification strategy (Refs A and B).  Kader Asmal, who 
advocated for the Convention from his position as Chair 
of the UNESCO negotiations, is reportedly to "consult" 
with developing countries and urge ratification of the 
Convention.  Meanwhile, proponents plump for the 
Convention at meetings around the world.  End summary 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Kader Asmal, the South African Chair of 
UNESCO Cultural Diversity talks is rumored to be lined 
up for UNESCO-financed consultancies with developing 
countries to assist in the development of cultural 
policies, including ratification of the Cultural 
Diversity Convention.  (Note.  Official UNESCO sources 
deny the rumors.  End Note.) 
 
     --French President Jacques Chirac personally 
awarded the prestigious French Legion d'Honneur to 
Asmal 20 December, citing Asmal's role in the formation 
of the Convention. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) UNESCO Secretary General Matsuura will lead a 
12-15 person delegation to Khartoum, which UNESCO has 
named as the Arab Cultural Capital for 2005 (Ref C), to 
attend a 23-24 January African Culture Summit, 
organized by the African Union, and likely to feature 
encouragements to ratify the Convention (Refs A and B). 
 
¶4.  (SBU) East Asian meetings are also part of the 
picture. 
 
     --Vietnam.  Reports of a 14-15 November Conference 
in Hanoi on the Cultural Diversity Convention indicate 
that French and Canadian speakers pitched the 
Convention 
 
     --China. A 9 November conference in Hangzhou, 
styled in news reports as the third Globalization 
Forum, reportedly drew 180 attendees and focused on 
cultural diversity. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) However, in separate 2 December meetings, 
Chinese and South Korean UNESCO reps predicted to 
poloff that the Cultural Diversity Convention would not 
be ratified in the near future in their respective 
countries, given complex ratification procedures.  The 
South Korean rep also cited a standoff between South 
Korean trade officials, who opposed to the Convention, 
and Culture officials and domestic lobbying groups, who 
favored it. End note.) 
 
¶6.  (SBU) We are fairly certain that we catch only 
glimpses of the full ratification efforts, the bulk of 
which now take place in capitals.  Many of poloff's 
normally voluble African contacts evaded inquiries 
about the African meetings. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Comment.  Now that the Convention has been 
formally adopted, the action on this seems to have 
shifted from UNESCO Paris headquarters to capitals 
considering ratification of the Convention. 
 
Koss