05PARIS7948
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Bush to Mongolia Israel-
Tue Nov 22 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 007948 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Bush to Mongolia Israel- 
Political Change Iran U.S.- France: Social Models 
PARIS - Tuesday, November 22, 2005 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Bush to Mongolia 
Israel- Political Change 
Iran 
U.S.- France: Social Models 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
Today's national rail strike is the lead front page and 
editorial story. Commentators agree that the cause behind the 
strike is "fear of privatization." But they also note that the 
government's assurance that "privatization is not in the 
works" does not help the rail company's development. A strike 
by the Paris metro system has been announced for tomorrow. 
 
International stories include Ariel Sharon's break with the 
Likud, the reprieve Iran is getting from the West, and 
President Bush's visit to Mongolia, "his ally." (See Part C) 
The Mehlis report due on December 15 leads Le Figaro to write: 
"The Syrian President on November 10 made clear that he would 
not bend and that Syria is clearly being targeted. Observers 
note he has two options: a compromise with the U.S. about Iraq 
or confrontation." 
 
Angela Merkel's first day in office is extensively covered. 
She is expected to meet with President Chirac tomorrow. La 
Croix believes "Merkel is planning more drastic reforms for 
Germany than France's." Alain Franco in La Croix comments: 
"Merkel is somewhat of a mystery, but she is not a source of 
concern. She has reassured her European entourage by adopting 
a stance that favors the stability pact and respects the 
commitment made to Turkey." 
 
Macedonia's FM Ilinka Mitreva who is interviewed in Le Figaro, 
adamantly defends the notion that Macedonia belongs in the EU, 
"geographically, historically and culturally." 
 
Financial La Tribune interviews WTO's Peter Mandelson: "I will 
not make new proposals on agriculture. The stalemate is not 
due to agricultural issues, but to the fact that the market is 
not sufficiently open in the service sector. Those who cast 
doubt on the sincerity of the American proposals do so because 
the Americans have not offered to cut their agricultural 
spending, only to lower the ceiling of expenditures." 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Bush to Mongolia 
 
"Bush Visits His Ally: Mongolia" 
Philippe Gelie in right-of-center Le Figaro (11/22): "The more 
surreal aspect of President Bush's visit to Mongolia is 
probably the fact that this was the easiest portion of his 
Asian trip. President Bush is never complacent with 
dictatorships; he is often contested by `older' democracies. 
But when it comes to new democracies Bush is at his best. 
Especially when they send their soldiers to fight alongside 
the GIs. For Washington, Mongolia is an important 
steppingstone in the region. On the aftermath of a Chinese 
visit that was marked by tension, the White House is back to 
its regional strategy game of Monopoly. But with Congress and 
the Pentagon concerned about China's new rise in power, 
Beijing would have to be blind not to see America's 
containment maneuvering to secure strategic alliances in 
Central Asia. Washington has more than one weapon available: 
the other is economic. What remains to be seen is whether 
Washington will opt for dtente or is preparing for a cold 
war." 
 
Israel- Political Change 
 
"Sharon Wants a Political `Big Bang'" 
Jean-Christophe Ploquin in Catholic La Croix (11/22): "The 
Lion, at seventy-seven, is still roaring. This strategist, who 
has imposed new rules in the game with the Palestinians, and 
given himself new margins of maneuver with the Israelis, could 
well succeed in a partial pullout in the West Bank while 
safeguarding the essential part of the settlements." 
"Sharon Opts For a Break" 
Patrick Saint-Paul in right-of-center Le Figaro (11/22): 
"Sharon's wager is risky. Bearing the fruits of a successful 
pullout from Gaza, all polls signaled him as a winner. But the 
surprise win of the Labor party's Amir Peretz has changed the 
game. Without a coalition government, Sharon must change 
course. With his centrist approach he wants to offer a more 
liberal economic policy and work in `favor of peace' with the 
Palestinians." 
 
Iran 
Renaud Girard in right-of-center Le Figaro (11/22): 
"Washington wants to give Putin enough time to convince Iran 
to accept a compromise. An agreement between the White House 
and Moscow was apparently reached in Pusan. But this is 
Washington's last chance offer to Tehran." 
 
"Barbs and Traps in Tehran" 
 Marie-Claude Decamps in left-of-center Le Monde (11/22): "In 
short, whatever the new Iranian President does or says is a 
source of contention and mistrust inside Iran. So much so that 
the Ayatollah Khameini was forced to intervene recently in 
favor of his protg asking the Iranians `to give the 
government time and to stop the criticism.' A subtle sign 
according to some that the problems caused by Ahmadinejad are 
a source of dissent not only among the conservatives but also 
a source of annoyance for the spiritual leader, taken by 
surprise by Ahmadinejad's initiatives." 
 
U.S.- France: Social Models 
 
"The Image of the U.S. in France." 
Alfred Grosser in Catholic La Croix (11/22): "In France we 
willingly talk about Europe and European values, opposing them 
to the U.S. We forget that they come from the Declaration of 
Independence. It is true that George Bush and his 
administration violate many principles. One among them is more 
e 
American than European: lying as political sin. President Bush 
has indeed led his country in a war based on lies. Detainees 
are held without trials. Torture is used either directly or by 
proxy. But where in France are the Foreign Ministers whose 
faces are the color of a Colin Powell or a Condoleezza Rice? 
How much do our newly arrived migrants from North Africa weigh 
in on our politics compared with the Hispanic Americans of 
California? Oil may corrupt, but what about our robbing 
Africa's wealth? The U.S. media at times does beat its own 
`mea culpa,' but never France's. The negative similarities 
between France and the U.S. are at times glaring: contempt for 
minorities, an arrogant press. Yes, America is hypocritical 
when it preaches what it does not practice. But does France 
have the right to proclaim itself as a model of virtue in the 
face of its supposed American fiend?" 
 
"Virtuous Examples" 
Yves de Kerdrel in right-of-center Le Figaro (11/22): "In the 
U.S. there are multiple examples of `black power' in its 
capitalistic society. Many other minorities are also rising. 
In this regard, France is far behind. It is undeniable that 
the American cocktail of affirmative action, policies of 
quotas and selective immigration presents more advantages than 
disadvantages. Diversity creates wealth." STAPLETON