05PARIS6028
USUNESCO: UNESCO GENERAL CONFERENCE TO LAUNCH
Tue Sep 06 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 006028 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM USMISSION UNESCO 
 
STATE FOR IO/UNESCO JANE COWLEY 
 
E.O. 12958:     N/A 
TAGS: AORC EAID SOCI UNESCO
SUBJECT:  USUNESCO: UNESCO GENERAL CONFERENCE TO LAUNCH 
DEBATE ON MEDIUM-TERM STRATEGY 
 
REFS:  A) Paris 5862 
 
¶1.  Summary and comment: Influencing the agenda of 
UNESCO's October 2005 General Conference will be 
preliminary discussions of the organization's medium-term 
strategy (2008-14).  The negotiation process -- leading 
up to adoption of a new medium-term strategy by the 
October 2007 general conference -- offers an opportunity 
to shape UNESCO's mission into the next decade.  This is 
the first time that consultations on the medium-term 
strategy have started so far in advance of the target 
date for adoption, an initiative intended to give member 
states more control over the process.  Given the novelty 
of this approach, some of the process is still TBD. 
Devising an appropriate roadmap for drafting in 
conjunction with like-minded states is a first important 
challenge.  End summary and comment. 
 
CRAFTING A NEW MEDIUM-TERM STRATEGY FOR UNESCO 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶2.  For the first time, UNESCO's member states will 
launch discussion of the medium term plan (C4) well in 
advance of its scheduled adoption (at the 2007 General 
Conference), to ensure that they have maximum input to 
the resulting strategy document.  At the upcoming 
General Conference, the debate on the new medium-term 
strategy will start from scratch.  Principle priorities 
of the various sectors will not necessarily carry over 
into the next exercise; the idea of even having principle 
priorities -- a Matsuura initiative -- will also be on 
the table.  (NOTE:  As an example, the Nordic States and 
the UK are tabling a draft resolution to study the 
Natural Sciences and SHS sectors; this study is meant to 
inform the medium-term planning process, ref A.)  Strong 
U.S. interventions at this debate will be a way to 
demonstrate leadership. 
 
¶3.  At the General Conference, the Medium-term strategy 
for 2008-2014 is on the agenda for discussion at each of 
the five "program" commissions:  General questions and 
program support; education; natural science/social and 
human sciences; culture; and communication.  The debate 
will take the form of 7-10 minute interventions by member 
states.  The debates in Commission will probably begin 
with a presentation by UNESCO Director for Strategic 
Planning Hans D'Orville, who will outline the drafting 
procedure, as well as ideas that might be addressed by 
the new medium-term strategy.  At this point, the medium- 
term strategy is not on the agenda of the plenary 
sessions of the General Conference, although the 
Secretariat says member states are free to address this 
 
SIPDIS 
issue in the General Policy debate. 
 
¶4.   The next step is to translate the ideas evoked 
during the General Conference debate into fodder for the 
Regional consultations led by National Commissions that 
will take place spring/summer 2006.    One mechanism 
would be for interested member states to participate in a 
drafting group that would craft a resolution conveying 
the instructions of the General Conference to the 
Secretariat and to the Regional Groups.  (During a recent 
 
SIPDIS 
cycle, Executive Board President Canada chaired an 18- 
member task force "UNESCO for the 21st century" that, 
among its other functions, informed the medium-term 
planning process.)   The reports of the regional 
consultation meetings will be the basis of the 
preliminary draft mid-term strategy that the Secretariat 
will present to the Fall 2006 Executive Board.  Debate 
and revision will continue at Executive Board meetings 
that will take place in the Spring and Fall of 2007. 
The new medium-term plan (2008-14) will be adopted at the 
Fall 2007 General Conference. 
 
¶5.  Outline of Drafting Process for Medium-Term Strategy 
(2008-14): 
 
October, 2005  General Conference 
Medium-Term plan 2008-2014 is on the agenda for 
discussion at the five program commissions. 
 
Spring/Summer 2006  Regional Consultations 
National Commissions of each of UNESCO's regional groups 
meet in regions to flesh out ideas presented at the 
General Conference, submitting input to the Secretariat. 
 
Fall 2006, Executive Board 
Secretariat presents preliminary draft of Medium-Term 
 
SIPDIS 
Plan, based on regional input. 
 
Spring/Fall 2007 Executive Boards 
Preliminary draft of Medium-Term Plan debated and 
revised. 
 
Fall 2007, General Conference 
Medium Term Plan adopted by member states. 
 
GENEVA GROUP COUNTRIES TO EXPLORE COORDINATED APPROACH 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶6. At a September 1 Geneva group meeting, the Medium-term 
strategy was evoked briefly.  Most participants did not 
have a clear idea regarding the process to be followed. 
Canada stressed the opportunities for pro-active 
participation by member states afforded by early debate 
of the medium-term strategy.  The Geneva Group decided to 
revisit the issue at its September 12 meeting; one option 
to consider will be the organization of an informal 
drafting group to craft a General Conference resolution. 
 
¶7.  Delegation's recommendations regarding UNESCO's 
Medium Term Strategy (2008-2014) to follow septel. 
 
OLIVER