05PARIS7772
USUNESCO: UNESCO SYMPOSIUM EXAMINES CULTURAL
Tue Nov 15 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS PARIS 007772 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM USMISSION UNESCO PARIS 
FOR IO/T 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA AORC SCUL JA FR UNESCO
SUBJECT: USUNESCO: UNESCO SYMPOSIUM EXAMINES CULTURAL 
DIVERSITY IN EAST-WEST CONTEXT 
 
REF:  PARIS 07446 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY and comment: UNESCO's Social and Human 
Sciences Sector held an international symposium on 
"Cultural Diversity and Transversal Values: East-West 
Dialogue on Spiritual-Secular Dynamics" on November 7- 
¶9.  The symposium concluded with a communiqu 
identifying new directions for dialogue between the 
East and West in order to foster mutual respect. 
Cultural diversity, as related to the recently adopted 
Cultural Diversity Convention (CDC), was not 
extensively discussed, although intercultural dialogue 
was. 
 
¶2.  The Social and Human Sciences division of UNESCO is 
currently seeking a role for itself within UNESCO 
(reftel) by capitalizing on the momentum surrounding 
cultural diversity.  However, we note that dialogue on 
civilizations is an increasingly important one for 
UNESCO and has been handled more convincingly in 
conferences and events organized by other sectors. 
This is a potential area of engagement for the 
U.S.[Septel]  End summary and comment. 
 
Cultural Diversity- Moving beyond the Convention 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶3. Cultural diversity was discussed in two ways 
throughout this symposium; the first was in regards to 
the CDC, the second looked at historical methods and 
exchanges of dialogue between diverse cultures. 
Director General Matsuura opened the symposium noting 
that adoption of the Cultural Diversity Convention 
(CDC) marks states' concerns regarding cultural 
impoverishment and universality in the context of 
rampant globalization.  By adopting the convention, 
states have formulated policy to protect culture. 
Regarding cultural exchanges, Matsuura stressed that 
dialogue, particularly religious, is necessary to 
promote tolerance and understanding. 
 
¶4.  French and Japanese entities, including the French 
National Commission for UNESCO, were the symposium's 
primary organizers and participants.  Participants, 
mainly academic, also came from the United States, 
China, the Republic of Korea, and the Holy See. 
Speakers covered five main themes: (1) the East-West 
historical meeting; (2) Mediators; (3) Cultural 
Diversity and the plurality of values; (4) the impact 
of modernity on cultural transfers; and (5) transversal 
values in a diverse world.  The final communiqu 
identified six `springboards' for future dialogue, 
which could be the subject of similar future symposia 
at UNESCO. 
 
¶5.  Comment. The symposium's abstract, philosophical 
approach stands in sharp contrast to the real-life 
phenomenon relating to cultural diversity - i.e. riots 
by French youth of sub-Saharan and North African 
heritage - that were never mentioned once as they 
flared near Paris while the symposium was taking place. 
KOSS