05PARIS8116
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Alleged CIA Secret Prisons
Wed Nov 30 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 008116 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Alleged CIA Secret Prisons 
President Bush and His Iraq Policy Iran- U.S.-Azerbaijan 
Relations EuroMed- Europe Vs U.S. The French Social Model Seen 
From the U.S. 
PARIS - Wednesday, November 30, 2005 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Alleged CIA Secret Prisons 
President Bush and His Iraq Policy 
Iran- U.S.-Azerbaijan Relations 
EuroMed- Europe Vs U.S. 
The French Social Model Seen From the U.S. 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
The allegations of CIA secret prisons in Europe, the Council 
of Europe's request that Washington give explanations, as well 
as Secretary Rice and Porter Gross's responses are prominently 
reported in Le Monde, Le Figaro and Liberation. (See Part C) 
 
President Bush's Iraq policy is termed a "fiasco" by Daniel 
Vernet in Le Monde (See Part C) while Liberation interviews 
Iraqi Foreign Affairs Minister Zebari who is on an official 
visit to Paris: "Arab nations are taking an interest in Iraq 
once more, after two years of indifference. They fear that 
Iraq might become a haven for a coalition of terrorists that 
will then turn against Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states. 
Allawi's recent comments in the European press are 
unfortunate. He is sending the wrong message to the people of 
Iraq and to our friends. We have excellent relations with 
Paris: what divided us is part of the past." 
 
The "disappointing" conclusion of the EuroMed summit elicits a 
commentary from political analyst Alain Barluet in Le Figaro 
in which he notes the competition between Europe and the U.S. 
for that region of the world and concludes: "Arab nations, 
which are pragmatic, know that the future of their region 
resides more in Washington than in Barcelona." (See Part C) In 
Catholic La Croix Agnes Rotivel interviews researcher Dorothee 
Schmid: "Between the U.S., the Europeans and the Arab world, 
the major subject of discussion is the evolution of the 
regimes and democratization. The day the subject was 
introduced it turned into a handicap. Nations are not willing 
to be caught by surprise or ignored over this issue. They feel 
that they are being sold political reforms, but indirectly. 
After 9/11, the notion of partnership was turned into a 
security tool by the Europeans. It is unfortunate because the 
partnerships have been undermined by mistrust, even if on a 
bilateral level they seem to work." 
Le Figaro carries an op-ed by Ken Weinstein of the Hudson 
Institute criticizing the French social model, President 
Chirac's response to the recent suburban unrest and urging the 
French to regain their self-confidence. (See Part C) 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Alleged CIA Secret Prisons 
 
"Brussels Threatens Nations that Might Harbor CIA Prisons." 
Jean-Pierre Stroobants in left-of-center Le Monde (11/30): 
"Franco Frattini, the EU Commissioner in charge of justice and 
security issues said on Monday he asked the White House and 
the State Department for explanations regarding the alleged 
existence of CIA secret prisons in Europe. Frattini threatened 
to take away from EU member states, which may have harbored 
such detention centers, the right to vote. The European 
Commission, which was very cautious at first, has changed the 
tone of its remarks. Since then justice departments in several 
countries have asked for investigations and confirmed the use 
of local airports as a stopover for CIA flights, possibly tied 
to illegal detention and torture of presumed Islamic 
terrorists. The Council of Europe is investigating. Frattini 
indicated that the Treaty of Nice requires that member states 
respect fundamental liberties and human rights. Article 7 
gives the Council the prerogative to deprive them of their 
right to vote. According to the European administration, 
Washington is said to have asked for a delay in order to 
formally answer Brussels's requests. `There is unfortunately 
no assurance yet' that these prisons do not exist, said 
Frattini, who indicated that he did not know when Washington 
would respond to his request. Europe's attitude will depend on 
the length of time Washington will take in answering, he 
added. If these prisons exist, Frattini said, `severe 
sanctions' would be requested against those responsible. The 
subject is sure to come up next week when Secretary Rice 
travels to Europe." 
 
"The Europeans Worried About CIA Secret Prisons" 
Jean Quatremer in left-of-center Liberation (11/30): "It is 
not an explicit confirmation, but it is close. Asked about the 
existence of these secret prisons, the CIA Director, Porter 
Gross answered in a roundabout way that `the U.S. is at war 
against terrorism.' while Sean McCormack recognized the 
validity of Europe's questions. He also said the U.S. would 
answer `in as honest a manner as possible.' Secretary Rice who 
is expected in Europe next week assured her German counterpart 
she would answer the questions that the British EU Presidency 
would be asking. The Europeans' attention to the issue has 
been growing. and lately the EU has begun to take the stories 
very seriously. After having first underestimated the affair, 
the European authorities are now wondering whether some 
capitals did not effectively push their collaboration with 
Washington a little too far. Franco Frattini has raised his 
voice and invoked article 7: but to implement it, proof is 
needed that it was violated. Several political groups within 
the European Parliament are demanding the creation of an 
inquiry commission, even if the EU does not have the 
competency to investigate member nations. But this is not the 
case of the Council of Europe." 
 
"CIA Secret Prisons: Washington Is Not Denying Them" 
Right-of-center Le Figaro (11/30): "Secretary Rice who is 
expected in Europe next week will most probably have to give 
explanations about the secret activities of the CIA in Europe. 
The CIA's Porter Gross has neither confirmed nor denied the 
accusations. although he adamantly denied that the U.S. makes 
use of torture, while avoiding to define `torture.'" 
 
President Bush and His Iraq Policy 
 
"Fukuyama, Bush and `Realistic Wilsonism'" 
Daniel Vernet in left-of-center Le Monde (11/30): "The Iraqi 
expedition is a fiasco. It was started under a false pretext. 
President Bush managed to trigger exactly what he was trying 
to avoid. He did not find weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, 
but the American intervention has provoked an armed 
insurrection led by Bin Laden's allies and the Baath party. 
His unilateral policy has contributed in isolating the U.S. 
from the rest of the world and triggered feelings of anti- 
Americanism. The results are catastrophic. William Kristol and 
Lawrence Kaplan said in 2002 `Our Road Starts in Baghdad.' It 
is more likely that it will end there. Is this the result of a 
failed neo-conservative policy, or has President Bush misused 
its principles? For Francis Fukuyama, it makes no difference." 
 
Iran- U.S.-Azerbaijan Relations 
 
"Washington and Tehran Rival For Azerbaijan" 
Delphine Minoui in right-of-center Le Figaro (11/30): "Iran is 
worried about Washington's presence in Azerbaijan. The purpose 
of this U.S. military presence is barely hidden and aims 
essentially to control Iran. The Azeri Republic is at the 
heart of a battle for influence opposing Iran and the U.S. 
Rumors indicate that military bases will soon be built on the 
Iranian border. While officially Baku denies such military 
cooperation, evidence proves otherwise. America's neo- 
conservatives, who favor a change of regime in Iran, are also 
interested in the Azeri separatist movement in Iran, which 
could be used as a destabilizing force against Tehran's 
regime. The recent radical stance adopted by Iran's President 
could also influence the Americans towards a more acute 
presence in Azerbaijan." 
 
EuroMed- Europe Vs U.S. 
"Euro-Mediterranean Misunderstandings Linger" 
Alain Barluet in right-of-center Le Figaro (11/30): "To say 
that the Euro-Med summit was a disappointment is an 
understatement. So much so that one wonders whether there is 
more that separates the two sides of the Mediterranean than 
brings them together. What is at stake is all the more crucial 
because of the growing presence of the U.S. in the region. Of 
course the Greater Middle East, stretching from Mauritania to 
Pakistan, lacks cohesion and the millions spent by Washington 
fall short of what EuroMed represents. EuroMed constitutes a 
global partnership to which the members have adhered 
willingly. This is the position put forward by diplomats who 
want to minimize the impact of U.S. efforts in the region. But 
the fact remains that despite the hatred elicited by President 
Bush in the Arab world, Washington is scoring points. with 
free trade agreements, training missions and scholarships. 
Projects which the U.S. sometimes finances with European 
funds. Our Mediterranean neighbors, who are pragmatic, are 
lending their ears to the U.S. They know that the future of 
their region resides more in Washington than in Barcelona." 
 
The French Social Model Seen From the U.S. 
 
"Changing the French Social Model" 
Ken Weinstein of the Hudson Institute in right-of-center Le 
Figaro (11/30): "The crisis France is experiencing is a deep, 
moral, political and economic crisis. The prevailing pessimism 
worries foreign observers. France is in the grips of self- 
doubt. It is urgent for France to look into the failings of 
its model. but it must go beyond a debate. The policy of 
complacency implemented for years must operate a radical 
shift. Elected to fight against France's `social fracture,' 
President Chirac has not only aggravated the fracture, he has 
hidden his failures with a grandiose and anti-American foreign 
policy, which has helped to isolate France even more. 
Solutions exist, but they require a will the President no 
longer seems to possess. France must develop economic 
opportunities for all citizens. The French system of social 
protection should also be revised. The French must acknowledge 
that its population of immigrant origins is also French 
citizens. Mechanisms for social mobility must be re-enforced. 
In this regard, we must salute Sarkozy's efforts. Short-term 
measures will not be enough. The French must regain their self- 
confidence when it comes to their country's influence, 
nationally and internationally. If passivity and a wait and 
see attitude take over, France's fate could become a concern 
for its allies. If the French decide to shoulder their 
responsibilities and tackle needed reforms, suburban violence 
will have received the proper answer." STAPLETON