05PARIS4660
FRENCH SHARE CONCERNS ON POSSIBLE ARISTIDE RETURN
Fri Jul 01 00:00:00 +0200 2005
SECRET
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T PARIS 004660 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/01/2015 
TAGS: PREL FR HA SF
SUBJECT: FRENCH SHARE CONCERNS ON POSSIBLE ARISTIDE RETURN 
TO HAITI 
 
REF: STATE 121144 
 
Classified By: Political Minister-Counselor Josiah Rosenblatt, reasons 
1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (C) Poloff and Embassy Africa Watcher delivered reftel 
demarche July 1 to both MFA DAS-equivalent for Central 
America and the Caribbean Gilles Bienvenu and MFA AF 
PDAS-equivalent Elisabeth Barbier.  Bienvenu stated that the 
GOF shared our analysis of the implications of an Aristide 
return to Haiti, terming the likely repercussions 
"catastrophic."  Bienvenu actively sought our thoughts on 
next steps to prevent Aristide from returning.  Initially 
expressing caution when asked about France demarching the 
SARG, Bienvenu noted that Aristide was not a prisoner in 
South Africa and that such an action could "create 
difficulties."  However, Bienvenu later offered to express 
our shared concerns in Pretoria, perhaps under the pretext 
that as a country desiring to secure a seat on the UN 
Security Council, South Africa could not afford to be 
involved in any way with the destabilization of another 
country.  Barbier, speaking on behalf of the AF bureau, 
however, did not foresee any problems at all in delivering a 
demarche in Pretoria. 
 
¶2.  (S) Bienvenu speculated on exactly how Aristide might 
return, seeing a possible opportunity to hinder him in the 
logistics of reaching Haiti.  If Aristide traveled 
commercially, Bienvenu reasoned, he would likely need to 
transit certain countries in order to reach Haiti.  Bienvenu 
suggested a demarche to CARICOM countries by the U.S. and EU 
to warn them against facilitating any travel or other plans 
Aristide might have.  He specifically recommended speaking to 
the Dominican Republic, which could be directly implicated in 
a return attempt.  Both Bienvenu and Barbier confided that 
South African mercenaries could be heading towards Haiti, 
with Bienvenu revealing the GOF had documented evidence that 
10 South African citizens had come to Paris and requested 
Dominican visas between February and the present. 
 
¶3.  (C) Comment: France seems to share our analysis and 
concerns regarding any attempt by Aristide to return to 
Haiti.  They appear eager to prevent such an occurrence and 
could be valuable, both bilaterally and within the EU, in 
convincing other countries to avoid involvement in any plans 
by Aristide.  End Comment. 
STAPLETON