06PARIS3110
FRANCE: RESPONSES TO USG POINTS ON NO-FLY AND DATA PRIVACY
Thu May 11 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 003110 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR EB/TRA, S/CT, EUR/WE, L 
USEU FOR MORENSKI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAIR PTER PREL FR
SUBJECT: FRANCE: RESPONSES TO USG POINTS ON NO-FLY AND DATA PRIVACY 
LEGISLATION 
 
REF: A) STATE 66769 B) STATE 56285 B) PARIS 2432 C) PARIS 2316 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  We have raised the issue of the proposed 
submission of airlines No-Fly screening to the French Data Privacy 
Authority (CNIL) (refS A and B) in meetings with officials from the 
General Secretariat for State Security (SGDN) April 11, April 27 and 
May 9, the Civil Aviation Authority (DGAC) April 21 and 28, MFA May 
5, and conversations with Air France officials April 13 and April 
¶28. (TSA/TSNM General Manager Richard Stein participated in the 
April 28 discussions.  EB/TRA DAS John Byerly participated in the 
May 9 conversation.)  Non-papers drawn from reftels have been 
circulated to contacts at MFA, Ministry of Justice, and the Ministry 
of Transportation. The following provides a summary of the principal 
results of our discussions. 
 
 
-------------------------- 
No No-Fly Means No Flying 
-------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) We have clearly delivered the message to the GOF that any 
interruption of No-Fly screening resulting from a decision by the 
CNIL would mean the interruption of flights to the U.S., and have 
been repeatedly assured that this is clearly understood.  General 
Secretariat for National Defense Director of State Security Bernard 
 
SIPDIS 
Boube told Emboffs April 11 that the GOF was in general supportive 
of the No-Fly system.  After substantial interagency coordination, 
it had decided to move ahead now, before a potentially unfavorable 
decision from the European Court of Justice decision on PNR that 
could make the political environment for CNIL approval more 
unfavorable. On April 28 Director General of Civil Aviation Michel 
Wachenheim echoed these points.  However all of our interlocutors 
have also stressed that the CNIL is an independent body, with 
authority to judge what criteria are applicable in a given case. 
Boube in particular emphasized that the GOF had received no advance 
assurances of success from the CNIL before coming to its decision. 
 
 
--------------------------------------- 
A Government or Airline Responsibility? 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) In response to our points detailing GOF obligations to 
provide for aviation security under existing international 
agreements, Boube said that under French data privacy law this was a 
responsibility for individual airlines rather than the French 
government, because the airlines performed the data processing (ref 
C). He detailed long-standing legal concerns about No Fly screening, 
including its vulnerability to lawsuits by passengers.  The GOF had 
decided to inform airlines that they would need to apply to the CNIL 
for approval of their No Fly screening procedures after an in-depth 
Ministry of Justice legal analysis.  We requested that we be given a 
copy. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Boube also indicated that the Civil Aviation Authorities 
had been tasked with explaining their obligations to the carriers, 
and had recommended to them that their applications be coordinated 
under a procedure provided for in the 1978 law on data privacy.  Air 
France had volunteered to take the lead in producing an application, 
which other carriers could adopt. 
 
¶5. (SBU) In a follow-up conversation April 21, DGAC Technical and 
Strategic Affairs Director Paul Schwach, and DGAC Security Chief 
Jacques le Guillou confirmed that the GOF had considered a number of 
options before deciding to proceed, including some form of 
government-to-government agreement. Alternative approaches (a 
negotiated agreement, a specific law, an additional article added to 
a US/EU Open Skies agreement etc.) had been rejected, because they 
would have required Parliamentary approval, including a specific 
exemption from the legal requirement for approval by the CNIL.  They 
did not believe that our points about the security provisions under 
existing agreements such as the Chicago Convention and U.S. France 
air services agreement addressed these specific requirements under 
French law. 
 
------------------------- 
A Collective Application? 
------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Schwach and Le Guillou also provided their point of view on 
what a collective application from the carriers might look like. 
They noted that Both APIS and PNR data would be concerned by a CNIL 
review, as both were implicated in name matching.  Transmission to 
the US would not be part of the case, in their opinion.  They 
believed that the future quick query/"secure flight" alternative 
would minimize or eliminate the need for CNIL approval, as the 
processing would all be done offshore. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Schwach and Le Guillou agreed that the situation of Air 
France, which applies special procedures for No Fly notification 
mandated by the GOF, and the fact that much of the U.S airlines' 
processing was performed offshore, could make a joint application 
more complicated to prepare. It was unclear whether future EAs or 
technical modifications to existing procedures would require 
additional applications to the CNIL.  They did not believe the issue 
of the security justification or adequacy of NF screening would be 
raised, but in the end also admitted that the CNIL was independent, 
and had the authority to judge whether this sort of application was 
pertinent or not. 
 
¶8. (SBU) In a meeting with Civil Aviation Director Michel Wachenheim 
April 28, Emboffs and TSA representatives explained the U.S. 
position, and mentioned in particular Washington concern with the 
idea that all air carriers apply to the CNIL for approval 
simultaneously.  Wachenheim said that he could not guarantee that if 
the data was processed outside of French territory that this would 
resolve the issue with the CNIL.  He added that he did not believe 
that the CNIL would ban processing of the No Fly list, but that they 
might prohibit specific procedures airlines used to match passenger 
information against the list, or require additional steps such as 
notification of passengers, echoing the relatively optimistic view 
of other DGAC interlocutors, who have told us they feel the CNIL 
would be open to constructive engagement on the issue. He mentioned 
that future meetings would be held to discuss these issues further 
within the GOF. 
 
----------------- 
Air France's View 
----------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) After initial consultations with Air France's Legal Staff 
April 11 indicated that it did not plan to seriously take up the 
issue until early May, Emboffs met with Air France Vice-President 
for International Affairs Guy Tardieu April 28 to get its views on a 
potential application to CNIL.  Tardieu indicated that Air France 
had not yet reached a decision about how to respond to the DGAC's 
invitation to carriers to apply to the CNIL.  He indicated that Air 
France had regular contacts with the CNIL, which had so far 
tolerated its No Fly screening procedures (e.g. absence of 
notification of passengers), perhaps with the expectation that 
offshore processing would eventually solve the problem.  This was 
Air France's view as well, and he hinted that they might delay 
submitting an application to the CNIL until the Fall with the hope 
that the proposed APIS Quick Query (AQQ) System would be operational 
by then. If an application went ahead, Tardieu believed the CNIL 
would be realistic, and at most might require a new disclosure 
statement.  In any case, Air France had not yet coordinated with 
other airlines, and still needed to assess whether a common 
application to the CNIL would best serve its interests. 
 
¶10. (SBU) In a May 9 lunch meeting with SGDN's Boube and visiting 
EB/TRA DAS John Byerly, Economic Minister-Counselor noted that Air 
France seemed much less seized with the urgency of the issue than is 
the GOF.  Air France is of the view that proposed future changes in 
the processing of No Fly name queries in the U.S. (e.g., APIS Quick 
Query) could obviate the need to go to CNIL.  Boube took the point, 
and confirmed that the GOF is taking stock of Embassy approaches on 
the issue over the past few weeks.  The Prime Minister's office is 
expected to chair a meeting shortly to discuss the entire issue. 
 
-------------------- 
Our Advice: Go Slow 
-------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Without dismissing the real concerns that might lay at the 
base of the GOF's recommendations to airlines to apply to the CNIL, 
based on what we have heard so far, we think it inappropriate at 
present to advise U.S. carriers to dive into such murky legal 
waters, in particular given the absence of any indication from CNIL 
that this is an urgent requirement. The GOF's reasoning--as they 
have explained it to us--is primarily political: that it is better 
to move ahead now, before privacy advocates in Parliament and the 
CNIL are reinforced by a potentially unfavorable ECJ decision on 
PNR. However, aside from the uncertainty about what the ECJ might 
decide, it is clear that it will in any case render a decision 
before the CNIL considers this case.  In addition, the GOF does not 
seem to have fully considered the technical complexities of No Fly 
processing for U.S. carriers, or the impact of GOF-mandated No Fly 
procedures that affect only Air France before recommending a common 
application process. Given this, it does not seem likely that the 
airlines will find it easy to quickly coordinate a common approach. 
 
¶12. (SBU) We will continue to probe for additional details from the 
GOF on its legal analysis, and to see if some kind of 
government-to-government approach might provide an alternative way 
of resolving the issue. 
STAPLETON