06PARIS4221
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - U.S. - EU Summit Saddam Trial North
Tue Jun 20 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 004221 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; 
AF/PA; EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; 
PM; OSC ISA FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR 
ITA/EUR/FR AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - U.S. - EU Summit Saddam Trial North 
Korea 
PARIS - Tuesday, June 20, 2006 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
U.S. - EU Summit 
Saddam Trial 
North Korea 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
Domestic stories dominate today's front pages and editorials, 
including the inauguration of a new museum on primitive art, dubbed 
"Chirac's Museum" because of his developed taste for ancient 
civilizations. The exception is Le Figaro, which leads with: "Death 
Penalty Requested for Saddam." Several other international stories 
get wide inside coverage: "Hamas and Fatah Close to an Agreement" 
reports Le Figaro, which also notes: "North Korea Triggers Missile 
Crisis," a story also developed in Le Monde. (See Part C) 
 
Radio commentator Bernard Guetta devotes his morning report to the 
U.S.-EU Summit: "Seen from abroad Europe does exist. So much so that 
President Bush holds a summit with it every year, and addresses it 
as if it were an alter ego." (See Part C) 
 
An inside report in Liberation is entitled "Human Rights: The UN 
Tries to Change its Course." In the report, Luc Hilly writes: "Words 
of hope and warnings were mingled in Kofi Annan's opening speech... 
Indeed the legacy of the previous Human Rights Commission, which was 
but the shadow of itself, is a heavy one. The Commission was taken 
hostage by the major powers (U.S. and China) in their game of 
rivalry, and by interest groups..." 
 
A small front-page sidebar in Les Echos announces Robert Zoellick's 
departure from the State Department to join Goldman Sachs. Inside, 
the story recalls that former Goldman Sachs executive Henry Paulson 
is now Secretary of the Treasury, which leads reporter Nathalie 
Halpern to comment about "the game of musical chairs between Goldman 
Sachs and the Bush administration." The article is mainly devoted to 
the Goldman Sachs reorganization, but a separate article traces 
Secretary Zoellick's career, first as Trade Representative and later 
 
SIPDIS 
as Assistant Secretary of State: "In this position, Zoellick made 
considerable inroads in the relationship between the U.S. and China 
and became very committed to the crisis in Darfur." A small item in 
Liberation is entitled "Zoellick Drops Bush..." Le Parisien notes 
briefly: "According to the press, Zoellick was disappointed for not 
having been chosen as Secretary of the Treasury." 
 
Les Echos leads with the Deutsch Borse's latest concessions to 
Euronext, "which it wants to charm at all cost" while La Tribune 
leads with the government's announcement that it will "postpone the 
privatization of GDF (gas utility company) until September." 
 
Le Monde carries a profile of Jerome Guillet, a Frenchman who is the 
star writer of the American energy industry sector blog, 'Daily Kos' 
"the most popular political blog in the U.S." according to Corine 
Lesnes who quotes Guillet: "I have never noticed anti-French 
hostility towards me." Guillet has also developed a European website 
as an answer to "Anglo-Saxon journalism in which France is truly 
demonized...'" 
 
La Croix's portrait is devoted to Bill and Melinda Gates, 
"Profession, Philanthropists." Laurent D'Ersu describes the areas to 
which the 'Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation' is devoted to, 
including university scholarships for minority students. 
 
In France Soir, Thomas de Rochechouart devotes his column to 
"Boeing's Counter Attack" reporting that "Boeing has denied the 
rumors of delay for its Dreamliner. In the war opposing it to 
Airbus, everything is game... It is well known that in a war, 
communication is almost as important, if not more, than the 
soldiers. And Boeing, which knows this, has immediately denied the 
allegations of delay... In today's media war which opposes it to its 
European rival, the American aircraft manufacturer is in the lead." 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
U.S. - EU Summit 
 
"The Summit of the Two Coasts" 
Bernard Guetta in government-run France Inter radio (06/20): "Seen 
from Europe, the Union is almost non existent. But seen from abroad, 
it exists. So much so that every year President Bush holds a summit 
with the EU and addresses it as if it were an alter ego... While the 
balance between the two sides is slightly asymmetrical, there is 
between the two leading world powers a sort of equality based on the 
realities of a power struggle. Economically speaking, they weigh the 
same and are direct competitors in several sectors: aerospace, 
agriculture, satellites and services. In international negotiations, 
whether they are allies or opponents, they deal directly between one 
capital and the other, between Washington and Brussels, because 
Europe stands united. Regardless of the individual governments, the 
EU stands as one on Iran, the Palestinian territories, climate 
change, human rights and the ICC. One might then ask where does the 
relationship stand between these two powers? It is much better than 
when the Iraq crisis began, when the EU was divided over the 
invasion... The Euro-American dtente is due essentially to 
America's failure in Iraq and its need for European support on 
international issues... The entente is all the more developed 
because both parties want to turn the page on Iraq with the least 
possible damage. Yet issues of contention remain: they are on 
opposite sides at the WTO; the EU wants Guantanamo closed; they 
disagree on climate change and on the visas which the U.S. requires 
for citizens from new EU members. More serious than this is the 
dwindling U.S. image in European opinions, including in the UK, 
where positive opinion of the U.S. is down to 56% from 83% in 2000. 
The Atlantic does indeed have two coasts." 
 
Saddam Trial 
 
"The Prosecution Asks for the Death Penalty" 
Delphine Minoui in right-of-center Le Figaro (06/20): "For the 
families of the victims, the verdict is a relief... But for the 
Sunni minority in Iraq, the former dictator's presence on TV is a 
reminder of Arab nationalism and prompts a certain degree of 
nostalgia... Certain Iraqis regret the fact hat the trial is taking 
place in the green zone 'on American turf...' and for the press that 
wants to cover the trial it is a veritable obstacle course to gain 
access." 
 
North Korea 
 
"Washington Suspects Pyongyang of Preparing a Ballistic Missile 
Attack" 
Philippe Pons in left-of-center Le Monde (06/20): "North Korea's 
show of force is a way to prove that it exists while the Iranian 
crisis has mobilized international attention... and to denounce what 
it sees as the West and Washington's double standards, particularly 
with regard to other nuclear powers such as India... But there are 
also domestic reasons for Pyongyang's threatening attitude. The 
hardening of relations with Washington has reinforced the position 
of the hardliners in North Korea... A successful missile launch 
would spark the national pride of a population that feels isolated." 
 
 
"North Korea Triggers a Missile Crisis" 
Jean-Jacques Mevel in right-of-center Le Figaro (o6/20): "The 
question is will they or won't they shoot? This time around the 
situation appears to have reached a point of no return... And the 
difference this time is that Kim Jong Il's regime is not hiding the 
fact that it is making preparations for a missile launch... The 
imminence of such a launch has elicited several warnings from the 
U.S., including a call by the State Department to North Korea's 
mission at the UN, a very rare happening... But beyond the suspense 
of whether the launch will take place, the mystery lies in Kim Jong 
Il's objectives. The little dictator is unpredictable, but knows how 
to make noise when he wants to force a discussion, when he is being 
assailed where it hurts him most, or when he is being ignored... 
Needless to say, the entire operation looks like a prestige 
operation to remind the world he exists." STAPLETON