06PARIS3667
FRENCH FOREIGN MINISTER REACTION TO U.S. STATEMENT
Thu Jun 01 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS PARIS 003667 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PARM IZ FR
SUBJECT: FRENCH FOREIGN MINISTER REACTION TO U.S. STATEMENT 
ON IRAN 
 
REF: STATE 087682 
 
¶1. Late on May 31, in response to the Secretary's statement, 
which we had previously delivered, the MFA issued a 
supportive statement by French Foreign Minister Douste-Blazy 
praising the U.S. decision to join the EU3's negotiations 
with Iran (see  informal translation para 2).  On June 1, the 
MFA stated that FM Douste-Blazy would attend the meetings in 
Vienna but deflected questions about when and how a joint 
proposal would be delivered to Iran (se para 3). 
 
¶2. Informal Embassy translation of text of Minister's comment: 
 
I praise the willingness of the U.S., and eventually that of 
other partners, to join the ongoing German, UK, and French 
negotiations with Iran.  This action strengthens the 
credibility of the European position and the proposals that 
the Europeans wish to offer to Iran with the support of the 
international community. 
 
Tomorrow's reunion (June 1) in Vienna will be an opportunity 
to come to an agreement, which will present Iran a way to 
resume negotiations.  We are expecting to be able to make 
substantial proposals at this meeting, thanks to the growing 
engagement of our partners. 
 
We hope that the Iranian authorities will take the necessary 
time to study these proposals and to follow up in a 
constructive manner. 
 
¶3. At the MFA's June 1 daily press briefing, the spokesperson 
was asked whether the Europeans would travel to Tehran to 
present their proposals after the day's meetings, to which he 
responded that he had no further details to provide either on 
the offer under discussion or how it would be delivered to 
the Iranians.  The MFA spokesperson also referred queries on 
the meetings in Vienna to UK representatives in Vienna, who 
are hosting the meeting and dinner later on June 1. 
 
Please visit Paris' Classified Website at: 
http://www.state.sgov.gov/p/eur/paris/index.c fm 
 
STAPLETON