06PARIS6095
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - President Bush - 9/11 - Iraq Middle
Tue Sep 12 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
null
Lucia A Keegan  09/12/2006 05:38:37 PM  From  DB/Inbox:  Lucia A Keegan

Cable 
Text:                                                                      
                                                                           
      
UNCLAS        PARIS 06095

SIPDIS
cxparis:
    ACTION: PAO
    INFO:   ARS DCM POL AMB

DISSEMINATION: PAOX
CHARGE: PROG

APPROVED: PRS: CDOELL
DRAFTED: PR:  FTHOMAS
CLEARED: NONE

VZCZCFRI527
OO RUEHC RUEAIIA RUEATRS RHEFDIA RUEKJCS RHEHAAA
RUCPDOC RUEHRL RUEHRO RUEHMO RUEHNO RUEHVEN RHMFIUU
DE RUEHFR #6095/01 2551100
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 121100Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1224
INFO RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC//ASD/ISA//
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC
RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN 6353
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 7979
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 5601
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 3649
RUEHVEN/USMISSION USOSCE 3186
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLTUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 006095 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; 
AF/PA; EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; 
PM; OSC ISA FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR 
ITA/EUR/FR AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - President Bush - 9/11 - Iraq Middle 
East - Iran - Gaza - Lebanon 
PARIS - Tuesday, September 12, 2006 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
President Bush - 9/11 - Iraq 
Middle East - Iran - Gaza - Lebanon 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
Afternoon paper Le Monde yesterday headlined "Bush Stumped by Al 
Qaida's Challenges."  The editorial harps on "President Bush's 
Errors," namely the war in Iraq, and concludes that "for the past 
five years, the U.S. has been pushing the world towards a clash 
between civilizations."  For today's Le Figaro, "President Bush Is 
Politicizing 9/11" while Liberation echoes the thought in an article 
whose title is a quote from the President's speech:  "There is still 
an enemy over there..."  For Le Figaro's Washington correspondent 
Philippe Gelie, "President Bush Wants to Turn the War in Iraq into 
an Electoral Asset."  Yesterday the editorial in regional Les 
Dernieres Nouvelles d'Alsace was entitled "[We Are] All 
Americans..."  Olivier Picard faults President Bush for "having 
triggered a new wave of anti-Americanism" but says "the time has 
come to stop the caricaturing:  President Bush is not America..." 
(See Part C) 
 
This morning FR2 mentioned President Bush's speech from the White 
House.  For the journalist, "his policy is not expected to change. 
He will continue to pursue the terrorists until he finds them."  For 
Radio Europe 1, President Bush continued using "his martial tone" in 
his speech. 
 
Le Figaro carries an op-ed by former Assistant Secretary of Defense 
Richard Perle entitled "The Day the Europeans Abandoned Us" as part 
of a series on the post 9/11 situation, terrorism, fundamentalism 
and the 'Greater Middle East.'  Perle accuses the Europeans of 
"preferring thought to action and the status quo to democratic 
progress." 
 
The Middle East is back as a lead international story.  The hope for 
an agreement between Fatah and Hamas leads Le Figaro's editorialist 
to say "that a government of national unity in Gaza would satisfy 
the conditions set by the international community."  La Croix 
devotes its lead to Lebanon and the French contingent's mission. 
The editorial, entitled "A Mission for Appeasement" comments on "the 
chances of renewed talks between Israel and the Palestinians," an 
opportunity which "UNIFIL must assist by giving the players peace of 
mind on the Lebanese front."  (See Part C) Iran's apparent "last 
minute turnaround" and its "offer to the West" are analyzed in Le 
Figaro.  (See Part C) 
 
A two page report in Le Monde cynically entitled "Mission 
Accomplished" claims that five years after the American invasion of 
Afghanistan "insecurity, murder, kidnappings, corruption, un-kept 
promises and renewed Taliban raids are rampant."  The journalists 
note that the foremost question in most Afghans' minds is "where are 
we going?"  The journalists underscore the lack of coordination 
between the Afghan government and the international community "which 
sometimes borders on the absurd." 
 
Domestic stories lead on today's front pages, while Interior 
Minister Sarkozy's visit to New York for the 9/11 commemoration 
ceremonies, which Le Figaro reports in an article entitled "Sarkozy 
Wants to Reassure His 'American' friends," has sparked internal 
political dissension leading President Chirac to announce from 
Helsinki that "he sent Sarkozy to New York as France's 
representative..."  For TF1, "this is a new opportunity for Sarkozy 
to express his admiration for the Americans."  A journalist from FR3 
explained that "he is looking for America's approval," adding "he 
should be careful because being too close to America is not the best 
in France."  This morning, Radio Europe 1 mentioned his meeting with 
Kofi Annan and reported "his desire to meet President Bush." 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
President Bush - 9/11 - Iraq 
 
"[We Are] All Americans..." 
Olivier Picard in regional Les Dernieres Nouvelles d'Alsace (09/11): 
 "Like five years ago, on this 9/11 we are all New Yorkers...  But 
we also want to say we are all Americans... without any complexes 
and even if it is no longer politically correct to say so...  The 
commemoration ceremonies for 9/11 bring us closer to an ambivalent 
America which, on other occasions, frightens us...  9/11, 2001 was 
the beginning of a cold spell in Franco-American relations...  The 
differences on how to respond separated Washington from Paris until 
the spectacular divorce over the war in Iraq.  This was more than 
just a diplomatic quarrel.  It was a profound incomprehension 
between two perceptions of a new and more uncertain world...  The 
war strategy and the bellicose arrogance of the American President 
triggered a new wave of anti-Americanism, as sterile as it was 
triggered by gut reactions.  Time has come to end this caricaturing. 
 President Bush stands only as a simplistic representation of 
America.  His imperialistic views... cannot lastingly hide the 
generosity, the courage and the strength... of a people that has 
much to teach us." 
 
"Bush's Errors" 
Le Monde's editorial (09/12):  " Since September 11 the world has 
changed for the worse.  It has become more chaotic, less 
clear-cut...  Al Qaida's voice has been heard all over the Arab and 
Muslim world, and beyond...  Al Qaida's success is in part due to 
the way in which the Americans chose to retaliate.  The first war 
waged by Washington met with unanimous support... and compared to 
what was to take place later in Iraq, this war was a success.  But 
after Afghanistan, the Americans made a major mistake.  They 
attacked Iraq:  putting forward two bad reasons to go to war... 
Over the course of the last three and a half years the Iraqi 
adventure has turned into a nightmare.  In Iraq, as elsewhere, the 
Bush Administration trampled on a number of American values...  The 
White House infringed on international law, opened Guantanamo, 
authorized the torture of prisoners and restricted civil liberties 
in the U.S.  After Afghanistan, the US should have concentrated its 
energy on al Qaida...  It should have been more solicitous of 
countries, which, even if they are allies, are at the mercy of 
Islamic ideology and maintain networks of support for Jihad - such 
as Pakistan and Saudi Arabia.  It should have formulated policies 
that take into account sentiments of victimization in the Muslim 
world...  In the last five years, the US has pushed the world 
towards the clash of civilizations wanted by al Qaida." 
 
"President Bush Wants to Turn the War in Iraq into an Electoral 
Asset." 
Philippe Gelie in right-of-center Le Figaro (09/12):  "Despite the 
fact that Iraq is, including in President Bush's judgment, one of 
his presidency's greatest failures, he wants to use Iraq as an 
electoral asset.  Meanwhile, the Democrats hope to defeat him 
because of the Iraqi quagmire...  In his speeches President Bush 
amalgamates 'fighting terrorism' and the war against a country which 
had nothing to do with 9/11...  The President is betting on his 
image of 'President of war' in the mid term elections...  This is a 
risky wager, but he does have some trump cards up his sleeve... 
including attacks against the Democrats for being 'defeatocrats...' 
The weakness in President Bush's strategy resides in the fact that 
in 2004, the deciding factor was the public's confidence in a final 
victory." 
 
"President Bush:  'There's Still an Enemy Over There..." 
Philippe Grangereau in left-of-center Liberation (09/12): 
"President Bush has every intention of playing on American's 
patriotism to strengthen the Republican Party.  On Sunday, Vice 
President Cheney opened the hostilities accusing the Democrats of no 
less than playing into the hands of the terrorists... Without any 
qualms he also admitted that had he known Iraq had no WMD, he would 
still have opted for invading Iraq..." 
 
Middle East - Iran - Gaza - Lebanon 
 
"Hope in Gaza" 
Pierre Rousselin in right-of-center Le Figaro (09/12):  "The forming 
of a government of national unity in Gaza is a preamble to regaining 
control of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict...  Hamas has finally 
understood that it will profit from its electoral victory only if it 
takes into account the international context and shares power... 
For the past six months the international community has implemented 
a policy of the worst...  One year after the Israeli pullout from 
Gaza, seen then as a historic move, Israel's neighbor is sinking 
into anarchy and extremist factions are dominating...  The Lebanese 
war has demonstrated the impasse of the situation... The agreement 
between Fatah and Hamas in view of creating of government of 
national unity brings a glimmer of hope...  And even if Hamas 
retains its extremist stance, the Palestinian government, albeit 
with the participation of Hamas, would satisfy the conditions set by 
the international community...  Of course Corporal Shalit must be 
released in the framework of an exchange of prisoners...   Both 
Olmert and Mahmoud Abbas are in favor of this...  If this scenario 
were to be implemented, the international community must support it 
without reservation...  For the Palestinians it is the only way to 
stop the chaos.  For Israel it is the only means of giving Olmert's 
government a second wind after the controversial war with Lebanon." 
 
"Iran Tries to Coax the West" 
Maurin Picard in right-of-center Le Figaro (09/12): "The scenario is 
familiar:  for the past four years every time Iran feels sanctions 
are about to be imposed, the regime begins by arguing and posturing, 
but in the end it makes concessions.  Since Sunday there is a rumor 
that Tehran may be ready to give up its uranium enrichment program, 
temporarily, opening the door to negotiations with the P5+1...  The 
information was revealed by European diplomats after weekend 
negotiations in Vienna... Although Tehran has not confirmed the 
information, it would seem Iran is ready to give in, as long as 
there is 'no apparent pressure...'  Meanwhile, the international 
community remains divided about whether or not to pursue 
negotiations with Iran's envoy and seems unable to choose between 
the carrot and the stick.  Led by Nicholas Burns, U.S. diplomacy is 
forcefully attempting to wrap up the draft resolution on 
sanctions." 
 
"A Mission for Appeasement" 
Dominique Quinio in Catholic La Croix (09/12):  "No peacekeeping 
mission is peaceful.  It is always seen by the various sides as a 
hindrance to their own strategy... and at times it is perceived as a 
foreign 'occupation.'  The civilian populations are the only ones to 
welcome a quieting of the arms...  The soldiers fear the numerous 
demands made on them and the risks incurred when multinational 
forces come face to face with armed militia, such as Lebanon's 
Hezbollah, which shows no inclination to disarm...  The chances of 
renewed talks between Israel and the Palestinians are an opportunity 
which UNIFIL must assist by giving the players peace of mind on the 
Lebanese front.  Progress cannot be made in the region unless the 
dialogue between Israelis and Palestinians resumes.  UNIFIL's 
success would be to create the conditions for this to be possible." 
HOFMANN