06PARIS1465
New Visa Regulation
Tue Mar 07 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS PARIS 001465 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR D STAFF (Matera and Davies)and EUR/WE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ETRD CVIS FR
SUBJECT: New Visa Regulation 
 
REF:  Matera-Shub e-mail, 06 Feb 2006 
 
¶1.   This message contains an action request.  See Paragraph 
¶4. 
 
¶2.  During the course of their meeting January 31 in Paris, 
France's Trade Minister-delegate, Christine Lagarde asked 
Deputy Secretary Robert Zoellick about a pending visa 
regulation.  In sum, the minister understands that the USG 
is discussing a proposed visa regulation that would impose a 
requirement of two years of professional experience for 
trainee programs.  The Minister indicated, in a letter to 
Deputy Secretary Zoellick dated March 2, that this 
requirement would "seriously undermine" France's 
international corporate trainee program, which is geared to 
giving recent business school graduates some practical 
experience in overseas subsidiaries of French companies. 
 
¶3.  Test of March 2 letter follows: 
 
Dear Mr. Secretary, 
 
I greatly appreciated meeting with you and hope to have a 
chance to continue our dialogue during my visit to 
Washington this coming April. 
 
During our recent meeting, I mentioned my concern regarding 
the drafting of a regulation by the Department of State, 
currently under review by the Office of Management and 
Budget (OMB). 
 
This regulation would impose new requirements on our trainee 
program (Volontaires Internationaux en Entreprises "VIE") 
for French companies having subsidiaries in the USA. 
 
A requirement of two years of professional experience would, 
if confirmed, and applicable to this category of applicants, 
seriously undermine this program, open mainly to recent 
graduates of business and engineering schools. 
 
As Minister for Trade, I am encouraging French companies to 
use the VIE program.  It is a very useful and efficient way 
for them to assess job applicants and possibly hire them 
upon their return to France. 
 
Young professionals gain first hand exposure to 
globalization and the United States whose dynamism, openness 
and business orientation are greatly appreciated by the 
beneficiaries of the program. 
 
I hope that the final regulation will allow us to continue 
operating in the same format as we do at present. 
 
Salutation 
 
/s/ 
 
¶4.  Action Request:  Embassy would appreciate Department 
guidance on status of proposed regulation, and suggested 
response to Trade Minister 
 
Stapleton