06PARIS1264
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - President Bush to India
Wed Mar 01 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 001264 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA; USVIENNA FOR USDEL OSCE. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - President Bush to India 
Iraq Hamas 
PARIS - Wednesday, March 01, 2006 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
President Bush to India 
Iraq 
Hamas 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
Iraq's mounting violence, although not a lead editorial story 
is widely reported, including in all electronic media. LCI, 
the all news TV station called it "the civil war by another 
name." Le Figaro reports "400 casualties in Iraq in a week," 
while in Liberation a report describes Moqtada Al-Sadr as a 
"growing Shiite leader" who calls for "peace while pushing his 
troops to radicalism." (See Part C) 
 
Both Les Echos and Le Figaro report on President Bush's trip 
to India. "Bush Courts India, China's Counterweight," 
headlines Les Echos, while for Le Figaro "Bush Is Looking for 
an Ally in India." (See Part C) 
 
Israel's position on Hamas is reported in Le Figaro, as 
Israel's FM Tzipi Livni begins her European tour to "convince 
the international community to remain firm vis--vis Hamas." 
(See Part C) She starts in France, where she plans to present 
her condolences to the family of Illan Halimi. In her 
interview in Le Figaro she praises France for its handling of 
incidents related to anti-Semitism. About Hamas she says: 
"Elections cannot function like a washing machine: a terrorist 
group cannot enter the electoral system and come out a 
legitimate political party." 
 
Liberation carries an op-ed on France and its history of anti- 
Semitism by political analyst Alain Duhamel entitled "France's 
Anti-Semitisms." He contends there are various forms of anti- 
Semitism in France, "a tradition in our country," he writes, 
"at times virulent, at others more latent but always present. 
France is threatened by antagonism between its communities." 
 
Angela Merkel's one hundred days in office elicits several 
editorial commentaries: her popularity ratings remain high, 
but she, like Vilepin in France, is at the mercy of the 
negative effects of growing unemployment and the need for 
reforms. 
 
Le Figaro devotes a half-page report to France's "biometric 
passport mess," calling France "Europe's poor student" when it 
comes to delivering the passport "required by the U.S." And 
quotes an industrialist who says that the biometric passport 
is "the Clemenceau of the Interior Ministry." CG Don Wells is 
quoted on the visa requirements. The report also notes that 
France's highest judicial body, le Conseil d'Etat, will debate 
today about whether to allow the Interior Ministry to give the 
passport printing job to a private printing company, thus by- 
passing the suit filed by the unions of the Imprimerie 
Nationale. A separate article relates the costs and the delays 
involved in getting a visa for the U.S. and mentions that 
French citizens can get visas in Brussels or Frankfurt. Don 
Wells is again quoted on the need for French travelers to 
"make sure they have the proper travel documents before buying 
their air tickets." 
 
Vladimir Putin pens an op-ed in Le Figaro on energy security 
and his priorities for the G8, as Russia takes on the 
presidency of the group for 2006. Putin promotes a long-term 
strategy of energy cooperation worldwide, based on reasonable 
prices and ecological necessity. Putin is also promoting 
innovating technologies as well as "inviting non G8 members to 
participate, namely those with an important economic 
development." Putin warns against "energy selfishness." In 
addition to energy, Putin puts forth his idea to fight Avian 
Flu and promote education. 
 
Les Echos carries an op-ed by Stephan Richter of the Globalist 
on the "hidden side of American immigration." Richter argues 
that those who criticize immigration (legal as well as 
illegal) should consider the fact that a large number of these 
immigrants will be paying for their retirement. This is why 
immigrants need to be better educated so they can hold better 
paying jobs. 
Catholic La Croix reports on the Turkish anti-American film, 
"The Valley of Wolves," noting that "the U.S. Embassy in 
Ankara wants to minimize the impact of the film: `people make 
the difference between a movie and reality.'" The movie shown 
in Germany has triggered a debate because the Bavarian 
President Edmund Stoiber has asked for it to be banned. 
 
The spread of Avian Flu and the first case of a mammal 
infected with the H5N1 virus - a reported dead cat in Germany 
- continue to elicit widespread reporting. Quoting Moliere, 
the regional Dauphine Libere quips: "What's new? The little 
cat died." 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
President Bush to India 
 
"Bush Looking for an Ally in India" 
Philippe Gelie in right-of-center Le Figaro (03/01): 
"President Bush is not looking for Indian folklore but for 
strong allies in a strategic region for the U.S. Washington 
has for a long time neglected the Indian Colossus, because of 
its poverty, economic self-sufficiency and its political non- 
alignment. The first challenge for the U.S. President will be 
the signing of the nuclear cooperation agreement, which is 
eliciting tension in both countries. Just when the U.S. is 
trying to put together an international coalition against 
Iran, the preferential treatment offered India is considered 
by many to be counter productive. And while the Pentagon's 
dreams for a `counterweight' to China appear to be 
unrealistic, India as a faithful regional super power in the 
war against terrorism remains a viable option." 
 
"A Visit Dominated by Nuclear Issues" 
Gabriel Gresillon in right-of-center Les Echos (03/01): "There 
is no doubt that India represents a central piece in the 
international strategic system the U.S. wants to build up. 
Through economic agreements but also a commercial nuclear 
cooperation agreement, the U.S. is sending the message that 
India, the world's largest democracy, is back in its radar. 
But the chances for signing the nuclear cooperation agreement 
are slim: resistance is strong in both countries. In the U.S., 
voices have been raised against it because a breach in the NPT 
would make it even harder to adopt a firm stance vis--vis 
other nations, starting with Iran. In India meanwhile, 
Washington's demands with regard to its commercial nuclear 
program are perceived as a sign that India is losing its 
independence." 
 
Iraq 
 
"Al-Sadr's War and Peace" 
Christophe Ayad in left-of-center Liberation (03/01): "One man 
has benefited from the recent skirmishes between religious 
groups: Moqtar al-Sadr, the pyromaniac firefighter. While his 
militia burned the Samara Mosque, he was calling the Sunnis 
and Shiites to unite. His political ascent is no longer in 
doubt: from being marginalized two years ago, he has now 
become one of three major poles of power in Iraq. One thing 
which has not changed is his fierce anti-Americanism, which 
has earned him support from the Sunnis. And his recent support 
of Hamas has elicited support from Iran and Syria." 
 
Hamas 
 
"Israel Asks for Determination Against Hamas" 
Patrick Saint-Paul in right-of-center Le Figaro (03/01): 
"Israel wants to avoid a confrontation with Europe and its 
financing of the Palestinian people. Foreign Minister Livni is 
touring Europe to ask for a firm stance when it comes to 
dealing with Hamas. Her position with regard to Mahmoud Abbas 
has caused some strife within her own government: she 
considers it is useless to pursue contacts with him once Hamas 
has formed its new government, while PM Olmert, in an effort 
not to upset the U.S., is in favor of Abbas retaining his 
position. Despite this apparent divergence of views, Livni 
insists she and Olmert are not at odds." STAPLETON