06PARIS3101
REPLY TO BEYOND THE EXECUTIVE BOARD QUESTIONS
Wed May 10 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

101534Z May 06UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 003101 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM USMISSION UNESCO PARIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNESCO
SUBJECT:  REPLY TO BEYOND THE EXECUTIVE BOARD QUESTIONS 
 
REF: a) State 069712, b) State 070067 
 
¶1.  The following items respond to Department's questions in 
reftels. 
 
¶2. Next steps on Education for All Global Action Plan: 
Peter Smith, UNESCO's Assistant Director General for Education, was 
in New York City on April 27 for consultations on the EFA Global 
Action Plan.  He and his UNESCO colleagues met with three 
representatives from the World Bank, one person from the UNDP, three 
people from UNICEF, a senior director of UNFPA and Marie Helene 
Gosselin from UNESCO NY.   Following their New York meetings, a new 
draft was circulated to the agencies for their input.  ADG Smith and 
his staff are working on revisions of the EFA Global Action Plan. 
We expect to see a copy soon, and will forward it to Washington for 
comments as soon as we get it. 
 
¶3. Global Symposium on Promoting the Multilingual Internet, Geneva, 
May 9-11:  US Mission PAO, Caitlin Bergin, will be attending the 
Geneva conference, and will provide a full report to Washington at 
the end of the conference. 
 
¶4. Second World Forum on Human Rights, Nantes, France July 10-13: 
At this time there seems to be no direct involvement by UNESCO in 
this conference, except that it is promoted on the UNESCO web site. 
 The description (and the Forum's own materials) cleverly refer to 
the 2004 Forum as having been held "at the initiative and with the 
support of UNESCO," leading all but the most precise readers with 
the impression that these descriptions of UNESCO's involvement apply 
to the 2006 Forum.   UNESCO (ADG Pierre Sane) is a member of the 
Scientific Committee (which reviews speakers and applications to 
hold sessions). 
 
As this is not a UNESCO meeting, Mission does not wish to give it 
greater legitimacy through our official participation.  At the same 
time, we are considering recommending certain NGO speakers 
participate to ensure a balanced presentation.   While it is 
difficult to know at this point what issues might be problematic for 
us, Mission does intend to cover the Forum and will be reporting 
back to Washington at its conclusion. 
 
¶5. ICSECA Funds:  Already in progress. 
 
¶6. Staff portfolios: 
 
Portfolios of the eight officers and staff of the US Mission to 
UNESCO: 
 
Ambassador Oliver 
DCM Andrew Koss 
 
John Hoff, Department of Health and Human Services, Attache 
Mr. Hoff's UNESCO portfolio is principally related to health and 
social matters.  As such, he normally covers the following subjects 
at UNESCO: 
Social and Human Sciences 
Ethics of Science and Technology; Bioethics 
Philosophy and Human Sciences 
Social Sciences, Research and Policies 
In addition to his UNESCO responsibilities, Mr. Hoff also devotes 
half his time covering health related issues at OECD. 
 
Nancy Cooper, State Department, Science Officer 
Ms. Cooper's portfolio is primarily connected to science issues. 
She is currently responsible for the following subjects at UNESCO: 
Natural Sciences Sector 
Water and science issues 
International Oceanographic issues 
Basic Engineering and Sciences 
Ecology and Earth Sciences 
Sciences Analysis and Policies 
World Heritage Issues 
UNESCO governance 
 
Michael Peay, State Department, Senior Legal Adviser 
Mr. Peay is charged with providing legal support and advice to all 
Mission officer regarding substantive and procedural matters that 
arise within their respective areas of responsibility.  In addition, 
Mr. Peay assists the Ambassador and DCM in covering issues that are 
considered highly contentious and politically volatile.  In 
particular he will be covering the following subjects at UNESCO: 
Cultural Diversity 
Human Rights 
Internal Oversight 
International Standards and Legal Affairs 
Negotiation and other work related to treaties and other 
instruments 
 
Caitlin Bergin, State Department, Public Affairs Officer 
Develops and manages the Mission Public Diplomacy (PD) program. 
Plans PD activity, receptions and outreach.  Other PD 
responsibilities include the Mission website, Voluntary Visitor and 
other exchanges, cultural, exhibit and speaker programs. 
Coordinates with UNESCO's Bureau of Public Information on important 
initiatives involving U.S. interests. Updates Mission on 
UNESCO-related media and drafts updates on Mission events for the 
U.S. National Commission for UNESCO newsletter.  Fulbright scholar 
liaison.  PAO also tracks and reports on telecommunication and media 
freedom issues in UNESCO's Information and Communication Sector 
(WSIS, Information Society, Internet Governance, World Digital 
Library, Memory of the World, Media Freedom, World Press Freedom Day 
and Prize, Media in post conflict situations, International 
Programme for the Development of Communication) and drafts reports 
on developments as needed. 
 
Sally Lovejoy, Department of Education, Education Attache 
Ms. Lovejoy's portfolio will consist of responsibility for all 
UNESCO education issues, including the "Education for All" program 
and its Global Action Plan. She is due to arrive at post this 
summer. 
Basic Education 
Secondary, Technical and Vocational Education 
Higher Education 
Promotion of Quality Education 
Educational Policies and Strategies 
AIDS/HIV education 
 
David Ostroff, State Department, Political Assistant 
Mr. Ostroff is the Mission's political generalist.  As such, he is 
responsible for keeping current on the hot issues covered by the 
Mission officers, and backing them up as needed.  He also is 
responsible for covering the following subjects: 
 
UNESCO personnel and American hiring 
Extra budgetary funding and private sector funding 
Executive Board and General Conference: Mission planning and 
execution 
National Commissions 
Relations with NGO's 
Relations with other delegations 
 
Oliver