06PARIS3429
USUNESCO HOSTS RECEPTION FOR MAY CHIDIAC
Mon May 22 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

221318Z May 06UNCLAS PARIS 003429 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM US MISSION UNESCO PARIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SCUL LE UNESCO
SUBJECT:  USUNESCO HOSTS RECEPTION FOR MAY CHIDIAC 
 
 
¶1.  Ambassador Oliver hosted a reception in honor of the well-known 
Lebanese television journalist May Chidiac yesterday evening, May 
18th, at the Ambassador's residence.  Chidiac was awarded UNESCO's 
Guillermo Cano World Press Freedom Day Prize in April in recognition 
of her courage in defending and promoting freedom of the press. 
 
¶2.  Chidiac, a journalist with the Lebanese Broadcasting Corporation 
International (LBCI), was injured in September 2005 in a series of 
bombings in Lebanon targeting Christians and critics of Syria and 
lost a leg and an arm in the attack.  She is currently in France for 
medical treatment.  Chidiac said she plans to return to work next 
month and had announced her candidacy for the vacant Maronite seat 
in Lebanon's Baabda-Aley by-election.  She mentioned that she has 
been forced to withdraw her name for the seat because of health 
problems, but hopes to reconsider running in the future.  She was 
accompanied by members of her family, Lebanon's Ambassador to 
UNESCO, and several prominent Lebanese governmental and legislative 
officials. 
 
¶3.  The reception was extremely well attended and included, notably, 
the presence of UNESCO's Director General Matsuura, UNESCO's Deputy 
Director Barbosa, and dozens of Ambassadors and delegation 
representatives.  Visiting IO Deputy Assistant Secretary, James 
Warlick, read and presented a letter from Secretary Rice to Ms. 
Chidiac, who said she was extremely honored by the gesture. 
 
 ¶4.  In introducing Ms. Chidiac, Ambassador Oliver described her as 
a symbol of courage and freedom.  Many of those present commented on 
how much they appreciated the opportunity to meet Ms. Chidiac, and 
the Ambassador's kindness in hosting the event.  Ms. Chidiac, in 
remarks that were extremely moving, promised to continue her work 
and said she would not be intimidated or threatened into silence. 
The event was covered both by Lebanese television and other print 
journalists. 
KOSS