06PARIS601
ECOLOGY MINISTER RAISES SUITE OF ENVIRONMENT ISSUES
Mon Jan 30 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 PARIS 000601 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR G/DOBRIANSKY, OES/MCMURRAY, OES/GC, OES/ENV; 
WHITE HOUSE FOR CEQ/CONNAUGHTON; 
TREASURY FOR LESLIE HULL; 
DOE FOR OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY, LAU AND PRICE, AND THE 
OFFICE OF CLIMATE TECHNOLOGY, ATTN:RMARLAY; 
EPA FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS/MEDEAIRIS; 
USEU FOR ESTH/SMITHAM 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: SENV TSPL EAID PREL FR
SUBJECT: ECOLOGY MINISTER RAISES SUITE OF ENVIRONMENT ISSUES 
WITH AMBASSADOR; CLOSER COLLABORATION SOUGHT 
 
¶1.  (U) This is an action message.  Please see para 10. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Summary.  On January 25, Ambassador and Minister 
for Ecology and Sustainable Development Nelly Olin engaged 
on climate change-related issues, the Global Environmental 
Facility replenishment talks, the `World Environmental 
Organization' concept proposed by President Chirac, and a 
new international mechanism of scientific expertise on 
biodiversity (known as `IMOSEB'), also strongly supported by 
the GOF.  Notwithstanding different views on these subjects, 
the discussion was positive and Minister Olin welcomed the 
Ambassador's suggestion that she visit U.S climate, energy, 
and environmental research facilities, possibly in May 2006. 
The Minister proposed an exchange of French and U.S. 
environmental officers to improve understanding of each 
others' perspectives and environmental systems.  End 
summary. 
 
------------------------------ 
Climate Change: "Step-by-Step" 
------------------------------ 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Minister Olin presented French concerns on climate 
change and, in reference to the Montreal Conference, 
expressed appreciation for the "U.S.'s last minute helpful 
gesture that other countries had been waiting and hoping 
for."  She said she had followed "with great interest" the 
Inaugural Ministerial Meeting of the Asia-Pacific 
Partnership on Clean Development and Climate in January in 
Sydney.  The Ambassador stressed the U.S.'s deep commitment 
to find technical solutions to meet the climate change 
challenge; our successes recently in reducing GHG emissions 
domestically; and the necessary involvement of China and 
India to develop an effective global response to climate 
change. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Olin agreed that "developing countries must 
include a number of environmental priorities" in their 
policy.  She further commented that she was recently 
"happily surprised" with the Chinese positioning on 
ecological issues and that she felt that China was "making 
progress."  She was more reserved about India which she 
perceives as adopting a wait-and-see attitude on clean 
development.  Olin concluded the climate discussion on a 
positive note stating that "on this issue we are making 
progress." 
 
¶5. (U) In other opening remarks, the Minister spoke highly 
of U.S. - French collaboration in the Congo Basin Forest 
Partnership.  Viewing this as a successful project, she 
mentioned that France will now serve as the partnership's 
head, pursuing policies put in place when the U.S. had led 
the partnership. 
 
--------------------------------- 
"Grand Souci" GEF-4 Replenishment 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Regarding the ongoing round of Global Environment 
Facility (GEF) replenishment talks, the Minister prefaced 
her points saying that this was "a real source of worry" and 
"This is something for which I need your help." She stressed 
the importance of the GEF as the key financial mechanism to 
ensure progress on such issues as climate change, 
biodiversity, desertification, and chemicals management for 
the developing world.  Olin asked the Ambassador's help "to 
unblock" the replenishment of the GEF Trust Fund.  She said 
that the U.S. had made a commitment at the Gleneagles G-8 
Summit to support the facility.  Experts on the Minister's 
staff stressed the unique nature of the fund, its past 
successes, and the repercussions were the U.S. contribution 
to be reduced.  Such an action would not only impact the 
replenishment but would in turn serve as a signal for other 
contributors to reduce their offers.  Embassy ESTH Counselor 
inquired about France's financial commitment - 164 million 
Euros over a four-year period - and indicated that while the 
Embassy knew that GEF replenishment talks were underway, we 
were unaware of the details of the U.S. position.  The 
Ambassador agreed to convey to the French U.S. points on the 
GEF. 
 
------------------------------------- 
A `World Environmental Organization'? 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) The Minister said it was the wish of President Chirac 
to transform the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) 
into something larger, a United Nations Environment 
Organization (UNEO) perhaps, to strengthen the efficiency 
and coherence of international environmental governance. 
She claimed that this desire is now shared by all European 
countries and that the Austrian EU Presidency plans to soon 
raise the issue on the United Nations' agenda. 
 
--------------------------- 
New Biodiversity Mechanism? 
--------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (U) Olin also confirmed the GOF desire to move forward 
on the `IMOSEB' issue.  (Note: The concept of an 
International Mechanism of Scientific Expertise on 
Biodiversity (IMOSEB) was introduced by President Chirac at 
the International Conference on Biodiversity and Governance 
held in Paris in January 2005.  During that conference, and 
recalling the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC), Chirac proposed the creation of a similar 
mechanism for biodiversity.  The conference final statement 
urged the launch of an international, multi-stakeholder 
consultative process to assess the need for such a 
mechanism, and a meeting was held in Paris in June 2005 to 
initiate the `next steps' consultative process.  End note.) 
Olin informed the Ambassador that a follow-on IMOSEB meeting 
would take place in Paris February 21-22, 2006.  ESTH 
Counselor responded that the U.S. favors neither a `World 
(nor UN) Environment Organization,' nor perceives the need 
for an additional mechanism to oversee biodiversity.  The 
U.S. goal is to enhance the performance of existing 
international/multilateral scientific organizations, 
mechanisms, and treaties.  While stressing that the U.S. is 
disinclined to concur in a new mechanism for biodiversity, 
ESTH Counselor indicated that the USG may send an officer 
from Washington to attend the February meeting.  While 
comprehending the U.S. position, Olin nonetheless hoped that 
the U.S. would indeed participate in the meeting. 
 
----------------------------------- 
Enhancing Environmental Cooperation 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶9.  (U) Olin told the Ambassador that the Ecology Ministry 
has begun an exchange program of government officials, 
notably with other EU countries.  She said that her Ministry 
would welcome a U.S. environmental officer to participate in 
a secondment.  The Ambassador suggested that France might 
wish to augment its existing technical environmental 
exchanges with the U.S.   That this might include U.S. 
`brownfield' sites.  The Ambassador invited the Minister to 
visit U.S. energy laboratories, such as the Department of 
Energy's Renewable Energy Laboratory and/or the National 
Center for Atmospheric Research or similar centers.  The 
Minister said she would like to accept the Ambassador's 
invitation perhaps around a planned visit to New York, May 
10-12, her schedule permitting. 
 
¶10.  (U) Action Requested:  Washington agencies are 
requested to provide the following: 
 
-- U.S. points re the GEF replenishment talks to forward to 
Minister Olin; 
 
-- Reactions to the GOF suggestion regarding secondments of 
U.S. environmental officers (State OES?, EPA?) for short or 
long periods at the French Ministry of Ecology; 
 
-- Site visit suggestions for Minister Olin that highlight 
U.S. climate technology efforts. 
 
¶11.  Comment: Notwithstanding the sensitive topics 
discussed, we sensed the Minister sought to make the 
dialogue constructive and positive.  Interestingly, not once 
was the `Kyoto Protocol' mentioned.  The Embassy seeks to 
continue this dialogue begun between Minister Olin and U/S 
Dobriansky at the Montreal Climate Conference and we think 
it would be extremely useful strategically to provide her 
with points on the U.S. position on the GEF, views regarding 
a possible secondment of a U.S. officer to the Ministry of 
Ecology, and suggestions for visits to U.S. environmental, 
energy efficiency, and climate science sites.  End comment. 
 
STAPLETON