06PARIS2437
MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iran Afghanistan Italy
Thu Apr 13 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 002437 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR; IIP/RW; IIP/RNY; BBG/VOA; IIP/WEU; AF/PA; 
EUR/WE /P/SP; D/C (MCCOO); EUR/PA; INR/P; INR/EUC; PM; OSC ISA 
FOR ILN; NEA; WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC/WEUROPE; DOC FOR ITA/EUR/FR 
AND PASS USTR/PA; USINCEUR FOR PAO; NATO/PA; MOSCOW/PA; 
ROME/PA. 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR FR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION REPORT - Iran Afghanistan Italy 
PARIS - Thursday, April 13, 2006 
 
 
(A) SUBJECTS COVERED IN TODAY'S REPORT: 
 
Iran 
Afghanistan 
Italy 
 
B) SUMMARY OF COVERAGE: 
 
The tug-of-war between the West and Iran is today's lead story 
in Le Figaro: "Military Option Against Iranian Threat." The 
front-page story analyzes how Washington "is in favor of 
force" while Europe "would prefer sanctions." Either way, Le 
Figaro acknowledges: "Teheran Is Taunting the West." Inside, 
the two-page report includes a story on how the U.S. is 
"evaluating a military option to counter Iran," one on the 
various scenarios the Pentagon has been "studying" for a "U.S. 
military air strike campaign" and also the possibility of a 
"solo Israeli operation." The editorial is entitled "Iran Toys 
with the West." Alexandrine Bouilhet reports on the EU's 
"preference for gradual sanctions." Liberation reports that 
"for Washington, Tehran has crossed the yellow line." (See 
Part C) Interviewed in Le Figaro, Kuwait's PM says: "The 
Iranians are very clever. They will go as close to the 
precipice as they can before stepping back at the last minute 
to negotiate. They want to be in a position of strength when 
they face the Americans. It is understandable. They are very 
smart. Believe me, I have met Ahmadinejad and he knows what he 
is doing." 
 
Liberation devotes its lead to Afghanistan and "The Awakening 
of the Taliban." "After four years, western troops, for the 
most part French, are unable to deal with the guerrilla 
resurgence." The editorial compares their task to Sisyphus and 
his rock. (See Part C) 
 
The editorial in Le Monde, entitled "Two Italys," contends 
that while Prodi has won "the mathematical and political right 
to govern" it will be difficult. (See Part C) 
 
(C) SUPPORTING TEXT/BLOCK QUOTES: 
 
Iran 
 
"Iran Toys With the West" 
Pierre Rousselin in right-of-center Le Figaro (04/13): "Each 
time Iran crosses the yellow line in its nuclear program, the 
West must take an equivalent step backward. The extremists who 
lead Iran have understood that they have everything to gain 
from playing this game. While Teheran cannot yet produce the 
bomb, being able to produce enriched uranium is a slap in the 
face of the UNSC, with immediate guarantees of having an 
effect. The Iranian message to the world is very clear. and 
includes the question `why Israel and not Iran.' The questions 
raised by Tehran are basic ones raising real issues and which 
no one dares answer. In Washington, Paris, London and Berlin, 
everyone prefers talking about sanctions, even if everyone 
knows they will either serve little purpose or if they are 
effective, will trigger an Iranian response that could really 
hurt. Because the sanctions blackmail is not working, the 
threat of a military intervention is being raised. Last week's 
stories in the U.S. press are part of the equation. And it 
could be that Teheran responded with its own daring about 
uranium enrichment. While this game goes on between the West 
and Tehran, countries in the region must be drawing their own 
conclusions. Arab opinion is sensitive to the notion of 
`double standards.' Europe's image, like that of the U.S. is 
falling fast. To come out of this impasse we must find better 
than sanctions and military threats. We must rethink the non- 
proliferation regime completely and engage in negotiations 
with Iran: these two initiatives are essential. But a weakened 
America and a paralyzed Europe are not up to this." 
 
"For Washington, Iran Has Crossed the Yellow Line" 
Jean-Pierre Perrin in left-of-center Liberation (04/13): 
"Probably for domestic reasons, the Iranian regime has decided 
to continue to challenge the international community. Their 
recent declarations have triggered protests from the 
international community, including from Russia and China. even 
if they continue to be opposed to the use of sanctions. It is 
clear that a race is on between the Iranian leaders in their 
provocations to the West and all for domestic consumption. 
Meanwhile the Iranian declarations are a godsend for the 
American administration because uranium enrichment represents 
a `yellow line' which should not be crossed, as Secretary Rice 
reminded everyone. To increase the West's concern, Under 
Secretary Rademaker said in Moscow that the Iranians would be 
 
SIPDIS 
able to build a nuclear bomb within 15 months. But Washington 
does not know how to respond to Tehran's challenge. 
Diplomatically, Washington will be hard pressed to find a 
consensus on the use of punitive measures against Iran. At the 
military level, an operation seems out of the question because 
of the consequences for the region and the fear of reprisal in 
Iraq. In fact Tehran does not seem to be taking the threats 
seriously. Meanwhile both Iran and the U.S. appear bent on a 
confrontation, particularly since Washington refuses to talk 
directly with Tehran." 
 
Afghanistan 
 
"Sisyphus" 
Patrick Sabatier in left-of-center Liberation (04/13): "Some 
one thousand French soldiers are engaged in Afghanistan along 
with American and European soldiers. Some are dying while 
there is no end in sight to the intervention. Four years after 
the end of the Taliban regime, extremists continue to hamper 
Afghanistan's reconstruction while they lead in a reign of 
terror. The conflict is a low intensity one, and Karzai's 
regime has not been threatened. But one has to wonder about 
the usefulness of the intervention, like all military 
interventions in foreign lands . by western powers, which see 
themselves as the sheriff of the world. Reconstruction of a 
nation, which has been destroyed or has never really existed 
is, if not impossible, a very long-haul affair. The right to 
intervene against a regime accused of genocide is not in 
question here. The 2001 intervention in Afghanistan was both 
legitimated and necessary. But stabilizing such a backward 
country where armed militia reign under orders of war lords 
and drug lords, is like Sisyphus pushing his rock. Changing 
regimes is easy, as in Iraq and Afghanistan. Building a new 
one can never be the job for foreign hands." 
 
Italy 
 
"Two Italys" 
Left-of-center Le Monde in its editorial (04/13): "Prodi has a 
political right to claim the role of President of the Council. 
Mathematically, he has very good chances to be named by both 
houses. But the left has failed to turn the elections into an 
anti-Berlusconi referendum. Meanwhile `Il Cavaliere' has lost 
his power, although he has not been completely eliminated. and 
`Il Professore' will need to be extremely clever in order to 
satisfy the very contradictory demands of his majority. While 
the task will be difficult, the Europeans have every reason to 
be hopeful now that they have gained a faithful partner 
committed to Europe." STAPLETON