06PARIS2005
UNESCO: MEETING THE FIRST LADY OF SENEGAL
Tue Mar 28 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS PARIS 002005 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM USMISSION UNESCO PARIS 
 
FOR IO/UNESCO 
 
E.O. 12958:    N/A 
TAGS: KPAO EAID UNESCO
SUBJECT:  UNESCO: MEETING THE FIRST LADY OF SENEGAL 
 
 
¶1.   (U) SUMMARY:  Ambassador Oliver met with the First Lady 
of Senegal, Viviane Wade, on March 23 at the request of the 
Senegalese Delegation.  Mrs. Wade requested the meeting in 
order to explore USG and First Lady Laura Bush's interest in 
partnering with her to combat disease and promote 
vaccination in Senegal.  Wade inquired whether the First 
Lady would be interested in helping her to promote health 
education in Senegal, and Mission advised it would convey 
her interest to Washington.  Wade also asked if the U.S. 
could share research on sickle cell anemia as Senegal had 
begun building a research center dedicated to the disease. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
---------------- 
PROMOTING HEALTH 
---------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Wade, the Senegalese First Lady since 2000, has been 
active in UNESCO programs promoting community radio and 
education in Senegal.  She explained that the literacy rate 
in Senegal is low and worsened by the trend of school 
dropouts.  She stated that images work best in promoting 
health awareness and disease prevention, and asked if First 
Lady Laura Bush would be interested in working with her on 
these challenges.  She indicated she would seek a meeting 
with her later this year.  Such initiatives would involve, 
for example malaria, vaccinations, and sickle cell anemia. 
She also described government efforts to promote research 
and training on sickle cell anemia, which she noted targets 
thousands across West Africa each year.  In Senegal, she 
stated, people hide that they have the disease.  Would the 
U.S. be willing to share its research on this disease with 
Senegal, she asked, noting legislation on umbilical cord 
stem cells that President Bush signed into law last 
December. 
 
¶3.  (U) Ambassador Oliver clarified that the WHO, not 
UNESCO, has the lead on vaccinations and health in the UN 
system, but UNESCO does promote health education.  The 
Ambassador suggested a two-track approach, where Wade 
continued to promote health awareness through images, but 
also linked her efforts with literacy and education.  The 
creation of culturally sensitive, short and targeted 
programs for mothers, the Ambassador stated, could help 
promote family health.  On school dropouts, the Ambassador 
noted the importance of showing families that education 
provides skills for children that will help improve their 
lives.  She emphasized that the First Lady is interested in 
helping people live a better life and noted that she would 
relay Wade's inquiry to her. 
 
¶4.   (U) The Ambassador noted that research on diseases such 
as sickle cell anemia helps everybody, and indicated that 
she would relay Wade's request for information on sickle 
cell anemia research to Washington.  The Ambassador also 
noted UNESCO's basic sciences program, a program that was 
not yet very strong, but that could still potentially 
promote these kinds of research partnerships. 
 
¶5.  (U) Wade agreed that linking literacy and education 
programs with disease prevention would be a good approach 
and welcomed any interest from the First Lady.  She 
expressed hope that the U.S. and Senegal could share 
information on sickle cell anemia and expressed gratitude 
for the Ambassador's willingness to meet her on short 
notice. 
Oliver