07PARIS1011
UNESCO DG REACTS TO HIGH-LEVEL PANEL REPORT "DELIVERING AS
Thu Mar 15 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
null
Lucia A Keegan  03/20/2007 09:47:02 AM  From  DB/Inbox:  Lucia A Keegan

Cable 
Text:                                                                      
                                                                           
      
UNCLAS        PARIS 01011

SIPDIS
cxparis:
    ACTION: UNESCO
    INFO:   ECON AMBO POL AMB DCM SCI AMBU

DISSEMINATION: UNESCOX
CHARGE: PROG

APPROVED: CHG: AKOSS
DRAFTED: SCI: NCOOPER
CLEARED: NONE

VZCZCFRI448
PP RUEHC RUEHGV RUCNDT RUEHIL RUEHHI RUEHTO
RUEHDR RUEHMN RUEHTI RUEHLGB
DE RUEHFR #1011/01 0741332
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 151332Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5650
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA PRIORITY 2617
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 1169
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 0689
RUEHHI/AMEMBASSY HANOI 0225
RUEHTO/AMEMBASSY MAPUTO 0403
RUEHDR/AMEMBASSY DAR ES SALAAM 0309
RUEHMN/AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO 0092
RUEHTI/AMEMBASSY TIRANA 0171
RUEHLGB/AMEMBASSY KIGALI 1099UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 PARIS 001011 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FROM USMISSION UNESCO PARIS 
 
STATE FOR IO/UNESCO KELLY SIEKMAN, IO/S LISA SPRATT, IO/EDA GEORGE 
DRAGNICH 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: UNESCO AORC UNGA PREL PHUM SOCI EAID
SUBJECT:  UNESCO DG REACTS TO HIGH-LEVEL PANEL REPORT "DELIVERING AS 
ONE":  "WE'RE READY TO TEST PILOT OFFICES" 
 
REFS:  A) 06 State 187687  B) Paris 424 
 
¶1.  This is a guidance request, see para 4. 
 
¶2.  Summary:  After some initial hesitation, UNESCO's Director 
General Matsuura continues to engage member states on the results of 
the UN high level panel report "Delivering as One."  At a March 9 
question and answer session with member states, the DG stressed 
UNESCO's proactive response to the "one country" approach, including 
UNESCO's determination to participate in all eight of the pilot UN 
country offices.  He also reported on UNESCO's continuing engagement 
in shaping the ongoing UN reform dialogue:  his own recent visit to 
New York, where he met with UN SecGen Ban, and the March 7 meeting 
he hosted that brought together heads of the five large specialized 
agencies (ILO, FAO, UNIDO, and WHO).   Matsuura also announced that 
UNESCO is a member of an informal "one UN" support group that will 
next meet on April 19 in Geneva.   Despite this pro-active approach, 
Matsuura did note that the High-Level panel report must go through 
the "intergovernmental stage," including action by the UNGA.  The DG 
explained that the mandate for work on the "one UN" at country level 
is derived from the 2004 Triennial Comprehensive Policy Review 
(TCPR) resolution of the UNGA. 
 
¶3.  Matsuura took pains to outline UNESCO's current role in areas 
covered by the report of the High-Level Panel, citing the Education 
for All (EFA) Global Action Plan as a "compelling example of 
'delivering as one'", while stressing that culture, an element of 
UNESCO's mandate, needs to be integrated into national development 
plans.  To strengthen UNESCO's role in humanitarian assistance, 
Matsuura said that he would seek membership in the Executive 
Committee for Humanitarian Affairs.  On environmental governance, 
Matsuura cautioned, "it would be an error to assume that the role of 
more than 25 agencies should be merged into a single program or 
organization."   During the question and answer question, some 
member states - including Norway, Switzerland, and Afghanistan - 
expressed approval of the UNESCO DG's pro-active stance in 
implementing the "one UN" proposals at the country level.  But some 
developing nations advocated caution, led by India, who recalled 
reticence expressed by the G-77 and China in other UN fora (paras 
10-13). Queried on funding for the "One UN" pilot offices, the DG 
reported, "this element needs to be examined with a lot of 
attention, because the details are not yet established." 
 
¶4. Comment:  Perhaps the reservations expressed by the UNESCO DG and 
member states at this session can inform the USG strategy on UN 
reform.  The DG stressed in his speech that the panel's findings 
have not been officially adopted.  But UNESCO's reaction to the 
"Delivering as One" proposals, as described by DG Matsuura, seems a 
positive development, as it includes more pro-active engagement with 
other UN agencies and a more strategic approach to country-level 
planning.  Post requests additional guidance on the High-Level Panel 
Recommendations as they pertain to specialized agencies in order to 
prepare for the debate on UNESCO's new Medium-Term Strategy at 
UNESCO's April 10-26 Executive Board.  End summary and comment. 
 
 
¶5.  Director General Matsuura began his speech by  "welcoming and 
endorsing" the main thrust of the report of the high-level panel. 
The DG outlined UNESCO's "active engagement" in the reform process. 
The preceding week, Matsuura himself visited New York, where he met 
with UN SecGen Ban, UN Deputy Secretary General Migiro and UNDP 
Administrator and UNDG Chair Dervis, among others.  On March 7, he 
hosted a meeting at UNESCO of the heads of the five large 
specialized agencies (ILO, FAO, UNIDO, and WHO) to identify the best 
way to work together to advance the reform process, and ensure that 
the specialized agencies are able to "bring their unique 
competencies to bear in support of national development."  Matsuura 
noted, though, that the "Delivering as One" report now needs to go 
through the intergovernmental stage, notably consideration and 
action by the UNGA; he reported that UN SecGen Ban had told him that 
he would present his own views later this month. 
 
¶6.  The DG then stressed at length UNESCO's direct involvement in 
the three areas covered by the report:  development, humanitarian 
assistance, and the environment.  UNESCO is the international 
coordinator of the Education for All (EFA).  UNESCO Education 
Support Strategies (UNESS) could serve as the basis for common 
country planning documents for UN agencies involved in education. 
The EFA has also led development of the EFA Global Action plan -- in 
partnership with UNDP, UNICEF, UNFPA, and the World Bank -- "a 
compelling example of 'delivering as one'".  Matsuura reported that 
he and UNDG Chair Dervish had agreed that the EFA Global Action Plan 
would be sent to resident coordinators of local UN teams for 
implementation via joint country program exercises.  Matsuura 
stressed the need for World Bank involvement in common country 
action on EFA. 
 
¶7.  Asserting that "the significance of culture has not always been 
recognized by UNESCO's partners" and expressing disappointment that 
culture had not been included in model UNDAF development plans, the 
DG pledged that UNESCO will promote its inclusion in country plans. 
He highlighted the recently announced Spanish fund for the 
achievement of the MDGs as a potential vehicle for this.  (Comment: 
UNESCO continues to push the role of culture in development though 
it has little to show for it.) 
 
¶8.  On Humanitarian assistance, the DG underlined UNESCO's emphasis 
on the "human and institutional, rather than the physical, aspects 
of reconstruction," saying this would help ensure more coherent 
transition strategies from humanitarian assistance to reconstruction 
in post conflict or post-disaster situations.  He also cited the 
Tsunami Early Warning System as an example of UNESCO's efforts to 
 
SIPDIS 
promote disaster prevention.  To enhance its role in humanitarian 
assistance, UNESCO will seek membership in the Executive Committee 
for Humanitarian Affairs (ECHA). Regarding environmental 
sustainability, Matsuura endorsed the panel's recommendation for 
strengthened environmental governance, but said that "much more 
thorough analysis" is needed.  He stressed that "it would be an 
error to assume that the role of more than 25 agencies should be 
merged into a single program or organization."  (Comment:  In this, 
the DG is doubtless concerned about the future roles of the UNESCO's 
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, International 
Hydrological Program, and Man and Biosphere Program.  End Comment.) 
 
 
DG on One UN at Country Level: "We're There!" 
 
¶9.   On establishing "One UN" offices at country level, DG Matsuura 
reported that basic agreement on next steps was reached at the joint 
UNDG management and program group retreat in New York at the end of 
January.   UNESCO is committed to taking part in all 8 pilot 
offices, and the DG has already sent a mission to Viet Nam, a pilot 
country.  DG Matsuura said that he was heartened by the "growing 
consensus at top decision-making levels" regarding the need for 
"flexibility", as opposed to "earlier rigidity".   He then outlined 
the four aspects of the "One UN" concept, commenting as follows: one 
leader ("firewalled" from the dual identity of UNDP resident 
representative); one program; one budgetary framework (to identify 
funding gaps, to which the bilateral donor community could 
contribute via country-level coherence funds); one office (entailing 
a merger of business practices, but not necessarily a joint 
headquarters). 
 
¶10.  In DG Matsuura's view, defining a common program to support 
national development goals will be the core task for the UN system; 
it will replace the UNDAF approach of "simply accumulating 
individual agency deliverables." 
Each organization must be able to contribute to the implementation 
of the "One Program" at country level, regardless of the funds it 
can commit, Matsuura stressed; this will be facilitated by the 
revision of UNDAF guidelines spelling out the obligations of 
resident coordinators to integrate the expertise of specialized 
agencies.  Pilots must be assessed at the end of this year before 
the initiative is "scaled up."  Matsuura announced that UNESCO is 
part of the "select group" of ten UNDG members that will comprise 
the informal support group on the "One UN."  The group recently held 
its first meeting, and will meet again on April 19 in Geneva. 
 
¶11.  Matsuura reported that he had decided to advance the review of 
UNESCO's decentralization strategy, reviving the Task Force under 
the leadership of DDG Barbosa.  Key to this will be a new 
accountability framework for field operations, as well as policy 
guidance regarding UNESCO's substantive inputs to country planning 
exercises.  Modalities of UNESCO action in the three pilot countries 
where UNESCO is not resident are still TBD.  The Decentralization 
Task Force works closely with UNESCO's working group on UN reform, 
chaired by Elizabeth Longworth, the DG's chief of staff.  DG 
Matsuura concluded by stressing that the "One UN" approach was of 
central concern when the secretariat prepared the new draft Medium 
Term Strategy (2008-13) and Program and Budget (2008-9). 
 
Reaction of Member States:  G-77 and China "Cautious" 
 
¶12.  DG Matsuura then fielded questions from a packed house, with 
many Ambassadors present.  Norway, Afghanistan and Switzerland 
praised the DG for his pro-active response, with Afghanistan asking 
what developing countries not chosen as one of the eight pilots but 
in need of more coordinated assistance from the UN might do. 
In response to Norway's request for the DG's assessment of the 
reaction to the "Delivering as One" report, the DG conceded that 
there are many stakeholders and they are not completely united. 
That said, the five key specialized agencies have been able to 
arrive at a common position.  At first, the DG had some concern 
about the WHO -- because they had said at one point that they could 
not join the pilot effort in Viet Nam, given the "rigid" model 
advanced at the beginning -- but the new WHO DG is taking a more 
positive stance.  The DG expressed optimism regarding the degree of 
UN-wide consensus, including on the part of specialized agencies. 
But he also expressed concern about the "cautious attitude" of the 
chair of the G-77 and Pakistan group in New York; while the 
Pakistani Ambassador is not negative, he is cautious procedurally, 
advocating waiting until the UNGA adopts a resolution.  But 
preparations for the one-country offices will take time; and the 
2004 Triennial Comprehensive Policy Review (TCPR) resolution of the 
UNGA can provide the necessary mandate.  What is key is that 
developing countries believe that the "one UN" approach is 
beneficial.  It is important to create a visible success, 
particularly in the five countries where UNESCO has field offices. 
 
 
¶13.  The Indian Ambassador also noted the "cautious approach" of the 
G-77 and China to the report of the high-level panel.  The Indian 
Ambassador reported that she had attended the February 26-27 meeting 
in Rome of the chairmen of G-77 and China chapters, chaired by 
Pakistan Ambassador to the UN Munir Akram.  At that meeting, the 
following reservations were expressed:  the pilots should be 
voluntary, led by national governments, and take into account 
national needs. Any system-wide change in funding or organization 
would be pre-mature, as would be expansion of the pilot experimental 
models without consideration of the results.  The Indian Ambassador 
noted that Ambassador Akram sent a letter to Secgen Ban urging him 
to avoid "precipitate action" before necessary intergovernmental 
consultation.  DG Matsuura responded that while in New York, he had 
tried unsuccessfully to speak with Ambassador Akram; but he had been 
able to probe the Secretary General on his reaction.  DG Matsuura 
expressed the hope that Ban would give his position on the 
"Delivering as One" soon, and that this will be discussed at the 
UNGA so as to establish a common position.  The "One UN" at the 
country level will proceed in the meantime; a good number of 
enthusiastic developing countries want to implement these proposals. 
 Matsuura also described the panel's recommendations on women as 
"not very ambitious", entailing the establishment of a new office. 
But Ki-Moon had confided to him that there is some resistance even 
on this; Ki-Moon believes that this new office is needed. 
 
¶14.  The Moroccan Ambassador -- a purported candidate for the post 
of DG to succeed Matsuura in 2009 -- was eager to defend UNESCO's 
interests.   She asserted that the last information session on the 
"Delivering as One" proposals left some at UNESCO "frightened". 
Regarding issues within UNESCO's mandate that are addressed by the 
report, including water and gender -- who will evaluate the 
performance of each agency?  According to the proposed scheme, the 
budget will be based on results.  UNESCO risks losing its soul.  DG 
Matsuura responded that while the "One UN" approach may lead to less 
visibility for UNESCO, it will result in more of a team effort by 
the UN as a whole.  The budget frameworks for the "One UN" pilot 
offices do not represent a sole budget; UNESCO will not make 
financial contributions to a general budget.  This detail needs to 
be examined with a lot of attention, because the details are not 
established.  UNESCO will be accountable to member states via the 
implementation of projects financed by UNESCO.  UNESCO staff will 
direct the UNESCO office and implement UNESCO projects under the 
direction of the regional coordinator.  The precise model adopted 
will depend on the country. 
 
¶15.  Nigeria evoked a series of challenges:  defining the nature of 
the "one country" coordinator; persuading member states to be 
"master of programs"; and stagnant funding for many UN 
organizations.  He asked:  "From now on, programs will not be 
included in the budget absent a link to performance; but who 
evaluates performance?"  Gabon, taking a constructive stance, noted 
"mistrust", but also "the need to reestablish confidence."  She 
stressed the need for flexibility as well as the importance of 
involving Bretton Woods Organizations, given their involvement in 
structural readjustment plans.  Regarding the context posed by the 
ongoing preparation of UNESCO's draft medium term strategy (2008-13) 
and program and budget (2008-2009), the Gabonese Ambassador invited 
the DG to brief the Africa group in more detail, given the fact that 
"Africa is a priority for the UN." 
KOSS