07PARIS1027
WEEKLY MEDIA WRAP-UP:  PRESIDENT BUSH IN LATIN AMERICA;
Fri Mar 16 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXRO7766
RR RUEHIK RUEHYG
DE RUEHFR #1027/01 0751348
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 161348Z MAR 07
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5679
INFO RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVE
RUEHMRE/AMCONSUL MARSEILLE 1591
RUEHSR/AMCONSUL STRASBOURG 0358UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 PARIS 001027 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/PPD, EUR/WE, INR, R 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC PREL KPAO FR
SUBJECT: WEEKLY MEDIA WRAP-UP:  PRESIDENT BUSH IN LATIN AMERICA; 
FRENCH PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN HIGHLIGHTS; SARKOZY -- IMMIGRATION AND 
NATIONAL IDENTITY.  MARCH 16, 2007. 
 
PARIS 00001027  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
Sensitive but unclassified.  Please protect accordingly. 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (SBU) In a week dominated by President Chirac's address to the 
nation (March 11), domestic politics led the national agenda, 
whether questions about Chirac's legacy, centrist presidential 
candidate Bayrou's rise in the polls, or the essence of French 
identity.  On the international front, President Bush's trip to 
Latin America provided ample fodder for ruminations about America's 
diminished place in the world, and juxtaposed President Bush's 
"measured" behavior with Venezuelan President Chavez's 
"immoderation."  End Summary. 
 
----------------------------- 
FRENCH PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Right-of-center Le Figaro (March 12) carried the headline, 
"Chirac Salutes the 'Magnificent France,'" and underscored that 
"Abroad, commentaries waver between praise and lack of interest." 
According to Le Figaro, the United States' "lack of interest is 
almost surprising, concerning a man that the U.S. said to have hated 
and adored," and noted that "George Bush was the first to react" on 
the international scene to President Chirac's announcement.  In 
Catholic La Croix's editorial (March 12), Francois Ernenwein wrote 
that "Chirac's biggest coup after twelve years in office was his 
resistance to George W. Bush's warlike ambitions in Iraq..." 
 
¶3. (SBU) Left-wing Liberation's front page (March 15) featured the 
headline, "If I Were to Win," featuring an interview with centrist 
UDF candidate Francois Bayrou.  Not surprisingly, the editorial by 
Laurent Joffrin commented on the interview in negative terms, saying 
that "Voting for Bayrou is like a leap of faith... he is especially 
adept at being vague.  What would happen if he won?  He has no idea. 
 With whom will he govern?  We will see when we get there...  What 
will be his platform? It depends...  In short, Francois Bayrou has a 
program but its implementation is an enigma..." 
 
¶4. (SBU) Philippe Gelie (March 15) wrote in right-of-center Le 
Figaro that "to watch the unfolding of the French presidential 
campaign from the U.S. is like discovering an anachronistic, vaguely 
dangerous country that has an opportunity for change that it may 
once again let slip away.  Whatever the political bias of the 
publication, the perception of France is striking...  The U.S. press 
sees Sarkozy as a man who wants to 'wake up France...' while Bayrou 
appears to be a 'neither-nor' type of candidate... who, if he had 
been American, would have voted for Reagan in the 1980s and Clinton 
in the 1990s." 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
SARKOZY'S PLANS -- IMMIGRATION AND NATIONAL IDENTITY 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) All media commented on presidential candidate Nicolas 
Sarkozy's announcement that he would create a Ministry of 
Immigration and National Identity if elected.  Left-wing 
Liberation's editorial entitled "Insult" charged that "to promise a 
Ministry of Immigration and National Identity is to offend 
republican values...  By setting identity and immigrant in 
opposition, the Interior Minister has broken with the French 
tradition of integration to promote assimilation.  In other words, 
the choice is to espouse the French identity or pack up and leave! 
Sarkozy has shown that he is even ready to anticipate the 
programmatic desires of the far right." 
 
¶6. (SBU) Left-of-center Le Monde's unsigned editorial (March 15) 
noted that "for the third year in a row the number of asylum 
requests for France has gone down...  The danger is that this drop 
may tarnish the image of France that places the defense of Human 
Rights at the forefront of its values."  Catholic La Croix (March 
15) devoted its headline to the issue of French national identity 
and the editorial by Dominique Quinio asked "How does a French 
presidential candidate regard national identity?  With his plans for 
a Ministry in charge of immigration and national identity, Nicolas 
Sarkozy has runs the risk of prompting people to think that a 
national identity can only be had in opposition to immigrants... 
Before being threatened from the outside, French national identity 
is already flawed from the inside...  The issue of identity cannot 
be avoided."  The editorial in right-of-center Le Figaro by Yves 
Threard, however, accused those criticizing Nicolas Sarkozy's 
suggestion to create an immigration ministry of simply taking 
advantage of the opportunity to label Sarkozy as a "neo-fascist." 
"Not only does Sarkozy have the courage to plainly present his plans 
 
PARIS 00001027  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
but he also points to one of the most significant issues facing our 
country today." 
 
------------------------------- 
PRESIDENT BUSH IN LATIN AMERICA 
------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Right-of-center Le Figaro (March 13) reported that by going 
to Mexico for the last leg of President Bush's trip to Latin 
America, the White House made a "safe choice" but "Felipe Calderon 
is dealing with an American president whose hands are tied by 
Congress and whose approval ratings have dropped to their lowest 
point..."  Left-wing Liberation devoted two full pages to the 
"Bush-Chavez American-style Duel."  "During his entire trip, 
President Bush made it a point never to speak the name of Chavez and 
ignored his verbal attacks... which served to overshadow the 
meetings that Bush had with his Latin American counterparts, but 
during this trip, the American president has been as measured and 
parsimonious as Chavez has been immoderate." 
 
¶8. (SBU) State-run France Inter radio's Bernard Guetta told 
listeners on March 14 that "George Bush was able to get hands-on 
proof of the resentment that Latin America has towards the U.S. 
because of what it sees as the American Administration's 
indifference to its problems...  Divisive issues such as the 'wall' 
... and the fight against drug trafficking remain...  In the 
meantime, the Middle East will continue to be the focus, and Latin 
America as a whole will continue to receive less aid from the U.S. 
than Egypt alone." 
 
¶9. (SBU) The "Question of the Day" in Catholic La Croix (March 14) 
asked David Recondo, researcher at Sciences Po-CNRS and expert on 
Latin America, "What is the real influence of Hugo Chavez in Latin 
America?"  Recondo responded that the "countries that are the most 
influenced by Chavez are also those that depend the most on 
international aid...  The poorest factions of society are also the 
most swayed by Chavez's anti-Bush stance...  In the end, Chavez's 
influence is quite limited... But one can also say that America's 
influence is quite limited since September 11, 2001.  George Bush's 
trip to Latin America is intended to create the illusion that the 
U.S. has a major interest in Latin America, while it is clear that 
its priorities are elsewhere." 
 
¶10. (SBU) Left-of-center Le Monde (March 15) focused on the 
differences between Mexican presidents Vicente Fox and Felipe 
Calderon and their approach to President Bush.  "Mr. Calderon spoke 
with a candor that is unusual for a Mexican leader since the free 
trade agreement was implemented in 1994."  A separate piece by 
left-of-center Le Monde's Washington correspondent pointed out that, 
on the issue of immigration, the "Republicans are divided."  The 
article claimed that immigration "may be one of the only topics 
where President Bush and the new majority in Congress see eye to 
eye." 
STAPLETON