08PARIS633
PARIS CLUB - MARCH 2008 DISCUSSION OF POLICY AND
Mon Apr 07 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXRO4975
RR RUEHBW RUEHBZ RUEHGI RUEHPOD
DE RUEHFR #0633/01 0981037
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 071037Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2477
INFO RUEATRS/DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN 6759
RUEHSW/AMEMBASSY BERN 2082
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6630
RUEHCP/AMEMBASSY COPENHAGEN 1539
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 6839
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID 2781
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW 6060
RUEHNY/AMEMBASSY OSLO 1582
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 8769
RUEHSM/AMEMBASSY STOCKHOLM 1589
RUEHTC/AMEMBASSY THE HAGUE 2946
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 2663
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS 2224
RUEHLU/AMEMBASSY LUANDA 0925
RUEHGI/AMEMBASSY BANGUI 0162
RUEHRY/AMEMBASSY CONAKRY 0001
RUEHBZ/AMEMBASSY BRAZZAVILLE 0092
RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD 0011
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 1103
RUEHMV/AMEMBASSY MONROVIA 7329
RUEHBW/AMEMBASSY BELGRADE 0909
RUEHPOD/AMEMBASSY PODGORICA 0072
RUEHPS/USOFFICE PRISTINA
RUEHUB/USINT HAVANA 0050
RUEHKI/AMEMBASSY KINSHASA 1569
RUEHAB/AMEMBASSY ABIDJAN 1163
RUEHLC/AMEMBASSY LIBREVILLE 1307
RUEHJL/AMEMBASSY BANJUL 0356
RUEHPU/AMEMBASSY PORT AU PRINCE 0795
RUEHPC/AMEMBASSY LOME 1039
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES 1501
RUEHKH/AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM 0230
RUEHPO/AMEMBASSY PARAMARIBO 0052
RUEHHI/AMEMBASSY HANOI 0235
RUEHBP/AMEMBASSY BAMAKO 0948
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 1660UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 13 PARIS 000633 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EEB/IFD/OMA 
TREASURY FOR DO/IDD AND OUSED/IMF 
SECDEF FOR USDP/DSCA 
PASS EXIM FOR CLAIMS - MPAREDES 
PASS USDA FOR CCC -- ALEUNG/WWILLER/JDOSTER PASS USAID FOR CLAIMS -- 
WFULLER 
PASS DOD FOR DSCS -- PBERG 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EFIN ECON OECD EAID FR
SUBJECT:  PARIS CLUB - MARCH 2008 DISCUSSION OF POLICY AND 
METHODOGICAL ISSUES 
 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) The Paris Club met on March 13 to discuss 16 countries and 
other policy and methodological issues.  Creditors reported on 
contacts with the new Argentine government, which has been arguing 
against an IMF agreement and for minimizing external payments in 
seeking a Paris Club deal.  The IMF's report on the DRC made clear 
that HIPC Completion Point will not be reached this year.  On Cuba, 
creditors confirmed that they had not discussed medium- or long-term 
debt with Cuba; many creditors that had restructured short-term debt 
with Cuba now found that Cuba was in arrears yet again.  Russia 
announced the February signing of the bilateral agreement 
implementing its 2004 commitment to provide Iraq debt relief, while 
Brazil reported on contacts with Iraq's advisors.  Liberia is on 
track to receive Paris Club interim HIPC relief in April, while Togo 
should receive a pre-HIPC debt treatment in May.  The Club discussed 
a French idea to provide a type of "debt moratorium" for countries 
embarking upon Emergency Post Conflict Assistance (EPCA) programs. 
Several creditors noted the proposal would erode the principal of 
conditionality, while the U.S. and others raised possible legal 
impediments. 
 
 
Argentina 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (U) The IMF reported that there had been a February mission to 
discuss the effects of global volatility on Argentina, and that they 
continued to discuss inflation measurement issues.  No date had been 
set for an Article IV.  The World Bank reported that it was looking 
at a three-year program, likely to come to the Board at end-2008, of 
about $1 billion/year.  All of the proposed loans will be investment 
lending.  The Bank has made no adjustment loans to Argentina since 
2003 (adjustment loans are generally for budget support and imply 
some level of comfort with macroeconomic policy); the outstanding 
portfolio is about $5 billion. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Bilateral Contacts: The Secretariat/France, Germany, 
Italy, the UK, and U.S. all reported on various bilateral meetings 
with Argentine officials.  They all reported holding to the Paris 
 
PARIS 00000633  002 OF 013 
 
 
Club position that there can be no restructuring without an IMF 
agreement and that Argentina should resume payments.  Argentine 
officials, in turn, had stated to France that their priorities were 
not to increase financing needs and not to challenge current 
stability and economic performance.  The GOA aims to maintain 
reserves to guard against external shocks, and noted that there were 
both legal and policy constraints against using reserves.  The GOA 
claimed it could not afford a voluntary settlement of arrears. 
France had not found this an acceptable justification and reminded 
the GOA of Club rules regarding conditionality.  The Secretariat 
will initiate a data call in order to assess GOA data received 
recently.  The Secretariat noted private banks regularly sued to 
avoid expiration of the statute of limitations on holdout bondholder 
claims. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Germany reported GOA desire to resolve the issue in 2008; 
but the Argentines were "not eager" to resume payments, and they 
wanted better terms than the six-year schedule they had received 
from Spain, e.g., eight years.  Germany also reported that the GOA 
had promised two items:  statistical information, and a proposal by 
the end of March, ahead of the IMF/IBRD Spring Meetings.  Germany 
had received a data presentation from Argentina (which the 
Secretariat distributed to all creditors).  The Argentines had also 
 
SIPDIS 
proposed an IMF-type program -- perhaps even put together with IMF 
staff -- but issued instead by the Inter-American Development Bank 
(IDB), an idea that both France and Germany told Argentina was a 
non-starter. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Finally, Italy reported no sign of an opening.  For the 
time being, Argentina was defensive, made no indication of a payment 
as a goodwill measure, and claimed it could not afford to pay.  The 
GOA had again said that the holdout issue had been settled by law 
and was not subject to reopening.  Italy advocated insistence on a 
goodwill gesture compatible with the GOA's financial situation. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The Netherlands asked the Secretariat to use its contacts 
to point out the need for payment as a goodwill gesture and to clear 
arrears, and suggested that Club members should refuse to engage 
until payments were resumed.  The Secretariat disagreed, opining 
that Argentina should be allowed to make a proposal.  All creditors 
agreed on the need for continued solidarity, and that the 
 
PARIS 00000633  003 OF 013 
 
 
Secretariat would prepare a new working paper before the Bank/Fund 
 
SIPDIS 
Spring Meetings, laying out a common message. 
 
Congo (Brazzaville) 
------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) The IMF reported that the new staff-monitored program 
(SMP) would be going to Management in mid-March and to the Board 
probably in June.  The program would require cuts in subsidies and 
spending, and structural changes focused on public financial 
management and transparency.  A May mission would review performance 
through March.  The Bank reported that a recent HIPC progress 
mission had found mixed results, and that the PRSP would come to the 
Board by the end of July.  The Fund also reported that Congo had 
signed three agreements with China, two of which are disbursing. 
The concessionality of one agreement --- for energy -- met PRGF 
requirements; the IMF had granted a waiver for the other agreement, 
which financed aircraft.  There was also a 2006 framework agreement 
on priority sectors, including roads, airports, health and water, 
but it had not been activated; the IMF noted lack of clarity about 
projects covered and financing modalities.  Neither the Bank nor the 
Fund had information about a recent agreement with litigating 
creditors, reported in the press.  The Secretariat noted that 
reports had indicated that the agreement was above face value, and 
will write to Congolese authorities to inquire. 
 
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  (SBU) The Fund reported that the SMP was being extended for six 
months with a focus on corrective measures in public financial 
management, meaning that a PRGF could come no earlier than the 
summer, and Completion Point no earlier than 2009.  Given the track 
record, this timetable is ambitious.  November/December information 
revealed institutional weaknesses and fiscal deterioration, 
including unauthorized spending amounting to 2.5 percent of GDP. 
The central bank is establishing a committee in an effort to halt 
unauthorized expenditures.  IMF staff will provide an update to the 
Club on DRC ability to make payments during the first half of 2008. 
A number of creditors expressed dismay at the delay, indicating that 
they would have to reallocate funding that had been intended for 
 
PARIS 00000633  004 OF 013 
 
 
DRC's debt treatment.  Expressing concerns about debt sustainability 
and, more broadly, the impact of large PRC projects in Africa, 
creditors appreciated the IMF's work with DRC authorities.  The 
Secretariat reported that the DRC had not responded to the 
 
SIPDIS 
Secretariat's October 2007 letter. 
 
SIPDIS 
 
Cote d'Ivoire 
------------- 
 
¶9.  (U) The IMF reported higher than desired military spending and 
delays in implementing reforms.  Despite the mixed performance under 
the previous EPCA, Cote d'Ivoire had requested a SDR 41 million 
follow-up, planned for April 4 Board discussion, that will focus on 
fiscal consolidation, cuts in non-priority spending, and investment 
in social infrastructure.  A Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) 
is under preparation, and Decision Point could come later this year. 
 
 
¶10.  (U) There had also been progress in normalizing relations with 
creditors:  Cote d'Ivoire was up-to-date with multilaterals and had 
settled much of its domestic debt.  World Bank and African 
Development Bank (AfDB) arrears clearances were progressing, with 
the World Bank planning an April 1 Board date.  European Investment 
Bank arrears clearance was also underway, and Cote d'Ivoire was 
talking to London Club creditors. 
 
¶11.  (U) Paris Club creditors asked about litigating creditors.  The 
Secretariat replied that discussions were ongoing, noting that 
 
SIPDIS 
private creditors were "not in a litigating mood" and appeared 
willing to provide HIPC-comparable treatment. 
 
Cuba 
---- 
 
¶12.  (U) The Fund and Bank declined to report, on the grounds that 
Cuba was not a member.  The Secretariat noted that the last 
discussions with Cuba (with a grouping of some creditors, not the 
Paris Club) had taken place in 2001, and that the country had not 
been discussed since November 2006.  Creditors had agreed not to 
discuss medium- and long-term (MLT) debt with Cuba, but were free to 
seek agreements on short-term (ST) debt.  All creditors indicated 
 
PARIS 00000633  005 OF 013 
 
 
that they had adhered to this understanding. 
 
¶13.  (SBU) Countries reported as follows: 
 
o Canada:  a July 2005 agreement on short-term debt arrears covered 
C$13.5 million; there had remained a balance of arrears in 
short-term exposure.  Since then, a June 2007 agreement on ST 
arrears covered C$30.4 million, which had all been paid or were to 
be paid imminently.  Canada's position was that there be no 
discussion of MLT debt. 
 
o Italy:  there had been sporadic contacts, but no agreement on 
short-term debt, though both sides had reconciled most of the debt. 
ST claims were $76.1 million, of a total exposure of $290 million, 
plus an additional $13 million in ODA. 
 
o Netherlands:  had agreed a new payment schedule in 2004, which had 
gone off track.  ST arrears were 19.7 million euros, principal not 
yet due 31 million euros.  MLT debt was 2.4 million euros, plus an 
unspecified 1.1 million euro claim.  No discussion of MLT debt. 
 
o Japan:  had reached an agreement in 2000.  ST claim was 13.2 
billion yen, which was being honored promptly.  Not covered was 6.5 
billion yen, which was not in arrears.  Arrears on MLT had been 
accruing since 1986, and totaled 154 yen billion as of March 2008. 
Japan had also been approached recently on MLT debt, but had 
declined to discuss it. 
 
o Spain:  A mission in July 2007 had begun reconciliation of debts, 
a process which was close to completion.  No ST negotiations had 
begun. 
 
o Russia:  Indicated that it was the major creditor, with claims of 
$25 billion as of early 2008.  No progress had been made, even on 
reconciliation. 
 
o UK:  had signed an MoU on ST debt in April 2003, totaling GBP 8.5 
million.  They had received three payments, but nothing since 2004. 
 
o Austria:  had signed a bilateral in April 2002 covering 6 million 
euros, payments had been fairly regular, with the last due in 
 
PARIS 00000633  006 OF 013 
 
 
December 2009. 
 
o Belgium:  had signed an agreement rescheduling 12 million euros ST 
over five years.  Since then, there had been no arrears, though some 
delays.  There had been no request for discussion of MLT loans. 
 
o Germany:  Agreement in May 2000.  No arrears, no problems. 
 
o France:  Short term debt totaled $110 million, plus an additional 
4 million euro in guarantees that had not been called.  Working on 
an ST agreement that should be reached in the near future. 
 
o Switzerland:  had signed an MoU in 2005 on SF45 million, which 
ends in August 2008.  Has no MLT debt. 
 
o U.S.:   No discussions or agreement. 
 
o Mexico:  Italy and Spain reported that they had heard of a 
Mexico-Cuba agreement; Spain had heard it was for $400 million. 
 
 
Gabon 
----- 
 
¶14.  (SBU) Japan had asked for Gabon to be placed on the agenda, and 
it reported that Gabon had missed a 9.2 million yen payment on 
January 31.  Three million yen of this had since been paid, but the 
rest remained outstanding.  The U.S. reported that all arrears had 
been cleared; a number of creditors indicated that payments were 
frequently delayed or incorrect.  Canada suggested that arrears to 
all creditors should be cleared before creditors moved forward on 
the buyback (a number have not yet implemented it), but the 
Secretariat opined that there were no arrears, only payment errors 
 
SIPDIS 
or technical arrears, and that no linkage was possible at this 
stage.  Japan did not want repetition of this situation, in which 
debt buybacks occur even as Gabon fails to make scheduled payments. 
The Secretariat did agree to write to the Gabonese, which Japan 
accepted. 
 
Haiti 
----- 
 
PARIS 00000633  007 OF 013 
 
 
 
¶15.  (U) The IMF reported that the second review of the PRGF had 
been completed, with one target missed and both spending and 
revenues below program targets.  Creditors agreed to allow the 
second phase of Haiti's 2006 Paris Club agreement, conditioned on 
completion of the second review, to enter into force.  A donors 
conference is set for April 25 in Port au Prince. 
 
Iraq 
---- 
 
¶16.  (SBU) The U.S. had arranged with the Secretariat to have the 
Iraq discussion while Brazil was present in view of Brazil's failure 
to conclude a bilateral.  The Secretariat pressed hard, noting that 
Brazil was one of the countries that had received an official letter 
from the Club, and asking what the problems were.  The Brazilian 
delegate reported that there had been an unofficial meeting in 
Brazil with Iraq's advisors the previous week to discuss 
reconciliation of figures, and there could be another meeting in 
April or the beginning of May.  The advisors had told Brazil that 
there was a June 3 deadline.  Brazil said it would reply to the 
letter.  The Secretariat reiterated the need to sign an agreement on 
Paris Club-comparable terms. 
 
¶17.  (U) The Russian delegate reported on the belated signing of 
Russia's bilateral.  He agreed to provide a copy to the Secretariat, 
as required by standard Club procedures.  The Secretariat agreed to 
share the bilateral with interested creditors. 
 
¶18.  (SBU) The Secretariat also indicated that it had met with 
Tunisia, which had declared its claims, to explain comparable 
treatment.  Tunisia had begun discussions with Iraq.  Algeria 
confirmed that it had claims, but had not done so by the deadline 
last year.  The Secretariat had not yet met with Algeria to discuss 
comparability of treatment.  The Secretariat also agreed to send new 
letters to Greece and Poland (which were not included in the most 
recent batch since they had received letters two years prior).  In 
response to a question from the Netherlands on whether the 
Secretariat had raised the issue with Greece and Portugal on the 
 
SIPDIS 
margins of EU meetings as agreed, the Secretariat replied that no 
suitable meetings had taken place.  Other EU members noted there 
 
PARIS 00000633  008 OF 013 
 
 
were EU meetings every day.  The Secretariat promised to raise the 
issue in the near future; if such an informal approach fails, the 
Secretariat will send letters.  The Secretariat promised an update 
 
SIPDIS 
on this issue before the next Paris Club meeting.  Japan inquired 
about China, noting that, at the January meeting, the Secretariat 
had wanted a schedule its technical meeting with PRC officials 
before sending a letter.  The Secretariat reported that it was still 
finalizing the meeting with the Chinese. 
 
Jordan 
------ 
 
¶19.  (U) Creditors participating in the buyback were asked about 
representation at the signing ceremony, and the Secretariat polled 
them on a Jordanian request for a date change.  (The date reverted 
to the original March 30.)  An IMF staff team was in Amman for 
Article IV discussions. 
 
Liberia 
------- 
 
¶20.  (U) The Fund and Bank reported that their Boards were ready to 
approve Decision Point, accompanied -- in the case of the Fund -- by 
arrears clearance, restoration of voting rights, and the PRGF.   The 
Secretariat will formally invite Liberia to negotiate on April 17. 
 
SIPDIS 
A few questions were raised about arrears to small multilateral 
creditors and about commercial debt negotiations.  The IMF indicated 
total private debt in nominal terms is believed to be below $2 
billion, but because of lost or destroyed documentation, it is hard 
to determine the total amount. 
 
Mali 
---- 
 
¶21.  (U) The IMF reported that agreement had been reached on a 
program, but that discussions had not been completed because some 
data outcomes had differed from expectations.  Discussions would 
continue in late March.  The IBRD reported on a new lending strategy 
and IDA/IFC program, cited no specific problems with the IDA 
portfolio, and noted some non-concessional borrowing from the 
Islamic Development Bank for electricity generation.  The 
 
PARIS 00000633  009 OF 013 
 
 
Netherlands reported growing arrears of 400,000 euros on a 4 million 
euro loan, while France reported 15 million euros in arrears.  As a 
post-Completion Point HIPC, Mali has no formal relations with the 
Club.  The Secretariat, however, promised to send an informal 
message to the authorities. 
 
Serbia/Kosovo 
------------- 
 
¶22.  (SBU) The Secretariat reported that Serbia was continuing to 
pay the portions of debt notionally allocated to Kosovo.  The IMF's 
next visit to Serbia would be April 1.  The World Bank indicated 
that Serbia had deposited enough money to cover three years of 
payments due to it, but excluding the putative Kosovar portion. 
However, Serbia had indicated that it still intends to pay the 
Kosovar share, which amounts to about $500 million of $2 billion. 
Many creditors reported that they had not yet signed agreements on 
the Serbia/Montenegro division of debt, although none raised 
particular concerns.  The Netherlands reiterated its use of the 
debtor/guarantor, as opposed to final beneficiary, principle.  On 
February 26, the U.S. signed its bilateral agreement with 
Montenegro.  In a side conversation with the U.S., the Secretariat 
indicated that it had not received original loan documentation from 
Serbia, notwithstanding GOS assertions to the contrary. 
 
Seychelles 
---------- 
 
¶23.  (SBU) The IMF said that the Article IV report had identified 
severe vulnerabilities, including sharp increases in arrears and 
debt ratios, and 27 percent inflation in January, but the 
Seychellois authorities had indicated that they needed more time to 
decide whether to seek a program.  The Article IV had been delayed 
by "delicate" discussions on the exchange rate section.  The Bank 
reported that a recent mission on debt management had found severe 
weaknesses, which the authorities did not seem to comprehend.  The 
Secretariat reported a meeting with the Finance Minister, at which 
 
SIPDIS 
they had told him that a Fund program was necessary for Club 
treatment, and they felt that the Seychelles would seek one.  The 
government has established a committee to look at new borrowing. 
The UK had pressed the President to seek a program.  [The U.S. is 
 
PARIS 00000633  010 OF 013 
 
 
not a creditor.] 
 
Sudan 
----- 
 
¶24.  (SBU) The Secretariat asked Japan about recent reports that it 
had provided debt relief to Sudan.  Japan explained, as it had 
privately, that the forgiveness under discussion dated from a 1978 
Trade Development Board multilateral commitment at UNCTAD, which 
Japan understood most other Club creditors had delivered.  Japan had 
decided to use the visit of Presidential Assistant Marfa to raise it 
as "simply a notification to deliver on a 1978 commitment."  The 
relief, amounting to Yen 3.2 billion had not yet been delivered and 
was being tied to a number of prior actions, including efforts to 
end the Darfur conflict. 
 
Suriname 
-------- 
 
¶25.  (SBU) The IMF reported that growth was strong (6 percent in 
2007, 7 percent projected for 2008) on the basis of commodity 
exports, with a doubling of reserves.  The next Article IV 
discussion will be in May.  The authorities had reported progress on 
arrears, including with Spain and the U.S., and that the GOS planned 
to negotiate with others.  Brazil replied that it had in fact made 
little progress even in arranging a meeting in May.  The U.S. 
reported the clearing of concessional debt arrears and the 
Surinamese request for reduction of non-concessional debt that 
remains in arrears.  The Netherlands, in contrast, indicated that 
Suriname had repaid 70 million euros -- the entire balance of the 
GOS's outstanding ODA debt.  The Secretariat stressed the importance 
of implementing the recent Working Paper on countries that had no 
relations with the Club, urging creditors to maintain a common 
position, not to deal bilaterally, and not to conclude agreements 
without reporting to the Club.  Brazil requested a copy of the 
Working Paper, and the Secretariat asked to be kept informed of 
developments. 
 
Togo 
---- 
 
 
PARIS 00000633  011 OF 013 
 
 
¶26.  (U) The IMF requested financing assurances for Togo's upcoming 
PRGF, scheduled for an early April Board date.  The country's debt 
ratios will likely qualify it for HIPC, and a preliminary document 
could be ready in May or June, with Decision Point possible by 
year-end.  World Bank and AfDB arrears would have to be cleared; the 
Bank reported that it would bring to its Board a plan to use an IDA 
grant to cover all of the arrears, and that it understood that talks 
with AfDB were well advanced.  All creditors provided assurances 
(The U.S. requested a de minimus clause, since debt is just $6,000.) 
 Negotiations are expected in May. 
 
Vietnam 
------- 
 
¶27. (U) Germany had requested that Vietnam be placed on the agenda 
and reported late payments.  No other creditors reported late 
payments.  The IMF reported that there had been a review in October, 
and that the main concern was overheating.  The Bank reported that 
Vietnam had been declared creditworthy for IBRD lending and would be 
reclassified as a blend country, despite its low income level. 
 
Methodological discussion: 
Paris Club Treatment for Countries with EPCAs 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶28.  (SBU) Creditors discussed a Secretariat proposal to provide 
treatment to IDA-only countries under Emergency Post Conflict 
Arrangements (EPCAs), namely to defer all payments during the EPCA 
period.  The paper cited Iraq and Tsunami as precedents (Russia 
helpfully noted the understanding that Iraq was not to be used as a 
precedent for future Club action), and acknowledged departure from 
the Club's principle of requiring conditionality.  The response was 
at best mixed, with numerous issues raised.  Only France and Norway, 
while recognizing there was moral hazard, supported the proposal as 
written.  Many, probably most, countries supported the principle, 
however, and felt the Club should keep pace with other institutions' 
efforts to lend support to fragile states.  Sweden pointed out that 
the Club was a creditors group, not a development entity, an 
argument the Netherlands and Finland supported, and that this matter 
involves political decisions.  Several countries argued the Club 
should await IMF deliberations on fragile states before acting.  The 
 
PARIS 00000633  012 OF 013 
 
 
U.S. indicated that it might have more general legal and budgetary 
constraints that could prevent it from participating. 
 
¶29.  (SBU) Japan argued that decisions should be made on a 
case-by-case basis to avoid providing relief to serial EPCA 
countries; the Secretariat and some others agreed.  Italy asked what 
advantages there would be for HIPCs, whose debts would eventually be 
written off, and Belgium suggested inclusion of non-IDA countries. 
The UK, supported by Italy, asked how comparable treatment would be 
sought from other creditors, or whether it would be waived.  The 
U.S. asked why France/the 
Secretariat saw this policy as necessary, since debts of EPCA 
 
SIPDIS 
countries had always been dealt with once the countries received 
upper credit tranche programs, and few, if any, affected countries 
would likely make payments during the EPCA.  Spain's main concern 
was lack of conditionality and negative incentive effect, and legal 
issues for some creditors, and suggested linking treatment to a 
later PRGF by cancelling it if the PRGF were not reached.  The 
Secretariat's reacted somewhat positively.  The U.S. then made an 
 
SIPDIS 
alternative proposal, under which the Secretariat would send a 
letter to EPCA countries, noting the Club's understanding that 
arrears could continue to accumulate during the EPCA period and that 
the Club could be willing to address them when an upper tranche 
treatment were approved. 
 
¶30.  (SBU) Concluding the discussion, the Secretariat agreed to 
revise its paper, taking into account the Fund's discussions and the 
many comments made.  It promised that the revised paper would be 
less didactic, but opined that there would be a political imperative 
for the Club to take some action. 
 
Methodological discussion: 
Relationships with China 
------------------------ 
 
¶31.  (U) The Chinese Ministry of Trade had indicated that it was 
amenable to meeting with the Secretariat, although there had been no 
response from the Ministries of Finance and Foreign Affairs.  The 
meeting with Trade Ministry officials would take place in Beijing, 
probably at the end of March.  The PRC prefers a technical meeting 
only with the Secretariat; representatives from Club member 
 
PARIS 00000633  013 OF 013 
 
 
embassies would not be invited.  At creditors' request, however, the 
Secretariat agreed to provide a readout to missions in Beijing.  (On 
 
SIPDIS 
March 21, the Secretariat informed us that the technical meeting 
would take place on March 31; Embassy reps would be briefed on April 
1.) 
 
¶32.  (U) A broader follow-up meeting could take place in Paris if 
the Chinese agree; the meeting would be billed as a "seminar," and 
other emerging market creditors would also be invited.  The Chinese 
have not responded to this proposal. 
 
Methodological discussion: 
Paris Club Annual Report 
------------------------ 
 
¶33.  (U) Creditors generally supported the Secretariat's plan for an 
Annual Report, a draft of which the Secretariat plans to submit for 
approval at the May Tour d'Horizon, for publication in June.  Spain 
and Germany offered to be examples for the section on bilateral 
creditor efforts; others -- including the UK, U.S. and Japan -- 
suggested that the section be deleted, which the Secretariat agreed 
to do for this first annual report. 
 
Methodological discussion: 
Comparability of treatment - follow-up 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶34.  (U) Creditors approved the letters the Secretariat proposed to 
send to debtors asking for information on their efforts to seek 
comparable treatment from non-Club creditors.  The Secretariat also 
agreed to provide six-month updates on the results of these efforts. 
 
 
 
STAPLETON 
 
 
 
14