09PARIS1447
POLAND DELEGATION PARLAYS MDEP MEETING TO
Wed Oct 28 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Paris
R 281511Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 7428
DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DC
NRC WASHINGTON DC
AMEMBASSY WARSAW
USMISSION UNVIE VIENNAUNCLAS PARIS 001447 
 
 
FROM USOECD PARIS 
 
STATE FOR EUR/ERA 
STATE FOR ISN/FO/RSTRATFORD 
NRC FOR OIP/BWITTICK, MDOANE, CROSALES-COOPER, 
CABRAMS, CMILLER 
DOE FOR NE/PLYONS, EMCGINNIS, CWELLING, RBOUDREAU 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ENRG OTRA TRGY TECH OECD FR SP IO
SUBJECT: POLAND DELEGATION PARLAYS MDEP MEETING TO 
CONVEY INTENTIONS FOR NUCLEAR ENERGY 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. The Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) Multinational 
Design Evaluation Program (MDEP) held a conference 
in Paris, France on September 10 and 11. MDEP core 
members had decided to expand their reach and 
organize a formal exchange with national regulators 
from MDEP non-member countries, industry 
representatives and standards development 
organizations.  As a result, the MDEP conference 
attracted more than 170 attendees from 23 countries 
and 10 international organizations ? certainly a 
wider audience than that provided by the core MDEP 
members.  Of particular note, Poland sent a high- 
level representative to the meeting: Ms. Hanna 
Trojanowska, Deputy Minister for the Economy and 
Government?s Plenipotentiary for the Development of 
Nuclear Power in Poland.  The Polish delegation 
organized briefings, lunch and dinner meetings for 
Deputy Minister Trojanowska, providing an 
opportunity for the Deputy Minister to convey 
Poland?s desire to restart their nuclear energy 
program, their desired cooperation with the United 
States in this endeavor, and desired membership to 
the Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA). Deputy Minister 
Trojanowska also met with Nuclear Regulatory 
Commission (NRC) Chairman Jaczko to discuss 
cooperation between the NRC and the Polish National 
Atomic Energy Agency. END SUMMARY 
 
-------------------------------------- 
BACKGROUND ? POLAND AND NUCLEAR ENERGY 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. Poland does not currently have nuclear power, 
although they have several active nuclear energy 
research facilities. In August 2009, a roadmap for 
nuclear energy was unveiled by Poland ? announcing 
the steps it will take with the aim of generating 
nuclear power before 2021.  The introduction of 
nuclear power is part of a plan to reduce exposure 
to volatility in imported energy sources and reduce 
dependence on fossil fuels. 
 
¶3. A 2006 feasibility study suggested that 11.5 GWe 
of nuclear capacity would be optimum for Poland but 
possibly unaffordable in the medium term, so the 
figure of 4.5 GWe by 2030 was then targeted. A 2007 
draft energy policy proposes 10 MWe of indigenous 
nuclear capacity by 2030, providing 10 percent of 
electricity then, and an interim 7.5 percent by 
¶2022. 
 
¶4. State-owned Polska Grupa Energetyczna SA (PGE), 
Poland's largest power group by generating capacity, 
in January 2009 announced plans to build two nuclear 
power plants, each with a capacity of 3,000 MWe, one 
in the north and one in the east of the country. 
PGE estimates that the cost would be EURS 2500- 
3000per kilowatt of nuclear power.  The energy 
security strategy approved by the Polish government 
in January 2009 aims at one or two nuclear power 
plants to be built by PGE, the first by 2020.  PGE 
would hold 51 percent of the projects as part of a 
consortium with foreign partners.  A four-stage plan 
envisages legislation by 2010, site, technology and 
construction arrangements by 2011-13, technical 
plans and site works by 2014-15, and construction 
between 2016-20. 
¶5. Poland relies heavily on fossil fuel, 
specifically coal, as its primary source of energy. 
Poland has the largest reserves of coal in the EU 
(14 billion tonnes) ? providing 93 percent of their 
electricity needs.  They have very high emissions of 
green house gases and will likely have difficulty 
meeting decreased greenhouse gas emission scenarios 
for the EU. Poland is a net electricity exporter ? 
11 billion kWh in 2006, mostly to Czech Republic and 
Slovakia. Poland?s own electricity consumption is 
forecast to grow by 90 percent by 2025, but the EU 
has placed stringent restrictions on CO2 emissions. 
 
 
About half of the country's gas supply comes from 
Russia. 
-------------------------------- 
THE NEED TO ADJUST THE VARIABLES 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶6. The equation for decreased carbon emissions is 
not in their favor: high emission coal plus growing 
demand plus looming EU restrictions on emissions. 
 
¶7. The Polish cabinet decided early in 2005 that for 
energy diversification, and to reduce CO2 and sulfur 
emissions, the country should move immediately to 
introduce nuclear power, so that an initial plant 
might be operating soon after 2020. In July 2006 the 
new Prime Minister reaffirmed the need to build 
nuclear power plants, and mentioned French 
technology. 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
BACKGROUND ? POLAND AND THE NUCLEAR ENERGY AGENCY 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶8. (SBU) Poland has previously shown an interest in 
joining the (NEA). However, the NEA and a few of its 
member countries have exhibited some hesitancy with 
respect to having new members without a substantive 
nuclear power program (including research programs). 
There are two reasons behind this hesitancy of NEA, 
which is a predominantly technical organization.  a) 
NEA wants to ensure that members at the table 
provide substantive input ? and substantive input 
for a technical agency requires experience and 
expertise that would come from an operational 
program.  b) Governments change with elections.  A 
nuclear-issues friendly government of today could be 
nuclear energy-opposed after the next election. 
The change might not be so dramatic in a country 
that currently relies on nuclear energy ? but in a 
country currently without nuclear power on the grid 
? such a policy change might leave no choice for the 
member state other than to send naysayer delegates 
to the meetings.  This would be disruptive to 
strategic planning for any organization. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Poland expressed interest in joining the 
NEA in 1999. At that time the U.S., Japan and UK 
decided they wanted (as NEA member states) 
substantive nuclear energy-users that could bring 
something to the table. They essentially blocked 
Poland from joining by never reaching a final 
decision. 
 
¶10. NEA suggested to Poland that in an effort to 
forge a closer relationship to NEA and member 
states, that they join some of the technical 
committees to "prove" their interest and competency 
over time. Poland followed this advice and has been 
very active.  In 2007 they joined the Radioactive 
Waste Management Committee and the Nuclear Science 
Committee (NSC) and are active in two NSC working 
parties.  Poland?s contributions are very welcome. 
 
¶11. Poland?s interest in NEA membership is due to 
their belief that this will be one way to help guide 
them along their path to developing the 
infrastructure to support a domestic nuclear power 
program and to help them win public confidence. 
 
¶12. Poland is not new to the Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) 
community.  They have been a member of the OECD 
since 1996.  In 2008, Poland joined the 
International Energy Agency (IEA), a sister agency 
to the NEA - specializing in coal, oil, gas, 
renewable and emergency response.  Poland is also a 
member of the U.S. Global Nuclear Energy 
Partnership. 
 
-------------------------------- 
MEETING WITH NRC CHAIRMAN JACZKO 
-------------------------------- 
 
 
¶13. The NRC Chairman and delegation met with Deputy 
Minister Trojanowska; Jan Woroniecki, Poland?s 
Ambassador to the OECD; and Maciej Jurkowski, Vice 
President, National Atomic Energy Agency (PAA) on 
September 10, 2009 while in Paris, France. The U.S. 
delegation consisted of Chairman Jaczko; Margaret 
Doane, Director of International Programs (OIP); 
Angela Coggins, Policy Advisor; and Brian Wittick, 
International Relations Officer. 
 
¶14. During the meeting Ms. Trojanowska said that she 
is responsible for preparing Poland to launch their 
nuclear power program. 
 
¶15. Poland?s National Atomic Energy Agency (PAA) is 
responsible for developing the safety authority and 
regulatory framework.  The Ministry of Economy is 
responsible for the promotional aspect of the 
nuclear program. 
 
¶16. Ms. Trojanowska said one of her big concerns is 
the large generation gap between when nuclear power 
was last pursued and present day. 
 
¶17. Ms. Trojanowska expressed a strong desire to 
continue cooperation efforts with the U.S. and in 
particular between the NRC and PAA.  Chairman Jaczko 
provided that he also desired to continue, and 
further develop our cooperative relationship with 
Poland. 
 
¶18. Mr. Jurkowski stated they have reviewed the 
draft agreement between regulatory agencies that was 
provided to the Polish Embassy in DC earlier this 
spring. They have only to insert the correct name of 
their regulator to proceed with the agreement. (Side 
note: The U.S. will also need to have the agreement 
translated to Polish; if opportunity presents there 
could possibly be a signing by the end of year, or 
more likely in conjunction with the Regulatory 
Information Conference (RIC) next spring).  Chairman 
Jaczko provided that he would like to finalize the 
agreement, and NRC OIP staff would work with PAA to 
do so.  Mr. Jurkowski said the Polish Minister has 
discussed the agreement with our Secretary of Energy 
when they met. Ms. Trojanowska stated that they had 
no comments on the agreement and emphasized the 
agreement should be between regulators. 
 
¶19. Mr. Jurkowski stated that they have a nuclear 
law from 2000 (last nuclear law was 1896) they would 
be using as the basis to proceed with their new 
program. 
 
¶20. Ms Trojanowska indicated that Poland desires to 
join the Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA), and that they 
had applied 10 years ago for membership, but it did 
not come to fruition. Poland believes they can be a 
contributor to the Nuclear Energy Agency?s programs. 
 
---------------------- 
NEA Steering Committee 
---------------------- 
 
¶21. The NEA Steering Committee (SC) meets this 
October 29th and 30th in Paris.  Poland is listed on 
the agenda (?Participation of Poland in NEA 
Committees and Working Parties?) and member states 
will be able to weigh in on whether they consider 
Poland?s participation has been valuable.  Poland is 
likely, in the not-too-distant future, to formally 
express interest in joining the NEA. 
 
¶22. During the Deputy Minister?s brief stay in 
Paris, Poland hosted several other events to 
highlight their intent to develop a nuclear power 
program and also their interest in joining the NEA. 
KORNBLUH