07AITTAIPEI1008
MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS; U.S.-JAPAN SECURITY
Thu May 03 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1008/01 1232205
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 032205Z MAY 07
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5140
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 6714
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 7963UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001008 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - LLOYD NEIGHBORS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS; U.S.-JAPAN SECURITY 
CONSULTATIVE MEETING 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused news 
coverage May 3 on the joint statement issued at the conclusion of 
the May 1, 2007 U.S.-Japan Security Consultative Committee meeting 
with a special focus on its non-mention of the Taiwan issue, in 
contrast to the statement issued after the the 2005 U.S.-Japan 
meeting.  The other focus today was the KMT's nomination of former 
KMT Chairman Ma Ying-jeou as the party's candidate in the 2008 
presidential election. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, the pro-independence, 
mass-circulation "Liberty Times" editorialized that a total of 36 
KMT legislators should not visit China to curry favor with China's 
President Hu Jintao when the Legislative Yuan is still in session. 
The editorial went on to say that this is a waste of taxpayers' 
money.  The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" urged 
in its editorial that the four DPP presidential contenders touch on 
a 'Taiwan-centric' economic and social development path in their 
upcoming debate in order to respond to KMT-CPC forum.  An article in 
the pro-status quo, mass-circulation "China Times" said that the 
joint statement of the U.S.-Japan Security Consultative meeting did 
not include the Taiwan issue because both parties want to restrain 
Taiwan independence.  Commentator Chiang Chun-nan opined in the 
mass-circulation "Apple Daily" that the United States and Japan 
decided not to include the Taiwan issue in their joint strategic 
goals in exchange for China's non-objection to the sale of U.S. 
F-22s to Japan.  End summary. 
 
¶3.  Cross-Strait Relations 
 
A) "How Can [Pan-Blue Legislators] Use Tax Payers' Money to Do 
Things that Betray Taxpayers?" 
 
The pro-independence, mass-circulation daily, "Liberty Times" 
[circulation: 500,000] said in its editorial (05/03): 
 
"... Our compatriots should lash out at the 36 KMT legislators who 
went to Beijing [to join the KMT-CPC forum.]  First, although [KMT 
Honorary Chairman] Lien Chan is odious, after all he does not hold 
any government position; but these legislators are congress members 
elected by the people.  Currently, it is the busiest time to review 
bills, and how can legislators in the Blue camp ignore their jobs 
but beg for [Chinese President] Hu Jintao's affection? ... What is 
worthy of attention is whether these legislators will claim 
reimbursement of their travel expenses to China from public funds. 
These legislators should make clear explanations on the matter.  We 
will never tolerate these toady legislators using compatriots' taxes 
for betrayal. ..." 
 
B) "DPP Must Respond to KMT-CCP Scheme" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (05/03): 
 
"... Although the forum is ostensibly intended to take concrete and 
pragmatic actions to improve cross-strait relations, the decision by 
the Beijing authorities to deliberately ignore repeated offers by 
the DPP government to set up official or authorized channels for 
bilateral consultation or negotiation and announce "liberalizations" 
in these forums with Taiwan's former rulers has actually impeded 
efforts to build a mutually acceptable framework for normalized 
bilateral ties. 
 
"But achieving genuinely 'mutually beneficial' or 'win-win' progress 
is actually not the true agenda of either the CCP or the KMT. In the 
mentality of the PRC regime's ruling party, the arbitrary 
announcement of more liberalization moves are doses of 'good will,' 
but as far as the governing DPP is concerned, such actions comprise 
only an intensification of domestic political pressure. 
 
"In the mentality of the KMT, the more pressure on the DPP and the 
more political checks issued by the KMT that the DPP government is 
unable to cash, the more disappointed voters will flock to the KMT 
and the greater the chances will be for the KMT to win back Taiwan. 
 
 
"However, contrary to the expectations of Lien, the KMT and the CCP, 
public opinion has turned against the KMT's transparent efforts to 
sell out Taiwan's interests, and the DPP government has actually 
turned more resolutely toward promoting the 'normalization' of an 
independent Taiwan. 
 
"... In the face of the pressure of these false promises of 
'liberalization,' propaganda campaigns by KMT politicians and 'free 
market' economists that any attempts at 'active regulation' to 
protect Taiwan's industry and society are useless, we can only 
wonder whether Taiwan has any overall economic strategy to counter 
the common pressure exerted by the KMT and CCP to spur the 'westward 
march' of Taiwan human resources to China in the wake of the past 
CONSULTATIVE MEETING 
 
migration of our manufacturing and services. 
 
"The question of formulating a 'Taiwan-centric' economic and social 
development path is the most important issue that the four 
candidates for the DPP's presidential nomination should address this 
evening in the third and last debate in Kaohsiung City." 
 
¶4.  U.S.-Japan Security Consultative Meeting 
 
A) "U.S.-Japan Security Consultative: From Preventing Unification 
[with China] to Restraining Independence [of Taiwan] in Case Taiwan 
Becomes Volatile" 
 
An article in the pro-status quo, mass-circulation "China Times" 
[circulation: 400,000] said (05/03): 
 
"... As far as U.S. officials are concerned, the U.S. strategic 
interests on the Taiwan issue lie first in the status quo and second 
in 'a peaceful solution.'  Based on these, China's move to push for 
unification [with Taiwan] will inevitably cause the U.S. decision to 
prevent it; it is also unavoidable that the 'unpredictability' of 
Taiwan's cross-Strait policy will force the United States to use 
countermeasures to 'restrain independence [of Taiwan].' ..." 
 
B) "No Contingency in Peripheral Areas of Taiwan" 
 
Commentator Chiang Chun-nan opined in the mass-circulation "Apple 
Daily" [circulation: 500,000] (05/03): 
 
"The United States is considering selling F-22 fighter jets with a 
radius of 2,000 kilometers to Japan.  The sale will have an obvious 
impact on the military balance in East Asia.  In order to reduce 
China's increasing worries, both the United States and Japan intend 
to keep the Taiwan issue out of their joint strategic goals and use 
this chance to pressure Taiwan.  This is to some extent a subtle 
means of military diplomacy. 
 
"As regards military security, every country has been doing the 
worst planning and the best preparation; political leaders are 
always cautious when giving remarks on the matter.  However, Taiwan 
leaders always confuse military affairs with politics.  For example, 
it was said on an official occasion that Taiwan's missiles can reach 
the Three Gorges Dam [in China].  The fact that the Taiwan issue is 
included in the U.S.-Japan Security Treaty has been fussed over by 
talkative politicians.  This has already caused dissatisfaction from 
the United States and Japan, and they have urged Taiwan to be 
cautious in word and deed. 
 
"... It is not surprising to exclude the Taiwan issue from the U.S. 
Security Treaty and to make the island a sacrificial offering of the 
U.S.-Japan transaction [of F-22s].  How to restore the U.S. trust 
and support of Taiwan is a major issue in the post-A Bian era." 
 
YOUNG