07KHARTOUM757
COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR SHARON MORRIS TO SUDAN
Tue May 15 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXYZ0006
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKH #0757/01 1350349
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 150349Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 7194UNCLAS KHARTOUM 000757 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA AMGT APER ASEC SU SZ
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR SHARON MORRIS TO SUDAN 
 
Ref:  STATE 056737 
 
¶1. (SBU) Embassy Khartoum welcomes and grants country clearance for 
AF/SE Senior Advisor Sharon Morris to travel to Khartoum o/a May 21 
to o/a June 15, 2007.  Travel within Sudan is contingent on approval 
from the Regional Security Officer based on an assessment of the 
fluid security situation.  Travel in Darfur outside the three state 
capitals of El Fasher, El Geneina, and Nyala is often limited due to 
transportation and logistical constraints.  The Embassy will 
endeavor to provide maximum assistance to Ms. Morris, though Post's 
ability to facilitate contact with tribal leaders and rebel groups 
in the field is limited.  Please see para. 11 for additional 
information on travel to Darfur. 
 
¶2. (SBU) U.S. citizens are reminded that Sudanese visas are now 
required for travel to all parts of Sudan.  The Sudanese Government 
has informed us that it no longer recognizes SPLM clearances (see 
paragraph 7 for details.) 
 
¶3. (SBU) CONTACT INFORMATION:  Point of Contact for the visit is 
Political Officer Payton Knopf, who can be reached on cell phone 
number 011-249-912178513.  The Embassy switchboard number is 
249-183-774-700 or 249-183-774-702.  The Embassy may be contacted 
after hours by calling the local guard at Post One at 
249-183-774-701.  The Embassy is open from 08:00 to 16:30 Sunday 
through Thursday. 
 
¶4. (U) Assistance will be provided at Khartoum International Airport 
on arrival. 
 
¶5. (U) EXCHANGE RATE: Current exchange rate at post is 200 Sudanese 
Dinars to one USD. 
 
¶6. (U) PASSPORT/VISA: 
 
¶A.  U.S. Citizens are reminded that Sudanese visas are now required 
for travel to all parts of Sudan.  It is the traveler's 
responsibility to obtain a Sudanese visa prior to arrival in 
Khartoum.  Please note that the Government of Sudan does not/not 
issue airport visas and currently does not permit entry of a 
traveler whose passport bears an Israeli stamp. 
 
¶B.  IF TRAVELING FROM THE UNITED STATES AND/OR A U.S. MISSION 
ABROAD:  The Sudanese Government has a restrictive policy in regards 
to visa issuances to official American travelers.  Official 
Americans should not begin their travel to Sudan without having 
obtained a Sudanese visa or having received notice that a visa has 
been authorized for issuance in another city.  Recently the 
Sudanese 
Government has advised that official American travelers coming from 
Washington, DC, no longer need post's assistance in preparing 
diplomatic notes for visa issuance; travelers may apply directly to 
the Sudanese Embassy in Washington.  For visa issuance from other 
Sudanese Embassies, official American travelers may have to contact 
the American Embassy in Khartoum for assistance. 
 
¶7. (U) MEDICAL CLEARANCE: 
 
¶A.  All employees, including WAEs and civil service employees who 
are in TDY status for more than 60 days (cumulatively) in a calendar 
year, are required to have an up-to-date medical clearance from the 
Department of State Office of Medical Services (M/MED) in order to 
receive full State Department medical benefits from an Embassy 
Medical Unit, to include Embassy Khartoum Medical Unit. 
 
¶B.  MEDICAL CLEARANCE FOR PSC AND NON-PSC:  As per State cable 
201464, all contract workers (PSC and non-PSC, to include 
institutional contractors and grantees) must have a medical 
clearance issued from M/MED before arrival at post.  A copy of this 
clearance is required by the Medical Unit on arrival at post before 
any Embassy Khartoum Medical Unit services can be provided. 
 
¶C.  IMMUNIZATIONS (DIRECT HIRE, WAE, TDYERS, PSC, AND NON-PSC): 
Please ensure that you complete all immunizations recommended by 
M/MED before arrival at post.  Yellow fever and polio (IPV) are 
required at least 10 days before departure.  Malaria prophylaxis is 
required for post and should commence 1 or 2 weeks before departure. 
 Please ensure enough prophylaxis is issued to cover your TDY period 
at post.  Upon arrival, travelers should visit the Medical Unit to 
register and receive further health information.  Travelers' 
diarrhea is a common problem in Sudan.  Only bottled water or 
distilled water should be used for drinking (this includes ice). Eat 
foods that are well cooked.  Avoid fruits without peels, raw 
vegetables, salads, and local dairy products, which might not be 
pasteurized.  At least 8-10 glasses of water or At least 8-10 
glasses of water or fluids are recommended to avoid dehydration.  A 
topical insect repellent and sunscreen SPF 15-30 are also 
recommended. 
 
¶8. (U) BRINGING IN COMPUTERS: 
 
¶A.  In accordance with 95 State 243815 and 95 State 244394, 
Department of State policy prohibits the connection of official, 
portable computers to OpenNet or ClassNet without the explicit 
approval of the Bureau or Post ISSO (12 FAM 625). 
 
¶B.  Personally owned computers, personal digital assistants, cell 
phones, digital cameras, and audio recorders may not be brought into 
the Embassy without approval from the RSO or ISSO.  Personally owned 
computers may not be connected to OpenNet or ClassNet under any 
circumstances and may not be used within USG Controlled Access Areas 
(CAA)(12 FAM 625). 
 
¶C.  COTRs/CORs are responsible for their contract employees, and 
must ensure that all contracted employees receive required systems 
security training before accessing OpenNet or any other post or 
bureau-operated system. 
 
¶D. (U) Transport and use at post: 
 
1)  As stated in reftels (paragraph 9.A above), official travelers 
on temporary duty, including non-state personnel, must coordinate 
the transport of official unclassified portable computers that will 
be used within USG controlled access facilities with the RSO and 
ISSO.  A country clearance request cable containing a statement to 
this effect will meet the requirement. 
 
2)  Unclassified portable computers intended for use within the CAA 
on a long-term basis (over 30 days), must be shipped via 
professional or non-pro diplomatic courier (classified pouch). 
 
3)  An official traveler can personally transport a USG portable 
computer to post only under the following conditions: 
 
-- The official traveler must have at least a secret level security 
clearance; 
 
-- The official traveler will be on temporary duty at the Embassy 
for a period not to exceed 30 days; 
 
-- The portable computer must have been transported under the 
continuous personal control of the official traveler; 
 
-- Under no circumstances may the computer have been left unattended 
outside of the CAA or in a public area, nor should it be checked in 
as luggage on public transport; and 
 
-- All wireless and audio features on the portable computer must be 
disabled or de-installed, to include infrared ports and sound card, 
before entering the CAA, regardless of mode of transport. 
 
¶9. (U) SECURITY: 
 
¶A.  All visitors to Khartoum are required to make an appointment, 
within 24 hours of arrival, with the Regional Security Officer. 
Adherence to and compliance with all mission security directives is 
mandatory; violating these directives may result in disciplinary 
action and/or revocation of country clearance. 
 
¶B.  The Department of State has a Travel Warning in effect for Sudan 
and strongly urges all travelers to review this document.  Visitors 
should follow all prudent personal security measures such as, but 
not limited to, varying routes and times of travel, avoiding 
becoming involved in demonstrations, attending non-official events 
at large public venues, avoiding predictable patterns of 
activities, 
and being aware of surroundings for potential threats.  Anti-U.S. 
street demonstrations always remain a strong possibility; however 
they are usually well controlled by the host country government and 
generally peaceful.  The criminal environment does not specifically 
target Americans in Khartoum.  Crimes of opportunity are the most 
typical incidents that may affect any visitor in country. 
 
¶10. (U) TERRORISM:  Visitors are also reminded that Sudan is a 
critical threat terrorism environment and that the country is still 
listed as a state sponsor of terrorism.  The Department acknowledges 
that the Sudanese government has taken steps to address the presence 
of terrorist groups in country; however, Sudan still might harbor 
extremists and those who are supportive of known terrorist 
organizations.  Presently, we are not aware of any information 
concerning an immediate, specific, or credible terrorist threat 
against official U.S. interests in Sudan. 
 
¶11. (U) TRAVEL OUTSIDE KHARTOUM WITHIN SUDAN: 
 
¶A.  Post requires at least 3-days advance notice for proposed travel 
to any area outside Khartoum. (See Paras B and D below for Darfur 
and Juba specific restrictions).  Fighting continues in specific 
parts of Southern Sudan and Darfur, especially along the Chad, 
Uganda and Kenya borders.  The humanitarian crisis in Darfur as well 
as the instability in Southern Sudan poses collateral security 
issues for all expatriates operating in country.  Banditry is 
prevalent in outlying areas and it is not uncommon to see illegal 
roadblocks, especially in regions that lack a formal security 
presence. 
¶B.  TRAVEL TO DARFUR:  All official travel to the Darfur region is 
contingent upon an RSO security assessment of the specific area to 
be visited immediately prior to the proposed travel.  Darfur 
continues to be an area of instability and the potential for 
official travelers being caught in the wrong place at the wrong time 
is a growing concern.  Some areas have erupted in factional fighting 
with little or no warning.  The RSO continues to monitor the 
temperament of the local populace and any reporting concerning 
threats and/or incidents directed at Western NGOs operating in this 
area.  A recent Sudanese newspaper headline quoted the Sudanese 
President declaring Darfur aid agencies the "real" enemy of the 
Government of Sudan.  Extensive ground travel outside the major 
cites in Darfur is generally not advisable due to the fluid and 
unpredictable security situation. 
 
¶C.  If official travel is approved to the Darfur region, the 
following information must be provided to the Embassy a minimum of 
96 hours (4 days) prior to the departure date for Darfur: a clean, 
color, scanned copy of information page of valid passport, as well 
as extension pages if applicable, and the valid Sudanese visa page 
in order for appropriate Government of Sudan approvals to be 
obtained.  A clean, color, scanned passport photo is also needed 
for 
the Darfur permit.  If the traveler also wants to take photos, a 
photo permit is also required for Darfur.  One clean, color, scanned 
passport size photograph must also be provided to the Embassy a 
minimum of 96 hours prior to travel to the Darfur area. Sending all 
this required information at one time is most convenient for 
expediting the processing procedures. 
 
¶D.  TRAVEL TO SOUTHERN SUDAN:  As with Darfur, all travel to 
Southern Sudan is contingent upon an RSO security assessment of the 
specific area to be visited immediately prior to the proposed 
travel.  High unemployment, banditry, the presence of Ugandan rebels 
(LRA) and an ineffective police presence have contributed to a very 
tenuous security structure in much of Southern Sudan.  At this time, 
overland travel anywhere south of Juba is strictly prohibited 
without an armed United Nations escort.  All USG personnel in Juba 
are expected to stay at the U.S. Consulate General there.  Other 
accommodations will not be permitted except in the most 
extraordinary circumstances.  Landmines and unexploded ordinance 
remain a problem in some areas of Southern Sudan, thereby requiring 
further travel precautions and restrictions. 
 
¶E.  Effective October 1, 2005, the UN Humanitarian Air Service 
(UNHAS) in Sudan will commence charging $100 per fixed-wing aircraft 
flight and $40 per helicopter flight within Sudan.  Charter flights 
will be charged at the actual expense level.  Although no charge was 
made for flights in the past, higher costs, a high rate of 
no-shows, 
and frequent non-essential travel made the fee necessary for the 
continued functioning of the UNHAS.  Travelers to Sudan should be 
aware of these charges, which are done at the time of booking, and 
include a provision for such in their travel orders. 
 
¶12. (U) WEATHER:  Sudan for most of the year is hot and dry, with 
summer (March - October) temperatures reaching 120 plus degrees 
Fahrenheit.  Winter (November - February) temperatures average 80-90 
degrees.  Although the heat in Southern Sudan is not as intense as 
that in Khartoum, it is nonetheless humid, with frequent rains 
during the summer months (May - September). 
 
¶13. (U) ATTIRE:  In public, it is recommended that men and women do 
not wear shorts or non-sleeved shirts or blouses, including 
participants in running/walking activities, and that woman wear 
ankle-length skirts or dresses, or pants.  Lightweight, cotton 
clothing is recommended, including a hat and sunglasses. 
 
¶14. (U) Please contact your Post Point of Contact if you have any 
questions.  Have a safe journey; we look forward to your visit. 
Regards. 
 
POWERS