07MANAGUA1327
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE IMPROVES ABILITY OF NEWLY
Wed May 23 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Managua
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMU #1327/01 1432312
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 232312Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY MANAGUA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0299
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEABND/DEA HQS WASHINGTON DC
RHMCSUU/FBI WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS MANAGUA 001327 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR INL/LP, WHA/CEN 
JUSTICE FOR OIA, AFMLS, NDDS, OPDAT 
TREASURY FOR FINCEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EINV OPIC KCOR PGOV SNAR KCRIM KJUS NU
SUBJECT: TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE IMPROVES ABILITY OF NEWLY 
CREATED NICARAGUAN NATIONAL POLICE VETTED UNIT TO FIGHT 
CORRUPTION AND TRANSNATIONAL CRIME 
 
REF: MANAGUA 00911 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  After several years of planning, a vetted 
unit has been created in Nicaragua to investigate 
high-profile financial, corruption-related, narcotics and 
transnational crimes.  The unit has been initially funded by 
illicitly acquired assets of corrupt former Nicaraguan 
officials that were seized in the United States and 
subsequently repatriated for this purpose.  Capacity and 
technical assistance to unit members has commenced with funds 
from INL and DOJ OPDAT.  A protracted, comprehensive, 
multi-disciplinary training program is being implemented to 
provide the unit's personnel with the necessary specialized 
knowledge to enforce the law against those who commit corrupt 
acts.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Background: Fulfilling a Great Need 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) In Nicaragua, corruption within the judiciary 
constitutes a strong obstacle to anti-corruption law 
enforcement efforts.  There is little political will, 
however, to reform this corrupted institution.  Ineffective 
law enforcement institutions do not deter crimes related to 
corruption.  Instead, within a weakened and politically 
manipulated system, these institutions are particularly 
vulnerable and susceptible to undue influence.  Organized 
criminals have taken advantage of the many corrupted 
operators within the criminal justice system, from 
politically militant judges who demand money to enhance their 
party's coffers and line their own pockets, to law 
enforcement officers who are motivated by greed or party 
affiliation to ignore the law and the reappointment of a 
chief prosecutor who manipulates the law and the evidence to 
suit the political or financial interests of his party's 
boss.  Whatever the reasons for these public servants' 
betrayal of the public's trust, transnational organized 
criminals have benefited as the ideal of law, order and 
justice in Nicaragua becomes more distant.  Currently, the 
intolerably high levels of corruption in the public sector, 
including the judiciary, have caused Nicaragua to become a 
magnet and haven to transnational criminal organizations. 
 
Plan of Action 
-------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) To succeed in this setting, we must develop over 
time an independent, specialized and complex set of law 
enforcement components that contribute to the investigation, 
prosecution and adjudication of corruption crimes.  This 
implies the creation of a specialized unit to deal 
exclusively with corruption and related crimes. This unit 
will bolster intelligence gathering and information sharing, 
improve the skills of its members, centralize knowledge and 
capacity to increase the effectiveness of these resources 
with regards to enforcement and take over the sensitive 
issues from ordinary law enforcement agencies that have been 
perceived as corrupt.  The unit will be strongly centralized 
at the national level and staffed with hand-picked, vetted 
specialists, such as financial crimes investigators and 
independent prosecutors. To increase efficiency the unit will 
operate as a "strike force," vested with the ability to 
investigate corruption cases and the power to initiate 
prosecutions. It will be located in its own building and will 
report directly to the police chief and attorney general. 
This will enhance independence and assure competence of law 
enforcement authorities entrusted with investigating and 
prosecuting corruption while providing a buffer against 
political and administrative interference. Ultimately, this 
arrangement will prevent corruption within the different 
components of the criminal justice system. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Embassy Managua considers it important to have a 
well-trained, trustworthy unit to locally investigate and 
seek domestic prosecution in Nicaraguan courts of high 
profile corruption-related offenses. This commitment by the 
Embassy, INL, the RLA program and DEA furthers the USG's 
policy to assist Nicaragua develop a credible program to 
combat its rampant public and private corruption. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) The long term value that this unit can provide 
toward achieving this goal can only be realized by providing 
its well intentioned and eager members the capacity and 
technical tools to investigate complex criminal offenses 
involving, in most instances, politically charged cases and 
locally influential individuals. 
 
Capacity Building and Training Begins 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) RLA has begun providing specialized training for 
the unit. Coordination and support has been obtained from DOJ 
OPDAT, ICITAP-Colombia, Internal Revenue Service, Criminal 
Investigation Division (IRS-CI) and the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation (FBI). 
 
¶7.  (SBU) In March 2007, RLA coordinated an interactive 
workshop to develop a short-term strategy to fight low-level 
public corruption. DOJ OPDAT, FBI and RLA held a 3-day 
workshop to develop a best practices handbook to investigate 
and prosecute economic and corruption related crimes 
(REFTEL). In April, seven unit members, along with other 
Nicaraguan law enforcement personnel and prosecutors 
participated in a second encounter to continue developing and 
refining the handbook.  Additional working sessions have been 
scheduled for the coming months until the techniques are 
ready for implementation. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) RLA is coordinating both basic and specialized 
training on how to conduct criminal investigations.  In March 
2007, ICITAP-Colombia delivered a 5-day training session on 
interrogation techniques to all 18 members of the vetted 
unit.  In addition, 2 Nicaraguan National Police internal 
affairs investigators participated in the training.  The 
training included both theory as well as practical exercises 
and provided the participants with useful tools to conduct 
interrogations of suspects and defendants. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) In April 2007, a senior trial attorney from DOJ's 
Office of International Affairs and a former AUSA from the 
District of Columbia handling extraterritorial investigations 
and cases with vetted units in Colombia, Peru and elsewhere 
made a presentation to select members of the vetted unit.  He 
emphasized the importance of teamwork, case preparation and 
career development and how it contributes to the success of 
the unit's goals.  Additionally, he discussed a few of his 
experiences working with other Latin American units in the 
investigation and the prosecutorial stages of high-profile 
cases. 
 
¶10.  (SBU) Two hand-picked vetted unit members and a 
prosecutor attended a technical assistance program sponsored 
by OPDAT and delivered by DOJ and FBI cyber-crime experts in 
San Jose, Costa Rica.  The program focused on teaching 
practical aspects of forensic investigations related to 
cyber-crime and other computer crimes. 
 
Scheduled Future Training Events 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶11.  (SBU) RLA coordinated with Plan Colombia's JSRP to visit 
Colombia's specialized units in May 2007. RLA will visit the 
anti-corruption, human rights, anti-narcotics, money 
laundering and asset forfeiture and intellectual property 
(cyber-crimes) units to observe how they are organized, learn 
more about how they operate and discuss how they coordinate 
their investigations with prosecutors to bring forward and 
prepare cases for prosecution. We would like to replicate, to 
the extent practicable, the model implemented by the 
specialized units in Colombia. 
 
¶12.  (SBU) American Embassy Honduras and OPDAT are conducting 
a practical technical assistance program that will follow up 
on their strategy to combat crimes associated with violations 
of intellectual property rights. The late May program will 
feature the development of practical law enforcement 
investigation techniques like developing an investigative 
plan, planning and conducting searches and analyzing and 
cataloguing the recovered evidence. RLA will assist in the 
program as a facilitator and will accompany two participating 
Nicaragua vetted unit members. 
 
¶13.  (SBU) IRS-CI International Training Division at the 
National Criminal Investigation Training Academy will be 
conducting a needs assessment of the unit in May 2007 in 
order to design a comprehensive financial investigation 
techniques training, in various progressive modules, to 
provide capacity building in forensic accounting and 
investigative techniques that would benefit criminal 
investigators in identifying and detecting access by corrupt 
public officials to financial systems. 
That program will be offered in the Fall. 
 
¶14.  (SBU) The unit's success depends not only on the 
capacity and training skills imparted to the unit members, 
but also on the development of its members from the human 
asset standpoint. In order to build camaraderie, team spirit 
and cohesion and develop leadership skills, ICITAP-Colombia 
will offer a technical assistance program on team building 
and leadership to all 18-unit members in mid June. 
Additionally, ICITAP-Colombia will also offer an advanced 
interviewing skills and techniques course the last week of 
June for all members. 
 
¶15.  (SBU) RLA is coordinating with DHS Central America 
agents to provide training assistance to the unit regarding 
criminal violations and administrative responsibilities like 
money laundering, immigration and customs violations, 
contraband, cyber-crime, etc. within their investigative 
responsibilities. 
 
¶16.  (SBU) RLA is coordinating with NAS-Dominican Republic to 
schedule an anti-corruption training program that emphasizes 
the relationship between corruption, narcotics trafficking 
and financial crimes. This program will be offered in the 
fall. 
 
Training in US Criminal Law and Procedures 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶17. (SBU) The unit will need, at times, to conduct 
investigations and gather evidence for cases that will not be 
prosecuted in local Nicaraguan courts but rather in United 
States federal courts or elsewhere.  RLA will provide 
technical assistance to train the members of the unit in the 
concepts of U.S. criminal law involving offenses like money 
laundering, narcotics and arms trafficking, electronic 
surveillance, undercover operations, entrapment, debriefing 
and use of cooperating witnesses, plea agreements, among 
others. 
 
¶18.  (SBU) DOJ Tax Division attorney and an investigator from 
and IRS-CI will train unit members in use of international 
assistance instruments like multilateral legal assistance 
treaties, letters rogatory and techniques for conducting 
international money laundering investigations. 
 
Conclusion 
---------- 
 
¶19.  (SBU) The success of the vetted unit in achieving its 
mission depends on many factors.  Most notably, these include 
the following: the prevailing political climate; the degree 
of commitment and independence from pressures by the chief of 
police; and the willingness of the prosecuting agencies in 
Nicaragua, and are beyond our control.  Other factors, like 
the motivation of and willingness of unit members to tackle 
corruption -- one case at a time -- and our commitment to aid 
the development of specialized skills for the unit to make 
credible progress are well within our control. 
Implementation, enforcement, and self-sustainability in the 
short term depend on the USG not abandoning the field and 
providing all the necessary tools, including equipment and 
the development of human assets, to give the unit a 
meaningful opportunity to wage a credible fight against the 
corruption that pervades many of the public institutions in 
Nicaragua.  The likelihood of success will be greatly 
enhanced by continued commitment to maintaining an RLA 
assigned to Nicaragua.  Post's request for INL and DOJ to 
consider continuance of funding for Post's RLA program will 
follow septel. 
TRIVELLI