07TELAVIV1348
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Tue May 08 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0011
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #1348/01 1281139
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 081139Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0973
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUENAAA/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 2123
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 8859
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 2093
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 2926
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 2123
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 9990
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 2866
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 9759
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 0235
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 6841
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 4244
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 9145
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 3336
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 5263
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 6757
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 001348 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Iran 
 
¶3.  PM Olmert's Performance 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Yediot, Israel Radio, and other leading media quoted State 
Department Spokesman Sean McCormack as saying in his daily briefing 
on Monday that he would not expect Secretary of State Condoleezza 
Rice to travel to Israel and the Palestinian territories on her 
upcoming trip next week as planned.  McCormack mentioned the 
political situation in Israel.  Israel Radio quoted senior GOI 
sources as saying that they were surprised by the cancellation of 
Secretary Rice's visit.  The radio quoted one senior Israeli source 
 
SIPDIS 
in Jerusalem as saying that the cancellation is "unprecedented" and 
that people in the region might interpret the cancellation as 
evidence that, because of the situation in Israel, the US 
administration does not believe that the diplomatic process can be 
moved forward.  Israel Radio cited the belief of another GOI source 
that Secretary Rice's visit was postponed by a few weeks. 
 
IDF Radio quoted Dov Weisglass, who was former PM Ariel Sharon's top 
advisor, as saying that Rice "has come to the conclusion that in the 
current situation, the government's ability to make decisions of 
significance is limited. She certainly does not want to waste her 
time and to create or to draw gratuitous attention.  Danny Ayalon, 
formerly Israel's ambassador to the United States, told IDF Radio 
that Secretary Rice's  "disappointment is mainly with the 
Palestinians.  But, of course, the lack of political clarity here 
does not contribute to the matter. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that PM Ehud Olmert is conducting secret talks 
with PA Chairman [President] Mahmoud Abbas.  The newspaper wrote 
that Olmert, in conversations with ministers and other political 
figures recently, has hinted that he and Abbas have been holding 
talks, but did not reveal the content or venue of the talks, or the 
level of those involved.  According to Ha'aretz, the people Olmert 
spoke to say he expects significant political progress this summer. 
The secret talks appear to be about state affairs, rather than 
confidence building measures such as removing roadblocks and opening 
passages. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that on Monday Olmert intimated to 
visiting German FM Frank-Walter Steinmeier that Israel would take 
widespread military action in the Gaza Strip if a Qassam rocket 
kills Israelis.  Ha'aretz reported that the IDF's OC Southern 
Command, Maj. Gen. Yoav Galant, recently presented a contingency 
plan to the cabinet to counter the firing of Qassam rockets at 
Israel from the Gaza Strip and thwart Palestinian efforts to 
consolidate military power there.  Palestinian militants have 
launched a number of rockets into Israel recently, one of them 
hitting a house in Sderot.  The media reported that the IDF 
responded by striking a vehicle that Islamic Jihad used for firing 
rockets, wounding three militants.  According to Ha'aretz, the 
blueprint presented to the cabinet discusses engaging hostile forces 
near the security fence surrounding the Strip and employing 
remote-controlled weapons systems, rather than a ground operation to 
purge the cities and refugee camps in and around Gaza of militants. 
Galant reportedly listed five components for the plan: 1. Creating a 
buffer zone on the Palestinian side of the fence separating the Gaza 
Strip from Israel.   2. An escalation of retaliatory actions 
following the firing of Qassam rockets to render launching the 
rockets into Israel counterproductive by extracting a steep price 
from the Palestinians.   3. The renewal of aerial assassinations of 
high-ranking terrorists as well as Palestinians responsible for 
firing Qassam rockets and arms smuggling.   4. Developing improved 
technology for detecting and destroying tunnels employed for arms 
smuggling.   5. Reinforcing intelligence capabilities.  Ha'aretz 
said that PM Olmert did not approve the IDF's proposals.  He only 
agreed to authorize a small expansion of the area within the Strip 
in which the IDF is allowed to operate.  In addition, Olmert will 
convene the security cabinet next week for a hearing concerning the 
amassing of military power by the Palestinian organizations in Gaza, 
and the IDF's plans to counter it.   Ha'aretz quoted political 
sources as saying that the discussion was necessary because the 
cabinet might be asked to authorize action in Gaza "at any given 
moment." For that purpose, the sources were quoted as saying, the 
ministers must be briefed in advance on the material.   Yet senior 
officials in the defense establishment believe that extensive action 
in the Gaza Strip is unavoidable.  Ha'aretz cited the US 
administration's hope that the actions of Palestinian security 
forces loyal to Abbas to foil terrorist activity could help avoid 
this scenario. 
The Jerusalem Post reported that Austrian Maj. Gen. Wolfgang Jilke, 
commander of the UN force deployed along the Israeli-Syrian border, 
told the newspaper that , while Syria is repairing its military 
positions along the border with Israel, its army has not beefed up 
its forces on the Golan Heights.  Jilke, commander of the United 
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) responsible for 
maintaining the cease-fire on the border, dismissed Israeli claims 
of an unprecedented military buildup within Syria.  The Jerusalem 
Post reported that Israeli defense officials rejected Jilke's 
assessment.  All media reported that on Monday the head of Israel's 
National Security Council, Ilan Mizrahi, told the Knesset's Foreign 
Affairs and Defense Committee that Syria's move to restart the peace 
process was authentic.  "It is not clear whether they want peace or 
whether they just want the peace process," he was quoted as saying. 
"They are still figuring out how it will best serve them, but the 
call for peace talks themselves is authentic."  Maariv reported that 
a few days ago Farid Razeri (sp.), a Syrian exile in Paris, who is a 
strident opponent of Bashar Assad's regime, published a very 
pro-Israel article on the Internet.  Maariv reported that Razeri 
confirmed his views in an interview to the newspaper, 
 
Maariv reported that the Foreign Ministry has been working 
stealthily on an "international campaign against Iran," which is to 
be waged by Israeli diplomats across the world in keeping with a 
list of tasks and detailed instructions that will be received from 
Jerusalem.  The campaign is currently in the final stages of 
preparation.  The person behind the idea and its execution is Aharon 
Abramovitch, the Director General of the Foreign Ministry, who 
received FM Tzipi Livni's approval.  The planned campaign was 
inspired by the international campaign that Israel waged against 
Hizbullah, which was declared a resounding success and resulted in 
Hizbullah being defined as a terrorist organization in many 
countries and by the European Union. 
 
Ha'aretz quoted an Olmert associate as saying on Monday that if the 
Labor Party pulls out of the coalition after the May 28 party 
primaries, Kadima will ask Likud to join if it agrees to an election 
date, which will apparently be set for the end of 2008.  The comment 
came as Olmert and his aides begin preparing for the possibility of 
a Labor withdrawal.   All media reported that on Monday the 
coalition survived three no-confidence votes, with some Kadima and 
Labor Knesset members abstaining or absenting themselves from the 
votes.  Ha'aretz reported that former PM Ehud Barak is contemplating 
joining Olmert's cabinet.  Ha'aretz reported that an internal survey 
among Labor members carried out by Barak's staff indicated that the 
party's members want to remain in the coalition.  Ha'aretz quoted 
senior Kadima members as saying that Olmert is weighing naming 
Construction and Housing Minister Meir Sheetrit (Kadima) finance 
minister. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that FM Livni will head to Cairo on Thursday to 
meet with Egyptian and Jordanian leaders, who are interested in 
"marketing" the Arab peace initiative to Israel.  During her visit, 
Livni is expected to meet with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak. 
Media reported on Livni's talks with German FM Steinmeier.  Livni 
mentioned the Qassam rocket attacks against Israel and Steinmeier 
was quoted as saying that Germany will do everything it can to 
advance the diplomatic process and minimize the scope of violence in 
the region.  The Jerusalem Post reported that PM Olmert stressed 
Saudi Arabia's positive role to Steinmeier. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that Abbas has failed to persuade Hamas 
and most Palestinian factions to accept the latest US plan for 
easing restrictions and improving security for Israel.  The 
newspaper wrote that the "benchmark" plan has also been rejected by 
some of Abbas's top aides and political allies.  The Jerusalem Post 
reported that on Sunday Abbas praised the US plan. 
 
Yediot reported that Olmert will meet with Jordan's King Abdullah II 
in Petra next week. 
 
Maariv reported that, six years after the closure of the Moroccan 
representation in Israel, Morocco's King Mohamed VI recently 
appointed an unofficial ambassador to Israel -- Serge Berdugo, the 
head of Morocco's Jewish community and a former tourism minister of 
that country.  Maariv also reported on growing Jewish and Israeli 
pilgrimages and tourist visits to Tunisia. 
 
Yediot and The Jerusalem Post quoted French president-elect Nicolas 
Sarkozy as saying on Monday, in a phone conversation with PM Olmert, 
that he is a friend of Israel, which can rely on his friendship. 
The Jerusalem Post reported that French Ambassador to Israel 
Jean-Michel Casa told the newspaper on Monday that, with Sarkozy's 
election, "there will be new progress and new steps forward in 
French-Israeli relations."  The Jerusalem Post cited the French 
Foreign Ministry as saying that Sarkozy received a higher percentage 
of votes from French citizens in Israel than from expatriates in any 
other country.  The French ministry said that 90.7 percent of French 
citizens living in Israel outside of Jerusalem voted for Sarkozy, 
significantly higher than the 53 percent of the votes he garnered in 
France.  The Jerusalem Post noted that 71.5 percent of the French 
voting in Lebanon voted for Sarkozy, an indication that just as 
Israelis view him as pro-Israeli, French Lebanese seem to view him 
as pro-Lebanese.  (In the US, Sarkozy won just under 64 percent of 
absentee ballots.) 
 
All media reported that on Monday the Hebrew University of Jerusalem 
announced that the grave and tomb of Herod the Great, the 
Roman-appointed king of Judea (37Q4 BCE), have been discovered at 
the fortress Herodian (or Herodium)  in the Judean desert. 
 
All media reported on the recrudescence of anti-Semitic attacks in 
Russia and Ukraine over the past two weeks. 
 
All media (banner in Yediot) reported that on Monday the rate of the 
US dollar dropped to its lowest point in seven years: 3.998 shekels. 
 Leading economic commentators called to detach common dollar-linked 
payments, such as real estate prices, from the US currency. 
 
Ha'aretz presented the results of Tel Aviv University's Peace Index 
poll conducted among Israelis on April 30 and May 1: 
- The number of those in the Jewish public who now justify the 
Second Lebanon War is in fact lower than last summer, but a clear 
majority of 57 percent still define the war as justified (38 percent 
consider it to have been unjustified and the rest have no clear 
opinion). 
- A small majority (52.5 percent) believes the main faults 
identified in the Winograd report will be addressed, whereas 38 
percent do not think so.  However, the gap between those who think 
the report exposed all the main problems (46 percent) and those who 
believe it failed to address significant issues (38 percent) is not 
large.   According to the survey organizers, this indicates a not 
inconsiderable degree of suspicion toward a commission appointed by 
the PM -- a suspicion apparently rooted in the profound distrust of 
the establishment and of the political leadership.  Some 68 percent 
also believe that if those responsible do not resign willingly, 
there will be a wave of civil protest demanding their resignation. 
Furthermore, 38 percent -- an extremely high rate considering that 
it is usually a minority that participates in protests of this kind 
-- say they will take part in such a protest if it erupts (58 
percent say they will not participate). 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Former Israeli Ambassador to the UN and conservative contributor Dr. 
Dore Gold wrote in the mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: 
"Like Israel, Saudi Arabia wants to curb the Iranian takeover of the 
region, but it is not prepared to strengthen moderate Palestinian 
elements at the expense of Hamas or to reach an open dialogue with 
Israel." 
 
Military correspondent Amir Rappaport wrote in the popular, 
pluralist Maariv: "Israel has the moral obligation to make sure that 
every one of its citizens knows that its leaders did their utmost to 
prevent [war with Syria]." 
 
Military correspondent Yaakov Katz wrote on page one of the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post: "The growing consensus in 
the defense establishment is that Prime Minister Ehud Olmert will be 
extremely careful and hesitant before sending Israel back to war 
[with Syria]." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "Was There an Initiative?" 
 
Former Israeli Ambassador to the UN and conservative contributor Dr. 
Dore Gold wrote in the mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot 
(5/8): "It may be assumed that the Olmert government, which is under 
heavy domestic pressure, will find a way to revive the diplomatic 
process -- among other reasons: to create a political agenda.  The 
search for a diplomatic initiative is legitimate, provided it is 
based on a proper reading of the regional reality... [Saudi King 
Abdullah] has recently declined to meet with Iraqi Prime Minister 
Nuri Al-Maliki, thus again slapping in the face of the US 
administration, because Al-Maliki is considered a pro-American 
leader..... One must ask the question about how the United States 
can lead a diplomatic move between Israel and Saudi Arabia when 
Riyadh-Washington relations are so fragile. Furthermore, it is 
astounding to see how [Condoleezza] Rice has represented a Saudi 
stance that is open to negotiations with Israel, when the Saudi King 
has made strong anti-Western statements.... Indeed, like Israel, 
Saudi Arabia wants to curb the Iranian takeover of the region, but 
 
it is not prepared to strengthen moderate Palestinian elements at 
the expense of Hamas or to reach an open dialogue with Israel. 
Thus, the hope that the Saudi initiative could be adopted might 
fizzle." 
 
II.  "Yes, Talk with the Syrians" 
 
Military correspondent Amir Rappaport wrote in the popular, 
pluralist Maariv (5/8): "The answer to the dilemma of whether to 
respond affirmatively to the Syrian call for peace negotiations is 
simple..... Even prior to statements made  [on Monday by the head of 
Israel's National Security Council, Ilan] Mizrahi, the balance of 
calculations was already in favor of holding negotiations.  And the 
reason is not necessarily because there are high chances of 
achieving a peace agreement with Syria.  On the contrary, [Mossad 
Director Meir] Dagan is probably right and Assad is interested in 
negotiations for the sake of the talks only and not for reaching an 
agreement.  What counts is the damage: if we hold negotiations with 
Syria that do not lead anywhere, in other words, what is most likely 
to happen is that we will be back at the same point we are today, 
that is not as terrible as willingly passing on negotiations that 
have even the smallest chance of success, and then we reach going to 
war.  Furthermore, if Israel is fated to fight another war with 
Syria, Israel has the moral obligation to make sure that every one 
of its citizens knows that its leaders did their utmost to prevent 
it." 
 
III.  "Assessing Syria's True Intentions a Tricky Task" 
 
Military correspondent Yaakov Katz wrote on page one of the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post (5/8): "In Israel, there is 
a real concern about the prospects of war with Syria.  Defense 
officials are predicting that should another round with Hizbullah 
erupt, it would not remain isolated to Lebanon.  And unlike last 
summer when it watched from the sidelines, Damascus will be forced 
to join the fray,... The growing consensus in the defense 
establishment is that Prime Minister Ehud Olmert will be extremely 
careful and hesitant before sending Israel back to war.  While the 
Knesset announcement [made on Monday by the head of Israel's 
National Security Council, Ilan] Mizrahi, could be per Olmert's 
bidding as part of an effort to lay the ground for a new diplomatic 
initiative vis a vis the Syrians, it may also be an attempt on 
Mizrahi's part to prevent war and to urge his boss to answer the 
Syrian overtures." 
 
--------- 
¶2.  Iran: 
--------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: "If 
France championed draconian sanctions against Iran, it could almost 
single-handedly lead Europe in avoiding both the need for Western 
military action against Tehran." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"Sarkozy's Opportunity" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized (5/8): 
"The great majority of French Jews and French-Israeli dual citizens 
voted for the victor in Sunday's presidential runoff, Nicolas 
Sarkozy.  It is not just the Jewish people, however, who should be 
encouraged by the results and wishing the president-elect every 
success, but the citizens of France and of all free nations.... The 
notion of the last few decades that France advanced its own 
interests by almost reflexively opposing the US and siding with the 
Arab world against Israel has not done well for France or for the 
world.  It was a conceit more than a rational policy.  Certainly, in 
today's world, it has shifted from being merely indulgent to posing 
real dangers for international security.  Today, the Free World is 
facing a threat from Islamo-fascist regimes and their terrorist 
allies that demands solidarity among nations that are under attack. 
Sarkozy himself has said that an Iranian nuclear weapon is 
unacceptable, and that sanctions must be tightened.... France knows 
better than most nations the price of not standing up to aggressive 
tyrants in time.  If France championed draconian sanctions against 
Iran, it could almost single-handedly lead Europe in avoiding both 
the need for Western military action against Tehran, and the threat 
of living under a growing nuclear and terrorist shadow.  There is no 
better way to restore French leadership and pride." 
 
---------------------------- 
¶3.  PM Olmert's Performance: 
---------------------------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
"The Danger Inherent in Closing One's Eyes" 
 
Senior columnist Dan Margalit wrote in the popular, pluralist 
Maariv: "[The Israeli Left] does not care about the government 
having failed; about the fact that it went to a rational war but 
eroded Israel's deterrence because of its blinking policy." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"The Danger in Closing One's Eyes" 
 
Senior columnist Dan Margalit wrote in the popular, pluralist Maariv 
(5/8): "[The Israeli Left] does not care about the government having 
failed; about the fact that it went to a rational war but eroded 
Israel's deterrence because of its blinking policy: neither war nor 
peace, neither invasion nor restraint.... Neither does it care about 
how much corruption is piling up under the regime's desk.... The 
person who understood the significance of corruption in the collapse 
of the government is Arieh Eldad of National Union [a far-Right 
opposition party].  Speaking in Tel Aviv a week ago, the Professor 
and Knesset Member said that he had learned some lessons.  He is 
unwilling to accept from a corrupt government even a decision to 
establish new settlements in Judea and Samaria [i.e. the West Bank], 
which he so fervently longs for. 
 
JONES