04WELLINGTON740
NEW ZEALAND COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR MATTHEW KING AND
Mon Aug 30 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WELLINGTON 000740 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SINGAPORE FOR CUSTOMS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OTRA ETRD ASEC AMGT NZ
SUBJECT:  NEW ZEALAND COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR MATTHEW KING AND 
SCOTT DAVIS, SEPTEMBER 16-18, 2004 
 
REF:  SINGAPORE 2550 
 
¶1.  Embassy welcomes and grants country clearance to ICE 
Attache Matthew King and Deputy Assistant Director Foreign 
Operations Scott Davis to travel to Wellington, New Zealand 
from on or about September 16 to on or about September 18, 
¶2004.  The purpose of this visit is to meet with New Zealand 
Customs and other government officials. 
 
¶2.  Embassy understands no assistance is required. 
 
¶3.  Embassy point of contact is Pol/Econ Office Manager 
Bridget Walsh.  Contact details are as follows: 
 
Office:  644-462-6033 
Fax:     644-472-3537 
Cell:    027-451-2540 
E-mail:  walshba@state.gov 
 
¶4.  All official visitors to the Embassy are required to 
report to the Regional Security Office for a TDY security 
briefing. 
 
¶5.  Visitors should use local taxi service, which is 
generally safe, reliable and frequent.  Taxi fare from the 
airport to downtown Wellington hotels is approximately 
NZD30. 
 
¶6.  Travelers can exchange currency at the airport upon 
arrival and ATM machines are readily available throughout 
New Zealand. 
 
¶7.  Biosecurity Fines: 
 
The government of New Zealand instituted fines for non- 
declared biosecurity hazards on travelers entering New 
Zealand with undeclared plant, animal or food material. 
Travelers found carrying these undeclared items will be 
immediately fined NZ$200 (US $150).  Biosecurity is a 
serious issue in New Zealand and fines will be administered 
immediately and without warnings. 
 
¶8.  Security Assessment: 
 
a.  There are no local terrorist groups or support groups 
believed to be operating in New Zealand at this time.  In 
light of the worldwide security alert all visitors should 
heighten their security awareness and report any unusual 
incidents to the regional security office. 
 
b.  Anonymous telephonic threats and obscure threat mail 
have occasionally targeted U.S. diplomatic missions in New 
Zealand.  In response to U.S. policies and actions, various 
groups in New Zealand have demonstrated occasionally at the 
embassy in Wellington and at the consulate in Auckland. 
These demonstrations were of a small scale and were 
peacefully conducted.  During these demonstrations, the host 
country police and protective services provided adequate 
protection to the embassy and consulate. 
 
c.  While New Zealand is considered a low threat crime 
environment, Wellington and Auckland have experienced an 
increase in violent and petty crimes.  Home invasion 
robberies and assaults, once very rare, are becoming more 
frequent.  Burglaries and thefts occur countrywide. 
Visitors should be aware that street crime is a daily 
occurrence in the larger cities, including Wellington and 
Auckland.  Common sense precautions should be taken, 
especially at night, to avoid becoming a target of 
opportunity. 
 
d.  All forms of public transportation are generally safe at 
all times of the day. 
 
Swindells