04WELLINGTON860
COUNTRY CLEARANCE TO NIUE FOR NOAA OFFICIAL
Wed Oct 13 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WELLINGTON 000860 
 
SIPDIS 
 
COMMERCE FOR NWS/ROSENZWEIG 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OTRA TPHY OTRA KSCA WS NE NZ
SUBJECT:  COUNTRY CLEARANCE TO NIUE FOR NOAA OFFICIAL 
RICHARD K. NYGARD, OCTOBER 25 - OCTOBER 29, 2004 
 
REF:  USDOC 4832 
 
¶1.  Embassy grants country clearance to Department of 
Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
National Weather Service Official Richard K. Nygard to 
travel to Alofi, Niue, October 25 - 29, 2004.  The purpose 
of travel is to re-establish and install Tsunami Tide 
System. 
 
¶2.  Embassy understands no assistance is required. 
 
¶3.  Point of contact at Embassy Wellington is Economic 
officer Joy Yamamoto.  Contact details are as follows: 
 
Office:  644-462-6182 
Fax:     644-472-3537 
Cell:    027-446-4467 
E-mail:  yamamotojo@state.gov 
 
Security Assessment 
------------------- 
 
¶4.  Niue is a free association territory of New Zealand, on 
which it relies for defense and assistance in meeting low- 
level security threats.  The Embassy is not aware of any 
specific threats to U.S. facilities or personnel at this 
time in Niue.  Visitors to Niue must exercise appropriate 
caution and be alert to their surroundings with regard to 
their personal security.  Suspicious incidents/activities 
should be reported to RSO Wellington (Telephone (64)(4) 462- 
6000, 24 hours/day). 
 
¶5.  Following the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks in 
the U.S. and the November 2002 terrorist bombing in Bali, 
there has been concern that terrorists might seek to take 
advantage of the low level of security maintained in small 
island states such as Niue in order to target tourists in 
previously safe destinations.  Terrorist actions may 
include, but are not limited to, suicide operations, 
bombings, or kidnapping.  Possible threats include 
conventional weapons such as explosive devices or non- 
conventional weapons, including chemical or biological 
agents.  Terrorists do not distinguish between official and 
civilian targets.  Targets may include facilities where 
Americans and other foreigners congregate or visit, such as 
residential areas, clubs, restaurants, places of worship, 
schools, hotels, outdoor recreation events, resorts, and 
beaches.  U.S. citizens should increase their security 
awareness at such locations, avoid them, or switch to other 
locations where Americans in large numbers generally do not 
congregate. 
 
¶6.  As a result of recent military action in Iraq, there is 
a potential for retaliatory actions to be taken against U.S. 
citizens and interest throughout the world.  Public 
demonstrations carry the potential for precipitating 
violence directed at American citizens. 
 
¶7.  U.S. Government facilities worldwide remain at a 
heightened state of alert and some have drawn down their 
dependents and/or personnel.  These facilities may 
temporarily close or suspend public services from time to 
time for security reasons.  In those instances, U.S. 
embassies and consulates will make every effort to provide 
emergency services to American citizens.  Monitor the local 
news and maintain contact with the nearest American Embassy 
or U.S. Consulate. 
 
¶8.  Crime:  Appropriate common sense precautions should be 
taken, especially at night, to avoid becoming a target of 
opportunity. 
 
¶9.  Weather:  Severe cyclones present a threat during the 
hurricane season, which is from November to March. 
 
Burnett