04WELLINGTON797
NEW ZEALAND COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR USGS RUGGIERO,
Thu Sep 16 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 WELLINGTON 000797 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS TO DINT/USGS/RESTON/RPAQUETTE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OTRA TPHY KSCA NZ
SUBJECT:  NEW ZEALAND COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR USGS RUGGIERO, 
COTTER, LAHR, FRAME, FORNWALL, HERMANN, AND SIMPSON 
 
REF:  STATE 198469 
 
¶1.  Embassy welcomes and grants country clearance to the 
following U.S. Geological Survey Biologists: 
 
-- Michael RUGGIERO to travel to Auckland and Wellington, 
New Zealand from September 29 - October 9, 2004.  The 
purpose of this visit is to attend the Species 2000 
Management Meeting and the Global Biodiversity Information 
Facility (GBIF) and make a presentation. 
 
-- Gladys COTTER and Thomas LAHR to travel to Wellington and 
Christchurch, New Zealand from October 4 - 14, 2004.  The 
purpose of this visit is to attend the Global Biodiversity 
Information Facility (GBIF) and to attend and make a 
presentation at the Biodiversity Informatics Meeting. 
 
-- Michael FRAME to travel to Wellington, New Zealand from 
October 2 - 9, 2004.  The purpose of this visit is to attend 
the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF). 
 
-- Michael FORNWALL to travel to Wellington, New Zealand 
from October 3 - 12, 2004.  The purpose of this visit is to 
attend the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF). 
 
-- Thomas HERMANN to travel to Christchurch, New Zealand 
from October 9 - 15, 2004.  The purpose of this visit is to 
attend the NATO Information Management Committee Meeting. 
 
-- Annie Simpson to travel to Auckland, New Zealand from 
October 5 - 16, 2004.  The purpose of this visit is to 
attend the Invasive Species Steering Committee. 
 
¶2.  Embassy understands no assistance is required. 
 
¶3.  Embassy point of contact is Political Officer Dorothy 
Rogers.  Contact details are as follows: 
Office:  644-462-6043 
Fax:     644-472-3537 
Cell:    027-451-2538 
E-mail:  RogersD@state.gov 
 
¶4.  Visitors should use local taxi service, which is 
generally safe, reliable and frequent.  Taxi fare from the 
airport to downtown Christchurch hotels is approximately NZD 
¶35.  In Wellington, it is approximately NZD 30, and in 
Auckland it is approximately NZD 60. 
 
¶5.  Travelers can exchange currency at the airport upon 
arrival and ATM machines are readily available throughout 
New Zealand. 
 
¶6.  Biosecurity Fines: 
 
The government of New Zealand instituted fines for non- 
declared biosecurity hazards on travelers entering New 
Zealand with undeclared plant, animal or food material. 
Travelers found carrying these undeclared items will be 
immediately fined NZ$200 (US $150).  Biosecurity is a 
serious issue in New Zealand and fines will be administered 
immediately and without warnings. 
 
¶7.  Security Assessment: 
 
a.  There are no local terrorist groups or support groups 
believed to be operating in New Zealand at this time.  In 
light of the worldwide security alert all visitors should 
heighten their security awareness and report any unusual 
incidents to the regional security office. 
 
b.  Anonymous telephonic threats and obscure threat mail 
have occasionally targeted U.S. diplomatic missions in New 
Zealand.  In response to U.S. policies and actions, various 
groups in New Zealand have demonstrated occasionally at the 
embassy in Wellington and at the consulate in Auckland. 
These demonstrations were of a small scale and were 
peacefully conducted.  During these demonstrations, the host 
country police and protective services provided adequate 
protection to the embassy and consulate. 
 
c.  While New Zealand is considered a low threat crime 
environment, Wellington and Auckland have experienced an 
increase in violent and petty crimes.  Home invasion 
robberies and assaults, once very rare, are becoming more 
frequent.  Burglaries and thefts occur countrywide. 
Visitors should be aware that street crime is a daily 
occurrence in the larger cities, including Wellington and 
Auckland.  Common sense precautions should be taken, 
especially at night, to avoid becoming a target of 
opportunity. 
 
d.  All forms of public transportation are generally safe at 
all times of the day. 
BURNETT