04WELLINGTON737
NEW ZEALAND TAKES FIRM LINE WITH IRAN FOREIGN
Sun Aug 29 00:00:00 +0200 2004
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L WELLINGTON 000737 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/ANP 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/30/2014 
TAGS: NZ
SUBJECT: NEW ZEALAND TAKES FIRM LINE WITH IRAN FOREIGN 
MINISTER OVER IAEA AND IRAN NUCLEAR PROGRAM 
 
 
Classified By: Pol/Econ Counselor Tim Zuniga-Brown for reasons 1.5 (B/D 
). 
 
Iran's Foreign Minister Seeks "A Fair Hearing" 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶1. (U) Iranian Foreign Minister Kamal Kharrazi visited New 
Zealand August 23-24 to explain Iran's position in the IAEA. 
Kharrazi met with Prime Minister Helen Clark, Foreign 
Minister Phil Goff, Disarmament Minister Marian Hobbs, 
Communications Minister Paul Swain and Agriculture and Trade 
Minister Jim Sutton.  FM Kharrazi said he decided to visit 
New Zealand because Iran knew it could count on receiving a 
"fair hearing" from the Kiwis the lead up to the upcoming 
Board of Governors (BOG) meeting later in September.  NZ 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT) Deputy Secretary 
(Under Secretary-equivalent) Rosemary Banks provided select 
embassy reps a debrief on the Kharrazi visit.  Banks noted 
that in addition to discussions on the IAEA (below), the two 
sides also held talks on human rights and increased political 
and economic cooperation through a revamped Joint Ministerial 
Consultative process. 
 
Kharrazi: "Don't Isolate Us" 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) Banks prefaced her comments by noting that New 
Zealand believed it had influence with Iran as it was "not 
identified with any particular side," adding that the GNZ 
would be guided by IAEA reports on Iran and "consensus" views 
within the IAEA.  Banks said Kharrazi repeatedly urged that 
Iran not be isolated if the international community wanted to 
achieve its goals with Tehran.  At the same time, Kharrazi 
was also insistent that Iran had a right to develop a nuclear 
power program that included a fully developed nuclear fuel 
cycle.  Development of a nuclear program was now a matter of 
"national pride" for Iran, according to Kharrazi, especially 
within the new Majlis.  He further stated that the Majlis was 
pushing the Iranian government to move more quickly on 
establishing a full nuclear program.  Kharazzi insisted that 
the suspension of the enrichment program had always been 
meant to be temporary. 
 
¶3.  (C) An "upbeat" Iranian delegation told the GNZ that it 
felt Iran had provided "satisfactory" answers to all 
outstanding questions and no longer expected to be 
"automatically" placed on future IAEA BOG agendas.  The 
delegation said the current "file" on Iran should be 
"permanently closed" after the September IAEA meeting. 
During its meetings with Hobbs and elsewhere, the Iranian 
delegation had ticked off its list of answers to outstanding 
questions.  For instance, on shielding, the Iranians said 
this was simply due to an "old French design."  On fuel 
supplies, Iran said Russia had agreed to supply and take back 
expended fuel, but there had been no agreement on price as 
yet.  On polonium, contamination had occurred before Iran 
acquired the technology.  On laser enrichment, the delegation 
admitted that Iran had tried various technologies during the 
period it was under sanctions. 
 
GNZ:  Iran Must Abandon Enrichment and Refining Activities 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) A senior official of Prime Minister Helen Clark's 
office informed DCM that the PM had firmly told Kharrazi in 
their private session that NZ expected Iran to abandon its 
enrichment and refining activities.  PM Clark publicly stated 
that it was "absolutely critical" that Iran comply with IAEA 
requests and expressed concern at the length of time it was 
taking to find out what Iran was "actually doing."  Minister 
Hobbs bluntly told the Iranians in private that the IAEA 
reports painted a picture of a possible nuclear weapons 
program.  The GNZ told the Iranian delegation that Iran's 
"IAEA file" would only be closed if Iran's outstanding 
questions were fully resolved to the satisfaction of the IAEA 
BOG. 
Swindells