05WELLINGTON566
THE SLEAZE HITS THE FAN: AN INCREASINGLY WORRIED
Fri Jul 22 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

220623Z Jul 05C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 WELLINGTON 000566 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR D (CASTRO), EAP/FO, EAP/P AND EAP/ANP 
STATE PASS DEPT OF AGRICULTURE 
NSC FOR VICTOR CHA AND MICHAEL GREEN 
SECDEF FOR OSD/ISA LIZ PHU 
PACOM FOR J2/J233/J5/SJFHQ 
USDA FOR SECRETARY JOHANNS AND FAS/MIKE CONLON 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 07/22/2015 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EAGR NZ
SUBJECT: THE SLEAZE HITS THE FAN: AN INCREASINGLY WORRIED 
LABOUR CLAIMS NATIONAL IS U.S. PAWN 
 
 
Classified By: Charge D'Affaires David R. Burnett, 
for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary: Facing rapid losses in the polls, the ruling 
Labour Party has apparently decided to play the anti-American 
card, telling New Zealanders that a vote for the National 
Party means a vote against New Zealand's independent foreign 
policy.  Embassy Wellington is in general keeping a low 
profile on this and other election-related issues.  However, 
we released a press statement in response to veiled Labour 
allegations that U.S. interests are funding and controlling 
the National Party's campaign.  We have also quietly warned 
the Government that we will similarly respond to any further 
baseless allegations.  Labour's actions are not without risk 
to its own interests: more than one media report has 
expressed suspicions that the Government is trying to divert 
attention from its problem-plagued domestic policies.  In 
light of Labour's actions, Ambassador Swindells strongly 
recommends that Washington reconsider whether Agriculture 
Secretary Johanns should visit New Zealand just weeks before 
 
SIPDIS 
the general elections (see para 13).  End Summary. 
 
------------------ 
THE MITTS COME OFF 
------------------ 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  After months of appearing invulnerable to a series 
of scandals and controversies, the Labour Government's armor 
is apparently beginning to crack.  A series of polls 
conducted in recent weeks has shown support for the 
opposition National Party is increasing at the same time as 
Labour's is falling.  The most recent polls, conducted over 
the weekend, have shown National now leads Labor by between 
three and five percentage points, although neither party has 
majority support.  (A One News/Colmar Brunton poll issued 
July 18 showed National's support at 42 percent vs. Labour at 
39 percent; a July 16 Fairfax New Zealand/AC Nielson poll 
showed 42 vs. 37 percent, respectively.) 
 
¶3.  (C)  It is now almost certain that elections will not be 
held until mid-September rather than late August, and 
Labour's worry over its recent slide is at least partly 
responsible for the later date.  But although the Prime 
Minister is not likely to announce the election date formally 
before August 20, campaigning is already well underway and is 
becoming more personal and vicious.  In a recent speech, Dr. 
Brash called PM Clark "a petty, spiteful, deceitful leader 
whose government was 'rotten to the core.'"  Meanwhile, an 
apparently worried Labour has made the decision to play the 
anti-American card: senior Labour officials have begun to 
imply that a vote for National would mean a vote against an 
independent NZ foreign policy, and a vote for a U.S.-run NZ 
government. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) On Tuesday, PM Clark and Michael Cullen each 
claimed in separate speeches that the question of National 
leader Don Brash's credibility would be a cornerstone of 
Labour's campaign.   At the same time, Labour began to run 
advertisements in local newspapers and on buses that include 
a statement Brash made about the Iraq War some time ago -- 
that given the evidence surrounding Saddam and weapons of 
mass destruction, he too would have "done the same thing as 
President Bush" i.e., sent New Zealand troops to participate 
in Operation Iraqi Freedom.  Young Labour also put up posters 
showing side-by-side photos of Brash and the President, 
together with the accompanying slogan "Can you spot the 
difference?"  Cullen also questioned in his speech where 
National was getting it's money, claimed that the party had 
much more money than Labour, and implied that some funds were 
coming from overseas. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) In response, Brash told the media that Labour was 
just trying to divert attention from the Government's 
domestic policies.  Obviously wishing to avoid the question 
of the Iraq war, which remains deeply unpopular here, Brash 
also stressed that the past was the past and it makes no 
sense to talk about what he would have done two years ago. 
Undaunted, Foreign Minister Goff issued an official statement 
claiming that Brash's Iraq policies were a legitimate 
question: Australia has recently decided to send more troops 
to Iraq; would Brash as PM make a similar decision?   After 
repeated questions by the media, Brash later fleshed out his 
stance, "In some circumstances we (i.e., a National-led 
Government) might certainly go with the United States but we 
make that judgment in the light of what's in New Zealand's 
best interests." 
 
----------------- 
CROSSING THE LINE 
----------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) On July 23, Education Minister Mallard upped the 
ante.  During a press conference that was ostensibly on the 
Government's education policies, he alleged that "the lead 
bag man" for Brash "is an American..." and that "we will name 
him at the appropriate time."  Mallard then went on to say 
that "..if you say nukes gone by lunchtime and you have very 
close relations on Iraq and may or may not have made promises 
to send troops to Iraq the fact that an American is 
collecting cash for you is I think pretty interesting."  He 
also said that "...Brash has indicated that he will act on 
American lines more than any government in New Zealand ever 
has in the past," and added that National's campaign is being 
written by Americans. While claiming that his remarks were 
not directed at Americans or the Bush Administration, Mallard 
clearly meant to hint at  U.S. Government connection to 
National's financers, remarking, "...I think New Zealanders 
expect our policies...to be written in Wellington not 
Washington." 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Despite the fact that the Charge had hosted Mallard 
to dinner the night before, the Embassy first learned about 
the Minister's claims from a journalist who was reporting on 
the story and wished to know the Embassy's response.  (The 
Charge had actually raised concerns about Young Labour's 
poster campaign over dinner; the Minister did not respond but 
looked very uncomfortable.) 
 
------------------------------------ 
THE EMBASSY (VERY QUIETLY) WEIGHS IN 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶8.  (SBU) After learning of the press inquiries concerning 
Mallard's innuendoes, the Charge called Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs (MFAT) and Trade CEO Simon Murdoch, who was unaware 
of Mallard's comments.  (We then faxed the transcript to 
him.)  Murdoch contacted Minister Goff, who was on travel 
within New Zealand and about to board a flight.  Goff agreed 
that a line had been crossed, and said he would call the 
Charge once he returned to Auckland. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Brash, meanwhile, was telling the media that this 
was a low blow.  National's policies are not for sale, he 
said, and are written by New Zealanders for New Zealanders. 
Although the media has speculated the financial backer in 
question is Julian Robertson, a wealthy US property developer 
who has been a part-time resident here for years, Brash 
denied that National has gotten truly significant funding 
from any single donor.  TVNZ, in reporting the flap, implied 
that Mallard's comments were driven by National's 
hard-hitting criticism of Labour's education policies.  TVNZ 
also ran old footage of an obviously pleased Prime Minister 
Clark meeting with President Bush, commenting that Clark 
clearly relished the attention of the U.S. President.  Radio 
NZ said that Mallard will have to soon prove his accusations 
or he will completely lose credibility. 
 
¶10.  (C) When, as promised, Goff called in, the Charge told 
him that we recognize that New Zealanders have the right to 
debate issues of substance during their election campaign, 
even when the issues involve the United States.  The Embassy 
had not, for example, commented on Minister Goff's remarks on 
Labour's vs. National's Iraq policies.   But by hinting that 
Washington was interfering in the elections and cutting 
secret deals with National, Mallard's statements had gone 
 
SIPDIS 
over the line.  Goff agreed, noting that "Mallard's wording 
was not as careful as it should have been."  The Charge 
countered that, on the contrary, Mallard's words seem to have 
been very carefully chosen to imply that there was U.S. 
Government involvement without actually saying so.  Goff was 
silent at this. 
The Charge also reminded Goff that Ambassador Swindells had 
spoken in his July 4 speech of the failure of both 
governments to deal with the legacy of mistrust that exists 
between us. He added that Labour's tactics seemed designed to 
increase that mistrust rather than to reduce it. 
 
¶11.  (C) The Charge told Goff that the Embassy would have 
appreciated a head's up that Mallard would be making these 
remarks.  Goff said that as was well known, he (Goff) has 
very favorable feelings towards the United States and close 
family connections there.  (Goff's sister is an Amcit and has 
two sons serving in the U.S. military (one of who is in Iraq) 
with a third on his way to West Point.)  But, he went on, the 
Government believes that these issues do resonate with the 
New Zealand public and it would therefore be foolish not to 
pursue them.  There will be more campaigning on issues 
related to U.S. policy in the weeks ahead, he cautioned.  The 
Charge said that was Labour's call to make, but if further 
false claims were made the Embassy would respond.  Goff 
agreed that it was in the Embassy's right to do so, and 
endorsed the idea of our making a press statement refuting 
Mallard's claims.  The Charge then released to the media the 
following statement, which has also been cleared by 
Washington: 
 
"Our position is that the outcome of the upcoming election is 
entirely a matter for the people of New Zealand to decide. 
The U.S. Government has neither asked for nor received 
assurances of any kind from any political party in New 
Zealand.  As Ambassador Swindells mentioned in his farewell 
speech, we stand ready to work with whomever New Zealanders 
choose to represent them in order to make this important 
relationship all that both countries want it to be." 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶12.  (C) The tepid media reaction to Mallard's comments shows 
Labour's strategy might be a risky one.  Many journalists are 
questioning the accuracy of the claims and have picked up 
with some sympathy National's view that this is a 
diversionary tactic. (Embassy has e-mailed a summary of media 
reports to EAP/ANP and others in Washington.)  In addition, 
we understand that our MFAT contacts have been counseling the 
Government that there will be long-term impact on our 
bilateral relations if Labour continues its baseless 
diatribes and hints that a close relationship with the United 
States is in general not in New Zealand's interests. 
Meanwhile, we continue with our behind the scenes talks with 
MFAT and other key decision makers in government, the private 
sector, and the media about ways we can improve the bilateral 
relationship after the elections (septel). 
 
¶13.  (C) But if Labour wins, its campaign may impact our 
ability or desire to build bridges.  Ambassador Swindells, 
who is on travel but has been kept abreast of the latest 
flap, also strongly recommends that Washington reconsider 
whether or not late August is a good time for Agriculture 
Secretary Johanns to visit New Zealand.  Ordinarily such a 
 
SIPDIS 
visit would be a positive message of support for bilateral 
ties.  However, we question whether a Cabinet-level visit 
just weeks before the elections might not be seen as 
interference in domestic politics or be used to undermine 
broader U.S. interests. 
 
 
Burnett