05WELLINGTON28
COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR HARRIS AND WILLIAMS,
Wed Jan 12 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 WELLINGTON 000028 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SINGAPORE FOR TSA 
EAP/ANP - TRAMSEY 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA EAIR CW NZ
SUBJECT:  COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR HARRIS AND WILLIAMS, 
JANUARY 29 - FEBRUARY 12, 2005 
 
REF:  SINGAPORE 3629 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Embassy welcomes and grants country clearance to 
Transportation Security Administration Officials Francis 
¶E. Harris and Lisa A. Williams, to travel to Rarotonga, 
Cook Islands from January 29 - February 5, 2005, and 
Auckland, New Zealand from February 5 - 12, 2005.  The 
purpose of this visit is to conduct airport assessments in 
accordance with the International Civil Aviation 
Organization's standards and recommended practices, and to 
inspect the air carriers subject to U.S. regulations. 
 
¶2.  (U) Embassy will make hotel reservations and schedule 
meetings, as requested.  All relevant information will be 
sent via email to Singapore and Sydney contacts. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Embassy point of contact is Economic Officer Joy 
Yamamoto.  Contact details are as follows: 
 
Office:  644-462-6182 
Fax:     644-472-3537 
Cell:    027-446-4467 
E-mail:  YamamotoJO@state.gov 
 
----------- 
NEW ZEALAND 
----------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) All TDY visitors to Embassy Wellington are 
required to report to the Regional Security Office for a 
security briefing if they have not completed an approved 
overseas personal security training course. 
 
¶5.  (U) Visitors should use local taxi service, which is 
generally safe, reliable and frequent.  Taxi fare from the 
airport to downtown Auckland hotels is approximately 
NZD60.00. 
 
¶6.  (U) Travelers can exchange currency at the airport 
upon arrival and ATM machines are readily available 
throughout New Zealand.  Check cashing privileges at the 
Embassy are limited to traveler's checks only up to USD 
300.00 daily.  Personal checks will not be accepted. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Biosecurity Fines: 
 
The Government of New Zealand instituted fines for non- 
declared biosecurity hazards on travelers entering New 
Zealand with undeclared plant, animal or food material. 
Travelers found carrying these undeclared items will be 
immediately fined NZD200.00 (USD150.00).  Biosecurity is a 
serious issue in New Zealand and fines will be 
administered immediately and without warnings. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Security Information: 
 
a.  (SBU) All U.S. citizen personnel serving under the 
Chief of Mission authority in a temporary status of 30 
days or more must complete appropriate overseas personal 
security training prior to travel (04 State 66580). 
Employees who have completed the Security Overseas Seminar 
course at the Foreign Service Institute (FSI) after June 
1, 2000, meet this requirement.  All other TDY personnel 
must either (1) complete the approved seminar at FSI 
entitled "Serving Abroad for Families and Employees" 
(SAFE), or (2) have their agency certify to the Department 
of State's Bureau of Diplomatic Security that the employee 
has undergone equivalent security training.  The contact 
for this training is Assistant Director for Training at 
(703) 205-2617.  Country clearance will not be granted for 
any traveler with planned TDY in excess of 30 days if this 
information is not stated/certified.  POC for additional 
information is RSO Wellington. 
 
b.  (SBU) The U.S. Mission in New Zealand currently rates 
the threat from transnational and indigenous terrorism as 
low.  There are no terrorist groups or support groups 
believed to be operating in New Zealand at this time.  In 
light of the worldwide security alert all visitors should 
heighten their security awareness and report any unusual 
incidents to the Regional Security Officer. 
 
c.  (SBU) Anonymous telephonic threats and obscure threat 
mail have occasionally targeted U.S. diplomatic missions 
in New Zealand.  In response to U.S. policies and actions, 
various groups in New Zealand have demonstrated 
occasionally at the Embassy in Wellington and at the 
Consulate in Auckland.  These demonstrations are usually 
small and are peacefully conducted.  During these 
demonstrations, the host country police and protective 
services normally provide adequate protection to the 
Embassy and Consulate. 
 
d.  (SBU) New Zealand is considered a medium threat crime 
environment.  As such, Wellington and Auckland have 
experienced an increase in violent and petty crimes, but 
they are usually non-confrontational in nature.  However, 
home invasion robberies and assaults, once very rare, are 
becoming more frequent.  Burglaries and thefts occur 
countrywide but primarily in the large cities of Auckland, 
Christchurch and Wellington, and visitors should be 
especially aware that street crime, such as scams and 
pickpockets, is a daily occurrence in these cities. 
Common sense precautions should be taken, especially at 
night, to avoid becoming a target of opportunity. 
 
e.  (SBU) Generally, New Zealand does not play a 
significant role in the world drug situation; however, 
evidence indicates that New Zealand has been utilized as a 
transit point for shipments of Ecstasy, Heroin and Cocaine 
to Australia.  The most abused drugs in New Zealand are 
locally produced methamphetamine and cannabis.  There have 
been increased amounts of lab seizures and violent crime 
associated with groups attempting to control this market. 
 
f.  (U) All forms of public transportation are generally 
safe at all times of the day; however, at night visitors 
should use common sense precautions so as to not become a 
target of opportunity. 
 
g.  (U) The traffic situation in Auckland can be difficult 
with a moderate amount of congestion.  Visitors are 
advised that traffic drives on the left-hand side of the 
road.  Visitors are advised that traffic accidents are 
common and that it is safe to pull over so that police may 
take an accident report.  However, visitors who experience 
hostility or anti-American sentiment should depart the 
scene immediately and notify the RSO. 
 
h.  (U) Precautions should also be taken to not discuss 
sensitive or classified information outside secure 
environments or over unsecured and/or cellular telephones, 
and to securely safeguard classified or sensitive 
information at the Chancery and not at hotels or 
residences. 
 
i.  (U) Visitors should also be aware of the State 
Department's Consular Information sheet for New Zealand 
and the most recent Worldwide Caution Public 
Announcements, which are available via the Internet at 
http://travel.state.gov 
 
j.  (U) In essence, visitors to New Zealand must exercise 
appropriate caution and be alert to their surroundings 
with regard to their personal security.  Suspicious 
incidents/activities should be reported to RSO Wellington 
(Telephone (64)(4)462-6000, 24 hours/day). 
 
------------ 
COOK ISLANDS 
------------ 
 
¶9.  (U) The Cook Islands is a Parliamentary democracy in 
free association with New Zealand, on which they rely for 
defense and assistance in meeting low-level security 
threats.  The Embassy is not aware of any specific threats 
to U.S. facilities or personnel at this time in the Cook 
Islands.  However, in light of the worldwide security 
alert all visitors should heighten their security 
awareness and report any unusual incidents to the Regional 
Security Office at the Embassy in Wellington, New Zealand. 
 
¶10.  (U) Following the September 11, 2001 terrorist 
attacks in the U.S. and the November 2002 terrorist 
bombing in Bali, there has been concern that terrorists 
might seek to take advantage of the low level of security 
maintained in small island states such as the Cook Islands 
in order to target tourists in previously safe 
destinations.  New Zealand has worked with the Cook 
Islands to improve airport security in response to this 
possibility.  Terrorist actions may include, but are not 
limited to, suicide operations, bombings, or kidnapping. 
Possible threats include conventional weapons such as 
explosive devices or non-conventional weapons, including 
chemical or biological agents.  Terrorists do not 
distinguish between official and civilian targets. 
Targets may include facilities where Americans and other 
foreigners congregate or visit, such as residential areas, 
clubs, restaurants, places of worship, schools, hotels, 
outdoor recreation events, resorts, and beaches.  U.S. 
citizens should increase their security awareness at such 
locations, avoid them, or switch to other locations where 
Americans in large numbers generally do not congregate. 
¶11.  (U) The Cook Islands offshore finance industry has 
come under scrutiny regarding possible money laundering. 
The Cook Islands has been included on the OECD's list of 
non-cooperating states in the fight against money 
laundering. 
 
¶12.  (U) As a result of recent military action in Iraq, 
there is a potential for retaliatory actions to be taken 
against U.S. citizens and interest throughout the world. 
Public demonstrations carry the potential for 
precipitating violence directed at American citizens. 
 
¶13.  (U) U.S. Government facilities worldwide remain at a 
heightened state of alert and some have drawn down their 
dependents and/or personnel.  These facilities may 
temporarily close or suspend public services from time to 
time for security reasons.  In those instances, U.S. 
embassies and consulates will make every effort to provide 
emergency services to American citizens.  Monitor the 
local news and maintain contact with the nearest American 
Embassy or U.S. Consulate. 
 
¶14.  (U) Crime:  Appropriate common sense precautions 
should be taken, especially at night, to avoid becoming a 
target of opportunity. 
 
¶15.  (U) Weather:  Severe cyclones present a threat during 
the hurricane season, which is from November to March. 
 
Swindells