05WELLINGTON549
NEW ZEALAND NOMINATION FOR FSN POLITICAL
Thu Jul 14 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS WELLINGTON 000549 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FSINFATC FOR SPAS/POL - BILL INGRAM AND HAITHAM AL-MUSSAWI 
DEPT FOR EAP/ANP - THOMAS RAMSEY 
 
E.O. 12985:  N/A 
TAGS: AFSI AFSN PGOV PREL NZ
SUBJECT:  NEW ZEALAND NOMINATION FOR FSN POLITICAL 
TRAINING COURSE, SEPTEMBER 26 - OCTOBER 7 
 
REF: STATE 115052 
 
¶1.  Embassy Wellington submits the following nomination 
for the FSN Staff Political Training Course to be held in 
Washington from September 26 - October 7, 2005. 
 
¶2.  Name:  Craig Brian Greaves 
Grade:  9 Step 2. 
Length of Service: Start date - May 16, 2005. 
English language ability: level 4 (native speaker). 
 
Time spent in the U.S.: 
November 1998:  Washington DC.  Purpose:  Brief period 
before travelling to Bosnia to work for a DC-based 
research and polling firm (Greenberg Research Inc). 
 
December 1998 - March 1999:  Washington DC.  Purpose: 
Internship with DC Legislative and Regulatory Services. 
 
February 2000:  San Francisco.  Purpose:  One week 
personal vacation. 
 
Previous training in the U.S.:  None. 
 
Previous nomination for political training course: No. 
 
¶3.  Narrative:  Although Craig Greaves has been at Embassy 
Wellington for just a short time, after being recruited 
directly from the New Zealand Parliament, he has already 
become invaluable to us.  We foresee a great future here 
for years to come. 
 
Our post is small, and just graduated from SEP post 
status, which has significantly increased our reporting 
load.  Most of the work falls on the three-officer Pol- 
Econ Section, and virtually all political reporting is 
currently done by the Pol-Econ Counselor and the entry- 
level, first-time Poloff.  Recognizing the shortage, an 
FTE was approved for a new mid-level officer for the 
section, but the bureau does not have the funds to fill 
the slot.  It will be at least two years before the funds 
are allocated. 
 
In addition to this, there is no predecessor's work for 
Craig to draw on, as he is the first Embassy Wellington 
LES to perform this extensive reporting role.  Further, no 
Wellington LES has ever taken this training course. 
Therefore, Post considers it is imperative that Craig be 
selected for this course at this time. The timing is 
particularly optimal as it will immediately precede the 
formation of the new Parliament and it will advance 
Craig's ability to counsel and support the new Ambassador. 
 
New Zealand - U.S. relations are good overall but we 
differ on many issues of concern to the United States. 
Already Craig has proved invaluable in providing access to 
leading decision makers both inside and outside of the 
political community. 
 
The training course would provide him with the necessary 
complementary skills and background knowledge needed to 
clarify USG positions in an effort to influence key 
players throughout New Zealand as well as presenting 
essential insights in understanding how Washington 
operates and what USG policymakers need. 
 
Craig is skilled enough to perform many of the functions 
of a reporting officer; he brings with him an array of 
skills, contacts and knowledge that improves the Mission's 
understanding and interpretation of the domestic political 
environment.  Craig is also hard working, a fast study, 
and unfailingly considerate, and we think he'd be a great 
asset to the class. 
 
The Ambassador and the DCM strongly support his nomination 
and firmly believe Craig's immediate participation in this 
course will significantly advance the Mission's 
objectives. 
 
Swindells