05WELLINGTON160
NEW ZEALAND AIMS TO STRENGTHEN ITS TERRORIST
Wed Feb 23 00:00:00 +0100 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 WELLINGTON 000160 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR EB/ESC/TFS, EAP/ANP AND S/CT 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/22/2015 
TAGS: KTFN EFIN PTER PREL NZ
SUBJECT: NEW ZEALAND AIMS TO STRENGTHEN ITS TERRORIST 
FINANCE LAWS 
 
 
Classified by: DCM David R. Burnett.  Reasons: 1.4 (b) and 
(d). 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: The New Zealand government continues to 
tighten provisions of an anti-terrorism law it enacted more 
than a year after September 11, 2001, and that it amended in 
¶2003.  The government recently introduced legislation that 
will delay the expiration date for New Zealand's designations 
of terrorist organizations to 2007.  The bill also proposes 
extending the law's reach to cover intentional financing of 
non-designated terrorist organizations.  The changes are 
aimed at keeping New Zealand in compliance with UN Security 
Council Resolution 1373, as well as to follow recommendations 
presented in a Financial Action Task Force review.  More 
changes are coming, with a government review of the 
anti-terrorism law scheduled for completion by December 1, 
¶2005. 
 
¶2. (C) Meanwhile, the government is grappling with procedural 
issues that often have delayed New Zealand's designation of 
terrorist individuals and entities.  Its law does not allow 
for the automatic designation of terrorists as listed by the 
United Nations.  Nor has New Zealand yet designated as a 
terrorist any individual or entity that was not already 
UN-listed, largely because it lacks procedures for handling 
classified information in its courts.  Post continues to work 
with New Zealand officials to determine whether the U.S. 
government might help the New Zealand government as it works 
to revamp its legislation and court procedures.  End summary. 
 
Changes in the law 
------------------ 
3) (U) On February 10, Justice Minister Phil Goff introduced 
in Parliament a second amendment to the Terrorism Suppression 
Act 2002, the law that allows the government to designate 
terrorists and terrorist organizations and to freeze their 
assets.  The act's drafters had assumed that some 
designations might be short-lived, and so the law requires 
that New Zealand's designations of terrorist organizations -- 
covering 318 organizations listed by the UN Security Council 
-- expire in October unless renewed individually by the High 
Court.  The amendment extends the expiration date by two 
years, to 2007, aiming to keep New Zealand in compliance with 
UN Security Council Resolution 1373 and related resolutions. 
The extension also accommodates an ongoing government review 
of the Terrorism Suppression Act, which is expected to 
recommend additional changes to the law when it is completed 
by December 1, 2005.  The government hopes to pass the 
amendment by July, well before national elections that 
probably will be held in September, as the resulting change 
in government appointments could delay the bill's 
implementation. 
 
4) (C) The amendment also would extend the law's prohibitions 
against financing terrorist acts and designated terrorist 
entities to apply to the intentional financing of 
non-designated terrorist organizations.  To be illegal, the 
funding would not necessarily have to be used to support a 
specific terrorist act.  Any support of the organization 
would be banned.  This change addresses a shortcoming in New 
Zealand's law identified in a review by the OECD's Financial 
Action Task Force on Money Laundering (FATF).  Gabrielle Rush 
(strictly protect), an adviser in the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs and Trade's legal division, said the government 
believes that successful prosecutions under the provision 
would be unlikely, given the difficulty of proving a person 
"knowingly" financed a terrorist group.  Nonetheless, the 
government wants to comply with FATF's Eight Special 
Recommendations on terrorist financing and its revised 40 
Recommendations.  New Zealand was among the first countries 
to undergo a FATF peer review of its terrorist financing and 
money-laundering laws.  Recommendations by the review, which 
was completed in late 2003, have not yet been published, 
although the government received the task force's draft 
report in mid-2004. 
 
5) (U) On February 16, Minister Goff announced additional 
laws to counter terrorist financing and money laundering, all 
intended to satisfy FATF's recommendations.  The laws would 
set up a monitoring regime to ensure compliance by financial 
and other institutions with anti-money laundering and 
terrorist finance requirements.  Currency changers and funds 
remitters -- currently unregulated -- would be required to 
register and would be subject to the same reporting 
requirements as banks.  Financial institutions would have to 
obtain, verify and retain information about the identity of 
people sending wire transfers.  Minister Goff explained in a 
statement, "New Zealand's largely deregulated financial 
system results in potential loopholes in our system that 
require closing in order to meet strict international 
requirements." 
 
Problems in the law 
------------------- 
¶6. (C) New Zealand has largely complied with UNSCR 1373.  It 
has not yet identified any terrorist assets in the country. 
But the government's process for designating UN-listed 
terrorist entities can involve delays.  Since enactment of 
the Terrorism Suppression Act, the New Zealand Police have 
initiated the designation process, determining whether 
sufficient criteria exists -- even for UN-listed entities. 
The process is a slow one:  The police draft applications for 
designation, circulate them among relevant government offices 
and send them to the Prime Minister for her final approval. 
Although the Prime Minister has approved all designations 
presented by police, weeks can pass between designation of an 
individual or entity by the United Nations and designation by 
New Zealand.  Previously, a stopgap measure approved by 
Cabinet on November 26, 2001, had provided for the automatic 
designation of UN-listed entities in New Zealand.  A year 
later, it was replaced with the Terrorism Suppression Act, 
which designated in New Zealand all entities listed by the 
United Nations by October 18, 2002.  (Those designations will 
expire in October under the current law.)  Since then, 
designations have been made through the process shepherded by 
police. 
 
¶7. (C) Even for UN-listed individuals and entities, police 
must build a case for their designation in New Zealand that 
meets the Terrorism Suppression Act's requirements, according 
to Bill Peoples (strictly protect), crime policy and projects 
officer for the New Zealand Police.  That means the police 
case must provide the Prime Minister with "reasonable 
grounds" for believing that an individual or entity knowingly 
carried out or participated in a terrorist act, before she 
can designate it.  Peoples said that in some cases the 
government's legal counsel, Crown Law, has questioned whether 
the United Nations had sufficient evidence to make a 
designation. 
 
¶8. (C)  If the designations are sponsored by the United 
States, providing "reasonable grounds" can be relatively 
easy, Peoples said.  The U.S. government supplies a statement 
of case when it pre-notifies the New Zealand government 
before submitting names for designation to the UN 1267 
Sanctions Committee.  However, some nations do not authorize 
the United Nations to identify them or to release their 
statements of case when they submit names for designation. 
In such instances, the police are forced to independently 
build a case for designations. 
 
¶9. (C) Flaws in the law stem from how it was drafted, said 
Rush of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT). 
When the law was first introduced, a number of legislators 
immediately objected that the bill would unfairly impinge on 
civil liberties.  In the end, it took a year to be reviewed 
and passed, and provisions had been watered down.  As Rush 
explained, some New Zealanders fear the law could be applied 
to someone like Nelson Mandela, who was labeled a terrorist 
by his government but who many consider a "freedom fighter." 
While New Zealand's designations under the Terrorism 
Suppression Act have not been challenged in court and no New 
Zealander has been designated, Rush said the government 
worries about how it would defend designation of a New 
Zealander based on the UN list, if information behind the 
listing were not available.  New Zealand officials expect 
their planned, future revisions will eliminate the law's 
weaknesses, as now there are clearer international best 
practices in place. 
 
¶10. (C) Peoples and Rush said the government also is 
exceedingly cautious because of the case of Ahmed Zaoui, a 
former member of Algeria's parliament who sought refugee 
status on arrival in New Zealand in December 2002.  In a 
statement on entities designated as terrorists by the Prime 
Minister in September 2004, Zaoui's political party -- the 
Islamic Salvation Front, or FIS -- was linked to an 
individual who has ties to al Qaida.  At the time, the 
government was under pressure by Zaoui's supporters because 
it continued to keep him in custody, largely on the basis of 
classified information.  While the UN designation did not 
link the FIS to al Qaida, the New Zealand police had based 
the statement on open sources.  But, that information was 
subject to different interpretations, and the police 
ultimately withdrew the statement and apologized.  Peoples 
said the designation has been the only problematic one 
presented to the Prime Minister for approval.  The Zaoui case 
is still pending, and New Zealand officials are reviewing 
possible legislative changes that would eliminate conflicts 
between the country's immigration and refugee laws that the 
case has exposed.  In the meantime, publicity surrounding the 
case has increased the Prime Minister's cautiousness -- and 
that of Crown Law and other government agencies -- in 
considering police proposals for designations. 
¶11. (C) In addition, the New Zealand government has not yet 
designated individuals and entities as terrorists that are 
not already designated by the UN, because the courts lack 
procedures for the introduction of classified information in 
trials, Rush said.  Crown Law and the judiciary are working 
to establish such procedures.  Until then, the government is 
reluctant to designate entities not on the UN list because of 
the fear of legal challenges.  In the meantime, Peoples said 
he is preparing a proposal to designate Hezbollah based only 
on open-source documents.  He is uncertain whether such a 
case would provide "reasonable grounds" for a designation. 
 
¶12. (C) The police are preparing a list of issues they want 
addressed by the Foreign Affairs, Defense and Trade Select 
Committee, which is reviewing the Terrorism Suppression Act. 
Those include the lack of an automatic designation of 
UN-listed entities.  Other government departments also have 
been asked to comment on the law.  Rush said the government 
will be studying the designation process in other countries 
and will consider two tracks for designations, one for 
UN-listed entities, possibly incorporating a degree of 
automaticity, and another for entities not designated by the 
United Nations. 
 
¶13. (C) Comment: Rush and Peoples noted that more open-source 
information would be helpful in obtaining designations.  Post 
will continue to work with EB/ESC/TFS and other relevant 
offices to determine whether additional U.S. government 
information could be provided to New Zealand, at least until 
it revises its law and court procedures. 
Swindells