05WELLINGTON666
REQUEST FOR RESETTLEMENT ASSISTANCE OF CERTAIN
Wed Aug 31 00:00:00 +0200 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 WELLINGTON 000666 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR S/WCI - AMBASSADOR PROSPER, EAP/FO, AND EAP/ANP 
NSC FOR VICTOR CHA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 08/30/2015 
TAGS: KAWC MOPS PREL PTER PHUM PREF PINR NZ
SUBJECT: REQUEST FOR RESETTLEMENT ASSISTANCE OF CERTAIN 
DETAINEES FROM GUANTANAMO 
 
REF: SECSTATE 158272 
 
Classified By: ACTING DCM KATHERINE B. HADDA, 
FOR REASONS 1.4(B) AND (D). 
 
This message contains an action request, at paras 1 and 7. 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary: New Zealand is willing to consider taking in 
Uigher refugees from Guantanamo, but would at a minimum need 
a request from the UNHCR to start the process.  Both Minister 
of Foreign Affairs Goff and Immigration Minister Swain will 
make the final decision of whether to admit the Uighers. 
Please advise post if and when UNHCR would be willing to make 
the request. End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (C) Acting DCM raised the U.S. request with Simon 
Murdoch, CEO of New Zealand's Ministry of Foreign Affairs and 
Trade (FYI: The CEO is the highest civil servant in the 
Ministry.)  Murdoch said that he would urge relevant 
officials to give the request full consideration, but 
cautioned that there were many strikes against it: New 
Zealand generally only takes refugees at the UNHCR's request, 
and has already exceeded its UNHCR quota for 2005 and 2006. 
In addition, New Zealand has no Uigher community, and 
government policy is to give priority to those refugees who 
can draw from existing communities for support as they adjust 
to NZ life. 
 
¶3.  (C) Acting DCM thanked Murdoch for his consideration of 
the request and told him that  we have already been working 
with UNHCR and others.  She said that New Zealand is an open 
society with a long history of taking in refugees and other 
immigrants, as well as tolerance towards these groups.  For 
this reason, we rank New Zealand high on the list of 
potential homes for the refugees.  We also consider 
significant New Zealand's well-assimilated, multinational 
Muslim community, which might be willing to help the 
refugees.  ADCM acknowledged that there are no Uighers in New 
Zealand, but said that depending on the background of 
individual refugees, it may also be possible that some 
members of New Zealand's large Chinese population could help 
them settle into life here.  She repeated Washington's offer 
to provide more detailed background on the detainees if 
helpful.  (Comment: New Zealand's pre-war Chinese and sizable 
Taiwan communities are among those Chinese-speaking New 
Zealanders who are not particularly pro-PRC and therefore 
possibly able/willing to help.  End Comment.) 
 
¶4.  (C) Acting DCM also made the request to Mary Anne 
Thompson, Workforce Deputy Secretary at the Department of 
Labour.  (FYI: Thompson, a former member of PM Clark's staff, 
is an influential player on NZ immigration matters.) 
Thompson said that she would recommend to the Prime 
Minister's Department and others that GNZ should keep an open 
mind about the request. She said that a letter from UNHCR 
supporting the request would be "most helpful," as more and 
more it is GNZ's emphasis to only admit UNHCR-sponsored 
refugees.  She said that if and when GNZ received such a 
letter, they would look at the individual potential refugees 
and their circumstances.  GNZ would also want to send people 
to interview the detainees, to determine whether they would 
be willing/able to contribute to NZ society over time, and 
whether they could be a security risk.  In the meantime, 
Thompson said, she would quietly advise staff working on 
refugee matters that a UNHCR request "may be coming."  Given 
the sensitivity of the issue, she asked that we keep it 
confidential.  ADCM assured her that we would, as we have 
 
SIPDIS 
similar concerns. 
 
¶5.  (C) Thompson also noted that NZ preference is to admit 
refugees from groups with existing communities here, but took 
on board ADCM's suggestion that some Chinese New Zealanders 
and Muslim New Zealanders may be able to help.  Thompson also 
noted that if GNZ decided to take in any of the detainees, it 
would rather take in a group of them (i.e., "10 to 12") 
rather than one or two.  This would make assimilation easier, 
she said.  GNZ would also admit the refugees' families, as 
appropriate. 
 
¶6.  (C) Comment: GNZ is negotiating a free trade agreement 
with China and is pursuing close relations with the Chinese 
on many levels.  That being said, they continue to draw the 
line against direct or indirect support for China's human 
rights violations.  Although clearly cautious, GNZ officials 
may well be willing to consider taking in the Uighers if we 
continue to take a quietly, quietly approach as well as work 
through the UNHCR on the request.  End Comment. 
 
¶7.  (C) Action Request: Please advise whether and when it 
would be possible for UNHCR to make a formal request for GNZ 
to consider taking in some of the Uigher detainees. 
Burnett