05WELLINGTON907
CO-LEADER'S DEATH LIKELY TO STEER NZ'S GREEN PARTY
Fri Nov 25 00:00:00 +0100 2005
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Wellington
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 WELLINGTON 000907 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR D (FRITZ), EAP/FO (STEPHENS) 
AND EAP/ANP 
NSC FOR VICTOR CHA 
SECDEF FOR OSD/ISA ELIZABETH PHU 
PACOM FOR J2/J233/J5/SJFHQ 
AIT FOR DAVID KEEGAN 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/25/2015 
TAGS: PGOV PREL NZ
SUBJECT: CO-LEADER'S DEATH LIKELY TO STEER NZ'S GREEN PARTY 
FURTHER LEFT 
 
REF: WELLINGTON 692 
 
Classified By: DCM David R. Burnett, 
for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
Summary 
-------- 
 
¶1.  (C) New Zealand's Green Party is likely to move further 
left following the unexpected death of its relatively 
pragmatic co-leader Rod Donald. The Greens, who garnered 
about 5% of the party vote in September's general election, 
are in a confidence and supply agreement with the Labour 
coalition Government.  Because the party's votes are not 
needed for Labour to form a Parliamentary majority, they have 
little real influence on Government policy.  But if the 
current coalition collapses, for example because of a 
defection by Foreign Minister (and NZ First leader) Winston 
Peters, Labour might have to make concessions to the more 
radicalized Greens to form a new Government. This would hurt 
Labour's standing among more mainstream New Zealanders.  End 
Summary. 
 
¶2.  (C) The death of Green Party co-leader Rod Donald is 
proving to be a decisive moment for the political future of 
the Green movement in New Zealand.  Donald was a pragmatist 
who had a unique appeal across parties and to the wider 
electorate. He was the only Green who could communicate with 
business, and although companies often  disagreed with him he 
did not frighten or anger them the way his fellow party 
members usually do. As reported reftel, Donald was also the 
only Green MP to reach out to the Embassy.  As was made 
obvious following his shocking, sudden death from a rare 
myocardial virus on Nov. 19, even non-Green Kiwis favorably 
regarded Donald as 
someone who lived by his principles.  His consistently upbeat 
manner made a mark in this somewhat depressive society, 
particularly in contrast to his more dour co-leader, Jeanette 
Fitzsimons. 
 
¶3.  (C) The post-Donald Green Party is certainly not doomed, 
but it will almost definitely change its character. Despite 
the belief that personalities do not matter and that the 
Green vision and mission is bigger than any one advocate, the 
party under the next co-leader is likely to be more of a 
zealot than a pragmatist. Donald left the Green Party without 
an obvious successor. There are, however, three identifiable 
candidates for the co-leadership, who must be male under the 
Party,s constitution.  All are more radical and less 
pragmatic than Donald.  Two, Keith Locke and Nandor Tanczos, 
are MPs.  The third, Russell Norman, is the party's national 
campaign manager. 
 
¶4.  (C) Neither Lock nor Tanczos have the same sort of 
broader leadership appeal of Donald, appealing instead to the 
fervent core of loyal Green supporters.  Locke lacks Donald's 
ebullience. A returning member of the Parliamentary Foreign 
Affairs 
Select Committee, Locke is a passionate leftist crusader with 
an incontrovertible and unwavering mistrust of United States 
foreign policy.  He has, for example, been a loud and 
constant critic of the NZ Government's decision to send SAS 
troops to Afghanistan, claiming that NZ should not be 
supporting what Locke claims are US "war crimes" there. 
Tanczos, a half-Hungarian Rastafarian, was squeezed out of 
Parliament by the Greens' reduced party votes in the last 
election.  He reentered Parliament to replace Donald.  An 
amiable man, Tanczos is best known in New Zealand for his 
relentless campaign to legalize marijuana, which -- together 
with his dreadlocks -- has definitely detracted from his 
gravitas.  (The marijuana stigma has also moved from Tanczos 
himself to taint the party as a whole, leading some Green 
Party officials 
to express frustration that the party is now automatically 
associated with the drug.) Tanczos' first public act since 
returning to Parliament has been to decry the decision of a 
South Island dairy to stop selling its milk in glass bottles. 
 
 
¶5.  (C) Russell Norman, the national campaign manager who 
does not sit in Parliament, is most frequently mentioned as 
the possible replacement for Donald. An Australian with a PhD 
in politics, Norman has Donald,s enthusiasm but little of 
his pragmatism. 
He does, however, have organizational skills, a decided asset 
in a party traditionally weak in them. He also has broad 
Green experience in both New Zealand and Australia. Although 
selecting a co-leader from outside parliament would be 
unusual, it would not necessarily lack credibility with 
Greens themselves, who have always emphasized 
grassroots accountability. 
 
The Greens: Little effect on policy under present 
circumstances 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶6.  (C) Despite Donald's best efforts, the Greens were unable 
to get their hands 
on the levers of power after the election. Under Donald, the 
Greens played a much 
more supportive role for Labour in 2005 and were explicitly 
clear in their 
willingness to form a coalition and have a place in Cabinet. 
Much to the distress of Donald personally, this did not 
happen. If anything, the Green influence on policy has 
weakened under this Government. Even if the post-Donald Green 
Party moves left, it 
will not have much, if any, effect on the political direction 
of the Government. There 
is little trust between the hard left of the Greens and the 
hard left of the Labour 
Party. Although there may be some synergy in areas of 
industrial relations and labor issues between the two, 
Labour's left remains skeptical of and nervous towards their 
Green counterparts, seeing them more as rivals than as 
colleagues. 
 
But... 
------- 
 
¶7.  (C) If, however, NZ First leader Winston Peters defects 
(or is booted) from Labour's governing coalition and the 
arrangement collapses, PM Clark will only be able to form a 
new Government if she can demonstrate continued Green 
support, as she 
will have lost the seven NZ First MPs she has used to form a 
majority.  (Indeed, a Labour Party official has told us that 
the Greens are Labour's "insurance policy" in case Peters 
breaks out of the coalition.)  The now more-radicalized 
Greens would in this case be in a much stronger position to 
demand policy concessions, a seat in Cabinet, or both.  This 
in turn could seriously undermine Labour's standing in the 
polls among more "mainstream" New Zealanders, a prospect that 
the opposition National Party would certainly exploit. 
 
¶8.  (C) Perhaps because there is no clear successor for 
Donald, the Greens are in no hurry to elect one, and recently 
announced they will not do so until the party's Annual 
General Meeting next June.  The decision on who will replace 
Donald will be determined after the party decides the 
direction of its post-Donald policies. But their decision is 
very likely to be a bigger move to the hard left, as the 
biggest and most effective voice of pragmatism is no longer 
on the scene. 
McCormick