06WELLINGTON221
COOK ISLANDS HIGH COMMISSIONER SACKED FOR PLOTTING
Wed Mar 22 00:00:00 +0100 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Wellington
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHWL #0221/01 0811929
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 221929Z MAR 06
FM AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2551
INFO RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 4345
RUEHSV/AMEMBASSY SUVA 0453
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIC O N F I D E N T I A L WELLINGTON 000221 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/ANP DRICCI 
PACOM FOR JO1E/J2/J233/J5/SJFHQ 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/21/2016 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PBIO NZ
SUBJECT: COOK ISLANDS HIGH COMMISSIONER SACKED FOR PLOTTING 
 
REF: 04 WELLINGTON 1066 
 
Classified By: Deputy Chief of Mission David Burnett, 
for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
Summary 
------- 
¶1. (SBU) On March 3, citing involvement in a plot to topple 
him from Government, Cook Islands Prime Minister Jim Marurai 
sacked Dr. Robert Woonton as High Commissioner to New 
Zealand.  Marurai succeeded Woonton as Prime Minister in 
December 2004, and Woonton became High Commissioner as a 
political accommodation.  While Marurai's government has 
averted a test of its confidence for now, a new threat is 
likely to emerge in July, when Parliament must convene to 
approve a new budget.  End Summary 
 
WQnton Sacked for Plotting to Topple Government 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
¶2. (SBU) On March 3, Cook Islands Prime Minster Jim Marurai 
dismissed Dr. Robert Woonton as High Commissioner to New 
Zealand.  Marurai told Radio New Zealand that Woonton, ousted 
Minister of Cultural Development Piho Rua, and 
Wellington-based property developer Tim Tepaki had attempted 
to bring down Marurai's Cook Islands First Party (CIFP)-led 
coalition government.  Meanwhile,  opposition leader Sir 
Geoffrey Henry claimed on March 2 that his Cook Islands Party 
(CIP) had the support of thirteen seats in the twenty-four 
member Cook Islands Parliament, as the result of the 
defection of two MPs from the governing coalition: Rua (an 
independent) and Upoko Simpson (CIFP).  In 2005, Marurai had 
dumped Rua as Minister of Cultural Development and Tourism. 
Developer Tepaki is generally believed to favor CIP. 
 
¶3. (C) At a March 3 press conference confirming the decision 
to sack Woonton, Foreign Minister (and CIP member) Wilkie 
Rasmussen explained, "In taking this decision, the Government 
of the Cook Islands believes that Dr. Woonton has not acted 
in the best interest of the Cook Islands, and as such no 
longer enjoys the confidence of Cabinet to continue in the 
capacity of Cook Islands High Commissioner to New Zealand." 
He continued, "The very nature of this appointment 
necessitates a position of political neutrality in both New 
Zealand and the Cook Islands."  According to First Secretary 
Sonya Kamana (protect) at the Cook Islands High Commission, 
Woonton told her he had not done anything improper.  However, 
Kamana confided to Poloff that Woonton should not have been 
as involved in politics as he was. 
 
Instability represents more of the same 
--------------------------------------- 
¶4. (U) While the sacking of Woonton has been characterized by 
the government and media as a "failed coup," the event is 
just the most recent sign of instability extending as far 
back as the June 1999 elections.  Since becoming 
self-governing in 1965, there have been nine Cooks Prime 
Ministers: four of these since the Democrats came to power in 
¶1999. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Following September 2004 elections (see reftel), a 
series of petitions delayed a final outcome for three months, 
including one concerning then Prime Minster Woonton's narrow 
majority.  After a recount, the high court ordered a 
by-election, and Woonton had to step down from office as 
Prime Minister.  He was subsequently named High Commissioner 
to New Zealand after he declined to stand in the February 
2005 by-election.  After the election, the four-member Demo 
Tumu Party (now renamed Cook Islands First) joined 
independent Piho Rua and the CIP in an unstable parliamentary 
majority.  Under the coalition arrangement, Jim Marurai 
became prime minister and the leader of CIP, Henry, was 
slated to take over the remaining two years. 
 
¶6. (U) In September 2005, Marurai nullified the coalition 
with CIP after having ousted Henry and two other CIP 
ministers:  Tom Marsters (Foreign Affairs) and Tupou Faireka 
(Justice).  Although CIP moved into opposition, two CIP 
members remain as ministers in Government, Rasmussen (Foreign 
Affairs) and Teina Bishop (Outer Islands).  Replacing Henry 
as Deputy Prime Minister, Dr. Terepai Maoate is the sole 
representative of the Democratic Party in Cabinet. 
 
What's Next? 
------------ 
¶7. (U) FM Rasmussen said that there would be no repeat of the 
situation a couple of years ago when it took twelve months 
for the Woonton Government to appoint Sir Tom Davis as High 
Commissioner to New Zealand.  In the meantime, 
First Secretary Sonya Kamana will serve as acting 
commissioner. 
 
¶8. (C) Kamana confirmed to Poloff that Woonton intended to 
remain in New Zealand. However, Dr. Woonton, who was given 
three weeks to vacate his office, has since returned to the 
Cook Islands.  Kamana claims Woonton, a pathologist, had gone 
to assist in a nine-year old murder case for which there was 
new evidence.  (Woonton was previously associated with case.) 
 
¶9. (U) On March 11, Marurai announced that the Parliament 
would not convene until June.  The PM preempted critics by 
saying that his reasons were not political but operational. 
There are no bills presently before Parliament and the budget 
has not yet been completed.  Critics suggest that by holding 
off on convening Parliament, Marurai is seeking to duck a "no 
confidence" motion against his Government.  Parliament is not 
required to sit until July 1, when it must convene to approve 
the new budget. 
 
New Zealand MPs drop in 
----------------------- 
¶10. (C) In March, four MPs from the New Zealand Parliament's 
Finance and Expenditure Select Committee made a trip to the 
Cook Islands, where the members advised Cook Islands' 
Cabinet, other MPs and the heads of ministries on good 
governance and accountability with public money.  The members 
included chair Shane Jones (Labour), Hone Harawira (Maori 
Party), Murray McCully (National, former chair) and Doug 
Woolerton (New Zealand First).  Murray McCully said that the 
trip was a "serious undertaking" as some ministries, for 
example, had not filed "annual reports for a few years." 
McCully told Poloff that he has made eight or nine trips to 
the Cook Islands over the years, and is well-acquainted with 
the players.  He said that there is an ongoing challenge 
between the older and younger members for leadership in the 
Cook Islands political parties.  He told Poloff that, even 
though Marurai claimed to be confident he would remain Prime 
Minister, McCully "would not be surprised if there were a 
change in government." 
McCormick