06WELLINGTON741
Proposal for US Speaker John F. "Jack" McGuire, Interim
Wed Sep 20 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Wellington
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHWL #0741/01 2632134
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 202134Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 3291UNCLAS WELLINGTON 000741 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
FOR IIP/G/EA - TVOSE; RFHOLDEN; EAP/PD - AEGRIMES, JBOOKBINDER, 
RHOLDEN, TSKIPPER; EAP/ANP 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: OIIP NZ
SUBJECT: Proposal for US Speaker John F. "Jack" McGuire, Interim 
 
 
President and CEO of the American Red Cross 
 
¶1. Post requests John F. "Jack" McGuire, interim President and CEO 
of the American Red Cross, to come to New Zealand to be the keynote 
speaker at the 75th anniversary conference of the New Zealand Red 
Cross in Christchurch, November 18-19, 2006. 
 
¶2. Post requests Mr. McGuire in support of MPP Goal 07-01, Mutual 
Understanding. 
Allowing for a rest day and Embassy briefings in Wellington, Post 
would like McGuire to arrive in Wellington no later than Thursday, 
November 16, and depart Christchurch on Sunday, November 19.  This 
would allow for a maximum of three official program days and a rest 
day. 
 
¶3. Justification and Objective: For 75 years the New Zealand Red 
Cross has responded to all in times of crisis.  Formed in 1931 
following the Napier earthquake, the New Zealand Red Cross has not 
stopped its work since then. Through war, flood, and fire volunteers 
have responded willingly and risen to the task with a renowned 
passion and commitment. Their reputation is richly deserved, 
embodying the universal spirit of Red Cross.  The New Zealand Red 
Cross is one of 183 national Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies 
worldwide that make up the International Federation of Red Cross and 
Red Crescent Societies. As part of the world's largest humanitarian 
organization, the Kiwi Red Cross has no political, religious, or 
cultural affiliation and is independent of government. 
 
While Democratic Senator for Illinois, John McGuire received the 
"Legislator of the Year" award from the Red Cross in 1991.  Post 
believes that the events in the United States in the past eighteen 
months have shown how agencies such as the American Red Cross have 
risen to great challenges in times of crisis, such as Hurricane 
Katrina.  We believe that Mr. McGuire is ideally placed to discuss 
disaster preparedness with a number of organizations in New Zealand. 
 A speaker with the experience of such an event as Katrina would be 
of real interest to conference attendees, as well as to members of 
local government here.  Post would welcome the opportunity to have a 
dialog with its contacts regarding emergency preparedness, which is 
important for all citizens, especially older people and those with 
disabilities; disaster relief; and training in local communities. 
We request three days of programming, to include consultations in 
Wellington on Friday, November 17, before departing for the national 
conference in Christchurch November 18-19. 
 
McGuire has been strongly recommended to Post by the National 
President of the New Zealand Red Cross, who has met him at 
conferences overseas and says he is a very competent public speaker. 
 She believes that New Zealanders could learn from his experiences. 
We are also of the opinion that he is eminently suitable to come to 
New Zealand as a keynote speaker for the national conference. 
 
Of Note for Australia: McGuire and the Australian Blood Service (NZ 
does not have such an organization) have registered a mutual 
interest in visiting Australia while he is in the region to share 
his expertise in improving the safety and availability of the blood 
supply. His experience, which includes time as president and CEO of 
Hemasure, Inc., a company that developed products to increase the 
safety of donated blood and improve certain blood transfusion and 
collection procedures, is of serious interest to the Australians. 
Under McGuire's leadership the commercialization of Hemasure 
products was streamlined, and commercial partnerships were 
developed.  In 2000 McGuire received the Distinguished Service Award 
from the AABB, an award that recognized his commitment to the 
Association and its work to improve patient access to new 
blood-banking technologies. 
Please see the Australian Blood Service website: 
http://www.arcbs.redcross.org.au/. 
 
¶4. Activity Date, Fiscal Year and Quarter: Requested date is 
November 17-19; 1st quarter, FY2007. 
 
¶5. Audience and Types of Events: 
McGuire's experience both in the US and overseas makes him 
especially suited to a program of lectures, seminars, roundtables, 
and media interviews in Wellington and Christchurch.  We expect that 
the audience for the New Zealand visit will include politicians, 
members of local government, policy makers, academics, and the 
media. 
 
¶6. Post plans to discuss the exact subject of the roundtables and 
presentations with McGuire once the proposal is accepted. 
 
¶7. McGuire's contact details: 
John McGuire, Interim President and CEO 
American Red Cross 
National Headquarters 
2025 E Street NW 
Washington, DC 20006 
www.redcross.org 
 
Email: macguireJ@usa.redcross.org 
 
President and CEO of the American Red Cross 
 
Ph: 202-303-4498 
 
¶8. Post Project Officer: Control Officer: Christine Vivian 
Office Phone: 644-462-6112; Fax: 644-499-0490 
Email: cvivian@actrix.gen.nz or vivianc@state.gov 
 
¶9. Funding: This visit is contingent on availability of FY07 
funding. Please advise soonest.  Many thanks. 
MCCORMICK