07WELLINGTON875
NEW ZEALAND COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR CODEL BOND AND
Fri Dec 28 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Wellington
VZCZCXRO0651
RR RUEHNZ RUEHPT
DE RUEHWL #0875/01 3620158
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 280158Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4980
INFO RUEHNZ/AMCONSUL AUCKLAND 1581
RUEHDN/AMCONSUL SYDNEY 0620
RUEHPT/AMCONSUL PERTH 0030
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 5062
RUEHBK/AMEMBASSY BANGKOK 1718UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 WELLINGTON 000875 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR H - AMACDERMOTT AND EAP/ANP 
STATE PASS SSCI - LTUCKER 
 
E.O. 12985:  N/A 
TAGS: OTRA NZ
SUBJECT:  NEW ZEALAND COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR CODEL BOND AND 
DELEGATION 
 
REF:  STATE 170441 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Embassy welcomes and grants country clearance to CODEL 
Bond and delegation to travel to Auckland and Queenstown, New 
Zealand from January 6-8, 2008.  The purpose of this visit is to 
discuss bilateral issues with government officials. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Embassy control officer is Embassy Official James Manown. 
Contact details are as follows: 
 
Office:  644-462-6155 
Fax:     644-472-3537 
Cell:    021-257-8115 
E-mail:  manownjd@state.gov 
 
Embassy administrative point of contact is Jennifer Dougherty. 
Contact details are as follows: 
 
Office:  644-462-6155 
Fax:     644-472-3537 
Cell:    027-270-6238 
E-mail:  doughertyjl@state.gov 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Hotel accommodations have been made at the Langham Hotel 
in Auckland for January 5 and 6 located at 83 Symonds Street. 
Telephone number is 64-9-379-5132.  Hotel accommodations have been 
made at Crowne Plaza in Queenstown for January 7.  The Crowne Plaza 
is located on Beach Street and their telephone number is 
64-3-442-7800.  Transportation has been arranged for arrival, 
meetings and departures.  As Embassy cannot provide cashier 
services, the delegation will receive their M&IE before they leave 
Washington and the delegation will authorize the Embassy to 
chargeback the cost of the hotel rooms to the fund cite.  Schedules 
will be sent separately when they are confirmed. 
 
¶4.  (U) Travelers can exchange currency at the airport upon arrival 
and ATM machines are readily available throughout New Zealand. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Biosecurity Fines: 
 
The Government of New Zealand instituted fines for non-declared 
biosecurity hazards on travelers entering New Zealand with 
undeclared plant, animal or food material.  Travelers found carrying 
these undeclared items will be immediately fined NZD $200.00 (USD 
$150.00).  Biosecurity is a serious issue in New Zealand and fines 
will be administered immediately and without warnings. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Security Information: 
 
a.  (SBU) All U.S. citizen personnel serving under the Chief of 
Mission authority in a temporary status of 30 days or more must 
complete appropriate overseas personal security training prior to 
travel (04 State 66580).  Employees who have completed the Security 
Overseas Seminar course at the Foreign Service Institute (FSI) after 
June 1, 2000, meet this requirement.  All other TDY personnel must 
either (1) complete the approved seminar at FSI entitled "Serving 
Abroad for Families and Employees" (SAFE), or (2) have their agency 
certify to the Department of State's Bureau of Diplomatic Security 
that the employee has undergone equivalent security training.  The 
contact for this training is Assistant Director for Training at 
(703) 205-2617.  Country clearance will not be granted for any 
traveler with planned TDY in excess of 30 days if this information 
is not stated/certified.  POC for additional information is RSO 
Wellington. 
 
b.  (SBU) The U.S. Mission in New Zealand currently rates the threat 
from transnational and domestic terrorism as low.  There are no 
terrorist groups or support groups believed to be operating in New 
Zealand at this time.  In light of the worldwide security alert all 
visitors should heighten their security awareness and report any 
unusual incidents to the Regional Security Officer. 
 
c.  (SBU) Anonymous telephonic threats and obscure threat mail have 
occasionally targeted U.S. diplomatic missions in New Zealand.  In 
response to U.S. policies and actions, various groups in New Zealand 
have demonstrated occasionally at the Embassy in Wellington and at 
the Consulate in Auckland.  These demonstrations are usually small 
and are peacefully conducted.  During these demonstrations, the host 
country police and protective services normally provide adequate 
protection to the Embassy and Consulate. 
 
d.  (SBU) New Zealand is considered a medium threat crime 
environment.  As such, Wellington and Auckland have experienced an 
 
WELLINGTON 00000875  002 OF 002 
 
 
increase in violent and petty crimes, but they are usually 
non-confrontational in nature.  However, home invasion robberies and 
assaults, once very rare, are becoming more frequent.  Burglaries 
and thefts occur countrywide but primarily in the large cities of 
Auckland, Christchurch and Wellington, and visitors should be 
especially aware that street crime, such as scams and pickpockets, 
is a daily occurrence in these cities.  Common sense precautions 
should be taken, especially at night, to avoid becoming a target of 
opportunity. 
 
e.  (SBU) Generally, New Zealand does not play a significant role in 
the world drug situation; however, evidence indicates that New 
Zealand has been utilized as a transit point for shipments of 
Ecstasy, Heroin and Cocaine to Australia.  The most abused drugs in 
New Zealand are locally produced methamphetamine and cannabis. 
There have been increased amounts of lab seizures and violent crime 
associated with groups attempting to control this market.  Due to 
the increase of methamphetamine use in New Zealand there has been an 
increase in crimes of opportunity (i.e breaking into houses and 
vehicles). 
 
f.  (U) All forms of public transportation are generally safe at all 
times of the day; however, at night visitors should use common sense 
precautions so as not to become a target of opportunity. 
 
g.  (U) The traffic situation in Auckland can be difficult with a 
moderate amount of congestion.  Wellington and Christchurch traffic 
is significantly better; however, during rush hour moderate delays 
can be expected.  Visitors are advised that traffic drives on the 
left-hand side of the road.  Visitors are advised that traffic 
accidents are common and that it is safe to pull over so that police 
may take an accident report.  However, visitors who experience 
hostility or anti-American sentiment should depart the scene 
immediately and notify the RSO. 
 
h.  (SBU) Travelers intending to bring and use any USG provided 
electronic or photographic equipment must contact the RSO prior to 
introducing that equipment into the Chancery.  Personal electronic 
or photographic equipment is not permitted in the Chancery.  Only in 
severely limited cases will a notebook or laptop computer be 
permitted to be used in the Chancery. 
 
i.  (U) Precautions should also be taken to not discuss sensitive or 
classified information outside secure environments or over unsecured 
and/or cellular telephones, and to securely safeguard classified or 
sensitive information at the Chancery and not at hotels or 
residences. 
 
j.  (U) Visitors should also be aware of the State Department's 
Consular Information sheet for New Zealand and the most recent 
Worldwide Caution Public Announcements, which are available via the 
Internet at http://travel.state.gov 
 
k.  (U) In essence, visitors to New Zealand must exercise 
appropriate caution and be alert to their surroundings with regard 
to their personal security.  Suspicious incidents/activities should 
be reported to RSO Wellington (Telephone (64)(4)462-6000, 24 
hours/day). 
 
Keegan