07WELLINGTON554
NEW ZEALAND COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR DHS/ICE TTU SC DEAN
Wed Aug 01 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Wellington
VZCZCXRO7561
RR RUEHNZ
DE RUEHWL #0554/01 2130414
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 010414Z AUG 07
FM AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON
TO RUEHGP/AMEMBASSY SINGAPORE 0491
INFO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4519
RUEHNZ/AMCONSUL AUCKLAND 1408
RUEAIAO/HQ ICE IAO WASHINGTON DC 0047UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 WELLINGTON 000554 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
SINGAPORE FOR ICE; HQ ICE IAO FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS, FOREIGN 
OPERATIONS DIVISION, ASIA DESK OFFICER ROBERT J> COOKE 
 
E.O. 12985: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA ASEC NZ ETRD AMGT AS
SUBJECT: NEW ZEALAND COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR DHS/ICE TTU SC DEAN 
WAUSON AND SINGAPORE ICE REP VANESSA PIEPENBURG - AUGUST 1-3 2007 
 
REF: SINGAPORE 01293 
 
¶1. (SBU) Embassy Wellington and Consulate General Auckland welcome 
and grant country clearance to DHS ICE Washington DC TTU Section 
Chief Dean A. Wauson and Singapore ICE Representative Vanessa 
Piepenburg for travel to Auckland, New Zealand during the time 
period August 1-3, 2007. The purpose of this visit is to meet with 
New Zealand Customs officials to conduct a TTU technical assessment 
and provide a comprehensive demonstration of the Data Analysis and 
Research for Trade Transparency System. 
 
¶2. (U) Post understands no further assistance is required at this 
time. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Embassy point of contact is RSO James Doherty. 
Contact details are as follows: 
 
Office:  644-462-6013 
Fax:     644-462-6070 
Cell:    027-451-2537 
E-mail:  dohertyjp@state.gov 
 
¶4. (SBU) All TDY visitors to Embassy Wellington who stay over 5 days 
are required to report to the Regional Security Office for a 
security briefing if they have not completed an approved overseas 
personal security training course. 
 
¶5. (U) Visitors should use local taxi service, which is generally 
safe, reliable and frequent.  Taxi fare from the airport to downtown 
Wellington hotels is approximately 30 NZD.  A commercial shuttle 
service is also offered at the airport. Taxi fare from the airport 
to downtown Auckland hotels is approximately NZD55-NZD65.  A 
commercial shuttle service is also offered at the Auckland airport. 
 
¶6. (U) Travelers can exchange currency at the airport upon arrival 
and ATM machines are readily available throughout New Zealand. 
Check cashing privileges at the Embassy are restricted to traveler's 
checks only up to USD100.00. Personal checks will not be accepted. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Biosecurity Fines: 
 
The Government of New Zealand instituted fines for non-declared 
biosecurity hazards on travelers entering New Zealand with 
undeclared plant, animal or food material. 
Travelers found carrying these undeclared items will be immediately 
fined NZD200.00 (USD150.00).  Biosecurity is a serious issue in New 
Zealand and fines will be administered immediately and without 
warnings. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Security Information: 
 
a. (SBU) All U.S. citizen personnel serving under the Chief of 
Mission authority in a temporary status of 30 days or more must 
complete appropriate overseas personal security training prior to 
travel (04 State 66580).  Employees who have completed the Security 
Overseas Seminar course at the Foreign Service Institute (FSI) after 
June 1, 2000, meet this requirement.  All other TDY personnel must 
either (1) complete the approved seminar at FSI entitled "Serving 
Abroad for Families & Employees" (SAFE), or (2) have their agency 
certify to the Department of State's Bureau of Diplomatic Security 
that the employee has undergone equivalent security training.  The 
contact for this training is Assistant Director for Training at 
(703) 205-2617.  Country clearance will not be granted for any 
traveler with planned TDY in excess of 30 days if this information 
is not stated/certified. POC for additional information is RSO 
Wellington. 
 
b. (SBU) The U.S. Mission in New Zealand currently rates the threat 
from transnational and indigenous terrorism as low. There are no 
terrorist groups or support groups believed to be operating in New 
Zealand at this time.  In light of the worldwide security alert all 
visitors should heighten their security awareness and report any 
unusual incidents to the Regional Security Officer. 
 
c. (SBU) Anonymous telephonic threats and obscure threat mail have 
occasionally targeted U.S. diplomatic missions in New Zealand.  In 
response to U.S. policies and actions, various groups in New Zealand 
have demonstrated occasionally at the Embassy in Wellington and at 
the Consulate in Auckland. These demonstrations are usually small 
and are peacefully conducted.  During these demonstrations, the host 
country police and protective services normally provide adequate 
protection to the Embassy and Consulate. 
 
d. (SBU) New Zealand has a medium threat crime environment. As such, 
Wellington and Auckland have experienced an increase in violent and 
 
WELLINGTON 00000554  002 OF 002 
 
 
petty crimes, but they are usually non-confrontational in nature. 
However, home invasion robberies and assaults, once very rare, are 
becoming more frequent.  Burglaries and thefts occur countrywide but 
primarily in the large cities of Auckland, Christchurch and 
Wellington, and visitors should be especially aware that street 
crime, such as scams and pickpockets is a daily occurrence in these 
cities.  Common sense precautions should be taken, especially at 
night, to avoid becoming a target of opportunity. 
 
e. (SBU) Generally, New Zealand does not play a significant role in 
the world drug situation; however, evidence indicates that New 
Zealand has been utilized as a transit point for shipments of 
Ecstasy, Heroin and Cocaine to Australia.  The most abused drug in 
New Zealand is locally produced methamphetamine and cannabis.  There 
have been increased amounts of lab seizures and violent crime 
associated with groups attempting to control this market. 
 
f. (U) All forms of public transportation are generally safe at all 
times of the day; however, at night visitors should use common sense 
precautions so as to not become a target of opportunity. 
 
g. (U) The traffic situation in Auckland can be difficult with a 
moderate amount of congestion. Wellington and 
Christchurch traffic is significantly better; however, during rush 
hour moderate delays can be expected. Visitors are advised that 
traffic drives on the left-hand side of the road. Visitors are 
advised that traffic accidents are common and that it is safe to 
pull over so that police may take an accident report.  However, 
visitors who experience hostility or anti-American sentiment should 
depart the scene immediately and notify the RSO. 
 
h. (U) Travelers intending to bring and use any USG provided 
electronic or photographic equipment must contact the RSO prior to 
introducing that equipment into the Chancery. Personal electronic or 
photographic equipment is not permitted in the Chancery.  Only in 
severely limited cases will a notebook or laptop be permitted to be 
used in the Chancery or connected to Wellington's LAN. 
 
i. (U) Precautions should also be taken to not discuss sensitive or 
classified information outside secure environments or over unsecured 
and/or cellular telephones, and to securely safeguard classified or 
sensitive information at the Chancery and not at hotels or 
residences. 
 
j. (U) Visitors should also be aware of the State 
Department's Consular Information sheet for New Zealand and the most 
recent Worldwide Caution Public Announcements, which are available 
via the Internet at http://travel.state.gov 
 
k. (U) In essence, visitors to New Zealand must exercise appropriate 
caution and be alert to their surroundings with regard to their 
personal security.  Suspicious incidents/activities should be 
reported to RSO Wellington (Telephone (64)(4)462-6000, 24 
hours/day). 
 
MCCORMICK