07WELLINGTON867
NEW ZEALAND COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR CODEL BAIRD AND
Wed Dec 19 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Wellington
VZCZCXRO5266
RR RUEHNZ
DE RUEHWL #0867/01 3530229
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 190229Z DEC 07
FM AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4967
INFO RUEHNZ/AMCONSUL AUCKLAND 1574
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 5055
RUEHDN/AMCONSUL SYDNEY 0618UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 WELLINGTON 000867 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR H - DRICH AND TLONON AND EAP/ANP 
 
E.O. 12985:  N/A 
TAGS: OTRA NZ
SUBJECT:  NEW ZEALAND COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR CODEL BAIRD AND 
DELEGATION 
 
REF:  STATE 168126 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Embassy welcomes and grants country clearance to CODEL 
Baird and delegation to travel to Christchurch, New Zealand from 
December 31 - January 5, 2007.  The purpose of this visit is to 
examine research programs on the Antarctic Continent and examine 
oceanographic, marine science, and climate and energy research being 
conducted in New Zealand. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Embassy control officer is General Services Officer Andrea 
Gastaldo.  Contact details are as follows: 
 
Office:  644-462-6046 
Fax:     644-462-6044 
Cell:    027-230-7074 
E-mail:  gastaldoa@state.gov 
 
Embassy administrative point of contact is Mary Lou Forrest. 
Contact details are as follows: 
 
Office:  644-462-6181 
Fax:     644-472-3478 
Cell:    027-449-6973 
E-mail:  forrestml@state.gov 
 
¶3.  a. (SBU) Hotel accommodations have been made at Crowne Plaza 
Christchurch (www.crowneplaza.co.nz) located at Kilmore and Durham 
Streets.  Telephone number is 64-3-365-7799 and fax number is 
64-3-365-0082.  Room rate is NZ$285.00 per room per night which 
includes continental breakfast and goods and services tax of 12.5% 
(US$224.00 approx).  Room charges will be charged back against CODEL 
fund cite for nights of Dec 31, Jan 1 and 4 for Delegation members 
and staff traveling to Antarctica.  Room nights for Jan 2 and 3, for 
accompanying spouse will be at members personal expense, along with 
room incidentals. 
 
b.  (SBU) Transportation has been arranged for arrival, meetings and 
departures. 
 
c.  (SBU) As Embassy cannot provide cashier services, the delegation 
will receive their M&IE before they leave Washington and the 
delegation will authorize the Embassy to chargeback the cost of the 
hotel rooms to the fund cite. 
 
¶4.  (U) Travelers can exchange currency at the airport upon arrival 
and ATM machines are readily available throughout New Zealand. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Biosecurity Fines: 
 
The Government of New Zealand instituted fines for non-declared 
biosecurity hazards on travelers entering New Zealand with 
undeclared plant, animal or food material.  Travelers found carrying 
these undeclared items will be immediately fined NZD $200.00 (USD 
$150.00).  Biosecurity is a serious issue in New Zealand and fines 
will be administered immediately and without warnings. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Security Information: 
 
a.  (SBU) All U.S. citizen personnel serving under the Chief of 
Mission authority in a temporary status of 30 days or more must 
complete appropriate overseas personal security training prior to 
travel (04 State 66580).  Employees who have completed the Security 
Overseas Seminar course at the Foreign Service Institute (FSI) after 
June 1, 2000, meet this requirement.  All other TDY personnel must 
either (1) complete the approved seminar at FSI entitled "Serving 
Abroad for Families and Employees" (SAFE), or (2) have their agency 
certify to the Department of State's Bureau of Diplomatic Security 
that the employee has undergone equivalent security training.  The 
contact for this training is Assistant Director for Training at 
(703) 205-2617.  Country clearance will not be granted for any 
traveler with planned TDY in excess of 30 days if this information 
is not stated/certified.  POC for additional information is RSO 
Wellington. 
 
b.  (SBU) The U.S. Mission in New Zealand currently rates the threat 
from transnational and domestic terrorism as low.  There are no 
terrorist groups or support groups believed to be operating in New 
Zealand at this time.  In light of the worldwide security alert all 
visitors should heighten their security awareness and report any 
unusual incidents to the Regional Security Officer. 
 
c.  (SBU) Anonymous telephonic threats and obscure threat mail have 
occasionally targeted U.S. diplomatic missions in New Zealand.  In 
response to U.S. policies and actions, various groups in New Zealand 
have demonstrated occasionally at the Embassy in Wellington and at 
the Consulate in Auckland.  These demonstrations are usually small 
 
WELLINGTON 00000867  002 OF 002 
 
 
and are peacefully conducted.  During these demonstrations, the host 
country police and protective services normally provide adequate 
protection to the Embassy and Consulate. 
 
d.  (SBU) New Zealand is considered a medium threat crime 
environment.  As such, Wellington and Auckland have experienced an 
increase in violent and petty crimes, but they are usually 
non-confrontational in nature.  However, home invasion robberies and 
assaults, once very rare, are becoming more frequent.  Burglaries 
and thefts occur countrywide but primarily in the large cities of 
Auckland, Christchurch and Wellington, and visitors should be 
especially aware that street crime, such as scams and pickpockets, 
is a daily occurrence in these cities.  Common sense precautions 
should be taken, especially at night, to avoid becoming a target of 
opportunity. 
 
e.  (SBU) Generally, New Zealand does not play a significant role in 
the world drug situation; however, evidence indicates that New 
Zealand has been utilized as a transit point for shipments of 
Ecstasy, Heroin and Cocaine to Australia.  The most abused drugs in 
New Zealand are locally produced methamphetamine and cannabis. 
There have been increased amounts of lab seizures and violent crime 
associated with groups attempting to control this market.  Due to 
the increase of methamphetamine use in New Zealand there has been an 
increase in crimes of opportunity (i.e breaking into houses and 
vehicles). 
 
f.  (U) All forms of public transportation are generally safe at all 
times of the day; however, at night visitors should use common sense 
precautions so as not to become a target of opportunity. 
 
g.  (U) The traffic situation in Auckland can be difficult with a 
moderate amount of congestion.  Wellington and Christchurch traffic 
is significantly better; however, during rush hour moderate delays 
can be expected.  Visitors are advised that traffic drives on the 
left-hand side of the road.  Visitors are advised that traffic 
accidents are common and that it is safe to pull over so that police 
may take an accident report.  However, visitors who experience 
hostility or anti-American sentiment should depart the scene 
immediately and notify the RSO. 
 
h.  (SBU) Travelers intending to bring and use any USG provided 
electronic or photographic equipment must contact the RSO prior to 
introducing that equipment into the Chancery.  Personal electronic 
or photographic equipment is not permitted in the Chancery.  Only in 
severely limited cases will a notebook or laptop computer be 
permitted to be used in the Chancery. 
 
i.  (U) Precautions should also be taken to not discuss sensitive or 
classified information outside secure environments or over unsecured 
and/or cellular telephones, and to securely safeguard classified or 
sensitive information at the Chancery and not at hotels or 
residences. 
 
j.  (U) Visitors should also be aware of the State Department's 
Consular Information sheet for New Zealand and the most recent 
Worldwide Caution Public Announcements, which are available via the 
Internet at http://travel.state.gov 
 
k.  (U) In essence, visitors to New Zealand must exercise 
appropriate caution and be alert to their surroundings with regard 
to their personal security.  Suspicious incidents/activities should 
be reported to RSO Wellington (Telephone (64)(4)462-6000, 24 
hours/day). 
 
Keegan