08WELLINGTON385

Thu Nov 13 00:00:00 +0100 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Wellington
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHWL #0385 3182138
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 132138Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5536
INFO RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 5319
RUEHSV/AMEMBASSY SUVA 0773C O N F I D E N T I A L WELLINGTON 000385 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/13/2033 
TAGS: PREL US NZ KS XU XV
SUBJ: AMBASSADOR PAYS FAREWELL CALL ON PRIME MINISTER HELEN CLARK 
 
Classified by AMBASSADOR William McCormick, reasons 1.5 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (C)  The Ambassador called on Prime Minister Helen Clark November 
13 to say farewell as he prepares to conclude his assignment as 
Ambassador and as the Prime Minister prepares to step down sometime 
in the next few days. The Ambassador thanked the Prime Minister for 
everything she has done to improve the bilateral relationship, noting 
that the two governments together had changed the relationship in 
what had sometimes been a difficult environment by focusing on common 
concerns. The Prime Minister agreed, saying that we had made 
considerable progress together. She thanked the Ambassador for all he 
had done and asked the Ambassador to convey her thanks to the 
President for his friendship. She praised the Secretary, Assistant 
Secretary Hill, DAS Davies and former ANP Director McGann for their 
contributions. 
 
¶2.  (C)  The Ambassador said that he would remain interested in the 
Pacific after he left his post. He said that the Pacific Island 
Countries face enormous governance challenges and New Zealand is 
"carrying the load" in working with those countries. The Prime 
Minister observed that she was particularly concerned about Fiji. The 
United States is now paying more attention to the Pacific than at any 
time since World War II and that needs to continue. Both agreed that 
they shared a serious concern about the growth of dollar diplomacy in 
the region, particularly by the Chinese who often step in when New 
Zealand and others try to persuade PIC governments to take necessary 
but unpalatable steps. The Ambassador said that he had been 
disappointed at the praise Samoa recently lavished on Chinese 
construction projects, including a lavish but impractical swimming 
pool complex, while giving much less attention to the forty years of 
Peace Corps contributions to the islands economy and society. 
 
¶3.  (C)  PM Clark said she had recently been very disappointed that 
the Tongan candidate, Deputy Prime Minister Dr. Viliami Ta'u tangi, 
to be elected Regional Director of the World Health Organization 
Western Pacific regional Office had been defeated. New Zealand had 
agreed to support the decision of the Pacific Island Forum to vote in 
favor of the Tongan candidate only to discover that many PIF 
representatives, including the PIF chairman, eventually voted against 
the Tongan candidate. It was clear to her, the PM said, that money 
had likely played a role in changing their votes to favor the 
successful Korean candidate. 
 
¶4.  (C)  The Ambassador expressed his hope that Clark would stay 
involved in international issues. She responded that she was looking 
for opportunities but recognized that the prime minister of a small 
country might not always be in great demand. The Ambassador responded 
that Kiwis always told him they were a small country, but he never 
heard this from Washington because the U.S. saw them as a significant 
partner. Clark said that she hoped New Zealand was seen as a friendly 
Western country that sometimes can do things the United States 
cannot. 
 
McCormick