09KINGSTON581
JAMAICA ON VERGE OF IMF STAND-BY AGREEMENT
Mon Aug 03 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kingston
VZCZCXRO3655
PP RUEHGR
DE RUEHKG #0581/01 2151948
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 031948Z AUG 09
FM AMEMBASSY KINGSTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7904
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC PRIORITY
INFO RUCNCOM/EC CARICOM COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KINGSTON 000581 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR (RALVARADO)(VDEPIRRO)(WSMITH) 
WHA/EPSC (MROONEY) (FCORNEILLE) 
EEB/IFD/OMA 
WHA/PPC (JGONZALEZ) 
INR/RES (RWARNER) 
INR/I (SMCCORMICK) 
SANTO DOMINGO FOR FCS AND FAS 
TREASURY FOR ERIN NEPHEW 
EXPORT IMPORT BANK FOR ANNETTE MARESH 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ECON ENRG EFIN EINV ETRD PGOV PREL SOCI ASEC IADB
IBRD, IMF, TRYS, KRCM, JM, XL 
SUBJECT: JAMAICA ON VERGE OF IMF STAND-BY AGREEMENT 
 
REF: A. KINGSTON 551 
¶B. KINGSTON 521 
¶C. KINGSTON 517 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY: After months of negotiations, the Government of 
Jamaican (GOJ) is on the brink of signing a Stand-by Agreement with 
the International Monetary Fund (IMF).  This disclosure was 
confirmed by lead IMF representative, Trevor Alleyne, at a meeting 
with the donor community held at Post on July 30.  Alleyne told 
attendees that the GOJ had formally stated its intention to apply 
for an agreement and was working assiduously to have one in place by 
October.  Alleyne, who was quizzed about the likely social impact of 
an IMF program, was at pains to explain that the Fund had changed 
its mode of operation and was now more sensitive to social and 
political imperatives.  He explained that Jamaica is a sovereign 
country and, the IMF would not dictate the terms of an agreement. 
He said the IMF would be working with the GOJ to address the key 
macro-economic imbalances that have plagued the country.  End 
Summary. 
 
USD 1.2 Billion Over 2 years 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Alleyne spoke to Emboffs and members of the international 
donor community, including representatives from United Nations 
Development Program (UNDP), UK Department for International 
Development (DFID), Canadian International Development Agency 
(CIDA), European Commission Delegation (ECD), United Nations 
Resident Coordinator (UNRC), Ministry of Finance, and the Public 
Service/European Commission Delegation (ECD).  He said there was 
every indication that the IMF and the GOJ are moving quickly toward 
an agreement.  He said the program, which could run from two to 
three years, could be put before the IMF Board as early as October. 
He said to maintain this tight timeline the negotiations would have 
to conclude by September.  The GOJ has suggested that the country 
would be able to access up to USD 1.2 billion over a two-year 
period. 
 
Fiscal Consolidation Targeted 
----------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) Recognizing that Jamaica has been affected by decades of 
structural impediments, Alleyne noted that any new program must seek 
to address the key macro-economic imbalances over the medium term. 
He suggested that the approach should be to cherry-pick, rather than 
being broad-based, looking at the fundamentals and helping the 
government accordingly.  In this regard, he pointed to the need for 
fiscal consolidation, which he said should be underpinned by 
fundamental fiscal reform.  He stated that the objective must be to 
tie everything into one coherent strategy to put fiscal policy on a 
sustainable footing through lower interest rates, which is part of 
the basis for investment and growth.  He said part of the Fund's 
rule of engagement was therefore to look at the GOJ's plan for 
medium-term fiscal consolidation. 
 
Here by Invitation 
------------------ 
 
¶4. (SBU) Some members of the donor community expressed concern over 
the potential impact of an IMF agreement on the level of social 
services, fearing it could further worsen conditions for poorer 
Jamaicans.  Alleyne reminded attendees that the IMF was invited to 
Jamaica because the country was suffering from balance of payments 
(BOP) problems due to declining earnings from tourism, bauxite, 
remittances and a lack of access to capital markets.  He explained 
that Jamaica is a sovereign country, and as such the IMF was in no 
position to dictate policy prescriptions.  He made it clear that the 
IMF and the GOJ agree on the main pillars of the macro-economic 
program.  That said, he stated that everyone must appreciate that 
Jamaica's problems were not simple, and as such it was important 
that any solution be properly implemented.  When asked about the 
possible conditions, he stated that he could not announce any 
conditions, as none had been decided. 
 
IMF's Human Face 
---------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) He conceded that social stability had become important to 
the IMF following past experiences.  He stated, "This is something 
that has damaged our reputation in the past and we remain cognizant 
of this fact."  He continued, "Every recent program has a section 
explaining how the most vulnerable will be protected."  To 
illustrate this point he explained that the IMF Board now ensures 
that measures are taken to protect the social safety net.  He also 
drew the group's attention to an IMF article addressing the "IMF's 
Role in Helping Protect the Most Vulnerable in the Global Crisis." 
He did not attempt to downplay the dire economic situation in 
Jamaica, and pointed out that the GOJ must prioritize in this time 
of crisis and as such it cannot be all things to all people. 
 
Spreading the Burden 
-------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) He noted that even though the IMF fully supports 
prioritizing social safety net programs, there must be adjustments, 
and the aim is to ensure that the burden is spread across society. 
(NOTE: The IDB representative Gerard Johnson announced that the GOJ 
has approached the bank for a USD 100 million loan to guarantee 
social safety net programs.  The European Union Representative 
announced that his office is also providing a USD 45 million grant 
for budgetary support.  End Note). 
 
Debt Holders Accept Lower Rates? 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Critics voicing their opinions in local newspaper 
editorials, including the trade unions, remain bitterly opposed to 
an IMF program.  They suggest that the burden of adjustment has 
traditionally been borne by the most vulnerable groups.  Alleyne 
suggested that a key element of any program must be a sharing of the 
cost of adjustment (Reftels).  Prime Minister (PM) Bruce Golding 
announced that terms were being worked out with banks and financial 
institutions, noting that a deal now hinges on whether financial 
institutions can convince clients to accept lower interest rates. 
In his continued bid to calm fears in the local capital market, 
Golding was quick to add that "we can't repudiate the debt, nor can 
we unilaterally alter the terms and conditions of the debt".  For 
his part, Alleyne told attendees that in the final analysis the aim 
must be the restoration of macro-stability, preparing the path for 
enhanced growth in a sustainable manner.  In this regard, he said 
there was no sense in negotiating a three year public sector wage 
freeze, only for wages to be ratcheted up with even more force at 
the end of the period. 
 
Interest Rates Decline 
---------------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) The impending IMF agreement, coupled with GOJ negotiations 
with creditors, appear to have provided the perfect platform for the 
Bank of Jamaica (BOJ) (Central bank) to start reducing rates. 
Within the space of a week, the BOJ cut rates by two hundred and 
fifty basis points (2.5 percentage points), effectively reducing 
debt servicing cost by almost USD 10 million.  (Note: Every one 
percentage point decline in rates leads to an almost USD 4 million 
reduction in debt serving cost.  End Note).  The decline also was 
underpinned by stability in the local money market.  The reduction 
also occurred against the background of moderating prices, with the 
inflation likely to fall below the original target of 11 to 14 
percent.  The decision also was prompted by lower demand for foreign 
exchange after an extended period of foreign exchange market 
instability. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) Jamaica is expected to conclude an IMF program when Alleyne 
and his team return to the country in September.  Although the terms 
are not disclosed, from all indications some of the austerity 
measures anticipated by the public, such as massive job cuts and 
steep currency depreciation, might not materialize.  PM Golding also 
has maintained that the health, education and security sectors are 
sacrosanct, leaving little room for major cuts in non-debt 
expenditures.  As tax revenues continue to decline from the collapse 
of the bauxite sector and business contraction, it appears that the 
GOJ is banking on major interest rate concessions from its creditors 
to alleviate the current fiscal crisis. 
 
¶10. (SBU) However, with financial institutions unlikely to convince 
clients to accept lower interest rates in the very short term, it 
would be surprising if the GOJ can negotiate a substantial reduction 
in rates by October.  This leaves the GOJ little option but to 
further slash capital expenditures, and most likely the Prime 
Minister's constituency development fund,which was established to 
allow members of Parliament to finance development projects in their 
respective districts.  GOJ coffers also may have to be augmented by 
proceeds from the planned sale of some state-owned assets.  End 
comment. 
MOSS