09KINGSTON701
JAMAICA: FOREIGN MINISTER'S VIEWS re HIGH-PROFILE
Fri Sep 18 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Kingston
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHKG #0701/01 2612229
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
O 182229Z SEP 09 ZFF3
FM AMEMBASSY KINGSTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0024
INFO RHMFISS/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATE
EC CARICOM COLLECTIVE
RUEABND/DEA HQS WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 0001
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0016
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA 0016C O N F I D E N T I A L KINGSTON 000701 
 
SIPDIS 
STATE FOR WHA/CAR  - J.MACK-WILSON, W.SMITH, V.DEPIRRO 
L/LEI - C.HOLLAND, A.KLUESNER 
INR/IAA - G.BOHIGAN 
INR/RES - R.WARNER 
JUSTICE FOR OIA - P.PETTY 
TREASURY FOR E.NEPHEW 
AMEMBASSY BRIDGETOWN PASS TO AMEMBASSY GRENADA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 2019/09/18 
TAGS: CJAN PREL PGOV SNAR SOCI ECON ASEC KCOR KCRM JM XL
SUBJECT: JAMAICA: FOREIGN MINISTER'S VIEWS re HIGH-PROFILE 
EXTRADITION REQUEST 
 
REF: STATE 85807 (181409Z AUG 09)(NOTAL) 
KINGSTON 655 (2821557Z AUHG 09); KINGSTON 666 (021935Z SEP 09) 
KINGSTON 676 (041911Z SEP 09); KINGSTON 680 (082054Z SEP 09) 
KINGSTON 697 (18150Z SEP 09) 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: I.L. Parnell, Charge, State, Kingston; REASON: 1.4(A), 
(D) 
 
Summary 
 
 
 
1.(C)  The Government of Jamaica (GoJ) has responded to the USG's 
request for the extradition of reputed "Don" Christopher Coke, to 
face charges in New York of trafficking in drugs and firearms, with 
a diplomatic note (transmitted septel) requesting additional 
information.  The GoJ's Minister of Foreign Affairs stresses that 
the timing of the request is "extremely delicate" because of the 
economic crisis facing the country; the GoJ will have to carefully 
"review the situation" and adopt "measures to address the social 
consequences," weighing the "implications for stability," and 
recognizing that "unrest is possible."  End Summary. 
 
 
 
2.(C)  The Government of Jamaica (GoJ)'s Minister of Foreign 
Affairs & Foreign Trade, Dr. Kenneth Baugh, summoned ChargC) to a 
private meeting on the morning of Sept. 18; Baugh was accompanied 
by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs & Foreign Trade (MFAFT)'s 
Minister of State Dr. Ronald Robinson, Permanent Secretary Amb. 
Evadne Coye, and Under-Secretary for Bilateral and Regional Affairs 
Amb. Paul Robotham.   Baugh began by saying that, based on input 
from the Attorney General and Ministry of Justice, the MFAFT was 
preparing a diplomatic note in reply to the U.S. extradition 
request for Christopher Coke (reftel A); MFAFT's note would be 
ready within a few minutes.  He then said he hoped that 
communications between the GoJ and USG could be treated 
confidentially, and that no public statements would be made. 
 
 
 
3.(C)  ChargC) thanked Baugh for the chance to meet and for the good 
overall relationship between the USA and Jamaica, and then 
reemphasized the importance attached by the USG and the Embassy to 
this extradition request.  The USG appreciated the 15-20 years of 
consistency in effective implementation of the Extradition Treaty, 
and was disappointed that the GoJ had stretched out this particular 
request so long.  The USG had worked judiciously with various 
levels of the GoJ to ensure the bona fides of the request, and had 
been candid in explaining what was happening and how.  Therefore, 
we had been perplexed  by the GoJ's expressions of "surprise" and 
questions regarding the bona fides of the request.  We were not 
suggesting that the GoJ should not ensure that the request meets 
the standards of due process; however, in light of the care taken, 
we were disappointed with the progress to date.  We understood that 
the GoJ would request that confidential witnesses be named in the 
request; Baugh confirmed that this was one of the technical 
problems which would be delineated in the GoJ's forthcoming 
diplomatic note (septel).  ChargC) pointed out that Footnote No. 1 
of the request had addressed this issue; we therefore viewed this 
objection as problematic.  The USG had given the GoJ the first 
indications that this extradition request would be forthcoming over 
two months ago, and had sought the GoJ's counsel at every turn. 
 
 
 
4.(C) Baugh then said that he had no details of whatever 
consultations may have taken place before the date of delivery of 
the extradition request.  He then said that, in any event, the 
timing of the request was "extremely delicate" because of the 
economic crisis facing Jamaica; the GoJ would have to carefully 
"review the situation" and adopt "measures to address the social 
consequences," weighing the "implications for stability," 
recognizing that "unrest is possible."  Current economic conditions 
made this extradition request "politically difficult."  He noted 
 
 
that the Cabinet had met three times in the last week in an effort 
to meet the IMF's conditions for assistance to Jamaica.  The 
economy had lost 30-40,000 jobs in the current recession, and 
remittances were in decline.  This extradition had "special 
significance" in light of the poverty and economic crises 
experienced by Jamaica in the 1970s and 80s; the formal economy had 
been unable to offer jobs, and therefore many marginalized 
Jamaicans had been forced to turn to the informal economy to 
survive.  Over this period, Jamaica had become a "channel" for 
illegal drugs in high demand in North America and Europe; Jamaica 
was "at the mercy" of Latin America and North America, but "we 
still cooperate" with the USA, even though our people are 
"vulnerable" and drugs/arms trafficking had become "embedded."  The 
Caribbean Basis Initiative had been conceived as a "mini-Marshall 
Plan" for the region, but when the Caribbean was not included in 
NAFTA, the region had "lost ground."  Coke was not just a "drug 
kingpin;" he was a powerful figure embedded in critical 
socio-economic needs of many Jamaicans.  Something of a Mexican 
standoff had evolved: if Coke were arrested, this might be 
perceived as unjust by many Jamaicans, resulting in an uproar which 
could end up destabilizing the country. 
 
 
 
5.(C) ChargC) said he knew the case was not an easy one, and 
recognized the challenges; nevertheless, the U.S. position was that 
the GoJ must honor the provisions of the Extradition Treaty.  The 
USG was concerned that whole communities had become dependent on 
the trafficking of drugs and firearms.  If Coke were not 
extradited, this would set a dangerous precedent for possible 
future extradition requests; the USA-Jamaica partnership rested not 
just on dealing with easy cases, but difficult ones, as well.  The 
U.S. expected no differences in the steps for handling this 
particular request.  It would be problematic to end this discussion 
thinking that the GoJ would not adhere to treaty provisions due 
simply to the social/economic/political concerns that might apply 
to individual cases.. 
 
 
 
6.(C) Baugh then said that the GoJ's first concern was with the 
security of the country; therefore, it must manage the extradition 
process carefully, making sure that "everything is on track."  Many 
Jamaicans had been denied basic necessities by the "circumstances 
of birth," and the GoJ must "establish equity."  In many ways, 
Jamaica was reaping the results of what was happening in the U.S. 
and UK.  He then said he was happy to work with the U.S. and 
Secretary Clinton on regional programs to advance the security and 
economy of the Caribbean.  The GoJ wanted to cooperate fully, and 
was committed to honor the Extradition Treaty - but in ways that 
"can avoid destabilizing the country." 
 
 
 
7.(C) ChargC) then noted that a failure to extradite Coke would 
represent "a serious step backward."  One of the reasons for 
security concerns in Jamaica's "garrison" communities was precisely 
because Coke and others were importing firearms and trafficking 
drugs.  ChargC) asked whether the GoJ took the position that 
extradition treaty provisions only applied to lesser criminals; 
Baugh replied that anyone found guilty should be dealt with 
according to law, and then noted that the "technical aspects" of 
the Extradition Treaty must be decided by the Solicitor General and 
Ministry of Justice, bearing in mind the GoJ's duty to ensure that 
the rights of individual citizens were protected.  ChargC) then 
pointed out that several years ago the Jamaican courts had ruled 
that there was no requirement that extradition requests name 
witnesses.  Baugh said he would be surprised if the Solicitor 
General and Ministry of Justice were unfamiliar with the court's 
previous rulings vis-C -vis extradition requests.  Baugh then raised 
concerns over a recent lawsuit by a Jamaican who had been 
extradited to the USA, filed on the grounds that extradition 
procedures had not been followed properly.  ChargC) noted that a 
number of extradition requests in which witnesses had not been 
 
 
named had been successfully processed by the GoJ; the U.S. was 
disappointed that the GoJ had not moved more expeditiously and 
positively in the Coke case, but would continue to look for ways to 
move forward. 
 
 
 
8.(C) Baugh then again inquired about the possibility of keeping 
all communications between the USG and GoJ confidential..  ChargC) 
assured Baugh that he would continue to alert the GoJ regarding any 
anticipated USG press releases, but noted that he had no control 
over what other agencies of the USG may release in the USA.  Baugh 
then noted that the publicity to date surrounding the extradition 
request had "created disadvantages."  He then asked how word of the 
extradition request had ended up in the public domain.  ChargC) 
noted that he was equally surprised to see press reports about the 
extradition request only one day after the diplomatic note had been 
delivered to the MFAFT.  ChargC) noted that the Embassy could not 
commit to issuing no statements to the press until we had had time 
to review the GoJ's diplomatic note.  ChargC) also advised Baugh 
that, during his upcoming visit to New York, he may receive a call 
from A/S Shannon expressing USG interest in the extradition case. 
 
 
 
9.(C) Baugh then expressed hopes for continued cooperation and 
friendship between Jamaica and the USA, and asked that Washington 
keep in mind that Jamaica's small economy loses 80% of its human 
capital to North America and the UK, and got criminal deportees in 
return, saying "we're victims, not the cause" of crime, and calling 
the relationship "asymmetrical."  ChargC) responded that the U.S. 
wanted to remain a good partner, and by pointing out: 
 
 
 
-- recent statements by Secretary Clinton and President Obama 
acknowledging that the U.S. demand for illegal drugs was a critical 
component of the drug problem; 
 
 
 
-- the need for both societies to take advantage of opportunities 
to remove elements of crime and violence; 
 
 
 
-- and the importance of confidence in the rule-of-law in 
attracting international investors and tourists to Jamaica; 
 
 
 
 
ChargC) concluded by wishing the Foreign Minister a pleasant and 
successful visit to New York for the UNGA. 
Parnell