08AITTAIPEI311
MEDIA REACTION: PENTAGON'S REPORT ON CHINESE MILITARY
Thu Mar 06 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0265
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0311/01 0660744
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 060744Z MAR 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8279
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 7890
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 9147UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000311 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: PENTAGON'S REPORT ON CHINESE MILITARY 
GROWTH, TAIWAN'S UN REFERENDA 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused March 6 
news coverage on the upcoming presidential poll and the UN 
referenda; on the government's Wednesday announcement of incentive 
measures to encourage overseas Taiwan businesses to return capital 
to Taiwan; on the island's consumer price hike, and on the U.S. 
primaries.  In terms of editorials and commentaries, an editorial in 
the pro-independence "Liberty Times" discussed the Pentagon's 
recently released report on Chinese military growth and urged the 
voters to pay attention to China's increasing military threat to 
Taiwan.  An op-ed in the centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" focused 
on a news report that Washington and Beijing will sit down and work 
together on drafting the military strength report for the next year. 
 The article said the move will be a perfect opportunity for the 
United States to test whether China is willing to enhance its 
information transparency.  A "Liberty Times" op-ed, on the other 
hand, discussed Kosovo's recent declaration of independence and said 
Taiwan should learn from Kosovo and vote to pass its UN referenda. 
End summary. 
 
¶2. Pentagon's Report on Chinese Military Growth 
 
A) "How Can the Ruling and Opposition Parties Turn a Blind Eye to 
Severe Chinese Military Threats against Taiwan?" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 720,000] 
editorialized (3/6): 
 
"During the lead-up to the presidential election this year, China 
has yet to launch any verbal attacks or saber-rattling against 
Taiwan, and it seems at first glance that there are hardly any 
ripples across the Taiwan Strait for now.  However, a U.S. Defense 
Department report on Chinese military strength released recently 
indicated that as of November 2007, the People's Liberation Army 
(PLA) has deployed 990 to 1070 missiles across from Taiwan, and the 
number of missiles deployed is increasing at the speed of over 100 
missiles per year, with their range, precision, and trajectory 
capacity being continually enhanced.  The Taiwan government, on the 
other hand, has also detected a dramatic increase in unusual 
behavior from the PLA lately and has briefed the U.S. side on PLA 
movements via the Taiwan-U.S. military cooperation framework.  The 
move has aroused concerns from the United States, which has thus 
launched close surveillance of PLA activities.  As it stands, China 
has not slowed down its pace of military deployment against Taiwan, 
and the cross-Strait situation is in reality full of turbulent 
undercurrents. ... 
 
"The contention of the March election seems now to have focused on 
cross-Strait policy and the future direction of the new leadership. 
It was originally a correct move to put the campaign focus on China 
policy, which is essential to Taiwan's survival.  But the arguments 
over cross-Strait policy have only focused on the aspect of [the 
island's] westbound [investments] and overlooked their impact on 
[the island's] entire economy, politics and military.  Taiwan is 
falling into dangerous circumstances without really knowing or 
feeling it. ..." 
 
B) "Are Washington and Beijing Being Honest with Each Other or 
Harboring Sinister Designs against Each Other?" 
 
Chen Chung-chih, a Taipei County-based Ph.D. candidate, opined in 
the centrist, KMT-leaning "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] 
(3/6): 
 
"The U.S. Congress requires that the U.S. military release a report 
on Chinese military strength each year.  The fact that Washington 
chose to release this year's report earlier than usual [indicated] 
that the United States is placing a bet on both sides -- namely, it 
has not only sought to remind Taiwan prior to the presidential 
election to keep on the lookout for a potential crisis across the 
Taiwan Strait, but has also tried to reduce the backlash from China 
by releasing its report earlier, so that it will not poison the 
atmosphere when U.S. President George W. Bush visits China in 
August.  For Taiwan's part, it is noteworthy that in the future, 
Washington and Beijing will work together in drafting this military 
strength report.  One cannot help but wonder whether the two sides 
are trying to be honest with each other or whether they are 
harboring sinister designs against each other. ... 
 
"Washington has been adopting the 'an eye for an eye' strategy 
against China.  Early last year, China shocked the international 
community by launching a missile to shoot down one of its 
satellites.  The United States, in return, launched an interception 
missile from its Aegis-class cruiser, the USS Lake Erie, this year 
and destroyed another satellite.  When Beijing demanded via its 
diplomatic channel that Washington reveal relevant data and 
information [of the missile launch], U.S. Secretary of Defense 
Robert Gates generously expressed willingness to share 'part' of the 
data with China. 
GROWTH, TAIWAN'S UN REFERENDA 
 
 
"For the United States, both Washington and Beijing working together 
to draft the military strength report will be a perfect opportunity 
to test whether China is willing to enhance its transparency on 
information sharing.  If China refuses to cooperate, it will provide 
solid proof of the U.S. theory that China's military growth will 
pose threats [to the United States].  On the contrary, should China 
show interest in cooperation, its neighboring countries, including 
Taiwan, will be able to positively assess whether China's military 
growth is a 'peaceful rise' or a 'China threat.'" 
 
¶3. Taiwan's UN Referenda 
 
"Taiwan's Rights" 
 
Chen Lung-chu, president of the Taiwan New Century Foundation and 
director of the UN for Taiwan Alliance, opined in the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 720,000] (3/6): 
 
"... As an independent sovereign nation, Taiwan, like the other 
countries, is entitled to be free from invasion or coercion by 
external forces.  China, however, has tried every means it can and 
will stop at nothing to suppress Taiwan's elbow room in the 
international community and block Taiwan's efforts to obtain UN 
membership.  Unity is power.  For the sake of the well-being of our 
descendants, we need to learn from the Kosovo people their spirit of 
asserting independence and [seek to] pass Taiwan's UN referenda with 
firm will and determination.  That way we can show the international 
community Taiwan's common wish to become a UN member.  God helps 
those who help themselves.  Let us cast our referendum ballots in 
support of Taiwan's UN membership at this critical moment so as to 
create a new opportunity for Taiwan to become a normal country!" 
 
YOUNG