08ANKARA522
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Mar 18 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO8197
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0522/01 0781436
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 181436Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5621
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8756
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4006
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2783
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6480
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6317
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2894
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000522 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, MARCH 18, 2008 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Chief Prosecutor: Turkish Republic under Islamic Threat 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Radikal, Taraf, Cumhuriyet, Zaman, Yeni Safak 
and others report 
Court of Appeals Chairman Hasan Gerceker has called for restraint 
amid criticism against his chief prosecutor's AKP closure case. 
Gerceker defended his chief prosecutor by saying Yalcinkaya was 
acting within the framework of his constitutional authorities and 
responsibilities.  Mainstream Hurriyet writes on page one the Court 
of Appeals was uneasy with former Parliament Speaker Bulent Arinc's 
reaction to the closure case, "Death is the ultimate truth, and the 
chief prosecutor, too, should understand this."  Prosecutor 
Yalcinkaya said he was merely fulfilling his duties to protect the 
regime.  "The republic is under Islamic threat.  You can find 
evidence for this in the indictment.  I will never step back," he 
stressed.  Police reportedly have tightened security measures to 
protect the chief prosecutor. 
 
The Constitutional Court's acting Chairman, Osman Alifeyyaz Paksut, 
said the court rapporteur was examining the indictment prepared by 
the chief prosecutor, and would complete his recommendation within 
ten days.  If the case is accepted, the AKP will be given time to 
prepare its defense. 
 
Erdogan: Closure Case Will Only Increase AKP Votes 
All papers cite unnamed sources revealing remarks by Prime Minister 
Erdogan in a closed-door party meeting yesterday.  According to the 
sources, he expressed confidence that the case would only increase 
support for the AKP, but there were no plans for early elections 
Erdogan also said they were discussing possibilities for changing 
the constitutional provisions related to the closure of political 
parties.  Erdogan instructed the lawmakers to refrain from making 
public statements about the case.  Sources also claimed Erdogan 
emphasized that his government had dealt a heavy blow to the 
'Ergenekon' ring and other criminal gangs, implying that the case 
against the AKP might be revenge for these operations.  However, in 
a written statement released later, the PM's office denied he had 
discussed Ergenekon in the meeting. 
 
Baykal: Indictment against AKP Unbiased 
Opposition CHP leader, Deniz Baykal, told Star TV last night that in 
democracies, no one likes party closures.  Baykal said the CHP was 
closed after the military takeover in 1980, and that the he had been 
banned for five years.  "We must think about the reasons the AKP is 
facing this closure case even though it received 46 percent of the 
vote.  I think the indictment is impartial and responsible, and has 
been prepared within the authority of the prosecutor," Baykal said. 
Opposition far-right MHP Secretary General Cihan Pacaci said the 
constitution could not be protected by closing parties.  "Turkey has 
closed 28 political parties; it only damages democracy," Pacaci 
said.  He added they were ready to discuss proposals for replacing 
the sanctions against political parties with sanctions against 
individual party members. 
 
 
Editorial Commentary on AKP Closure Case 
 
"Self-Serving Democracy" 
Okay Gonensin wrote in mainstream Vatan (3/18): "Democracy faces 
either open threats or hidden threats, including from self-serving 
democrats - those who want democracy to serve only their interests. 
The AKP is such an example, and the ongoing closure case has 
strongly proven it.  The AKP government was in charge when we saw 
three party closure cases against [pro-Kurdish] HADEP, DEHAP and 
HAK-PAR respectively; and we didn't see any statements from 
so-called democrat figures of the AKP.  Finally, the DTP, which has 
representation in parliament,faced a closure case and strong 
democratic statements are yet to be seen from the AKP. Now, AKP 
spokespersons cite their 47 percent of votes in the last election 
 
ANKARA 00000522  002 OF 003 
 
 
and cry disrespect for the people's will.  In real democracies, 
there should be absolutely no difference between 47 percent and 1 
percent, both of them are the will of people.  However, self-serving 
democrats consider low percentages of votes as less important.  The 
AKP presented itself as a party of freedoms; and the headscarf issue 
was linked to that characterization.  While allowing the wearing of 
a headscarf is a fight for women's freedom in AKP's terms, the very 
same AKP has done nothing about honor killings, kept a blind eye to 
family violence and did not even think to take measures to increase 
the numberof women in the labor force.  It is also an indication of 
their self-serving democratic mentality that they have done nothing 
to pave the way for freedom of expression by changing penal code 
¶301.  Self-serving democracy is a hypocrisy which undermines 
democracy itself.  That is the very reason Turkey's democracy is 
still stumbling." 
 
"Closure Case" 
Ali Bayramoglu wrote in Islamist-leaning Yeni Safak (3/18): "For the 
first time in Turkey's history, a political party is facing a 
closure case after garnering 47 percent of the votes and the ruling 
party of government; and even worse, the case contains absolutely 
trivial charges.  After reading the indictment, there is no way to 
defend the arguments.  This is an attempted coup by using the 
judiciary and the rule of law.  The general picture is one of state 
vs. government.  Let's hope that following this unfortunate event, 
the AKP becomes even stronger than before and increases its votes 
and popular support.  But if this case is a big game played by some 
military in order to create a militant democracy against the AKP, 
then the situation is serious and we will see more plots in the days 
to come." 
 
"Embracing Democracy" 
Ismet Berkan wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal (3/18): "Going 
through the indictment against the AKP, it is obvious that the 
prosecutor collected statements and speeches from AKP figures.  Can 
we conclude that there is no freedom of speech in this country? 
Can't we just let people express their feelings and thoughts, and do 
nothing as long as these expressions do not call for violence or 
discrimination?  The case against the AKP is an example of penal 
code 301 vs. the AKP.  Turkey has witnessed the prosecution and even 
killing of its citizens, like Hrant Dink, just because of what they 
said.  They were all subject to court cases on the basis of 301. 
This is the time for the AKP, particularly for PM Erdogan to realize 
the importance of removing all barriers against freedom of 
expression.  I hope the AKP learns a lesson from this case." 
 
TGS Chief Buyukanit on Sending Troops to Afghanistan 
Sabah, Milliyet, Zaman:  In an interview with Star TV, Chief of 
General Staff General Buyukanit said that "when I assumed this 
position I said we would not send a single soldier to Afghanistan to 
fight against terrorism.  I still have this view.  Our soldiers are 
deployed in Kabul area with ISAF and ISAF is not responsible for 
combating terror.  The Turkish military is currently fighting 
terrorism here with tens of thousands of its members, therefore, new 
cannot afford to join the fight against terror on a different 
front." 
 
Vice President Cheney in Iraq 
Milliyet, Zaman, Cumhuriyet, Taraf:  Mainstream Milliyet cites 
President Talabani's press office announcement about Cheney's 
surprise visit to Iraq.  According to the release, Talabani and 
Cheney discussed the political process and security issues in Iraq 
as well as relations with Turkey.  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports 
that VP Cheney at a press conference after the meeting with Prime 
Minister Al-Maliki, referred to Iraq's occupation in 2003 as "a 
successful effort." 
 
NATO Secretary - General's Remarks. 
Mainstream Sabah reports that NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop 
Scheffer hosted a group of Turkish journalists at NATO headquarters. 
 
ANKARA 00000522  003 OF 003 
 
 
 de Hoop Scheffer commented on Afghanistan, Kosovo and NATO's 
missile defense system.  Regarding the missile defense system, 
Scheffer said "deployment of the missile defense system in Turkey is 
not on NATO's agenda." 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- The Constitutional Court has banned 24 political parties in Turkey 
since 1963. 
 
- The trial of the suspects in the killing of three Christian Bible 
publishers in Malatya will continue on April 14. 
 
- Turkish unemployment rate increased to 10.6 percent in 2007 in 
comparison to 10.5 percent in 2006. 
 
International News 
 
- German government spokesman Thomas Steg said Berlin was "worried" 
by the lawsuit against the AKP, calling the move "undemocratic." 
 
 
- Two more houses of Turks living in Germany were torched last week. 
 
 
- Secretary Rice and Defense Secretary Robert Gates met Putin and 
his successor, Dmitry Medvedev, in Moscow to discuss Washington's 
plans to build a missile defense shield in Eastern Europe. 
 
WILSON