08ANKARA444
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Mar 06 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO7251
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0444/01 0661425
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 061425Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5497
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8731
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3962
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2750
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6457
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6292
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2871
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000444 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, MARCH 6, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
General Odierno's Comments Stir Controversy 
All papers report US Lieutenant General Ray Odierno's comments 
during a press conference at the Pentagon earlier this week.  "The 
long-term solution in northern Iraq is not a military one.  There's 
pressure that has to be put on them, the PKK, so we can start to 
talk and have negotiations with these terrorist elements," said 
Odierno.  Mainstream Hurriyet and the Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak 
characterize Odierno's remarks as contradictory to official US 
policy, which rules out any contact with PKK terrorists. 
 
Papers report State Department European Affairs Spokesperson Chase 
Beamer said, "The US policy has not changed; we do not negotiate 
with terrorists nor do we support such negotiations." 
Conservative-nationalist Bugun and leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
say Odierno was the commander of US troops when they placed hoods on 
the heads of Turkish Special Forces in northern Iraq. 
 
Papers also report US Congressman Rush Holt, US House Intelligence 
Committee member, told a gathering in New York that "the US was 
'happy' with PKK activities in Iraq during the time of Saddam 
Hussein," but that "both the US and Turkey were paying for their 
past mistakes regarding the PKK." 
 
Meanwhile, mainstream Hurriyet quotes Ambassador Wilson as saying at 
a reception in Ankara that "the US had nothing to do with the 
Turkish withdrawal from northern Iraq.  It was Turkey's own decision 
to end the ground offensive in northern Iraq." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Odierno's PKK Comments 
Mustafa Balbay wrote in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet: "US 
Lieutenant General Odierno, the Number Two general for US forces in 
Iraq until two weeks ago, is talking about negotiating with the PKK. 
 He will soon be promoted to a higher rank and he will be the Number 
Two general for US Land Forces.  The essence of his remarks is that 
the US' ultimate goal is for Turkey and the PKK to sit at a 
negotiation table.  This message is a clear double standard.  If 
sitting at a table with a terrorist organization is the best way to 
solve the problem, then why doesn't the US sit down at a table with 
Al-Qaeda?  Turkey is right in the middle of an American game that is 
playing against us." 
 
The Duel between the Opposition and the Military 
All papers report that on Thursday, opposition parties CHP and MHP 
responded to the Turkish General Staff (TGS) statement on Tuesday 
which referred to opposition criticism against the operations as 
"more harmful than the assaults of traitors."  TGS rejected 
allegations that the Turkish offensive ended under US influence. 
The CHP said its criticism regarding the operation was targeting the 
Prime Minister.  The MHP also criticized the TGS' response.  Leftist 
Taraf writes that opposition leaders who used to support the 
military are now involved in a verbal duel with them. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Military vs. Opposition CHP, MHP 
Fehmi Koru wrote in Islamist-leaning Yeni Safak:  "Opposition 
parties criticized the methods of the recent cross border operation 
and the military became the main recipient of this criticism.  This 
is because the military has claimed ownership over this operation 
from the beginning.  Instead, the political authority should be 
criticized. The military should not feel obliged to answer 
opposition parties' criticism.  In the midst of the ongoing chaos, 
the political system is wearing out as we see the opposition in a 
duel with the military while the government is almost completely 
left out of the debate.   The government should take the same 
approach it took when it stood against the military warning issued 
on April 27, 2007.  The government should put out a public statement 
warning the military not to answer the opposition's criticism. 
That's how we will be democratized." 
 
 
ANKARA 00000444  002 OF 003 
 
 
Ergun Babahan wrote in mainstream Sabah: "I wonder if the military 
thinks of itself as a political party?  The military explained the 
details of its operation and defended the withdrawal.  The 
opposition parties apparently were not satisfied with the 
explanation and voiced their criticism.  This is a normal thing 
because the Turkish General Staff is not a state institution that 
defines a political party's stance.  And it is definitely not an 
institution which has the authority to accuse political parties of 
being traitors.  Political parties talk or argue with other parties, 
it's what political parties do.  It is both the wrong attitude and 
undemocratic for the military to get involved in a debate between 
the government and the opposition." 
 
Talabani Visit 
Sabah, Milliyet, Hurriyet, Zaman, Radikal, Vatan, and others: 
Papers report that Iraqi President Jalal Talabani is coming to 
Ankara on Friday for a "working visit." Mainstream Sabah's headline 
reads "A 24-Hour Visit," and reports Talabani will not be greeted 
with a military ceremony.  However, there will be an official dinner 
at the Presidential Palace but the names of the both Presidents' 
wives have been omitted from the guest list.  Sabah adds that it is 
not clear yet whether the TGS Chief will be invited or not. 
Mainstream Milliyet's headline reads "He was a Peshmerge once upon a 
time, but will be staying at the Presidential Palace tomorrow." 
Talabani will be staying at the Presidential.  Milliyet says TGS 
Chief Buyukanit and other military personnel will not attend 
tomorrow night's dinner.  Milliyet columnist Semih Idiz reminds 
Turkish officials that "whether we like him or not, he is the 
President of Iraq" and "the Turkish government should leave behind 
sentiments of hatred and revenge in order to develop a coherent new 
Iraq policy in harmony with the regional facts." 
 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports that Talabani will be accompanied by 
the Iraqi Ministers of Water Resources, Oil, Industry, National 
Security and Finance.  However, Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari will 
not accompany Talabani.  Zaman adds that Ankara wants to open a new 
page in bilateral relations with Iraq. 
 
Editorial Commentary Talabani's Turkey Visit 
In liberal Radikal, Murat Yetkin wrote: "Since 2005, Turkey's 
foreign policy has been shaped by the fight against PKK terrorism, 
which has prevented Ankara from moving forward in compliance with 
changing situation in Iraq and Iraqi leadership.  It took three 
years for Ankara to overcome the ideological and psychological 
obstacles in that regard.  In the meantime, other countries across 
the world have established diplomatic relationships with the 
northern Iraqi leadership, while Ankara is still wondering whether 
it should even initiate political dialogue with them.   We haven't 
even managed to establish high level contacts with Baghdad, yet 
alone Erbil.  Therefore, Iraqi President Talabani's visit to Ankara 
is very important and it will pave the way for a Turkish 
Presidential visit to Baghdad." 
 
TUSIAD Expresses Concern about Economic Developments 
Sabah, Milliyet, Hurriyet, Radikal, Zaman and others: Arzuhan Dogan 
Yalcindag, the chairperson of the Turkish Industrialists' and 
Businessmen's Association (TUSIAD), expressed the business world's 
concerns about recent economic developments.  Yalcindag emphasized 
that "inflation and unemployment rates in February are the source of 
our concern."  Yalcindag urged the government to establish a new 
economic program and a new industrial strategy.  She also noted that 
the private sector is ready to support such a program. 
 
Gul Invites Ahmedinejad to Turkey 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak cites Iran's official news agency IRNA 
as reporting President Abdullah Gul invited Iranian President 
Ahmedinejad to Turkey yesterday.  The paper writes that Gul's 
invitation was extended yesterday when he received the Iranian 
Foreign Ministry Undersecretary Ali Riza Attar.  Gul called 
Ahmedinejad's visit to Baghdad 'historic.'  He also noted how the 
 
ANKARA 00000444  003 OF 003 
 
 
improvement in bilateral ties will benefit the whole region, 
according to IRNA. 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- The Constitutional Court is to hold its first meeting Thursday on 
the opposition CHP's request to annul the recent headscarf changes 
in the constitution. 
 
- Police arrested five demonstrators in Yuksekova in Hakkari in 
southeast Turkey during demonstrations against Turkish military 
operations into northern Iraq.  In Ercis town in the eastern 
province of Van, seven policemen and 50 protesters were injured 
during a protest march following a women's meeting. 
 
- On Friday, Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis will come to 
Turkey to participate in International Women's Day festivities, 
which will be organized by the ruling AKP's women's branch. 
 
- A survey conducted out by Egitim-Sen labor union shows 
unemployment, education and the Kurdish problem as the top problems 
facing Turkish university students.  The students did not place the 
turban among their top priority concerns. 
 
International News 
 
- The northern Iraqi PUK Media website quotes Peshmerge sources who 
claim Turkish helicopters struck Barazgr Valley in Sidekan region. 
Security operations continue in Cudi and Gabar mountains on the 
Turkish side of the border. 
 
- Iranian President Ahmedinejad said "even if all Americans vote for 
him, the US system would not allow Obama to be president." 
 
- Israel's Haaretz daily claims Iran is arming Hizbullah with 
missiles sent via Turkey, according to an intelligence report 
prepared by the Israeli military. 
 
- Queen Elizabeth II and her husband Prince Philip will visit Turkey 
in May at the invitation of President Abdullah Gul. 
WILSON