08ANKARA423
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Tue Mar 04 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO4711
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0423/01 0641428
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 041428Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5454
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8724
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 3955
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2744
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6451
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6284
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2864
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000423 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
TUESDAY, MARCH 4, 2008 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
TGS Chief General Buyukanit Addresses Criticism from the Press 
All papers report that Chief of Turkish General Staff (TGS) General 
Yasar Buyukanit addressed the press yesterday and reacted strongly 
against allegations that the Turkish military withdrew because of US 
pressure.  All papers quoted General Buyukanit, "if anyone can prove 
the US influenced the decision to withdraw, I will take my uniform 
off."  He added, "We chose Zap as a target because it is the place 
where the PKK masterminds its attacks.  Zap is the nerve center for 
the terrorists, while camps in Qandil are used for training and 
logistics.  The PKK cannot be eliminated with one operation; this 
time, we taught them one lesson; but we will teach the terrorists 
more lessons in the future.  The fight against terrorism cannot be 
carried out only by military operations.  But advocates for 
political solution do not provide details for a solution.  When 
someone does speak in detail, he/she speaks on behalf of the PKK and 
demands constitutional reforms, recognition of the Kurdish identity, 
education in mother tongue and general amnesty. I have not seen any 
other political proposal." 
 
Meanwhile, mainstream Sabah reports that Land Forces Commander 
General Ilker Basbug said, "The Turkish state should take necessary 
measures in order to prevent poor, uneducated, and unemployed 
youngsters from joining the PKK.  Economic measures should somehow 
be presented to these youngsters." 
 
EDITORIAL COMMENTARY 
 
"Stop Counting Dead Bodies" 
Cengiz Candar is a prominent foreign affairs analyst and columnist 
for business daily Referans.  He wrote in Referans (3/4): 
"Turkey has to look ahead and put aside debates about future land 
operations.  Any rhetoric related to cross border operations will 
only fuel the fires of violence and help the PKK attract new 
recruits.  Now is the time to take preventive action to eliminate 
the need for any further land operations.  First of all, a 
cooperation mechanism with Iraqi Kurds should be initiated.  Turkey 
will find it very easy to proceed with this mechanism when Baghdad 
and the US are fully engaged in the control of the border.  Next, 
there is an urgent need for a four-party mechanism between Ankara, 
Baghdad, Erbil and Washington.  The security cooperation should be 
attached to political and economic contacts with Iraqi Kurds. 
Turkey should also initiate legal steps for its own Kurds. 
Revitalizing Turkey's EU process can be a good route to initiate 
this process.  The upcoming visit of Iraqi President Talabani to 
Turkey is a good opportunity to open a brand new page in relations. 
Let's look ahead and discard the rhetoric of violence." 
 
 
 
"Killing is not the Way to Finish the PKK" 
Sahin Alpay is a senior columnist and researcher.  He wrote in 
Islamist-oriented Zaman (3/4): 
"Because the land operations were so short, they ended on a happy 
note.  Had the operation lasted longer, our troops could have faced 
confrontation with the Kurdish Regional Administration, Iraq and the 
US.  The operation ended right after calls for withdrawal from US 
officials, but that does not justify the argument that Turkey 
withdrew due to US pressures.  Given the fact that Iraq is still 
under American occupation, this operation proved Turkish military 
activity can be carried out with American cooperation and 
coordination.  The core question should be about the success of this 
operation.  We should talk about the methods of fighting, namely the 
PKK's guerilla tactics vs. the Turkish military's conventional 
approach.  Also, we should discuss the need for a professional army. 
 In any case, this operation proved Turkey's power and determination 
in the fight against the PKK.  Nevertheless, in order to render the 
PKK ineffective, Ankara needs to engage in close cooperation with 
Kurdish Regional Administration, Washington and Baghdad.  Now the 
 
ANKARA 00000423  002 OF 003 
 
 
question is whether the AKP government will be able to make this 
happen.  You cannot finish the PKK by killing them off, one-by-one. 
However, the recognition of legitimate freedoms and rights for 
Turkey's Kurds can render the PKK ineffective.  Once that point is 
reached, the main questions for the ruling AKP are: Are we going to 
see the implementation of democratic reforms?  Are we going to see 
special development measures for the southeast region?  Are we going 
to see an amnesty plan to win back the youth who are currently under 
the influence of the PKK?" 
 
 
CHP Leader Deniz Baykal Comments on the Withdrawal 
Milliyet, Cumhuriyet, Sabah, Radikal, Cumhuriyet and others: 
During yesterday's live interview on NTV, main opposition party CHP 
leader Deniz Baykal said he does not accept claims that Turkey 
withdrew from northern Iraq on its own.  Baykal claimed that the 
decision for withdrawal was made during the meetings between US 
Secretary of Defense Robert Gates, PM Erdogan and President Gul.  "I 
 
SIPDIS 
think some are trying to hold a sword over Turkey so we cannot 
eliminate terror permanently.  My party will carry the issue to the 
parliament." 
 
Turkish Academics' View on A Solution for Kurdish Issue 
Liberal Radikal is writing a series of reports on academics' 
approaches to solutions for the Kurdish Issue.  Professor Baskin 
Oran said "a solution must include economic measures and freedom. 
Freedom is needed not only for Kurdish people but for all people of 
Turkey".  Tugrul Turkes of MHP said, "We all have equal 
constitutional citizenship.  Economic reforms are needed in the 
southeast."  MHP Istanbul Deputy Gunduz Aktan said "The PKK should 
lay down their arms.  Cultural rights cannot be discussed while the 
terrorist threat continues." 
 
PKK Alarm at the Border 
Mainstream Milliyet reports that Turkish military units along the 
border with Iraq were put on alert against possible attacks by the 
PKK.  Turkish troops launched a "dawn operation" to neutralize 20 
PKK terrorists who infiltrated the border into Sirnak's Bestler 
Dereler region.  Operations continue in Cudi, Kato, Kupeli and Cirav 
regions. 
 
Supreme Court: "Compulsory Religious Education is Unconstitutional." 
 
Sabah, Cumhuriyet, Milliyet and others:  The Supreme Court of 
Appeals ruled that the religion classes within the current 
curriculum cannot be compulsory.  The Supreme Court's 8th Chamber 
recognized the claims of two Alevi parents who filed an appeal which 
asked that their children to be exempt from religion classes.  The 
Supreme Court ruled that when a curriculum is based on the 
perspective of a single religion, in this case Islam, it is not a 
'religion and ethics culture' class but a religion class.  Students 
cannot be forced to take such classes.  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet says that the ruling was "historical." 
 
Controversial Independence Celebrations in Askale 
Sabah, Milliyet, Vatan, Radikal, Hurriyet, Cumhuriyet, Posta, and 
others:  Yesterday marked the 90th anniversary of the liberation of 
Askale, a town in the Erzurum region.  Part of the program included 
the reenactment of an imam being hung by an Armenian gang.  Children 
of the town were shocked by the grotesque nature of the scene.  All 
papers carried the story from the angle that such reenactments 
should no longer take place.  Mainstream Sabah columnist Ergun 
Babahan criticizes the scene harshly and says "as long as we raise 
our kids with such scenes, we won't have a hard time finding 
triggermen in murders based on ethnic, religious and intellectual 
differences."  Sabah's front page headline reads, "Hate Ceremony," 
and carries a photo of children who are frightened by the mock 
execution.  Mainstream Hurriyet quotes a psychiatrist who notes, 
"These kinds of hate ceremonies led to the murder of Hrant Dink." 
 
 
ANKARA 00000423  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Government spokesman Cemil Cicek said the government does not have 
a special for combating terror, and urged PKK militants to apply for 
existing repentance law. 
 
- Five students from Gazi University in Ankara have filed a legal 
complaint against Rector Kadri Yamac, who refused to admit them to 
the University because they were wearing turbans. 
 
- YOK President Prof.Ozcan visited Kirikkale University.  He did not 
answer questions for journalists, but said he will try to relax the 
atmosphere 
 
International News 
 
- Iranian President Ahmedinejad proposed a trilateral cooperation 
between Turkey, Iran, and Iraq in order to combat the PKK and PJAK 
 
- The Turkish youth who was beaten by police in Germany has died. 
 
WILSON