08BEIJING892
March 11 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: XINJIANG TERRORISM, SAFETY AND
Tue Mar 11 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO1298
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0892/01 0711054
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 111054Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5642
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 000892 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PTER PGOV PHUM MARR KOLY ETRD CH JA RS SU SR
BM, KS, KN, TW, XA 
 
SUBJECT: March 11 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: XINJIANG TERRORISM, SAFETY AND 
CLEAN ENVIRONMENT FOR OLYMPICS, TIBET PROTESTS, U.S.-DPRK GENEVA 
MEETINGS, CLIMATE CHANGE PROPOSALS 
 
¶1. Key points at the March 11, 2008 regular MFA Press Briefing were: 
 
 
-- China continues to investigate the suspicious liquid found on a 
flight from Xinjiang to Beijing and rejects attempts to link 
terrorism to a single religion or ethnic group. 
 
-- China is working to ensure safe air quality and a high level of 
security during the Olympics. 
 
-- A number of monks were "dealt with according to the law" after 
"disturbing social stability" in Lhasa and China will also take 
measures to secure its territorial integrity in the face of a 
reported planned protest march from India to Tibet. 
 
-- A/S Hill and his DPRK counterparts will meet in Geneva but did 
not specify a date. 
 
-- China will consider any climate change proposal in line with the 
Kyoto Protocols, the Bali Roadmap, the principle of common but 
differentiated responsibility and the UNFCCC. 
 
Xinjiang Terrorists 
------------------- 
 
¶2. At the March 11 regular MFA press briefing, spokesperson Qin Gang 
denied accusations that recent police actions against alleged 
terrorists had been fabricated.  Qin said that police raided a 
terrorist camp on January 27 and discovered weapons.  The suspects 
confessed to establishing a violent group under the Eastern 
Turkistan Islamic Movement (ETIM).   Qin noted that ETIM is 
recognized as a terrorist organization by the UN and called on the 
international community to combat the group. 
 
¶3. Qin also said that the fight against terror should not be linked 
to religious or ethnic groups.  The Uighur people "love peace and 
oppose extremist and splittist forces."  Qin accused overseas Uighur 
activist Rebiya Kadeer of "deliberately linking China's fight 
against terror to the Uighur people" and called these efforts 
"sabotage."  Kadeer and people like her are trying to "make 
conflicts between ethnic groups," something which will be "met with 
the stern opposition of the Uighur people."  Kadeer and people like 
her "only represent a small handful of terrorist forces." 
 
¶4. When asked for clarification specifically about the recent 
reports of terrorist activity on a flight from Xinjiang to Beijing, 
Qin confirmed that a China Southern flight landed in Lanzhou when a 
suspicious liquid was discovered. The flight then continued to 
Beijing.  Relevant authorities are investigating the incident, said 
Qin. 
 
Olympics Pollution and Security 
------------------------------- 
 
¶3. Responding to a question about Haile Gebresalassie's announcement 
that he will not participate in the marathon event at the Beijing 
Olympics, Qin said that Beijing is working to improve its 
environment not only in preparation for the Olympics but also to 
improve the lives of its residents.  Qin noted that 68 percent of 
last year was rated as "blue sky" and that Beijing was preparing to 
enact temporary measures during the Olympics to ensure that air 
quality reaches the level suggested by the WHO. 
 
¶4. Spokesman Qin also said that China attaches great importance to 
security during the Olympics, has established a command center and 
has promulgated security plans.  China is safe, Qin said, but will 
not spare any effort in security. 
 
¶5. When asked whether the approaching Olympics would affect how 
China handled dissidents, Qin responded saying that China would deal 
with cases according to law regardless of the Olympics.  Qin said 
that he had noticed that recently foreign media were paying extra 
attention to "individual cases." 
 
Splittist Activities in Tibet 
----------------------------- 
 
¶6. Qin confirmed that a group of "ignorant monks abetted by some 
people" conducted "illegal activities aimed at upsetting social 
stability" in Lhasa on the afternoon of March 10.  These monks were 
"dealt with in accordance with the law."  Qin said that China would 
continue to combat "illegal activities." 
 
¶7. Regarding a march reportedly planned from India to Tibet in 
protest of Chinese occupation of Tibet, Qin noted that India has 
promised not to recognize the Tibetan government in exile and that 
China would "protect its territorial integrity." 
 
¶8. Qin added that Tibet has been a part of China "since ancient 
 
BEIJING 00000892  002 OF 002 
 
 
times" and no country has ever accepted Tibet as a separate country. 
 "Old Tibet" was "feudal and backwards" and has been "destroyed for 
good."  Qin said that the Dhali Lhama has distorted facts and should 
take actions to help the Tibetan people and "do something for them 
in his lifetime." 
 
U.S., DPRK Envoys Meet in Geneva 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶6. Qin reported that A/S Christopher Hill will meet with his DPRK 
counterpart in Geneva.  Qin said that China hopes the talks will be 
successful and that the parties "make joint efforts to push 
forward."  He added that he was not aware of reports that the DPRK 
negotiator was in Beijing. 
 
Climate Change Proposals 
------------------------ 
 
¶7. In response to questions about China's support for caps on carbon 
emissions, Qin said that China would keep an open mind toward any 
proposal which was in line with the Kyoto Protocols, the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), the 
principle of common but differentiated responsibility and the Bali 
Roadmap.  Qin said that developed countries should take the lead in 
combating climate change and should provide developing countries 
with financial and technical support.  Developing countries will 
"make efforts according to their abilities," said Qin. 
 
Human Rights Watch, G20, Tang Wei 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶8. Responding to a question regarding Human Rights Watch's 
accusations regarding abuses of migrant workers, Qin responded by 
saying that Human Rights Watch "has a problem with its eyes" and 
"needs to correct its glasses."  Qin asked reporters not to ask him 
a question about Human Rights Watch ever again.  Qin said that Xie 
Zhenhua, Vice Chairman of the National Development and Reform 
Commission, would be attending the upcoming NDRC G20 meeting in 
Japan.  Finally, Qin said that he had no information about reported 
banning of actress Tang Wei from mainland media and that reporters 
should contact another department.