08KHARTOUM381
UNIVERSITY POLITICS: NCP DOMINANCE, ISLAMIST CHALLENGES,
Sat Mar 15 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Khartoum
VZCZCXRO5941
PP RUEHBC RUEHDE RUEHGI RUEHKUK RUEHMA RUEHROV
DE RUEHKH #0381/01 0751112
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 151112Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY KHARTOUM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0200
INFO RUCNFUR/DARFUR COLLECTIVE
RUEHEE/ARAB LEAGUE COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 KHARTOUM 000381 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR AF/SPG, AF S/E WILLIAMSON 
DEPT PLS PASS USAID FOR AFR, AND ALSO PASS USAID 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM SU
SUBJECT: UNIVERSITY POLITICS: NCP DOMINANCE, ISLAMIST CHALLENGES, 
REBEL GROUPS, AND OTHER TRENDS 
 
REF: A) KHARTOUM 350 
 
B) KHARTOUM 340 
C) KHARTOUM 329 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  SUMMARY:  In four separate meetings the week of March 9, 
student political party leaders told emboffs that the National 
Congress Party is the most organized and successful political party 
in Sudan's universities.  Many opposition contacts cautioned that 
this NCP dominance is due not to the NCP's platform, but rather to 
its deep resources, overall student apathy, and a lack of viable 
alternatives.  Contacts emphasized that an unaffiliated Islamist 
constituency poses a threat to the NCP, as it did in the University 
of Khartoum's last student elections.  Student leaders of the Sudan 
Liberation Movement led by Darfur rebel leader Abdel Wahid Al-Nur 
reported that they have been harassed, detained, and tortured for 
their political activities on campus. END SUMMARY. 
 
NCP STRONG, BUT ISLAMISTS COULD HELP OPPOSITION 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
¶2.   (U)  On March 12, the Deputy Secretary General of the National 
Congress Party Student Association, Sana' Hamid Al-Awad told econoff 
that of 24 student elections in the last year, the NCP won 19. 
Al-Awad stated that the most notable losses were in Juba University, 
the University of Khartoum, and Jazira University.  Although an 
opposition alliance (composed primarily of the SPLM and Umma) 
defeated the NCP at the University of Khartoum, Al-Awad attributed 
this loss to rival Islamic groups that convinced some students to 
break away from the NCP.  "Some students think that the NCP is too 
moderate and migrate to more radical groups," stated Al-Awad.  She 
stated that the two most notable Islamic alternatives to the NCP at 
the University of Khartoum are "Takfir and Hijra" and "Ansar 
Al-Sunna" (both of these are generic names for radical - and often 
violent - Islamist groups).  Al-Awad stated that the next scheduled 
university election is April 15 at Red Sea University, and that NCP 
campaigning is well underway. 
 
STUDENTS WILL PLAY BIG ROLE IN 2009 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
¶3.  (U)  Al-Awad stated that political participation on campus has 
decreased, but that students are still important for Sudan's 
political life.  Even though political activism is in decline, said 
Al-Awad, the larger number of universities and students elevate the 
importance of student politics.  She stated that within the last two 
decades the number of universities in Sudan has jumped from a 
handful to over 56 today.  Al-Awad estimated that approximately 40% 
of the voters in the 2009 elections will be students or recent 
graduates.  (Note:  Although Al-Awad's estimates may be exaggerated, 
the majority of Sudan's population is under 30.  End Note).  Al-Awad 
also stated that energetic students have a multiplier effect on 
society and will influence their families, neighborhoods, and 
tribes. Al-Awad predicted that like the ongoing student elections, 
the NCP will win in the 2009 national mid-term elections. 
Nonetheless, Al-Awad said that the NCP would not rule-out an 
alliance with the SPLM.  "We can win on our own, but it might be 
better for the future of the country and for the prospects of a 
unified Sudan if we align with the SPLM," said Al-Awad. 
 
NCP ORGANIZATION 
- - - - - - - - - 
¶4.  (U)  Al-Awad emphasized that the NCP has the most developed 
organization and structure of any political group, and a 
comprehensive social, cultural, intellectual, and political program 
for its students.  She said that the party's leadership recognizes 
the importance of student politics, as "this generation will be the 
next leaders of Sudan."  Even more important than winning student 
elections, said Al-Awad, is training young adults in the art of 
politics.  She stated that many NCP student groups collect dues from 
their members which are later distributed to poor NCP students.  She 
stated that the NCP provides academic tutoring centers for its 
members.  Al-Awad admitted that NCP university party membership can 
lead to employment opportunities, as the connections that one 
develops help one find "intermediaries" in the party. 
 
SPLM 
- - - 
¶5.  (U)  On March 11, the SPLM Chairman for Youth and Students, 
Walid Hamid, told econoff that there are over 3,000 SPLM students at 
12 universities and higher institutions of learning in Khartoum. 
Hamid stated that most of these 3,000 students are based at the 
University of Juba (which is mostly still in Khartoum).  Hamid 
stated that the SPLM has struggled to transform itself from a 
southern, African party to a diverse national party.  Hamid stated 
that remnants of an SPLM university affiliate, the African National 
Front (a group that still limits its membership to southerners) has 
not helped the SPLM's campaign to appeal to diverse ethnic and 
geographic groups.  Hamid stated that he has tried to resolve this 
problem by establishing a new structure called the SPLM Student 
 
KHARTOUM 00000381  002 OF 003 
 
 
Coalition.  According to Hamid, this body will bring together both 
the ANF and other, non-ANF, SPLM student groups and should make the 
SPLM more attractive to interested students.  Hamid cautioned that 
the 2009 elections could bring violence and Sudan could follow the 
fate of Kenya, given "the NCP's attitude towards CPA 
implementation." 
 
SLM-NUR 
- - - - 
¶6.  (SBU)  On March 13, a  27 year-old Sudan Liberation Movement 
(SLM-Nur) leader of  Khartoum University and another 26 year-old 
leader from Al-Zaim Al-Ansari University  (AZA University) told 
econoff that their SLM political activities on campus have led to 
multiple detentions, torture, and continued harassment by Sudanese 
police and security.  (Note:  Names and contact information of these 
two SLM-students are available from post via siprnet communications. 
 End Note.) 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  These contacts stated that there are approximately 250 
students at the University of Khartoum and another 500 students at 
Zaim Al-Azhari affiliated with SLM-Nur and its related political 
bureau the United People's Front.  These contacts stated that most 
of the activities of SLM-Nur are underground, though they have 
occasionally organized rallies and protests, largely in conjunction 
with international events.  The Khartoum U. SLM leader stated that 
there is a "strong relationship" between the work of the rebels and 
their student activities.  "The rebels are responsible for the 
revolution," said the Khartoum University SLM leader, "and we 
respect them and try to support their work." 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Both contacts stated that during their last public event 
in October 2007, forty SLM-Nur students were imprisoned, 
interrogated, and tortured.  The Khartoum University SLM leader 
reported that he was detained for 16 days, and the AZA University 
student leader said he was held for over two months.  One of the 
contacts reported that he was tortured during his detention and 
subjected to burning, electrical shocks, whipping, and beatings with 
a barbed stick. (He displayed to econoff several 4 inch scars on his 
back and circular burn marks on his arm that he said were cigarette 
burns.) 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  These contacts stated that many university professors 
double as politicians and intelligence officers.  "If you are of the 
same political party as these professors, you may be rewarded with 
good grades, evaluations, and better opportunities," said one of the 
contacts.  The Khartoum University student leader reported that he 
had not been able to take his last several exams because the 
intelligence service consecutively detained him on his test dates. 
"It is no coincidence that they detain me on my exam days.  There is 
coordination between the University administrators and the security 
apparatus," he said. 
 
TRENDS 
- - - - 
¶10.  (SBU)  On March 11, Mohamed Yusif the Minister of State for 
Labor, an SPLM leader, and Professor of Social Anthropology, 
University of Khartoum told econoff that student politics are not 
what they used to be.  Yusif stated that until 1989 university 
campuses were a center of political activity.  Political rallies and 
discussions were frequent, crowds gathered to listen to speakers, 
and walls were plastered with political manifestos and 
announcements, said Yusif. 
 
¶11.  (SBU) Yusif stated that before the NCP came to dominate 
Sudanese politics, students tended to gravitate either toward the 
Muslim Brotherhood or the Communist Party.  He stated that the 
debate between these groups was usually open and civil and there was 
little violence on the campuses.  Since 1989, there has been 
shrinking support for these two political extremes, and more 
students have become moderate or politically apathetic.   According 
to Yusif, few students today are interested in or knowledgeable 
about domestic political affairs and many know more about foreign 
politics than Sudanese politics.  Students are disillusioned with 
their job prospects, preoccupied with personal affairs, and have a 
low regard for the existing political parties, stated Yusif.  Yusif 
believes that student involvement in politics may rise again, but in 
a different form.  Previous political interest was centered on big 
ideas, but renewed political participation will be based on 
implementation of the CPA and what it means in concrete terms, such 
as power sharing, wealth sharing, free elections, etc.  According to 
Yusif, political activity is most likely to grow among marginalized 
groups, who may benefit from this new focus of politics. 
 
¶12.  (SBU)  According to Yusif, membership in the NCP youth wing has 
been shrinking.  In his view, clever, ambitious students join the 
NCP, because they know it is a route to secure their future after 
they graduate, not because of ideological appeal.  Yusif believes 
 
KHARTOUM 00000381  003 OF 003 
 
 
this actually discourages recruitment, because present members see 
new members as potential competitors and want to keep the pool of 
competition as small as possible. 
 
POLITICAL VIOLENCE ON CAMPUS 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
¶13.  (SBU)  Yusif also noted the rising amount of political violence 
on campus.  Although the number of politically active students has 
decreased, they have become increasingly extreme.  In his view, many 
of these students view the world and politics in black and white 
terms and have no tolerance for opposing views.  Yusif said that 
political disputes frequently lead to bloodshed and this probably 
discourages the average student further from becoming involved. 
 
¶14.  (SBU)  SLM and NCP contacts also commented on the recent March 
9 violence at Omdurman Islamic University.  The SLM-Nur contacts 
stated stated that they participated in the SLM gathering at 
Omdurman Islamic University.  According to them, two NCP students 
had handguns that they fired into the air provoking their meagerly 
armed group of SLM students with sticks, knives, and Molotov 
cocktails.  The NCP's Al-Awad had a differing account of the March 9 
events, saying that the SLM-Nur group instigated the fighting by 
promoting their office in Israel, supporting Denmark against the 
Sudanese boycott, and even publicly insulting the holiest places of 
Islam.  Al-Awad predicted that violence will not spread to other 
universities, but that "outside forces will try to exploit 
universities for their own purposes." 
 
COMMENT 
- - - - 
¶15.  (SBU)  The NCP's student leader appeared to be the most 
knowledgeable, articulate, and prepared of all the party 
representatives and is likely a testament to the NCP's emphasis on 
developing its new cadre of leaders.  The University of Khartoum's 
student elections provide one example of a strategy (albeit a risky 
one) that the SPLM and opposition groups could employ in 2009. 
Opposition groups could attack the NCP's lack of Islamic piety, 
encourage more stalwart Islamic groups to break away from it, and 
attempt to fracture the conservative Islamic vote.  Undoubtedly the 
NCP recognizes this vulnerability, and has subsequently attempted to 
frame itself as the only Islamic party in Sudan.  Organizing large 
anti-Danish cartoon rallies, repeatedly denouncing Israel and 
SLM-Nur's opening of an office in Tel Aviv, and continuing to use 
strong inflammatory religious language are just a few recent 
examples of the NCP's religious propaganda aimed at securing its 
political base.  Yusif's comments about the level of political 
activity on university campuses, previously considered forces for 
political change in Sudan (and the source of student activism that 
brought the current NCP regime to power) are especially intriguing. 
The NCP obviously recognizes the value of student support in 
aggressively pursuing university election victories, while 
simultaneously stomping out alternate political voices.  This is 
another clear sign that the NCP is planning for national elections, 
and plans to win by any means. 
 
FERNANDEZ