08MEXICO886
THE FARC IN mexico   Classified By: POL Officer Frank Penirian. Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).
Fri Mar 28 00:00:00 +0100 2008
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Mexico
VZCZCXYZ0003
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHME #0886/01 0881950
ZNY SSSSS ZZH (CCY TEXT ADX: 767D28 MSI6994 600)
P 281950Z MAR 08
FM AMEMBASSY MEXICO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1092
INFO RUEHWH/WESTERN HEMISPHERIC AFFAIRS DIPL POSTS PRIORITY
RUEAHLA/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY PRIORITY   S E C R E T MEXICO 000886 

  SIPDIS 

  NOFORN  SIPDIS 

  C O R R E C T E D C O P Y (ADDING CAPTION)   

E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/28/2018 
 TAGS: PREL PTER KCRM PINR SNAR MX
SUBJECT: THE FARC IN mexico   Classified By: POL Officer Frank Penirian. Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 

 1. (U) Summary. The death of at least four Mexican nationals  during the recent Colombian attack on a Revolutionary Armed  Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerilla camp in Ecuador caused  again a brief stir in mexico over FARC activity here. Media  focus on the four nationals killed in Ecuador raised  questions as to whether the terrorist organization was  maintaining troubling ties to the Mexican far left and  narcotics cartels. While an affinity between members of the  organization and the far left in mexico no doubt remains  strong and provides a draw for fellow travelers to enroll in  FARC's cause in one fashion or another, Embassy law  enforcement and security elements have seen nothing to  indicate that the organization has broadened its presence in  mexico significantly in recent years. Similarly, despite  longstanding FARC commercial ties to the cartels, principally  as a steady supplier of cocaine, there is no evidence that  members of the organization have an established criminal  presence in mexico. End Summary. 

  2. (U) Five Mexican nationals were present at the FARC camp  in Ecuador where the organization's number two Raul Reyes was  killed by Colombian forces 3/1. Four Mexicans are confirmed  to have been killed in the attack, three of them students at  the Mexican National Autonomous University (UNAM). Lucia  Morett Alvarez, who completed her studies at UNAM in 2005,  also was present in the camp but survived. According to  press reports, Morett Alvarez headed a Mexican delegation  that traveled to Quito, Ecuador to attend a "Bolivarian  Congress" of Latin American leftist groups and that five of  them then decided to go to the rebel camp on the Colombian  border. Morett Alvarez' family insist that she is not a  guerilla but was working on an academic paper on leftist  movements. Unsubstantiated press reports alleged that she  was the main contact between the FARC and its supporters in  mexico and that at least eight Mexican students are training  with the FARC in Colombia and Ecuador.    FARC's Political Presence in mexico 

  3. (C) Given FARC's historical presence in mexico, questions  about its current political activities are reasonable.  mexico invited the organization to set up a political office  in mexico City in 1992. The move was consistent with the  GOM's relatively benign regard for the organization back  then, as well as its traditional interest in playing a  mediating role in regional conflicts, including Colombia's.  mexico allowed the FARC to run a quasi-diplomatic operation  and press office in the belief that it might be useful in  pursuit of a peace settlement in Colombia -- and on the  condition that the organization not meddle in mexico's  internal politics. So long as successive Colombian  governments engaged in efforts to negotiate with the FARC  through the late 1990s and into 2002, they tolerated an  "official" FARC presence in mexico. After 2001, battle lines  hardened and then President Andres Pastrana asked mexico to  close the office shortly after he broke off peace talks with  the FARC in 2002.   

¶4. (U) The office's principal reportedly relocated to Cuba  but maintained ties to members of mexico's hard left.  According to Mexican academic Raul Benitez, FARC  intermediaries at times also delivered messages to senior GOM  officials. In 2003, Colombia's Ambassador to mexico publicly  voiced concern over FARC's continued activities here,  asserting that the organization worked through fellow  travelers in UNAM's philosophy department, but he provided  few details. Charges have also surfaced over the years that  the organization has links to various indigenous guerilla  groups, including the Popular Revolutionary Army (EPR). 

  5. (S/NF) CISEN officials, however, have discounted such  links and in particular say they have ruled out a FARC  connection to the recent bombings carried out by the EPR.  Media have highlighted two videos showing FARC training  camps, one allegedly passed among UNAM students, another  purportedly showing Morett at a camp in military attire. The  number of miltary recruits among the Mexican student body, as  opposed to sympathizers, is not likely to be large, however.  Most of the students attending the Bolivarian Congress in  Quito shortly before the attack on the FARC camp were clearly  political tourists. One Mexican law enforcement official  expressed concern that some radical students have indeed  taken up arms for the FARC without saying how many. This  official thought it conceivable that some might come back and  enlist as soldiers in the Mexican armed left, but said the  GOM had no evidence that any have yet done so.    FARC Drug Ties "Transactional"  

¶6. (C) ICE, ATF and DEA do not have any open cases involving  the FARC in mexico. Organization members have been tied  loosely to several Mexican drug trafficking organizations in  the past in drugs for guns deals according to DEA. In 2001,  Colombian Carlos Ariel Charry Guzman was arrested in mexico  for acting as an intermediary for a drugs and weapons deal  with the Arellano Felix Cartel. According to the DEA, he was  a doctor for the FARC and came to mexico to buy medical  supplies to take back to the camps of the FARC. At the time,  mexico's Attorney General publicly denounced the link between  the FARC and the Tijuana-based organization. DEA also  reported that in October 2007 a plane piloted by known  Mexican narcotraffickers ran large quantities of cocaine  between Ecuador's border region (near a FARC stronghold in  Colombia) and mexico. After the killing of Reyes on March 1,  media carried an unsubstantiated report that one of the  computers seized at the site contained information relating  to a February 18, 2008, shipment of drugs to a cartel in  mexico. According to ATF, there is no evidence that the FARC  is supplying guns or ordnance to Mexican drug cartels, the  EPR or any other groups in mexico. On March 12 Attorney  General Medina Mora sought to clarify the issue when he said  that the FARC maintains only "transactional" ties with  Mexican drug cartels, meaning they have no fixed presence in  mexico, nor any interest in formally grafting on to local  crime organizations. Embassy law enforcement officials say  no evidence exists to contradict this assertion.   

¶7. (C) Comment. Initially, the Mexican public expressed  outrage at the killing of Mexican nationals in Colombia's  raid on the guerilla camp in Ecuador. Progressively,  however, attention has shifted to FARC's presence in mexico.  Publicly, President Calderon has walked a careful line  discretely rejecting Colombia's attack but devoting more time  to promoting reconciliation between the two sides. While  there is evidence of sporadic FARC "transactional" activity  trafficking drugs and weapons, it would appear at this  juncture its primary focus is on conducting discreet  ideological activities to its student base in UNAM. Many  Mexicans maintain a relatively benign regard for the FARC.  Indeed one senior SRE official told Poloff this week that the  organization springs from the legitimate left in South  America and "there is an historical basis for its existence."  These sentiments notwithstanding, President Calderon has  evinced concern enough to task his own intelligence forces to  look more closely into FARC activities here. End Comment.