08STATE28930
SOMALIA-- TALKING POINTS FOR MARCH 20 OPEN DEBATE
Wed Mar 19 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #8930 0792332
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 192327Z MAR 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI PRIORITY 0000UNCLAS STATE 028930 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: UNSC PREL PHUM SO XA XW
SUBJECT: SOMALIA-- TALKING POINTS FOR MARCH 20 OPEN DEBATE 
 
 
¶1.  This is an action message.  See paragraph 2.  USUN is 
instructed to draw from the following talking points for 
their March 20 open 
debate on Somalia. 
 
Begin points: 
 
-- The United States would like to thank the Secretary 
General for his thorough March 14 report on the situation in 
Somalia, which included the UN's Strategic Assessment of 
Somalia and contingency plans for a possible United Nations 
peacekeeping operation. 
 
-- The United States agrees -- as the United Nations outlined 
in the Strategic Assessment of Somalia -- that it is 
important for the political, security, and programmatic 
efforts of the UN and the international community to be 
coordinated and well organized. 
 
-- With that in mind, I would like to discuss these three 
tracks. 
 
-- First, on the political track, the United States fully 
supports the efforts of the Somali Prime Minister Nur 
"Adde" Hassan Hussein and of the Special Representative of 
the Secretary General Ahmedou Ould Abdallah to reach out 
to talk to members of the opposition.  It is extremely 
important, in the spirit of reconciliation, that members 
of the legitimate opposition be brought into the decision 
making process of the Transitional Federal Government (TFG). 
 
-- The large-scale peace conferences held inside Somalia, 
such as the National Reconciliation Congress in 
July-August 2007, and outside Somalia, such as the Somalia 
National Reconciliation Conference that ended with the 
formation of the TFG and adoption of the Transitional Federal 
Charter in 2004, provide the way forward.  Further 
dialogue must be focused on achieving the mandate of the 
transitional process outlined by the Charter, not on a new 
formal agreement or re-opening the already agreed-upon 
political framework. 
 
-- At the same time, it must be stressed that there is no 
place at the table for spoilers and those who refuse to 
renounce violence.  Al-Shabaab is one such group.  On 
February 29, the United States designated al-Shabaab as a 
Foreign Terrorist Organization (under Section 219 of the 
Immigration and Nationality Act) and as a Specially 
Designated Global Terrorist Entity (under Section 1(b) of 
Executive Order 13224).  This designation was made in 
recognition of the terrorist threat posed by al-Shabaab to 
international stability and the group's determination to 
pursue a path of violence at the expense of dialogue, 
including the use of intimidation and targeted 
assassinations. 
 
-- The United States fully supports efforts to relocate the 
UN Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS) and other essential 
members of the UN Country Team from Nairobi to Mogadishu as 
laid out in Scenario 2 of the UN contingency plan, in Annex 
III of the SYG report.  The United States understands that at 
present the security situation does not allow for 
this deployment.  However, we encourage the UN to start 
making arrangements now for the relocation of UNPOS and 
other elements of the UN Country team to Mogadishu, including 
the development of appropriate security 
arrangements. 
 
--  Second, on the security track, the United States agrees 
with the UN contingency planning report that there is no 
viable Somali solution to replace AMISOM in the near to 
medium term.  To help stabilize Somalia and create the 
dynamics for lasting peace and stability, the international 
community must double and triple its efforts 
to bolster deployment and maintenance of AMISOM.  We are 
aware, as the UN contingency planning report points out in 
its last paragraph, that many feel the voluntary basis of 
AMISOM's budget support is hampering AMISOM efforts to 
recruit and deploy forces.  However, there is currently no 
alternative to this system.  As we have said repeatedly, the 
United 
States cannot support the funding of non-UN missions through 
UN assessed contributions.  We renew our call on 
the international community to provide greater financial and 
logistical support for AMISOM immediately to 
facilitate deployment of troop contributing countries that 
require additional funding guarantees and to help ensure 
the success of this critical mission.  We also would like to 
thank once again the AU forces from Uganda and Burundi 
currently deployed to Somalia for their tireless efforts, 
often in the face of danger, to bring peace and stability to 
Somalia. 
 
--  The United States was intrigued by the recommendation of 
a maritime task force referenced in Scenario 1 of the 
contingency planning.  The United States previously 
approached Security Council members and other interested 
parties about the need to combat piracy and other maritime 
crime in and around Somali Territorial Waters.  We note 
the February 27 letter from the TFG to the UNSC asking for 
assistance in combating piracy in its territorial waters. 
We look forward to working with the Council in the coming 
weeks to determine how best the UN Security Council can 
assist the TFG in stopping piracy off its coasts. 
 
-- Third, on the programmatic efforts, we support the idea 
outlined in the strategic assessment for the formulation 
of a joint planning unit that could coordinate an integrated 
strategy.  However, we emphasize the need to 
maintain the neutrality of UN humanitarian operations in any 
enhanced coordination mechanisms among UN programmatic 
activities. 
 
-- In conclusion, the United States appreciates the effort 
and analysis reflected in the latest SYG report, including 
the Strategic Assessment Mission and the UN Contingency 
Planning Report.  We also appreciate the continued efforts 
of SRSG Ould-Abdallah in working with the TFG to reach out 
and facilitate dialogue with members of the legitimate 
opposition.  As we continue to encourage a process of 
peaceful political dialogue, we will also seek to isolate 
those who, out of extremism, refuse to engage in that 
dialogue and insist on violence.  We look forward to 
continued close cooperation with the UN and our Security 
Council partners as we work towards lasting peace and 
stability in Somalia. 
RICE