04TELAVIV2242
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Mon Apr 19 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 TEL AVIV 002242 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Iraq 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
All media reported on Holocaust Memorial Day events, 
which started last night and will continue through 
tonight. 
 
Sunday, all media led with the assassination of Hamas 
leader Abdel Aziz Rantisi in an IAF helicopter strike 
Saturday evening.  Shortly after the assassination, 
Khaled Mashal, the head of the movement's political 
bureau, who operates from Damascus, announced that the 
identity of the new Hamas leader in Gaza would not be 
disclosed.  Today, Ha'aretz reported that Israel will 
consider attacking Hamas's compound in Damascus should 
the organization move its main power base to Syria. 
The media pitted strong responses to the killing around 
the world against mild responses in the U.S. 
 
Leading media quoted National Security Advisor 
Condoleezza Rice as saying in an interview on the Fox 
network that the U.S. did not have advance information 
about Israel's intention to kill Rantisi.  Rice called 
on Israel to "consider the implications of the actions 
it carries out," but she stressed that Israel has a 
right to defend itself, and that Hamas is a terror 
organization.  The media also quoted Democratic 
presidential contender Sen. John Kerry as saying on 
NBC: "I believe that Israel has every right to respond 
to terror threats against it."  Kerry also said that he 
supports Sharon's disengagement plan, and that if 
elected he will appoint a high-level Middle East 
mediator acceptable to the international community and 
Israel.  Israel Radio reported that the Islamic 
Movement in Israel intends to demonstrate this week 
opposite the U.S. Embassy in Tel Aviv. 
 
All media reported that Sunday PM Sharon won a cabinet 
majority for his disengagement plan, when Finance 
Minister Binyamin Netanyahu, Education Minister Limor 
Livnat, and Minister-without-Portfolio Meir Sheetrit 
decided to back it.  Netanyahu was quoted as saying in 
an interview with Yediot that he "obtained the maximum 
for the settlers."  FM Silvan Shalom is still 
undecided.  The media quoted Sharon as saying at the 
cabinet meeting: "The U.S. believes that settlement 
blocs will remain in Israel's hands in any case and 
that will be outside future negotiations with the 
Palestinians."  Yediot sums up seven achievements 
reached by Sharon during his visit to the U.S., which 
he detailed at the cabinet meeting: the U.S. pledged 
not to adopt another plan than the road map; there will 
be no diplomatic negotiations before terrorism ends, 
terrorist groups are dismantled and comprehensive 
reforms are made [in the PA]; the U.S. recognizes 
Israel's need for defensible borders, and accepts 
Israel's right to defend itself everywhere --including 
in areas it has evacuated and will evacuate; there will 
be no return of refugees to Israel; there will be no 
return to the 1967 borders, because the settlement 
blocs will remain in Israel's hands, and because of 
Israel's right to defensible borders; not only will 
settlement blocs remain in Israel's hands, but also 
Israel will be able to build in them in a scope to be 
jointly determined with the U.S.; and the security 
fence will be built along the complete  route that was 
decided upon by the government, including the erection 
of a continuous fence around the settlement blocs.  The 
government will complete the fence before the beginning 
of the evacuation of settlements.  Jerusalem Post 
reported that Sharon told his cabinet Sunday that an 
Israeli team will meet in the next few days with U.S. 
Ambassador Dan Kurtzer to define where construction 
will be allowed in the settlements. 
 
Sunday, leading media quoted British PM Tony Blair as 
saying in an interview with BBC Radio from Washington 
Saturday that Israel's plan to withdraw from Gaza and 
part of the West Bank will reinvigorate rather than 
destroy the road map.  There were contradictory media 
reports regarding the EU's position in the matter. 
 
Jerusalem Post quoted a PA source as saying that 
Palestinian FM Nabil Shaath canceled his trip to the 
U.S., which was planned for next month, because the PA 
wants to reconsider its acceptance of Sharon's Gaza 
withdrawal plan and its relations with the U.S. 
Administration. 
 
Yediot and Maariv excerpted an interview with nuclear 
whistleblower Mordecai Vanunu, who will be released 
Wednesday.  In the interview, which was conducted by 
the defense establishment and which will be broadcast 
tonight on Channel 10-TV, Vanunu is alleged to say: 
"The Dimona nuclear reactor should be destroyed as the 
Iraqi reactor was."  He reportedly said he will have a 
computer with access to the Internet and that nobody 
will be able to do anything against him, and that 
"billions" of people in the world consider him a hero. 
 
All media reported that Saturday afternoon a border 
policeman was killed and that three other Israelis were 
wounded when a suicide bomber blew himself up at the 
Erez crossing.  The electronic gate did not detect the 
explosive charge.  Ha'aretz and other media reported 
that a Palestinian youth was killed near Ramallah 
Friday, and that two Palestinians were killed in Gaza 
Sunday.  All media reported on a shooting incident on a 
Galilee road Sunday:  Ha'aretz and Israel Radio 
reported that border policemen killed an Israeli Arab 
and wounded another.  They had attempted to shoot at 
border police vehicles on a Galilee road. 
 
Sunday, the media reported that Israel's embassy in 
Australia has dispatched a diplomat to New Zealand with 
the arrests of two Israelis allegedly trying to obtain 
a fake New Zealand passport.  The media reported on 
allegations in New Zealand that the two men could be 
Mossad agents. 
 
Sunday, Jerusalem Post reported that the U.S. State 
Department has suggested in recent days that Syria may 
be able to avoid imposition of fresh U.S. sanctions, 
under the Syria Accountability and Lebanese Restoration 
Act, if it soon shows it has taken some of the steps 
required by the law. 
 
Leading media reported Sunday that two weeks ago Giora 
Eiland, the coordinator of the Gaza withdrawal plan, 
drafted a document criticizing the Geneva Accord for 
being a "dangerous sleight of hand" regarding the right 
of return for Palestinian refugees.  The media cited a 
response by the Geneva Accord team, that the 
understandings in the agreement do not include 
recognition or materialization of the right of return. 
 
Leading media reported that, in a groundbreaking move, 
Israir Airlines is to launch direct charter flight 
service between Israel and the U.S. (on the Tel Aviv- 
New-York line), starting in June. 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: "Even 
if it is possible to identify substantive arguments to 
justify the Rantisi assassination, the timing of the 
act raises skepticism about the motives of those who 
decided to carry it out." 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: 
"Will the British Foreign Minister explain why the 
killing of Uday and Qusay Hussein was justified and 
'productive,' but the killing of Abdel Aziz Rantisi was 
not?" 
 
Military correspondent Alex Fishman wrote on page one 
of mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: 
"Rantisi needed to disappear quickly if only because he 
threw the gates of Gaza wide open to direct Iranian 
influence." 
 
Political commentator Shalom Yerushalmi wrote in 
popular, pluralist Maariv: "The serial killing of 
Sheikh Yassin and Rantisi is turning Sharon into a 
national hero within the ranks of the Likud." 
Chief Economic Editor and senior columnist Sever 
Plotker wrote in the editorial of Yediot Aharonot: 
"Ultimately, Palestinian society is going to have to be 
the one to root out Hamas from its midst, if it ever 
wants to live as a normal society." 
 
Ha'aretz editorialized: "Sharon's plan should be 
supported, but without illusions of any real American 
guarantees." 
 
Nationalist, Orthodox Hatzofe editorialized: "The U.S. 
President is now being swept into helping Sharon." 
 
Arab affairs commentator Danny Rubinstein wrote in 
Ha'aretz: "If in previous years there was talk of Hamas 
joining Arafat's regime, it appears now in Gaza that 
the talk is more to do with the PA joining Hamas." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "The Motivation Behind the Missile" 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (April 
19): "Knocking off Hamas leaders is not, in itself, 
policy. If these acts aggravate risks faced by Israel 
and its citizens, they are wrong.  Conversely, if they 
are likely to restrain Hamas and lead it toward the 
route of a cease-fire (which disappeared rapidly last 
summer) and encourage the organization to work out 
practical arrangements with the Palestinian Authority 
prior to the withdrawal of IDF troops and settlements 
from Gaza -- then the assassinations should not be 
ruled out.  An echo of this approach can be heard in 
the White House.... Even if it is possible to identify 
substantive arguments to justify the Rantisi 
assassination, the timing of the act raises skepticism 
about the motives of those who decided to carry it out. 
Sharon was eager to arrive at Sunday's cabinet meeting 
-- and to influence whether top Likud ministers who 
have expressed reservations about his disengagement 
plan will join active opponents of the plan or be 
content to issue vacuous statements -- with a military 
success under his belt." 
 
II.  "Justified and Productive" 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized 
(April 19): "Will the British Foreign Minister explain 
why the killing of Uday and Qusay Hussein was justified 
and 'productive,' but the killing of Abdel Aziz Rantisi 
was not?  All three are, or were, leaders of what the 
British government defines as terrorist 
organizations.... To follow the minister's 
pronouncements to their logical conclusion, Israel may 
take no measure in its self-defense except to arrest 
suicide bombers when they reach Israeli soil, which is 
as good as no defense at all.  Alternatively, he 
believes Israel must resume negotiations with the 
Palestinian Authority, notwithstanding the failure of 
the PA to take steps against terrorist organizations 
and the evidence that it is deeply implicated in 
terrorist activity." 
 
III.  "Assassination for Disengagement Purposes" 
 
Military correspondent Alex Fishman wrote on page one 
of mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (April 
18): "If any such thing as a 'positive assassination' 
exists, then Abdel Aziz Rantisi's assassination 
warrants that term.  That is because the removal of 
Rantisi from the arena is likely to produce a far more 
substantial change in the performance of Hamas in Gaza 
than the assassination of Sheikh Ahmed Yassin.  Rantisi 
needed to disappear quickly if only because he threw 
the gates of Gaza wide open to direct Iranian 
influence.... Assassinating leaders on its own serves 
no purpose, unless the weakening of the organization 
they headed is exploited to promote political goals. 
Should the Palestinian Authority rise to the occasion 
and take responsibility in the Gaza Strip as a result 
of Hamas's weakened state, should Egypt, Jordan and 
other moderate Arab countries encourage and bolster 
constructive elements in the Gaza Strip to take 
responsibility and to rehabilitate life there after the 
Israeli withdrawal, should Israel rise to the occasion 
to strengthen those elements in the Gaza Strip that 
have the ability to assume responsibility -- then these 
assassinations will prove to have been efficacious. 
Rantisi's assassination does not change Hamas's desire 
for revenge in the least." 
 
IV.  "Targeted Assassination of the Objection" 
 
Political commentator Shalom Yerushalmi wrote in 
popular, pluralist Maariv (April 19): "The serial 
killing of Sheikh Yassin and Rantisi is turning Sharon 
into a national hero within the ranks of the Likud, a 
leader whom one must now join, and not place obstacles 
on his way.... The recent developments are placing the 
Likud opponents of disengagement in a very difficult 
predicament.... Sharon's achievements in the U.S., 
Rantisi's assassination and the defection of [hard-line 
Likud ministers] Netanyahu and Livnat to the ranks of 
the supporters isolate them and leave them without a 
leader endowed with a stature to continue the 
struggle." 
¶V.  "A Foreknown Scenario" 
 
Chief Economic Editor and senior columnist Sever 
Plotker wrote in the editorial of Yediot Aharonot 
(April 18): "The Israeli government does not hide 
behind an anonymous hand.  It announces to all and 
sundry that it intends to kill the people who lead, 
initiate and organize the terrorist campaign against 
it.  That is where the strategic novelty lies.  The 
issue of the open and foreknown assassinations raises a 
large number of legal, moral, military and humanitarian 
questions.  Not all of them either can or should be 
answered.  It is true that Israel has enormously 
expanded the definition of the ticking bomb, which it 
used to justify assassinations early on.  With that 
having been said, one thing is clear: it is 
inconceivable that the people who send others to commit 
suicide bombing attacks should be able to sleep soundly 
in their beds.  If there is justification for killing a 
terrorist on his way to commit a terror attack, there 
is far more justification for killing the commander and 
preacher who sent the terrorist on his way.... Israel 
currently stands at the vanguard of the war on terror. 
It has taken the initiative, and the results are 
impressive.  But we should not delude ourselves. 
Dismantling Hamas's spinal cord and killing its 
leadership will not erase the burning hatred for Israel 
but rather will intensify it -- at least in the short 
run.  Ultimately, Palestinian society is going to have 
to be the one to root out Hamas from its midst, if it 
ever wants to live as a normal society." 
 
 
 
 
 
VI.  "The Bush Wrapping" 
 
Ha'aretz editorialized (April 18): "As the clouds of 
celebration dissipate from around the White House, it 
becomes clear that Sharon has provided a solid 
commitment to implement practical steps, while Bush 
offered a statement and an atmosphere, 'a sober 
evaluation,' with no American commitment regarding 
opposition to the Palestinian right of return or 
recognition of the reality of large blocs of settlement 
in the West Bank that will require adjustment through 
exchanges of territory.  This mysterious American 
policy leaves it to the sides to bargain over the final 
agreement.  As expected, in the wake of Arab and 
European criticism of the plan, the U.S. Administration 
peeled off the plan's wrapping and went back to 
focusing on its immediate benefit to the Palestinians - 
- withdrawal.  In order not to delay the fulfillment of 
the promises until 2005, or the next prime minister, 
Sharon gave in to the demand to immediately dismantle 
the illegal outposts, under close American supervision. 
Under the conditions that have been created, and in 
spite of the real concern over the chaos that will roil 
in the territories, all in all, the removal of 
settlements is of supreme significance as a precedent. 
For this reason, Sharon's plan should be supported, but 
without illusions of any real American guarantees." 
 
VII.  "Bush Enlisting For the Corrupt One" 
 
Nationalist, Orthodox Hatzofe editorialized (April 18): 
"The President of the U.S. has done something that is a 
bit startling: if the plan he supports doesn't win a 
majority, he could find himself in additional trouble 
on the eve of the presidential race.  Is it possible 
that President Bush is interested in strengthening the 
image that U.S. night talk show hosts have nurtured 
regarding his judgment?.... The U.S. President is now 
being swept into helping Sharon.  He could find out 
that this cost him his second term.  It is doubtful 
that as far as Israel is concerned, Kerry is better 
than Bush as president.  But, should that happen, 
Sharon could well succeed in causing more damage to 
Israel.  On the other hand, how important is this?  The 
important thing is that the Sharon family survives the 
corruption investigations." 
 
VIII.  "The Victory of the Hamas Way" 
 
Arab affairs commentator Danny Rubinstein wrote in 
Ha'aretz (April 19): "The Gaza Strip appears ... to be 
heading toward a new regime, which won't exactly be a 
continuation of the Palestinian Authority, but rather 
'an action committee under the auspices of the PA,' as 
Muhammad Dahlan has suggested.  If in previous years 
there was talk of Hamas joining Arafat's regime, it 
appears now in Gaza that the talk is more to do with 
the PA joining Hamas.  In any event, the Hamas way has 
emerged victorious: there is no political process; the 
armed struggle has returned; the fight is against 'the 
Zionist entity'; and the issue of the right of return 
has once again been brought to the fore." 
 
--------- 
¶2.  Iraq: 
--------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Nachman Shai, who was the IDF spokesman during the 1991 
Gulf War, wrote in conservative, independent Jerusalem 
Post: "Israel is rightfully concerned that American 
determination could flag.... An American withdrawal 
would leave us alone in an already hostile environment 
that would only, in such circumstances, become even 
more violent and cruel." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Rooting For America" 
 
Nachman Shai, who was the IDF spokesman during the 1991 
Gulf War, wrote in conservative, independent Jerusalem 
Post (April 18): "Since the allies occupied Iraq more 
than a year ago, Israel has kept a 'low profile'.... 
Last week things changed when Defense Minister Shaul 
Mofaz said, 'We are crossing our fingers for the 
Americans... If the U.S. wins in Iraq it will have a 
positive effect on the whole Middle East.  If it is 
forced out due to the pressure of terrorism, it will 
create a new and dangerous model of Arab rule'.... I 
suggest everyone wait and see.  The U.S. is not stupid, 
and the move it initiated in Iraq was justified and 
correct.... Anyone who opts for a policy of surrender 
and appeasement, as recently exhibited by the new 
Spanish government's rush to withdraw its forces from 
Iraq, is only inviting global terror to continue.... 
John Kerry has to be very careful when he criticizes 
matters that lie at the core of the ethos of the 
American nation.  In times of war the Americans rally 
around the flag and postpone their criticism for 'the 
day after.'  That day has yet to come.  Israel is 
rightfully concerned that American determination could 
flag.... An American withdrawal would leave us alone in 
an already hostile environment that would only, in such 
circumstances, become even more violent and cruel." 
 
KURTZER