05TELAVIV5404
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Fri Sep 02 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

021109Z Sep 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 TEL AVIV 005404 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
USCINCCENT MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Meeting of Israeli and Pakistani Foreign Ministers 
 
¶2.  Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
All media (lead stories in Ha'aretz and Jerusalem Post) 
reported on the "historic" meeting between FM Silvan 
Shalom and his Pakistani counterpart Mian Khurshid 
Mahmood Kasuri in Istanbul.  The media reported that 
Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf initiated the 
meeting.  Ha'aretz and Jerusalem Post say that PM 
Sharon and Musharraf may meet in New York later this 
month.  Israel Radio quoted senior World Jewish 
Congress official David Twersky, who has held extended 
contacts with Pakistani officials, as saying that a 
Pakistani cabinet minister, whom he declined to name, 
will visit Israel soon.   Ha'aretz reported that 
Pakistan's move sparked  "condemnation, criticism, and 
a little praise from the Arab world."  Jerusalem Post 
writes that the summit meeting will be dependent on 
domestic Pakistani and Arab world reactions to the FMs' 
public meeting.  Ha'aretz's web site reported that hard- 
line Pakistani lawmakers walked out of parliament 
Friday to protest the first formal talks between 
Pakistan and Israel, as radical Islamic groups planned 
rallies at mosques across Pakistan. 
 
Yediot and Maariv banner maneuvers by the right wing to 
topple Sharon (see below: Yediot's poll among members 
of the Likud's Central Committee).  Maariv writes that 
the recent attempt to bring down PM Sharon was 
initiated by two West Bank settlers and funded by a 
Jewish donor from the U.S.  Israel Radio quoted a close 
associate of MK Binyamin Netanyahu as saying that, if 
elected Likud chairman in November, Netanyahu aspires 
to topple the government immediately and become interim 
PM until the Knesset elections.  The station later 
cited a denial by Netanyahu's HQ.  Ha'aretz's 
Washington correspondent Shmuel Rosner cites the belief 
of Netanyahu's associates that the U.S. administration 
has no cause for concern if their man becomes the next 
PM. 
 
Jerusalem Post quoted unnamed sources as telling the 
newspaper that if Sharon opts to leave the Likud and 
runs for election at the head of a new faction, he will 
set out a vision for Israel's borders in the West Bank 
similar to the route of the security barrier with minor 
additions.  The newspaper also quoted unspecified 
sources as saying that Sharon will indeed quit the 
party if its central committee defies him this month 
and votes for the leadership contest sought this winter 
by Netanyahu and MK Uzi Landau. 
 
Vice PM and Finance Minister Ehud Olmert was quoted as 
saying in an interview conducted with Jerusalem Post on 
Thursday that Israel has given the U.S. administration 
commitments that it will not build between Jerusalem 
and Ma'aleh Adumim and that the contested project has 
been put on hold indefinitely. 
 
All media reported that on Thursday, Israel and Egypt 
signed a detailed agreement providing for the 
deployment of 750 Egyptian policemen along the 
Philadelphi road.  Israel Radio cited a senior defense 
source as saying that the move poses no strategic 
threat to Israel.  Jerusalem Post quoted Hamas leader 
Mahmoud Zahar as saying on Thursday that if Israel does 
not relinquish control over the Rafah border crossing, 
Hamas will launch armed attacks on Israel to force it 
out of the area.  Jerusalem Post reported on a palpable 
decline of the PA in Gaza, where Hamas is winning the 
PR campaign. 
 
Maariv reported that GOI sources have confirmed that 
King Abdullah II of Jordan will visit Israel next week, 
despite previous Jordanian denials. 
 
Yediot reported that Israel secretly opened a 
diplomatic-commercial representation in Dubai a few 
days ago. 
 
Israel Radio reported that Shalom will meet today with 
a senior leader of China's Communist Party to discuss 
Iran, the PA, and the weapons exports crisis with the 
U.S. 
 
Yediot reported that the Shin Bet has instructed that 
Sharon should only travel by helicopter, because of 
increasing threats on his life. 
 
All media continued to report on the havoc wreaked by 
Hurricane Katrina.  Referring to looting, murders, and 
hunger in New Orleans, Yediot's front-page headline 
reads: "Like in the Third World."  Israel Radio 
reported that on Thursday, Israel offered to send 
hundreds of medical personnel, as well as supplies and 
medicine, to the U.S.  Ha'aretz invites its readers to 
contribute to the United Jewish Communities (UJC) 
Hurricane Katrina Disaster Relief Fund. 
 
Maariv reported on a new security doctrine being 
formulated by a team made up of academics, politicians 
and security officials and headed by former Justice 
Minister Dan Meridor.  The team's report, which Maariv 
says will be shown soon to the prime minister and 
defense minister, allegedly states that there is no 
longer any "security significance" in holding onto the 
West Bank and Golan Heights.  Maariv quoted Meridor as 
saying last night: "The document is still being drafted 
and it is still too early to talk about the contents. 
At this stage there is no statement about the 
territories." 
 
Yediot reported that Sharon poured outstanding praise 
on Defense Ministry D-G Amos Yaron at a farewell 
meeting with him. 
 
Leading media reported that on Wednesday, a Los Angeles 
court indicted four members of an Islamic cell who 
planned to carry out attacks against synagogues, the 
Israeli Consulate-General, El Al, and U.S. military 
facilities. 
 
Leading media cited a Justice Ministry announcement on 
Thursday that the state prosecution plans to indict all 
those arrested during the pullout who are suspected of 
serious crime. 
 
A Yediot/Mina Zemach (Dahaf Institute) poll conducted 
on August 30-31 among members of the Likud's Central 
Committee found that the committee would rate prominent 
Likud politicians in the following positions in the 
party's list for the Knesset elections: 
-Uzi Landau: 1st (up from 10th in the original Likud 
list of candidates in the 2003 elections); Netanyahu: 
4th (up from 10th); Silvan Shalom: 11th (down from 
4th); Ariel Sharon: 12th (down from 1st); Shaul Mofaz: 
13th (down from 12th); Ehud Olmert: 22nd (up from 
33rd); Limor Livnat: 25th (down from 6th); and Omri 
Sharon: 40th(down from 27th). 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
¶1.  Meeting of Israeli and Pakistani Foreign Ministers: 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "Ariel Sharon's 
disengagement plan presented a good opportunity for 
renewing efforts to establish ties in the Arab and 
Muslim world.... Pakistan was the first to reward 
Israel for the Gaza withdrawal." 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: 
"The Muslim and Arab boycott of Israel harms the cause 
of Palestine because it conflicts with the two-state 
solution on which the establishment of a Palestinian 
state is supposedly based." 
 
Dr. Meir Litvak, a senior researcher in the department 
of Middle Eastern History at Tel Aviv University, wrote 
in mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: 
"Thursday's meeting holds a meaningful message for 
other Muslim countries and Muslim societies and gives 
legitimacy to Israel from a leading Islamic country." 
 
Dr. Shmuel Bar, a senior research fellow at the 
Interdisciplinary Center, wrote in popular, pluralist 
Maariv: "The strengthening of Pakistan's moderate image 
and even presenting it as advancing the peace process 
in the Middle East would help the Pakistanis vis a vis 
the Americans." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "A Reward For Withdrawal" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (September 2): "The 
equation was written during the first stages of the 
peace process, at the 1991 Madrid Conference: Israel 
would gradually end its occupation of the territories 
and would receive, in turn, diplomatic recognition and 
economic opportunities from the 'outer circle' nations. 
The idea was that, in exchange for the territories, 
Israel would achieve international acceptance, which 
would encourage it to continue the process.  The United 
States exercised its diplomatic might toward this end, 
and Israel exploited its image as having magic powers 
in Washington.... Ariel Sharon's disengagement plan 
presented a good opportunity for renewing efforts to 
establish ties in the Arab and Muslim world.  Silvan 
Shalom brings up the issue with his U.S. and EU 
counterparts at every meeting.  For months, aides have 
been searching for a breakthrough in Asia, Africa and 
the Maghreb.  Pakistan was the first to reward Israel 
for the Gaza withdrawal." 
 
II.  "Pakistan's Play" 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized 
(September 2): "Pakistan's President Pervez Musharraf 
has been quick to deny that yesterday's historic public 
meeting between the Pakistani and Israeli foreign 
ministers presages the imminent opening of diplomatic 
relations....  But the pictures of smiling ministers 
Kurshid Kasuri and Silvan Shalom speak louder than a 
thousand protestations.... The motives behind this 
opening more likely relate to the United States and to 
India than they do to Palestine. Gestures toward Israel 
are likely seen as an easy way to curry favor with the 
U.S. while giving Israel a possible reason to set 
limits on its warming military ties to India.... The 
Muslim and Arab boycott of Israel harms the cause of 
Palestine because it conflicts with the two-state 
solution on which the establishment of a Palestinian 
state is supposedly based.... Muslim and Arab states 
have at least as great an interest, whether narrowly or 
broadly defined, in opening ties with Israel as we do 
with them.  By being among the first, Pakistan may 
benefit slightly more than those who follow.  But this 
is no argument for straggling, because the cost of 
being in the rejectionist camp are likely to go up." 
 
III.  "Meaningful Message to the Muslim World" 
 
Dr. Meir Litvak, a senior researcher in the department 
of Middle Eastern History at Tel Aviv University, wrote 
in mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot 
(September 2): "The importance of the meeting between 
Foreign Minister Silvan Shalom and Pakistani Foreign 
Minister Khurshid Kasuri is mainly symbolic, although 
we should not make light of the importance of symbols. 
Pakistan, the second largest Muslim country in the 
world, where Islam is the basis for its national 
identity, was hostile to Zionism and to Israel since 
the state was established.  There is no doubt that 
Thursday's meeting holds a meaningful message for other 
Muslim countries and Muslim societies and gives 
legitimacy to Israel from a leading Islamic country. 
This having been said, it is reasonable to assume that 
Pakistan's motives for the meeting have more to do with 
its relations with the U.S. and the need of General 
Pervez Musharraf's regime to earn further American 
support.... Even if the foreign ministers' meeting on 
Thursday does not herald a strategic change, there is 
no question that it is something beneficial and should 
be welcomed." 
 
IV.  "Target: U.S." 
 
Dr. Shmuel Bar, a senior research fellow at the 
Interdisciplinary Center, wrote in popular, pluralist 
Maariv  (September 2): "What in essence are the 
Pakistanis' interests in ties with Israel about? It 
turns out that they have quite a few. First and 
foremost, Pakistan views Israel as a comfortable and 
quick means to win over the heart of the U.S.  The 
strengthening of Pakistan's moderate image and even 
presenting it as advancing the peace process in the 
Middle East would help the Pakistanis vis a vis the 
Americans and prove that it is worthy of their support 
despite its non-democratic regime....   Furthermore, 
Pakistan has much interest in curbing military ties 
between Israel and its bitter enemy, India.  It is also 
possible that Pakistan views coordination with Israel 
-- also considered a country with a nuclear capability 
-- as a way of curbing pressures to make a commitment 
not to spread WMD.  This is primarily in the wake of 
its having been designated as partially responsible for 
the Iranian nuclear program.  On the other hand, and 
despite all these interests, Musharraf must continue to 
deal with vocal and aggressive Islamic opposition, 
which has already declared the day of recognition of 
Israel as a black day in the history of Pakistan. 
Which interests and pressures will be the decisive 
ones? It is possible that we shall soon know." 
 
------------ 
¶2.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Senior columnist and chief defense commentator Zeev 
Schiff wrote in independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: 
"International support for the [disengagement] plan 
depends first of all on the fact that the international 
community does not see the disengagement as a slamming 
of the door on continuing negotiations with the 
Palestinians." 
 
Senior columnist Nahum Barnea wrote in mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "[Hard-core 
Likudniks and settlers] believe that in the choice 
between pressure from the Right and American pressure, 
Netanyahu will bend to the Right." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "What the Security Services Think" 
 
Senior columnist and chief defense commentator Zeev 
Schiff wrote in independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz 
(September 2): "The IDF's Intelligence Branch believes 
there is now a greater chance that Israel will improve 
its security capability, and that international 
legitimacy for terror will decline in the wake of the 
withdrawal.... International support for the plan 
depends first of all on the fact that the international 
community does not see the disengagement as a slamming 
of the door on continuing negotiations with the 
Palestinians, or a subterfuge for transferring settlers 
from the Gaza Strip to the West Bank.  Moreover, 
Military Intelligence reminds us that the conflict with 
the Palestinians will go on even after we have left the 
Gaza Strip, and that this isn't total disengagement, 
because part of the economic responsibility for what is 
going on with the Palestinians will fall on Israel even 
after the disengagement.  It is clear that the head of 
MI would have preferred that the disengagement be 
'unilateral and coordinated' with the Palestinians, 
rather than unilateral.  And that is what is, in 
effect, happening at present, including help from 
America and from international bodies." 
 
II.  "This Will Be the Last Battle" 
 
Senior columnist Nahum Barnea wrote in mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (September 2): 
"When one talks to distinct right-wingers, religious 
and non-religious, one realizes that what motivates 
them now is an intense desire for revenge.... It will 
sear into the consciousness of all politicians, any 
contenders for the crown, the knowledge that anyone 
touching their holies, the settlements, the Land of 
Israel, has one fate-- demise.   What happened to Rabin 
one way will happen to Sharon another way.  If one 
insists, it can be shown that this happened to others: 
to Shamir after the Madrid conference, to Netanyahu 
after his concessions in Hebron, to Barak after Camp 
David.  A myth has been created.  Sharon must not break 
it (for this exact reason the Left should wish for 
Sharon's survival, in order to prove to the next 
generation of leaders that it is possible to evacuate 
territories without losing power).... Distinct right- 
wingers who support [Netanyahu] -- the reference is not 
to the Knesset members who sat behind him [at his press 
conference], each with his own police record, but the 
veterans of Herut [the core of Likud] and the settlers 
-- are counting on his weakness.  They believe that in 
the choice between pressure from the Right and American 
pressure, Netanyahu will bend to the Right." 
 
KURTZER