05TELAVIV1631
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Fri Mar 18 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TEL AVIV 001631 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
All media reported on the Cairo talks and their 
conclusion with an agreement on a temporary state of 
calm, known in Arabic as tahdia.  According to a report 
in Yediot, PA Chairman Mahmud Abbas sought to achieve a 
long-term cease-fire, or hudna, but the Palestinian 
factions refused, preferring to maintain their freedom 
to engage in militant action.  This morning Israel 
Radio cited PM Sharon as saying, in the course of a 
telephone conversation with Egyptian President Mubarak, 
that the agreement reached in Cairo is an initial 
positive step; however, Palestinian factions should be 
disarmed in the interest of the continuation of the 
peace process. 
 
Yediot reports that as of next week, the security 
establishment has decided to ban settlers from moving 
to Gush Katif in order to block a massive move of 
residents to Gaza with the purpose of disrupting the 
disengagement move.  All media reported on a mass 
prayer yesterday in Neve Dkalim, attended by some 
10,000 people, to stop the disengagement plan.  The 
rift between settlers advocating an all-out struggle 
against the pull-out and those who want to campaign for 
a better compensation deal was also covered. 
 
Leading media reported that U.S. President George W. 
Bush has invited PM Sharon to his Crawford, Texas ranch 
in April for the first time for talks on boosting the 
Middle East peace process.  U.S. government sources 
were cited as saying that the decision to move the 
location from Washington to the ranch is meant to help 
advance the peace process, and as expressing President 
Bush's support of Sharon. 
 
Maariv bannered this morning that Jewish investors from 
overseas have secretly purchased from the Greek 
Orthodox church in Jerusalem the Ibn al-Hitab compound 
in the Old City, between the Jaffa Gate and the Arab 
market, including the Imperial Hotel and the Palace 
Hotel.  Palestinians are said to be in shock at this 
development. 
 
All media reported on the arrival of the new Egyptian 
Ambassador, Mohammed Assem Ibrahim, in Israel, after 
the four-year absence of an Egyptian Ambassador. 
 
Yediot quoted Finanace Minister Netanyahu as promising 
that the vote on the budget will have sufficient 
support by the deadline at March 31 at 23:59. 
Meantime, Haaretz reported this morning that the vote 
in the Knesset Finance Committee on the budget has been 
postponed to next Wednesday, since the coalition 
appeared to lack the necessary votes.  Maariv led with 
the headline: "Shinui and Am Echad said "no" to 
Sharon."  Israel Radio reported this morning on a rift 
among Shinui party leadership with regard to their vote 
on the budget.  Shinui Chairman Tommy Lapid slandered a 
few of his colleagues, accusing them of hindering their 
party's platform by saying in public that their lack of 
support for the budget will interrupt the disengagement 
move. 
 
According to Teleseker's poll published in today's 
Maariv, 40% of Israelis (including 28% of Likud 
constituencies) support the immediate evacuation of the 
illegal outposts.  Only 20% (30% of right wing voters) 
are categorically against any evacuation.  20% agree to 
evacuation, however, only following the disengagement. 
 
---------- 
1.Mideast: 
---------- 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Senior Arab Affairs op-ed writer Zvi Bar'El wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "The more important 
aspects of the agreements reached yesterday lie in the 
new relationship between the PA and the Palestinian 
opposition groups, including their participation in the 
local elections, scheduled for May, and those for the 
Legislative Assembly, set for July, as well as their 
political cooperation in the future." 
 
Senior columnist and long time dove Yoel Marcus wrote 
in independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "Anyone who 
thinks that the pullout will end with disengagement 
from Gaza should pay attention to what President Bush 
is saying about a Palestinian state being established 
on contiguous territory. " 
 
Correspondent Efraim Ganor wrote in popular, pluralist 
Russian-language Novosty Nedely (March 17): "Apparently 
PM Sharon has problems not only with the rebels in his 
own [Likud] party and the state budget, but ... also 
with the U.S. - Israel's main ally. ... The White House 
is very upset with Sharon for not fulfilling his 
obligations.  One can only guess what would happen 
should Israel not make the serious and painful 
concessions Washington is to demand in the nearest 
future." 
 
Columnist Caroline Glick wrote in conservative, 
independent Jerusalem Post: "The only thing left for 
the Israeli public to do is to demand new general 
elections. " 
 
 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------ 
 
¶1. "The start of a new relationship" 
 
Senior Arab Affairs op-ed writer Zvi Bar'El wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz : "The gathering of 
the Palestinian factions and the leadership of the 
Palestinian Authority in Cairo... not in a crisis, but 
in an agreement that was well-known in advance for the 
most part.... The more important aspects of the 
agreements reached yesterday lie in the new 
relationship between the PA and the Palestinian 
opposition groups, including their participation in the 
local elections, scheduled for May, and those for the 
Legislative Assembly, set for July, as well as their 
political cooperation in the future.  This is a 
significant change in the attitude of Hamas, which 
refused in 1996 to participate in the elections that it 
regarded as the result of the Oslo process.  It is also 
a withdrawal from terms initially posed by the group, 
when they asked for a 40 percent quota of 
parliamentarians, before the elections were held.  But 
the continuation of the hudna is not merely a tactical 
ploy to bring calm to the area, but a return for the 
commitment of Mahmoud Abbas to carry out structural 
reforms in the Palestinian leadership." 
 
 
 
 
¶2. "8 comments on the situation" 
 
Senior columnist and long time dove Yoel Marcus wrote 
in independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "Everyone knows 
that a camel is a horse designed by a committee.  The 
government's decision to appoint a ministerial 
committee to study Talia Sasson's report on the 
unauthorized settlements is a stalling tactic at best 
and an attempt to turn the horse into a kosher camel at 
worst.  But anyone who thinks that the pullout will end 
with disengagement from Gaza should pay attention to 
what President Bush is saying about a Palestinian state 
being established on contiguous territory, i.e., land 
that is basically settlement-free.  Friendship is all 
very nice, but Bush is the redhead type.  I wouldn't 
want to get him mad." 
 
 
 
 
¶3. "When the White House Gets Upset" 
 
Correspondent Efraim Ganor wrote in popular, pluralist 
Russian-language Novosty Nedely (March 17):"Apparently 
PM Sharon has problems not only with the rebels in his 
own [Likud] party and the state budget, but ... also 
with the U.S. - Israel's main ally... Israel has not 
fulfilled part of the obligations it committed itself 
to (establishment of a joint U.S.-Israeli committee 
that would define the borders of Jewish settlements in 
the West Bank; Israel has to pass the Americans a list 
of unauthorized outpost settlements in 30 days, 
including the date for their dismantling; build the 
security fence as discussed; an assurance to forward a 
map with all the check-posts in the West Bank.) ... The 
GOI seems to avoid the obligations it committed itself 
to.  It seems like PM Sharon personally stands behind 
this.  Since his disengagement plans aroused protests 
among the right wing in general and Likud party in 
particular, PM Sharon decided not to stop construction 
in the Jewish settlements.  He also prefers not to 
provide the U.S. with a list of unauthorized outpost 
settlements which are subject to dismantling. ... The 
White House is very upset with Sharon for not 
fulfilling his obligations.  One can only guess what 
would happen should Israel not make the serious and 
painful concessions Washington is to demand in the 
nearest future." 
 
 
 
 
¶4. "Sharon's Terror Masters" 
 
Columnist Caroline Glick wrote in conservative, 
independent Jerusalem Post: "Unfortunately, the answer 
to all these questions - unasked by the Israeli media - 
is internal Israeli politics.  Once Sharon abandoned 
his natural support base and preferred instead the 
embrace of the Left, he has boxed himself into a 
situation where he can do nothing except advance the 
Left's agenda of appeasing terrorists. ... Given this 
state of affairs, the inevitable conclusion is that the 
only thing left for the Israeli public to do is to 
demand new general elections.  With Sharon now fully 
committed to a policy that is manifestly dangerous to 
the state, he must be replaced by a leader who has not 
so committed himself.  It is the only chance that 
Israel has to prevent the establishment of a new base 
for global terror on the outskirts of Ashkelon [in 
Gaza]." 
 
KURTZER