06TELAVIV785
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Fri Feb 24 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 09 TEL AVIV 000785 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
USCINCCENT MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Secretary Rice's "Transformational Diplomacy" Plan 
 
¶2.  Iran: Nuclear Program 
 
¶3.  Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Israel Radio reported that A/S David Welch will visit 
Israel during the weekend and meet with Acting PM Ehud 
Olmert on Sunday. 
 
Yediot, Maariv, Israel Radio, and other media reported 
that on Thursday, Olmert called Jordan's King Abdullah 
II and told him that comments made on Wednesday by O/C 
Central Command Maj. Gen. Yair Naveh, who questioned 
the durability of the Jordanian monarchy, do not 
represent Israel's view.  Yediot reported that the King 
told Olmert that he knows this.  Maariv and Israel 
Radio reported that the two leaders agreed to meet 
after the Israeli elections. 
 
In its lead story, Maariv quoted Khaled Mashal, the 
head of Hamas's political bureau, as saying in an 
interview with Zuhair Andrawus, the Editor-in-Chief of 
the Israeli-Arab newspaper Kul Al-Arab, that his 
organization is not afraid of Israel, that the truce 
with Israel is no longer relevant, and that the first 
assignment of the new Palestinian government will be to 
release the murderers of Israeli cabinet ministers 
Rehavam Zeevi.  Ha'aretz quoted Mashal as saying in an 
interview with the Nazareth-based radio A-Shams that 
Hamas is willing to hold talks with the U.S. and any 
other country except Israel.  Maariv reported that the 
Jordanian authorities clarified to Mashal that he would 
have to renounce his Jordanian citizenship if he wants 
to visit their country. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Hamas activists are providing 
assistance to militants from other groups -- mostly 
Islamic Jihad activists, activists from Fatah's Al Aqsa 
Martyrs Brigades, and members of local factions such as 
the Popular Resistance Committees -- who launch Qassam 
rockets at Israel from the Gaza Strip.  Israel Radio 
reported that last night, two Palestinians were killed 
and another arrested at the Kissufim crossing near the 
central Gaza Strip.  The radio said that they might 
have been trying to lay explosives charges.  Israel 
Radio reported an Israeli air-strike on a car in Beit 
Hanoun in the northern Gaza Strip, and quoted 
Palestinian sources as saying that two Palestinians 
were injured in the attack.  Ha'aretz, Yediot, and The 
Jerusalem Post reported that in total, five 
Palestinians, including four wanted men, were killed in 
clashes with IDF troops in Nablus on Thursday. 
Ha'aretz reported that Ismail Haniyeh, the Hamas leader 
whom PA Chairman [President] Mahmoud Abbas nominated 
for premiership, condemned the IDF operation in Nablus, 
saying that the "massacre must be stopped."  Hatzofe 
quoted Haniyeh as saying that Palestinian blood is 
being spilled as part of the Israeli elections.  Yediot 
quoted former Shin Bet Director Avi Dichter as saying 
that Haniyeh is a legitimate target for assassination. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that voices are being 
raised in the Quartet, arguing that the cutoff date by 
which Hamas must accept certain preconditions or face 
international isolation is "malleable" and not 
necessarily the day a Hamas government is formed. 
Meretz-Yahad Chairman Yossi Beilin was quoted as saying 
in an interview with The Jerusalem Post that Abbas 
might yet save Israel from "Hamastan." 
 
Maariv reported that the IDF plan creating separate 
roads for Israelis and Palestinians in the West Bank is 
close to fruition. 
 
Maariv (Ben Caspit) reported on a meeting held in 
Washington in early February between Jordan's King 
Abdullah and Vice President Dick Cheney.  The newspaper 
quoted indirect sources as saying that the Jordanians 
were surprised by remarks made by members of Cheney's 
staff who attacked Abbas, calling him a "broken reed." 
The newspaper further reported that the Americans 
expressed satisfaction over Hamas's victory and noted 
that this only strengthened their view that the 
Palestinians should be left alone and that Israel 
should "take care of them." 
 
Ha'aretz quoted U.S. Ambassador to Israel Richard Jones 
as saying on Thursday at a meeting with the Israel- 
America Chamber of Commerce that the U.S. expects 
Israel to improve its policies in the fields of 
standards, intellectual property rights, and government 
tenders.  The newspaper also reported that the 
Ambassador called on Israel to deepen trade with the 
U.S. through completing trade liberalization and 
lifting non-customs trade barriers.  Ha'aretz cited 
Jones' assessment that improvement in Israel's economic 
strength in recent years allows it to cope with 
challenges such as the rise of Hamas, and that its 
economy is on the way to full recovery. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted Hamas spokesman Sami Abu 
Zuhri as saying that on Thursday, Hamas made an offer 
to former PA finance minister Salam Fayed to join its 
new cabinet. 
 
Yediot quoted Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice as 
saying in Beirut that Syria should stop frightening 
Lebanon.  Israel Radio reported that in Abu Dhabi, the 
Secretary and foreign ministers of the Persian Gulf 
 
SIPDIS 
Cooperation Council voiced fears over nuclear 
proliferation in the Persian Gulf region. 
 
Yediot reported that in a phone conversation on 
Thursday, Olmert and Turkish PM Recep Tayyip Erdogan 
reaffirmed the friendly connection between their two 
countries. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that on Thursday, the High 
Court of Justice decided to issue an interim injunction 
halting for 30 days construction of the Simon 
Wiesenthal Center-affiliated Museum of Tolerance being 
built over a Muslim cemetery in Jerusalem's 
Independence Park. 
 
Based on the results of a Smith Institute poll 
conducted for The Jerusalem Post, the newspaper 
concluded that Israelis are "uninspired" by all three 
candidates for the premiership (Olmert, Binyamin 
Netanyahu, and Amir Peretz). 
 
All media reported that on Thursday, Olmert approved a 
series of measures to reduce social gaps, including the 
creation of "negative income tax."  Yediot bannered: 
"Olmert's Election Economics." 
 
Ha'aretz and Yediot reported that on Wednesday, the 
Jerusalem police arrested a 32-year-old immigrant from 
the U.S., who resides in Beit Shemesh (a city west of 
Jerusalem, inside the Green Line), under suspicion of 
having brought to Israel over the past two months 
weapon parts, ammunition, and military equipment. 
Yediot quoted the suspect as saying: "I wanted to 
protect my family.  In the past, I served in the U.S. 
Army in Iraq."  Yediot wrote that he apparently does 
not belong to an extremist organization. 
 
Ha'aretz cited recently declassified USG documents that 
shed light on the Nixon administration's attitude in 
the wake of the 1972 Munich Olympics massacre of 
Israeli athletes. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that a high-level meeting of Knesset 
members, world Jewish leaders, and academics was held 
at the residence of Israeli President Moshe Katsav on 
Thursday to discuss ways of increasing Diaspora Jewry's 
connection to Israel.  The newspaper wrote that 
American Jewish leaders sharply criticized a proposal 
by Professor Yedidya Stern and other senior Israeli 
figures to seek U.S. federal government support for 
private Jewish schools. 
 
All media reported that on Thursday, French President 
Jacques Chirac, his wife Bernadette, and French PM 
Dominique de Villepin, attended a memorial evening at 
Paris' Grand Synagogue for Ilan Halimi, the 23-year-old 
Jewish Frenchman who was kidnapped, tortured, and 
murdered by a Muslim gang.  The lead suspect in the 
killing was arrested in the Ivory Coast. 
 
All media (lead story in Globes) reported that on 
Thursday, the High Court of Justice rejected El Al's 
appeal against Israir's designated carrier status on 
the Tel Aviv-New York line.  The decision effectively 
opens the skies to competition, and Israir is preparing 
for the immediate operation of its fixed line to New 
York, becoming the first Israeli airline to compete 
with El Al on that lucrative route.  The media assessed 
that the fares of Israir's scheduled flights would be 
lower by 10 to 15 percent than the current fares, with 
return tickets on the line costing USD 600 to 1,000. 
 
A Yediot/Mina Zemach (Dahaf Institute) poll held late 
this week shows that the popularity of the Labor Party 
and the Likud has become almost even: 
-"Were elections for the Knesset held today, for whom 
would you vote?"  (Results in Knesset seats -- in 
brackets, results of last week's poll.) 
-Kadima 39 (41); Labor Party 19 (20); Likud 16 (15); 
Shas 10 (10); Yisrael Beiteinu 9 (7); Arab parties 9 
(9); National Union-National Religious Party 8 (8); 
United Torah Judaism 5 (5); Meretz 5 (5); "floating 
mandates": 12 (14). 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
¶1.  Secretary Rice's "Transformational Diplomacy" Plan: 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Washington correspondent Nathan Guttman wrote in the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post: "[Secretary 
Rice's 'transformational diplomacy' plan enjoys] the 
President's support and is considered an attempt to 
deal with the question America has been struggling with 
for more that four years now: 'Why do they hate us?'" 
 
 
 
 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Showdown at the State Department" 
 
Washington correspondent Nathan Guttman wrote in the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post (February 24): 
"Critics of public diplomacy say it is a euphemism for 
propaganda, but the events of the past years 
demonstrate that no matter what you call it, the U.S. 
needs to deal with the fact that it is not understood 
and is widely disliked in much of the world.... As is 
often the case with overwhelming reform programs, big 
plans can't always contend with realities on the 
ground; so it remains to be seen what parts of this one 
[Secretary Rice's 'Transformational Diplomacy'] will 
actually be implemented.  Still, it does enjoy the 
President's support and is considered an attempt to 
deal with the question America has been struggling with 
for more that four years now: 'Why do they hate us?' 
Where the Middle East is concerned, the plan signifies 
a change in attitude, not in policy.  Its call for many 
more Middle East specialists and Arabic speakers in the 
Foreign Service and for greater openness to the people 
will not affect American policy in terms of the 
region's conflicts.  But it might help ease some of the 
tension -- something that's always seen as a positive 
step in the Middle East.". 
 
-------------------------- 
¶2.  Iran: Nuclear Program: 
-------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Editorial Page Editor Saul Singer wrote in the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post: "The Bush 
team's goal should be to either have won, or be clearly 
winning, against Iran 18 months from now." 
 
Senior columnist and chief defense commentator Zeev 
Schiff wrote in independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: 
"Had the Shah of Iran tried to develop nuclear weapons, 
Israel would not have been pleased, but its reaction 
would, no doubt, have been entirely different." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "Those Jihadi Grins" 
 
Editorial Page Editor Saul Singer wrote in the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post (February 24): 
"A mindset ... has sunk deep roots in Washington.  This 
thinking holds that America can only do one thing at a 
time, and that thing is to consolidate democracy in 
Iraq.... This muddling mindset must be replaced, if 
Republicans want to hold on to the Presidency and if 
George Bush does not want to leave office with the 
jihadis ascendant.  The 'must-win' attitude toward Iraq 
should be extended to Iran, where winning is defined as 
the fall of the Iranian regime or, at least, complete 
Iranian capitulation on the nuclear and terrorism 
issues, as Qadhafi did in Libya.  The Bush team's goal 
should be to either have won, or be clearly winning, 
against Iran 18 months from now: those jihad grins 
should be gone." 
 
II.  "A Loose Cannon in Tehran" 
 
Senior columnist and chief defense commentator Zeev 
Schiff wrote in independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz 
(February 24): "After the crude declarations by Iranian 
President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad about the Holocaust and 
the need for wiping Israel off the map, one of Israel's 
intelligence chiefs said wryly: 'We've succeeded. Our 
best candidate was elected president of Iran.'  Indeed, 
there has been no factor more inimical recently to Iran 
in Western public opinion than Ahmadinejad's 
statements.  He has provided additional proof of the 
danger of a nuclear Iran.... From Israel's perspective, 
it makes no difference what exactly Ahmadinejad's 
motives have been.  What is crucial is such a person is 
liable to have his finger on the trigger of nuclear 
weaponry in a religious, fanatic country.  This regime 
makes declarations that have not been heard since 
Hitler's era.  Had the Shah of Iran tried to develop 
nuclear weapons, Israel would not have been pleased, 
but its reaction would, no doubt, have been entirely 
different." 
 
 
 
------------ 
¶3.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Senior editor Rafi Mann wrote in an editorial of 
popular, pluralist Maariv: "While Europeans can't be 
considered a bunch of leftist Israel-haters, Washington 
isn't a goody-goody or absolutely wise." 
 
Liberal columnist and Hebrew University Prof. of 
Political Science Zeev Sternhell wrote in independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz: "Hamas is now facing off against 
an Israeli government that differs from that of the 
Likud only in its outward appearance, but not in its 
essential values and nature." 
Conservative columnist Nadav Haetzni wrote in Maariv: 
"as the new heads of the PA even refuse to recognize 
the agreements that are the source for their rule, we 
are entitled to cancel them." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "America' Mistakes in the Middle East" 
 
Senior editor Rafi Mann wrote in an editorial of 
popular, pluralist Maariv (February 24): "While 
Europeans can't be considered a bunch of leftist Israel- 
haters, Washington isn't a goody-goody or absolutely 
wise.  Energetically aided by Natan Sharansky, the new 
American Right pulled George Bush straight into a 
quagmire called 'fight for democracy.'  Not only have 
2,280 U.S. soldiers (as of Wednesday) paid that mistake 
with their lives, put the entire world was made to pay 
for it: had Washington not spoiled its might in vain 
over Baghdad, it would have been able to act against 
the threat of the Iranian atom.  By the way, that 
mistake is not exclusively that of right-wing 
administrations: Jimmy Carter pressured the Iranian 
Shah to improve his human rights record -- thus only 
accelerating the fall of his regime and Khomeini's 
rise." 
 
II.  "Politics Without Principles" 
 
Liberal columnist Hebrew University Prof. of Political 
Science Zeev Sternhell wrote in independent, left- 
leaning Ha'aretz (February 24): "Just as Menachem Begin 
uprooted settlements in Sinai and made peace with Egypt 
for the sake of a Greater Land of Israel, and for the 
sake of peace with the United States, Sharon liquidated 
the settlements of the Gaza Strip to guarantee himself 
freedom of movement in the West Bank and to placate 
America, which he needed to handle Iran.... So it 
happened that Hamas is now facing off against an 
Israeli government that differs from that of the Likud 
only in its outward appearance, but not in its 
essential values and nature.  It is ruled by the same 
blindness with which the right, and all varieties 
thereof, has always excelled.... How will the 30 
million people living between the Jordan River and the 
Tel Aviv coastline by the year 2050 live if we do not 
reach a peaceful settlement and cooperation with the 
Palestinians? This is not a question that [security- 
minded Kadima politicians] are wont to address, and 
most certainly not on the eve of elections." 
 
III.  "Facing the Reality of Hamas" 
 
Conservative columnist Nadav Haetzni wrote in Maariv 
(February 24): "The Palestinian people's new murderous 
choice can serve Israel well -- if only we stop 
deluding ourselves, formally annul the Oslo Accords, 
and put an end to the existence of the Palestinian 
Authority.  Particularly now, as the new heads of the 
PA even refuse to recognize the agreements that are the 
source for their rule, we are entitled to cancel them. 
Those who say that this isn't realistic are invited to 
visit the cemeteries and the rehabilitation wars so 
they can check the reality of the continuation of the 
Oslo conception." 
 
JONES