06TELAVIV12
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Tue Jan 03 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

031126Z Jan 06UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 TEL AVIV 000012 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
USCINCCENT MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1. Security Fence 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
All media reported on missiles fired last night by IAF 
helicopter at a car carrying three senior activists in 
Islamic Jihad's military wing, causing their death. 
Among the three casualties was Said Abu Jedian, known 
as the "Kassam commander." According to Maariv's 
website, Abu Jedian was incarcerated by Israel from 
1997 until 2002 and, upon his release, came to serve in 
a dominant capacity in Islamic Jihad's military wing in 
the northern Gaza Strip, focusing mainly on Kassam 
rocket fire. Israel Radio reports that at least five 
Kassam rockets were fired at Israel in apparent 
retaliation for the targeted killing operation, but 
it's believed that all rockets fell in open fields 
causing neither damage nor casualties. 
 
Israel Radio reported this morning that last night the 
army arrested 11 Palestinians on the wanted list, most 
of them active members of Hamas. A Tanzim activist was 
arrested in Kalkilya. In the Bethlehem area a Hamas 
activist was arrested and nine others in Hebron and the 
surrounding area. Soldiers on an operation near Tulkarm 
came under fire but none of them were hit. 
 
All media reported on Likud Chairman Binyamin Netanyahu 
demanding the immediate resignation of Likud ministers 
from the government, and instructing them to submit 
letters of resignation by this coming Sunday. Yediot 
Aharonot's front page assesses that the chairman fears 
increasing opposing to this step in his own party. 
Ministers Livnat, Shalom, Naveh and Katz have expressed 
their opposition to the resignation now, preferring to 
take this step only after the Likud primaries are held 
on January 17. 
 
Maariv published this morning a denial by Kadima's 
chairman, Roni Baron, to a Maariv report yesterday 
(Monday) that PM Sharon is planning a "road map bang." 
Baron said that this report has no basis, and that "t 
he only political plan at the moment is the road map." 
According Maariv's report yesterday, the "road map 
bang" stipulates that in the absence of a partner in 
the PA, Israel will determine its eastern border with 
the Americans, who will act as a sort of custodian for 
the Palestinians, who will be able to establish a state 
with temporary borders within territory that will be 
evacuated. On the other hand, Shimon Peres admitted 
yesterday in an interview with the Russian Television 
RTV1 that "such a plan exists," though hastened to 
clarify that in any case it is better to wait until the 
PA election results before taking any measures on the 
matter. Peres said that what is being discussed is a 
period of transition and that we must build a partner 
on the Palestinian street, but added that if none 
should be found, then this plan can certainly take 
shape. Peres noted that in any case, the plan will not 
become a reality before the elections in Israel. 
Yesterday, the Palestinian Authority and both ends of 
the political spectrum in Israel reacted angrily to the 
report of the plan. 
 
Ha'aretz bannered with the Civil Administration's 
admission that illegal construction was approved in 
Upper Modi'in, after construction was already going on, 
to create facts on the ground. 
 
Kol Israel reported this morning that during the night 
the army, the police and the Civil Administration 
evacuated an illegal settlement outpost near Hebron. 
The outpost, named Pnei Hever, was established in the 
past week. 
 
Ha'aretz quoted Palestinian Authority Chairman Mahmoud 
Abbas as saying Monday, in Qatar, he might delay 
upcoming parliamentary elections if Israel bars 
Jerusalem Arabs from voting. This was the first time 
that Abbas has indicated, in public, he might delay the 
January 25 vote. A Commander of Palestinian Police was 
also quoted as saying that the PA is incapable of 
holding elections. The Jerusalem Post reported that 
Israel's final decisions on East Jerusalem Arabs' vote 
will take place after consulting with two ranking U.S. 
officials.  It's also reported that Elliot Abrams and 
David Welch are due in Israel Thursday, to discuss with 
both Israeli and PA officials the upcoming elections. 
Kol Israel reported this morning that the Palestinian 
parliament election campaign officially opened today. 
Palestinian organizations are expected to hold rallies 
in East Jerusalem even though the Israeli police have 
prohibited this. 
 
Jerusalem Post reported that the Prisons Service has 
been ordered by the political echelon to ease 
restrictions on jailed Fatah Tanzim leader Marwan 
Barghouti and to allow him to hold routine political 
meetings in jail in the run-up to the Palestinian 
legislative elections. 
 
 
All media reported that the security establishment has 
recommended to the prime minister that Israel evacuate 
the residents of the northern part of the village of 
Ghajar on the Lebanese border and erect a security 
fence along the international border with enhanced 
security facilities. A comprehensive discussion on the 
issue will be held on Wednesday at the Prime Minister's 
Bureau. An alternative proposal, not to evacuate the 
inhabitants but to enhance the security systems in the 
village, will also be considered. The proposal to 
evacuate the residents was submitted in the wake of the 
Hizbullah attack on the village about a month and a 
half ago, when the attackers attempted to abduct an 
Israeli soldier, and wounded 11 soldiers.  Yediot 
assesses that PM Sharon will oppose the idea of 
dividing the village into two parts, and will support 
the military stands in strengthening security measures 
in the area. 
 
------------- 
¶1. Security Fence 
------------- 
                       Summary: 
                     ------------- 
Conservative, independent The Jerusalem Post 
editorialized: "So long as the threat of terrorism 
remains clear and present, Israel has the right and 
responsibility to put the security of its citizens 
first, not the diplomatic concerns of other nations. 
Israel might point out to these nations that the 
fence, far from blocking the creation of a 
Palestinian state, is actually consistent with, and 
even likely to advance, that end." 
 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
¶I. "Finish the Fence" 
 
Conservative, independent The Jerusalem Post 
editorialized: "We have seen that the security fence 
is not a panacea, because it is possible for a bomber 
to get through crossing points in the fence, and 
because it will not stop missile attacks... The Shin 
Bet (Israel Security Agency), in the meantime, has 
pointed out that casualties from terrorism were down 
60 percent in 2005: 45 killed compared to 117 in 
¶2004. This improvement was attributed not to the 
fence, which had not been lengthened significantly 
over the past year, nor directly to Israeli military 
successes, but to the "cease-fire" implemented by the 
terrorist groups. During this year-long self-declared 
"truce," which in any case expired on Sunday, the IDF 
reports there were 2,990 terrorist attacks.... But it 
is precisely because the improvement in security was 
attributed more to Palestinian fatigue than Israeli 
prowess that it is critical that our government not 
let its guard down. Under these circumstances, it is 
worth reviewing where the construction of the 
security fence stands. So far, about 200 km. have 
been built, roughly along the northern portion of the 
Green Line from the Jordanian border to the Petah 
Tikva area. Another 10 km. have been built north of 
Jerusalem and 10 km. more south of the capital. This 
leaves more than half of the barrier incomplete - 
about 350 km. have yet to be built. Less than 10 
percent of the unbuilt sections are currently being 
contested in court. The Gush Etzion Local Council has 
been objecting to constructing the fence around that 
settlement bloc, out of concern that some settlements 
will be left outside. But neither court procedures 
nor local Israeli or Palestinian objections fully 
explain the fact that, far from being completed, the 
fence barely advanced in 2005. The existing sections 
were mostly built from mid-2002 through 2004....In 
the meantime, the most likely reason for delay is 
that Prime Minister Ariel Sharon is reluctant to 
contend with the two most important critics of the 
fence's route, our High Court of Justice and the 
United States..... Again, though, less than 10 
percent of the unbuilt barrier is being contested 
before our justices, and so the interventions of the 
court are no excuse for the wider delay. Similarly, 
American concerns about fencing in the settlement 
blocs should not be allowed to stop the fence from 
being built.  So long as the threat of terrorism 
remains clear and present, Israel has the right and 
responsibility to put the security of its citizens 
first, not the diplomatic concerns of other nations. 
Israel might point out to these nations that the 
fence, far from blocking the creation of a 
Palestinian state, is actually consistent with, and 
even likely to advance, that end." 
 
JONES