06TELAVIV623
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Fri Feb 10 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

101127Z Feb 06UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 TEL AVIV 000623 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
USCINCCENT MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1. President Putin's Announcement 
 
¶2. Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
All media headlined Russian President Vladimir Putin's 
invitation to Hamas leaders to visit Russia. Putin was 
quoted as saying that Russia never considered Hamas a 
terrorist organization and that they were elected by 
their people in democratic, legitimate elections.  The 
media claimed that Putin's announcement contradicts a 
statement issued two weeks ago by the Quartet, of which 
Russia is a member.  The reports in the media 
emphasized that Putin's words were the first crack in 
the united international front against the Hamas and 
cited different Israeli officials' concerns that this 
would lead to more countries recognizing Hamas.  Israel 
Radio interviewed Minister Meir Shitrit, who described 
Putin's announcement as an international scandal and a 
stab in Israel's back.  The media quoted Assistant 
Secretary of State David Welch as saying that Russia is 
 
SIPDIS 
a member of the Quartet and that the U.S. expects any 
meeting between Russian officials and Palestinian 
representatives to comply with Quartet decisions.  The 
American response was described by the media as 
moderate and cautious.  Israel Radio reported that 
Hamas leader Khaled Mashal accepted Russia's invitation 
and also announced that he would visit Jordan in the 
near future. 
 
All media reported that while FM Livni was in a meeting 
with National Security Advisor Stephan Hadley, 
President George Bush entered the meeting and joined 
them for thirty minutes.  Livni was quoted as saying 
after the meeting that the conversation was interesting 
and that important issues were raised. 
 
Israel Radio this morning cited a Qatari newspaper 
report that Qatar's Foreign Minister had a phone 
conversation with Foreign Minister Livni regarding 
Hamas's victory in the P.A. elections. 
 
Maariv reported that Shimon Peres was scheduled to meet 
P.A. Chairman Abu Mazen in Jordan but, in an effort to 
present a united front against Hamas, Acting Prime 
Minister Olmert instructed Peres to cancel the meeting. 
 
Leading media reported that Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, 
NATO's Secretary General, said that Israel is currently 
not a candidate for membership in NATO.  Minister of 
Defense Shaul Mofaz is leading the Israeli delegation 
to the NATO meeting in Sicily and is expected to 
deliver a forceful speech today regarding the Iranian 
issue. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that IDF officers from the 
Northern Command have warned this week that if 
international pressure on Syrian President Bashar Assad 
continues he might decide to attack Israel. 
 
All media reported on President Bush's press conference 
in which he revealed that U.S. security forces have 
foiled a planned al-Qaeda terror attack on the US BANK 
Tower in Los Angeles in October 2002. 
 
All media reported that Egypt's military attach to the 
P.A. was abducted on Thursday by two masked men 
believed to be members of Fatah's Al-Aqsa Martyrs' 
Brigade. 
 
Leading media reported that 3 Palestinians militants 
were killed by IDF troops in two separate incidents in 
the Gaza Strip. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that the World Jewish Congress (WJC) 
held its biannual gathering in Jerusalem this week. 
The WJC has launched a campaign against Iran following 
Iran's nuclear crisis and anti-Semitic statements. 
 
POLLS: 
Yediot/Mina Zemach (Dahaf Institute) poll found: 
Should Israel part from the majority of the 
Palestinians by unilateral disengagement? 59 percent 
support unilateral steps; 37 percent oppose. 
 
---------------------------------- 
¶1. President Putin's Announcement: 
---------------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                     ------------- 
 
Territories correspondent Arnon Regular wrote in left- 
leaning, independent Ha'aretz: "Within 24 hours after 
Hamas won the Palestinian elections, its leaders had 
identified the Russian-Chinese axis, as well as a few 
European countries, as the place to concentrate its 
efforts to soften the stringent conditions for 
acceptance by the international community that are 
currently being set by the United States, Israel, Egypt 
and Jordan.   Nevertheless, even Hamas was surprised to 
receive a direct invitation to its leaders from Putin." 
 
  Chief economic editor Sever Plotzker wrote in a page- 
one article of mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot: "President Putin, disciple of the KGB, dreams 
of returning Russia to meddling in the Middle East. 
For this purpose he is extending a hand to the darkest, 
most benighted, most dangerous forces in the Arab 
world.  This is a bloody pact: Putin's hands are soiled 
with Chechen blood, and Hamas's hands with Israeli 
blood." 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote in popular, 
pluralist Maariv: "This is a Russian measure that is 
more reminiscent of a Soviet measure from the old days: 
Putin spotted a rare, enormous opportunity to turn into 
the main player in the Middle East once again, the only 
one who can deliver the goods and mediate between the 
parties.  He ignores the fact that it is a dirty game 
and that he has scored a goal after the referee called 
half-time.  He is the only one dribbling in this game, 
but meanwhile this dribbling is giving everyone a 
headache." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.   "Welcome Bear Hug" 
 
Territories correspondent Arnon Regular wrote in left- 
leaning, independent Ha'aretz (February 10): "Russian 
President Vladimir Putin's announcement that he would 
be willing to meet with Hamas leaders did not come as a 
complete surprise to Hamas, which is currently on a 
drive to obtain international legitimacy for its future 
government.  Within 24 hours after Hamas won the 
Palestinian elections, its leaders had identified the 
Russian-Chinese axis, as well as a few European 
countries, as the place to concentrate its efforts to 
soften the stringent conditions for acceptance by the 
international community that are currently being set by 
the United States, Israel, Egypt and Jordan. 
Nevertheless, even Hamas was surprised to receive a 
direct invitation to its leaders from Putin.... Putin's 
invitation is evidence of the split in the 
international community, and Hamas is trying to exploit 
this split to soften the demands that it recognize 
Israel and accept existing agreements between Israel 
and the Palestinians.... Hamas' natural allies, Iran 
and Syria, have already promised to make up the 
shortfall should Western aid to the PA be cut off.  But 
Putin's invitation offers Hamas its best chance yet to 
improve its hand vis-a-vis the West." 
 
II.  "Putin's Bloody Pact" 
 
  Chief economic editor Sever Plotzker wrote in a page- 
one article of mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot (February 10): "The solution to the 
Palestinian problem, according to Hamas, is solely 
through jihad [holy war]; every Muslim, wherever he is, 
must join this holy war personally.  It is with people 
who hold such opinions that the Russian president 
wishes to engage in constructive dialogue.... The 
invitation that Putin sent to Hamas is not only a slap 
in the face to Israel; it is also a disgrace for 
Russia.  Has it learned nothing from the support of the 
Soviet Union for the Palestinian terror organizations 
in the past?  Its Middle Eastern policy is filled with 
mistakes, failures and odd alliances, which ended in 
pushing Moscow out of every corner in the Middle 
East.... Nevertheless, President Putin, disciple of the 
KGB, dreams of returning Russia to meddling in the 
Middle East.  For this purpose he is extending a hand 
to the darkest, most benighted, most dangerous forces 
in the Arab world.  This is a bloody pact: Putin's 
hands are soiled with Chechen blood, and Hamas's hands 
with Israeli blood." 
 
 
 
III. "The Soviet Union Returns" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote in popular, 
pluralist Maariv (February 10): "Yesterday, Vladimir 
Putin shocked the entire world.  Yesterday, the Soviet 
Union broke the worldwide alliance taking shape against 
Hamas.  Just like in the good old days of the Cold War, 
only now it is much closer to us and also a good deal 
warmer.  Yesterday could have been a day of 
accomplishments and celebrations, with Tzippi Livni 
receiving honor in Washington that is reserved only for 
royalty and nobility.  The American president gave her 
an entire half hour and the entire administration 
applauded her enthusiastically.  And then, just before 
the ending credits, out came Putin, inviting Hamas 
leaders to Moscow.  A cold shower in the middle of 
winter, which threatens to take apart everything that 
Olmert, Livni, Weiss and Solana have been building for 
weeks.... This is a Russian measure that is more 
reminiscent of a Soviet measure from the old days: 
Putin spotted a rare, enormous opportunity to turn into 
the main player in the Middle East once again, the only 
one who can deliver the goods and mediate between the 
parties.  He ignores the fact that it is a dirty game 
and that he has scored a goal after the referee called 
half-time.  He is the only one dribbling in this game, 
but meanwhile this dribbling is giving everyone a 
headache." 
 
----------- 
¶2. Mideast: 
----------- 
 
                        Summary 
                       --------- 
 
Senior columnist and chief defense commentator Zeev 
Schiff wrote in independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: 
"Israel must exhibit unflinching determination when it 
comes to existential affairs, even if the harm done to 
Palestinians runs deep.  To this end, Israel needs 
international support.  The Israeli strategy must lead 
to a split in Hamas such that the pragmatists in the 
organization forgo the idea of destroying Israel." 
 
                     Block Quotes 
                    -------------- 
 
"Does Israel Have a Strategy?" 
Senior columnist and chief defense commentator Zeev 
Schiff wrote in independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz 
(February 10): "It would be best if a dialogue were to 
develop between the majority of the Palestinian public, 
which seeks normalcy, and Hamas.  This dialogue will 
not ensue if Israel continues to send money to the PA 
as if nothing has happened.  Israel must exhibit 
unflinching determination when it comes to existential 
affairs, even if the harm done to Palestinians runs 
deep.  To this end, Israel needs international support. 
The Israeli strategy must lead to a split in Hamas such 
that the pragmatists in the organization forgo the idea 
of destroying Israel, just as Fatah and the Palestine 
Liberation Organization did in their day.  If Hamas 
refuses to capitulate and keeps following its same 
line, Israel will become embroiled in a violent and 
harsh conflict.  If it fails in this conflict, the 
deterioration will be widespread, and spill over into 
Jordan too." 
JONES