06TELAVIV1295
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Mon Apr 03 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 TEL AVIV 001295 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
USCINCCENT MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Iraq 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
 
Major media reported that on Sunday, the Central 
Elections Committee announced it was correcting a 
mistake in the Knesset elections results, taking one 
Knesset seat from the Labor Party and adding it to 
United Arab List-Arab Renewal, headed by Ahmed Tibi. 
At this time, the composition of the 17th Knesset 
appears as follows: 
Kadima: 29; Labor: 19; Shas: 12; Likud 12; Yisrael 
Beiteinu: 11; National Union-National Religious Party 
9: Pensioners' Party: 7; United Torah Judaism: 6; 
Meretz: 5; Arab parties: 10 (Balad-National Democratic 
Assembly: 3; Hadash: 3; and United Arab List-Arab 
Renewal: 4). 
 
Over the weekend, all media reported on Labor Party 
Chairman Amir Peretz's attempts to form a coalition 
with right-wing parties.  This morning, Israel Radio 
quoted Peretz's associates as saying he is not 
interested in heading a right-wing government. 
 
Leading media reported that over the weekend, the GOI 
directed the IDF to cut off all contacts with 
Palestinian security forces under the authority of the 
Hamas government.  Over the weekend, all media quoted 
Deputy State Department Spokesman J. Adam Ereli as 
saying on Friday: "We've advised our mission in 
Jerusalem, as well as other missions around the world 
that have dealings with the Palestinian Authority, that 
there should be no contact between US government 
officials and PA officials who are under the authority 
of the Prime Minister or any other minister in the 
Hamas-led government.  This includes ... working-level 
officials in those ministries."  On Sunday, Ha'aretz 
quoted former President Bill Clinton as saying in a 
weekend interview with BBC-TV  that he backs dialogue 
with the Hamas-led government if several conditions are 
met, in particular a halt to violence.  Leading media 
reported that on Sunday, in an interview with the 
Chinese news agency Xinhua, Palestinian FM Mahmoud 
Zahar, who is considered a Hamas hard-liner, reiterated 
Hamas's desire to eliminate Israel and replace it with 
an Islamic state.  On Sunday, Yediot featured 
Palestinian PM Ismail Haniyeh's political adviser, 
Ahmed Yousef, who lived for more than 20 years in the 
US, where he headed a research center that served as a 
cover for Hamas activity.  Over the weekend, major 
media reported on Haniyeh's call to end public displays 
of weapons, and on Palestinian in-fighting. 
 
On Sunday, Ha'aretz and other media reported that over 
the weekend the IDF pounded the northern Gaza Strip 
with a massive artillery, air, and naval barrage, 
targeting Qassam launch sites.  All media reported that 
two Israeli Arabs were arrested in the Bet She'an area 
on Sunday on suspicion of planning a terrorist attack. 
They were unarmed.  All media reported that the police 
had declared a high alert in northern Israel. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that last Wednesday, the day after 
Election Day, Elad, one of two organizations working to 
purchase houses and settle Jews in Jerusalem 
neighborhoods, took control of two large, populated, 
and sensitive compounds in two East Jerusalem 
neighborhoods, Silwan and A-Tur (on the Mount of 
Olives). 
 
Yediot reported that Attorney General Menachem Mazuz 
said that the agreement between the Hebron settlers and 
the IDF and the state prosecutor's office, which 
provided for the voluntary evacuation of settlers from 
the city's wholesale market, is null and void.  Mazuz 
was quoted as saying that the agreement, which said 
that the settlers could eventually return to the 
market, contradicted the Chief of Staff's instructions. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Arab banks holding accounts 
belonging to the PA have recently tried to convince the 
PA to withdraw its assets from the banks.  Ha'aretz 
wrote that the Arab banks apparently fear that banks in 
the US and other Western countries could impose 
sanctions on them for holding terrorism-related money. 
 
Yediot cited The Washington Post as saying that Iran 
would respond to an attack on its nuclear installations 
with a worldwide terror offensive.  Yediot wrote that 
The Washington Post cited an unnamed terrorism and 
intelligence expert.  Major media cited an Iranian 
announcement that Iran devised the "fastest and most 
advanced" torpedo in the world.  Maariv reported that 
Israeli Foreign Ministry official Meir Yitzhaki was 
chosen to represent Western countries at a professional 
advisory committee to the UN General Assembly dealing 
with WMD proliferation.  Maariv noted that the 
committee has been inactive for three years. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that American televangelist John 
Hagee told Jewish American community leaders over the 
weekend that the 40 million evangelical Christians in 
the US support Israel and that he plans to utilize this 
power by launching a Christian pro-Israel lobby -- 
Christians United for Israel.  Hagee was quoted as 
saying that the new lobby will be more powerful than 
AIPAC. 
 
Ha'aretz cited the hope of Israeli and Palestinian 
professors that the modest math exhibition that opened 
on Sunday in the Bloomfield Science Museum in Jerusalem 
will be the progenitor of a Palestinian science museum. 
 
Yediot reported that Egypt plans to turn the Taba 
border crossing into a large duty-free zone in order to 
attract Israeli tourists to the Sinai. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted Israeli and Jordanian Health 
Ministry representatives as saying that, three weeks 
after the discovery of bird flu in the area, Israeli 
and international health authorities are being 
cautiously optimistic about their progress in combating 
the disease in the region, despite the fact that they 
are still unable to predict its spread. 
 
Major media reported that on Sunday, US Secretary of 
State Condoleezza Rice and British Foreign Secretary 
Jack Straw made a surprise visit to Baghdad. 
 
Yediot reported that Shimon Peres, No. 2 in Kadima, 
will meet with Pope Benedict XVI at the Vatican on 
Thursday. 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Senior Middle East affairs analyst Zvi Bar'el wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "In the American 
hierarchy of principles, there is apparently a 
distinction between righteousness and interests.  It is 
... even justified that interests take priority.  Even 
Hamas understands this." 
 
Ha'aretz editorialized: "If the Palestinians have 
chosen to ignite even the region Israel has evacuated, 
it is a worrisome precedent with regard to future 
withdrawals.  Accordingly, Olmert must not radiate 
weakness." 
 
Senior op-ed writer Akiva Eldar commented in Ha'aretz: 
"Labor and Meretz must not join a 'no partner' 
government under any circumstances.... Without peace, 
there will be no money to raise the minimum wage or old- 
age stipends in any event." 
 
Political parties commentator Sima Kadmon wrote in mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "This is a 
fraud.  A blatant violation of a campaign promise.  The 
nightmare of anyone who voted for the Labor Party as a 
left wing party, and could get a right wing 
government." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "Let Hamas Do Its Work" 
 
Senior Middle East affairs analyst Zvi Bar'el wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (April 2): "In the 
American hierarchy of principles, there is apparently a 
distinction between righteousness and interests.  It is 
not surprising and is even justified that interests 
take priority.  Even Hamas understands this.  And not 
only today.  It demonstrated this when it declared the 
first cease-fire, the hudna, and when it modified the 
name to tahdiya (calm).  It is also acting this way 
now, as its leaders begin to formulate a "new language" 
in referring to Israel.... No disaster would occur, and 
the plan for unilateral convergence would not be 
hindered one bit if Israel's new ministers soon begin 
to meet with their Palestinian colleagues -- not, 
heaven forbid, to discuss the convergence plan or 
jointly forge a political solution, but just to 
coordinate administrative matters, really.  Hamas would 
not emerge any stronger from such meetings.  After all, 
they are already the elected government.  On the 
contrary, if it is strengthened by meeting with Israel, 
this would demonstrate that it recognizes Israel.  And 
there is another latent issue: Rice noted that 
Washington supported the disengagement plan from Gaza, 
among other reasons, because what started as a 
unilateral step 'was ultimately coordinated with the 
Palestinians.'  This is a not very subtle hint to those 
who still believe in a unilateral withdrawal or who 
think that the previous withdrawal was truly 
unilateral.  If this is also going to be the American 
condition in the future, it would be best to start 
recognizing the new 'non partners.'" 
 
II.  "Ensuring Convergence" 
 
Ha'aretz editorialized (April 2): "Ensuring peace and 
quiet in the south [of Israel] and creating an 
effective balance of deterrence with the Palestinians 
in Gaza is very important.  Kadima's achievement in the 
elections was smaller than the party had hoped, a fact 
that will cast a shadow over attempts by Olmert to 
implement his convergence plan.  Continued terror in 
the Negev will make it difficult to persuade others 
that if the attempt to move ahead with the road map 
fails, a major unilateral withdrawal from the West Bank 
should be implemented.  If the Palestinians have chosen 
to ignite even the region Israel has evacuated, it is a 
worrisome precedent with regard to future withdrawals. 
Accordingly, Olmert must not radiate weakness. So that 
he does not, the Israel Defense Forces must continue to 
take aggressive measures against the Qassam launchers, 
as it began to do on Saturday." 
 
III.  "Peace Talks First, Wage Talks Later" 
 
Senior op-ed writer Akiva Eldar commented in Ha'aretz 
(April 3): "Who said last week's elections were a 
referendum on the issue of dividing the land of 
Israel?.... Less than a week later, our elected 
officials are involved in coalition negotiations to 
determine which party will get the Ministry of 
Finance.... Perhaps the Hamas victory has already put 
paid to the vision of peace, fulfilling the prophecy 
that Abu Mazen is not a partner for a final agreement. 
Labor and Meretz must not join a 'no partner' 
government under any circumstances.  In light of the 
abyss gaping below us, the new government must make 
every possible effort to renew talks with the 
Palestinians.  Amir Peretz and Meretz chairman Yossi 
Beilin must focus their coalition negotiations on an 
uncompromising demand to form a coalition for 
negotiations.  Without peace, there will be no money to 
raise the minimum wage or old-age stipends in any 
event." 
 
IV.  "Laboring to Fool Us" 
 
Political parties commentator Sima Kadmon wrote in mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (April 3): "This 
is a fraud.  A blatant violation of a campaign promise. 
The nightmare of anyone who voted for the Labor Party 
as a left wing party, and could get a right wing 
government.  Not to mention those who were persuaded to 
vote for Labor just to strengthen it in Kadima's 
government.  Even a country with a memory as short as 
ours has not yet forgotten Peretz's promise not to sit 
in one government with the Likud.... A coalition 
partnership between the Labor Party and the National 
Union-National Religious Party?  Really, there is a 
limit....  Let us not be confused: The government for 
which the right wing parties are striving is intended 
only for one thing: To postpone, if not to halt, the 
process of separation from the Palestinians.   And what 
does Peretz want?   He too wants only one thing: To be 
prime minister.  And if on the way it is possible to 
send Olmert to the devil, and shaft Peres, Ramon and 
Itzik: So much the better.  Anyone who thinks this is a 
tactic, a maneuver aimed at gaining strength versus 
Olmert, does not know what he is talking about. 
Peretz's appetite reaches much further than a 
ministerial position.... Peretz would do well to come 
to his senses quickly.  To acknowledge the fact that 
Kadima is the largest party, and it will be the one to 
form the government, which will be headed by Olmert.... 
If this does not happen, Peretz will be responsible for 
the insane prices that the public will pay on the way 
to forming the government.   He will pay a heavy 
personal price for not keeping his promises.  There is 
a deep abyss between me and the Likud -- he said on the 
eve of the elections.  There will be such an abyss 
between him and his voters." 
 
--------- 
¶2.  Iraq: 
--------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
The Director of the Interdisciplinary Center's Global 
Research in International Affairs Center, columnist 
Barry Rubin, wrote in the conservative, independent 
Jerusalem Post: "It is ... dangerous for the US 
government to do what can certainly be called 'the 
right thing' in theory." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"When 'Being Right' Is Bad Policy" 
 
The Director of the Interdisciplinary Center's Global 
Research in International Affairs Center, columnist 
Barry Rubin, wrote in the conservative, independent 
Jerusalem Post (April 3): "People tend to like those 
who are on their side.  American and other coalition 
forces fight and risk their lives largely to protect 
the majority from terrorists whom they despise.  As 
long as this relationship continues the US task in Iraq 
may be heavy but it is not impossible.  But what if 
that equation should change; what if, instead of 
saying, 'Thanks to the Americans, who are helping us be 
in power,' Shi'ites shifted to claiming, "Down with the 
Americans, who are keeping us from exercising power"? 
The anti-American forces in Iraq would increase, in 
very rough terms, from about one-tenth of the 
population (i.e., some of the Sunni Arabs) to half or 
even more. Such a situation would make what has gone on 
in Iraq so far seem like a picnic by comparison.  That 
is why it is so dangerous for the US government to do 
what can certainly be called 'the right thing' in 
theory.... For the US government to take sides with 
Sunni and Kurds against [Acting Prime Minister Ibrahim 
Al-Jaafari] injects America into Iraqi internal 
politics in a way that will not endear it to the Iraqi 
majority.... If [President Bush] actually thinks that 
the US should stay until the insurgency is repressed 
and an ideal democracy is installed, his administration 
is heading for far more trouble than it has yet 
accumulated." 
 
JONES