06TELAVIV464
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Wed Feb 01 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 TEL AVIV 000464 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
USCINCCENT MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Israel-NATO Relations 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Israel Radio reported that last night, President Bush 
devoted most of his State of the Union Address to the 
global war on terror and the Iraq issue.  Giving an 
account of the President's speech before it was 
delivered, Ha'aretz's Washington correspondent Shmuel 
Rosner defined it as a defense of U.S. policy.  Israel 
Radio quoted Bush as saying in the address: "The 
Palestinian people have voted in elections.  And now 
the leaders of Hamas must recognize Israel, disarm, 
reject terrorism, and work for lasting peace." 
 
Israel Radio and leading Internet web sites reported 
that this morning, the High Court of Justice rejected a 
petition against the destruction of nine houses at the 
illegal settler outpost of Amona in the West Bank. 
The radio earlier reported that in the middle of the 
night, Justice Elyakim Rubinstein issued a temporary 
injunction against the demolition. All media 
highlighted the face-off at the outpost between 
security forces and right-wing activists.  The 
electronic media reported that two far-right Knesset 
members, Effi Eitam and Aryeh Eldad, were among the 
first to be injured in the clashes, in which dozens 
have been hurt on both sides. 
 
Ha'aretz (lead story in Hebrew Ed.) wrote that Russia 
and China are siding with the West for now on the issue 
of Iran's nuclear program, but that aggressive measures 
against Iran are still a long way off.  Ha'aretz wrote 
that International Atomic Energy Agency inspectors have 
discovered documents proving that Iran intends to build 
a nuclear bomb. 
 
Both Ha'aretz and The Jerusalem Post published 
interviews they held on Tuesday with Ismail Haniyeh, a 
senior Hamas leader in the Gaza Strip.  In Ha'aretz, 
Haniyeh was quoted as saying that Hamas will oppose the 
transfer of control of the PA's security forces to PA 
Chairman [President] Mahmoud Abbas.  In The Jerusalem 
Post, Haniyeh was quoted as saying: "Earthquakes are a 
symbol of destruction, while Hamas is talking about 
construction."  Maariv reported that Hamas is 
considering adopting an Iran-like regime.  Israel Radio 
cited the London-based Al-Hayat as saying that Hamas 
and Islamic Jihad met in Damascus Tuesday, and that 
Islamic Jihad promised it would not disturb Hamas.  The 
radio reported that Abbas will visit Egypt today to 
discuss with President Hosni Mubarak Hamas's victory in 
the Palestinian legislative elections.  Yediot reported 
that Abbas is interested in Egypt mediating between the 
PA and the Hamas leadership, and that Egyptian 
intelligence chief Omar Suleiman will bring Khaled 
Mashal, the head of Hamas's political bureau, from 
Damascus to Cairo for a meeting with Abbas.  The 
Jerusalem Post quoted Western diplomatic officials as 
saying that Abbas, in recent talks with the Quartet 
principals, asked for support for a transitional 
government so the PA could put its financial house in 
order, get out of the shadow of the Israeli elections, 
and give Hamas time to contemplate the fact that it now 
has to govern. 
 
Leading media reported that FM Tzipi Livni will visit 
Cairo today to discuss the Hamas victory.  Speaking on 
Israel Radio, she said that is very important that 
Egypt, the leading nation in the Arab world, support 
the position of the international community against the 
establishment of a terrorist state in the PA-controlled 
territories. 
 
A high-ranking IDF officer was quoted as saying Tuesday 
in an interview with The Jerusalem Post that Hamas has 
yet to suspend its efforts to perpetrate terrorist 
attacks against Israel despite having won the 
elections. 
 
Leading media reported that on Tuesday, Congresswoman 
Ileana Ros-Lehtinen (R-FL), chair of the Subcommittee 
on the Middle East and Central Asia and a senior member 
of the International Relations Committee, introduced 
the first legislative response to Hamas's victory in 
the PA elections.  Cosponsored by Democrat Tom Lantos, 
the suggested legislation includes some extremely harsh 
measures.  However, Ha'aretz cited the belief of 
Washington sources that some of them will not be 
included in the final draft of the legislation. 
Ha'aretz wrote that there is good reason to believe 
that the U.S. administration will try to moderate the 
language of the new legislation.  Israel Radio said 
that the American Israel Public Affairs Committee 
(AIPAC) is behind the initiative. 
 
All media reported that on Tuesday, an Israeli 
policeman was seriously injured and two wanted men from 
Islamic Jihad were killed in an incident near Jenin. 
Yediot cited Islamic Jihad as saying that its revenge 
will shock Israel. 
 
Major media reported that on Tuesday, the Tel Aviv 
District Court sentenced Lebanon-born Danish citizen 
Iyad Al-Ashwah, accused of conspiring with Hizbullah, 
to 33 months in jail, in accordance with a plea bargain 
he had made with the prosecution. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that thanks to the intervention of 
the Association for Civil Rights in Israel, the 
Interior Ministry's Population Administration will 
streamline the process for granting residency permits 
to the spouses of East Jerusalem residents. 
 
All media reported that on Tuesday, the Kadima party 
presented its list of 50 candidates for the Knesset. 
The first spots on the list are Acting PM Ehud 
Olmert's, veteran statesman Shimon Peres's, and 
Livni's.  Former Shin Bet head Avi Dichter and Defense 
Minister Shaul Mofaz are fifth and eighth on the list, 
respectively.  Major media reported that former PM Ehud 
Barak, Tafnit leader Uzi Dayan, and the remnants of the 
Shinui Party are negotiating the possibility of running 
for the Knesset on a united slate under the Tafnit or 
Shinui name.  The Jerusalem Post reported that the 
Israeli Arab parties are urging Israel to talk with 
Hamas. 
 
Ha'aretz and Yediot reported that a few days ago, the 
Defense Ministry gave 2.4 million shekels (around USD 
515,000) to 28 Palestinians who were tortured by the 
IDF and the Shin Bet.  The payment was made after an 
out-of-court settlement was reached with the 
plaintiffs, who agreed that suits filed in the Tel Aviv 
Magistrate and District courts would be withdrawn. 
 
All media reported that on Tuesday, the Palestinian 
film "Paradise Now" won an Oscar nomination for best 
foreign-language film of the year. 
 
Maariv reported that the Italian newspaper Il 
Reformista awarded its prize of "man of the year in 
politics" to PM Ariel Sharon. 
 
Major media reported that on Tuesday, the High Court of 
Justice reconfirmed the legality of the expected 
extradition of underworld kingpin Zeev Rosenstein to 
the U.S. 
 
Citing news agencies, The Jerusalem Post and Ha'aretz 
reported that on Tuesday, the U.S. Senate confirmed the 
nomination of Judge Samuel A. Alito Jr. as an associate 
justice of the Supreme Court. 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: "The 
international community, which is engaged in a 
difficult battle against fundamentalist Islam, has a 
rare lever here for achieving its goals.  It must 
remain united and exploit this lever to the fullest." 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in Ha'aretz 
(February 1): "Kadima is not seeking a permanent 
agreement, but rather improved management of the 
conflict." 
 
Yossi Alpher, coeditor of the Israeli-Palestinian web 
site bitterlemons.org, a former director of the Jaffee 
Center for Strategic Studies, and a former advisor to 
PM Ehud Barak, wrote in Ha'aretz: "The unintentional 
outcome of American policy is now in danger of hurting 
us seriously." 
 
Hebrew University Political Science Professor Yehezkel 
Dror, the recipient of the prestigious 2005 Israel 
Prize for his work in public policy and strategic 
planning, wrote in the conservative, independent 
Jerusalem Post: "It's way past time Israel designed a 
radically innovative, long-term grand strategy toward 
the future Palestine." 
 
Former Israeli Representative to the UN Dore Gold wrote 
in popular, pluralist Maariv: "Hamas spokesmen are not 
always cautious and sometimes expose the identification 
with global jihad." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "A Determined World" 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized 
(February 1): "It is impossible not to be impressed by 
the international community's determined and vital 
stance [in the wake of the elections in the Palestinian 
Authority].... Nevertheless, it is already possible to 
distinguish differences in nuance between the 
Americans, who seek to emphasize the stick of 
sanctions, and the Europeans, who prefer to hold out 
the carrot of aid.  There are grounds for believing 
that, in the long run, the Bush administration -- which 
came up with the plan to democratize the Middle East -- 
will take an uncompromising and threatening line toward 
Hamas, while the Europeans and the UN will prefer a 
'wait and see' approach.... The international 
community, which is engaged in a difficult battle 
against fundamentalist Islam, has a rare lever here for 
achieving its goals.  It must remain united and exploit 
this lever to the fullest." 
 
II.  "Managing the Conflict" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in Ha'aretz 
(February 1): "Kadima is not seeking a permanent 
agreement, but rather improved management of the 
conflict.  It's offering to stabilize a new border that 
will keep the Palestinian masses out of the Israelis' 
sight, and bring home the settlers and soldiers from 
the hills of Samaria [the northern West Bank] and the 
ravines of Judea [the southern West Bank].  The 
withdrawal will end the status of occupation, which is 
unpopular in the world, and move the conflict to one of 
a border dispute between two sovereign countries, 'who 
will settle their differences through negotiations,' as 
Olmert said.  Thus, Israel will be freed of disturbing 
international pressure and of a reputation as an 
oppressive occupation regime." 
 
III.  "What Should Israel Do?" 
 
Yossi Alpher, coeditor of the Israeli-Palestinian web 
site bitterlemons.org, a former director of the Jaffee 
Center for Strategic Studies, and a former advisor to 
PM Ehud Barak, wrote in Ha'aretz (February 1): "Until 
now, official Israel has been remarkably tolerant of 
President George W. Bush's democratic reform plan for 
the Arab Middle East, even though that plan has 
empowered these radicals.  After all, the U.S. is our 
ally, American lives are at risk in Iraq and 
Afghanistan, and it behooves us to support the U.S. 
effort in the region.  But the unintentional outcome of 
American policy is now in danger of hurting us 
seriously.  It's time to look for persuasive ways to 
say, 'With respect, Mr. President, your approach is 
wrong.  Democratization cannot take the form of 
elections that install militant anti-democratic 
Islamists.  Desist'.... Sadly but necessarily, we have 
to at least contemplate eventual military action to 
remove Islamist threats on more than one neighboring 
front.... Many of our neighboring regimes, led by Egypt 
and Jordan, share some or all of our concerns.  The 
situation calls for quiet but expanded coordination 
with them." 
 
IV.  "Israel Needs a 'Grand Strategy'" 
 
Hebrew University Political Science Professor Yehezkel 
Dror, the recipient of the prestigious 2005 Israel 
Prize for his work in public policy and strategic 
planning, wrote in the conservative, independent 
Jerusalem Post (February 1): "It's way past time Israel 
designed a radically innovative, long-term grand 
strategy toward the future Palestine; one nested within 
an overall regional and global political-military 
approach.  As far as possible, such an effort should be 
coordinated with the U.S. (and other willing 
countries); but if necessary, Israel should act on its 
own.... [IN any case], in a vacuum, further unilateral 
withdrawals could increase support for Hamas.... 
Allowing a future Palestine to develop its military 
capabilities is a sure prescription for disaster -- 
especially in the long term, and not just for Israel 
but (more immediately) for Jordan.... As far as 
influencing thinking is concerned, this could ideally 
be achieved by some kind of international trusteeship 
that would take charge of teaching, influencing 
religious exhortations, reforming the educational 
curriculum and fostering mass media that socialize for 
tolerance." 
 
¶V.  "In the Service of World Islam" 
 
Former Israeli Representative to the UN Dore Gold wrote 
in popular, pluralist Maariv (February 1): "Many 
commentators tend to separate Hamas from world jihad 
terrorist organizations such Al Qaida.... [But] Hamas 
spokesmen are not always cautious and sometimes expose 
the identification with global jihad.  For instance, 
after the disengagement, Mahmoud Zahar declared: 'We 
are part of a great world program called the World 
Islamic Movement.'  He expressed his confidence that 
the disengagement would raise the mood of the Arab and 
Muslim world, and influence the struggle in Iraq and 
Afghanistan as well.  On January 30, the leader of the 
Islamic movement in Jordan declared that Hamas's 
victory was the model for an Islamic takeover of 
additional regimes. Including Jordan.... Thus, the rise 
of Hamas strengthens the Israeli need for maintaining 
'defensible borders', and, through them, preserving 
regional stability as a whole." 
 
-------------------------- 
¶2.  Israel-NATO Relations: 
-------------------------- 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
Uzi Arad, Chairman of the Herzliya Conference and 
Chairman of the Atlantic Forum of Israel, who was a 
senior advisor to former prime minister Binyamin 
Netanyahu, wrote in mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot: "Jerusalem should follow with interest the 
upcoming meeting of the NATO defense ministers, in 
which ... the idea of Israel's membership may be 
discussed." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Is Israel Headed For NATO?" 
 
Uzi Arad, Chairman of the Herzliya Conference and 
Chairman of the Atlantic Forum of Israel, who was a 
senior advisor to former prime minister Binyamin 
Netanyahu, wrote in mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot (February 1): "Italian Defense Minister 
Antonio Martino recently announced that in his opinion, 
the time has come to include Israel in NATO as a 
regular member, and he intends to raise the issue at 
the meeting of NATO defense ministers next week. 
Martino emphasized further that any future aggression 
against Israel would be considered an act of aggression 
against all the NATO states, and such recognition will 
undoubtedly contribute to the stability in the 
region.... NATO's interest in including Israel stems 
from the heightened involvement of the alliance in the 
greater Middle East, and recognition of the potential 
contribution that Israel is capable of making, due to 
its experience and capabilities.... It would appear 
that recently, more favorable winds have been blowing 
in Europe.  Moreover, the strategic understandings 
between the U.S. and Israel, which were formulated 
between then-prime minister Netanyahu and President 
Clinton, and subsequently ratified by their successors, 
including President Bush's letter of commitments from 
April 2004, successfully anchor Israel's right to 
defend itself -- on its own.... Jerusalem should follow 
with interest the upcoming meeting of the NATO defense 
ministers, in which, as mentioned above, the idea of 
Israel's membership may be discussed." 
 
JONES