07TELAVIV2124
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Wed Jul 11 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0019
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #2124/01 1920957
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 110957Z JUL 07
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2211
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 2441
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 9160
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 2493
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 3246
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 2467
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 0419
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 3200
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 0076
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 0544
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 7143
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 4556
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 9470
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 3642
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 5580
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 7382
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 002124 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Pakistan 
 
¶3.  Iraq 
 
¶4.  US-Israel Relations 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Ha'aretz and The Jerusalem Post reported that the Arab League 
delegation composed of Egyptian FM Ahmed Ali Abu al-Gheit and 
Jordanian FM Abdelelah al-Khatib will only arrive in Israel on July 
25, due to PM Ehud Olmert's crowded schedule.  The Jerusalem Post 
reported that Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and the Quartet's 
new envoy to the region, former British PM Tony Blair, are expected 
to attend next week's Quartet gathering in Cairo.  The Jerusalem 
Post quoted officials in Jerusalem as saying that nothing concerning 
a Bush visit to Israel has been confirmed. 
 
Israel Radio quoted State Department Spokesman Sean McCormack as 
saying on Tuesday: "Anything that President Abbas proposes with 
regard to maintaining law and order, I think people have to take a 
look at it. I'm not sure that you're going to find too many forces 
willing to go into what I expect is a non-permissive environment. 
The focus should be on building up functioning, capable, responsible 
Palestinian security forces that are capable of functioning in both 
areas.  Now, I know that right now that's a difficult proposition 
with respect to the Gaza, but that's really where the main weight of 
our focus is and the main weight of our effort."  McCormack was 
responding to Mahmoud Abbas's proposal that international forces be 
sent to the Gaza Strip. 
 
Leading media reported that on Tuesday Palestinian militants fired 
at least 11 mortar shells toward Israel from the Gaza Strip.  No one 
was injured, but two structures near the Kerem Shalom border 
crossing sustained damage, and the IDF closed the crossing down.  An 
anti-tank missile was also fired at IDF troops on the Gaza border, 
but no one was hurt. Hamas targeted the crossing apparently because 
of Israel's intention to make it the main entry point into Gaza. 
This morning Israel Radio reported that Israel is sending to the 
Gaza Strip dozens of truckloads of agricultural produce.  Makor 
Rishon-Hatzofe reported that on Tuesday the Palestinian government 
headed by deposed PM Ismail Haniyeh asked Israel to start direct 
talks with Israel on opening the crossings. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that the latest IDF assessment predicts 
that war with Syria could erupt if PM Olmert does not begin peace 
negotiations with Damascus and that such a conflict would be "at 
least 10 times worse" than last summer's conflict with Hizbullah. 
The Jerusalem Post and other media quoted Syrian MP Muhammad Habash 
as saying that Syria has rejected PM Olmert's offer of peace talks 
with President Bashar Assad. Speaking on IDF Radio, Internal 
Security Minister Avi Dichter said that Olmert's offer was "genuine 
and real."  But he was not optimistic that Assad would agree. 
Maariv reported that in an interview published this week in The New 
York Sun, an unnamed Syrian Ba'ath official threatened Israel with 
attacks against Golan settlements if Israel does not evacuate the 
Golan Heights by September.  The official was quoted as saying that 
Syria "learned from the Hezbollah experience last summer and we can 
have hundreds of missiles hitting Tel Aviv that will overwhelm 
Israel's anti-missile batteries."  He was further quoted as saying 
that Syria has "proof" that Israel is also readying for a war. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that IDF Intelligence (MI) is also 
identifying and pinpointing targets for the IDF in the event that a 
strike is launched against Iran's nuclear facilities. Major media 
cited MI's assessment that Iran might obtain a nuclear bomb by 2009, 
although it is more likely to succeed in its endeavors in 2010 or 
¶2011.  Hamodi'a reported that the US has dispatched the aircraft 
carrier USS Enterprise to the Persian Gulf.  Maariv reported that an 
interview published with Italian PM Romano Prodi, in which he said 
that Israel should be guaranteed that there will be no Iranian 
military program, caused angry responses in Tehran and almost 
produced a diplomatic crisis between Italy and Iran. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that the UN has transmitted messages to Israel in 
recent weeks that the organization's mapping experts have determined 
that the controversial Sheba Farms on Mount Dov near the Lebanese 
border, now controlled by Israel, is Lebanese territory.  The UN, 
which has communicated to Israel that the disposition of the Sheba 
Farms should be dealt with as soon as possible, has proposed to 
senior government officials that Israel withdraw from the area and 
that it be considered international territory to be controlled by 
UNIFIL.  Ha'aretz noted that FM Tzipi Livni and PM Olmert oppose the 
idea.  Ha'aretz quoted GOI officials in Jerusalem as saying that the 
UN cartographer handling the matter in recent months has determined 
that the area is indeed Lebanese. The officials added that Syria and 
Lebanon also agree that the area is Lebanese.  Therefore, the UN has 
said there is no reason for Israel not to relinquish control over 
the area.  Ha'aretz said that GOI officials are treating the matter 
with kid gloves out of concern that a public statement by the UN 
could lead to renewed conflict in the North.  The daily also noted 
that the US and France want the Sheba Farms to return to Lebanon. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that Mahmoud Abbas has come under heavy 
criticism from Palestinians -- including drafters of the PA's Basic 
Law -- who say he is forging a "military dictatorship" in the West 
Bank by granting military courts broad powers to crack down on 
civilians.  Abbas is also under attack for seeking to dilute the 
power of the Palestinian Legislative Council, whose members were 
elected in January 2006. 
 
Ha'aretz and Israel Radio reported that the Waqf Muslim religious 
trust is digging a ditch in the Old City of Jerusalem, from the 
northern side of the Temple Mount compound to the Dome of the Rock 
as a prelude to infrastructure work in the area, generating protests 
from archaeologists.  Ha'aretz also reported that the Israel 
Antiquities Authority (IAA) told the High Court of Justice that it 
was prepared to allow construction of the Museum of Tolerance on the 
site of an ancient Muslim cemetery in Jerusalem's Mamila area, 
although an enormous archaeologist had determined that the 
excavation was far from complete. 
 
Martin Scheinin of Finland, Special Rapporteur for the UN Human 
Rights Council, was quoted as saying in an interview with The 
Jerusalem Post on Tuesday that the council has been a huge 
disappointment, as it singled out Israel.  Scheinin also criticized 
Israel over its security fence and targeted killings. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that on Monday Vice Premier Haim Ramon and 
Transportation Minister Shaul Mofaz called for the building of a 
fence along the southern border to prevent illegal entries via 
Egypt.  Mofaz was quoted as saying that a fence would also reduce 
drug smuggling and trafficking in women. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported in-depth on the Fourth of July reception 
at the US Ambassador's residence.  The newspaper reported that DCM 
Gene Cretz, the master of ceremonies at the celebration, will be 
winding his tour of duty next month. 
 
Ha'aretz and Yediot reported that the stocks on Tel Aviv's financial 
markets represent one of the best investments in the world; since 
the start of the Second Lebanon War they have risen by 40 percent. 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Prominent liberal author A. B. Yehoshua wrote in the 
mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "Weaknesses and 
failures are not necessarily moral flaws -- just as victories and 
achievements are not proof of a moral advantage." 
 
Senior columnist Moshe Ishon wrote in the nationalist, Orthodox 
Makor Rishon-Hatzofe: "[Tzipi Livni's peace plans] cannot be 
implemented in reality.  It turns out that the minister in charge of 
foreign affairs is hovering in the air." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I. "A Year Since Operation Peace for Galilee" 
 
Prominent liberal author A. B. Yehoshua wrote in the 
mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (7/11): "A year ago, on 
July 12, from the international border, Hizbullah -- a Lebanese 
military organization that advocates the destruction of Israel -- 
launched an attack on Israel, killed eight soldiers, took two 
prisoners, and directed rocket fire at the northern communities.  We 
will not repeat what happened a year ago, since the events are 
well-known.  Israel's strong response to the offensive was morally 
right, and it was so perceived by most of the world, including parts 
of the Arab world.  True, the war, despite its justification, lasted 
longer than it should have and revealed many weaknesses, both in the 
army and in the defense of the home front, but weaknesses and 
failures are not necessarily moral flaws -- just as victories and 
achievements are not proof of a moral advantage.  In complete 
contrast to its older and bloodier sister, this war, which we still 
call the Second Lebanon War, was actually Operation Peace for 
Galilee.  It recaptures the original name of the first Lebanon War, 
which was staged with blood and destruction by the Begin-Sharon 
government.  Will there be peace for the Galilee in the future?  I 
do not know.  If this war, the anniversary of which we are now 
marking, will become not only a punching bag and source for 
recriminations, but also a long list of urgent actions that need to 
be taken, in repairing the army, in fortifying the northern 
communities and in stabilizing the Security Council agreement on the 
international border, and mainly in a bold peace initiative with 
Syria -- then there is a real chance that there will indeed be peace 
in the future for northern Israel, which is much larger than we 
think -- from [the northern Galilee] to the outskirts of Tel Aviv." 
 
II.  "A Foreign Minister Disconnected From Reality" 
 
Senior columnist Moshe Ishon wrote in the nationalist, Orthodox 
Makor Rishon-Hatzofe (7/11): "It is worth mentioning that it is not 
only the national camp [i.e. the Right] that does not believe in a 
peace arrangement in a foreseeable time -- but also the liberal camp 
and part of the Left.  Our generation is not prepared for peace.... 
But our Foreign Minister, who has recently been talking about peace 
with the Palestinians, is not aware of that.  She still believes in 
progress in peace talks.  Meanwhile, her peace plans 'lie in peace' 
on the pages of newspapers and the Foreign Ministry's protocols. 
But they cannot be implemented in reality.  It turns out that the 
minister in charge of foreign affairs is hovering in the air." 
 
 
 
 
------------- 
¶2.  Pakistan: 
------------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Dr. Itzik Kfir, an expert on terror in the developing world at the 
Interdisciplinary Center Herzliya, wrote in the mass-circulation, 
pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "The civilian/military Pakistani 
administration does not want to see bin-Ladin clutch the red 
button.... But there can be no doubt that the rise of Islamic 
extremism to power would increase Pakistani terrorist activity in 
India -- especially in Kashmir." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"Will Extremists Control the Islamic Atom Bomb?" 
 
Dr. Itzik Kfir, an expert on terror in the developing world at the 
 
Interdisciplinary Center Herzliya, wrote in the mass-circulation, 
pluralist Yediot Aharonot (7/11): "Despite the bloodshed, the 'Red 
Mosque' crisis will eventually end in a compromise.  Some rebel 
leaders will be jailed, but will be released after one or two years. 
 It would be more difficult to predict the results of the elections. 
 The civilian/military Pakistani administration does not want to see 
bin-Ladin clutch the red button.  Even the Islamist parties do not 
want this.  But there can be no doubt that the rise of Islamic 
extremism to power would increase Pakistani terrorist activity in 
India -- especially in Kashmir." 
 
--------- 
¶3.  Iraq: 
--------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Michael Freund, who was an assistant to former prime minister 
Binyamin Netanyahu, wrote in the conservative, independent Jerusalem 
Post: "As Israel's experiences with withdrawal over the past decade 
have made clear, retreat in the face of terror is simply not an 
option, and one can only hope that this lesson will not be lost on 
the powers that be in Washington." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"America, Stay the Course in Iraq" 
 
Michael Freund, who was an assistant to former prime minister 
Binyamin Netanyahu, wrote in the conservative, independent Jerusalem 
Post (7/11): "Before the decision-makers in Washington hastily 
embrace retreat, they might want to take a step back and consider 
just how detrimental, demoralizing and even destructive withdrawal 
can be.  For proof, they need only look to Israel's recent 
experience in this regard.  Twice in the past seven years the Jewish 
state has turned tail and fled, pulling its forces out of Lebanon in 
2000 and Gaza in 2005.  Tired of fighting a determined foe, 
successive Israeli governments decided to throw in the towel and 
hope for the best.  In both instances, Israel's retreat was carried 
out in a rapid and precipitous manner, with little thought given to 
the day after.  The result, of course, was nothing short of 
disastrous.... The fact is that what happens in Iraq matters.  Not 
just in Baghdad, but in Teheran, Pyongyang and in Gaza City too.  A 
weakened America means a strengthened foe, one even more determined 
to press forward with attacking Israel and the West.  As Israel's 
experiences with withdrawal over the past decade have made clear, 
retreat in the face of terror is simply not an option, and one can 
only hope that this lesson will not be lost on the powers that be in 
Washington.  For in the tinderbox that is the Middle East, an 
American pullout from Iraq might just be the spark that will lead to 
an even greater conflagration." 
 
------------------------ 
¶4.  US-Israel Relations: 
------------------------ 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Washington correspondent Shmuel Rosner wrote in the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz: "There is as degree of difficulty in planning 
a joint future for Israel and American Jews without first working 
out the reciprocal relationship." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"Where Is the Center of the Jewish People?" 
 
Washington correspondent Shmuel Rosner wrote in the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz (7/11): "There is as degree of difficulty in 
planning a joint future for Israel and American Jews without first 
working out the reciprocal relationship.  Zionist Israel will find 
it difficult to accept the status of a B team.... In any case, the 
requirement is to shape a partnership of a new sort.  This is a 
worthy, complex challenge for those planning the future of the 
Jewish people.  Otherwise, as in the old joke about the Jew and his 
two synagogues, the reality will draw the future: One place will be 
for living and the other for not setting foot." 
 
JONES