07TELAVIV1679
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Fri Jun 08 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0021
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #1679/01 1591113
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 081113Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1530
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUENAAA/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 2277
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 9003
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 2286
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 3087
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 2292
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 0189
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 3031
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 9907
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 0382
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 6986
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 4402
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 9301
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 3487
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 5423
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 7052
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 001679 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1. Syria 
 
¶2. Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key Stories in the Media: 
------------------------- 
 
Yediot headlined that Prime Minister Ehud Olmert talked to US 
President George Bush six weeks ago and received from him the ok to 
go ahead and open negotiations with Syria.  According to the paper 
PM Olmert conveyed through secretive channels a message to President 
Assad saying in exchange for full peace with Israel and dissolving 
the alliance with Iran and with the terror organizations, Syria 
would receive the Golan.  The paper cited a senior political source 
as revealing that Bashar Assad has still not responded to Olmert's 
message. In an interview to Israel Radio Minister of Trade, Eli 
Yishai, said that if President Assad is serious then he should come 
to Israel. 
 
Maariv reported that a day after Prime Minister Ehud Olmert declared 
that Israel is willing to talk to Syrian President Bashar Assad, a 
Syrian source said that Syria is willing to return to negotiations 
for peace. Yediot also cited a senior Syrian official as saying that 
Syria is willing to talk with Israel but that they are not 
optimistic. 
 
Yediot reported that PM Olmert will meet P.A. Chairman Mahmoud Abbas 
in Cario on June 25.  The paper noted that on the same occasion PM 
Olmert will meet Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak. 
 
Leading media cited Minister of Transportation and Road Safety, 
Shaul Mofaz, as saying after his meetings in Washington regarding 
Iran that the diplomatic track is preferable but that if that does 
not achieve the goal then all options should stay open. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Israel will not ask to widen the mandate of 
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) in the 
Golan.  The mandate is automatically extended every six months and 
despite the tension with Syria, Israel will not ask the UN to 
reinforce UNDOF to ensure that the status quo is maintained. 
Ha'aretz cited a statement released by UN Secretary-General Ban 
Ki-moon in which he expresses shock and dismay at the comments made 
this week by Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad forecasting the 
destruction of Israel. 
 
Israel radio reported that two Qassam rockets were fired towards the 
southern town of Sderot. No casualties or damage was reported. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that the IDF is only partially implementing the 
directive of Defense Minister Amir Peretz to end the ban on 
Palestinians entering the Jordan Valley.  According to the paper the 
IDF last week began allowing Palestinians who do not live in the 
Valley to pass through the checkpoints but only on foot. 
 
Maariv printed the results of a TNS/Teleseker Polling Institute 
survey: 
-"What is your position regarding withdrawal from the Golan Heights 
for peace with Syria?" 
Object any withdrawal: 44 percent; support only partial withdrawal: 
40 percent; support full withdrawal: 10 percent. 
-"Do you believe Assad's call for peace?" 
No: 74 percent; yes: 17 percent. 
-"Do you support the renewal of negotiations with Syria?" 
Support: 45 percent; oppose: 48 percent. 
 
 
 
--------- 
¶1. Syria: 
--------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Senior commentator Nahum Barnea wrote in the popular, pluralist 
Yediot: "Israel's diplomatic legacy is unequivocal: Israel has never 
said no to an Arab party that has expressed willingness for 
negotiations.  It has sometimes evaded negotiations by creative 
excuses ... but it has never said no outright.  Olmert cannot say no 
either.  That is why he was forced to announce this week festively 
that he invites Syria to direct talks.  It is doubtful whether an 
arrangement will come of this, but perhaps we will get through the 
summer safely." 
 
Senior columnist and longtime dove Yoel Marcus wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "So who invented the story about 
a war this summer?  The weather forecaster?  And what about the 
story that Syria is planning an attack on Israel?  Did we get a fax 
from Damascus?  Or is the army just covering itself in case it 
really happens because it cannot claim once again that it didn't 
know?  I wonder what goes on at those government meetings in 
Damascus.  Are they quaking in their boots or laughing their heads 
off? 
 
Senior military correspondent Alex Fishman wrote in 
mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "If the Syrians 'hold 
their breath' and will not attempt to forcefully retrieve the Golan 
Heights in the next four years, they will 'enjoy' a 'nuclear 
umbrella' from Iran." 
 
Senior columnist Dan Margalit wrote in the popular, pluralist 
Maariv: "The impression is that Israel is being dragged to talks 
only after it is threatened with war.... After it declared that it 
will not negotiate with Syria, it became clear that reality is 
different.  It is already there." 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit opined in popular, pluralist 
Maariv: "It is possible that negotiations [with Syria] will not 
ripen or not succeed.  It is possible that the move would lead us to 
war.  But the effort in necessary." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I. "June-July Heat" 
 
Senior commentator Nahum Barnea wrote in the popular, pluralist 
Yediot (06/08): "Olmert is deliberating.  He suspects that all the 
Syrians want is to extricate themselves without punishment from the 
Hariri assassination affair.  He fears a Syrian misunderstanding 
that will deteriorate into war.  That is what happened precisely 40 
years ago, on the eve of the Six-Day War.  Three prime ministers -- 
Rabin, Netanyahu and Barak -- held talks with the Syrians, and none 
of them succeeded in reaching an agreement.  Why should he, Olmert, 
succeed where they failed.  And what will Bush say.  And what will 
Yvette [Minister of Strategic Affairs Yvette Lieberman] say. 
Israel's diplomatic legacy is unequivocal: Israel has never said no 
to an Arab party that has expressed willingness for negotiations. 
It has sometimes evaded negotiations by creative excuses ... but it 
has never said no outright.  Olmert cannot say no either.  That is 
why he was forced to announce this week festively that he invites 
Syria to direct talks.  It is doubtful whether an arrangement will 
come of this, but perhaps we will get through the summer safely." 
 
II. "Drowning its Sorrow" 
 
Senior columnist and longtime dove Yoel Marcus wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (06/08): "Drowning its sorrows. 
So who invented the story about a war this summer?  The weather 
forecaster?  And what about the story that Syria is planning an 
attack on Israel?  Did we get a fax from Damascus?  Or is the army 
just covering itself in case it really happens because it cannot 
claim once again that it didn't know?  I wonder what goes on at 
those government meetings in Damascus.  Are they quaking in their 
boots or laughing their heads off?  Are they saying: If Israel says 
we're preparing to attack, maybe that means they're planning to 
attack?  Is it any wonder that they are sharpening their sabers over 
there?  And in the middle of all this, the papers are reporting 
secret talks between Israel and Syria.  But maybe that is 
 
SIPDIS 
camouflage, too.  Maybe there is some surprise attack in the offing, 
and the Syrians are honing their defenses?  Actually, it sounds more 
as if the Winograd Committee's final report is drawing near and the 
government is drowning its sorrows." 
 
III. "The Golan Race" 
 
Senior military correspondent Alex Fishman wrote in 
mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (06/08): "Talk of a 
possible confrontation in the coming summer is the first stop in the 
long and tense path of the year of decision that we are entering. 
Apparently, someone on our side thinks that enough warning signs 
have accumulated for us to be alert.  But it is doubtful that the 
Syrians have any real interest in starting the confrontation now. 
They are not ready yet.  If there is a confrontation in the summer, 
it could break out due to an error on the part of one of the sides. 
It could be a misinterpretation of a step taken by the other side. 
The headlines and statements by military figures and politicians 
could encourage an incorrect interpretation of one move or another, 
and that would ignite the fire.... If the Syrians 'hold their 
breath' and will not attempt to forcefully retrieve the Golan 
Heights in the next four years, they will 'enjoy' a 'nuclear 
umbrella' from Iran.  For the time being the IDF is concerned from 
the point of no return in the Syrian army's build-up.  In a 
theoretic world the IDF was supposed to present to the government 
the option to hit the enemy before it reaches that point.  Not to 
wait until it decides to attack but to attack it first.... Today the 
termination of a 'preemptive blow' was erased from IDF's schools.... 
The army understands that there will not be a preventive war unless 
the Syrians make a mistake and start raging in the Golan" 
 
IV. "Only Under Pressure" 
 
Senior columnist Dan Margalit wrote in the popular, pluralist Maariv 
(06/08): "Israel doesn't have a serious option to avoid negotiations 
with any certified Arab source who declares his wish for peace. 
Inner and outer pressure will do its own. So will common sense.  But 
the government is having difficulties.  Because the loss of 
confidence at home and the fear that it would be dragged to 
concessions due to its weakness.  There were years in which Israel 
mocked Arab countries saying their governments cannot talk peace out 
of fear for their own removal.  Now Syria claims that that is the 
reason why Israel cannot do peace and no one disagrees with it.  The 
impression is that Israel is being dragged to talks only after it is 
threatened with war.... After it declared that it will not negotiate 
with Syria, it became clear that reality is different.  It is 
already there." 
 
¶V. "A Year Ago" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit opined in popular, pluralist 
Maariv (06/08): "Up until a year ago entering negotiations with 
Syria was pretty simple.  But at that time we were strong. 
Meanwhile the Second Lebanon War broke.  Now we are weak.  The 
Syrians feel confident.... The Israeli leadership is panicked. 
Winds of war are blowing in its face.... Olmert is embarrassed.  He 
has no clue whether the Syrian deal is still valid.  What is certain 
is that the price has gone up.  If he was less arrogant and proud a 
year ago, everything could look different.... So now what we do? 
It's simple: stand up on the Knesset's podium and call upon Assad 
for an immediate meeting, with no preconditions. Say you know the 
price of peace and present Assad with the Israeli rate.  Reach out a 
hand clearly, bravely, determinably for peace with Syria.  Israel 
could never afford itself -- even when it thought that it is really 
strong -- to refuse peace.... It is possible that negotiations will 
not ripen or not succeed.  It is possible that the move would lead 
us to war.  But the effort in necessary." 
 
----------- 
¶2. Mideast: 
----------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
Senior columnist and chief defense commentator Zeev Schiff wrote in 
the independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "If what is happening in the 
Gaza Strip were to happen to Israel in the West Bank, we would be 
back in a situation like that during the War of Independence, and 
this could include the expulsion of terrorism supporters. 
Therefore, Israel must insist for now on isolating the West Bank, 
and it must also reject the security benchmarks plan proposed by 
U.S. security coordinator Major General Keith Dayton, as it is 
liable to lead to Hamas penetration of the West Bank." 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: "In his 
speech this month, Bush should build on his insight that the 
Palestinians were 'treated as pawns' in the conflict.  This is an 
obvious reference to the Arab states, which have used the conflict 
to distract from their own stagnant regimes." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I. An Israeli defeat in Sderot 
 
Senior columnist and chief defense commentator Zeev Schiff wrote in 
the independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (06/08): "Even if we declare 
dozens of times that Hamas is under pressure and wants a cease-fire, 
it will not erase the fact that in the battle for Sderot, Israel has 
in effect been defeated.... Israel is experiencing something in 
Sderot that it has not experienced since the War of Independence, if 
ever: The enemy has silenced an entire city and brought normal life 
there to a halt.... The present government in particular, but its 
predecessor as well, has suffered a resounding defeat here.  The 
government has not succeeded in turning bombarded Sderot into a 
national defense project.  That reinforces the assessment that this 
government is incapable of leading the nation in a major military 
confrontation.  It is also a defeat for the defense establishment, 
including the Israel Defense Forces.... Israel finds itself in a 
military draw with Hamas.  That is a serious national failure, which 
in my opinion is worse than the failure of the Second Lebanon 
War.... If what is happening in the Gaza Strip were to happen to 
Israel in the West Bank, we would be back in a situation like that 
during the War of Independence, and this could include the expulsion 
of terrorism supporters.  Therefore, Israel must insist for now on 
isolating the West Bank, and it must also reject the security 
benchmarks plan proposed by U.S. security coordinator Major General 
Keith Dayton, as it is liable to lead to Hamas penetration of the 
West Bank.  Even if we achieve a real cease-fire in the Gaza Strip, 
at least one year of quiet should pass until the cease-fire is 
extended to the West Bank." 
 
II. "Shift the Spotlight" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized (06/08): 
"The US-Israeli talks this week took place with two scheduled events 
in the background: Prime Minister Ehud Olmert's White House visit on 
June 19, and a speech by President George W. Bush around June 24, 
the fifth anniversary of his landmark address calling for a new 
Palestinian leadership.... In his speech this month, Bush should 
build on his insight that the Palestinians were 'treated as pawns' 
in the conflict.  This is an obvious reference to the Arab states, 
which have used the conflict to distract from their own stagnant 
regimes.  Five years on, Bush should say that it is no longer the 
lack of a Palestinian state that is perpetuating the conflict, but 
the conflict -- in the form of the Islamic refusal to accept Israel 
-- that is blocking a Palestinian state.  The weak and radicalized 
Palestinians cannot change this on their own; they need the Arab 
states to lead the way by taking concrete steps to make peace, which 
means accepting Israel.  Though the Palestinians must still be held 
responsible for their own destiny, the spotlight that Bush rightly 
trained on them should now be shifted to the Arab states." 
CRETZ