07TELAVIV3164
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Wed Oct 31 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #3164/01 3041030
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 311030Z OCT 07
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3951
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 2930
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 9613
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 3063
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 3718
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 2956
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 1014
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 3683
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 0551
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 1017
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 7594
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 5046
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 9962
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 4108
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 6046
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 8295
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 003164 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Ha'aretz and Israel Radio reported that the US has renewed pressure 
on Israel to evacuate unauthorized outposts and to broaden efforts 
to help West Bank Palestinians in the run up to the Annapolis 
meeting.  Those media quoted National Security Adviser Stephen 
Hadley as saying during talks in Jerusalem late last week that the 
US expects Israel to take measures that will assist PA Chairman 
[President] Mahmoud Abbas.  Hadley's message was that if Israel 
wants to delay the discussions on the core issues, it must help the 
Palestinians change the situation on the ground and evacuate the 
outposts.  (Ha'aretz reported that on Monday and Tuesday Israeli 
forces evacuated and destroyed the homes of Jewish shepherds in an 
illegal outpost in the southern Hebron Hills)  Ha'aretz said that 
Hadley also made it clear that the White House is fully behind 
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, dismissing any notion that she 
 
SIPDIS 
is acting independently. 
 
Makor Rishon-Hatzofe reported that on Tuesday in Cairo, Chairman 
Abbas called for a series of conferences.  The newspaper quoted 
chief Palestinian negotiator Ahmed Qurei (Abu Ala) as saying that 
there is no point to talks in the absence of an Israeli commitment 
to a timeline.  Citing AP, The Jerusalem Post quoted Abbas as saying 
that key Arab countries will attend the Annapolis meeting.  Makor 
Rishon-Hatzofe reported that Palestinian television has resumed 
"incitement" broadcasts. 
 
Ha'aretz quoted the Shin Bet as saying in an analysis to Israel's 
political leadership that the PA is demanding that Israel 
acknowledge the "Peres Letter," which accompanied the Oslo accords 
of 1993.  The letter promises to allow Palestinian institutions in 
East Jerusalem.  Ha'aretz reported that in anticipation of 
Palestinian demands at Annapolis, the Shin Bet warned PM Ehud Olmert 
that he should not be recognize East Jerusalem as the future 
Palestinian capital, because it also includes the Old City and the 
Western Wall.  According to Shin Bet analysts, there are concerns of 
a Palestinian "trick" during the negotiations, in which Israel will 
be tempted to offer recognition in principle of East Jerusalem as 
the Palestinian capital, and delay discussion of the details 
including on the administration of the holy sites. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that not a single kilometer of the West 
Bank security fence has been completed in the past four months.  The 
newspaper reported that despite  claims by the Defense Ministry of a 
lack of funds, the Prime Minister's Office says that 500 million 
shekels (around USD 125.7 million)  remains allocated to the project 
in the Defense Ministry's coffers.  The Jerusalem Post quoted both 
the Prime Minister's Office and the Defense Ministry as saying that 
they could not comment on the delay in the work of the South Hebron 
Hills portion of the fence. 
 
Major media reported that on Tuesday Israeli troops attacked a Hamas 
police station in Khan Yunis, in the southern Gaza Strip.  Four 
Palestinians were killed. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted Israeli defense officials as saying on 
Tuesday that despite Attorney General Menachem Mazuz's order to 
review energy-related sanctions on the Gaza Strip, Israel would soon 
begin cutting off electricity to Gaza.  Ha'aretz reported that on 
Tuesday the EU urged Israel to carefully reconsider how cutting 
energy supplies to the Gaza Strip will impact Palestinian 
civilians. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that on Tuesday Chinese PM Wen Jiabao told FM 
Tzipi Livni, who is on a visit to China, that his country is a full 
partner to the UN Security Council's sanctions on Iran.  Ha'aretz 
reported that Livni told Jiabao: "Hesitation in [the Iranian nuclear 
issue] is looked upon by the Iranian regime as weakness, and the 
moderate states in the region will try to appease Iran instead of 
fighting it, in order to reduce the danger to themselves."  Maariv 
reported that Livni told her Chinese hosts that a nuclear Iran might 
lead to a nuclear arms race in the Middle East.  The Jerusalem Post 
reported that "Livni made no headway in China." 
 
Leading media reported that on Tuesday Syria-based Palestinian 
officials announced that a Hamas-led meeting slated for early 
November in Damascus would be postponed to coincide with the 
Annapolis meeting.  Ha'aretz quoted Palestinian sources as saying 
that the US will invite Syria to Annapolis if Damascus does not 
meddle in the Lebanese elections. 
 
Leading media reported that on Tuesday up to 100 solidarity rallies 
for the three captive Israeli soldiers were held around the world. 
Ha'aretz reported that B'Tselem, The Israeli Information Center for 
Human Rights in the Occupied Territories, is about to open an office 
in Washington.  The organization hopes this will improve its access 
to US politicians, decision makers, think tank members, journalists, 
and diplomats, as well as the American Jewish community. 
 
All media reported that on Monday the Galilee village of Peki'in 
erupted into violent confrontations between police and residents, in 
scenes reminiscent of the October 2000 Arab-Israeli riots. The media 
reported that Druze and Israeli-Arab leaders have demanded that the 
police apologize for the violence and that a commission of inquiry 
be established. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Abir Atfah, the Cairo spokeswoman of the 
United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR), told the daily 
that the UNHCR is investigating whether Egypt broke its promise not 
to deport Sudanese refugees back to their country of origin after 
they had illegally crossed into Israel.  The investigation, which 
also involves Israel's Foreign Ministry, revolves around 48 Sudanese 
refugees whom Israel deported to Egypt two months ago. 
 
Leading media cited the State Attorney's concern that the High Court 
of Justice may intervene in the affair of former president Moshe 
Katsav.  The media said that Dorit Beinisch, the court's President, 
hurled sharp criticism at the plea bargain which omitted sexual 
charges. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that a group of prominent Jewish American 
philanthropists has taken steps in recent weeks to separate the 
Jewish Agency from the World Zionist Organization (WZO) and end all 
political affiliation in the operation of the WZO.   Donors and 
community leaders in the US are calling for increased transparency 
at the Jewish Agency, which is responsible for immigration from the 
Diaspora.  Major media reported that on Tuesday Interior Minister 
Meir Sheetrit told Jewish Agency officials that Israel should not 
rush into granting automatic citizenship to every Jew. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that Prof. Joseph Almog, a Hebrew 
University scientist, has invented a spray that can detect traces of 
explosives on bodies and belongings. 
 
-------- 
Mideast: 
-------- 
 
Summary: 
 
 
-------- 
 
Eytan Haber, veteran op-ed writer and assistant to the late prime 
minister Yitzhak Rabin, opined in the mass-circulation, pluralist 
Yediot Aharonot: "Israel [is likely to] be presented as a peace 
rejectionist versus the willingness for peace of the Palestinians, 
the Syrians, and all of the Arab states." 
 
Washington correspondent Shmuel Rosner wrote in the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz: "A shared fear of failure rather than hope 
for success is propelling the relevant parties toward Annapolis. 
That fear is multifaceted." 
 
Conservative columnist Yosef Harif wrote in the popular, pluralist 
Maariv: "As the Annapolis summit is getting closer, its principals 
-- the United States, Israel, and the Palestinians are showing signs 
of sobering up from exaggerated expectations." 
 
Very liberal columnist Meron Benvenisti, deputy mayor of Jerusalem 
from 1971 to 1978, wrote in Ha'aretz: "It is almost impossible to 
'subtract' neighborhoods [from Jerusalem] without destroying the 
fabric of life in the city." 
 
The Director of the Interdisciplinary Center's Global Research in 
International Affairs Center, columnist Barry Rubin, wrote in the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post: "The PA has never really 
punished anyone for murdering or trying to kill an Israeli or for 
attacking Israel." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "Deluge in Annapolis" 
 
Eytan Haber, veteran op-ed writer and assistant to the late prime 
minister Yitzhak Rabin, opined in the mass-circulation, pluralist 
Yediot Aharonot (10/31): "Of all of the people coming to Annapolis, 
only Olmert has something to sell, real merchandise -- territories. 
Despite extensive advance planning and preparations, Condi ... will 
surprise him with demands that will enable her and the United 
States, her country, to 'return home safely.' After Condi (and 
perhaps President Bush himself), the others, representatives of the 
countries that are responsible for world peace, will also try to 
explain to Olmert that he has no choice: He has to 'throw a bone,' 
give something.  As things look presently -- and the emphasis is on 
the word 'presently' -- Olmert can sell the entire Land of Israel, 
 
but he will have nowhere to return.... He will not have a 
government.  People will try to explain to Olmert that Begin did not 
have a majority for the peace agreement with Egypt, that Rabin had 
trouble with his coalition, and that Sharon, Arik Sharon, pushed 
forward the Roadmap and disengagement with miniscule, even 
deficient, parliamentary support.  Even after these explanations 
Olmert will not, apparently, be able to deliver the goods.  And 
then, at this point, Israel will be presented as a peace 
rejectionist versus the willingness for peace of the Palestinians, 
the Syrians, and all of the Arab states." 
 
II.  "Summit of Fear" 
 
Washington correspondent Shmuel Rosner wrote in the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz (10/31): "A shared fear of failure rather than 
hope for success is propelling the relevant parties toward 
Annapolis.  That fear is multifaceted.  Palestinian officials warn 
against a summit that would fail to meet the Palestinians' 
expectations, prompting Palestinian Authority Chairman Mahmoud Abbas 
to resign.  This would result in governmental chaos, the 
Palestinians warn.  Israeli intelligence officials, meanwhile, warn 
of Hamas's penetration into the West Bank.  Some Jordanians are 
worried that Hamas's presence there would cause the Hamas revolution 
to seep into the Hashemite Kingdom.  Those and other concerns make 
up the jigsaw of American fears.  Rice calls the sum of concerns 
'context,' but in fact it's just another name for the old "linkage 
factor" - a theory that links the outcome of American mediation in 
the peace process to possible regional ramifications.... The 
American mediators have to address another inherent difficulty, a 
double fear factor.  A recent Gallup poll revealed that 83 percent 
of Palestinians have little admiration for the American 
leadership.... One way of allaying the Palestinians' suspicions 
would be to opt for a real or simulated conflict with Israel.  But 
that would only serve to create suspicion from the Israeli side.  A 
recent survey by the [Israeli] Peace Index Project found that most 
Jews oppose allowing the US to act as the arbiter on which 
concession each party should make if the negotiations reach a 
stalemate.  To cross that line, Rice will need President George W. 
Bush to reaffirm his backing." 
 
III.  "Signs of Sobering Up" 
 
Conservative columnist Yosef Harif wrote in the popular, pluralist 
Maariv (10/31): "As the Annapolis summit is getting closer, its 
principals -- the United States, Israel, and the Palestinians are 
showing signs of sobering up from exaggerated expectations, as if 
the international meeting will advance the establishment of a 
Palestinian state, the moderate Arab states will recognize Israel, 
and [the meeting] will contribute to quiet and the stabilization of 
the United States' status in the region.... Israel has real 
existential demands which it will never give up.  It faces a weak 
Palestinian Authority, which is unable to make concessions.... 
Despite her failure to bridge the gaps so far, Condoleezza Rice 
still believes that a common denominator can be found between the 
sides and that they can be brought to the Annapolis negotiation 
table, but it appears that even if the conference starts, the 
chances of a real diplomatic process are pretty scarce." 
 
 
IV.  "Who Cares about Where Shoafat Is?" 
 
Very liberal columnist Meron Benvenisti, deputy mayor of Jerusalem 
from 1971 to 1978, wrote in Ha'aretz (10/31): "It is almost 
impossible to 'subtract' neighborhoods [from Jerusalem] without 
destroying the fabric of life in the city, and it is extremely 
difficult (and of course immoral) to retract social benefits 
previously granted.  It turns out that the lack of consideration 
created the borders of the annexation, gave birth to unexpected 
results and actually led to the economic improvement of Arab 
Jerusalem.  But perhaps it was not the thoughtlessness that led to 
this but rather the colonialist bravado; that those who drew the 
borders over the generations added and subtracted thousands of 
people without asking their opinions.  To day they are 'inside' and 
tomorrow, when the fashion changes, they will be 'out.'  This 
playing around with peoples' lives is the height of folly because 
anyone who wants to draw the future of the city must listen to the 
wishes of all its citizens, Jews and Arabs alike." 
 
¶V.  "Rules of the Game, Palestinian-Style" 
 
The Director of the Interdisciplinary Center's Global Research in 
International Affairs Center, columnist Barry Rubin, wrote in the 
conservative, independent Jerusalem Post (10/31): "The PA has never 
really punished anyone for murdering or trying to kill an Israeli or 
for attacking Israel.... Based on his own interests, Abbas should 
have shot [the alleged would-be assassins of Ehud Olmert], which is 
what the PA does to people it deems traitors.  But they probably 
won't even get community service in the end.  Why?  Because of the 
rules of Palestinians politics.... [Those tenets are:] 1) 
Palestinians cannot stop other Palestinians from attacking 
Israel.... 2) He who is most militant is always right.... 3) More 
violence is good and a 'victory' if it inflicts casualties or damage 
on Israel.... 4) No Israeli government can do anything good.... 5) 
Since Palestinians are the perpetual victim they are entitled to 
everything they want and never need to give anything in exchange for 
Israeli concessions.... 7) Fatah won't discipline or expel anyone 
for launching attacks.  8) Wiping Israel off the map is morally 
correct.... 9) The movement sets as top priority the so-called 
'right of return'.... 10) It is more important to be steadfast and 
patient with a terrible status quo than to make big gains by ending 
the conflict forever.... Even if a handful of Palestinians want to 
reach agreement with Israel, they cannot -- and even worse, dare not 
-- violate those commandments." 
 
JONES