08TELAVIV2106
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Mon Sep 15 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #2106/01 2591047
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 151047Z SEP 08
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8421
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 4385
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 0991
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 4738
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 5175
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 4387
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 2747
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 5147
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 2008
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 0230
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 8987
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 6468
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 1392
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 5489
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 7450
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH PRIORITY 0317
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 0438
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 002106 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  9/11 Anniversary 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Israel Radio reported that until a few months ago back-channel talks 
took place in Turkey, London, and Israel/the occupied territories 
between Israelis, headed by journalist Yitzhak Livni, a close friend 
of PM Ehud Olmert, and lower-ranking Hamas officials.  Livni told 
the radio that Olmert was unaware of those contacts, which were 
meant to check if there had been changes in Hamas's stance. 
 
The media reported that on Saturday residents of the settlement of 
Yitzhar went on rampage against residents of a Palestinian village. 
The incident was sparked by the infiltration of a satellite outpost 
of Yitzhar by a terrorist seeking to commit an attack.  During the 
infiltration, a 9-year-old was lightly wounded when he was stabbed 
in the hand.  Police launched an investigation yesterday into the 
rampage, but have not made any arrests or collected testimony 
relating to the incident, despite the fact that it was documented by 
news and human rights organizations.  Makor Rishon-Hatzofe quoted a 
senior officer as saying that the settlers did not shoot and that 
that the footage shown in the media were faked.  The media reported 
that Olmert told the government yesterday that the government will 
not allow West Bank settlers to carry out "pogroms against 
non-Jews." 
 
Channel 2-TV reported last night that PM Olmert has discussed with 
the Palestinians transferring to them 98.1 percent of the West Bank 
-- significantly more than the 94% to 96% that had been discussed in 
previous negotiations.  The report on the ongoing negotiations was 
broadcast in advance of Tuesday's planned meeting between Olmert and 
PA President Mahmoud Abbas.  The Prime Minister's Office declined to 
comment on the news item and said only that many such media reports 
had been published in the last months regarding the talks.  Earlier 
in the day, during what could be his last cabinet meeting before he 
becomes the head of a transitional government, Olmert addressed 
Israel's relationship to the West Bank when he spoke of a voluntary 
evacuation bill to help relocate settlers living east of the 
security barrier.  "The vision of a greater Israel no longer exists. 
 Those who speak of it are delusional," Olmert was quoted as saying. 
 No vote was taken on the measure. 
 
The media reported that yesterday Transportation Minister Shaul 
Mofaz, a principal contender to leadership in the Kadima Party, told 
reporters on Sunday: "I believe that on Wednesday, will win in one 
round with 43.7% on the votes."  This percentage is allegedly based 
on a model developed by Mofaz's American consultant Arthur 
Finkelstein (who used to work for Benjamin Netanyahu).  Livni's 
supporters mocked Mofaz for engaging in prophesy.  Over the weekend 
media reported that FM Tzipi Livni rejected comments attributed to 
one of her senior aides, that the "riffraff" (the Hebrew term 
carries a heavy ethnic connotation) among Kadima's members were 
supporting Mofaz.  Maariv reported that Mofaz enlisted former 
Defense Secretary and former CIA Director James Schlesinger in his 
campaign.  The media quoted Shas Chairman and Industry, Trade, and 
Labor Minister Eli Yishai as saying on Sunday that the party will 
not join a government that will negotiate Jerusalem.  The media 
stressed the importance of Shas to the future government coalition. 
 
The Jerusalem Post and other media reported that the U.S. Department 
of Defense has notified Congress of a potential sale to Israel of 
1,000 smart bombs capable of penetrating underground bunkers, which 
would likely be used in the event of a military strike on Iran's 
nuclear facilities.  The notification to Congress was made over the 
weekend by the Defense Security Cooperation Agency, the branch of 
the Pentagon responsible for evaluating foreign military sales. 
Congress has 30 days to object to the deal.  The deal is valued at 
$77 million and the principal contractor would be Boeing integrated 
Defense Systems.  Israel Hayom emphasized Israel's concern that 
Congress might not approve the deal. 
 
Leading media reported that DM Ehud Barak ordered all Israel-Gaza 
border crossings closed in response to a Qassam rocket attack on 
Sderot launched by Palestinian militants. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that yesterday former ambassador to the 
U.S. Danny Ayalon accused Tzipi Livni of distorting history by 
claiming in an interview with Israel TV that she had persuaded 
then-PM Ariel Sharon and President Bush to include the refugee issue 
in Bush's April 2004 letter of commitments to Israel. 
 
Yesterday Ha'aretz reported that Israeli troops operating near 
Bethlehem shot and killed a Palestinian teenager who participated in 
protests in the area.  Yesterday media reported that an IDF soldier 
was dismissed following an incident in which a pregnant Palestinian 
woman was delayed at the Hawara roadblock near Nablus.  The woman's 
infant was stillborn.  The soldier who was dismissed served at the 
time in question as the commander of the roadblock. 
 
Yesterday Ha'aretz reported that EU foreign policy chief Javier 
Solana told the newspaper that the peace talks between Israel and 
the Palestinians have been carried out far too slowly since last 
November's Annapolis summit. 
 
Leading media quoted Kadima MK Yitzhak Ben-Israel, a retired major 
general, as saying on Saturday that Ehud Barak "opposed the strike 
on November 6" of last year. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that Attorney General Menachem Mazuz recently 
ordered the police to open a criminal investigation against the New 
Profile organization -- the first time a criminal probe has ever 
been launched against a group that encourages draft dodging.  The 
probe, launched in response to a request from the IDF, constitutes 
an intensification of the army's war on draft dodging. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that yesterday billionaire Arkady 
Gaidamak voiced support for the potential candidacy of former Shas 
leader Aryeh Deri in the Jerusalem mayoral race, and seemed to 
suggest cooperating with him in the upcoming municipal elections. 
 
Major media reported that the British newspaper Sunday Times quoted 
a leader of Gaza's Doghmush clan as saying that Gilad Shalit is 
"living in paradise." 
 
Major media reported that yesterday the Iraqi Parliament lifted the 
immunity of MP Mithal Al-Aloussi because of his trips to Israel. 
 
The Jerusalem Post (and Maariv yesterday) reported that India seeks 
expertise in the Kashmir conflict. 
 
Leading media quoted Britain's Sunday Express as saying yesterday 
that Omar Bakri, an Islamic militant leader, warned that Sir Paul 
McCartney could be the target of a suicide bombing unless he 
canceled his first concert in Israel.  The celebrated rock star 
plans to arrive in Israel as part of a world tour and give a single 
concert in Tel Aviv on September 25.  Bakri said that McCartney's 
decision to perform as part of Israel's 60th anniversary 
celebrations has turned him into the enemy of Muslims worldwide. 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: "[What is] 
important is an ingrained sense among the Israeli public that we are 
dealing with realistic signs of a diplomatic horizon that must be 
nurtured and enhanced to yield viable agreements.  Whichever 
candidate is incapable of clearly formulating, in words, a 
commitment to realize this horizon does not deserve to lead the 
government." 
 
Palestinian affairs correspondent Avi Issacharoff wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "The perennial 'non-partner' has 
become a partner.... [But] nowadays, an Israeli partner is harder to 
find." 
 
The nationalist, Orthodox Makor Rishon-Hatzofe editorialized: "If 
the United States is interested in contributing to the promotion of 
the talks between Israel and the Palestinians, it would do well if 
it were to remove Jerusalem from the agenda." 
 
Ha'aretz editorialized: "Today the only possible interpretation of 
the government's oversights in its handling of the rioting settlers 
is that the situation is convenient for the government, which 
prefers it to confrontation with the rioters." 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: "We 
insist, however, that those who go out on vigilante raids against 
Arabs, or brawl with IDF soldiers are an affront to Zionism.... 
[However], a 'pogrom' is vigilante violence -- inspired, instigated 
and enabled by the authorities.  Clearly, Saturday's settler rampage 
was nothing of the kind." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "Continue the Process" 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (9/14): "In the 
coming days, Ehud Olmert will conclude his term as prime minister, 
but we have yet to hear a sharp, determined voice from any of the 
candidates vying to replace him pledging to continue the diplomatic 
process he started during his tenure.  One gets the impression that 
every candidate is afraid of appearing too willing to compromise, or 
defeatist, or 'less aggressive,' or worst of all, being labeled as 
someone who 'divides Jerusalem' and 'evacuates settlements.' 
Everyone, of course, wants peace, everyone warns that peace demands 
painful concessions, but it is hard to pinpoint a statement from any 
of the candidates obligating them to a withdrawal from the Golan 
Heights for peace with Syria, or a near-complete withdrawal from the 
territories for peace with the Palestinians, let alone a diplomatic 
plan.  Each candidate swears that he or she has a plan in the bag, 
but none of them is ready to reveal it to the public.  Instead, they 
run for cover by offering the statement: 'I'm not ready to conduct 
negotiations through the media.'  This is a miserable escape that 
cannot be used by anyone with his sights on the land's highest 
office.... No less important is an ingrained sense among the Israeli 
public that we are dealing with realistic signs of a diplomatic 
horizon that must be nurtured and enhanced to yield viable 
agreements.  Whichever candidate is incapable of clearly 
formulating, in words, a commitment to realize this horizon does not 
deserve to lead the government." 
 
II.  "There's a Partner, but who Cares?" 
 
Palestinian affairs correspondent Avi Issacharoff wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (9/15): "Although dozens if not 
hundreds of Hamas and Islamic Jihad members are currently being held 
in PA prisons, most are released within several days, much as they 
were in the late 1990s and during the second Intifada.  The PA has 
yet to formulate a convincing explanation for this, and its image 
problem is likely to persist until it does.  Nonetheless, the 
perennial 'non-partner' has become a partner.  The Palestinian 
Authority is relevant, at least regarding a future agreement in the 
West Bank.  Abbas, long viewed as a toothless leader, is slowly 
emerging as a force for stable, reliable and incorruptible 
leadership, even compared with Israel's decision makers.  Nowadays, 
an Israeli partner is harder to find.... The media's failure to 
highlight the change is nothing less than astonishing.  It could be 
that the Palestinian issue no longer interests the general public, 
that the greater strategic threat posed by Iran is pushing it off 
the public agenda.  Should another wave of violence surge from the 
West Bank, however, the Palestinian issue is likely to float to the 
surface once more and again take a starring role in the various 
media outlets.  But until then, who really cares?" 
 
III.  "A Sophisticated Trick with American Facilitation" 
 
The nationalist, Orthodox Makor Rishon-Hatzofe editorialized (9/14): 
"On what basis did the U.S. Consul-General cite that optimistic date 
for the conclusion of the [Israeli-Palestinian] talks?  Political 
officials suspect that there is reason to believe that the United 
States is in the possession of information that apparently has not 
yet been shared with some of the Israeli officials, and that a 
secret agreement between Israel and the Palestinians is being cooked 
up behind their backs.  Apparently, Prime Minister Ehud Olmert and 
PA Chairman Abu Mazen have reached an understanding between them 
that is going to lead to a division of Jerusalem, otherwise it is 
hard to understand the optimistic tone of the American Consul 
General's statement.  The U.S. Consul-General apparently ignored the 
fact that Mr. Olmert already has one foot out the door of the Prime 
Minister's Office.  Under those circumstances he lacks any authority 
to commit in the government's name to dividing the Israeli 
capital.... The decisions by the Israeli government, both Left and 
Right, against dividing Jerusalem remain valid at the present 
moment. Therefore, there is no room to permit them to be changed by 
means of sophisticated tricks by the Prime Minister with the help of 
an American representative.  If the PA Chairman has made continued 
talks contingent upon a division of the city, then he is planting a 
landmine on the way to an arrangement with his very own hands.  If 
the United States is interested in contributing to the promotion of 
the talks between Israel and the Palestinians, it would do well if 
it were to remove Jerusalem from the agenda.  There are enough 
issues in contention as is that need to be addressed in order to 
reach some sort of arrangement. Israel, at all events, will not be 
able to concede the capital of Israel." 
 
IV.  "Who Is the Sovereign Here?" 
 
Ha'aretz editorialized (9/15): "Dozens of armed settlers from 
settlements in Samaria [northern West Bank], and in particular from 
Yitzhar, rioted two days ago in the village of Asira al-Kabaliya 
after a 9-year-old boy was stabbed by a Palestinian who infiltrated 
Shalhevet Yam, near the settlement of Yitzhar.  The Palestinian's 
crime served as justification for mass delinquency by the settlers, 
who went there to shoot and destroy.  The men in uniform from the 
Israel Defense Forces and police were made to look like fools.... 
This state of affairs makes a mockery of Israel's pretensions to 
improve the Palestinians' quality of life.... Today the only 
possible interpretation of the government's oversights in its 
handling of the rioting settlers is that the situation is convenient 
for the government, which prefers it to confrontation with the 
rioters." 
 
¶V.  "Pogroms and Vigilantism" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized (9/15): 
"The [Jewish] radicals' message: Don't even think about dismantling 
an unauthorized outpost -- much less an actual settlement -- because 
the relative restraint we showed during disengagement in 2005 will 
not be repeated.  We understand that these settlers feel under 
siege.  The murders of [two settlers] in the second Intifada have 
not been forgotten.  We insist, however, that those who go out on 
vigilante raids against Arabs, or brawl with IDF soldiers, are an 
affront to Zionism.  Such behavior is inexcusable -- indeed, 
contemptible.... [But] a small minority of settlers behaving badly 
does not a pogrom make. In telling the cabinet on Sunday that "There 
will be no pogroms against non-Jewish residents in Israel," Prime 
Minister Ehud Olmert committed a grave injustice to Jewish history. 
Mr. Prime Minister: A 'pogrom' is vigilante violence -- inspired, 
instigated and enabled by the authorities.  Clearly, Saturday's 
settler rampage was nothing of the kind." 
 
--------------------- 
¶2.  9/11 Anniversary: 
--------------------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Senior Middle East affairs analyst Zvi Bar'el wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "It was Bush and his cronies who 
defined the 9/11 attacks as a culture clash....  This definition 
also contains the measuring stick for understanding change in 
Islamic countries." 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"The Glacier of September" 
 
Senior Middle East affairs analyst Zvi Bar'el wrote in the 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (9/14): "It is easy, too easy, to 
find fault with the U.S. administration for its adventures in the 
Middle East after 9/11.... An analysis with a longer view, however, 
could reveal some of the important developments resulting from 9/11 
and both the Americans' wars.  The first is the thorough stocktaking 
carried out by Muslim societies and their leaders in light of the 
horror perpetrated by bin Ladin and his organization.... For the 
first time, too, a distinction has been made between Islamic terror, 
which must be fought because it undermines the state's foundations, 
and legitimate struggle against occupation.  True, this is no great 
comfort for Israel or the United States; we are talking about 
glacially slow movement, but measurable nonetheless.  It was Bush 
and his cronies who defined the 9/11 attacks as a culture clash, not 
a political struggle, a battle between the Sons of Light and the 
Sons of Darkness.  This definition also contains the measuring stick 
for understanding change in Islamic countries.  These states, their 
schools, and their clerics are not graded according to their degree 
of support for the settlements or U.S. military policy in 
Afghanistan, but according to their abilities to create an economic 
and cultural horizon for their citizens.  That is the dialogue that 
millions of young people in the Middle East are conducting with 
their governments.  It is an incisive and demanding dialogue:  Get 
America off our backs, but give us Westernism." 
 
CUNNINGHAM