09TELAVIV241
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Wed Jan 28 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0007
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #0241/01 0281038
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 281038Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0250
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 4920
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 1517
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 5364
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 5724
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 4953
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 3412
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 5740
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 2578
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 0791
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 9507
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 7004
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 1950
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 6010
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 8040
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH PRIORITY 0838
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 1275
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 000241 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Israel Radio reported that last night the IAF bombed several tunnels 
in the Philadelphi Corridor.  The media reported that Israel 
assassinated the militant who planned yesterdayQs attack along the 
Israel-Gaza border.  All media reported that the IDF is prepared to 
strike Hamas targets in response to the attack, which some media 
attributed to a Hamas splinter group. 
 
Several media quoted President Obama as saying this week in an 
interview with Al-Arabiya that the Americans are not the Muslims 
enemies and that Israel is a strong ally of the U.S. and has a right 
to defend itself. 
 
HaQaretz reported that U.S. Mideast envoy George Mitchell is due to 
arrive in the country today, and is expected to tell Israeli and 
Palestinian officials the Obama administration wants to focus on 
stabilizing the Israel-Gaza cease-fire, rebuilding the Gaza Strip, 
and countering arms smuggling into Gaza with the help of Israel, 
Egypt, and the EU.  Leading media quoted President Obama as saying 
that Mitchell is in the region to Qlisten,Q not dictate.  HaQaretzQs 
web site quoted Reuters as saying that yesterday Palestinian 
President Mahmoud Abbas vowed yesterday to take a tough stance in 
talks with Israel and said he would tell Mitchell that Israel's Gaza 
offensive proved it was not intent on peacemaking. 
 
The media reported that yesterday French President Nicolas Sarkozy 
told Noam Shalit, the father of Gilad Shalit, that his son is alive. 
 Media quoted Noam Shalit as saying that there is hope for progress 
on the issue. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted U.S. Adm. Mike Mullen, chairman of the 
Joint Chiefs of Staff, as saying in response to a question from the 
newspaper yesterday that American military force against Iran 
remains an option, though it would be a "last resort."  Mullen 
emphasized, however, the importance he placed on engagement with the 
Islamic Republic, particularly when it came to Afghanistan, at the 
same time that he called for stricter UN resolutions to block Iran's 
weapons smuggling abilities 
 
Israel Radio quoted the international newspaper Ash-Sharq Al-Awsat 
as saying that Hamas is interested in an 18-month period of calm to 
start on February 5.  The radio reported that Hamas is opposed to 
the creation of a security zone in the Philadelphi Corridor. 
 
Israel Radio reported that a Kuwaiti parliamentarian visited Gaza, 
probably entering it through a tunnel. 
 
Makor Rishon-Hatzofe quoted Uri Lubrani, who was ambassador to Iran, 
as saying at a conference of the World Jewish Congress that economic 
difficulties are delaying the Iranian nuclear program. 
 
Maariv quoted senior Likud members as saying that their leader, 
Benjamin Netanyahu, fears being embraced by Shas.  Maariv cited 
LikudQs belief that the ultra-Orthodox-conservative image of such a 
coalition might lead to the defection of 4-5 Knesset seats to 
Kadima. 
 
Makor Rishon-Hatzofe reported that the Council of Jewish Settlements 
n the Territories is planning to put on a new public presentation 
just as Mitchell is meeting with officials. The purpose of the 
CouncilQs presentation is to demonstrate the dangers inherent in the 
establishment of a Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza.  The 
presentation, which is titled, QThe Palestinian state will explode 
in our faces,Q will be placed on the back of a large truck that will 
make its way from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. 
 
HaQaretz reported that Israeli diplomats have been told that the 
Obama administration intends to be involved intensively in the 
situation in the Middle East, particularly on the humanitarian 
effort in Gaza and the establishment of an orderly mechanism for the 
transfer of funds to the Palestinian Authority as soon as possible. 
The U.S. is also interested in looking into the role American aid 
can play.  HaQaretz and Yediot quoted Hillary Clinton as saying 
yesterday, at her first press conference as Secretary of State, that 
Israel had the right to defend itself against Qassam rockets. 
Israel Radio quoted GOI sources in Jerusalem as saying that 
President Obama will convene the foreign ministers of the Quartet 
after MitchellQs tour.  Major media reported that next week the U.S. 
will convene an international conference in Denmark to deal with the 
issue of weapons smuggling. 
HaQaretz quoted Brig. Gen. Zvi Fogel, a high-ranking reserve officer 
who served in a key role in the Israel Defense Forces' Southern 
Command during the IDF operation in the Gaza Strip, as saying that 
Israel missed an opportunity to defeat Hamas. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that Hamas PM Ismail Haniyeh announced 
yesterday that his government supported the idea of establishing an 
independent body that would supervise reconstruction work in the 
Gaza Strip with the help of the international community. 
 
The Jerusalem Post and Israel Radio quoted Peace Now as saying in 
its annual report on settlement activity in the territories that 
building in the settlements and unauthorized outposts has increased 
by 57 percent in 2008.  HaQaretz reported that the Defense Ministry 
is concealing a report on the same matter, for fear its publication 
would harm security and IsraelQs foreign relations. 
 
HaQaretz reported that the U.S. Navy was forced to release an 
Iranian boat detained in the Red Sea on suspicion of carrying arms 
to Hamas-ruled Gaza.  Weapons of various kinds were found aboard the 
ship, which was flying the Cypriot flag when it was stopped January 
¶19.  The ship was released yesterday when it became apparent that 
there was no legal basis for holding it. 
 
Leading media reported that the Kibbutz Movement intends to host in 
Israel for three weeks around 50 children from Gaza who lost parents 
in the course of Operation Cast Lead.  Movement official Yoel 
Marshak was quoted as saying yesterday: QDespite the tragedy, these 
Palestinian children will go on to become Israel's ambassadors in 
Gaza." 
 
HaQaretz and The Jerusalem Post reported that yesterday UN General 
Assembly (UNGA) President Miguel d'Escoto Brockmann skipped the 
world body's ceremony marking International Holocaust Remembrance 
Day, after American Jewish leaders threatened to demonstratively 
exit the event if he used the podium to attack Israel.  Israel Radio 
reported that the UN Security Council discussed the situation in 
Gaza shortly after the UNGA commemorated the Holocaust, and that 
voices in the UN compared the two situations.  HaQaretz reported 
that an exhibition about Muslims who saved Jews during the Holocaust 
opened Tuesday in the mixed Arab-Jewish city of Ramle. 
 
The media reported that Channel 10-TV might close down due to 
financial reasons.  The KnessetQs Economic Affairs Committee decided 
yesterday not to renew the TV stationQs broadcasting franchise. 
 
-------- 
Mideast: 
-------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: QAnyone for 
whom Israel's relations with the United States is important must 
vote for parties that support a peace agreement with the 
Palestinians. 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in HaQaretz: QIt is fair to 
assume that a Netanyahu-led right-wing government will be better 
able to carry out [evacuations of settlements and outposts] than the 
outgoing government.  This is the agenda portended by Mitchell's 
appointment, and it will keep Israel and the United States busy 
after the election. 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post wrote in its lead 
editorial: QNow Israel must do what needs to be done.  Not because 
we want to see Palestinians suffer, but because we want normalcy to 
return to southern Israel. 
 
Military correspondent Yuval Limor, who holds a similar position on 
Israel TV, wrote in the independent Israel Hayom: Qten days after 
the end of Operation Cast Lead (and less than a week after the last 
of the soldiers crossed the border back into Israel), no one is at 
all enthusiastic about launching an Operation Cast Lead II, and 
certainly not on the day of the arrival of George Mitchell. 
 
Hillel Frisch, a senior research associate and Arab affairs 
specialist at the conservative Begin-Sadat Center for Strategic 
Studies at Bar-Ilan University, wrote in The Jerusalem Post: QObama 
will be most surprised to discover that objection to any substantial 
movement on a Palestinian state will come less from Israel, and more 
from Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Jordan 
 
Liberal columnist Prof. Aviad Kleinberg wrote in the 
mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: QTalk about the 
dramatic change [in the U.S.] has not reached Israel.  Israel is one 
of the only places in the world where Bush is remembered fondly. 
The model for emulation here is Putin, not Obama. 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "AmericaQs Election Message 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (1/28): 
QIsraeli voters must know that the Obama government will be 
intolerant of construction in the settlements, as well as measures 
that hurt the Palestinians, such as closures and checkpoints.  It 
will make every effort to bring about a two-state solution.  Anyone 
for whom Israel's relations with the United States is important must 
vote for parties that support a peace agreement with the 
Palestinians, out of the recognition that the right-wing parties 
that support settlement expansion jeopardize Israel's international 
standing as well as its security, both of which are dependent on 
American support.  This message is also geared toward Israel's 
political leadership, particularly Benjamin Netanyahu, who is 
leading in the opinion polls.  His platform, which rejects the 
creation of a Palestinian state, and his statements in favor of 
Qnatural growthQ in the settlements, place him on a collision course 
with Washington -- especially if the senior partner in his coalition 
is Avigdor Lieberman. 
 
II.  "The Settlement-Terrorism Equation" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in HaQaretz (1/28): 
QMitchell's return suggests that the settlements will return to the 
daily political agenda, not only because of the envoy's personal 
views but also because of the pressures on his boss.. Palestinian 
weakness and the rift between Hamas and Fatah, along with the 
right-wing government that appears to be on its way to power in 
Israel, will make progress toward a permanent settlement difficult. 
Under these conditions, Obama will have to turn to the well-tested 
method used by U.S. administrations when they want to distance 
themselves from Israel: pressuring Israel to freeze settlements and 
remove roadblocks and travel restrictions -- just what Mitchell 
recommended eight years ago. Politicians and research centers in 
Israel are proposing another evacuation of isolated settlements and 
outposts as an alternative to a permanent accord.  This is the view 
supported by the Begin-Sadat Center for Strategic Studies, which 
leans to the right; the Institute for National Security Studies is 
calling for the evacuation of outposts in line with earlier promises 
Israel made to Bush.  It is fair to assume that a Netanyahu-led 
right-wing government will be better able to carry out such steps 
than the outgoing government.  This is the agenda portended by 
Mitchell's appointment, and it will keep Israel and the United 
States busy after the election. 
 
III.  "This Is the Test" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post wrote in its lead 
editorial (1/28): QWhile the outside world focuses on QGaza relief, 
fretting about Israel's QdisproportionateQ response to years of 
Hamas aggression, and treating the inflated civilian casualty 
figures disseminated by Palestinian authorities as fact, Hamas 
itself has just signaled it wants to go another round.  Tuesday 
morning enemy forces crossed our border, detonated a powerful 
roadside bomb and attacked an IDF patrol near Kissufim.   One 
soldier was killed, another was badly wounded, and several were more 
lightly hurt.  This is a test.  Israel can either respond 
powerfully, or be satisfied with the kind of tit-for-tat 
retaliations that preceded Operation Cast Lead.  It all depends on 
whether we consider our border inviolate.  We are tested at an 
inopportune moment. Elections are upon us and President Barack 
Obama's envoy is here. Prime Minister Ehud Olmert pledged that if 
Hamas persisted in violating the border, the IDF would respond. 
Now Israel must do what needs to be done.  Not because we want to 
see Palestinians suffer, but because we want normalcy to return to 
southern Israel.  Hizbullah is watching.  The world is watching. For 
the sake of quiet, Israel must act. 
 
IV.  QA Harsh but Smart Response 
 
Military correspondent Yuval Limor, who holds a similar position on 
Israel TV, wrote in the independent Israel Hayom (1/28): QNo one 
among either the decision-makers in Israel or the people who 
influence them had any doubt yesterday: The terror attack at 
Kissufim requires a response, and a harsh response. [But] ten days 
after the end of Operation Cast Lead (and less than a week after the 
last of the soldiers crossed the border back into Israel), no one is 
at all enthusiastic about launching an Operation Cast Lead II, and 
certainly not on the day of the arrival of George Mitchell, 
President Barack ObamaQs special envoy, who in any event is 
suspected of planning to impose a solution on us.  Conversely, if 
Israel shows weakness, that very same Obama might think that he is 
the one who is calling the shots and that IsraelQs right to 
self-defense is contingent upon first receiving authorization from 
the White House.  Adding further to the dilemma is the fact that 
Israel is currently in urgent need of American aid or, to be more 
specific, aid from the new administration and from the 
Democrat-controlled Congress.  The IDF used an enormous amount of 
ammunition in the course of Operation Cast Lead, which the IDF would 
like to replenish in case of an unexpected escalation in either the 
north or the south.  To that end, the Defense Minister is leaving 
tonight for Washington, in hope of mobilizing an airlift to 
replenish the IDFQs storehouses to their pre-Operation Cast Lead 
levels. 
 
¶V.  "Obama and the Muslim Cold War" 
 
Hillel Frisch, a senior research associate and Arab affairs 
specialist at the conservative Begin-Sadat Center for Strategic 
Studies at Bar-Ilan University, wrote in The Jerusalem Post (1/28): 
QObama will be most surprised to discover that objection to any 
substantial movement on a Palestinian state will come less from 
Israel, and more from Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Jordan -- which fear 
that under the present circumstances Hamas would probably take over 
Judea and Samaria [i.e. the West Bank] via an expanded Palestinian 
state. As far as they are concerned, Israel did not batter Hamas 
sufficiently to allay their suspicions.  These states prefer 
QprocessQ over meaningful movement regarding the Palestinian 
problem.  Nor will these Arab countries be pleased about the 
newfound American desire to engage Iran and Syria.  Saudi Arabia 
remains committed to seeing Bashar Assad tried in an international 
court, not letting him off the hook by engaging him.  All the 
moderate Arab states would like to see a U.S. that wields a big 
enough stick at Iran -- short of war -- to compel it to desist from 
its nuclear program.  Needless to say, a rapid U.S. military 
withdrawal from Iraq is hardly the way to wield the big stick at 
Iran. 
 
VI.  QThe Bastards Changed the Rules 
 
Liberal columnist Prof. Aviad Kleinberg wrote in the 
mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (1/28): QTalk about the 
dramatic change [in the U.S.] has not reached Israel.  Israel is one 
of the only places in the world where Bush is remembered fondly. 
The model for emulation here is Putin, not Obama.  Israelis are 
fascinated by the show of strength of the former Russian president, 
by his masculine brutality with which he tackles problem, by his 
breaking of the rules, the environment, the neighbors, diplomacy, 
and human rights.  After all the glorious war during which the IDF 
applied tremendous fire-power and succeeded in beating (?) the 
weakest force in the region at the enormous cost of civilian losses, 
was conducted along the model of RussiaQs Georgia operation and the 
Russian handling of Chechnya. 
 
CUNNINGHAM