09TELAVIV45
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Thu Jan 08 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #0045/01 0081418
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 081418Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 9922
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 4827
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 1426
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 5258
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 5633
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 4859
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 3291
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 5633
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 2470
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 0695
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 9416
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 6909
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 1856
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 5919
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 7917
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH PRIORITY 0747
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 1151
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 000045 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Gaza Operation and Diplomatic Corollary 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Israel Radio reported that this morning an IDF officer was killed by 
anti-tank missile in Gaza. 
 
HaQaretz and other media reported that Israel's three top cabinet 
ministers cannot agree on the best way to end the military operation 
in Gaza: PM Ehud Olmert and DM Ehud Barak want to reach a deal, with 
the help of the U.S. and Egypt, which will guarantee long-term quiet 
in the south and keep Hamas from getting stronger. Foreign Minister 
Tzipi Livni prefers to end the operation now, without an agreement. 
Israel Radio found that various reports on the matter are confusing. 
 HaQaretz reported that yesterday DM Barak ordered the IDF to get 
ready for a significant expansion of its activities in Gaza, which 
would focus on bringing reserve forces into the enclave. The 
preparations for the next phase of Operation Cast Lead are underway 
as the government considers Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak's 
cease-fire proposal. HaQaretz quoted political sources in Jerusalem 
as saying that the decision of whether to expand the Gaza operation 
will be made over the next few days.  Media reported that the 
political-security cabinet decided yesterday that military activity 
will remain at its current level and humanitarian aid to Gaza 
residents will be expanded.  HaQaretz reported that reserve units 
called up on Sunday are due to complete their preparatory training 
today.  The media reported that the IDF is focusing its raids on the 
Philadelphia Corridor.  The Jerusalem Post cited the belief of the 
defense establishment that Hamas is still capable of launching a 
QqualityQ terror attack against Israel, infiltrating the country 
through tunnels it has dug along the border. 
 
Major media reported that Amos Gilad, who heads the Defense 
Ministry's political-security bureau, is due to go to Cairo today to 
discuss producing new security arrangements that would end weapons 
smuggling from Sinai to Gaza .  HaQaretz and other media reported 
that Israel is refusing to discuss the diplomatic elements of the 
Mubarak proposal, like opening border crossings and advancing the 
dialogue between Hamas and the PA.  HaQaretz said that this is why 
the government has chosen to send Gilad, a security official rather 
than a diplomat, as its representative.  HaQaretz and Israel Radio 
reported that notwithstanding a series of statements suggesting that 
there is agreement for a cease-fire, it appears that there are still 
significant differences between Israel and Egypt regarding the 
nature of the settlement.  The main problem is the fact that Israel 
is preconditioning a cease-fire to a solution to the smuggling, 
while Egypt is asking for a cease-fire and the opening of the border 
crossings, before a resolution of the Hamas tunnels issue.   Maariv 
quoted senior Israeli sources as saying that if Egypt achieves an 
agreement that will prevent smuggling, Israel will stop the 
operation.  HaQaretz reported that the U.S. is also involved in the 
discussions between Israel and Egypt on an agreement that would seek 
to end smuggling into Gaza.   The Jerusalem Post reported that 
yesterday Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice extended her stay in 
New York as she continues her efforts to reach a cease-fire between 
Israel and Hamas.  HaQaretz reported that Arab sources have said 
that Israel and the U.S. are discussing possible security 
arrangements that could be used on the Philadelphi Corridor, and 
that in parallel Washington is discussing with Cairo how such 
arrangements may be implemented.  HaQaretz also reported that Israel 
proposed to the U.S. and the EU that a settlement be constructed 
from a series of accords "against Hamas" that would be imposed on 
the group by the international community.  The U.S. began talks with 
Egypt on the matter, and a few days ago French President Nicolas 
Sarkozy also became involved.  At this point Israel opted to avoid 
direct talks with Egypt, leaving the coordination to Washington and 
Paris. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted Israeli defense officials as saying that 
Hamas will not agree to any cease-fire that contains provisions that 
would stop smuggling weaponry into Gaza and that even the deployment 
of U.S. military engineers along the border would likely be 
incapable of stopping the smuggling.  The newspaper quoted Hamas 
officials as saying yesterday that Hamas rejected an Egyptian 
proposal to place the Rafah border crossing under forces loyal to PA 
President Mahmoud Abbas.  Hamas also rejected an Egyptian proposal 
to deploy international troops in Gaza in the context of a new 
cease-fire agreement with Israel.  Israel Radio quoted the 
London-based Al-Hayat newspaper as saying that Mubarak invited PM 
Olmert to meet with him in order to discuss the Egyptian initiative 
for a cease-fire in Gaza. The item said that Olmert said that he 
would come to Egypt after the security cabinet met.   Israel Radio 
reported that talks are also underway for a meeting between Olmert 
and PA Chairman Mahmoud Abbas, who will meet with President Mubarak 
 
in Cairo on Saturday.  According to Al-Hayat, Egypt has rejected out 
of hand any proposal to station an international force in its 
territory in order to prevent smuggling to the Gaza Strip, but it is 
willing to discuss the subject of the tunnels because they violate 
its sovereignty. 
 
Israel Radio reported that two Katyusha rockets landed this morning 
in the area of the northern town of Nahariya -Q one of them on an 
old-age home.  The radio reported that Ahmed JibrilQs Popular Front 
for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command might be responsible 
for the attacks.  The organization later denied being behind the 
launchings.  A few Israelis were slightly wounded.  Israel returned 
fire.  Israel Radio reported that a Palestinian unsuccessfully tried 
to set a petrol station in Mishor Adumim Q- on the Jerusalem-Jericho 
road -- on fire.  He was killed. 
 
All media reported that the IDF stopped the fighting for three hours 
yesterday to allow the passage of a humanitarian convoy to Gaza. 
 
HaQaretz reported that yesterday senior IDF officers expressed doubt 
over whether military efforts alone could bring regime change in 
Gaza, and said the army is far from achieving optimal conditions in 
the Strip to implement an exit strategy. 
 
Major media cited a report filed yesterday by State Comptroller 
Micha Lindenstrauss stating that, three-and-a-half years after 
IsraelQs unilateral withdrawal from Gaza, two-thirds of the 8,500 
evacuees are still living in temporary housing sites, and that the 
move-in date for their permanent housing is still far off. 
 
HaQaretz quoted sources in the Israeli defense establishment as 
saying that Hamas's military wing wants to continue fighting despite 
its heavy losses. Based on this evaluation, it is believed the Hamas 
military wing will not agree to a move that includes a cease-fire in 
which the Egyptians would pledge to work to stop arms smuggling from 
Sinai to the Gaza Strip.  HaQaretz and Maariv reported that Hamas is 
taking advantage of the fighting to eliminate Fatah men and 
collaborators with Israel. 
 
Leading media quoted UN Relief and Works Agency representatives as 
saying yesterday that they are Q99.9% certainQ that gunmen did not 
fire from a UN school in Gaza that was shelled by the IDF on 
Tuesday, and that it called for an independent investigation.  The 
media reported that the IDF maintained its position that a number of 
mortar shells were fired at IDF units Qfrom within the Jabalya 
school. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that yesterday Brig. Ben. (res.) Yossi 
Kuperwasser, former head of IDF IntelligenceQs research division, 
told diplomats and foreign correspondents in Jerusalem that Iran has 
reason to be satisfied with the conflict in Gaza as it draws 
attention away from the countryQs nuclear program. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted Yossi Levy, Foreign Ministry spokesman for 
the Hebrew media, as saying in a statement: QIsrael will continue to 
defend itself from its enemies, including Hamas and Iran, with whom 
Venezuela has close ties. It is no surprise that Venezuela has 
again shown the world what side it is on. 
 
Yesterday the Arabic-language Kull-Al-Arab newspaper quoted Minister 
Eli Yishai (Shas) as saying during his morale-boosting visit to 
southern Israel that Israel has to show how strong and capable it is 
in bringing down HamasQs rule is Gaza.  Yishai was quoted as saying 
that Israel must demolish Gaza from the ground, destroy thousands of 
houses, and only then will Hamas understand that Israel will never 
tolerate any more Qassam rockets. 
 
Maariv reported that politicians might delay the February elections 
in Israel by six weeks to two months if the operation continues. 
 
HaQaretz, Yediot, and The Jerusalem Post reported that the 
conservative Website pjtv.com has recruited Joe Wurzelbacher, a.k.a. 
QJoe the Plumber,Q as a war correspondent who will explain to his 
viewers why Israeli forces are mounting attacks against Hamas. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
Gaza Operation and Diplomatic Corollary: 
---------------------------------------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: QThe 
Egyptian-French-American initiative gives politicians leverage to 
stop the IDF's advance in dense urban areas of Gaza, and to stop the 
rocket fire on Israeli communities that led the cabinet to decide on 
the operation. 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: QIf a 
cease-fire is in the offing, Israel needs to be very clear about 
what it expects from such a temporary cessation of hostilities.... 
The cabinet must not lose sight of the fact that the goal of this 
operation was not a cease-fire, but to stop Hamas terror. 
 
Middle East affairs commentator Dr. Guy Bechor, a lecturer at the 
Interdisciplinary Center, wrote in the mass-circulation, pluralist 
Yediot Aharonot: QIsrael has won, but the moment of victory could be 
the most dangerous in the entire campaign, since in the heat of 
success one can move forward more and more, and want more, and 
thereby lose everything. 
 
Journalist and far-Left peace activist Uri Avnery wrote in the 
popular, pluralist Maariv: QSabra and Shatila are already happening 
now on the outskirts of Gaza. 
 
The nationalist, Orthodox Makor Rishon-Hatzofe editorialized: 
QIsrael has clarified that it will not agree to a toothless 
cease-fire, in which the enemy would simultaneously continue to 
prepare for the continuation of the war. 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "A Welcome Initiative" 
 
The independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized (1/8): QThe 
international initiative for a cease-fire in Gaza has many fathers: 
foreign ministers, prime ministers and three presidents -- Hosni 
Mubarak, Nicolas Sarkozy, and George W. Bush.  Of them all, Egypt's 
Mubarak is the most essential in any agreement.... It is best to 
view Mubarak's initiative as a positive introduction on the way to a 
converging of the wills and needs of the parties involved in the 
fighting.  Israel demands, and rightfully so, an end to the firing 
of rockets and their replenishment.  Hamas wants more than anything 
else to maintain its rule in Gaza and satisfy the people's 
yearnings, first and foremost for the opening of the crossings. 
Only a formulation that satisfies the needs of both sides has a 
chance of lasting.  The Egyptian-French-American initiative gives 
politicians leverage to stop the IDF's advance in dense urban areas 
of Gaza, and to stop the rocket fire on Israeli communities that led 
the cabinet to decide on the operation. 
 
II.  "IsraelQs Terms" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized (1/8): 
 
QWe have consistently argued that Israel cannot tolerate the 
existence of a hostile regime between the Mediterranean and the 
River Jordan.  Hamas stands as the antithesis of the two-state 
solution -- the quintessential enemy of reconciliation.  The 
prospects of cutting a deal with relative Palestinian moderates like 
Mahmoud Abbas are improbable so long as Hamas remains in power.... 
So if a cease-fire is in the offing, Israel needs to be very clear 
about what it expects from such a temporary cessation of 
hostilities.  It must also adhere to the larger strategy of 
asphyxiating Hamas in the fullness of time.  For now, Israel must 
insist that: the smuggling of weapons, munitions, terrorists, and 
contraband via tunnels below the Philadelphi Corridor not be allowed 
to resume ... the security reality must be changed.  The purpose of 
the IDF operation was to deter Hamas from attacking.  If the 
Palestinians violate the cease-fire by firing, tunneling, smuggling 
or manufacturing weapons, Israel must enjoy the freedom to 
retaliate, and in a timely fashion;  prior to implementing any 
cease-fire, Gilad Shalit must be freed in exchange for Hamas gunmen 
taken in the current operation ... the mandate for any international 
forces that would police the crossing points explicitly should give 
them the kind of enforcement authority that earlier EU Qmonitors 
lacked.  If not, their presence would be meaningless and Israel 
should oppose permanent opening of the crossings.  The cabinet must 
not lose sight of the fact that the goal of this operation was not a 
cease-fire, but to stop Hamas terror. 
 
 
III.  "Dangerous Victory" 
 
Middle East affairs commentator Dr. Guy Bechor, a lecturer at the 
Interdisciplinary Center, wrote in the mass-circulation, pluralist 
Yediot Aharonot (1/8): QNo one in the Arab world will now be able to 
say that Israel is weak and begging for its life, as in the Hamas 
play with the figure of Gilad Shalit.  The images of the past two 
weeks have been imprinted for years, and HamasQs bravado and 
arrogance have gone into the tunnels along with their frightened 
leaders.  The lesson has been learned, and now comes the turn of the 
diplomatic battle, which will be no less difficult than the military 
battle.  The IDF must deploy on GazaQs border, tighten the pressure, 
which includes not supplying fuel, continue the aerial bombings and 
refrain from contact with civilians, since the enemy will try to 
exact a toll of casualties from us by terrorist means and tip the 
scales of victory.  Israel has won, but the moment of victory could 
be the most dangerous in the entire campaign, since in the heat of 
success one can move forward more and more, and want more, and 
thereby lose everything.  We must be careful not to bite off more 
than we can chew.  The moment when one stops is the moment that 
remains in peopleQs consciousness, and this is that moment.  We have 
won, and now we should capitalize on the success.  How?  First of 
all, beware of dangerous Qbrokers,Q such as the Egyptians and the 
Turks.... We should not make use of Egypt on the topic of Gaza, 
since they are also an interested party.  They have a clear interest 
in keeping Gaza ours after the operation.... What are IsraelQs 
minimum conditions from which we must not diverge?  That the 
crossings between Israel and Gaza become a border and no longer be 
opened, since the weakened Hamas will continue to rule Gaza, and 
Hamas is IsraelQs enemy.  Never before in world history has a 
country fed its enemies. That a UNIFIL-like force be sent to Gaza, 
which will number at least 15,000 soldiers and deploy through the 
entire Gaza Strip, as in southern Lebanon.  This will be the worldQs 
way of supervising what is going on in this dangerous region. 
 
IV.  "Sabra and Shatila 2009" 
 
Journalist and far-Left peace activist Uri Avnery wrote in the 
popular, pluralist Maariv (1/8): QAfter this war started a reliable 
poll showed that 20% of the [Israeli] public are opposed to the war 
in general and that 20% are opposed to a ground operation.  It would 
be hard to assess what public opinion wants now.... To say the 
truth, Sabra and Shatila are already happening now on the outskirts 
of Gaza, as an innocent civilian population is being QmincedQ Q- pay 
attention to the word Q- by planes, artillery boats, and tanks, from 
the land, the sea, and the air.  But the [Israeli] public does not 
see this, since the media, which is mostly enlisted and guided, 
turns a blind eye to the events that can be watched on Al-JazeeraQs 
round the clock broadcasts, and because [IsraelQs] military 
correspondents are covering the war from a safe distance. 
 
¶V.  QA Final Status or the Continuation of the War 
 
The nationalist, Orthodox Makor Rishon-Hatzofe editorialized (1/8): 
QIsrael has clarified that it will not agree to a toothless 
cease-fire, in which the enemy would simultaneously continue to 
prepare for the continuation of the war.  Israel conditions its 
acceptance of the cease-fire on the complete disarming of the enemy, 
while establishing civilian Palestinian rule in Gaza, headed by Abu 
Mazen.  Israel believes that this is the only way to stop the threat 
of war in the region.  Until the establishment of the new civilian 
reality the IDF must remain on new lines in Gaza during an interim 
period to follow up the regime transition from Hamas to Abu Mazen or 
another agreed upon civilian regime.... In the mean time we are in a 
stage of clarifications.  At this time we are obligated to continue 
the task we started Q- beating the enemy. We must remember that the 
war is continuing, even as talks towards a cease-fire are being 
held. 
 
CUNNINGHAM