09TELAVIV2131
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Wed Sep 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #2131/01 2731330
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 301330Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3611
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 6032
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 2606
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 6630
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 6843
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 6090
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 4721
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 6937
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 3712
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 1927
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 0596
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 8112
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 3120
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 7102
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 9162
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH PRIORITY 1925
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 2874
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 002131 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Iran 
 
¶2.  Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Electronic media reported that the Security Cabinet has approved the 
release of 20 female Palestinian prisoners and detainees in exchange 
for proof that Gilad Shalit is alive.  In a statement, PM Benjamin 
Netanyahu's office said that it expects to receive a video showing 
the soldier is alive and well.  The deal is to be carried out on 
Friday.  Similar statements were given in Cairo and Gaza on 
Wednesday.  The Shalit family was also updated on the recent 
developments in the affair. 
 
All media reported that yesterday a London court rejected an appeal 
by pro-Palestinian organizations for the arrest of DM Ehud Barak, 
who is currently on a visit to Britain, for involvement in war 
crimes during Operation Cast Lead.  IsraelQs Ambassador to the U.K. 
Ron Prosor was quoted as saying in an interview with Israel Radio 
that it had not been easy to convince the British authorities to 
grant diplomatic immunity to Barak, but that this is a temporary 
situation.  Media quoted Barak as saying that he will neither flee 
nor apologize over IsraelQs war on terror.  The media reported that 
many GOI officials and IDF officers might be affected by the 
QGoldstone effect.Q  Leading media reported that Barak is initiating 
a commission of inquiry into accusations that the IDF acted wrongly 
in the operation.  Yediot and other media reported that the DM has 
suggested that former Chief Justice Aharon Barak head the 
commission. 
 
HaQaretz reported that the PA is urging the U.N. Human Rights 
Council to adopt the Goldstone Commission report in full and pass it 
on to the General Assembly for action.  The report was formally 
presented to the council Tuesday.  However, HaQaretz reported that 
Israel and the U.S. are furious with the PA initiative and are 
seeking to recruit the EU to help foil it.  Israel's 
diplomatic-security cabinet will meet Wednesday to discuss 
Jerusalem's response to the report.  Makor Rishon-Hatzofe quoted FM 
Avigdor Lieberman as saying that the PA promotes legal suits instead 
of negotiations.  The media reported that at Tuesday's council 
meeting in Geneva, Assistant Secretary of State Michael H. Posner 
criticized the report and rejected the suggestion that it be taken 
up by the Security Council.  The Jerusalem Post reported that 32 
U.S. Senators signed a letter to Secretary of States Hillary Clinton 
urging that the U.S. block any punitive measures against Israel at 
the U.N. on account of the Goldstone Report.  Media quoted Prof. 
Uriel Reichman, president of the Interdisciplinary Center in 
Herzliya (IDC), saying yesterday that if Israel does not investigate 
the military operation in Gaza, it will be forced to do so by the 
international community.  Professor Amnon Rubinstein of the IDC and 
a former Education Minister from Meretz voiced simila views in the 
media. Israel Radio quoted IsraelQ Ambassador to the U.K. Ron 
Prosor as writing inan op-ed article in the British daily The 
Times:QIn the history of international organizations it i hard to 
conceive of an institution less fit forpurpose than the absurdly 
titled U.N. Human Rights Council.  Since its inception in 2006, the 
UNHRC has included such champions of liberal values as Saudi Arabia, 
Pakistan, and Cuba.  There is no doubting the comic value of such 
membership. Analogies spring to mind of Jack the Ripper leading a 
disciplinary inquiry at Scotland Yard, or Dr. Harold Shipman 
chairing a panel discussion on medical care for the elderly.  Yet 
for Israel, on the receiving end of this surreal hypocrisy, it is no 
laughing matter.Q  Prosor added: QIt is impossible to escape the 
obsession of the Human Rights Council  with Israel.  In three 
years, it has issued 25 resolutions against individual states: 20 of 
them targeted Israel. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted Jessica Montell, the Director of the 
Israeli human rights group BQTselem, as saying that the U.N. Human 
Rights Council and the Goldstone Report are either biased or 
mistaken in some of their fundamental accusations against Israel. 
However, she added that Israel could have avoided such a repot had 
it conducted a Qthorough investigationQ of Cast Lead itself, 
something that BQTselem itself continues to urge on Israeli 
leaders. 
 
 
 
 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that the U.S. is looking for Iran to 
disclose details of its nuclear program, provide access to 
facilities and personnel, and otherwise take concrete steps to show 
E 
it is serious about complying with international demands at 
Thursday's landmark meeting between the countries -- though American 
officials characterized the parley as the beginning of a long 
process rather than a one-time occurrence. 
 
HaQaretz quoted Maj. Gen. Amos Yadlin, the head of IDF Intelligence, 
as saying that the IDF should adopt a "Code of Ethics for the War on 
Terror," because its existing ethical code is insufficient.  Yadlin 
co-authored the proposed code along with Prof. Asa Kasher, the 
philosopher who drafted the army's first code of ethics in the 
mid-1990s.   That code was later replaced by the current one, "The 
Spirit of the IDF," drafted by other philosophers.  However, Yadlin 
argues, the current code does not sufficiently address one of the 
army's most pressing challenges: asymmetric warfare against 
terrorist organizations that operate amid a civilian population, 
such as the 2006 war against Hizbullah in Lebanon or January's 
Operation Cast Lead against Hamas in Gaza.  IDF Chief of Staff Lt. 
Gen. Gabi Ashkenazi has yet to respond to Yadlin's proposal. 
 
The Jerusalem Post, HaQaretz, and Yediot reported that PM Netanyahu 
finally agreed yesterday to a request by French President Nicolas 
Sarkozy to rebuild GazaQs Al-Quds Hospital, which was damaged during 
Operation Cast Lead.  Netanyahu told Sarkozy by phone Tuesday that 
he had decided to approve the project as a humanitarian gesture. 
The Premier also said he wished to accommodate Paris due to the 
"strident stance that France has taken on Iran's nuclear program." 
The hospital is managed by the Red Crescent Society in Gaza. 
Sarkozy added that the initiative is a joint venture between France 
and Qatar, the wealthy Gulf sheikhdom that broke off relations with 
Israel during the Gaza war. 
 
Maariv detailed a plan to build 14,000 housing units in the area of 
the Arab village of Wallajah in southeast Jerusalem that will be 
brought for approval to the Interior Ministry's District Planning 
Committee as well as to various municipal planning bodies. 
[HaQaretz reported on the plan on Friday.]  This is the largest 
project in East Jerusalem since the construction of Pisgat Ze'ev, 
Gilo, and Har Homa.  The new neighborhood, Givat Yael, is to 
encompass 3,000 dunams (around 740 acres), and is expected to have 
approximately 40,000 Jewish residents. The new neighborhood is 
expected to exceed Jerusalem's municipal borders and enter the area 
of Judea (southern West Bank). The area around Wallajah was recently 
purchased by a group of investors, which also formed a company 
called Givat Yael. The group is headed by Meir Davidson, who was 
once one of leaders of Ateret Cohanim, a group dedicated to settling 
Jews in Arab neighborhoods of East Jerusalem.  The developers face 
two hurdles: the area is populated by many illegal Palestinian 
houses and has been declared a QgreenQ zone. Last February the 
District Planning Committee decided to reject the plan proposed by 
the Wallajah people to tear down the illegal houses.  The battle 
over the houses has been going on for years and is funded by various 
American and European sources.   Maariv reported that the 
international intervention concerning the village has sparked 
something of a storm in Jerusalem.  The village's cause is being led 
by Meretz city council member Meir Margalit, who laments the "brutal 
takeover of the village's land and the abuse of its residents." 
Elisha Peleg of Likud, on the other hand, argues that "we must 
promote construction in all parts of Jerusalem.  The European 
intervention is scandalous.  The British Mandate is long over."  In 
the course of the past week politicians leading the battle on behalf 
of the village claimed to have been offered a deal by the Givat Yael 
people -- the latter would be willing to keep the homes destined for 
demolition, in exchange for support on the municipal planning board. 
 Yesterday Meir Davidson yesterday denied the existence of such a 
deal.  The Jerusalem Post cited a brochure put out by Ateret Cohanim 
touting building in JerusalemQs Arab neighborhoods. 
 
Citing the AP, HaQaretz reported that yesterday chief Palestinian 
negotiator Saeb Erekat played down expectations for U.S. President 
Barack Obama's latest attempt to restart peace talks, saying key 
differences with Israel make it difficult for negotiations to 
resume. 
 
The media reported that an Israeli driver was moderately wounded 
last night when Palestinians opened fire on his car near the central 
West Bank outpost of Shvut Rachel, between Ramallah and Nablus. 
Also yesterday, Palestinians in Gaza fired two Qassam rockets at the 
western Negev. 
 
Media cited difference between the intelligence services of Israel 
and Germany on one side, and those of the U.S. regarding the 
proximity of IranQs acquisition of a nuclear weapon.  Media cited 
RussiaQs call to pursue diplomatic contacts with Iran. 
 
HaQaretz quoted the Kuwaiti Web site Al-Rai Al-Aam as saying that 
the U.S. is delaying the appointment of an ambassador in Damascus 
because of QmanipulationsQ by Syrian President Bashar Assad. 
 
The media quoted a state commission of inquiry into the state's 
treatment of the evicted settlers from Gaza as saying that while 
evacuating every last settler took less than two weeks, the 
Qfamilies' rehabilitation has not finished to this day, more than 
four years after the evacuation -- and, even worse, it seems the end 
is not even visible on the horizon."  This conclusion was part of an 
interim report that the commission, headed by former Supreme Court 
Justice Eliyahu Mazza, submitted yesterday to PM Netanyahu and other 
senior officials.  The commission assigned Netanyahu personal 
responsibility for ensuring that the rehabilitation process finally 
ends. It praised Netanyahu for having pledged to do so, but stressed 
that this pledge was as yet unfulfilled.  The commission placed 
responsibility for the situation on the successive governments and 
the settlers themselves, who the commission said did not extricate 
themselves from their predicament when they could.  The Jerusalem 
Post quoted Likud Knesset Member Danny Danon as saying yesterday 
that he would have the report sent to Washington, to put out the 
message that Israel had learned the lesson of the 2005 disengagement 
-- that any similar withdrawals in the future would not be carried 
out at the QwhimQ of the U.S. administration. 
 
HaQaretz (Akiva Eldar) pointed out a crisis between Jewish religious 
settlers in the West Bank region of Binyamin (north of Jerusalem) 
and their Christian Evangelist benefactors, who apparently broadcast 
missionary Christian content on their site www.frontlineisrael.com. 
 
Maariv cited the claim of the influential Egyptian daily Al-Ahram 
that the Mossad thwarted the appointment of Egyptian Culture 
Minister Farouq Hosni to the post of secretary-general of UNESCO. 
Maariv quoted Israeli Foreign Ministry officials as saying that they 
knew that after their defeat, Hosni and Egypt would embark on a 
revenge campaign against Israel. 
 
The media reported that, following consultations with DM Barak, the 
top brass, and Finance Minister Yuval Steinitz, PM Netanyahu has 
endorsed an additional 1.5 billion shekels (around $375 million) for 
the defense budget, to be spread out over this year and next.  The 
initiative has sparked criticism from politicians who advocate 
social causes, including Education Minister Gideon SaQar (Likud). 
Maariv quoted senior government officials as saying that an extra 
4.8-billion shekel (around $1.2-billion) budget cut will be 
necessary in 2010. 
 
--------- 
¶1.  Iran: 
--------- 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"The Iranian Paradox" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in the independent, 
left-leaning HaQaretz (9/30): QIn recent months, it seems Israel's 
preventive strategy is paying dividends.  The Iranian regime has 
lost some of its strength following the rigged presidential election 
and subsequent repression of the opposition, while Obama has taken a 
tougher public stance against Iran.  It is in Israel's interest to 
see both trends gain momentum -- Iran's weakeningand America's 
determination.  Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's challenge in the 
coming months will be to withstand the burgeoning pressures to 
attack Iran, keep his composure, and not become frightened at his 
own speeches warning of a Qsecond Holocaust"Q while adhering to the 
preventive strategy.  This is the most effective way, one that will 
give incentive to the West to rein in the Iranians without risking 
harm to Israel. 
 
------------ 
¶2.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "Dead Man Walking" 
 
Liberal columnist Gideon Samet, a former consul in Philadelphia, 
wrote in the popular, pluralist Maariv (9/30): QAfter all the 
attempts made by Barack Obama in the past weeks to revive the peace 
process, what remains is the clear recognition that this phrase has 
ended its convoluted lifetime.  The respiration effort seems 
pathetic.  The sour meeting by the leaders of Israel and the PA with 
the U.S. president can be recorded as the symbolic date of the end 
of the process, a burial ceremony for a protracted attempt that 
failed.  It had some good times.  But for quite some time, it has 
been a dead man walking.... In the past weeks, it has become clear 
with what ease an Israeli prime minister can succeed in thwarting an 
American initiative.  It is not outstanding power of action that 
enabled Benjamin Netanyahu to undermine ObamaQs initiative, it is 
growing distaste on the Israeli street with talk about a peace 
process.  And where there is no distaste, most Israelis exhibit 
complete indifference.  Take an unwilling leader and a public that 
is fed up with the process and you will get something that even a 
charismatic U.S. president will fail in promoting.  If there is a 
significant process, it is the shift of many Israelis rightward.... 
The next thing on the agenda will be talking about projects, 
diminishing the aspiration to a comprehensive solution.  The next 
arena, the truly hot and action-filled one, is Iran, of course.  The 
process has ended.  There will be no demonstrations.  Netanyahu has 
won. 
 
II.  "On the Right Path" 
 
Legal commentator Boaz Okun, who was Director of IsraelQs Courts 
from 2004 to 2006, wrote in the mass-circulation, pluralist Yediot 
Aharonot (9/30): QThe mandate of an [independent Israeli] committee 
[to investigate Operation Cast Lead] is ... not clear, but it would 
appear it ... is dictated by the Goldstone report.  In practice, the 
committee will have to examine all the events detailed in the 
Goldstone report, and take a stance on the question of whether the 
evidence it brings is sufficient to justify a criminal or other 
investigation in Israel.  It should be noted that the Goldstone 
report aims high and casts responsibility on the planners of the 
operation, those who gave the orders, and the advisers who 
supervised the operation,  not the foot soldiers in the field. 
Therefore, the committee will have to examine the cabinet's 
resolutions, the chief of staff's instructions, the orders given by 
senior commanders, and also the advice given by the legal advisers. 
The Defense Minister's attempt to restrict the committee's mandate 
will not succeed. 
 
 
 
 
 
III.  "Egypt, Stop the Rot" 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized (9/30): 
QVarious Israeli officials have privately been talking of late about 
a Qnew honeymoonQ period between Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu 
and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak.... Any such positive 
developments in bilateral relations, however, are being dismally 
outweighed by the negatives: Egypt, formally at peace with Israel 
for three decades, is at the forefront of Arab efforts to 
internationally discomfit Israel over the reported nuclear 
capability at the heart of this country's self-defense doctrine.  A 
well-rewarded U.S. ally, Egypt has also failed to encourage the 
dramatic moves by other Arab states toward normalized ties with 
Israel that the Obama administration has been seeking en route to an 
Israeli-Palestinian peace breakthrough.  And, perhaps most 
disturbingly, internally Egypt's media is intensifying its abiding 
hostility toward Israel, ensuring that our cold peace cannot be 
warmed.... Isn't that wider regression, emphatically encompassing 
the Egyptian media's viciously upgraded hostility to Israel, a 
decline Mubarak need urgently address? 
 
IV.  "On the Sovereignty Watch" 
 
Columnist Yoav Sorek wrote in the editorial of the nationalist, 
Orthodox Makor Rishon-Hatzofe (9/30): QIsrael is coping with the 
issue of its continued control of Judea and Samaria [i.e. the West 
Bank], but the Palestinian national movement is already ogling the 
Galilee.  The demand for Arab autonomy in the Galilee is not a 
distant nightmare but almost a reality; the worldQs interest in 
Israeli Arabs is evidence of this.  In its defense of its 
sovereignty and Jewish character, Israel must act forcefully against 
countries that hold contacts with the Higher Arab Monitoring 
Committee [in Israel], at least as long as the latter expresses a 
political agenda and not a municipal union that takes care of 
equality and social and economic conditions for the sector it 
represents. 
 
CUNNINGHAM