09TELAVIV449
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Wed Feb 25 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #0449/01 0561252
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 251252Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0641
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 5059
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 1657
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 5540
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 5865
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 5093
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 3586
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 5897
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 2722
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 0935
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 9647
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 7148
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 2104

RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 6149
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 8185
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH PRIORITY 0977
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 1476
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 000449 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Formation of Netanyahu Government 
 
¶2.  Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
HaQaretz reported that Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has 
relayed messages to Israel in the past week expressing anger at 
obstacles Israel is placing to the delivery of humanitarian aid to 
the Gaza Strip. A leading political source in Jerusalem noted that 
senior Clinton aides have made it clear that the matter will be 
central to Clinton's planned visit to Israel next Tuesday.  Ahead of 
Clinton's visit, U.S. special envoy George Mitchell is expected to 
issue a sharply worded protest on the same matter when he arrives 
here on Thursday.  Sources at the defense establishment confirmed 
last night that pressure is increasing on Israel to reopen the 
crossings to larger volumes of aid for the Gaza Strip. Defense 
sources said that Israel will find it increasingly difficult to 
counter the pressure, and may agree to more extensive use of the 
crossings for aid.  HaQaretz reported that an incident that occurred 
last week at a Gaza crossing seemed to contradict IsraelQs argument 
that there is no food shortage in Gaza: During Senator John KerryQs 
visit, he learned that many trucks loaded with pasta were not 
allowed entry. When Kerry inquired as to the reason for the delay, 
he was told by UN aid officials that "Israel does not define pasta 
as part of humanitarian aid -- only rice shipments."  Kerry asked DM 
Ehud Barak about the logic behind this restriction, and only after 
KerryQs intervention did Barak allow the pasta into Gaza.  The issue 
of humanitarian aid is central to a major debate between Israel's 
Foreign and Defense ministries.  The former supports broadening the 
amount and types of aid, while the Defense Ministry opposes anything 
it considers "concessions" to Hamas.  Meanwhile, Palestinian sources 
warned last night that the American plan for $900 million in 
reconstruction aid for Gaza will not have an effect without a 
cease-fire agreement with Israel.  The same sources also expressed 
skepticism at the value of Clinton's scheduled visit, saying that 
without an Israeli government that can be pressured into making 
substantive concessions to the PA, the visit is void of meaning. 
All media covered yesterdayQs swearing-in ceremony of the 120 
members of the 18th Knesset.  Beforehand, President Shimon Peres 
reiterated his call for a broad-based coalition and urged the new 
parliament to wrap up a peace accord with the Palestinians by the 
end of the KnessetQs term.  Peres also pushed for solidarity in the 
face of the financial crisis.  Yediot quoted associates of Likud 
Chairman Benjamin Netanyahu as saying that he will entrust either 
the treasury or foreign affairs portfolio to Yisrael BeiteinuQs 
Avigdor Lieberman.  The Jerusalem Post and other media reported that 
Finance Minister Roni Bar-On told Netanyahu yesterday that the 
economic crisis severely limits options for coalition maneuvering, 
Media reported that Bank of Israel Governor Stanley Fischer rebuffed 
Netanyahu on his offer to join the cabinet as finance minister. 
Maariv reported that Netanyahu might assume a role of 
Qsuper-ministerQ in the field of economics, assisted by his close 
associate Uri Yogev. 
 
HaQaretz reported that Ofer Dekel, Israel's negotiator for prisoner 
exchanges, is set to land in Cairo soon to meet with Egyptian 
intelligence chief Gen. Omar Suleiman.  The two will discuss a deal 
to release Gilad Shalit.  "This opportunity must not be missed, 
despite the painful price," officials at the Prime Minister's Office 
were quoted as saying yesterday.  The officials warned that it would 
be more difficult to reach an agreement with the next government, 
which includes opening the Gaza borders, which have been sealed 
since Hamas took control by force in 2007.  "Hamas must understand 
it has until mid-March to cut a deal," one official was quoted as 
saying.  Maariv reported that the semi-official Egyptian daily 
Al-Ahram came to the defense of Amos Gilad, whom PM Olmert dismissed 
from his position as negotiator.  The Jerusalem Post reported that 
President Peres told Hans-Gert Poettering, the visiting president of 
the European Parliament, who led a delegation to PeresQ residence 
yesterday, that it is regrettable that the world, with Europe in the 
lead, neither recognizes nor is exposed to the real face of Hamas. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that, Qwith stakes that have never been 
higher,Q Palestinian factions will open talks in Cairo today in an 
attempt to bridge a deep rift that has fragmented their people and 
jeopardized the creation of an independent Palestinian state.  The 
Jerusalem Post reported that senior PA negotiator Saeb Erekat told 
the newspaper yesterday: QIf this threat continues, it will have a 
disastrous impact. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that a senior GOI official told the 
newspaper yesterday that the UN Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) is 
systematically providing political cover to Hamas.  The official 
lashed out at the agency for passing a Hamas letter to Sen. Kerry 
last week.  UNRWA spokesman Sammy Mshasha denied the allegations, 
saying that the Israeli official should first check his facts. 
 
HaQaretz reported that Kadima leader Tzipi Livni has promised 
Netanyahu her party's support on the Iranian nuclear threat if she 
ends up heading the opposition.  The commitment, made during talks 
between the two leaders Sunday, became public as Netanyahu headed 
for his first day of formal coalition negotiations today.  "I will 
use my many contacts in the United States, Europe and the Arab 
world, along with my experience and that of other Kadima members, to 
win support from the international community against Iran to the 
extent necessary," Livni was quoted as saying. Netanyahu had argued 
that Kadima should join the government despite the differences 
between Kadima and Likud because it is crucial that Israel deal with 
the Iranian issue.  However, Livni said her party does not need to 
be in the coalition to support the government on the matter.  The 
Jerusalem Post noted the State DepartmentQs announcement on the 
appointment by Secretary Clinton of Dennis Ross, an Qadvocate of a 
more aggressive sanctions regime toward Iran. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted Israeli and Egyptian officials as saying 
yesterday that an Egyptian trade delegation that was suddenly 
recalled to Cairo will return to resume work tomorrow. 
 
Yediot reported that six senior Israeli professors in constitutional 
and international law demand that Attorney General Menachem Mazuz 
set up a commission of investigation into possible war crimes 
committed by the IDF during Operation Cast Lead.  According to them, 
only an external investigation would be able to neutralize future 
claims against Israel and exonerate Israel. 
 
HaQaretz reported that Channel 10-TV has again angered Muslims and 
Christians: One of the participants in the QSurvivalQ reality TV 
program dubbed his shoe QMuhammad.Q  The previous case was a satire 
skit about Mary and Jesus, which the Vatican condemned and over 
which PM Ehud Olmert apologized. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that veteran diplomat Avi Pazner is 
expected to be named acting chairman of the Jewish Agency,  ZeQev 
Bielski stepped down as Jewish Agency chairman yesterday, when he 
was sworn in as a Kadima Knesset member. 
 
Leading media cited an announcement made by the Education Ministry 
yesterday that Prof. Yehuda "Judd" Ne'eman, a filmmaker aware of 
"all the horrible things Israel does," has won the 5769 (2008-2009) 
Israel Prize for film.  Israel Radio announced yesterday that 
veteran military reporter Carmela Menasha and Palestinian affairs 
correspondent Gal Berger will be this yearQs recipients of the 
prestigious Ilan RoQeh Prize memorial prize. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported on a dinner attended this week by the 
Netanyahu and Kerry couples, and Ambassador Cunningham. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
¶1.  Formation of Netanyahu Government: 
-------------------------------------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz: QNetanyahu deserves a chance because he is 
convinced that he will work well with Obama, and even with Hillary 
Clinton. 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"Bibi Deserves a Chance" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Aluf Benn wrote in the independent, 
left-leaning Ha'aretz (2/25): QBenjamin Netanyahu deserves a chance 
to lead Israel on the basis of his worldview and with the coalition 
he forms, with or without Tzipi Livni and Ehud Barak.... Netanyahu 
deserves a chance because for years he has warned against an Iranian 
nuclear bomb, which he believes will pose the worst threat to 
Israel's existence ever.... Netanyahu deserves a chance because e 
is convinced that he will work well with Obama and even with 
Hillary Clinton.  Netanyahu knowsthat Obama will ask him about his 
position on a to-state solution, and believes he can find a formua 
that will satisfy the President.  But Netanyah believes in 
reciprocity in foreign affairs and hinks there should be no give 
without take, not ven among friends.... Netanyahu will try the 
Qquiet in return for actionQ method with Obama: Don't force me to 
turn my back on my ideological base and political partners, and 
trust me that conditions on the ground will improve.  In any case, 
he will tell Obama, you have no better alternative.... Netanyahu 
deserves a chance because he claims he has matured and learned to 
 
work with people and listen to them. 
 
------------ 
¶2.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Contributor Prof. Carlo Strenger, a philosopher and psychoanalyst 
who teaches at Tel Aviv University and is a member of the World 
Federation of Scientists' permanent monitoring panel on terrorism, 
wrote in the independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (2/25): QHere is 
what I hope [George Mitchell] is telling the President now.... My 
suggestion is that we, the U.S., apply our full leverage and do the 
following: We should pressure Israel into engaging with the Arab 
peace initiative. 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: QThirty 
years of fraught relations [with Egypt] trump the previous 30 years 
of bellicosity. 
 
Former Mossad director Ephraim Halevy wrote in the mass-circulation, 
pluralist Yediot Aharonot: QA credible and responsible examination, 
thinking Qoutside the box,Q could lead to innovative, surprising and 
perhaps promising alternatives.  Barack Obama is not reluctant to 
reexamine a policy that he has just adopted.  What about us? 
 
 
 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "Memo to Obama: Urgent Action Needed in Mideast" 
 
Contributor Prof. Carlo Strenger, a philosopher and psychoanalyst 
who teaches at Tel Aviv University and is a member of the World 
Federation of Scientists' permanent monitoring panel on terrorism, 
wrote in the independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (2/25): QWe do not 
know what special envoy George Mitchell told President Barack Obama 
after his tour of the Middle East.  But here is what I hope he is 
telling the president now.  QMr. President.... I believe that both 
Israel and the Palestinians are fragmented and paralyzed, and that 
bilateral talks would at this point be doomed to failure.  I am 
afraid that if we don't do anything, a third Intifada will start. 
The Arab regimes in the Middle East will not be able to deal with 
the rage that further Israeli military actions like the one in Gaza 
will generate in their streets, and the whole region could be 
destabilized.... My suggestion is that we, the U.S., apply our full 
leverage and do the following: We should pressure Israel into 
engaging with the Arab peace initiative.  We could do so if we 
provide Israel with the guarantee that we will use our might to 
prevent any attack from Iran, even if it goes nuclear, but that in 
return for this guarantee Israel will have to start dismantling the 
settlements in the West Bank.  We should convince Arab countries to 
dispatch military forces to take over security in the West Bank and 
Gaza, and we should set up an ongoing peace conference under the 
auspices of the U.S., EU, Russia and the Arab League that is 
committed to continue until a settlement is reached. I have used 
this model in Northern Ireland, and it has worked there. 
 
II.  QCountdown to 30 
 
The conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized (2/25): 
QIn a month's time, Egypt and Israel will mark 30 years since the 
signing of our peace treaty.... Israelis never fully appreciated, or 
perhaps wrongly discounted as lip service, the importance Sadat 
placed on a resolution of the Palestinian problem, linking it to 
progress on bilateral relations.... There is much that Israelis do 
not understand about Egyptian policy.... We never really understood 
Egypt's lackadaisical attitude to Hamas's weapons smuggling.... We 
do not understand why Egypt is pushing a Gaza cease-fire that would 
further strengthen Hamas, while leaving Gilad Shalit in its 
clutches.  But Egypt must be equally befuddled by Israel's decision 
to pummel Gaza for three weeks -- even as Cairo explicitly blamed 
Hamas for instigating the violence -- only to declare a unilateral 
cease-fire that left the Islamists emboldened.... Egypt is again 
trying to foster reconciliation between Hamas and Fatah. But 
Palestinian unity predicated on Hamas's maximalist demands hardly 
salvages what is admittedly a bad situation.... Our criticism 
notwithstanding, the survivability of the regime the 
now-octogenarian Hosni Mubarak established is a strategic Israeli 
interest.... Preliminary judgment: Thirty years of fraught relations 
trump the previous 30 years of bellicosity. 
 
III.  QIf It's Good Enough for Obama 
 
Former Mossad director Ephraim Halevy wrote in the mass-circulation, 
pluralist Yediot Aharonot (2/25): QIt is estimated that this year 
the number of civilian casualties [in Afghanistan] will rise, after 
the reinforcement of U.S. troops by 17,000 soldiers is completed. 
Despite this harsh forecast, Richard Holbrooke, President Obama's 
special envoy for the conflict, is examining the question of 
Washington's continued support for the lawful President of 
Afghanistan Karzai, due to the weakness that he displays.  His 
presidency is due to expire in May, but he seeks to extend it by a 
number of months, by means of questionable legality.  At the same 
time, Obama has ordered an urgent examination of policy on the 
complex issues of the Afghanistan-Pakistan situation.... In this 
case, if the two alternatives proposed by the heads of the two 
leading [Israeli] parties do not represent a realistic policy, why 
shouldn't they follow Obama's example and agree on conducting an 
urgent professional examination, with the aim of recommending 
realistic alternatives for coping with the Palestinian challenge? 
A credible and responsible examination, thinking Qoutside the box, 
could lead to innovative, surprising and perhaps promising 
alternatives.  Barack Obama is not reluctant to reexamine a policy 
that he has just adopted.  What about us? 
 
CUNNINGHAM