09TELAVIV1693
ISRAEL REPORTS FIRST H1N1 DEATH, ORDERS INOCULATION OF
Thu Jul 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
R 301332Z JUL 09
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 2853
INFO AMCONSUL JERUSALEMUNCLAS TEL AVIV 001693 
 
 
DEPT FOR CA/OCS/ACS Kim Richter 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CMGT CASC MED IS
SUBJECT: ISRAEL REPORTS FIRST H1N1 DEATH, ORDERS INOCULATION OF 
EVERY CITIZEN 
 
¶1. SUMMARY. Israel's Ministry of Health announced the country's 
first H1N1-related fatality on Monday, July 27. To date, 1,500 cases 
of H1N1 have been reported, with 30 to 40 new cases each day.  For 
the first time in Israel's history, Prime Minister Benjamin 
Netanyahu has issued an order for the purchase of enough swine flu 
vaccines to inoculate every Israeli citizen.  In addition, the 
Ministry of Health has agreed to increase the nation's flu 
medication reserves by five percent, so that the amount will be 
sufficient to treat 35 percent of the population rather than just a 
quarter.  According to the Health Ministry, the vaccine is not 
expected to arrive before October and may arrive by the end of next 
winter.  Israel's Director of Public Health Services has stated that 
99.9 percent of those infected with the virus have not had serious 
complications. END SUMMARY 
 
¶2. The Ministry of Health announced on Monday, July 27, the death of 
a 35-year-old Israeli man infected with the H1N1 virus. The man, 
whom the Ministry describes as "overweight and a heavy smoker," died 
on Sunday at Josephthal Hospital in Eilat. The Ministry states that 
the man's underlying health issues contributed to his death, but his 
family has filed a malpractice suit, claiming that his case was "not 
treated seriously enough" at the hospital. 
 
¶3. Sunday's death is the first reported H1N1 death in Israel. 
Meanwhile, a 38-year-old pregnant woman from East Jerusalem is in 
serious condition on a respirator after being hospitalized with 
swine flu, and a 50-year-old from the Jerusalem area who has 
hypertension and diabetes is also on a respirator after developing 
complications from the H1N1 virus. They and a handful of other swine 
flu virus patients are in medium or serious condition in various 
parts of the country. 
 
¶4. The Director of Public Health Services at Israel's Ministry of 
Health, Itamar Grotto, states that about 1,500 cases - about 30 or 
40 new cases a day - have been reported to date in Israel. Many more 
may have gone unreported, with people feeling unwell deciding to 
stay home and not see a doctor. 
 
¶5. On July 29, for the first time in Israel's history, Prime 
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu issued an order for the purchase of 
enough swine flu vaccines to inoculate every Israeli citizen.  In 
addition, the Ministry of Health agreed to increase the nation's flu 
medication reserves by five percent, so that the amount will be 
sufficient to treat 35 percent of the population rather than just a 
quarter.  Per the Health Ministry, the vaccine is not expected to 
arrive before October and may arrive by the end of next winter.  The 
cost of the vaccine purchase together with the increase in 
medication supplies will be around 450 million New Israeli Shekels 
[approx. 116.5 million USD]. 
 
¶6. Israel's Ministry of Health is running an H1N1 phone information 
line with answers to questions on Wednesday and Thursday between 8 
a.m. and 4 p.m. The Ministry is also planning a public education 
campaign for the autumn to reduce prevalence of the flu and to 
encourage vaccination against conventional influenza, which could 
combine with the H1N1 virus. 
 
¶7. Ordinary influenza is prevalent in the fall and winter months, 
thriving in cold weather when windows are closed and fresh air is 
not introduced. But Grotto said that H1N1 seemed to be thriving in 
Israel's hot summer weather because "it is very infectious. 
Fortunately, however, the effects have been very mild, with over 
99.9 percent of those infected not having serious complications." 
Also, reports in the Hebrew media that up to one-quarter of Israelis 
are likely to contract the H1N1 virus this winter were described by 
Grotto as exaggerated. 
 
CUNNINGHAM