09TELAVIV823
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Wed Apr 08 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #0823/01 0980954
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 080954Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1345
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 5261
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 1853
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 5771
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 6072
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 5299
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 3818
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 6113
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 2926
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 1135
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 9842
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 7347
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 2311
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 6345
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 8388
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH PRIORITY 1172
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 1803
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 000823 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
Please note: The Israel Media Reaction report will not appear on 
Thursday, April 9, due to the Passover holiday. 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
Mideast 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
HaQaretz reported that, Qin an unprecedented move,Q the Obama 
administration is readying for a possible confrontation with PM 
Benjamin Netanyahu by briefing Democratic congressmen on the peace 
process and the positions of the new government in Israel regarding 
a two-state solution.  The media reported that the Obama 
administration is expecting a clash with Netanyahu over his refusal 
to support the establishment of a Palestinian state alongside 
Israel.  HaQaretz says that the preemptive briefing is meant to foil 
the possibility that Netanyahu may try to bypass the administration 
by rallying support in Congress.  HaQaretz reported that the message 
that administration officials have relayed to the congressmen is 
that President Obama is committed to the security of Israel and 
intends to continue the military assistance agreement that was 
signed by his predecessor, George W. Bush.  However, Obama considers 
the two-state solution central to his Middle East policy, as he 
reiterated during a speech in Turkey on Monday, and he intends to 
ask that Netanyahu fulfill all the commitments made by previous 
governments in Israel: accepting the principle of a Palestinian 
state; freezing settlement activity; evacuating illegal outposts; 
and providing economic and security assistance to the PA.  HaQaretz 
also reported that administration officials made it clear to 
congressmen that the Palestinians will also be required to fulfill 
their obligations in line with the Roadmap and the Annapolis 
process. 
 
Makor Rishon-Hatzofe reported that Netanyahu intends to show 
President Obama that he is also striving for a diplomatic solution 
to the Palestinian issue, without explicitly advocating Palestinian 
statehood. 
 
The Jerusalem Post and Yediot quoted FM Avigdor Lieberman as saying 
yesterday at a Yisrael Beiteinu forum in Jerusalem that the new 
government will formulate a diplomatic program compatible with the 
wishes of the electorate, but that the world "should not stand over 
us with a stopwatch."  Saying that after 16 years of a diplomatic 
"dead end" in the peace process, the world must be ready to listen 
to new ideas, Lieberman declared that "we intend to work with 
determination on the diplomatic plane and formulate a detailed and 
up-to-date assessment.  This will not happen overnight, and they 
should not stand over us with a stopwatch in hand.  We will 
formulate the policy compatible with our world view and as the 
voters wanted in the elections."   Speaking on Israel Radio this 
morning, Deputy FM and former ambassador to the U.S. Danny Ayalon 
said that there is no chance of a confrontation with the U.S. 
 
Maariv reported that IDF Chief of Staff Lt. Gen. Gabi Ashkenazi and 
senior Israeli defense officials showed Netanyahu plans to contain 
the Iranian nuclear project.  The newspaper reported that Netanyahu 
was pleasantly surprised by progress in training and preparations to 
this effect.  Maariv also quoted senior defense sources as saying 
that the U.S. defense establishment is aware of IDF preparations 
against the Iranian threat.  The leading online news service Ynet 
quoted Vice President Joe Biden as saying yesterday on CNN that he 
does not believe that Netanyahu will decide to attack Iran, and that 
such an attack would not be wise.  HaQaretz reported that Israel's 
successful test yesterday of the upgraded Arrow II anti-ballistic 
missile system has made defense officials hopeful that the U.S. will 
continue funding the system, which is designed to defend against 
possible ballistic missile attacks by Iran and Syria.  Other media 
doubted the possibility that the funding would continue.  The 
Jerusalem Post quoted Haim Eshed, who has headed IsraelQs space 
program for three decades, as saying that Israel could be losing its 
Qqualitative edgeQ as other Middle East nations Q notably, Iran 
invest in space-based capabilities. 
 
HaQaretz quoted the armaments development authority Rafael as saying 
yesterday that the first complete short-range missile interception 
"Iron Dome" system is expected to become operational as early as 
summer 2010. 
 
Maariv reported that a first incident has occurred between Netanyahu 
and DM Ehud Barak, after less than a week since the formation of the 
government: Yesterday Barak approved the transfer of some 100 
million shekels (around $25 million) to banks in Gaza, an approval 
given without the knowledge of the Prime Minister. 
 
Maariv reported that Ofer Dekel, the PMQs point man on prisoners, 
was not invited to PM NetanyahuQs meetings with the parents of Noam 
Shalit.  The newspaper cited assessments that Netanyahu will name a 
new envoy. 
 
Claiming that far-Left organizations are pressuring the IDFQs Judge 
Advocate General, Makor Rishon-Hatzofe reported that an IDF officer 
who slapped a Palestinian in the face was arrested until the 
conclusion of the legal proceedings against him. 
 
HaQaretz reported that the U.S. has been training senior Palestinian 
security officials in an advanced officers' course in Ramallah for 
top brass.  The new course, entitled "senior leaders' course," is a 
two-month long program conducted in Ramallah with the assistance and 
supervision of the U.S., and is part of the project overseen by the 
U.S. security coordinator in the territories, Gen. Keith Dayton.  So 
far, the program has produced 80 graduates divided into two 
40-student classes.  A third class, made up of commanders from the 
Palestinian National Security Force -- the largest security force 
with 15,000 members, tasked with policing borders, providing 
military intelligence, military police services and presidential 
security -- is currently being trained in Jordan.  That class is 
undergoing special training by Jordanian instructors under American 
auspices.  The Jerusalem Post reported that Moscow has promised to 
supply PA security forces in the West Bank with new weapons, 
including two helicopters. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted former national security adviser Giora 
Eiland as saying in a document penned for the right-leaning 
Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs that IsraelQs Qpresent border 
line [with Syria] is the only one affording plausible defense for 
Israel. 
 
The Jerusalem Post and other media quoted Dani Dayan, head of the 
Yesha Council of Jewish Settlements in the Territories, as saying 
that IDF budget cuts will leave a Qlarge numberQ of settlements 
unguarded. 
 
Yediot quoted an American source as saying that the elite naval 
commando unit QShayetetQ took part in the Israeli raid on an arms 
convoy in Sudan. 
 
Israel Radio cited an Al Jazeera-TV report that seven Israeli Arabs 
were arrested in Egypt over Hizbullah-linked activities.  The radio 
reported that the Foreign Ministry denies any knowledge of this. 
The Jerusalem Post reported that Israel will not facilitate Northern 
Ireland politician Gerry AdamsQ entrance into Gaza through the Erez 
rossing because he will not commit to not meeting amas officials. 
The Jerusalem Post reported on te long, cozy IRA-PLO cooperation. 
 
The JerusalemPost reported that on March 31 Jerusalem Mayor Nir 
Barkat met with film industry figures in Los Angees to encourage 
more filming in his city. 
 
TheJerusalem Post cited Tel Aviv UniversityQs March 209 War and 
Peace Index (held on March 30-31) as saying that for a clear 
majority of the Israeli public, the economic crisis is the most 
important issue facing the new government (62% put it in first or 
second place). Trailing far behind are the security and political 
issues -- the Iranian threat at 39% and the negotiations with the 
Palestinians at 27%.  A majority of the Jewish citizens of Israel 
(53%), but not of the Arabs (33%), believe NetanyahuQs declaration 
that his government will strive for peace with the Palestinians. 
However, a majority of both sectors supports NetanyahuQs view that 
the key to achieving stability and quiet is Qeconomic peaceQ based 
on advancing the economic condition of the Palestinians.  In 
contrast, however, to NetanyahuQs refusal to commit himself to the 
formula of two states for two peoples, a majority of both sectors 
(56% of the Jews and 78% of the Arabs) currently favors working 
toward this solution.  That is, the Israeli public thinks Qeconomic 
peaceQ is a good idea but not enough to achieve ongoing quiet and 
stability.  The support for the two-state idea is especially evident 
when comparing it to two other possibilities: continuing the 
existing situation or establishing a binational state.  Among the 
Jews, 51% now back the two-state formula, 28% favor continuing the 
existing situation, and only 7% are for setting up a binational 
state.  For the Arabs the parallel figures are 66% for the two-state 
formula, 8% for continuing the existing situation, and 17% for 
binationalism. In other words, the Arabs, not surprisingly, 
overwhelmingly oppose continuing the existing situation; at the same 
time a large majority also opposes the idea of a binational state 
and supports, like the Jewish public, the two-state solution.  A 
further interesting finding is that a majority -- about 
three-quarters -- of both groups disagrees with the ominous claim 
that unless the two-state idea is realized soon, the result will be 
the rise of a binational state between the Jordan and the 
Mediterranean.  A majority of Israelis, both Arab (59%) and Jewish 
(54%), believe that despite the new governmentQs right-wing 
composition it will maintain a good relationship with the Obama-led 
U.S. administration when it comes to advancing Israeli-Palestinian 
peace.  However, while a majority of the Jewish public (55%) expects 
Obama to pressure Israel harshly if it does not cooperate in 
advancing the negotiations, a majority of the Arab public (51%) sees 
the chances of U.S. pressure on Israel as low. 
 
-------- 
Mideast: 
-------- 
 
Summary: 
-------- 
 
Defense commentator Amir Oren wrote in the independent, left-leaning 
Ha'aretz: QVery soon, in Netanyahu's visit to Washington and Obama's 
visit to Jerusalem, either a change will be imposed on Israeli 
policy, or a change will be imposed on the Israeli government. 
 
Liberal columnist Larry Derfner wrote in the conservative, 
independent Jerusalem Post: QLieberman is more dangerous than 
Ahmadinejad because we have the military power to deter Iran's 
threat to destroy us physically.  I don't know if we have the power 
to deter Lieberman from destroying us morally. 
 
The nationalist, Orthodox Makor Rishon-Hatzofe editorialized: 
QProgress with the Palestinians should only be made in conjunction 
with the ability of Abu MazenQs leadership to abide by its respect 
of understandings and agreements reached with Israel. 
 
 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "ObamaQs Seder [Passover Night or Order]" 
 
Defense commentator Amir Oren wrote in the independent, left-leaning 
Ha'aretz (4/8): QFrom the Israeli standpoint, the most essential 
strategic development is the shift of American interest eastward 
from Iraq, which took center stage during the Bush years.  The focus 
is moving to Iran, Afghanistan and North Korea.  The significance is 
that the attention devoted to existential threats of terrorism and 
nuclear weapons intensifies exactly as it did during the Bush 
presidency, yet it is disconnected from the Arab-Israeli conflict. 
Concessions on the Israeli front will not aid in the fight against 
Al Qaida and the Taliban, nor will they dissuade Kim Jong-il from 
launching missiles that can carry nuclear warheads.... Conversations 
with U.S. civilian and military officials suggest that in recent 
weeks there has been greater recognition among members of the Obama 
administration that the danger of a nuclear Iran to the entire 
Middle East and, together with North Korea, to the spread of nuclear 
weapons around the world, is greater than the anticipated cost of an 
Israeli operation against Iran.... But only an Israeli government 
that seeks peace can convince the public that its order to the IDF 
to act was given free from ulterior motives.  If Netanyahu's natural 
partner is Avigdor Lieberman, Obama is indicating that his natural 
partner is Tzipi Livni.  Very soon, in Netanyahu's visit to 
Washington and Obama's visit to Jerusalem, either a change will be 
imposed on Israeli policy, or a change will be imposed on the 
Israeli government. 
 
II.  QThe Threat from Within 
 
Liberal columnist Larry Derfner wrote in the conservative, 
independent Jerusalem Post (4/8): Q[Ahmadinejad and Lieberman] both 
exult in beating the drums for racism and war.  They both brand 
entire ethnic and religious groups as the enemy and promise a 
sweeping, violent solution.  They both appeal to a nation's spleen. 
The main ideological difference between them is that Ahmadinejad is 
a religious fanatic, while Lieberman is secular -- which, I imagine, 
is one reason he left Kach to develop his secular brand of Kahanism 
in the political mainstream.  Otherwise, he and Ahmadinejad are cut 
from the same cloth.   Lieberman talks a lot about the Qthreat from 
withinQ being more dangerous than the threat from without -- that 
the Arabs inside our borders can destroy this country easier than 
the Arabs outside.  He's right about the threat from within, but it 
isn't from Israeli Arabs, it's from Lieberman himself and what he 
represents and the power he's gained.  He's now taken over the 
Foreign Ministry.  He's gotten the stamp of approval from the 
leading parties of the right, center and center-left -- the Israeli 
consensus.  He's being laundered and sanitized by virtually the 
entire American Jewish establishment.  And he's not through by a 
long shot.  At this point, he seems to have an even brighter future 
ahead.  Lieberman is more dangerous than Ahmadinejad because we have 
the military power to deter Iran's threat to destroy us physically. 
I don't know if we have the power to deter Lieberman from destroying 
us morally -- from turning us into the image of what we claim to 
hate. 
 
III.  "Obama and the New Israeli Government" 
The nationalist, Orthodox Makor Rishon-Hatzofe editorialized (4/8): 
QThose who did not find the declaration of the European foreign 
ministers around two weeks ago clear, heard President ObamaQs speech 
to the Turkish Parliament.... Everybody repeats the mantra of two 
states for two peoples, the code word being Annapolis.... This 
approach is the recipe for an impasse from the very first stop of 
the Obama administration and the Netanyahu government.... There is a 
consensus in Israel that the country should not take upon itself 
QshelfQ commitments and that progress with the Palestinians should 
only be made in conjunction with the ability of Abu MazenQs 
leadership to abide by its respect of understandings and agreements 
reached with Israel. 
 
CUNNINGHAM