06AUCKLAND3
COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR NOAA DR. PHILLIP CLAPHAM TO AUCKLAND,
Tue Jan 31 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Auckland
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS AUCKLAND 000003 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL TPHY KSCA EFIS OTRA NZ
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR NOAA DR. PHILLIP CLAPHAM TO AUCKLAND, 
NEW ZEALAND 
 
REF: USDOC 00394 
 
¶1. AMCONGEN Auckland welcomes Dr. Phillip Clapham to Auckland, 
07-22 February 2006. The purpose of the visit is to participate 
in sessions of the South Pacific Whale Research Consortium 
annual meeting 07-12 February, followed by personal travel 13-22 
February. 
 
¶2.  Post understands no assistance is required. 
 
¶3. Point of contact at Consulate General Auckland is Consul 
General, Siria Lopez.  Contact details are as follows: 
Office Tel: 64-9-303 2724 ext.2950 
Cell Tel: 027-434 3140 
Fax: 64-9-366 0870 
E-mail:  LopezSR@state.gov 
 
¶4. Visitors should use local taxi service, which is generally 
safe, reliable and frequent.  Taxi fare from the airport to 
downtown Auckland hotels is approximately NZD60-65.  A 
commercial shuttle service is also offered at the airport. 
 
¶5. Travelers can exchange currency at the airport upon arrival 
and ATM machines are readily available throughoutNew Zealand. 
 
¶6. Biosecurity Fines: 
The government of New Zealand instituted fines for non-declared 
biosecurity hazards on travelers entering New Zealand with 
undeclared plant, animal or food material.  Travelers found 
carrying these undeclared items will be immediately fined NZ$200 
(~US$135).  Biosecurity is a serious issue in New 
Zealand and fines will be administered immediately and without 
warnings. 
 
¶7. Security Information: 
a. The U.S. Mission in New Zealand currently rates the threat 
from transnational and indigenous terrorism as low.  There are 
no terrorist groups or support groups believed to be operating 
in New Zealand at this time.  In light of the worldwide security 
alert all visitors should heighten their security awareness and 
report any unusual incidents to the regional security office. 
 
b. Anonymous telephonic threats and obscure threat mail have 
occasionally targeted U.S. diplomatic missions in New Zealand. 
In response to U.S. policies and actions, various groups in New 
Zealand have demonstrated occasionally at the Embassy in 
Wellington and at the Consulate in Auckland.  These 
demonstrations are usually small and are peacefully conducted. 
During these demonstrations, the host country police and 
protective services normally provide adequate protection to the 
Embassy and Consulate. 
 
c. New Zealand is considered a medium threat crime environment. 
As such,  Wellington and Auckland have experienced an increase 
in violent and petty crimes, and it is usually 
non-confrontational in nature.  However, home invasion, 
robberies and assaults, once very rare, are becoming more 
frequent. Burglaries and thefts occur countrywide but primarily 
in the large cities of Auckland and Wellington, and visitors 
should be aware that street crime, such as scams and pickpockets 
is a daily occurrence in these cities. Common sense precautions 
should be taken, especially at night, to avoid becoming a target 
of opportunity. 
 
d. All forms of public transportation are generally safe at all 
times of the day; however, at night visitors should use common 
sense precautions so as to not become a target of opportunity. 
 
LOPEZ