05ASUNCION1435
PARAGUAY AND COLOMBIA DISCUSS COUNTER-DRUG ISSUES
Tue Nov 22 00:00:00 +0100 2005
SECRET
Embassy Asuncion
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.id: 45823
date: 11/22/2005 13:39
refid: 05ASUNCION1435
origin: Embassy Asuncion
classification: SECRET
destination: 05ASUNCION1119|05ASUNCION403|05ASUNCION596
header:
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.



----------------- header ends ----------------

S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 ASUNCION 001435 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA, INL, S/CT 
STATE PASS TO USAID LAC/AA 
NSC FOR SUE CRONIN 
SOUTHCOM FOR POLAD BARBARA MOORE 
JOINT STAFF FOR J5 LTC SCOTT DAVIS 
NAIROBI FOR MICHAEL FITZPATRICK 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 11/16/2015 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR PTER MARR SNAR PA CO
SUBJECT: PARAGUAY AND COLOMBIA DISCUSS COUNTER-DRUG ISSUES 
AND ESTABLISH BILATERAL COMMISSION 
 
REF: A. ASUNCION 1119 
     ¶B. ASUNCION 596 
     ¶C. ASUNCION 403 
 
Classified By: PolOff Mark A. Stamilio, reasons 1.4(b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: An official Colombian counter-drug (CD) 
delegation traveled to Asuncion November 2-4 to hold 
bilateral CD discussions with the GOP.  As a result of those 
discussions, the GOP and GOC established a bilateral, 
interagency CD commission and three working groups.  Upon 
their arrival, the GOC delegation first met with US Embassy 
representatives for a frank discussion of the GOP's CD 
capabilities and level of commitment.  During the two days 
that followed, the delegation met with members of the 
National Anti-Narcotics Directorate (SENAD), former Attorney 
General, now Presidential National Security Advisor, Oscar 
Latorre, and the military services' Deputy Directors of 
Intelligence.  The GOC delegation left pleased with the 
formation of the bilateral commission and working groups, but 
somewhat disappointed with substantive discussions on CD 
cooperation.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (U) An official Colombian counter-drug (CD) delegation 
traveled to Asuncion November 2-4 to hold bilateral CD 
discussions with the GOP.  The delegation visited under the 
auspices of continuing discussions of bilateral security 
cooperation that began in the wake of the Cecilia Cubas 
kidnap/murder (refs B and C).  The GOC delegation comprised 
the following military and police officials: 
 
-- General Luis Paredes, Commander of the Colombian Army's 
Special CD Brigade 
-- Colonel Oscar Artehortua, the Colombian National Police 
officer in charge of CD operations in Colombia's northern zone 
-- Lieutenant Colonel Juan Carlos Rico, the Colombian Army's 
Deputy Director of Intelligence 
-- Major Edwin Reyes, Director of the Colombian Air Force's 
Drug Interdiction Unit 
 
¶3. (U) As a result of those discussions, the GOP and GOC 
established a bilateral, interagency CD commission and three 
working groups.  The bilateral commission fulfills a 
requirement established in an accord the two countries signed 
in 1997.  The commission comprises representatives from the 
two countries' law enforcement communities, public security 
agencies, and health and education officials, among others. 
The three working groups will focus on the following: 
 
-- reducing the supply of illicit drugs, fighting 
organized/transnational crime, urban and rural CD operations, 
and the identification and destruction of drug labs 
-- demand reduction (primarily through education programs in 
schools) 
-- combating money laundering and related crimes 
 
¶4. (C) At the GOC's request, the delegation met with 
representatives from the Embassy's POL section, DEA, ORA, and 
DAO prior to meeting with the GOP.  EmbOffs provided the 
delegation a frank assessment of the political situation in 
Paraguay and the GOP's CD capabilities and level of 
commitment in the war on drugs.  EmbOffs highlighted SENAD 
and others within the GOP who have proven to be reliable 
interlocutors, but stressed the debilitating effects of the 
country's pervasive corruption.  The delegation appeared 
somewhat surprised to learn of the degree and extent of that 
corruption. 
 
¶5. (C) Comment: The delegation noted that FARC activity 
within Paraguayan territory is a matter of significant 
concern to the GOC.  Colombian Ambassador Bernal, on the 
other hand, has repeatedly downplayed FARC activity in 
Paraguay, for example by complaining about Embassy MIST radio 
advertisements that begin, "The FARC is in Paraguay, the FARC 
is in Paraguay!"  The fact that Bernal and the delegation 
from Bogota are at odds on this matter raises questions about 
his support for the Uribe administration's policy on the 
matter.  Colombian Political Counselor Raul Sanchez confided 
in PolOff on 11/15 that he has advised Bernal to avoid 
appearing to differ with GOC policy on this and other 
matters, but that Bernal has resisted.  End Comment. 
¶6. (C) The GOC delegation met with SENAD to discuss CD 
cooperation, but neither side felt that the meeting was 
productive.  According to Sanchez, SENAD was unprepared for 
substantive discussions.  Sanchez also complained that SENAD 
Director Hugo Ibarra did not attend the meeting.  According 
to SENAD, they found out about the meeting at the last minute 
from the MFA and Vice President's office, and therefore did 
not have time to prepare for it.  SENAD, in turn, complained 
to DEA that the GOC delegation did not offer substantive 
recommendations during the meeting. 
 
¶7. (C) The GOC delegation also met with former Attorney 
Latorre and the military services' Deputy Directors of 
Intelligence, to discuss intelligence capabilities. 
According to Sanchez, the GOC views Latorre as their most 
reliable interlocutor with respect to bilateral security 
cooperation.  Sanchez told PolOff on 11/15 that the GOC is 
underwhelmed with the cooperation they have gotten from 
current Attorney General Ruben Candia, and that the GOC plans 
to invite Latorre to Bogota for two weeks to learn more about 
Colombia's Administrative Security Department (DAS), National 
Customs and Tax Directorate (DIAN), and other aspects of the 
Colombia's national security apparatus. 
 
¶8. (C) Comment: Latorre is battling cancer, and it remains 
unclear what roles and responsibilities will fall within his 
newly created portfolio as National Security Advisor. 
Latorre built a solid relationship with the Colombians during 
the Cubas investigation. 
 
¶9. (S) Comment continued: Candia and Latorre are at odds with 
each other.  When Latorre stepped down as Attorney General, 
he took with him all of the electronic listening equipment 
the Attorney General's Office (Fiscalia) had obtained from 
third-country governments.  Also, upon taking office, Candia 
tried to fire Javier Cazal, the head of the Fiscalia's 
Judicial Investigations Unit and a personal friend of Latorre 
(ref A), for hoarding information.  Ultimately, Cazal 
resigned, and went to work for Latorre in his new capacity as 
National Security Advisor.  Cazal was a subject in the 
investigation of the alleged torture of Juan Arrom and 
Anuncio Marti, the suspected masterminds of the 2001 
kidnapping of Maria Edith Bordon de Debernardi.  Latorre's 
last official act as Attorney General was to reassign two 
prosecutors who reportedly kept Cazal on the sidelines during 
the investigation of the 2004 kidnapping of Cecilia Cubas, 
which was perpetrated by a radical faction of Arrom and 
Marti's leftist Free Fatherland Party (Partido Patria Libre, 
or PPL). 
 
¶10. (S) Comment continued: Sensitive reporting indicates 
Latorre failed to share with appropriate GOP law enforcement 
officials information that GOC sources passed to him 
regarding assistance the PPL received from the FARC in 
planning and executing the Cubas kidnapping.  Additionally, 
Latorre, who is a lawyer by trade, recently affiliated 
himself with the law offices of Dionisia Martinez de Seidhom, 
in Ciudad del Este (CDE).  Martinez's husband, Yahya Seidhom, 
has used his CDE businesses to funnel money to Hezbollah. 
While Latorre asserts that he merely intends to provide legal 
advice to CDE businesses, his association with Martinez is 
troubling, at best.  End comment. 
JOHNSON 

=======================CABLE ENDS============================