04ANKARA1303
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT,
Thu Mar 04 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 ANKARA 001303 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT, 
THURSDAY MARCH 4, 2004 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
 
HEADLINES 
 
 
MASS APPEALS 
MFA Seeks Views of Ambassadors on GME Initiative- Sabah 
Grossman Visit to Ankara Cancelled - Sabah 
Denktas May Withdraw From Cyprus Talks on March 22 - 
Hurriyet 
Ambassador Edelman Visits DYP Chairman Agar - Hurriyet 
Another Step Forward on Cyprus - Milliyet 
Brother Ocalan's Mosul Gambit - Milliyet 
Grossman: "Cyprus is the Key for the GME" - Turkiye 
Denktas: "Greek Cypriots Reject All Proposals" - Turkiye 
 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Ankara Warns Weston on Cyprus Remarks - Radikal 
UN Prepares a fourth Annan Plan - Radikal 
UK FM Straw: "EU Will Give Turkey A Date" -- Cumhuriyet 
Denktas Says `No' to Referandum - Cumhuriyet 
Ankara Complains About Greek Cypriots to Weston - Cumhuriyet 
Parliament Passes New IPR Law - Zaman 
Turkey Moves Closer to the EU - Yeni Safak 
Ankara Asks US to Exert Pressure on Greek Cypriots - Yeni 
Safak 
 
 
 
 
BRIEFING 
 
 
Grossman Visit: All papers and TV channels report that U/S 
Grossman was forced to cancel his scheduled visit to Ankara 
today due to mechanical problems with his plane.  Grossman's 
plane developed engine trouble and made an emergency landing 
on the Greek side of Cyprus.  Since there are no flights 
available to Turkey from the Greek side, Grossman was unable 
to fly to Turkey.  US Embassy officials said that Grossman 
would likely return to Turkey in the future, but they 
declined to give a date. 
 
 
Cyprus/Weston Visit: All papers and TV channels report that 
US Cyprus coordinator Weston was received by FM Gul and 
other Foreign Ministry officials.  "Radikal" reports that 
Turkey issued a warning to Weston about his recent remarks 
concerning the Cyprus referendum.  "Zaman" notes that Turkey 
asked Weston to put more US pressure on the Greek Cypriots, 
and claims that Weston responded positively to this request. 
"Hurriyet" reports that the Turkish side floated a new 
proposal to hold 4-way talks in late March (talks that will 
involve Greece and Turkey) at the level of the Prime 
Minister or Foreign Minister to ensure there is `adeguate 
political will' to reach a solution.  "Hurriyet" reports 
that Denktas is disappointed about the lack of progress 
during the talks so far and cites a `reliable source' who 
claimed that Denktas might withdraw as negotiator on March 
¶22.  Denktas will be in Ankara today to attend a panel 
discussion arranged by Ankara Chamber of Commerce. 
 
 
PKK/KONGRA-GEL: "Milliyet" reports that 15 top KONGRA-GEL 
members including Osman Ocalan met with US officials in 
Mosul.  The article claims that Ocalan asked the US 
officials to allow him and his colleagues to continue their 
activities by settling in the Mosul area.  Turkey is 
following these developments closely. Responding to 
questions by journalists on the issue, FM Gul urged people 
to "continue to watch developments, and you will see the 
results."  These words were interpreted by journalists as 
meaning that Osman Ocalan might be handed over to Turkey by 
the US.  However, when US Ambassador Edelman was asked about 
the issue following his meeting with DYP leader Mehmet Agar, 
he said he had no information to confirm such reports. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION:  Greater Middle East Initiative 
 
 
"The Chances of the GME Initiative's Being Useful" 
Cuneyt Ulsever opined in the mass appeal Hurriyet (3/4): 
"The Greater Middle East project has a chance to produce 
major change in the Middle East as long as the following 
facts are recognized.  First of all, Arabs should admit the 
need for change and also should be able to admit their 
shortcomings in creating the internal dynamics for reform. 
Secondly, the United States should realize that democracy is 
not an export or import `good,' and that welfare and order 
cannot possibly be imposed on others.  Iraq stands as valid 
proof of that.  . We still don't know about the methods the 
US will use for  implementing its GME initiative.  Yet there 
seems to be one rational way of doing it -- that is, by 
devoting Arab resources toward human development goals. 
Investment in human capital is a must for the implementation 
of this project, and the project's success depends on the 
level of human and social progress. . On the other hand, the 
despotic regimes in this very region have so far managed to 
survive with US support. They have always refrained from 
educating their people, and they have considered public 
ignorance as a virtue.   Therefore, it will be interesting 
to see how they will be persuaded to change." 
 
 
"The Chances of Success for the GME Project" 
Sami Kohen commented in the mass appeal Milliyet (3/4): 
"Undersecretary Grossman launched a promotional tour for the 
GME project, but the timing does not provide him a good 
opportunity for success in his mission.  The recent attacks 
in Iraq once again proved that the balance of the region is 
fragile and can be turned upside-down any moment.  Grossman 
also did not hear encouraging statements in the countries he 
visited, particularly in Egypt.  Egyptian leader Mubarek's 
remarks about the GME are a clear indication that the Arab 
world will keep its distance from the initiative. . Turkey 
prefers to remain an observer without taking any binding 
stance on the project.  This is the right approach for 
Turkey, because it gives time to observe the reactions from 
other countries and wait until the draft project becomes 
more mature.  The project has some attractive goals that 
nobody can argue with, such as democratization and 
implementation of economic reforms and social development. 
It remains wishful thinking to believe that these changes 
will happen by themselves, yet the fact of the matter is 
that there is no real leadership in the Middle East. . 
Mubarek was right when he talked about the need for internal 
progress by emphasizing that a transition to democracy 
cannot happen by pushing a button.  But it is also apparent 
that there is no real engine for internal reform." 
 
 
EDELMAN