04BRASILIA745
BRAZILIAN MILITARY LOOKING ELSEWHERE FOR TRAINING
Mon Mar 29 00:00:00 +0200 2004
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 BRASILIA 000745 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 03/10/2009 
TAGS: PARM MARR MASS MCAP PREL BR KICC POL MIL
SUBJECT: BRAZILIAN MILITARY LOOKING ELSEWHERE FOR TRAINING 
 
REF: (A) BRASILIA 685 (B) BRASILIA 607 (C) 03 
     BRASILIA IIR 6 809 0381 03 (D) 03 BRASILIA 
     2544 
 
Classified By: Poloff Lawrence Cohen, reason 1.5 (b) 
 
¶1.  (C)  Summary and Introduction:  As a result of Article 98 
sanctions, Brazil's MOD is shifting to other countries for 
training and exchanges previously done with the U.S. -- a 
drop-off clearly evident to this Mission. Many in the 
Brazilian military -- including Defense Minister Viegas 
himself -- consider this development unfortunate and want to 
reinvigorate bilateral mil-mil ties, particularly leading up 
to Brazil's upcoming peacekeeping effort in Haiti.  Indeed, 
Defense Minister Viegas recently told the Ambassador that he 
views Brazil's participation in Haiti as an opportunity to 
try to bolster the Brazil-U.S. military relationship (Ref A). 
 But the transfer of funds to pay course/exchange costs and 
particularly full FMS pricing is unacceptable for Brazil. 
Unfortunately, a reversal of the decline in training and 
exchanges with the U.S. is unlikely; Brazil remains opposed 
to signing an Article 98 accord.  End Summary 
 
¶2.  (C) Prior to the imposition of Article 98 sanctions on 
July 1, 2003, the Brazilian Ministry of Defense (MOD) 
leadership warned that it would seek military training and 
exchange opportunities elsewhere if this were done and Brazil 
was subject to paying full FMS course costs for military 
training.  Almost nine months later, the MOD has indeed 
shifted most of its training away from U.S. military 
institutions.  Brazilian military leaders assert that MOD has 
done so without reducing the overall level of overseas 
training opportunities available to its officers. 
 
¶3.  (C) As expected, other countries have offered MOD 
training programs to replace those previously conducted at 
U.S. institutions. While France and the United Kingdom have 
picked up much of the slack, Brazilian officers, according to 
military sources, are now being sent also to training 
programs in China, India, and South Africa. 
 
¶4.  (C) A brief survey reveals that a severe drop off in U.S. 
training and exchanges has already occurred. The Navy plans 
to send only three officers to the U.S. in 2005, including 
two pilots for two-year flight training that MOD "would have 
paid for anyway" according to Navy sources.  When a decision 
on purchase of Brazil's next generation fighter jet, the F-X, 
is finally taken, training for pilots will likely be in the 
country of origin of the new aircraft; this further 
prejudices the already limited prospects for the U.S. F-X 
competitor, Lockheed Martin's F-16. The Army has also sliced 
the number of officers being sent to U.S. schools for 
training and exchanges.  The Army command's 2004 list of 
visits and other activities in the U.S. shows only one 
program as long as one month -- a program carried on the Army 
list as "no cost." 
 
¶5.  (C) Brazilian Army staff officers are emphatic that they 
continue to want strong ties with the U.S., and senior 
officers appear ready to switch back to the U.S. if full IMET 
funding were restored in the future.  Some senior Brazilian 
military officers go further and believe Brazil should bear 
the full costs for friendly nation military exchanges in 
Brazil.  Thus, they argue, reciprocal treatment should be 
granted Brazilian officers attending such exchange courses 
elsewhere.  Some of Brazil's new mil-mil exchanges are based 
on this formula. 
 
¶6.  (C) Comment:  Given the military's wounded pride and the 
now high costs of training in the United States, it is 
doubtful the sharp decline in training and exchanges with the 
U.S. will be reversed anytime soon.  Despite the loss of 
valued U.S. training and exchanges, neither the MOD nor the 
GOB shows any sign of softening its opposition in principle 
to signing an Article 98 Agreement with us.  As U.S.-Brazil 
training links weaken, so too, inevitably, will the 
traditionally close ties between our two armed forces. 
 
Hrinak