04DJIBOUTI282
OLHAYE MEETING WITH GENERAL ROBESON
Mon Mar 01 00:00:00 +0100 2004
SECRET//NOFORN
Embassy Djibouti
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.S E C R E T SECTION 01 OF 02 DJIBOUTI 000282 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NOFORN 
 
AF/EX FOR D. YAMAMOTO, AF/E FOR J. GAFFNEY, OSD FOR T. 
WHELAND 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/25/2014 
TAGS: CT PINR PM PREL DJ
SUBJECT: OLHAYE MEETING WITH GENERAL ROBESON 
 
Classified By: POLOFF C. BEAMER FOR REASONS 1.5 A and D 
 
SUMMARY 
-------- 
 
¶1. (S/NF)  Djiboutian Ambassador to the United States Roble 
Olhaye met at Camp Lemonier in Djibouti on February 25 with 
Brigadier General Mastin Robeson.  Ambassador Olhaye is 
nearing the end of a two week stay in Djibouti and was 
present for Ambassador Ragsdale's credentialing ceremony on 
the 23rd.  General Robeson and Olhaye focused on the way 
forward for a long term lease relationship between the 
Department of Defense and the Government of Djibouti.  End 
Summary. 
 
OLHAYE/ROBESON 
-------------- 
 
¶2. (S/NF) Olhaye congratulated General Robeson for having 
achieved a lot in a short period, making a number of camp 
improvements, and making his presence felt over the Red Sea 
and in neighboring countries.  General Robeson thanked Olhaye 
and asked if he had suggestions for how his organization's 
effectiveness could be improved.  Olhaye responded that he 
thought the task force was doing the right thing, 
coordinating with militaries in the region and making people 
feel accepted.  He said that President was positive about 
their actions and that their civil affairs efforts in 
particular had been very well received in Djibouti. 
 
¶3. (S/NF)  General Robeson then raised the base's long term 
lease relationship and how to make it amenable to both sides. 
 Olhaye responded that he had discussed the issue with DOD 
for the Government of Djibouti.  Djibouti welcomed the U.S. 
presence and would continue to do all it could to provide 
facilities but it desired a long term commitment.  He said 
Djibouti was not in a position to put any timelines or 
constraints on the USG, that the U.S. was "welcome to stay 
permanently if it wished and to expand, to be more 
comfortable."  Olhaye added that Djibouti will try its best 
to provide what the military needs and to be welcoming. 
General Robeson asked Olhaye if he would be involved in lease 
negotiations and the Olhaye responded positively that he 
would be representing the Djiboutian Government in 
Washington.  He went on to say that the lease was not really 
a question of signatures or price noting that his initial 
proposal to the USG was for 150 million dollars.  "The 15 
million we're actually getting is only important to us as a 
symbol of partnership, what comes from the U.S. presence here 
is what is important." 
 
¶4. (S/NF) General Robeson responded that eventually the U.S. 
would not have a permanent presence in Djibouti but that we 
wanted to leave a stronger, more capable Djiboutian military 
behind that was doing things right.  He stressed that with 
efforts in border security, coastal security, and 
anti-terrorism he wanted to help the Djiboutian Military 
understand the impact it can have nationally by partnering 
with outlying regions and acting as an engine of national 
development. 
 
¶5. (S/NF) Olhaye stated that he thought the specifics of 
military to military discussions should be resolved by 
General Robeson's leadership.  Olhaye saw no reason for 
stalemate on such issues but said they should be handled fast 
and in an acceptable manner here on the ground.  He asked 
General Robeson to "use your wisdom, see their point of view, 
come to consensus and resolve the matter."  General Robeson 
responded that he was looking for a positive way to move 
forward so that the military to military relationship was a 
happy one. 
 
¶6. (S/NF)  In this regard, General Robeson said, he had two 
options for resolving current tensions that revolved around 
the Djiboutian airbase/Presidential hangar that was ceded to 
the USG under the current lease.  The first was to move the 
airbase to an area near the civilian hangers.  Olhaye stated 
that that was not possible.  General Robeson went on to note 
that the Djiboutians could stay in that space but that the 
security measures he would take would hem them in and they 
would be unable to grow.  The General emphasized that either 
the Djiboutian military needed to content itself with the 
current space limitations or move further east of Camp 
Lemonier near the water.  Olhaye said either option was 
possible, there would be no noise on the issue, but that if 
the Djiboutian Military moved CJTF-HOA would have to "help 
them move."  Olhaye went on to say that if freedom of access 
could be provided to the Djiboutian military, everything 
could be sorted out.  He said his government was not happy 
with him when he signed and that "we are beyond the original 
map." 
 
¶7. (S/NF)  Olhaye stressed that frictions should be kept here 
at the local level and that there were problems with giving 
the General more ramp space at the Eastern edge of Camp 
Lemonier.  The General responded that a written proposal was 
being drafted in Washington for additional acreage and the 
issue would have to be resolved at another level.  Olhaye 
said he felt the French might have designs on that land as 
they were expanding with another 1,400 troops on the ground 
in Djibouti.  When queried on the possibility of a new 
civilian airport on the other side of the bay from Camp 
Lemonier, Olhaye responded that "nothing was imminent." 
 
¶8. (S/NF)  In closing General Robeson stated that he hoped 
the proposal turned out to be amenable and acceptable to 
Djibouti.  Olhaye responded that from his point of view 
everything should be done together rather than in piece meal 
fashion.  The General concurred that a holistic approach 
would be best and he hoped we could move quickly on 
implementing a long term solution which does not hinder our 
warm relations.  He said the easiest solution was to 
acknowledge that the airbase you want is yours and if 
additional space is needed eastward expansion is possible. 
General Robeson stressed that this issue should not affect 
the relationship at all and that he knew Generals Fahti and 
Zakaria had worked hard to maintain close relations with us. 
He said he had given his word that he would not go home until 
this issue had been resolved and that he was scheduled to 
depart in May. 
 
 
RAGSDALE