09SOFIA304
BULGARIAN MEDIA: LACKING MONEY AND MORALS
Thu Jun 18 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Sofia
VZCZCXYZ0012
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSF #0304/01 1691416
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 181416Z JUN 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY SOFIA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6086C O N F I D E N T I A L SOFIA 000304 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/18/2029 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KCOR KCRCM BU
SUBJECT: BULGARIAN MEDIA: LACKING MONEY AND MORALS 
 
Classified By: Ambassador McEldowney for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1.  (C)  Summary:  Bulgarian media is highly manipulated and 
increasingly concentrated in fewer hands.  Reporters and 
editors accept bribes to cover stories, to print propaganda 
articles as though they were news, and to not print 
information that sponsors do not approve.  The media's 
cooption obviously limits its ability to serve as a voice for 
civil society.  With elections for the national parliament 
around the corner, the consequences of concentrated media 
ownership and corrupt journalism are already on full display. 
 Though some independent outlets are surviving, the public 
has largely lost faith in mainstream media and is turning to 
tabloids for diversion.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (C)  With the overabundance of both traditional and new 
media outlets, many cannot survive on advertisement revenues 
alone and are reliant on donors.  The new local private media 
owners, who unlike their predecessors have no journalistic 
background, use the media to influence the public and promote 
their business interests through the selected release of 
information and targeted attacks.  Among the more dominant 
players is the recently formed conglomerate New Media Group, 
which is speculated to own three national dailies and one 
weekly newspaper, one regional newspaper and one television 
station, with rumored plans to purchase another.  The Group 
jump-started in the summer of 2007 with the acquisition of 
three papers, one of which, the Telegraph Daily, has become 
the largest circulation daily with over 100,000 copies on 
Saturdays and 60,000-70,000 on workdays.  The Group is 
rumored to belong to the circle of companies close to the 
current junior government coalition partner, the Movement for 
Rights and Freedom (MRF) political party.  The reported head 
of the Group, Irena Krustova, is a former government official 
with no credible means to afford such an investment. 
 
¶3.  (C)  Local media outlets regularly practice 
self-censorship and even have black lists of politicians and 
rival businessmen that are neither interviewed nor covered. 
The New Media Group recently printed the exact same article 
in all of its newspapers in apparent targeted attacks against 
its business and political enemies.  The Group has resorted 
to this practice on at least two previous occasions, the 
January gas crisis and the April garbage crisis in Sofia. 
The national daily Sega and the Standart daily have been 
criticized for more subtly representing the interests of 
their business mogul owners.  Similar trends are visible in 
television media, except at a much higher cost to business 
and political interests. 
 
¶4.  (C)  By contrast, the German media group WAZ, which owns 
two daily papers, Trud Daily and 24 Hours, with total 
circulation of over 150,000 copies, is considered more 
focused on the bottom line.  The emphasis on revenues has led 
to more sensational articles in both papers, lowering the 
overall quality.  With the foreign owners' lack of 
familiarity and interest in the local political scene, the 
chief editors of the papers largely determine reporting on 
domestic politics.  While these papers are not known to 
maintain blacklists, certain politicians receive clear 
preferential coverage, allegedly based on personal 
friendships with the chief editors. 
 
¶5.  (C)  With the emergence of new media and countless 
short-lived papers, many mainstream papers complain that 
their readership has decreased.  During the election season, 
editors say that readership typically drops further because 
readers "know" the stories are paid for.  Companies reduce 
their advertisements and instead, act as intermediaries 
purchasing advertisement space for political parties.  With 
the decrease in revenue and reporters, smaller papers 
sometimes resort to covering the news by watching television, 
which often offers sponsored news coverage.  Though under 
strain, larger newspapers continue to have enough staff to 
cover major events.  Privately, journalists say that 
political parties pay reporters, editors, and TV producers 
for interviews and news coverage, which appears without any 
financial disclosure.  Political parties also openly sponsor 
papers, such as Duma (Socialists) and Ataka newspaper and TV 
Skat sponsored by the nationalist party Ataka, which are 
easily identifiable. 
 
¶6.  (C)  Accustomed to manipulation of the press, the 
Bulgarian public has turned to tabloids for diversion.  The 
print media market has been flooded with short-lived yellow 
newspapers with anonymous owners.  Mainstream editors allege 
that these owners operate in the gray economy, evading taxes 
and basic journalistic ethics.  Because of murky ownership 
and the prevalence of unsigned articles the public has no 
protection against libelous stories printed in them.  The 
tabloid weeklies, Weekend and Show, are among the most 
popular and influential papers, with total circulation over 
450,000 copies.  The expansion in readership has prompted 
even serious politicians to grant the tabloids interviews. 
Days before the European elections, the PM gave an extensive 
interview for Weekend promoting his party's ideas. 
 
¶7.  (C)  Candidates across the political spectrum know how 
the game is played.  Journalists described MRF's current 
strong play for media influence as part of a long-standing 
tradition of political figures investing in media when their 
power is challenged.  The Socialists and the liberal-leaning 
King's party also have a well-established history of paying 
for press coverage.  The opposition center-right parties (DSB 
and UDF) previously paid only for advertisements.  In the 
past, GERB relied mainly on the charisma of the party's 
informal leader Boiko Borissov for coverage, who often called 
or texted journalists directly. 
 
¶8.  (C)  Comment:  Most Bulgarians get their basic news from 
TV, not papers.  But, print journalism is the political 
opinion driver, and many TV news programs feature headlines 
and articles from the papers, extending their influence far 
beyond the circulation numbers.  Overall, gray sector players 
and business practices are seriously threatening 
investigative journalism and media pluralism in Bulgaria. 
End comment. 
McEldowney