04THEHAGUE3044
AFTERMATH OF VAN GOGH MURDER - MORE CT PROPOSALS
Mon Nov 22 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy The Hague
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 THE HAGUE 003044 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EUR/UBI, S/CT, INL 
JUSTICE FOR OIA - JFRIEDMAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PINR PINS NL KPRP
SUBJECT: AFTERMATH OF VAN GOGH MURDER - MORE CT PROPOSALS 
AND PARLIAMENTARY DEBATE ...




REF: (A) THE HAGUE 2929 (B) THE HAGUE 2864 
(C) THE HAGUE 2308; (D) THE HAGUE 2995 

Summary 
------- 
¶1. On Nov. 11, the Justice, Interior and Immigration 
Ministers sent a letter to parliament outlining details of 
the van Gogh murder (reftels) and containing proposals for 
additional CT measures. These include: 

- having the AIVD intelligence service share its information 
more widely; 
- establishing a special terrorism unit within the National 
Crime Squad; 
- increasing resources for the AIVD; 
- expanding the number of people under surveillance; and 
- improving employment and anti-discrimination programs for 
young Muslims. 

The parliamentary debate that followed indicated widespread 
support for strong measures, including the Government's plan 
to increase AIVD's budget by 100 million euros (reftel D). 
The same day, the Justice Minister circulated a draft bill 
with earlier CT proposals, formalizing the new CT 
Coordinator's CT plan and expanding use of special 
investigative powers to fight terrorism, to outside 
organizations for comment. End Summary. 

Additional CT Plans/Programs After Van Gogh Murder 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
¶2. Prior to a scheduled Nov. 11 debate on the van Gogh 
murder, Justice Minister Donner, Interior Minister Remkes 
and Immigration Minister Verdonk sent a letter to the Second 
Chamber containing the Government's proposals in response to 
recent explosions of violent radicalism. The Ministers 
want the AIVD intelligence service to: 

- expand the surveillance of persons in any way related to 
terrorism, radicalization processes; 
- conduct a more intensive search for yet unknown 
radicalized or extremist individuals not linked to networks 
and/or individuals already known to justice and security 
services; and 
- intensify sharing of analyzed information and risk 
indicators to enable other government organizations and 
local authorities to carry out their tasks and 
responsibilities and play a role in combating terrorism and 
radicalization. 

The Ministers also promised to establish a special terrorism 
unit within the National Crime Squad and to make more 
resources available to protect public persons and property. 

¶3. The Government also plans to attack the causes of Islamic 
radicalism by improving social-economic prospects for young 
Muslims with special employment and anti-discrimination 
programs. It will develop an action program to promote 
awareness of the dangers of radicalization by distributing 
information against radical-political ideas of Islam and 
setting up a network of individuals to respond in event of 
emerging radicalization in individuals or groups. 

¶4. The Government said it would pursue tougher action, 
including expulsion from the Netherlands, against Muslim 
ministers, teachers, ideologists and Imams if their 
activities are contrary to the law or public order. If 
activities of a legal person, including mosques, are 
contrary to public order, the public prosecutor will be able 
to ask the court to ban and dissolve the legal entity. The 
Ministers plan to employ criminal and other options and 
powers to ensure discontinuation of unacceptable behavior 
and views, including use of alien law, financial supervision 
and control and political administrative measures. 
Foreigners wishing to disseminate radical Islamic ideologies 
will be denied permission to reside in the country. The 
Government also said it would shortly introduce a bill 
enabling authorities to rescind the Dutch nationality of 
individuals possessing dual nationality who pose a threat to 
the vital interests of the State. 

Parliamentary Debate 
-------------------- 
¶5. All political parties not only endorsed the Government's 
proposals, but also asked for even tougher measures during 
the Nov. 11 debate in the Second Chamber. For instance, 
right-wing parties, including government coalition member 
VVD, asked for immediate closure of radical mosques, and a 
Chamber majority wanted to set up Dutch training centers for 
Imams and terminate issuing residence permits for foreign 
Imams as of 2008. The Chamber also asked the Government to 
see whether it would be possible to prevent foreign radio 
and television stations spreading hatred and violence. The 
debate continues. 

Justice Ministry Draft Bill on Other CT Measures 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
¶6. Also on Nov. 11, Donner sent a draft bill containing 
other CT measures to outside organizations for review and 
comment. These measures, initially announced in early 
September (reftel C), would approve the Cabinet's plan 
creating a National CT Coordinator's Office and expand use 
of special investigative powers (phone taps, infiltration 
and surveillance) in cases of possible terrorist attacks. 
In addition, Donner wants to expand the scope for collecting 
information, remanding individuals in custody and carrying 
out preventive body searches. For example, under the bill, 
the public prosecutor would be able to designate certain 
areas/locales where preventive body searches, as well as 
searches of vehicles and property, could be carried out (for 
instance in the case of large sports events). In security 
risk areas, such as airports, railway stations and 
government buildings, Donner wants the police to be able to 
search individuals and vehicles without prior approval by 
the public prosecutor. 

Comment 
------- 
¶7. The assassination of van Gogh has shaken the Dutch and 
the Government is moving on a variety of fronts to confront 
the threat of terrorism and radicalism. Nonetheless, Dutch 
society with its tradition of consensus and respect for 
personal liberty moves very slowly. It took the Government 
more than 2 years to enact the CT measures it proposed 
following the 9/11 attacks. While these proposals contain 
some helpful law enforcement methods, it may be a long time 
before the police and intelligence services can use them. 

Sobel