06BOGOTA8283
AMBASSADOR MEETS WITH RESTREPO TO DISCUSS
Fri Sep 08 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Bogota
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBO #8283/01 2512105
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 082105Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY BOGOTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8663
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 7098
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS 8163
RUEHLP/AMEMBASSY LA PAZ SEP LIMA 4221
RUEHZP/AMEMBASSY PANAMA 9502
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO 4892
RUEHGL/AMCONSUL GUAYAQUIL 3684
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEAWJA/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RHEHOND/DIRONDCP WASHDC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L BOGOTA 008283 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/08/2016 
TAGS: KJUS PGOV PINR PREL PTER CO
SUBJECT: AMBASSADOR MEETS WITH RESTREPO TO DISCUSS 
EXTRADITION AND JUSTICE AND PEACE LAW PROCESS 
 
 
Classified By: Ambassador William B. Wood. 
Reasons: 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1. (C) The Ambassador voiced U.S. concerns to GOC Peace 
Commissioner Luis Carlos Restrepo on August 31 that the GOC's 
inclusion of narcotraffickers on its list of paramilitary 
leaders seeking Justice and Peace Law benefits threatened our 
positive extradition relationship.  Restrepo agreed and said 
the GOC would extradite soon five, and possibly seven, such 
narcotraffickers.  He blamed former Interior Minister Pretelt 
for trying to undo the Constitutional Court's JPL ruling 
through the implementing decree, but said the major challenge 
currently facing the peace process is the Fiscalia's 
reluctance to begin taking version libres.  The meeting ended 
with Restrepo noting paramilitary leaders' growing concerns 
about their personal security, asking for financial 
assistance for GOC efforts to identify and destroy weapons 
handed in by demobilized paramilitaries, and providing an 
impromptu briefing to President Uribe on the status of the 
peace process.  End summary 
 
------------------------------------- 
RESTREPO ON EXTRADITION AND JPL LISTS 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C) The Ambassador met with Peace Commissioner Luis 
Carlos Restrepo on August 31 to express his concerns that the 
GOC's recent actions undermined our excellent extradition 
relationship.  Restrepo told the Ambassador that 
narcotraffickers who were trying to buy their way into 
paramilitary structures to benefit from Justice and Peace Law 
(JPL) should be extradited.  He said the GOC posted the list 
of 24 extraditables on the Presidency's website on August 30 
to stimulate popular pressure against their inclusion. 
Restrepo said he did not agree with the inclusion of Eduardo 
Vengoechea and Juan Carlos Sierra on the JPL lists and blamed 
former Interior and Justice Minister Sabas Pretelt for their 
inclusion. 
 
¶3.  (C) Restrepo said paramilitary leaders were initially 
upset with the publication of the lists.  Paramilitary leader 
(Resistencia Tayrona Bloc) and narcotrafficker Hernan Giraldo 
Serna, who had included seven well-known, imprisoned 
narcotraffickers on his bloc's demobilization list for 
possible receipt of JPL benefits, had called him to complain 
about the government's action.  Restrepo said he also had met 
the previous day with the paramilitary leaders in La Ceja to 
explain the decision.  He had emphasized to the para leaders 
that the process needed to be transparent to be credible. 
After the meeting with Restrepo, the leaders reversed their 
stance and issued a statement supporting the GOC's decision 
to publicize the lists. 
 
 
------------------------------------------ 
JPL DECREE SHOULD REFLECT COURT'S DECISION 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶4. (C) Restrepo insisted the JPL implementing decree must reflect the Constitutional Court's decision. He blamed Pretelt for trying to create a decree that circumvented key elements of the Court's decision and charged that Pretelt had created false expectations for the paras. Still, he said the decree--based on the Court's assertion that its decision was not retroactive--should preserve the JPL provision stating that up to 18 months of the time spent in Santa Fe de Ralito should be applied to alternative sentences issued under the law. Restrepo said this had always been understood to be a key part of the peace agreement between the GOC and the paras to encourage demobilization. He hoped Uribe's decision to make public the draft JPL decree and the lists would boost public confidence in the process. The Ambassador agreed the decree should track the Constitutional Court ruling, saying this would avoid the problems that would be caused by a subsequent decision by the State Commission (Consejo de Estado) declaring the JPL decree invalid because it contradicted the Court's decision.
 
----------------------------------- 
VERSION LIBRES REQUIRED IMMEDIATELY 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (C) Restrepo said he was having a hard time convincing 
the Prosecutor General's Office (Fiscalia) to begin taking 
version libres, because the office wanted to first fully 
investigate the cases.  He complained that he had tried 
unsuccessfully for over three months to encourage the 
Fiscalia to start the process.  Further delays could 
discredit the process and discourage those paramilitary 
leaders who want to talk from doing so.  He said 25 
paramilitary leaders in La Ceja, three in police stations in 
other regions, and 205 mid-level commanders in the 12 
concentration zones are ready to give version libres now. 
With each delay, however, they are starting to melt away due 
to fear of retaliation by renegade para groups. 
 
¶6.  (C) Restrepo expressed concern that the Fiscalia was 
hesitating because of an unfounded assumption that it had to 
take 2,695 version libres all at once.  Instead, the Peace 
Commissioner wanted the Fiscalia to focus on the 240 he has 
lined up to begin the process.  He warned that the GOC knew 
nothing about 2,200 of those that have petitioned for JPL 
benefits and that the Fiscalia should therefore begin with 
those 240 well-known cases.  (Note: the list of 2,695 
demobilized paramilitaries does not include the more than 
2,400 incarcerated paramilitaries who have also requested 
JPL.)  Restrepo voiced frustration at the Fiscalia's failure 
to act on his week-old request that it take the version libre 
of the killer of former AUC leader Carlos Castano, Jesus 
Rolda (AKA Monoleche), who has offered to cooperate fully. 
He said he was worried that if the Fiscalia was unable to act 
on a single case, how could it manage the other cases. 
 
¶7.  (C) The Ambassador recognized the need for the version 
libre process to begin, but said the Fiscalia's task of 
taking more than 5,000 version libres was overwhelming.  He 
said the Fiscalia had asked for more manpower and the 
breaking up of the lists, as well as more resources for the 
section of Colombia's Supreme Court that will hear JPL 
appeals. 
 
---------------------- 
CARLOS CASTANO'S DEATH 
---------------------- 
 
¶8.  (C) Restrepo said he was in Monteria, Cordoba Department, 
on the day of Carlos Castano's murder, preparing the area 
that was to later become the site of the concentration zone 
in Santa Fe de Ralito.  He learned immediately from one of 
Castano's bodyguards that Monoleche had killed Castano.  Five 
days later, Restrepo said he met with para leaders, including 
Salvador Mancuso and Vicente Castano, at an isolated location 
near Ralito, where he was told that Castano "was on 
vacation."  They allowed him to question Monoleche who, at 
the time, had denied his participation in Castano's murder. 
 
¶9.  (C) Restrepo said para spokesman "Ernesto Baez" had been 
very helpful in convincing Monoleche to now cooperate with 
him in locating Castano's body.  He attributed this to Baez' 
shame over what the paras had done to Castano.  Restrepo said 
the para leaders wanted Monoleche to assume complete guilt 
for Castano's murder.  Still, Restrepo said Castano's 
brother, Vicente Castano, had played a role in the death.  He 
added that Vicente, who he called an astute businessman who 
made money off of everything, was not close to the other para 
leaders.  Restrepo speculated that if Vicente turned himself 
in under President Uribe'S ultimatum, he would insist on 
being held apart from his colleagues. 
 
------------------------ 
 
PARAS PARANOIA JUSTIFIED 
------------------------ 
 
¶10.  (C) Restrepo warned paras were feeling ever more 
vulnerable about their security.  He said the GOC recognized 
the need to offer some sort of protection for them and their 
families.  Few para leaders trusted each other, and 
internecine wars within the para community were threatening 
the lives of the leaders and their subordinates.  In the past 
week, Macaco's second in command was murdered in Medellin. 
Para leader "Cadena" had also been killed after expressing 
his interest in testifying about crimes committed by his 
group.  Restrepo said the paramilitary leaders' fear was 
causing them to remain in La Ceja; some mid-level commanders 
were abandoning the process.  He dismissed press reports that 
five para leaders had left La Ceja for medical conditions. 
 
¶11.  (C) Restrepo said confidence building was necessary.  He 
thought the Catholic Church's National Reconciliation 
Commission could be very helpful.  Unfortunately, the 
Commission's focus on the FARC made it unable it to play a 
constructive role with the paramilitaries. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
REQUEST FOR U.S. SUPPORT FOR ARMS DESTRUCTION 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶12.  (C) Restrepo asked for U.S. financial support for the 
destruction of arms turned over by the paramilitaries.  For 
judicial purposes, Restrepo said the GOC would need USD 
50,000 to conduct ballistic testing before destroying these 
weapons.  The arms have been in 24 military bases around the 
country; the GOC was concerned with the security of the arms. 
 The consolidation and destruction of these weapons remained 
stalled.  The GOC hoped to begin the process in the coming 
weeks and expected to be finished by November. 
 
-------------------------------- 
URIBE CALLS RESTREPO FOR UPDATES 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶13.  (C) As the Ambassador wrapped up the meeting with 
Restrepo, President Uribe called Restrepo on his cell phone 
for an update on the peace process.  Restrepo in a brief, but 
precise summary told Uribe the following: (1) he would 
accompany Monoleche to the site of Carlos Castano's remains 
on September 1 with the DIJIN and the Fiscalia; (2) para 
leader Jorge 40 planned to turn himself in to Congress's 
Peace Commission in Cesar Department on September 4; (3) GOC 
intelligence officials had told him Vicente Castano continued 
to ask for judicial assurances and was complaining about his 
economic situation; (4) Los Mellizos sent out a communique 
asserting their para affiliation; (5) a para leader (AKA 
Cuchillo) was threatening to rebuild his group in Meta 
Department; and (6) the Fiscalia was still not moving forward 
on taking version libres.  He also said the GOC needed to 
increase public forces in Uraba where the FARC had kidnapped 
five civilians in an area formerly controlled by demobilized 
para leader El Aleman. 
WOOD