10BOGOTA97
International Donors Signal Future Support for Consolidation
Wed Jan 27 00:00:00 +0100 2010
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Bogota
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBO #0097/01 0271936
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 271936Z JAN 10
FM AMEMBASSY BOGOTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2281
INFO RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RHMFISS/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEHBO/AMEMBASSY BOGOTA
RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
RUEHCV/AMEMBASSY CARACAS
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
RUEHPE/AMEMBASSY LIMA
RUEHQT/AMEMBASSY QUITO
RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN 0007
RUEHTC/AMEMBASSY THE HAGUE 0651
RUEHZP/AMEMBASSY PANAMA
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L BOGOTA 000097 

SIPDIS 

E.O. 12958: DECL: 2020/01/27 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM PTER EAID SNAR CO CA GM NL
SUBJECT: International Donors Signal Future Support for Consolidation 
of Security Gains 

REF: BOGOTA 186 

CLASSIFIED BY: Mark Wells, Political Counselor; REASON: 1.4(B), (D) 

Summary 

------- 



¶1. (C) On January 19, the Embassy's Colombia Strategic Development 
Initiative (CSDI) working group hosted officials from the Dutch, 
German and Canadian Embassies to discuss CSDI, Colombia's National 
Consolidation Plan (PNC) and the status of support from those 
Embassies for the PNC.  The chief concerns expressed by donors were 
perceptions of a lack of GOC leadership and home government and NGO 
fears that consolidation is militarized.  Despite this, the Dutch 
Embassy continues to support the model and has won the support of 
its MFA and NGO Pax Christi. The German Embassy supports the PNC 
but needs to convince a reluctant Berlin.  The Canadians are split, 
with the Canadian Development Agency (CDA) reluctant but the MFA 
willing to engage, albeit with concern about the GOC's commitment 
to the PNC.  Overall, these officials sent positive signals about 
future work in consolidation zones, reserving concerns mostly to 
implementation.  End Summary. 



CSDI Working Group Engages International Donors 

--------------------------------------------- -- 



¶2. (C) In an effort to encourage other governments that have
already committed some resources to the PNC, the CSDI working group 
invited the Dutch, German, and Canadian embassies to share 
experiences in helping the GOC to implement the PNC's 
whole-of-government approach on January 19.  Pushback from NGOs and 
home governments has made international donors reluctant to support 
the PNC due to concerns about its reputed military emphasis. 
Foreign embassy officials explained their views on the Colombian 
Government's (GOC) PNC and described where their governments stand 
in supporting it. 



Donors' Chief Concerns: Lack of GOC 

Leadership and Fears of Militarization 

-------------------------------------- 



¶3. (C) No one questioned the overall whole-of-government concept or 
the merits of the PNC.  The embassy officials seemed convinced that 
the PNC model of concentrating resources into the most troubled 
areas is the correct solution to help Colombia finish its 
transition from near-failed state to stable democracy.  However, 
all agreed that the situation was precarious unless improvements in 
implementation are made.  On GOC leadership, the head of the CDA 
said that Accion Social -- the lead civilian agency for the PNC -- 
was "showing all its warts" through its guidance of the 
consolidation process.  The senior official of the Dutch 
Development Corporation said that although Accion Social was not 
suited for a leadership role, there was no alternative and it was 
necessary to continue encouraging it. The Canadian Political 
Counselor expressed concern about key personnel being stretched 
thin, given that PNC leaders all had "day jobs." She offered 
support to keep the political pressure on the GOC to improve the 
situation, complaining that Accion Social had failed to 
strategically engage donor embassies ever since consolidation 
became state policy through Presidential Decree 001 of 2009.  The 
CSDI working group told the donors about Post's engagement plan to 
focus GOC leadership on consolidation and press for needed 
structural reforms. 



¶4. (C) On fears that the PNC is militarized, the CSDI working group 
shared that one of the key lessons learned from Plan Colombia is 
that security is a necessary prerequisite for other interventions, 
otherwise development is unsustainable and ends up benefitting 
illegal armed groups (IAGs).  Consequently, the initial phases of 
consolidation have appeared militarized to outsiders as the armed 
forces secure territory, and civilian agencies and the police lag 
behind security advances.  Additionally, GOC outreach has been 
wanting - the GOC has done a poor job of explaining the PNC and its 
emphasis on establishing civilian institutions, rule-of-law and 
socio-economic development.  The CSDI working group offered donors 
further engagement (e.g., site visits) to demonstrate the PNC's 
civilian aspects and progress, in order to help dispel false 
perceptions of militarization. 



Dutch Fully On-Board, Moving to Next Phase 

------------------------------------------ 



¶5. (C) Despite the above challenges, the Dutch continue to believe 
in the PNC concept and are focused on implementation. They are 
unlikely to be involved on a national level and choose to focus on 
the Plan for the Integrated Consolidation of the Macarena (PCIM), 
as there is enough work for them there and significant but 
manageable challenges require further attention. They are in 
discussions with their MFA and have convinced their Minister to 
move onto the second phase of support which would mean more funds, 
more political attention and more years of involvement in the PCIM. 
One of their goals is to broaden their assistance from food 
security and income generation to land issues, civil society/NGO 
strengthening and private sector economic development. 



¶6. (C) The Dutch are active in recruiting partners and socializing 
the PNC concept.  They have helped convince the NGO Pax Christi to 
support the PCIM which, according to Dutch officers, is a key 
victory because Pax Christi is their lead NGO in Colombia and 
others will follow its lead.  They are also working to convince 
local NGOs to take a second look at consolidation, including the 
thinktankCorporacion Nuevo Arco Iris (CNAI).  The Dutch also want 
to increase the human rights focus in the PNC and have approached 
the UN about a possible role in this regard. 



German Embassy Lobbying Home Government on PNC's Merits 

--------------------------------------------- --------- 



¶7. (C) The German chief of development said the German Embassy is 
convinced that the PCIM model is the best solution in Colombia. 
However, Berlin has a different view and is being pressured by NGOs 
and interest groups about the PNC's perceived militarization.  The 
German Embassy is working on three levels of support to the PNC. 
The Embassy will move forward on microprojects with a maximum cost 
of 10-15 thousand euros.  Although small, these will provide a 
positive political signal.  Secondly, the German Embassy will try 
to convince its MFA to release MFA-controlled funds for food 
security and alternative development totaling 500,000 euros per 
year.  The final level of assistance is controlled by the Ministry 
of Economic Cooperation, which according to the German official 
would be a challenge since it has a different perception of 
Colombia.  A positive decision would mean a 3-6 year project in the 
3-6 million euro range.  As part of their lobbying, the Germans 
will be receiving a delegation later this year to show them the 
Colombian context and risks and rewards of commitment.  Another 
issue for the Germans is the security of their experts in the 
field. 



Canadians Split on PNC 

---------------------- 



¶8. (C) The Canadian Head of Aid said that with its $25 million 
budget, the CDA is only concerned with short-term results in 
Colombia focused on vulnerable populations and thus does not have 
the "strategic responsibility" to ensure the stability of the 
Colombian state.  The CDA is reluctant to directly support the GOC 
and thus link its assistance to security and stability.  The 
official conceded that CDA should view its efforts in a "do no 
harm" principle and should try not to indirectly support IAGs, 
adding that his government was not neutral but wholly supported the 
Colombian state.  The CDA official said Canada has not made a 
decision on the PNC, but in rare direct support to the GOC, is 
planning to give the National Learning Service (SENA) $1 million 
per year. The official believes this will have a strategic link 
with the PNC based on education, a sector which has been largely 
ignored as a focus area in consolidation thus far. 



¶9. (C) The Canadian Political Counselor said that a Minister has 
made a public statement in support of the PNC, and though it was 
just a statement, there are no indications that the Canadian 
government does not stand behind it.  The officer said that her 
political section could access some funds ($5 million a year) that 
could be available from the MFA's Global Peace and Security fund. 
It would be a MFA decision and the MFA does not have the same 
concerns about the PNC as does the CDA.  The PNC resonates with the 
mandate of the fund -- stability and reconstruction -- and the fund 
has been used in Afghanistan, Haiti, Uganda, and Sudan.  It would 
be low-profile support and complement CDA efforts but with 
different objectives.  Possible support includes working along the 
border with Ecuador or building capacity with the Prosecutor 
General (Fiscalia) or Inspector General (Procuraduria).  Canada 
also has new regional funds ($15 million per year) for anti-crime 
capacity building, although Colombia would have to compete with 
other nations.  The officer's primary concern is that the GOC 
appears not to have fully bought into its own plan and is thus 
hesitant to push for the funds. 



GOC Makes Strides Towards Progress 

---------------------------------- 



¶10. (C) Coincidentally, the GOC made some strides towards 
addressing the donors' criticisms later the same day at a periodic 
coordination meeting of the Center for the Coordination of 
Integrated Action (CCAI).  Participants raised the issue of 
lingering perception that the consolidation plan is military-led, 
as well as the need to deepen outreach.  Diego Molano, head of 
Accion Social and PNC lead, said he was seeking a date in the first 
two weeks of February to hold a PNC discussion with donors.  Also, 
a representative from the National Planning Department (DNP) 
described a GOC interagency exercise to identify the entirety of 
government projects and programming in consolidation zones to 
better understand and manage them.  In addition, Molano approved 
Accion Social's strategic objectives for 2010, with elements 
specifically targeting consolidation zones including dedicated food 
security and income generation program budgets, incorporating 
19,000 new families into a voluntary eradication assistance 
program, and five new land restitution projects. 



Comment 

------- 



¶11. (C) Donors' concerns about the PNC echo our own, but like us, 
donors believe the challenges are not insurmountable and sent 
positive signals about future work in consolidation zones.  The 
actions taken by Accion Social later in the day demonstrate that it 
is determined to improve implementation and channel the resources 
within its control towards the PNC, though much work remains.  If 
Post and GOC engagement lead to more donors' (such as the Dutch and 
Germans) and NGOs' (such as Pax Christi) endorsement, inaccurate 
perceptions that the PNC is militarized should be mitigated.  The 
Canadians, though reluctant, left a window open for engagement and 
whether or not they openly support the PNC in the end, the CDA's 
programs will indirectly contribute to social development and 
consolidation in CSDI zones.  End Comment. 
BROWNFIELD