08CASABLANCA39
MOROCCO: 2008 ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT
Wed Feb 27 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Casablanca
VZCZCXRO8548
PP RUEHLA
DE RUEHCL #0039/01 0581242
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 271242Z FEB 08
FM AMCONSUL CASABLANCA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7977
INFO RUEHC/DEPT OF LABOR WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RUEAHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHDC
RUEAWJA/DOJ WASHDC
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT 8227
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 0629
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0347
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 0968
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID 3782
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 0302
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA 0354
RUEHUJA/AMEMBASSY ABUJA 0194
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 0282
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS 0372
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 0250
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI 0243
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS 2965
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS 2085
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 0191
RUEHNK/AMEMBASSY NOUAKCHOTT 2322
RUEHDK/AMEMBASSY DAKAR 0279
RUEHBP/AMEMBASSY BAMAKO 0259
RUEHNM/AMEMBASSY NIAMEY 0260
RUEHLA/AMCONSUL BARCELONA 0291
RUEHMIL/AMCONSUL MILAN 0110
RUEHMT/AMCONSUL MONTREAL 0353
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 4699
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH 1140
RUEHOS/AMCONSUL LAGOS 0117
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 0642
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELSUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 14 CASABLANCA 000039 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE ALSO FOR G/TIP, INL, DRL, NEA/MAG, NEA/RA, IWI, PRM, AND G 
 
STATE PLEASE PASS USAID AND USTR 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PHUM PREF ELAB SMIG KFRD KCRM KWMN MO
SUBJECT: MOROCCO: 2008 ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT 
 
REFS:  08 STATE 002731 
 
CASABLANCA 00000039  001.2 OF 014 
 
 
¶1. (U) This cable responds to action request (reftel) for updated 
information on the Moroccan government's efforts to combat 
trafficking in persons from April 2007 to March 2008. 
 
------------------------------------- 
Morocco Headed in the Right Direction 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Over the past year, the GOM continued to prioritize its 
law enforcement activities intended to investigate, prosecute, and 
deter what the GOM describes as "human-trafficking rings."  In 2007, 
Morocco continued its strategy to fight trafficking based on five 
major pillars: security measures, legislation, the creation of 
institutions specializing in fighting illegal migration, 
international cooperation, and public awareness campaigns.  It 
should be underlined, however, that the GOM makes no distinction 
between migrant smuggling and human trafficking.  The GOM understood 
both activities as illegal and exploitative, which often result in 
the abuse and even the demise of Moroccans and third country 
nationals who seek to emigrate clandestinely.  With GOM 
encouragement, Moroccan civil society was increasingly and visibly 
active on TIP issues. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) Morocco's geographic position as a natural conduit for 
sub-Saharan trafficking continued to be addressed by Morocco and the 
European Union (EU).  Despite efforts made by both Spain and Morocco 
to stem trafficking and illegal migration in the past few years, the 
problem persisted.    Throughout the year, the two countries 
reaffirmed their commitment to stemming the flow of illegal migrants 
across the border in the north, as well as in the waterways between 
Morocco and the Canary Islands.  In addition, in August 2007, Spain 
and Morocco signed an accord to prevent illegal migration of minors, 
guarantee them protection and facilitate their repatriation. 
Morocco also signed a 1.3 million euro agreement with Catalonia to 
prevent illegal migration of minors.  The GOM signed a similar, 2.0 
million euro agreement with Italy.  Morocco continued to work 
closely with the Spanish Government on resolving the issue of the 
approximately 6,000 Moroccan minors living illegally in Spain.  The 
Spanish Government will not repatriate minors until it is certain 
the young Moroccans have a safe and healthy environment available to 
them in Morocco.  Moreover, agreement is needed from the parents or 
guardians for the return, which is often difficult to acquire. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Moroccan officials continued to assert that the POLISARIO 
orchestrated the illicit transfer of migrants through the Western 
Sahara and northern Mauritania to the Canary Islands.  UN officials 
in the Western Sahara, however, claimed they saw no evidence of 
POLISARIO involvement in migrant smuggling in any organized or 
sanctioned way. 
 
¶5.  (U) PARA 27:  Overview of Morocco's activities to combat 
 
CASABLANCA 00000039  002.2 OF 014 
 
 
trafficking in persons. 
 
-- 27/A.  Morocco is a country of origin and destination for 
domestic trafficking, generally involving young rural children 
recruited to work as child maids or laborers in urban areas.  It is 
also a popular country of transit for internationally trafficked 
men, women, and children.  It is a country of origin for men, women, 
and minors trafficked to European countries and the Middle East. 
According to the GOM, international organizations, and numerous 
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), the number of Moroccan minors 
being trafficked and smuggled into Spain, Italy, and other European 
countries increased in 2007.  The International Organization for 
Migration (IOM) worked with the Governments of Morocco and Italy, 
and Moroccan NGOs to stop the trafficking of minors.  The first 
phase of this cooperative plan, completed in 2007, was a survey to 
measure the magnitude of the problem.  The survey identified the 
most vulnerable persons, pinpointed the regions from which persons 
are trafficked, and proposed the most effective methods of 
prevention.  As a result of the study, the GOM and GOI, along with 
the IOM, began work in on the SALAM (Solidarity with children of 
Morocco) project in March 2008.  The project will continue until 
September 2009.  IOM chose the town of Khouribga to begin the 
project after it found it to be the second largest city of origin 
for unaccompanied Moroccan minors in Italy, following only 
Casablanca. 
 
-- In addition, the IOM, UNHCR, UNDP, UNICEF, and UNIFEM began a 
four-month study in February 2008, to evaluate the extent of 
trafficking versus smuggling in Morocco.  An assessment committee, 
to include one GOM official, will be formed at the end of the study 
to evaluate the results and make recommendations to address the 
issue.  This will be the first comprehensive study on trafficking in 
Morocco, as well as the first time the GOM will have acknowledged 
the difference between smuggling and trafficking in persons.  UNICEF 
expects to release the results of the study in the summer of 2008. 
 
 
-- According to a spokesman from the Ministry of the Interior (MOI), 
the number of illegal migration attempts from Morocco to Europe fell 
in 2007.  The officials claimed that Morocco successfully and 
humanely repatriated over 1,200 illegal sub-Saharan migrants in 
¶2007.  The MOI representatives also stated that more then 260 
trafficking networks were dismantled in 2007. 
 
-- Both Moroccan boys and girls were at risk of being trafficked for 
labor.  Young girls were trafficked from the countryside to work as 
domestic laborers in larger cities.  Boys were farmed out as 
"apprentices" in the artisanal sector, construction field or in 
mechanic shops where they worked carrying supplies and performed 
menial tasks. 
 
-- Sub-Saharan women, who often originated as voluntary migrants, 
were forced into prostitution to pay off debts to smugglers.  Some 
 
CASABLANCA 00000039  003 OF 014 
 
 
were held captive and forced into prostitution.  Moroccan women were 
lured to Saudi Arabia, Syria, Cyprus, and the Gulf as domestic 
workers and forced, upon arrival, to work in bars and brothels.  The 
Mission has first hand as well as media and anecdotal information 
regarding trafficking of Moroccan women to Syria. 
 
 
-- 27/B.  Domestic trafficking in Morocco has historically involved 
three vulnerable groups as victims:  (a) girls sent involuntarily to 
serve as child maids, (b) young boys sent to work as apprentices, 
and (c) women forced to perform sexual services.  There have been 
several instances where Moroccan women were unknowingly trafficked 
abroad to become sex workers after being promised jobs as domestics. 
 It appears that the majority of the girls and young women pressed 
into domestic servitude and sexual tourism are from rural villages 
in the Middle and High Atlas Mountains.  However, according to some 
NGOs this phenomenon may have begun to change as more girls may 
recently have been trafficked from poor urban areas.  Human rights 
advocates charged that "intermediaries" approach poor parents 
promising that their children will have a chance at a better life as 
child maids or as apprentices where they will learn a trade and earn 
money for the family. 
 
-- Sub-Saharan Africans transiting Morocco, destined for Europe, 
also fell victim to traffickers.  According to Pastor David Brown of 
the French Anglican Church, who provided humanitarian assistance to 
sub-Saharan clandestine migrants, "handlers" pressured the majority 
of female migrants into prostitution and involuntary servitude to 
pay for food and shelter.  These claims were reinforced by officials 
at UNHCR in Rabat, as well as officials at IOM, who worked directly 
with sub-Saharan migrants. 
 
-- As a country of origin, Morocco's rural and urban poor were a 
ready pool for traffickers and migrant smugglers, who promised a 
better life to their recruits.  According to UNICEF and local NGO 
social welfare advocates, traffickers or "intermediaries" worked 
mainly in isolated rural villages in the Atlas Mountains where they 
persuaded desperate parents that their children would be better off 
as apprentices or child maids.  In some instances, these youngsters 
and teenagers ended up as sex workers in popular Moroccan tourist 
destinations, namely Marrakech, Agadir, and Tangier. 
 
-- Political will existed at the highest levels to combat 
trafficking in persons.  Morocco recognized its problem with 
trafficking as a transit country and country of origin.  The GOM has 
asked both the U.S. and the EU for assistance with border challenges 
and repatriation issues.  Morocco continued to participate in 
regional and international conferences focusing on how to counter 
trafficking and smuggling.  Morocco fully supported civil society's 
efforts to fight human trafficking and smuggling. 
 
-- 27/C.  The Prime Minister's Secretariat for Migration Affairs 
served as the coordinating office for agencies concerned with 
 
CASABLANCA 00000039  004.2 OF 014 
 
 
migration and illegal immigration.  Anti-trafficking activities were 
primarily carried out by the Ministry of the Interior (MOI), 
although it involved different entities falling under it: 
clandestine immigration is the purview of immigration officials; 
prostitution falls under the police; while child brides are under 
the purview of local authorities who ultimately report to the MOI. 
Three departments were chiefly responsible for child labor issues: 
the Ministry of Employment and Professional Training, the 
Secretariat for Families, Children, and the Handicapped, and the 
 
SIPDIS 
Ministry of National Education, specifically its Department of 
Non-Formal Education, which tried to provide remedial education and 
job training to child maids and "apprentices."  Prosecution of 
individuals charged with trafficking or violation of labor laws fell 
to the Ministry of Justice (MOJ). 
 
-- The Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) was also an integral part 
of the system and had a two pronged system to deal with migration 
and trafficking.  One department worked on Moroccan policy issues 
dealing with international migration while the other coordinated 
closely with international organizations represented domestically, 
such as UNHCR, IOM, UNICEF and others who dealt directly with 
migrants. 
 
-- 27/D.  While the GOM continued its efforts to fight trafficking, 
the cost was a hardship.  The GOM continuously requested help from 
the EU and individual countries.  While funding to assist with 
border security was promised to Morocco by the EU, according to 
officials at the MFA, only a small portion was delivered. 
Corruption in general was a problem; however, it did not appear to 
have a serious impact on trafficking. 
 
-- 27/E.  The GOM did not differentiate between trafficking and 
illegal migration; therefore, it did not monitor for evidence of 
trafficking specifically.  According to MFA officials, Morocco 
continues to heavily guard its northeast border with Algeria and its 
far southwest Atlantic border, including the disputed Western Sahara 
territory, facing the Canary Islands to interdict trafficking and 
migrant smuggling.  It also stepped up enforcement at airports, 
train stations, and shipping ports.  The GOM had a substantial and 
well-organized immigration, customs, and security apparatus that 
closely monitored the country's borders.  Border patrol officers 
routinely found clandestine migrants hidden in trucks and freighters 
destined for Spain. 
 
-- Some statistics were made public through the MOI.  These 
frequently included the number of people arrested, trafficking gangs 
dismantled, and the number of prevented incidents of illegal 
migration. 
 
¶6.  (U) PARA 28:  Investigation and Prosecution of Traffickers 
 
-- No new legislation regarding trafficking has been enacted since 
the last TIP report.  The GOM officially did not differentiate 
 
CASABLANCA 00000039  005.2 OF 014 
 
 
between smuggling and trafficking. 
 
-- 28/A.  On November 20, 2003, Morocco's new Immigration and 
Emigration Act 02-03, entitled "Entry and Stay of Foreigners in the 
Kingdom of Morocco, Illegal Emigration and Immigration," was 
published in the Official Bulletin.    Under Title II, Articles 
50-56, the law prohibits trafficking in persons and sets specific 
punishments.  It severely punishes people involved in migrant 
smuggling and human trafficking, including public officials who take 
a hear-no-evil and see-no-evil approach to violations of Moroccan 
immigration law.  Title II makes it abundantly clear that all 
individuals and their accomplices involved in human trafficking face 
high fines and prison sentences.  Asset forfeiture is also 
established, and the courts are given extra-territorial judicial 
powers to rule on violations of Moroccan law, which take place 
outside Morocco.  Moroccan immigration law holds public officials 
accountable.  The act criminalizes acts not only carried out by the 
operatives, but also by those who provide safe haven to smuggled 
persons and punishes security officers who fail to carry out their 
duties.  The law is especially harsh on public officials who are 
caught promoting illegal emigration and/or migration. 
 
-- Article 50 stipulates a fine of 3,000 to 10,000 dirhams (USD 
390-1,297) and/or one to six months imprisonment, aside from any 
punishments under the Penal Code, be assessed against any person 
attempting to enter and/or exit Moroccan territory by land, sea, or 
air by presenting a fraudulent travel document(s) or by traveling 
under an assumed name or by using falsified documents.  It also 
prohibits attempted entry/departure from points other than 
recognized border crossings and designated points of departure. 
 
-- Article 51 provides that a prison sentence of two to five years 
and a fine of 50,000 to 500,000 dirhams (USD 6,486-64,864) be levied 
against any public official (whether in charge of or a member of the 
"public forces"), travel agent, or transportation personnel 
operating carriers by land, water, and/or air who attempts to 
facilitate the illegal entry or exit of a person. 
 
-- Article 52 dictates a prison sentence of six months to three 
years and a fine of 50,000 to 500,000 dirhams (USD 6,486-64,864) 
shall be assessed against anyone found to have facilitated, 
organized, or participated in the illegal entry or exit of Moroccans 
and/or foreign nationals in a manner detailed in Articles 50-51 and 
whether or not payment was made for his/her services. 
 
-- Article 52 also specifies increased penalties of 10 to 15 years 
in prison and a fine of 500,000 to 1,000,000 dirhams (USD 
64,864-129,727) be levied against individuals who are repeat 
offenders and are discovered to have been habitually involved in 
human smuggling. 
 
-- Penalties of 10 to 15 years imprisonment and fines of 500,000 to 
1,000,000 dirhams (USD 64,864-129,727) are to be assessed against 
 
CASABLANCA 00000039  006.2 OF 014 
 
 
individual members of any association or cartel created for the 
express purpose of migrant smuggling.  Leaders of these associations 
are also subject to the penalties prescribed in Article 294, 
Paragraph 2, of the Penal Code. 
 
-- Moreover, Article 52 inflicts even greater punishments of 15 to 
20 years in prison should the would-be emigrant or immigrant suffer 
serious injury and "permanent incapacity" is the result.  If the 
migrant is killed while being transported, the trafficker is subject 
to life imprisonment. 
 
-- Should convictions be handed down, Article 53 grants the courts 
the right to confiscate the means of transport, whether public, 
private, or rental, used to commit violations of the law. 
Transportation assets of trafficking ring members and their 
accomplices may also be seized, whether or not they participated in 
the operation. 
 
-- Article 54 orders that a fine of 10,000 to 1,000,000 dirhams (USD 
1,297-129,727) be assessed against any corporate entity found guilty 
of immigration infractions as specified above.  Corporate entities 
are also subject to confiscation orders. 
 
-- Article 55 requires that judgments be made public in three daily 
newspapers, which cover the jurisdiction where the case was heard. 
 
-- Finally, Article 56 establishes that the Moroccan courts may hear 
cases brought against foreigners accused of violating Moroccan 
immigration law.  The courts are given extra-territorial 
jurisdiction in Article 56, which says they may rule on infractions 
of Moroccan law, which occur outside Morocco's borders and are 
committed by non-Moroccans. 
 
-- 28/B.  Penalties under articles 497-504 and 540-549 for 
traffickers deceiving, defrauding, or coercing individuals are from 
six months to five years' imprisonment and fines of 200 dirhams to 
5,000 dirhams (USD 26-648), depending upon whether minors have been 
corrupted. 
 
-- 28/C.  Morocco does not have a law specifically forbidding labor 
trafficking.  Moroccan law, however, does forbid clandestine labor. 
The violation carries a fine of between 2,000-5,000 dirhams (USD 
259-648).  In the case of employing children less than 15 years of 
age, the fine is increased to 25,000-30,000 dirhams (USD 
2,343-3,892).  The Moroccan penal code imposes a fine of 
5,000-20,000 dirhams (USD 648-2,594), and between one and three 
years in prison for anyone convicted of facilitating or encouraging 
forced child labor.  Forced labor is defined by the penal code as 
any illegal work or any work harmful to a child's health, security 
or morals. 
 
-- 28/D.  The penalty for rape or forcible sexual assault is 
dependent upon the involvement of minors and whether the act was 
 
CASABLANCA 00000039  007.3 OF 014 
 
 
deemed violent.  Rapists can be imprisoned for 5-10 years (article 
486).  Sexual offenses against minors, not involving violence (i.e., 
intercourse not deemed rape), are punishable by five to ten years 
imprisonment (article 484).  Perpetrators of similar acts with 
violence (rape) face 10-20 years in prison (article 485); if this 
results in victim's loss of virginity, the offender faces 20-30 
years in jail (article 488).  Actual sentences handed down may be 
less or more severe depending on whether it is a first offense or 
attenuating circumstances existed. 
 
-- 28/E.  While prostitution and solicitation of prostitutes was 
illegal, local law enforcement often closed its eyes to the problem. 
 Activities of brothel owners/operators, criminals, pimps and 
enforcers were criminalized; enforcement, however, was sporadic at 
best.  Prostitution was commonplace in large cites like Casablanca, 
Marrakech, Fez, Tangier and Agadir, but also posed a problem in 
smaller cities and in rural areas as well.  The Government 
prosecuted cases against individuals who coerced or forced women 
into performing sexual services. 
 
-- 28/F.  According to MOI reports, the Government claimed to have 
broken up more than 260 trafficking/smuggling rings in 2007. 
 
-- 28/G.   Law enforcement officers often participated in training 
and seminars that covered trafficking when these programs were 
offered by other countries.  In July 2007, 25-30 officials from a 
variety of ministries attended Counter-trafficking training provided 
by the IOM through the MFA's Center for Migrants Rights.  In 
addition to the officials, 25-30 NGO leaders dealing with migrants 
participated in the training.  In winter 2007, the GOM approached 
the IOM with a request to provide the MFA with assistance on 
developing a set of "best practices" for fighting sex tourism.  The 
request was made to assist an inter-ministry working group with the 
development of an Action Plan to Fight Sex Tourism. 
 
-- 28/H.  Morocco was party to several bilateral and multilateral 
conventions on judicial cooperation and extradition of criminals 
with European, Arab, Asian, and African countries, as well as the 
United States. 
 
-- 28/I.  The GOM did not extradite individuals charged with 
trafficking, although government officials note that Morocco does 
have bilateral extradition treaties with relevant countries. 
Morocco did not extradite its nationals in accordance with Article 
721 of the Penal Code.  The GOM has no plans to modify the law. 
 
-- 28/J.  There was no evidence of national government involvement 
or tolerance for trafficking.  On a local level, however, there were 
rumors that public servants acting on their own sought pay-offs or 
bribes to look the other way in some cases of migrant smuggling and 
trafficking.  The Government attempted to crack down on corruption 
within the public sector. 
 
 
CASABLANCA 00000039  008.3 OF 014 
 
 
-- 28/K.  The GOM prosecuted to the full extent of the law its own 
officials, as it does other individuals, involved in trafficking. 
 
-- 28/L.  In July 2007, Moroccan troops, posted in the Cote d'Ivoire 
on a UN Peacekeeping mission, were accused of the sexual abuse of 
Ivoirian women and girls.  The GOM fully supported the investigation 
of the troops.  A joint UN - Moroccan investigative committee was 
established in August 2007 to investigate the incident.  The 
allegations were dropped when none of the alleged victims would 
appear before the committee.  The African Press Agency reported in 
August 2007, that a UN document claimed that 13 of the Ivoirian 
girls confessed to having been manipulated by an NGO into accusing 
the Moroccan soldiers of sexual abuse in exchange for food and 
assistance. 
 
-- 28/M.  Morocco had a problem with sex tourism.  The phenomenon 
was identified by the GOM as a growing problem.  An Irish national 
was sentenced to one year in prison and a fine of USD 1,300, in 
August 2007, for sexually abusing two minor children less than 16 
years of age.  The verdict was overturned in November 2007 by the 
Court of Appeal of Agadir, and the Irish national was released.  In 
February 2008, a Spanish national was convicted of pedophilia and 
sentenced to a four-year prison term.  His Moroccan accomplice was 
sentenced to 10 months.  The Spaniard was also ordered to return the 
monies he collected from the victims in exchange for promises to 
help them immigrate to Spain.  Also in February, four Arab tourists 
from the Gulf were arrested along with four prostitutes, one of whom 
was a minor, and their pimp.  The group was being held pending 
trial. 
 
¶7.  (U) PARA 29:  Protection and Assistance to Victims 
 
-- 29/A.  The GOM did not provide assistance to foreign victims of 
trafficking by way of providing temporary or permanent residency 
status or other relief from deportation. 
 
-- 29/B.  Morocco's Center for Migrant Rights provided counseling 
services, including an explanation of one's legal and civil rights, 
to Moroccan migrants; however, legal representation was not offered, 
nor was shelter, medical or psychological services.  The GOM relies 
on the NGO community to provide most services to victims of 
trafficking. 
 
-- Child maids who have fled abusive employers or women forced into 
prostitution that have fled the abusive situation, relied solely on 
the Moroccan and international NGO community.  In some cases foreign 
victims of trafficking were able to seek assistance from the NGO 
community.  At least one Christian NGO catered solely to the migrant 
community and offered medical and financial support to victims of 
trafficking. 
 
--29/C.  The GOM provided modest funds to national NGOs offering 
shelter and services to victims of domestic trafficking.  In 
 
CASABLANCA 00000039  009.2 OF 014 
 
 
addition, it offered teachers and social workers to support national 
NGOs working with child maids.  At the Ministry of Labor, it 
provided offices to the International Labor Organization (ILO)'s 
International Program for the Elimination of Child Labor (IPEC), 
which worked on the child maid problem.  The GOM allowed authorized 
NGOs to solicit tax-free donations from citizens, residents, and 
companies, indirectly assisting these non-profit elements of civil 
society to provide services to trafficking victims. 
 
-- 29/D.  The GOM did not differentiate between victims of 
trafficking and voluntarily smuggled migrants; therefore, there was 
no data on the number of trafficking victims. 
 
-- 29/E.  Prostitution was not legal in Morocco. 
 
-- 29/F.  Morocco did not differentiate between victims of 
trafficking and smuggled migrants.  Foreign trafficking victims were 
treated as illegal migrants.  They were often arrested and deported 
along with other migrants.  Morocco routinely rounded up illegal 
sub-Saharan migrants and victims of trafficking and left them at the 
Algerian border, often without food or water.  There were first hand 
reports from Refugees Without Borders (MSF) of abuse of both 
migrants and trafficked persons at the hands of Moroccan police and 
gangs of sub-Saharans in the frontier area between Morocco and 
Algeria. 
 
-- For domestic victims of trafficking, in 2003 Parliament changed 
the Penal Code so that runaway child maids may be administratively 
returned to their families instead of being arrested for vagrancy. 
If returning them to their parents was not possible or feasible, 
they would be placed in separate youth centers, not mixed in with 
juvenile delinquents. 
 
-- Morocco's November 2003 Immigration and Emigration Act carefully 
defined the rights of illegal immigrants, economic migrants, and 
asylum seekers in Title II, Article 38.  This article also 
pinpointed the prerogatives immigration officials have in protecting 
Morocco's borders.  The statute (and the way the law was 
implemented) blurred the distinction between trafficked persons and 
economic migrants.  It set forth limits to how long a non-Moroccan 
may be detained and under what conditions.  The law furthermore 
listed the rights to which an intending immigrant, non-resident 
alien, casual visitor, or trafficked person was entitled. 
 
-- 29/G.  While victims were not encouraged to file civil suits 
against traffickers, they often testified on behalf of the GOM when 
it sought to prosecute trafficking cases.  Specific numbers of 
victims who testified were not available. 
 
-- 29/H.  We are unaware of any specific protections, other than 
laws forbidding the various forms of trafficking, that the 
Government provided to victims of trafficking or witnesses in cases 
against traffickers. 
 
CASABLANCA 00000039  010.3 OF 014 
 
 
 
-- 29/I.  Morocco offers some specialized training for government 
officials in dealing with victims of trafficking.  With the 
assistance of IOM, the Government trained diplomats in countries 
that are prime destinations or transit countries, i.e., Spain, Italy 
and the Gulf region, for Moroccan victims of trafficking. 
Statistics on the number of those assisted and exact type of 
assistance were not available. 
 
-- GOM officials from a variety of ministries including Foreign 
Affairs and Cooperation; Health; National Education; and Social 
Development, Families and Solidarity attended workshops on 
trafficking provided by the IOM in 2007. 
 
-- 29/J.  Morocco worked with NGOs and the international community, 
specifically Spain, Italy and the IOM, to establish shelters and a 
system to assist Moroccan minors who have been the victims of 
trafficking abroad.  In 2007, very few minors were repatriated 
according to Ambassador Jaouad El Himdi, MFA Director of Consular 
and Social Affairs.  El Himdi claimed that for repatriation, 
Moroccan family approval was needed and very rarely granted. 
 
-- 29/K.  Victims of trafficking in Morocco were assisted by local 
NGOs.  In addition, some international organizations assisting 
victims of trafficking were; the IOM, Medecins sans Frontieres(MSF), 
and several Christian charitable organizations in Rabat and 
Casablanca.  IOM repatriated 577 irregular migrants in the first six 
months of 2007, with financial assistance from the Government of 
Switzerland.  MSF assisted irregular migrants with medical problems 
in northern Morocco.  We are not aware of any GOM funding for these 
two organizations.  Several Christian organizations assisted 
irregular migrants and victims of trafficking with medical, 
financial, and psychological help.  Some assisted the migrants by 
finding lodging and setting up micro-enterprises.  Private 
charitable donations funded these programs. 
 
-- The GOM had a large budget to fight illegal migration.  However, 
since it did not differentiate between trafficking and smuggling, 
there were no funds earmarked to assist trafficking victims.  In 
addition, the GOM claimed it had inadequate funds to deal with the 
problem of clandestine migrants or victims of trafficking. 
 
-- The GOM worked very closely with international organizations and 
NGOs on internal trafficking, especially in the child labor sector. 
In January 2007, the GOM launched a National Plan of Action for 
Child to End Child Labor developed in cooperation with UNICEF, IPEC, 
and ADROS, the USDOL funded child rescue project.  The first phase 
of the project, the awareness campaign, lasted from January 22 to 
February 23, 2007 and used print media, radio and television to 
disseminate information about the dangers of child labor.  Phase 
two, completed in March 2007, encompassed the signing of five 
conventions or compacts between the Ministry of Social Development, 
Families and Solidarity and various partners in preparation of the 
 
CASABLANCA 00000039  011.2 OF 014 
 
 
implementation of phase three of the plan. 
 
-- The first compact, with the King's National Initiative for Human 
Development (INDH), will integrate the INDH goal of attacking 
poverty in Morocco with the elimination of child domestics by 
providing assistance and education to families who find it necessary 
to allow daughters to work as domestics in order to supplement the 
family income. 
 
-- The Secretariat of State for Literacy and Non-Formal Education 
agreed, in compact two, to continue the awareness campaign begun in 
early 2007, educating Moroccans on the dangers of employing or 
working as a child domestic.  In addition, the Secretariat pledged 
to increase non-formal education programs targeted at former child 
maids with the goal of reintegrating them into the formal education 
system. 
 
-- The third compact, concluded with the National Observatory for 
the Rights of Children (ONDE), will mobilize different partners, 
governmental and non-governmental, to conduct programs warning 
against the employment of child maids.  The ONDE will also continue 
to work on programs to assist child victims of abuse through legal 
and financial support, call centers, and programs for the protection 
of child maids. 
 
-- Twenty million dirham (USD 2.6 million) was committed for further 
implementation of the Plan of Action by the Moroccan Agency for 
Social Development in the fourth compact.  This money will be used 
to develop the capacities of families to help them create income 
generating projects to supplement a meager income instead of placing 
their children in the labor market. 
 
-- The final compact was signed with Zakoura Foundation, Morocco's 
largest micro-credit NGO.  The Foundation agreed to prioritize loans 
for families who allow their children to be withdrawn from the labor 
market and reintegrated into the educational system on a permanent 
basis. 
 
-- The third and final phase of the Plan, which will continue until 
2015, initiated the process of implementing the agreements noted 
above.  The project is underway in Greater Casablanca, concentrating 
in the regions of Doukkala-Abda and Chaouia-Ouerdigha, Marrakech 
focusing on the regions of Tansift-El Haouz, Rabat targeting the 
regions of Rabat-Sale and Zemmour-Zaer, Fez and Fez-Boulemane, Taza, 
Taounate and Errachidia, all areas known to be struggling with high 
percentages of the worst forms of child labor. 
 
-- Domestic NGOs also received some support from the GOM, most often 
as in kind donations.  The work of these NGOs includes:  publicizing 
and monitoring the child maid problem; providing remedial education, 
vocational training, health care, and recreational opportunities to 
child maids; rehabilitating and educating street children, 
delinquents and runaways; assisting single mothers to become 
 
CASABLANCA 00000039  012.2 OF 014 
 
 
financially independent; educating youth and prostitutes (male and 
female) about the dangers of unprotected sex; and advocating for 
women's and children's rights. 
 
¶8. (U) PARA 30:  Prevention 
 
-- 30/A.  The GOM did not differentiate between trafficking and 
irregular migration.  However, the GOM did acknowledge that child 
labor and irregular migration were problems. 
 
-- 30/B.  From January 22 to February 23 2007, the GOM ran an 
anti-child labor awareness campaign to inform and educate the 
citizens of Morocco.  The campaign included brochures, billboards, 
advertisements on buses, and radio spots.  The objective was to 
inform the people of Morocco about the dangers and legal 
ramifications of employing child maids.  The campaign was very 
effective and reached millions of Moroccan citizens.  This campaign 
targeted both the potential victims of domestic trafficking and the 
demand by denouncing the practice of hiring child maids. 
 
-- 30/C.  The GOM worked very closely with NGOs dealing with 
domestic trafficking.  The GOM continued to work with the IOM and 
UNHCR on migration issues.  In July 2007, the GOM signed an 
agreement with UNHCR allowing the UN organization to have full 
diplomatic representation in Morocco. 
 
-- 30/D.  The GOM monitored immigration and emigration patterns 
concerning illegal migration.  Law enforcement agencies did not 
screen for potential trafficking victims along Morocco's borders. 
 
-- 30/E.  In November 2003, in response to a royal edict issued by 
King Mohammed VI, the GOM established an overarching agency for 
migration matters, the National Agency for Migration and Border 
Surveillance.  This agency reports to both the Palace and the MOI. 
Within the MOI, the Director General of Internal Affairs, Director 
of International Cooperation, and Chief of Immigration are 
responsible for directing policy.  Within the Office of the Prime 
Minister, there is a secretariat for migration matters.  Other 
responsible parties include the police; gendarmes; and MOI border 
patrol; the army and navy; the Ministry of Social Development, 
Family, and Solidarity; the Ministry of Justice; the Ministry of 
National Education; the Minister Delegate in Charge of Moroccans 
Living Abroad; the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Consular and Social 
Affairs Office; and the Customs Service. 
 
-- On a routine basis, officials of the Labor Ministry, which has an 
Office of Children's Affairs dedicated to reducing child labor, met 
with ILO-IPEC and UNICEF representatives to harmonize policy and 
establish programs designed to combat child labor and the 
exploitation of children, notably those working as child maids, 
junior artisans or apprentices. 
 
-- 30/F.  In 2003, the GOM completed its national action plan to 
 
CASABLANCA 00000039  013.2 OF 014 
 
 
combat trafficking in persons.  The following were and continue to 
be involved in developing anti-trafficking (smuggling) policies and 
programs:  The Minister Delegate in Charge of Moroccans Living 
Abroad, Office of the Chief of Migration and Immigration Affairs, 
Office of the Prime Minister, Office of the Director of 
International Cooperation, Ministry of Interior, and Chief of 
Immigration, Ministry of Interior. 
 
-- In spring 2007, the same ministries involved in the 
anti-trafficking (smuggling) working group, with the addition of the 
Ministries of Tourism and Justice began to discuss an Anti-Sex 
Tourism Plan of Action.  According to MFA, and MOJ officials the 
Plan of Action was still being developed.  The working group 
requested assistance in the form of "best practices" from the IOM. 
 
 
-- 30/G.  In August 2007, the GOM voluntarily assisted in the 
investigation of Moroccan peacekeeping troops, accused of sexual 
abuse, in the Cote d'Ivoire.  Several high ranking Moroccan military 
officials served with members of the UN on an investigative panel in 
Cote d'Ivoire in July and August 2007, after the allegations 
surfaced.  Following the investigation, charges were dropped when no 
witnesses stepped forward. 
 
-- 30/H.  Not Applicable. 
 
-- 30/I.  Morocco very closely followed the activities of its 
peacekeeping troops.  The recent case, noted above, demonstrates 
Morocco's dedication to safe peacekeeping efforts.  In 2005, 
Moroccan troops were accused of sexual assault of women and children 
in the Democratic Republic of Congo.  Following an investigation by 
the UN and Moroccan official, the GOM arrested, prosecuted and 
sentenced those involved.  Morocco uses this example as part of its 
pre-deployment message to those troops on peacekeeping missions to 
demonstrate its "zero tolerance" standard. 
 
¶10.  (U) TIP Heroes:  Mission Morocco would like to nominate 
American citizens Pastor David Brown and Julie Brown of the French 
Anglican Church.  For the past two and a half years, Pastor and Mrs. 
Brown have been working tirelessly to assist sub-Saharan trafficking 
victims and clandestine migrants in Morocco, often at great personal 
risk.  The Browns' church is one of the few places where trafficking 
victims can turn for help in Morocco as the GOM does not offer 
assistance to these individuals.  The Browns welcome 150-200 new 
cases each month in Casablanca and Rabat, 25 percent of whom are 
women.  Upon initial contact, Pastor Brown listens to the victims' 
stories, assesses their cases and develops a plan of action for 
assistance.  The Browns help may come in the form of money, 
emergency shelter, food, clothing, counseling, start-up assistance 
for micro-enterprises and/or medical help.  Mrs. Brown, a certified 
nurse, examines each and every new arrival and offers free medical 
assistance to anyone who arrives at the church.  While all the 
Browns' cases are not trafficking victims, Pastor Brown believes 
 
CASABLANCA 00000039  014.2 OF 014 
 
 
that 90 percent of the women that visit his office are victims, most 
of whom have been forced into prostitution and many of whom have 
been gang raped either on the journey to Morocco or in the country. 
The assistance offered by the Browns has helped many women escape 
those dangerous situations and start a safer, more independent life. 
 The Browns are truly the unsung heroes of trafficking victims in 
Morocco. 
 
¶10.  (U) Mission POC on TIP issues is Amy M. Wilson, Labor/Political 
Officer, ConGen Casablanca, tel. 212-22-26-45-50, ext. 4151; fax 
212-22-20-80-96; mail: PSC 74, Box 24, APO, AE 09718; pouch: 6280 
Casablanca Place, Washington, DC 20521-6280; e-mail: 
WilsonAM@state.gov. 
 
¶11.  Embassy Rabat cleared this message. 
 
GREENE