06FREETOWN957
FREETOWN GRANTS G/TIP COUNTRY CLEARANCE REQUEST
Wed Nov 22 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Freetown
VZCZCXYZ0006
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHFN #0957/01 3261452
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 221452Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY FREETOWN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0536
INFO RUEHCO/AMEMBASSY COTONOU 0030
RUEHDK/AMEMBASSY DAKAR 0708
RUEHOS/AMCONSUL LAGOS 0206UNCLAS FREETOWN 000957 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA KCRM KWMN PHUM ELAB SMIG NI BN SG SL
SUBJECT: FREETOWN GRANTS G/TIP COUNTRY CLEARANCE REQUEST 
FOR AMY LEMAR 
 
REF: SECSTATE 186971 
 
¶1. Post welcomes and grants country clearance for the visit 
of Amy Lemar, Program Analyst for Africa in the Office to 
Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons (G/TIP), to 
Freetown December 10 - 14. A contract expediter meets all 
visitors - see para 9 below.  Visitors are urged to read the 
contents of this telegram, as it provides useful information 
intended to ensure the success of your visit to Freetown. 
 
¶2. Control officer for the visit: Martin A. Dale 
Embassy Freetown Switchboard: 232-22-515-000 or 
232-76-515-000 (in country 076-515-000). 
Embassy after-hours number (local guard):  232-76-634-603 (in 
country 076-634-603). 
CELL PHONE: in country: 076-616-609; 232-76-616-609 
E-Mail: daleMA@state.Gov. 
Address of New Embassy Compound: American Embassy, Leicester 
Square/Regent, Freetown, Sierra Leone 
 
¶3.  All visiting USG personnel are required to receive a 
security briefing from the Regional Security Officer (RSO) 
upon arrival. (See Paragraph 10.) 
 
¶4.  Visitors should consult the State Department Intranet 
(Opennet: HTTP://Freetown.State.Gov/) or Internet 
(HTTP://Freetown.Usembassy.Gov) sites for further information 
on the post and country. 
 
¶5. Accommodations: Reservations have been made at the Country 
Lodge Hotel (Tel: 232-22-235-589 / 235-098) at USD 120.00 per 
night, which is within per diem.  Credit cards are generally 
not accepted.  Please bring cash or travel orders with valid 
fiscal data. 
 
¶6. Visa Information: A passport and visa are required for 
entry and visitors should obtain a visa in advance. The 
latest information can be obtained from the Embassy of Sierra 
Leone, 1701 19th Street NW, Washington, D.C. 20009, Tel: 
(202) 939-9261 or the nearest overseas Sierra Leonean 
Embassy. There is no charge for diplomatic or official 
passport holders. There is a charge of 100.00 USD for tourist 
passport holders. 
 
Airport visas may be obtained only in extreme circumstances, 
as they are very difficult to arrange and are not encouraged. 
 Therefore, visitors coming from countries without a Sierra 
Leonean Embassy should contact their Control Officer at 
Embassy Freetown and fax a copy of their passports well in 
advance of travel. 
 
¶7. Health/Medical: Medical facilities in Sierra Leone fall 
critically short of U.S. standards. Presently, the only 
reliable medical facility is located 45 minutes outside of 
Freetown. Official visitors who do not possess a Class I 
medical clearance or have serious health concerns, e.g., 
diabetes, heart disease, asthma, or who are on blood thinners 
(with the exception of aspirin) are discouraged from 
traveling to Sierra Leone. The Embassy Health Unit stocks 
only limited medical supplies and is not equipped to handle 
serious illnesses.  All visitors and permanently assigned 
employees traveling to Sierra Leone must have their 
vaccinations current to include, but not limited to, tetanus, 
yellow fever, polio, meningitis, and rabies (for those 
staying longer than 30 days).  The cholera vaccine is not 
required.  Visitors should begin taking malaria prophylaxis 
two weeks prior to arrival. It is mandatory that visitors 
bring their own supply of medications, as local pharmacies in 
Freetown are usually unable to fill prescriptions.  The 
International Certificate of Vaccinations yellow card should 
be hand carried as proof of current yellow fever inoculation. 
Avoid eating uncooked vegetables and salads at restaurants 
and hotels. 
 
¶8. Medical Insurance: Non-Department of State personnel or 
contractors are required to have medical evacuation insurance 
prior to traveling to Sierra Leone. 
 
¶9. Travel to/from Freetown: SN Brussels Airlines services 
Freetown on Sunday, Monday and Thursday from Brussels. 
British Mediterranean services Freetown via London/Heathrow 
on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday. Regional air service into 
Freetown is sporadic, thus be prepared to handle alternate 
ticketing and/or increased food and lodging expenses. 
 
Arriving passengers should proceed through immigration, 
baggage claim, and customs. The Embassy contract expediter 
(Lungi Hotel) will meet all official passengers and arrange 
for transportation to Freetown since Lungi International 
Airport is located across the harbor from Freetown. 
 
 
Transport to Freetown may be by helicopter or hovercraft. 
Passengers are required to pay the expediter for the cost of 
travel from Lungi to Freetown.  The cost of the helicopter is 
50.00 USD (payable in local currency).  The cost of the 
hovercraft is USD 35.00, but it is often out of order. 
 
Passengers departing Freetown for locations within Africa 
must pay an Airport Tax of $40.00 at the airport. (This tax 
is already included in tickets for European destinations.) 
 
¶10. Threat Assessment - Security Advice: All visiting USG 
personnel will be required to receive a security briefing 
from the Regional Security Officer (RSO) upon arrival. 
Sierra Leone is rated high for crime. Visitors will be 
provided a two-way radio and instructions on how to summon 
assistance in the event of an emergency. All travel outside 
of Freetown must have the approval of the Control Officer and 
the RSO. The following guidance is provided to ensure your 
visit to Sierra Leone is safe and uneventful: 
 
-Do not use credit cards and personal checks in the local 
economy; -Do not carry or wear any items that may attract 
attention by thieves. Carry needed items deep in your 
pockets; -Do not walk around the city alone, especially at 
night; -Do not use taxis or public transportation; -Do not 
accept the assistance of strangers; -Do not take photographs 
of people without first asking as they can easily become 
offended. Do not photograph government or military 
facilities, including the airport; -If confronted by 
criminals, do not make threatening movements, comments, or 
gestures. Immediately give the criminals what they want. 
 
¶11.    Computer Systems Access:  If you are a DOS employee 
and would like to access OpenNet during your visit (without 
taking the 30-60 minute systems security briefing), please 
bring confirmation that you have attended, within the last 
year, the "Security Awareness Briefing on OpenNet Plus". 
This must a copy of the certificate you received when you 
completed the briefing.  Ask your systems administrator if 
you need help locating the DS Security Awareness Briefing 
Certificate. 
 
¶12.  Post Policy on Laptops and Thumb Drives: The RSO must 
approve the use of any laptop computer in the Embassy. Thumb 
drives are not authorized for use on Embassy computers unless 
officially issued with a Dept. of State classification label 
on it or approved by the IMO.  Thumb drives are absolutely 
not/not allowed on the CLASSNET.  Thumb Drives brought into 
the Embassy must be cleared by the RSO Office. 
 
¶13.  General Information: Travelers with TDY orders and 
fiscal data may cash checks at the Embassy cashier.  The 
current exchange rate is 2900 Leones to one USD. 
PRATT