09ANKARA624
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Thu Apr 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3003
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0624/01 1200912
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 300912Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9536
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9639
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5684
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3802
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7270
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7148
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3726
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000624 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
 
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 30, 2009 
 
President Gul and FM Babacan Speak Regarding 
Turkey-Armenia-Azerbaijan 
Mainstream Sabah reports President Gul spoke to reporters on his way 
to Prague and said "The normalization process between Turkey and 
Armenia is very important" and he has "high hopes that the problems 
between the two countries will be resolved during 2009."  In a 
related story, Foreign Minister Babacan responded to a question 
regarding the Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict from CHP Deputy Sukru 
Elekdag by saying, "The Azerbaijan-Armenia conflict is being watched 
by six countries.  We will be initiating comprehensive consultations 
within the next few weeks.  Our goal is not only the normalization 
of Turkey-Armenia ties but the full normalization in 
Armenia-Azerbaijan ties as well." 
 
Meanwhile, according to ANKA news agency, Azerbaijani President 
Ilham Aliyev said "Opening the border with Armenia is Turkey's 
internal issue and we don't interfere with any country's internal 
affairs and its bilateral relations." 
 
Sabah newspaper also reports that Secretary Clinton and Armenian FM 
Nalbandian had a telephone conversation regarding Turkey-Armenia 
ties.  Armenian Mediamax News Agency reported that Secretary Clinton 
described the normalization process between Armenia and Turkey as 
"an historic step" and expressed her expectation for a step forward 
regarding the Karabakh issue. 
 
Turkey Mourns The Deaths of 10 Soldiers 
All papers:  Nine soldiers were killed when their armored vehicle 
was hit by remote-controlled mine in Lice town of Diyarbakir. 
Reports indicated the PKK detonated 100 kilograms of explosives that 
were planted on the side of the road.  Another soldier was killed in 
Semdinli town of Hakkari when the PKK opened fire on a military unit 
while they were returning to their headquarters from an operation. 
Mainstream Sabah reports that the military wing of the PKK Terrorist 
Organization, HPG (People's Defense Forces) claimed responsibility 
for the attack in Lice. 
 
Turkish General Staff Denies any Links to Excavated Weapons 
All papers:  Chief of General Staff General Ilker Basbug held a 
press briefing at General Staff Headquarters yesterday.  General 
Basbug said "none of the weapons and ammunition found in excavations 
within the scope of Ergenekon probe belong to the Turkish Armed 
Forces (TSK)."   Basbug expressed the military's commitment to 
democracy and the regime and said "Among the fundamental values of 
democracy are the independence of the judiciary and the rule of law. 
 Everyone should refrain from any act that may damage our judicial 
system.  There is no individual within the TSK who may be engaged in 
any act against the democratic regime in our country."   When asked 
to expand on his April 14 statement regarding the repentance 
measures of PKK members not involved in crimes, General Basbug said 
the existing penal code articles are sufficient for repentance but 
they need to be clarified and applied more effectively.  On foreign 
policy issues, Basbug said "The TSK supports EU membership and in 
return expects the EU not to put forward demands to weaken the 
Turkish nation state."  Commenting on his recent meetings with 
American counterparts, Basbug said "American officials visit Turkey 
not to demand something but to exchange views on various 
developments." 
 
Editorial Commentary on General Basbug's Meeting with Press 
 
Murat Yetkin wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "Given the 
content and the issues discussed at the TGS press event, we can 
conclude that military-civilian relations are undergoing a 
restructuring." 
 
Yavuz Donat wrote in mainstream Sabah: "General Basbug gave good 
messages and presented these messages in a transparent manner.  The 
tone of his press event favored democracy and indicated a military 
 
ANKARA 00000624  002 OF 003 
 
 
coup is out of the question." 
 
Mehmet Yilmaz wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "The general's messages 
were all positive, but this is not the point.  In normal 
democracies, military chiefs are not supposed to comment on 
political issues." 
 
Hasan Cemal wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "It was not proper for the 
Chief of General Staff to comment on matters that should be 
addressed by the Prime Minister and other related ministeries." 
 
Ali Sirmen wrote in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet: "The military 
has clearly and unarguably made its commitment to democracy and the 
rule of law.  Unfortunately today in this country civilians do not 
pass all requirements of a democracy.  A country's future is at 
stake when civilians fail to upgrade the country's democratic 
standards." 
 
Ahmet Altan wrote in leftist Taraf: "It will serve to everybody's 
good if and when the army focuses only on military matters instead 
of politics and legal issues.  It will be good for democracy." 
 
Fehmi Koru wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "General Basbug 
gave long explanations to almost every issue but did not touch on 
the fact that he was exceeding the limits of military areas." 
 
Fikret Bila wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "General Basbug made it 
clear that army is committed to democracy and stands against coups 
but remains distant and even skeptical on certain points of the 
ongoing Ergenekon investigation." 
 
Former Justice Minister Escapes Suicide Bomb Attack Unhurt 
Media outlets report former Turkish justice minister Hikmet Sami 
Turk escaped a suicide bomb attack unharmed when his bodyguards 
thwarted a female attacker at Ankara's Bilkent University Wednesday. 
 Didem Akman, a 25 year old DHKP-C (Dev-Sol) militant, approached 
Turk while he was on his way to his class at the university's law 
faculty.  Bodyguards of Turk stopped Akman while she was trying to 
detonate the bombs wrapped on her body in front of the class door 
where Turk was about to lecture.  Turk and the students in the class 
escaped the attack unhurt.  Akman was rushed to hospital and her 
accomplice, Serkan Onur Yilmaz, was captured by the police while 
trying to leave Ankara at a bus station. 
 
Turk, 74, served as justice minister from 1999-2002 in the 
government of late prime minister Bulent Ecevit.  In 2000, Turk had 
ordered security operations -- dubbed 'Return to life' -- to quell 
prison riots in which 34 inmates were killed by security forces. 
Papers say the attack on Turk came one day after a lawsuit filed 
against the operation, was rejected under a statute of limitations. 
 
 
Incirlik Airbase Photos Found in Al-Qaeda Suspect's House 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports Hikmet A, suspected to be a senior 
al-Qaeda operative detained in the April 21 crackdown on the 
organization in five provinces, had in his possession some aerial 
photographs and sketches of the Incirlik Airbase.  The air control 
center and some security buildings were marked in the photographs. 
Zaman claims Hikmet A had received training in the al-Qaeda's camps 
in Afghanistan. 
 
Countries Take Varying Degrees of Measures to Address Swine Flu 
Media outlets report that, while the WHO has raised the threat level 
from swine flu, countries are taking various measures in efforts to 
control the spread of the virus.  Conservative nationalist Bugun 
asks "Who and what can fight this flu?"  Mainstream Vatan reports 
"Obama has asked for $1.5 billion to counter this flu," and "Mexico 
is planning to cancel flights" as "the virus continues to spread." 
Mainstream Sabah reports "The disease has spread to 21 countries and 
still there is no cure."  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports "Egypt has 
given the order to destroy all pigs as a measure against the virus," 
 
ANKARA 00000624  003 OF 003 
 
 
and "Kyrgyzstan has banned meat imports from the U.S. and Mexico," 
while "Turkey's Health Ministry has warned all of its citizens that 
anyone who develops flu-like symptoms and has returned to Turkey 
from Mexico since April 12th should seek immediate medical 
attention."  CNN Turk reports "Life Will Stop" in Mexico City as the 
city "will shut down public areas from May 1-5." 
 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- Health Ministry Deputy Undersecretary Turan Buzgan says the swine 
flu risk in Turkey was as high as in other countries. 
 
- 34 media institutions are fined by the radio and television 
watchdog RTUK for making "live broadcasts" during Monday's shootout 
between the police and a terrorist in Istanbul. 
 
- Turkey's Central Bank urges the government to carry out EU 
harmonization reforms and pass regulations listed in the 
pre-accession economic program. 
 
- A ruling of the European Court of Justice in favor of the Greek 
Cypriots to reclaim their properties in the Turkish part of Cyprus 
might force Turkey to pay compensations totaling USD 40 billion. 
 
World 
 
- EU Foreign relations commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner says the 
bloc was considering halting all travel to Mexico and disinfecting 
all airports due to the global flu outbreak. 
 
- President Obama says al-Qaeda and the Taleban are the "single most 
direct threat" to US national security. 
 
- A missile strike by a suspected US drone kills at least six 
militants in northwest Pakistan's tribal area bordering Afghanistan. 
 
 
- Libya's top oil official says his country is keen to invest in 
oil-and-gas exploration off Cyprus' southern coast. 
 
JEFFREY