09ANKARA564
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu Apr 16 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO1396
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0564/01 1061156
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 161156Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9436
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9607
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5636
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3763
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7239
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7117
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3695
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000564 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
 
THURSDAY, APRIL 16, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Balancing the Normalization of Turkey-Armenian Ties with 
Azerbaijan's Concerns 
Media outlets report the Azerbaijani President Aliyev's advisor, 
Nevruz Muhammedov, told APA news agency "Azerbaijan understands 
Turkey's position," but that Ankara should carry out the process 
with Armenia "through other paths."  "In principle, we are not 
against the opening of Turkey's border with Armenia," says 
Muhammedov.  "But we demand the question to be resolved through the 
path that was followed by Turkey's former presidents Turgut Ozal, 
Suleyman Demirel and Ahmet Necdet Sezer," he stressed.  Mainstream 
Haberturk reports the Azerbaijani lawmaker Nizami Jafarov, the head 
of the Turkey-Azerbaijan friendship group, as saying that giant gas 
and oil projects would be "frozen" if Turkey opens its border with 
Armenia.  Papers also report Armenian President Sargsian told 
Mediamax news agency, "We are ready to normalize the ties with 
Turkey without setting preconditions, but it seems that Turkey is 
not."  Sargsian added their desire for normalization doesn't mean 
Yerevan has changed its views on the genocide question. 
 
Meanwhile, Foreign Minister Ali Babacan went to Yerevan to attend 
the Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC) foreign ministers' meeting 
on Thursday.  "We want a comprehensive solution and full 
normalization," Babacan was quoted by CNN-Turk as telling reporters 
aboard his plane en route to Yerevan.  Babacan noted "the road to a 
solution must definitely run parallel with talks between Azerbaijan 
and Armenia." 
 
Papers carry an opinion survey by the Ararat Strategic Research 
Center, according to which 61 percent of Armenians oppose closer 
ties with Turkey.  Only 11 percent support the Armenian 
administration's policy toward normalization with Turkey.  74 
percent of those whose views were canvassed were Armenian citizens 
whereas 26 percent of them were Armenians living in Diaspora. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-Armenia-Azerbaijan 
 
Erdal Safak wrote in mainstream Sabah:  "The U.S., Russia and France 
co-chair the Minsk Group.  Unfortunately, the Minsk Group was unable 
to end the conflict between Azerbaijan and Armenia during the last 
17 years.  In order to normalize the ties between Turkey and Armenia 
and to create the right atmosphere for the Turkish and Azeri 
publics, we suggest Turkey take a more active role and become the 
fourth co-chair of the group.  As a co-chair, Turkey can initiate a 
new negotiation process that is based on  win-win principles within 
a limited timeframe, just like the one in Cyprus." 
 
Ibrahim Karagul wrote in Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak:  "Normalized 
relations between Turkey and Armenia will not only be to Armenia's 
interest but will be to Turkey and Azerbaijan's interest as well. 
The issues of opening the Armenian border and ending the occupation 
of Azeri territory should advance parallel to each other.  This 
whole issue is the result of a power struggle between Russia and the 
West.  If Russia loses Armenia, all energy projects will be 
re-arranged and a new position will be determined for the Caucasus. 
This is why the Azeri government and the public has been provoked by 
Russia and its allies.  If Azeri president Aliyev  gets closer to 
Russia and turns his back to the West, this will be a major mistake. 
 Armenia is definitely very important for the West, however, 
Azerbaijan is much more important.  For the time being, Azerbaijan 
is being tested by Russia, Iran and others against the possibilities 
of Armenia moving towards the West.  Therefore, Turkey should 
immediately eliminate this crisis in trust." 
 
Clinton and Talat Meet in Washington 
Media outlets are pleased to note that Turkish Cypriot Leader Mehmet 
Ali Talat was able to meet with U.S. Secretary of State Hilary 
Clinton and discuss a solution process for the divided island. 
 
ANKARA 00000564  002 OF 004 
 
 
Mainstream Haberturk reports "Talat Met with Clinton," and notes 
"Previously, the Greek lobby postponed his meetings," in the U.S. 
but "Talat was also able meet members of Congress and other civil 
society organizations."  Mainstream Hurriyet reports "The U.S. Gives 
Support to the Solution Process," as "Talat met with Clinton." 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "Clinton Promises to Talat Support 
for a Solution in Cyprus."  CNN Turk comments, "The U.S. Is Warm to 
Turkish Cyprus," and notes, "The Obama administration regards the 
Turkish Cypriots warmly," as  "Clinton and Talat had positive 
meetings." 
 
Iraq's al-Hashimi: Green Light to Turkish Base in northern Iraq 
Mainstream Sabah reports the Iraqi Vice President Tariq al-Hashimi 
told al-Hurra television that Iraq should either eliminate the PKK 
or allow Turkey to set up a "temporary base" in the region to 
"cleanse" terrorism in the mountains.  Hashimi said Turkey was right 
in its concerns, and noted the three-side mechanism of Turkey, Iraq 
and the U.S. continued its work.  Sabah says the PKK-affiliated 
Firat News Agency reported April 7 that Turkey would set up a base 
in Diyana, which was to be built by the Mak-Yol company in Turkey. 
 
 
Selected Media Criticize the Stoning of Female Demonstrators in 
Afghanistan 
Mainstream secularist, along with liberal and leftist outlets, 
criticize the attack on women protestors yesterday in Afghanistan. 
Islamist outlets refrain from reporting on the incident.  Mainstream 
Milliyet lauds the women protestors' efforts in the headline "300 
Women Heroes," and the paper reports "The women's protest was 
peaceful," but "Afghan men attacked the women."  Leftist Taraf 
headlines "Stoning to Those Who Say 'No' To Rape," and notes " male 
protestors threw stones and shouted 'Death to Christian Slavery' at 
the three hundred women who protested against marital rape." 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports "Stones Rained on Women" as 
"a peaceful women's protest was attacked by stone-throwing religious 
fundamentalists," and "women police formed a barricade between the 
two protests."  Liberal Radikal reports "Men Stone Afghan Women 
Calling for Rights," Mainstream Haberturk reports "Women Are Stoned 
As They Protest a Rape Law."  Mainstream NTV headlines, "Women Who 
Want Rights Are Stoned" in Afghanistan. 
 
DTP Protests Tuesday's PKK Detentions 
Papers report that on Wednesday in several cities in the mainly 
Kurdish southeast Turkey, the pro-Kurdish DTP staged demonstrations 
to protest the detention of party members in recent operations 
against the PKK.  On Tuesday, 52 suspects including three DTP 
provincial deputy chairs were taken into custody in police 
operations in 12 provinces across Turkey.  In Van, DTP lawmaker 
Ozdal Ucer said they would be "on the streets" until their friends 
are released.  In Diyarbakir, DTP lawmakers joined by mayor Osman 
Baydemir staged a protest march that included 10,000, papers report. 
 
 
Jobless Rate Reaches Record High in Turkey 
Media outlets report the Turkish Statistics Institution (TUIK) 
released on its webpage the unemployment rate in Turkey made a 
"peak," soaring to 15.5 percent in January, marking the highest 
point in the history of Turkey.  The number of the unemployed for 
January rose by 1,059,000 and reached 3.65 million. 
 
Mainstream Vatan says these figures make Turkey the "unemployment 
champion" in Europe, and on a global scale, rank second behind South 
Africa.  Liberal Radikal underlines the unemployment rate among 
young people went up from 21.2 percent to 27.9 percent, which means 
one out of every three young people is unemployed.  Analysts predict 
further rises in unemployment in the months, adding to the pressure 
on the AKP government to finalize fast a new loan accord with the 
IMF. 
 
Ambassador Jeffrey Responds to Students at 'Model UN Conference' in 
Istanbul 
 
ANKARA 00000564  003 OF 004 
 
 
Mainstream Milliyet reports Ambassador Jeffrey spoke at the opening 
of the "International Model UN Conference" held at Istanbul's Robert 
College to which 700 students from 13 countries participated.  "Over 
the coming 60-70 years, the most important issue you will face in 
international politics will be the world's resources," said Jeffrey. 
 Ambassador Jeffrey answered a question about North Korea's nuclear 
weapons and noted that these weapons posed a threat to the U.S. and 
the entire world.  Jeffrey recalled the U.S. has not used nuclear 
weapons since WW II, and underlined that President Obama announced a 
target to reduce nukes by 2012.  On another question regarding U.S. 
intentions over the natural resources in the Middle East, Jeffrey 
said "We want energy independence for all countries." 
 
Editorial Commentary on General Basbug's Annual Speech 
 
Fehmi Koru wrote in Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak:  "I have 
difficulty understanding Basbug's concerns for religious sects. 
Some people open Turkish language schools all over the world and fly 
the Turkish flag in these places and yet, they are considered as a 
"threat" in Turkey.  Democratic states, if they are truly 
democratic, do not get scared of individuals or groups." 
 
Kadri Gursel wrote in mainstream Milliyet:  "Why is Turkish media 
attaching such a big importance to the TGS Chief's speech?  The 
answer is this: the Turkish military is a Turkish reality which has 
a negative impact on the country by intervening in politics and it 
has a  negative influence on the Kurdish issue.  However, Basbug's 
speech reflected many positive changes in the Turkish reality." 
 
Murat Yetkin wrote in liberal Radikal:  "With his speech, General 
Basbug, in a way, shared his thoughts regarding the constitutional 
change and a partial amnesty with the government and the public. 
His milder approach was noticed regarding many issues but not 
regarding the religious sects.  I wonder if this could be an issue 
between PM Erdogan and General Basbug?  It is hard to guess, whether 
Basbug will mention this issue at his next week's press conference 
but it will be foolish to think that the timing of such a speech was 
just a coincidence." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- Ankara Prosecutor's Office saw "no need for investigation" against 
the pro-Kurdish DTP leader Ahmet Turk and party deputy Selahattin 
Demirtas who addressed in Kurdish a recent DTP party group meeting 
in the parliament. 
 
- Labor unions and professional associations including DISK, KESK, 
TMMOB and TTB announced they were determined to celebrate May Day in 
Taksim Square in the heart of Istanbul.  DISK chairman Suleyman 
Celebi said Taksim was identified with Labor Day after the killing 
of 36 people in Taksim on May 1 in 1977. 
 
- The pro-reunification CTP and the UBP are expected to race in the 
April 19 general elections in Turkish Cyprus.  Recent surveys show 
the CTP loses votes.  The UBP supports negotiations but opposes a 
federation to reunite the island. 
 
- Turkish markets expect Thursday's meeting of the Central Bank 
Monetary Board to curb interest rates by 50 points.  The curbing of 
the rates is expected to have a positive effect on markets hit by 
the economic crisis. 
 
World 
 
- President Gul addressed Wednesday the Parliament of Bahrain. 
"Turkey takes the new US administration's call on disarmament and 
the joint statements made by the US and Russian Presidents early 
this month very seriously," said Gul. 
 
 
ANKARA 00000564  004 OF 004 
 
 
- US special Middle East envoy George Mitchell kicks off his first 
peace mission to Israel and the Palestinian territories since PM 
Benjamin Netanyahu took office. 
 
- President Ahmadinejad says Tehran is preparing new proposals to 
break the deadlock over its nuclear program. 
 
- NATO says it plans to hold military exercises next month in 
Georgia. 
 
- The US State Department says North Korea has asked US experts 
overseeing the disablement of its Yongbyon nuclear plant to leave 
the country. 
 
JEFFREY