09ANKARA606
OBAMA DIDN'T SAY 'GENOCIDE' ... IN ENGLISH
Mon Apr 27 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO9554
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0606/01 1170905
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 270905Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9504
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9627
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5665
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3787
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7259
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7137
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3715
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000606 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: OBAMA DIDN'T SAY 'GENOCIDE' ... IN ENGLISH 
 
MONDAY, APRIL 27, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Obama Didn't Say 'Genocide'... in English (Haberturk) 
Media outlets over the weekend at first appeared relieved that 
President Obama did not use the word "genocide" in his statement 
commemorating the events of 1915.  However, today's press coverage 
is turning more negative against the statement, which referred to 
the events of 1915 by using the Armenian term "Meds Yeghern, 
Armenian for "The Great Catastrophe."  Mainstream Vatan reports 
"This statement was stronger than prior statements." 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak headlines "Big Reactions to the Great 
Catastrophe," and notes that "Ankara was infuriated by Obama's 
statement and called it 'unacceptable'", including "the Prime 
Minister who gave a sharp response to Obama."  Mainstream Hurriyet 
reports "The Prime Minister gave a strong answer to Obama" by saying 
"Turkey is not a country that can be deceived."  Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet reports "Reactions Will Be Shown to Obama  Via Official 
Lines of Communication," claiming "a note will be given to the U.S." 
to protest the "unacceptable statement." 
 
Some outlets began to imply that although the word genocide was not 
explicitly used, the President found a way to  say it implicitly. 
Yesterday's Milliyet commented, "Obama's statement was an elegant 
way of recognizing genocide."   Mainstream Haberturk  says "Obama 
just didn't say 'genocide' in English," because he used the Armenian 
term "Meds Yeghern," which, the paper contends "is equivalent to 
saying genocide." Yesterday's Haberturk pointed to three sentences 
in the statement where Obama "implied genocide charges."  First, he 
said "There is no change in my position," which Haberturk says 
indicates Obama has not changed his prior opinion that a genocide 
occurred.  Second, the paper notes he said "Turks and Armenians 
should acknowledge their common history" which the paper interprets 
to mean "Turkish people should recognize the genocide."  Finally, 
the paper says that Obama's call for dialogue is actually "a call to 
Turks to debate the issue." 
 
Turkish Leaders React Strongly to President Obama's April 24 Speech 
Media outlets reported over the weekend and today that Turkish 
political leaders were "displeased" by President Obama's use of 
"Meds Yeghern" (Great Calamity in Armenian) during his April 24 
statement to commemorate the events of 1915.  Parliament Speaker 
Koksal Toptan said Sunday "Statements like President Obama's remarks 
on the events of 1915 seriously harm the normalization process 
between Turkey and Armenia."  Toptan told reporters that despite 
Turkey's efforts, Obama was "not fully informed" about what happened 
in 1915.  Toptan also warned Armenian officials that "ties cannot be 
normalized this way."  The Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA) said in a 
statement on its webpage, "It should not be forgotten that several 
hundred thousand Turks also lost their lives in the same region, and 
at the same period, in the context of the events of 1915."  "History 
can be construed and evaluated only on the basis of undisputed 
evidence and documentation.  It's with such an understanding that we 
support the historical dimension of the Turkish-Armenian dialogue," 
said the MFA. 
 
Addressing a gathering of the AKP provincial heads on Sunday, Prime 
Minister Erdogan said Obama's speech was both "unacceptable" and an 
"unrealistic interpretation of history."  "It is distressing that 
the events of 1915 are being abused and used to garner votes," said 
Erdogan, arguing that Obama's statement "fulfilled the promises he 
made during his election campaign. These issues should be left to 
historians, otherwise, it adversely affects the relations between 
the countries."  Erdogan stressed Turkey's efforts for a settlement 
with Armenia, and said, "Turkey is not a country that can be 
deceived easily."  In a statement, President Abdullah Gul said he 
did "not agree" with some parts of Obama's speech.  "Hundreds of 
thousands of Turks and Muslims were killed in 1915, therefore, the 
agonies of both sides should be shared," said Gul.  Gul emphasized 
politicians and statesmen cannot make a judgment about history, 
 
ANKARA 00000606  002 OF 004 
 
 
noting that "diplomacy must be given a chance." 
 
Opposition CHP leader Deniz Baykal said, "President Obama did not 
utter the word 'genocide,' but by using the Armenians' terminology 
and interpretation, he proved he shares the views of Armenia and the 
Armenian Diaspora."   Baykal added it was "disappointing" that 
Obama's statement proves the events of 1915 were not seen in a way 
that takes into account the losses on both sides.  "The aim of such 
statements is to manipulate Turkey's foreign policy.  Turkey should 
be saved from such blackmail," stressed Baykal.  Opposition MHP 
leader Devlet Bahceli said in a statement the "The U.S. President 
clearly expressed that he agrees with the Armenians."  "Obama's 
speech, however, put an end to this matter being a Sword of Damocles 
hanging over Turkey," said Bahceli, and called on Prime Minister 
Erdogan to "undo his fault." 
 
Mainstream Haberturk reported Saturday Ambassador Jeffrey was 
summoned to the Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA), and was told that 
the "comments from the U.S. were unacceptable."  Papers report 
Turkey's Ambassador in Washington, Nabi Sensoy, too, conveyed 
Ankara's anxiety to the State Department.  The Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet says Monday that Ankara is to submit notes of protest to 
the State Department in Washington and the U.S. Embassy in Ankara, 
saying Turkey do not accept the U.S. President's statement on the 
events of 1915.  The Islamist-oriented Zaman reports Sunday that 
Prime Minister Erdogan "warned" the U.S. against statements that 
could "harm the process of normalization between Turkey and 
Armenia." 
 
Prime Minister Erdogan Sends Message to President Aliyev 
Liberal Radikal and conservative-nationalist Turkiye report that PM 
Erdogan sent a message to Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev and 
told him not to be deceived by those who were trying to damage 
Ankara-Baku relations.  Weekend papers reported that Azerbaijan, not 
pleased with recent developments regarding Turkey-Armenia 
rapprochement, increased the price of natural gas sold to Turkey. 
Moreover, Sunday's Vatan  reported that Azerbaijan voiced its 
reaction to Turkey by closing down a mosque in Baku which was 
constructed by the Turkish Religious Affairs Directorate.  Today's 
mainstream Sabah and Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak report that 
Turkish Energy Minister Hilmi Guler denied the reports regarding the 
gas price increase and said "it is not possible to increase the 
price of natural gas sold by Azerbaijan to Turkey because there is a 
contract regulating the issue."  However, NTV's 7 am news broadcast 
this morning quoted an Azeri official on the issue saying that "the 
contract has expired already." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-Armenia with President Obama's April 
24 Speech 
 
Mehmet Barlas wrote in mainstream Sabah (4/26): "Turkish foreign 
diplomacy has always been conducted under certain declared positions 
and any change in these positions could be interpreted as a 
concession.  Turkish politicians and diplomats prefer to stick with 
their prepared positions on every issue, from the Armenian issue to 
the EU, from Cyprus to northern Iraq and others.  Interestingly, the 
political geography surrounding us has changed while our positions 
have remained the same.  Turkey's position regarding the Armenian 
genocide claims, for instance, has remained unchanged in the same 
way that our Cyprus position remained the same 25 years.  One of the 
fundamental requirements of 'realpolitik' is to face change and be 
able to produce politics based on global realities.  Even the United 
States, with its super power influence, does not have the luxury of 
remaining unchanged.  Changing our positions based on world 
realities will only provide Turkey with better harmonization both 
inside and outside." 
 
Ferai Tinc wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "In this post April 24 
period, it is very important to see whether normalization with 
Armenia remains cosmetic or whether there will be concrete steps to 
follow.  At this stage, we must find ways to overcome our worries as 
 
ANKARA 00000606  003 OF 004 
 
 
well as the prejudices of the Turkish, Armenian and Azerbaijan 
peoples.  Otherwise, without popular support, normalization cannot 
move forward." 
 
Semih Idiz wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "President Obama did not 
pronounce the word 'genocide' but he meant it.  On the other hand, 
Obama also clearly asked both Turkey and Armenia to remain committed 
to the normalization process.  Washington expects Turkey to start 
diplomatic ties with Armenia as soon as possible and hopes to see 
the border opened.  The pending genocide resolution in the U.S. 
Congress indicates that the Armenian issue within Turkish-American 
relations is not yet over.  Moreover, President Obama's April 24 
message did not make it easier either.   Whether PM Erdogan likes it 
or not, he will need the advice of experienced diplomats in the days 
to come." 
 
Ali Aslan wrote in Islamist oriented Zaman: "Obama's language in the 
April 24 message indicates that Turkey has lost the Armenian issue 
in America from the intellectual and political perspective.  It is 
important to note that the U.S. government and Congress share 
similar Judeo-Christian values to the Armenians, who are Christian. 
However, Obama also did his best not to use the word 'genocide' in 
his statement, which indicates a good chance that Turkey can remain 
committed to diplomacy.  There is a new deadline coming up - on 
October 14, 2009 the Turkish and Armenian soccer teams will play a 
match.  There has to be some ways to find concrete measures on the 
Turkey-Armenia road map for a formula to ease Azeri worries before 
that date." 
 
Ruhat Mengi wrote in mainstream Vatan: "There is no room for 
optimism any longer.  While some were expecting a soft approach from 
President Obama, he went even further and used stronger language 
than former presidents.  Next year we are likely to hear the word 
'genocide,' which will be followed by Armenian claims for 
compensation and territory." 
 
Huseyin Bas wrote in leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet: "Don't be 
fooled by the Armenian Diaspora's statements indication 
dissatisfaction regarding President Obama's April 24 message.  In 
fact, they got what they wanted.  Armenian influence remains very 
strong in American politics and Turkey's step toward a road map with 
Armenia cannot give us anything positive.  We hope to see results 
from the Turkish-Armenian historians' commission but Washington has 
already made up its mind." 
 
Yavuz Baydar wrote in the English language daily Today's Zaman: 
"Turkey has changed since the early 1990s, which marks a remarkable 
transition.  Hopefully one day soon civilians from both sides can 
determine whether to call the events 'Yeds Meghern' or something 
else.  The obsession with the rulers of this nation with one single 
word [genocide] is already sentenced to oblivion." 
 
Admiral Mullen's 'Jet Speed' Visit to Turkey (Vatan) 
Mainstreams Hurriyet, Milliyet and Vatan and Islamist-oriented Yeni 
Safak reported that the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Admiral 
Mike Mullen paid a 12-hour visit to Ankara over the weekend. 
Hurriyet says Admiral Mullen stopped in Ankara on his way from Iraq 
to Washington.  He held meetings only with TGS Chief General Basbug. 
 They had dinner together and later met from 19.00 to 23.00.  Papers 
report the two discussed Iraq, PKK terrorism, Caucasus stability and 
Afghanistan.  Milliyet says "It was noticed that Mullen's visit 
wasn't announced in order to keep his meeting quiet." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- The military General Staff (TGS) said Sunday Turkey will stage a 
joint military exercise with Syria across the border on Monday, and 
will sign a memorandum of understanding on military cooperation with 
Kuwait. 
 
ANKARA 00000606  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
- Justice Minister Mehmet Ali Sahin said a file on the Deniz Feneri 
case was given to the Turkish embassy in Germany.  Sahin said the 
documents were being "assessed and translated." 
 
- Justice Minister Mehmet Ali Sahin said 70,000, and not 70 million, 
people were "wiretapped" via judge permissions within the operations 
against crime in Turkey. 
 
- State Minister Mehmet Simsek has submitted to the IMF a 
medium-term timetable for reforms. 
 
World 
 
- Iranian President Ahmadinejad says his government would accept a 
two-state solution for Israelis and Palestinians if Palestinians 
did. 
 
- Spain says that in the fall, Spain and Egypt would organize a 
summit on the peace process in the Middle East with Arab heads of 
state and government. 
 
- Prime Minister Sali Berisha says Albania will apply to start 
negotiations on EU candidate status on April 28. 
 
- At least 80 people in Mexico have died after contracting swine 
flu, with 20 cases also reported in the U.S. and six in Canada. 
 
JEFFREY