09ANKARA618
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Wed Apr 29 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO2031
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0618/01 1191334
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 291334Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9526
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9634
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5676
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3798
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7266
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7144
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3722
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000618 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
 
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 29, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Opposition Leaders Respond at Party Group Meetings to Obama's 
Armenian Remembrance Day Statement 
Media outlets note opposition leaders Deniz Baykal and Devlet 
Bahceli commented on U.S. President Barack Obama's April 24th 
statement in Tuesday's addresses to their party lawmakers in the 
parliament.  CHP leader Baykal said "Obama has adopted the Armenian 
and the Armenian Diaspora's terminology for the 1915 events.  The 
other side of the events was disregarded," arguing that many Turks 
and Kurds were also killed during the same period.  "The 
Turkey-Armenian process has not resolved the matter or improved 
relations with Armenia, yet it has adversely affected our ties with 
Azerbaijan," emphasized Baykal.  Baykal called on Azerbaijan to "not 
overreact," because the AKP government was "temporary" whereas the 
friendship between Turkey and Azerbaijan would "last forever." 
 
Opposition MHP leader Devlet Bahceli told his party group, "In the 
Armenians' literature, 'Meds Yeghern' (the Great Calamity) is used 
to define a violence which is equal to the 'Holocaust,' the massacre 
of the Jews by the Nazis."  Bahceli said "Obama used this term to 
show that the events of 1915 were equal to the Holocaust," and "to 
identify the Turkish nation with the Nazis." 
 
In another story, mainstream Aksam reports Ankara will make a 
'gesture' to Yerevan and allow Armenia to link to the 'Black Sea 
Motorway Project,' which will be joined by 12 countries on the 
shores of the Black Sea.  Armenia will join the project by 
constructing its own part through Georgia.  Turkey earlier excluded 
Armenia from the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan (BTC) oil pipeline, the 
Baku-Tbilisi-Kars railway, and the Baku-Tbilisi-Erzurum natural gas 
pipeline projects, writes Aksam. 
 
Turkish Security Council Reacts to Obama's Remarks 
Sabah, Milliyet, Turkiye, Vatan:  The National Security Council 
(NSC) criticized President Obama April 24th remarks when he called 
the events of 1915 "The Great Disaster."  The Council said in a 
statement issued after yesterday's meeting "The joint history of the 
Turkish and Armenian nations should be evaluated with an objective 
and scientific approach that is supported by indisputable proof and 
documents," reported mainstream Sabah.  Mainstream papers Vatan and 
Milliyet report that the NSC also discussed developments regarding 
additional troops to Afghanistan.  Milliyet speculates that, since 
the Council talked about the additional troops ISAF command, it is 
not planned to send additional Turkish troops to the combat zone in 
Afghanistan. 
 
President Aliyev Comments on Turkish-Armenian Rapprochement 
Vatan, Milliyet, Sabah, Radikal and CNN Turk:  Speaking in a joint 
press conference with European Commission President Jose Manuel 
Barosso, Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev said, "The Azerbaijani 
people have a right to know what is going on in relations between 
Turkey and Armenia.  Azerbaijan is not in a position to give the 
go-ahead or prevent relations between the two countries.  Azerbaijan 
has a right to shape its policy in line with new realities in the 
region.  The Azerbaijani people would like to know whether the 
Karabakh peace process was separate from Turkish-Armenian 
rapprochement.  This is a very simple question and a very simple 
answer is needed." 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-Armenia 
 
Soli Ozel wrote in mainstream HaberTurk: "For everyone who lived in 
the land of Anatolia, 'The Great Catastrophe' is an expression of a 
historic reality.  It will be most proper and healthy if we can 
accept this reality in order to heal wounds." 
 
Ismet Berkan wrote in liberal-intellectual Radikal: "Our cultural 
habits may tell us to remain silent regarding the agonies of the 
 
ANKARA 00000618  002 OF 004 
 
 
past.  However there are other cultures that prefer to face the past 
by talking about the past, which contributes to healing wounds." 
 
Cengiz Candar wrote in business daily Referans: "The most important 
aspect of the road map between Turkey and Armenia is that the two 
countries have finally reached an agreement after almost 90 years of 
debates.  At this point, the opening of the Turkish-Armenian border 
depends entirely on an agreement between Azerbaijan and Armenia.  As 
soon as these two sign the Minsk Group's document on Karabakh, the 
border will be opened." 
 
Istanbul Governor, Police Chief Find Monday's Raid on Terror House 
'Successful' 
Media outlets report Istanbul Governor Muammer Gurler and police 
chief Celalettin Cerrah held a joint press conference about Monday's 
police raid on a house in the Bostanci district in which two people, 
including a police officer, were killed and seven people wounded. 
Guler and Cerrah rejected criticism that the apartment was not 
evacuated during the skirmish, that the traffic around the building 
was not cut, and that the operation took "too long."  They said 
suspect, identified as Orhan Yilmazkaya, a senior operative of the 
terrorist Revolutionary Headquarters group, was trained in PKK camps 
in northern Iraq.  Cerrah said in the house, C-4 plastic explosives, 
hand grenades, "a bomb package like the one sent to an AKP building 
last year," and handguns were seized.  "It was a successful 
operation," said Cerrah and Guler. 
 
Liberal Radikal lashed out at Guler and Cerrah for "defending" the 
mistakes they made during Monday's operation, and for not even 
apologizing for the death of a passer-by who was "watching" the 
scene near some policemen who were gathered around the building 
where the skirmish took place. 
 
Nine Soldiers Killed in Blast in Southeast Turkey 
The chief of the military General Staff (TGS), General Ilker Basbug 
said early Wednesday nine soldiers were killed in a roadside blast 
in Lice in the province of Diyarbakir southeastern Turkey.  Basbug 
said in a televised press conference a tank and an armored personnel 
carrier were on a mission to secure the region before the passage of 
a military convoy when the explosion occurred.  "The personnel 
carrier has around 4-4.5 centimeters of armor underneath.  These 
explosives must have been strong to cause such damage.  According to 
our initial assessment, it is likely to be a homemade explosive," he 
said.  News agencies and televisions report the landmine was 
detonated by remote control. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Turkey-Syria-Israel 
 
Ibrahim Karagul wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "Certain 
circles including some in Turkey are trying to provoke new problems 
between Turkey and Israel by misrepresenting the strong relationship 
between Turkey and Syria.  Turkey should continue to act as a 
regional power and should engage in more cooperation like the 
current joint military exercises with Syria.  As Turkey emerges as a 
regional power, Israel's power will diminish." 
 
The Swine Flu Epidemic Spreads 
Media outlets continue to cover the spread of swine flu and coverage 
is still mostly sensational. Conservative Bugun reports "The 
Pandemic Can't Be Controlled" as "World leaders no longer have time 
to discuss the economic crisis or the Iraq war" and instead "are 
debating how to stop the onslaught of a new epidemic."  Conservative 
nationalist Turkiye reports "The World Health Organization has 
called on all countries to unite in the struggle against this 
epidemic" as "Swine flu has reached Europe and Asia."  Mainstream 
Vatan headlines "No Country is Safe."  Islamist-oriented Zaman 
reports "The Swine Flu Alarm Climbs to The Highest Level."  Leftist 
Taraf reports "The Epidemic Alarm Grows Louder." 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet headlines "The Epidemic Is Out of 
Control." Meanwhile, economic daily Referans headlines "Pork 
Smuggling and Unregistered Swine Farms Pose Swine Flu Threat to 
 
ANKARA 00000618  003 OF 004 
 
 
Turkey." Mainstream Hurriyet reports "International airports in 
Turkey will install thermal cameras monitoring the body temperature 
of passengers arriving from overseas against the possible infection 
of swine flu." 
 
Obama's First 100 Days 
NTV carries a feature article that looks at the views of several 
columnists regarding Obama's first 100 days.  These columnists 
praise President Obama for "Taking measures for human rights," 
"releasing the torture memos," and "changing the U.S. image bit by 
bit."  However, one columnist says "His plan to withdraw from Iraq 
may not take place as planned," another points to instability in 
Pakistan as a problem, and another columnist criticizes President 
Obama "for his April 24th message."  Mainstream Sabah notes that 
President Obama "Met with 44 foreign leaders, received eight heads 
of state, visited nine countries, changed six laws," and won "68 
percent approval ratings from the U.S. public" during his first 100 
days.  Liberal Radikal headlines "Obama's First Report Card Promises 
Hope," and the paper gives him high marks for closing Guantanamo, 
ending torture, reaching out to Iran, promising a withdrawal from 
Iraq, visiting Turkey to express support to Turkey's EU bid, and 
reaching out to Cuba.  Radikal, however, calls his initiatives 
toward China and toward the conflict between Afghanistan and 
Pakistan "weak."  The paper does say "The success of his economic 
policies remains to be seen."  Mainstream Haberturk carries the 
headline "They Are Crucifying Him on the 100th Day," and notes 
artist Michael D'Antuono's artwork depicted President Obama as if he 
is being crucified in front of the presidential seal, but the paper 
noted on April 26th "Obama has passed his 100-day test with a good 
mark." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- The American-Turkish Council (ATC) Director James Holmes says the 
future of US-Turkey relations was shaped by the April 6 speech of 
President Obama in the Turkish Parliament, and not by his April 24 
Armenian statement. 
 
- In Adana, 22 children between the ages 12 to 17 were given prison 
sentences between four and six years for throwing stones at the 
police during March 21 Nevruz celebrations in the city. 
 
- Prime Minister Erdogan is expected to submit his new cabinet list 
to President Gul on April 30. 
 
- Lockheed Martin has signed an agreement with Turkey's ALP 
Aviation, Aselsan and Kale Aviation to manufacture USD 5.5 billion 
of components for the F-35 Lightning II fighter plane. 
 
World 
 
- The Jerusalem Post comments Turkey's joint military drill with 
Syria has not only disturbed Jerusalem, it has also riled the 
Turkish military. 
 
- The U.S. Fifth Fleet will transfer the command of the 
counter-piracy international naval force CTF 151 to the Turkish Navy 
on May 3. 
 
- The EU's top court, the European Court of Justice, backs the right 
of a Greek Cypriot to reclaim land in Turkish Cyprus sold to the 
British couple Linda and David Orams, who built a villa on it. 
 
- Turkish Cypriot chief prosecutor asks the police to probe 
allegations for 'bribery' in the latest general elections, as 
acknowledged by Serdar Denktas, the leader of Democrat Party. 
 
- Palestinian administration establishes formal ties with Venezuela 
and opens a diplomatic mission in Caracas. 
 
ANKARA 00000618  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
JEFFREY