09ANKARA532
MIXED REACTIONS TO OBAMA'S CALL FOR DEMOCRACY, FREEDOM IN
Thu Apr 09 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO3644
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0532/01 0991149
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 091149Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9373
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 9587
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 5606
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 3741
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7220
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7095
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3675
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000532 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: MIXED REACTIONS TO OBAMA'S CALL FOR DEMOCRACY, FREEDOM IN 
TURKEY 
 
THURSDAY, APRIL 9, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Obama's Messages Meet Mixed Opinions Regarding Democracy, Freedom in 
Turkey 
Media outlets continue to praise the effects of Obama's visit to 
Turkey, but a controversy has erupted over Obama's call to re-open 
the Greek Orthodox Halki Seminary in Istanbul.  In "Thank you, 
President Obama," Sahin Alpay of Islamist-oriented Zaman wrote 
"Obama is an extraordinary leader" whose visit "was a powerful 
expression of support for freedom and pluralist democracy in 
Turkey."  On the other hand, mainstream Milliyet reports in "The 
First 'No' to Obama," that "State Minister for Religious Affairs 
Saiz Yazicioglu said "The call from the U.S. President (to open 
Halki Seminary) will not change anything," as "Prime Minister 
Erdogan also indicated that there are no preparations to reopen 
Halki Seminary."  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet tells a different 
story, namely that "anonymous" AKP officials "said the seminary was 
closed down due to tensions in Cyprus, but today there are no 
obstacles in the way of the reopening of the seminary."  Finally, 
liberal Radikal says "AKP officials are looking for a formula to 
solve the issue of the seminary." 
 
Opposition Parties React to Obama's Use of the Term 'Minority' When 
Referring to Kurds 
Mainstream Hurriyet writes President Obama's use of the term 
"minority" when referring to Kurds during his Tuesday meeting with 
students in Istanbul has drawn reaction from the political parties. 
AKP deputy group chief Nihat Ergun said President Obama did not use 
the term as a reference to the Minority Law in Turkey.  "The bans on 
the Kurdish language courses, Kurdish names, and television 
broadcasts do not exist today.  The problems of the Kurds can be 
resolved through the procedures of democracy and rule of law, and 
not through minority law," emphasized Ergun.  Main opposition CHP 
deputy group chief Hakki Suha Okay said, "The U.S. President must 
have been briefed wrong.  Kurdish people enjoy all the rights that 
Turkish people do -- calling the Kurds a minority is a huge 
injustice to the Kurdish people."  Opposition far right MHP deputy 
group chief Oktay Vural said Obama's mention of a "Kurdish minority" 
indicates he had a project to "create" a new minority.  "This is an 
initiative to divide the Turkish people.  I invite Obama to 
apologize to the Turkish people and the Kurds," said Oktay.  The 
pro-Kurdish DTP MP Hasip Kaplan said "Turkey's 20 million Kurds do 
not enjoy even few of the rights exercised by the minorities in the 
country," and "From the viewpoint of rights, the term 'minority' is 
correct.  Minority, in this sense, is a general term used under the 
EU framework which comprises the Kurds, Circassians and the Laz," 
stressed Kaplan. 
 
Editorial Commentary on President Obama's Turkey Visit 
 
Mehmet Barlas wrote in mainstream Sabah: "Before we get riled up 
over why Obama asked for a settlement to the Cyprus issue and to 
other issues, we better face with the truth.  This country is famous 
for piling up crises, one after another.  The EU reform crisis is 46 
years old and the Cyprus problem is 35 years old." 
 
Cuneyt Ulsever wrote in mainstream Hurriyet: "Unlike Turkish 
leaders, President Obama presented himself as a first class 
politician who has mastered first class public relations skills. 
Projects for the future and statements expressing real vision came 
from Obama, not from any Turkish leaders he met." 
 
Fehmi Koru wrote in Islamist oriented Yeni Safak: "As proven by the 
Obama visit, Turkey is an immediate priority for Washington.  Given 
the crisis-mongering administration in Israel, Turkey has become 
even closer to U.S. foreign policy priorities." 
 
Ismet Berkan wrote in liberal intellectual Radikal: "Relations 
 
ANKARA 00000532  002 OF 004 
 
 
between Turkey and Azerbaijan are very important, but these 
relations should not be allowed to hold Turkish-Armenian relations 
hostage.  Opening the border might be not easy at this point but 
Turkey at least should be able to establish diplomatic ties with 
Armenia before April 24." 
 
Nazli Ilicak wrote in mainstream Sabah: "President Obama should have 
used the word 'discrimination' regarding the Kurds instead of 
'minority' because Kurds are not a minority even though they suffer 
from discriminatory attitudes on certain grounds.  Obama also 
mentioned the reopening of Halki Seminary which must remind us of 
the urgent need for concrete action.  The Seminary first opened in 
1884 and stayed open until 1971.  There is no excuse for not opening 
it again." 
 
Obama Gives Iraqi Leaders Support for Iraq's Territorial Integrity 
Mainstream Sabah reports that, during his surprising visit to 
Baghdad, President Obama met with Iraqi President Talabani, PM 
Maliki and KRG President Mesoud Barzani to tell them that "the time 
has come for Iraq to take responsibility for Iraq."  During Obama's 
meeting with President Talabani, he stressed the importance of the 
friendship between the US and Iraq.  When President Obama met with 
PM Maliki, he reiterated that all US troops will withdraw from Iraq 
by 2011.  Moreover, Obama assured Maliki that the US had no eyes on 
Iraqi territory or Iraqi natural resources.  In response to Obama's 
comments, PM Maliki said "Iraq is a more secure, peaceful and stable 
country now and Iraq is expecting foreign investors."  During the 
meeting with KRG President Mesoud Barzani, President Obama stressed 
that he is very pleased with the  improved relations between the 
Kurdish Regional Government, the US, Baghdad and Turkey.  Barzani 
responded by saying "It appears the U.S. will withdraw from Iraq 
soon.  The Iraqi constitution guarantees its territorial integrity; 
based on the constitution, the joint government should continue.  It 
is not acceptable for only one side to have superiority.  Some are 
trying to weaken the Kurds' role in Iraq.  Five thousand of our 
villages have been burned to the ground in the past.  Chemical 
weapons were used against us.  We were saved from all that with the 
help of the US."  President Obama responded by saying, "I am aware 
of this history and I trust Iraq's integrity, along with its 
constitution.  I hope you have the same trust.  Our support for Iraq 
and the Kurdistan region will continue.  Moreover, I was pleased to 
see improved relations between Turkey and the Kurdistan region.  I 
mentioned this in Turkey as well." 
 
Kurdish Conference 
Mainstream Sabah reports that the mainly pro-Kurdish political 
opposition party DTP is focusing on the Kurdish Conference it will 
be organizing together with KRG President Mesoud Barzani's political 
party KDP in Arbil in May. Sabah says "The DTP is trying to convince 
Mesoud Barzani to give a nod to the PKK's participation to the 
conference; otherwise the DTP will not attend the conference." When 
Iraqi President Talabani visited Turkey, he invited the DTP 
administration to Iraq to work on the Kurdish Conference. Regarding 
the issue, the DTP Batman Lawmaker, Bengi Yildiz, said "the 
counterpart to the Kurdish question is the PKK," and "the DTP would 
not attend a conference where the PKK is not represented." 
 
Historic Plunge in Industrial Output: 23.7 Percent (Hurriyet) 
Milliyet, Sabah, Cumhuriyet, Vatan, Referans, Radikal:  Industrial 
production has fallen to a record low after a 23.7 percent drop in 
February.  There were sharp declines in production in the automotive 
sector, the electronic sector and the textile sector.    In a 
related story, liberal Radikal's headline reads "Minister Simsek Is 
in Wonderland" and reports that despite the 23.7 percent drop in 
industrial output, State Minister Mehmet Simsek expressed his 
optimism about the Turkish economy and said "households are fine and 
there are no problems in the public sector." 
 
YOK to 'Divide' Universities with Over 40,000 Students 
Liberal Radikal and leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet report the Higher 
 
ANKARA 00000532  003 OF 004 
 
 
Education Council (YOK) will 'divide' universities in the country 
with over 40,000 students.  YOK chair Professor Yusuf Ziya Ozcan 
said the "restructuring" aims to ease the management of the 
universities which have grown too big, with their buildings 
scattered around cities.  YOK is expected to prepare a draft bill to 
'divide' Istanbul University, Marmara University, Gazi University, 
Selcuk University and Uludag University.  Five members of the YOK 
board reportedly raised objections, saying the changes to be imposed 
were not compatible with "university autonomy" and "democratic 
culture," say papers. 
 
Uproar in Moldova Attributed to Romania, Twitter 
Media outlets use sensational headlines to report the anti-communist 
demonstrations in Moldova this week were quickly organized through a 
Twitter campaign.  At the same time, the government of Moldova is 
explicitly accusing its EU-member neighbor, Romania, for inciting 
the uprising against the pro-Russia government.  In "A Twitter 
Uprising," mainstream Haberturk reports "The social networking 
website Twitter launched the protests in Moldova in which 
demonstrators invaded parliament."  Islamist-oriented Zaman notes, 
"Moldova Holds Romania Responsible for the Disaster Caused by the 
Opposition's Uprising."  Liberal Radikal headlines, "A Romanian 
Experiment with a 'Digital Coup,'" and reports "Supporters of the 
West in Moldova used Facebook and Twitter to organize and launch a 
coup."  Mainstream Aksam headlines, "The EU-Russia War in Moldova," 
and report "anti-communist demonstrators filled the streets of 
Chisinau with Romanian flags in their hands." Leftist Taraf reports 
"Moldova Accuses Its Neighbor," as State President Voronin warns the 
protestors "Don't test my patience."  Meanwhile, CNN Turk reports 
"The Romanian Ambassador to Moldova was declared persona-non-grata 
and given 24 hours to leave the country." 
 
Cuban Leaders Signal Support to Obama 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet headlines "From Castro to the U.S. 
Delegation: How Can We Assist Obama?" and notes, "The U.S. 
Congressional Delegation, comprised of three Democrats of the 
African-American Lobby, visiting Cuba was able to come together with 
Raul and Fidel Castro," and "Raul and Fidel are ready for meetings 
with the U.S."  Islamist-oriented Zaman reports, "Castro Winks at 
the U.S." 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
- Former Housing Minister Koray Aydin stated opposition MHP leader 
Devlet Bahceli cannot run for a new term in office, and called for 
extraordinary party convention. 
 
- Following a meeting with PM Erdogan yesterday, Industry Minister 
Zafer Caglayan, Labor Minister Faruk Celik and chief EU negotiator 
Egemen Bagis agreed to make arrangements for declaring May 1 as 
official holiday. 
 
- Turk-Is labor union will ask Istanbul governor for permission to 
hold May Day celebrations on Taksim Square in the heart of the city. 
 
 
- The Diyarbakir prosecutor initiated an investigation against AKP 
MP Ihsan Arslan for spreading PKK propaganda in a speech in the 
city. 
 
- The pro-Kurdish DTP MP Sebahat Tuncel has filed a motion for 
changes in the compulsory military service law. 
 
World 
 
- Turkish Cyprus PM Ferdi Sabit Soyer has asked the prosecutor to 
investigate the alleged links between the 'Ergenekon' network and 
former president Rauf Denktas and former PM Dervis Eroglu. 
 
ANKARA 00000532  004 OF 004 
 
 
 
- The Turkish Cypriot-administered area of Cyprus will hold general 
elections on April 19. 
 
- On April 10, Russian PM Putin will meet with his Iraqi counterpart 
al-Maliki in Moscow to discuss stronger trade and economic 
relations. 
 
- Deputy Oil Minister Hossein Noqrehkar Shirazi said Wednesday 
"Tehran is ready to invite U.S. companies for oil projects in Iran." 
 
 
- The International Committee of the Red Cross says health workers 
violated medical ethics when they helped interrogate terrorism 
suspects who were tortured at secret CIA prisons overseas. 
 
JEFFREY