09BAGHDAD933
BAGHDAD U.: STUDENTS TALK POLITICS, OFFER BLUNT
Mon Apr 06 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Baghdad
VZCZCXRO0173
PP RUEHBC RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHIHL RUEHKUK
DE RUEHGB #0933/01 0960726
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 060726Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2546
INFO RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RHMFISS/CDR USSOCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC//NSC//UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 BAGHDAD 000933 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IZ PREL PGOV SCUL KPAO
SUBJECT: BAGHDAD U.: STUDENTS TALK POLITICS, OFFER BLUNT 
VIEWS ABOUT TODAY'S IRAQ -- AND US 
 
¶1. (U)  SUMMARY:  Poloffs met for two hours on April 2 at 
Baghdad University with eight professors, the acting 
president, and approximately 120 students from the political 
science college.  The group offered frank views about the 
U.S. decision to invade Iraq, what had happened in the 
country since 2003, as well as a number of "hard versus soft" 
power issues -- with many advocating less military might and 
more cultural and education initiatives.  One graduate 
student proudly proclaimed that he was the university's "only 
neo-con scholar" and then proceeded to name these members of 
the former U.S. administration.  The acting university 
president noted that 70 professors (of the university's 330 
faculty) had been murdered during the height of sectarian 
violence (2006-2007); however, he added that Baghdad 
University -- citing its 50 year-old history as the country's 
leading institution of higher learning -- had kept its doors 
open to "keep the university alive; the studying never 
stopped."  A third-year student said Iraqis had "removed the 
sectarianism with our own blood and by the sacrifices of our 
own people."  Another inquired about official U.S. policy in 
Iraq:  democracy or stability?  All urged the Embassy to 
continue to engage the group, with several openly asking 
Poloffs "why did it take you so long to come here?"  END 
SUMMARY. 
 
 
--------------------------------- 
BAGHDAD UNIVERSITY:  NO DAYS OFF, 
INCLUDING DURING DARKEST DAYS 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U)  Baghdad University is Iraq's leading institution of 
higher education and one of the largest universities in the 
Arab world.  Its campus is clean but dilapidated.  Students 
walking in small groups greeted us wearily upon entry. 
Banners advertising the TOEFL (Test of English as a Foreign 
Language) appear regularly.  Riyad Hadi Aziz, the deputy 
president, welcomed Poloffs and recounted the university's 
50-year history.  He talked about Baghdad University as a 
bastion for the Iraqi state and the creation of numerous 
colleges within it, including engineering and law.  He 
movingly reminded everyone that during the "dark days" of 
sectarian violence -- when 70 of its 330 faculty were 
murdered -- classes continued to be held, in order to "keep 
the university alive; the studying never stopped."  By the 
end of the morning, an entourage of students walked us to our 
vehicles, excitedly chatting and snapping digital photos with 
us.  And they asked us back for more visits. 
 
¶3. (U) The "College of Political Science" was founded in 
1959, later re-organized in 1969 and 1987.  It has three 
departments and one research unit (international studies, 
political thought, and political systems and the third 
world).  A research unit on political studies includes 26 
researchers.  Degrees are offered at the B.A., Masters and 
Ph.D. levels in political science. 
 
¶4. (U)  Course curriculum (by year for the B.A. degree) 
includes: 
 
-FIRST YEAR:  Constitutional law and comparative political 
systems; the principles of political science; history of 
international relations; introduction to political science 
"in English"; human rights and public liberties; economics; 
introduction to the study of law; Arabic language; computer 
Qintroduction to the study of law; Arabic language; computer 
science. 
 
-SECOND YEAR:  International relations; international 
organizations ("in English"); public administration; 
political sociology; ancient and mid-level political thought; 
public international law; political problems in Asia, Africa, 
Latin America; contemporary political developments in Iraq. 
 
-THIRD YEAR:  International organizations; strategy; 
political parties; modern political thought; Arab and Islamic 
political thought; contemporary political development in the 
Arab home land (with special emphasis on the states of Arabia 
and the Gulf); international economic relations; contemporary 
political systems ("in English"). 
 
-FOURTH YEAR:  Diplomacy; foreign policy; political systems 
 
BAGHDAD 00000933  002 OF 005 
 
 
of Turkey and Iran; contemporary political thought; 
contemporary Islamic political thought; international 
politics ("in English"); the Palestinian Question; public 
opinion; political research. 
 
NOTE:  The students urged the Embassy to assist the faculty 
and Baghdad University gain more opportunities for English 
language training and computer and Internet access.  END 
NOTE. 
 
 
------------ 
THE STUDENTS, 
AND ONE PROF. 
------------ 
 
¶5. (U)  While initially reluctant, the large group of 
political science students soon engaged in a lively 
back-and-forth across a number of issues.  After offering 
brief introductions, Poloffs made clear at the outset that 
any question could be raised, with no limit on subjects. 
About one-third were women (including one 2nd year student 
who asked the first question).  They appeared to represent a 
diverse cross-section of the capital and Iraq more widely. 
One professor said the student body was comprised of many 
students "who study by day and work by night" in order to 
cover living costs. 
 
¶6. (U)  One of the political science professors said the 
university welcomed the Embassy visit, but asked why it had 
taken "so long."  He said Americans tended to come "after 
events" not before; however, Iraqis had come to welcome the 
U.S.'s "pragmatic nature."  The professor said that U.S 
personal security details were unnecessary on campus because 
the students would protect their guests.  Few scholarship 
opportunities had been made available to Iraqi students -- 
"you always talk about the Fulbright" but that's not enough. 
He referred to former Coalition Provisional Authority head 
Ambassador Paul Bremer's book, in which the CPA leader 
conceded he knew little about Iraq.  The professor said that 
Americans would only really understand Iraq by talking to its 
poor and ordinary people.  (The professor's last comment was 
met with loud applause by the assembled students.) 
 
 
------------- 
THE QUESTIONS 
------------- 
 
¶7. (U)  Below are verbatim comments and questions from the 15 
students who had time (amid many raised hands) to put forward 
their views to us in the two-hour informal session.  A woman 
student asked the first question, in English. 
 
WHY DID YOU INVADE? ... 
AND WHAT WAS YOUR STRATEGY? 
--------------------------- 
 
-"I am a second-year student; you said that you focus on Shia 
parties -- what do you think of their ideology and 
thoughts?"; "And how can our government provide services if 
they lack money to spend?" 
 
-"I am a third-year student; welcome to the university.  I 
have three issues:  political, economic, and security.  Were 
these all achieved in Iraq?  Did you have a strategy before 
you invaded?  In 1991, you did not enter Iraq." 
 
-"One of the justifications you used to invade Iraq was to 
spread democracy, but that led to creative chaos; which is 
your policy -- democracy or stability?  What is your goal now 
in Iraq?" 
 
-"With all of your strategy institutes and big resources, why 
didn't you have a realistic plan?" 
 
 
SOFT POWER AND ACCOUNTABILITY; 
EX-PRESIDENT BUSH ON TRIAL 
----------------------------- 
 
 
BAGHDAD 00000933  003 OF 005 
 
 
-"I am a 2nd-year student, what you really need to do is 
improve your relations between Iraqi and U.S. universities." 
 
-"In the masters program, we want more opportunities but we 
lack English language opportunities.  You should do more to 
help us learn your language.  We have heard a lot of talk in 
the past, but no follow-up." 
 
-"I study relations between the U.S. and Iraq.  I refer to 
what Kissinger said, 'what is past is dead'". 
 
-"I am a 3rd-year student.  You occupied our country because 
you said you had three reasons:  weapons of mass destruction, 
Iraq's ties to Al Qaeda and to get rid of a dictatorship.  It 
has now been proven that there was no WMD and no link to Al 
Qaeda, but we did have a dictatorship and you helped us get 
rid of it.  Can you now help the Iraqi people to try 
ex-President Bush because he is the man who caused the deaths 
of many Iraqis and many Americans?  Can you help us file a 
case against him?  (NOTE:  loud clapping from most students 
followed these remarks and questions.  END NOTE.) 
 
 
BAGHDAD U.'S "ONLY NEO-CON SCHOLAR" 
---------------------------------- 
 
-"I am a PhD student focusing on American political ideology. 
 I follow the conservative or right wing in your country.  I 
am Baghdad University's only expert on the neo-cons, such as 
Cheney, Wolfowitz, Fukuyama.  I also study the religious 
right and Falwell."  (NOTE: this student expert on U.S. 
"neo-cons" was among the most excited to tell us his area of 
expertise, repeating several times that he was the "only" 
neo-con expert on campus.  END NOTE) 
 
 
A POST-SECTARIAN IRAQ? 
---------------------- 
 
-"You said you wanted to liberate Iraq, find the WMD and take 
down the former regime, but you found no WMD.  I am a 
third-year student.  Sectarianism increased but we removed it 
with our own blood and the sacrifices by our own people." 
 
 
TROOPS GO HOME (SORT-OF) 
------------------------ 
 
-"Is the presence of your troops positive or negative?  Some 
people will hear the lies and lies until they believe you. 
There will be no sovereignty for Iraq until all coalition 
troops are gone."  (NOTE:  the dean leaned over and commented 
that there were different views regarding the necessity of 
U.S. troops to stay in Iraq; this student's comments also 
appeared not to be shared by a majority of the other 
students.  END NOTE.) 
 
 
SADR CITY STATUS 
---------------- 
 
-"I am a 3rd-year student from Sadr City.  After your 
military operations there, more than 30 percent of buildings 
were damaged; do you have a plan to help rebuild Sadr City? 
Right now, we have had no water for the last two days." 
(NOTE: there appeared to be a full row of students sitting 
side-by-side from Sadr City -- Baghdad's vast and poorest 
district.  After the session, two approached Poloffs for a 
group picture.  END NOTE.) 
 
 
OIL RESOURCES FOR ALL? 
---------------------- 
 
-"What about our oil fields and Article 112 (of the 
constitution) -- 80 percent are in the north and south.  Will 
you take a role in that issue because Sunnis will be left 
out?" 
 
 
HEALTH AND EDUCATION MOST IMPORTANT 
 
BAGHDAD 00000933  004 OF 005 
 
 
----------------------------------- 
 
-"The U.S. Army used weapons that have damaged our 
environment.  This has increased the diseases among the 
people.  The U.S. should show an interest in this; the top 
issues that matter most to the Iraqi people are education and 
health." 
 
 
AMERICANS' TWO FACES 
-------------------- 
 
-"2nd-year student.  We know that Americans have two faces; 
today, we are seeing the positive face.  America is very 
interested in having a positive image in the world.  We ask 
the U.S. Embassy to work to improve your image before the 
Iraqi people." 
 
 
IS IRAQ SOVEREIGN? 
------------------ 
 
-"I want to know if you think Iraq is a sovereign country 
now?  Some proof could be that the Security Agreement put the 
Iraqi partner first."  (NOTE:  other students disagreed about 
how "sovereign" Iraq was given the continued presence of U.S. 
troops in the country; there seemed to be mixed, strong views 
on this point.  END NOTE.) 
 
 
BUDGET GAP 
---------- 
 
-"Will the U.S. help Iraq if our budget is bad because of low 
oil prices and the government does not have enough money to 
help the people?" 
 
------- 
COMMENT 
------- 
 
¶8. (SBU)  Notably, one Poloff had said in his introduction 
that he specialized in Shia political parties.  This led the 
dean of the department to stress that this kind of apparent 
one-party focus made the group feel "uncomfortable" -- as 
political scientists, he said, they treated all parties as 
equal subjects for analysis.  Poloffs clarified that the U.S. 
Embassy had not picked any Iraqi party for special attention; 
the Political Section had experts for all.  Later on, other 
students highlighted ongoing sensitivities surrounding 
"parties" in Iraq.  This likely is due to past sectarian 
violence on campus tied to Iraq's political parties and their 
activities. 
 
¶9. (SBU)  Baghdad University is a key strategic "human 
capital" anchor in Iraq's largest city, its capital.  Our 
two-hour engagement with the animated gathering of political 
science students showed that while most had seen a lot of 
American hard power since our 2003 invasion, not enough had 
experienced (or received answers to tough questions) 
regarding our soft power and overall policy objectives.  The 
tone in the exchanges evolved quickly.  Initially, the group 
appeared guarded, as did some of the faculty.  Soon after our 
introductions, however, the students expressed appreciation 
for our candid replies to their pointed questions, critiques 
and suggestions.  A few times, they openly laughed with us, 
especially during follow-on exchanges with the university's 
talkative, sole neo-con expert.  And they ended the session 
by saying they wanted more frank engagements with us. 
 
¶10. (SBU) We have tentatively outlined a plan to draw further 
and more regularly on the Embassy's expertise.  Public 
Affairs has interacted in the past with the university and 
will continue to do so.  The Political Section will propose 
holding weekly seminar-like discussions on political 
subjects, as well as consider sessions with high-level 
Embassy officials (and CODELS, possibly) to meet with vetted 
groups of university students in the future.  As smart 
students of political science, the 120 or so within this 
Qstudents of political science, the 120 or so within this 
Baghdad U. group inherently provide a needed USG policy, and 
perceptions, reality check.  Which questions they wanted 
 
BAGHDAD 00000933  005 OF 005 
 
 
answered first from us revealed a lot -- framing both the 
challenges still ahead and possibilities. 
BUTENIS