09BEIRUT444
LEBANON: USAID'S OFFICE OF TRANSITION INITIATIVES
Fri Apr 17 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beirut
VZCZCXYZ0006
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHLB #0444 1071237
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 171237Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIRUT
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 4695UNCLAS BEIRUT 000444 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR STATE FOR NEA/ELA AND NEA/RA 
NSC FOR SHAPIRO/MCDERMOTT 
PLEASE PASS TO USAID/NE AND USAID/OTI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAID LE
SUBJECT: LEBANON: USAID'S OFFICE OF TRANSITION INITIATIVES 
(USAID/OTI) EXTENSION AND FUNDING 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶1.  Post requests a one year extension to 2011 and additional 
funding for USAID's Office of Transition Initiatives, which is 
currently scheduled to conclude in August 2010 following the 
municipal elections of June 2010.  Maintaining USAID/OTI's program 
for an additional year would allow the US Mission to support 
independent or moderate local leaders who will need assistance 
post-elections to meet expectations and cement their support base. 
In addition, the OTI program is seen as an important addition in 
mission's new five year strategy.  End summary. 
 
¶2.  Since September 2007, USAID's Office of Transition 
Initiatives (OTI) have forged partnerships with a range of civil 
society actors to provide youth with alternatives to extremism and 
mitigate tensions in conflict-prone areas.  To date, the OTI program 
has issued approximately 90 grants worth $7 million to partners 
throughout Lebanon, including work in the Palestinian gathering 
areas; the Akkar district in the upper north, where Salafists have 
been gaining ground; and in the Hezbollah stronghold of Bint Jbeil 
in the deep south. 
 
¶3.  OTI catalytic role mobilizes youth toward civic activism and 
away from extremism in areas dominated by extremists. OTI is often 
the first USG entity to enter an area and/or to work with an 
organization, testing the waters and paving the way for broader U.S. 
support to new groups and communities. By countering the top-down 
approaches inherent in other political structures, young leaders 
have carved out an independent space for civic activism outside the 
sphere of influence of repressive political movements. 
 
¶4.  In the lead-up to the June 2010 elections, OTI will target 
progressive, high-performing municipalities where US assistance is 
welcomed. In these areas, OTI will support efforts that highlight 
strengthened municipal service delivery, transparency, and community 
participation. In contested districts where youth can galvanize 
support for independent or moderate candidates, OTI initiatives can 
focus youth activities on candidate performance over the past year 
and build the case for re-election or a change.  In municipalities 
with slim prospects for change but significant political importance 
OTI partners an help communities find their voice to challenge he 
status quo and open the dialogue for change. 
 
¶5.  With an additional year mandate following the elections, OTI 
could continue to expand their work in Lebanon, supporting moderate 
candidates to fulfill reform commitments by partnering with them to 
respond to community needs; continue to work with independent 
municipal council members to strengthen their effectiveness; and 
provide democratic space in politically repressive environments 
where the municipal balance of power may remain unchanged. In 
addition, OTI's activities provide the US Mission with a unique 
in-country capability to respond to contingencies and windows of 
opportunity in a constantly changing environment. OTI staff has 
unfettered access to geographic areas that are often out of reach 
for USG personnel, making it possible to keep a close pulse on 
evolving political dynamics. 
¶6.  The OTI program would require an additional $7 million to 
maintain current levels of programming through September 2011. To 
meet existing program needs USAID Lebanon is budgeting $3 million in 
FY 09 ESF and $2 million in FY 2010.  We request that DCHA/OTI 
allocate resources to ensure the success and extension of this 
critical program. 
 
SISON