09BEIJING871
MEDIA REACTION: G-20 Summit, U.S.-China relations,
Wed Apr 01 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO6183
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #0871 0911002
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 011002Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3225
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS BEIJING 000871 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: G-20 Summit, U.S.-China relations, 
Afghanistan and Pakistan 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
¶1. G-20 Summit 
"The London Summit should be active as well as practical-- 
Commentary by Professor Shi Jianxun" 
The official Xinhua News Agency international news publication 
People's Daily Overseas Edition (Renmin Ribao Haiwaiban)(04/01): It 
is very selfish and irresponsible of U.S. to misuse the USD's 
hegemonic position by printing more dollars to solve its financial 
deficit problem.  Zhou Xiaochuan's suggestion of allowing the SDR to 
gradually take over the USD as the international reserve currency 
has gained wide support from the world.  This summit should not just 
be empty talk.  There should be some substantive programs.  It 
should be agreed at this summit that the discourse rights of the 
emerging markets should be expanded and relevant timeline for 
processing these rights should be made.  Any program should not only 
benefit developed countries but developing countries.  The U.S. 
should give up its veto power at the IMF and the World Bank.  The 
U.S. and Europe should also let go of their fixed leadership in 
these two organizations.  There are also other measures should be 
adopted, including changing the shares of and the principles for 
dispensing voting rights within IMF, letting the stakeholders hoping 
to expand the discourse rights gradually increase their 
contributions to the IMF, and giving IMF the functional power to 
supervise the international financial system. 
 
¶2. U.S.-China relations 
 
"The U.S. - China relations should avoid becoming cold or playing 
games" 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao) (04/01): The degree of close U.S.-China 
cooperation in the process of coping with the global financial 
crisis will directly affect how fast the global economy can 
extricate itself from this difficult period.  However, 
unfortunately, at this important moment, there are noises coming 
from the other end of Pacific, talking about "a race for power 
between U.S. and China", which is inconsistent with the developing 
trend of U.S.-China relations.  Meanwhile, consequently, the 
statement "China is unhappy" is rising in China, especially among 
the younger generation.  This will bring a negative impact to the 
direction of U.S.-China relations.  China is not and will not 
challenge America's hegemonic status.  America should get used to 
the fact China is emerging on the world stage and drop the old views 
about China.  Only when China is given larger space for its 
development, can U.S.-China relations enjoy a stable foundation.  A 
more equal dialogue between China and the U.S. can only be conducted 
when the U.S. listens to and grows accustomed to China's voices. 
Any ideas or actions restricting and restraining China will benefit 
neither China nor U.S. We need to keep a clear mind about the 
current situation and not be disturbed by emotional public opinions. 
 This is a challenge for both the U.S. and China 
 
¶3. Afghanistan and Pakistan 
"What's new about Obama's anti-terrorism strategy?" 
The official Communist Party international news publication 
Guangming Daily (Guangming Ribao) (04/01): Compared with the Bush 
administration, there are many new things about Obama's strategy for 
Afghanistan and Pakistan.  First he admitted in the past seven years 
U.S. anti-terrorism strategy in Afghanistan was not successful. 
Second, compared to the Bush strategy, the new strategy is more 
clear, concise and achievable.  Third, he will combine cracking down 
on Afghanistan terrorism with economic development.  The U.S. even 
wants to create a mechanism similar to the ones for resolving the 
Iranian and DPRK nuclear issues to solve the Afghanistan issues 
through regional cooperation.  Fourth, in the future anti-terrorism 
strategy will not only rely on the Afghan central government, the 
U.S. will keep more contact with regional leaders and tribal 
leaders. Obama emphasizes that U.S. will send more non-military 
experts to Afghanistan in the fields of agriculture, education, 
engineering and law.  Fifth, Obama fully incorporated Pakistan into 
the anti-terrorism strategy.  For the first time it sees Afghanistan 
and Pakistan as one challenge, one battlefield.  Although Obama's 
strategy seems more thoughtful and practical, time is needed to 
prove the efficiency of this strategy. 
 
PICCUTA