09BUENOSAIRES461
ARGENTINA: MEDIA PRAISE FOR PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
Tue Apr 21 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Buenos Aires
VZCZCXRO5174
RR RUEHAO RUEHCD RUEHGA RUEHGD RUEHHA RUEHHO RUEHMC RUEHMT RUEHNG
RUEHNL RUEHQU RUEHRD RUEHRG RUEHRS RUEHTM RUEHVC
DE RUEHBU #0461/01 1111420
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 211420Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3579
INFO RUEHWH/WESTERN HEMISPHERIC AFFAIRS DIPL POSTS
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DCC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 04 BUENOS AIRES 000461 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/21/2019 
TAGS: PREL KSUM EFIN ENRG ECON PGOV CU AR
SUBJECT: ARGENTINA: MEDIA PRAISE FOR PRESIDENT OBAMA'S 
SUMMIT PARTICIPATION; CFK SATISFIED WITH OUTCOME 
 
REF: A. BUENOS AIRES 150 
     ¶B. 08 BUENOS AIRES 1407 
     ¶C. 08 BUENOS AIRES 1703 
 
Classified By: CDA Tom Kelly for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1. (C) Summary: Argentine press reacted extremely favorably 
to President Obama's participation in the Fifth Summit of the 
Americas (SOA), describing the meetings as a new, positive 
beginning for U.S.-Latin American relations.  In a press 
conference following the April 18 meeting between President 
Obama and UNASUR heads-of-state, President Fernandez de 
Kirchner (CFK) praised President Obama for listening and for 
his sincerity, though she added that the U.S. would need to 
take additional conciliatory actions to address lingering 
Latin American distrust of the United States.  Local press 
drew attention to the fact that CFK did not have a bilateral 
with President Obama and that Argentina was absent from most 
official and even leaked descriptions of U.S. priorities or 
plans for the region.  Nonetheless, the media seemed to give 
CFK a passing grade for her perceived performance.  Her 
opening remarks at the Summit were described as ""balanced"" 
despite the familiar jabs at the United States, and her call 
for the U.S. to lift its embargo on Cuba resonated well.  For 
CFK's part, we hear that she was ""delighted"" with the Summit 
and her interaction with President Obama, though she was 
reportedly annoyed by negative media stories here that sought 
to make an issue of the lack of a bilateral with him. 
 
¶2. (U) Although photos of President Chavez's moments with 
President Obama were run in virtually all papers, the 
Venezuela-U.S. theme did not dominate local coverage. 
Reporting on substance focused on Argentina's effort to 
attract World Bank and IDB financing, on the lack of 
agreement over the Summit communique, on Cuba policy, and to 
a lesser extent on public security.  Environment and energy 
issues received relatively little attention.  End Summary. 
 
President Obama, Cuba Dominate Local Press 
------------------------------------------ 
 
¶3. (U) Argentine press reporting on the Fifth Summit of 
Americas was focused on two main themes: first, President 
Obama's first extensive and positively received interaction 
with Latin American leaders and second, the question of U.S. 
Cuba policy (and Cuban participation in the OAS).  The two 
themes were intertwined, as the President's announcements on 
dialogue with Cuba and on travel policy changes were 
portrayed as key examples of a more balanced and 
consensus-based approach to the Hemisphere by the United 
States.  The press duly noted the calls by President Obama 
and Secretary Clinton for Cuba to release its political 
prisoners, embrace democratic reforms, and observe human 
rights. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Pro-government daily ""Pagina 12"" got the ball 
rolling with a large front page ""I (Heart) B O"" featuring the 
President's face in the heart.  The paper's coverage noted 
the positive reaction of South American heads-of-state to 
President Obama at the U.S.-UNASUR meeting and led with the 
headline: ""This is the beginning of a beautiful friendship."" 
 
¶5. (U) Ana Baron, U.S. correspondent for largest circulation 
daily ""Clarin,"" provided a glowing description of Latin 
American reactions to President Obama's humility and 
openness.  She cautioned that President Obama's focus on 
listening aside, it appeared the USG still intended to follow 
its own course toward Cuba via a policy of gradualism and 
calling for reforms on the island rather than acceding to the 
consensus view of other leaders for a quick lifting of the 
embargo.  Indeed, statements by President Obama and WH 
Spokesman Gibbs that the ball was in Cuba's court received 
fair coverage on April 19, eliciting only mild implicit 
criticism in left-leaning Pagina 12.  Following the 
U.S.-UNASUR meeting, Baron noted that all of the South 
American heads of state appeared anxious to have an exchange 
or a photo taken with President Obama. 
 
CFK: Balanced, to a Point 
------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Media coverage of President Cristina Fernandez de 
Kirchner's (CFK) opening speech at the SOA on April 17 was 
light compared to the attention given to President Obama. 
Local press described her remarks as balanced, with her 
critiques of U.S. Cuba policy ""balanced"" by her recognition 
that President Obama was new in office and had taken steps to 
""lift the absurd restrictions"" placed by President Bush on 
Cuba in 2004.  She urged the U.S. to lift its ""blockade"" 
(sic) of Cuba.  Somewhat discordantly, she contrasted U.S. 
 
BUENOS AIR 00000461  002 OF 004 
 
 
insistence on expelling Cuba from the OAS in 1962 due to 
Soviet involvement on the island with the United States' 
""failure to comply"" with its Rio Pact obligations of mutual 
assistance toward Argentina when Argentina was ""attacked 
(sic) by Great Britain in 1982.""  She called on the creation 
of a new regional order based on ""coordination, not 
subordination, and integration, not interference"" to replace 
what had been a ""traumatic relationship"" between the U.S. and 
the region.  FM Jorge Taiana echoed these comments when he 
told reporters that ""the SOA demonstrated the hemisphere is 
in a new phase based on the recognition of the importance of 
dialogue, of respect, of the principle of non-intervention 
and cooperation."" 
 
¶7. (SBU) CFK said her criticisms were not a ""reproach"" to 
President Obama.  ""He was not responsible for the Washington 
Consensus nor that bipolar (Cold War) world.  Indeed, he, 
too, may have had his civil, economic and political rights 
trampled due to the color of his skin.""  She also claimed 
that the 2005 SOA in Mar del Plata had been a ""turning point"" 
in hemispheric relations because ""different countries of our 
Americas, with different historical experiences and different 
ideas said no to the Free Trade Area of the Americas.""  In 
the wake of that rebellion, Latin America left behind ""the 
uncriticizing subordination to any (U.S.) proposal.""  CFK 
lamented that developing nations were unfairly being forced 
to pay the consequences of a global crisis they did not 
create. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Following the U.S.-UNASUR meeting, CFK praised 
Obama's participation, noting that it was a ""democratic"" 
meeting at which all spoke and that President Obama was 
sincere in answering every head-of-state in turn.  Slipping 
into critical mode, she said that ""we all suggested that an 
improved U.S.-Latin American relationship would require a 
different attitude and commitment to non-interference by the 
United States in the internal affairs of the other states. 
This hasn't been the case for 30 years.""  She alleged U.S. 
quiescence over an ""institutional coup"" attempt against 
President Evo Morales in 2008.  Of the 2002 coup attempt 
against President Chavez, moreover, she added that the ""only 
government in the world which supported this endeavor was the 
United States,"" in turn praising President Chavez for 
dialoguing with President Obama despite this history. 
 
CFK's Economic Agenda at the Summit 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) With no bilateral meetings scheduled at the Summit, 
CFK focused her attention on firming up multilateral 
development bank (MDB) credits that have been in the works 
for some time.  Local media reports on CFK's public remarks 
that ""we need the IDB to be recapitalized and provided with 
more funds.  Obama told us that he will study the 
recapitalization (request).  I believe that the study should 
be short and the decision needs to be made quickly.""  The 
President met for 10 minutes with IDB President Luis Albert 
Moreno on a US$ 1.5 ) 1.8 billion loan package to support 
GOA ""social infrastructure and labor programs.""  (Note: Ref B 
reported on Moreno's October 2008 conversation with 
Ambassador on growing GOA interest in expanded IDB credits in 
the face of global credit crunch.  The IDB was then working 
with the Ministries of Social Development and Labor to 
develop a $1.6 billion two-year program to revamp the 
nation's social safety net programs.  End Note.)  Local media 
also reported on CFK's meeting with World Bank Latin American 
Director Pamela Cox to discuss a pending US$ 700 million 
credit to fund the Riachuelo cleanup program.  (Ref C for 
details). 
 
Brazil Encourages Support for Argentina 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) An interesting economic subtext to the Summit were 
overt efforts by Brazil's President Lula and his cabinet to 
encourage IMF support for Argentina.  (Comment: Argentina is 
broadly considered ineligible for new IMF financial crisis 
credit lines due to the unreliability of its statistics and 
default status on some official and private debt.  WH 
Economic Advisor Summers' suggestion, quoted in Clarin, that 
countries would not qualify unless they had sound economic 
policies in place was read as meaning Argentina would in fact 
not qualify.  End Comment.)  In an April 16 interview with 
""La Nacion"" that was published on Sunday, April 19, Lula 
remarked: ""We don't think there should be an IMF delegation 
coming to check Argentina, Brazil, or Venezuela's accounts... 
We don't want that any more.  We don't want missions... We 
don't want them to come and tell us we have to make fiscal 
adjustments.  That's for the authority and sovereignty of 
each country to decide."" 
 
BUENOS AIR 00000461  003 OF 004 
 
 
 
¶11. (SBU) An April 20 article in ""Clarin"" reported that Lula 
called the reporter's attention to this earlier interview, 
noting ""We gave Cristina a hand, right?""  That same ""Clarin"" 
article quoted GOB sources on a meeting between National 
Security Advisor James Jones, GOB Defense Minister Nelson 
Jobim and Lula's foreign affairs advisor Marco Aurelio Garcia 
in which the GOB told Jones that Argentina is key to regional 
security and integration and that the region needs a strong 
GOA and a strong Argentina.  The article interpreted these 
comments as a GOB request that the USG give Argentina 
political and financial support. 
 
Where Does Argentina Fit In? 
---------------------------- 
 
¶12. (SBU) Despite Brazil's best efforts, the negative story 
for the GOA out of the Summit was the repeated assertion or 
implication that Argentina was not of great importance to the 
USG's Latin American policy.  Clarin's Baron quoted an 
unnamed White House source saying that President Obama had 
been interested only in five one-on-one conversations at the 
SOA -- with the Presidents of Colombia, Peru, Haiti and Chile 
and the Prime Minister of Canada. 
 
¶13. (SBU) ""La Nacion"" on 19 April reported that the White 
House had said Colombia would be the next country in Latin 
America visited by the President.  It also noted White House 
confirmation that President Obama had developed an ""extensive 
and very good dialogue"" with Brazilian President Lula.  The 
paper noted that Argentina had not been raised among possible 
travel destinations and that there was no evidence of any 
significant dialogue between CFK and President Obama at the 
Summit.  Other press had noted that Argentina was not among 
the countries mentioned by President Obama in his remarks 
either by name or by its capital.  ""La Nacion"" also noted 
that CFK did not meet with Labor Secretary Solis, as had 
other heads-of-state and that her ""only"" bilateral with the 
U.S. was with ""seven Members of Congress"" (i.e., Codel Engel). 
 
Venezuela: An Interesting Sidebar 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶14. (SBU) Although the photos of Presidents Chavez and Obama 
shaking hands or of Chavez presenting the President with a 
book were run in all media, the lack of U.S.-Venezuela 
theatrics made this a one-and-out story.  Clarin ran an 
interview with Chavez on April 19 in which Chavez described 
how important he viewed the book he had presented to 
President Obama, Eduardo Galleano's ""The Open Veins of Latin 
America.""  He confirmed his interest in ""becoming friends"" 
with President Obama and in an improvement in Venezuelan-U.S. 
relations.  He said that he could not imagine another Summit 
without Cuba's participation and referred positively to 
""Cristina's"" (CFK's) admonition that the Hemisphere not miss 
a ""second opportunity"" to reestablish the inter-American 
system with Cuba included, without conditions. 
 
CFK's Take on the Summit 
------------------------ 
 
¶15.  (C) After debriefing his boss on his return to the MFA 
April 20, Foreign Minister Chief of Staff Alberto D'Alotto 
reported that CFK and Taiana were ""delighted"" with the 
Summit.  They both were highly impressed with President 
Obama's charisma, noting that he communicated humility and 
leadership simultaneously.  In the view of Argentina's 
leaders, the new U.S. administration got off to a very good 
start in a new relationship with Latin America at the Summit. 
 D'Alotto said that Taiana ranted about Argentine press 
reports that President Obama ignored CFK or treated her 
coolly.  In fact, in Taiana's account, President Obama 
eagerly sought CFK out, walking across a crowded hallway to 
engage her.  CFK, according to this version (documented by a 
press photo showing CFK and her aide Carlos Zanini beaming in 
his presence) had her share of face time with the POTUS. 
 
Comment: Less Mileage from Anti-Americanism 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶16. (C) Although CFK stuck to some of her familiar themes in 
criticizing the U.S. record in Latin America, she appeared 
sincere in her suggestion that, from Argentina's perspective, 
a new beginning was possible under the Obama Administration. 
Memories of Kirchner and Chavez-led anti-American theatrics 
in 2005 at Mar del Plata were dispelled, at least for the 
local audience, with the upbeat photos of CFK with President 
Obama.  With less political space for profitable 
anti-American posturing and little to show in terms of a 
positive foreign policy agenda, the CFK Administration finds 
 
BUENOS AIR 00000461  004 OF 004 
 
 
itself without much to build on for domestic political 
consumption from the Summit.  At a minimum, though, CFK did 
not make any noteworthy misstep at Port of Spain. 
WAYNE