09HARARE285
ZIM NOTES 04-03-09
Fri Apr 03 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Harare
VZCZCXRO8923
RR RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHJO RUEHMR RUEHRN
DE RUEHSB #0285/01 0931322
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 031322Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY HARARE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4330
RUCNSAD/SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
RUEHUJA/AMEMBASSY ABUJA 2261
RUEHAR/AMEMBASSY ACCRA 2760
RUEHDS/AMEMBASSY ADDIS ABABA 2882
RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN 1328
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 2147
RUEHDK/AMEMBASSY DAKAR 2503
RUEHKM/AMEMBASSY KAMPALA 2930
RUEHNR/AMEMBASSY NAIROBI 5371
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 2049
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDC
RHMFISS/EUCOM POLAD VAIHINGEN GE
RUZEJAA/JAC MOLESWORTH RAF MOLESWORTH UK
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 HARARE 000285 
 
SIPDIS 
 
AF/S FOR B. WALCH 
ADDIS ABABA FOR USAU 
ADDIS ABABA FOR ACSS 
NSC FOR SENIOR AFRICA DIRECTOR MICHELLE GAVIN 
TREASURY FOR D. PETERS 
STATE PASS TO USAID FOR LDOBBINS AND JHARMON 
COMMERCE FOR BECKY ERKUL 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL ASEC PHUM ECON EFIN ZI
SUBJECT: ZIM NOTES 04-03-09 
 
----------- 
¶1.  SUMMARY 
----------- 
 
Topics of the week: 
 
- WhereQs the Money 
- QTsvangirai Blasts West 
- New Mercedes for All 
- Parliament forms Committees 
- QBlowQ to U.S. Sanctions 
- Journalist Abducted in Gweru 
- Anglican Church Feud Boils Over 
- No QHell HoleQ Here 
- Exam Council Corruption 
- Labor Struggles 
- Two Staffdels on Their Way 
- Family Planning Contributing to Health Success 
- King of Pop Supports GOZ 
- Scoping Mission for Donor-GOZ Needs Assessment 
- Prices Falling for the Masses 
- Biti Gets Tough with Tax Evaders 
- A Whiff of Recovery on Local Exchange 
- Deloitte Mired In Controversy 
- Quote of the Week 
 
----------------------------- 
On the Political/Social Front 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2.  WhereQs the Money... SADC last week in Swaziland approved an 
economic recovery plan of US$10 billion for Zimbabwe and agreed that 
US$2 billion was needed urgently.  SADC will next look to donors. 
Concretely, South Africa agreed to provide US$30 million over three 
months for budgetary support and a US$50 million line of credit. 
See Harare 278 
 
¶3.  QTsvangirai Blasts WestQ... On his first day back in the office 
following bereavement leave after the tragic death of his wife 
Susan, Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai said he saw Qno reason why 
everyone should doubt [ZimbabweQs] reforms.Q  The Herald twisted his 
words into a negative blast at U.S. sanctions.  A headline on Friday 
in the inside of The Herald declared QWest doesnQt want Govt to 
succeed,Q and again attacked the U.S. on sanctions.  ZANU-PF, 
through its mouthpiece The Herald, has apparently declared at least 
a temporary truce with its partner in government, and is focusing 
its ire on the West and the U.S. in particular. 
 
¶4.  New Mercedes for All... Education Minister David Coltart is the 
lone MDC minister to turn down a new US$50,000 E280 Mercedes Benz. 
This comes despite years of MDC criticism of government expenditures 
on luxury vehicles.  Finance Minister Tendai Biti told the press 
this week that the vehicles were purchased last year but never 
distributed.  Separately, Reserve Bank Governor Gideon Gono told 
parliamentarians this week that their second-hand vehicles will be 
replaced with new cars as soon as Minister Biti Qgets money. 
Senate president Edna Madzongwe (ZANU-PF) proposed that new MPs be 
given priority. 
 
¶5.  Parliament forms Committees... This week parliament finalized 
several important committee structures, including the legal 
committee, responsible for reviewing constitutionality of proposed 
legislation and the portfolio committees, which serve as an 
oversight mechanism on the executive.  Additionally, Parliament 
constituted a select committee on the constitution, which will 
direct the constitutional draft process.  See Harare 281 
 
¶6.  QBlowQ to U.S. Sanctions... This week John Bredenkamp, a 
businessman on the EU and OFAC sanctions lists who has backed the 
Qbusinessman on the EU and OFAC sanctions lists who has backed the 
 
HARARE 00000285  002 OF 004 
 
 
regime, won an interim order from the High Court in Johannesburg 
preventing South AfricaQs Standard Bank from shutting down his 
accounts.  The bank tried to close them citing concerns about its 
own reputation and that clients might think that Standard BankQs 
accounts Qcould be used to facilitate unlawful or unethical acts. 
 
 
¶7.  Journalist Abducted in Gweru... Kudzai Musengi, a freelance 
journalist, was abducted on March 31 and held for 24 hours by 
unknown assailants.  He had been working on a story about land 
invasions in the area when he was abducted.  He was driven into the 
bush where he was interrogated and threatened.  He was eventually 
released near his home. 
 
¶8.  Anglican Church Feud Boils Over... The contentious relationship 
between the head of the Anglican Church in Harare, Bishop Sebastian 
Bakare, and his deposed and excommunicated predecessor, former 
Bishop Kunonga, became violent on March 28 when police disrupted 
Anglican services and wounded a bystander with an errant shot. 
Police used tear gas and riot police to prevent Bakare supporters 
from holding services at Anglican churches, in support of KunongaQs 
claim that those properties now belonged to him.  While KunongaQs 
diocese has abandoned him, he retains strong ties to Police 
Commissioner Chihuri, who has directed his department to support 
Kunonga.  The two Home Affairs ministers met with both men this week 
and, while expressing dismay at the heavy-handed police action, 
deferred the matter to the Attorney GeneralQs office. See Harare283 
 
¶9.  No QHell HoleQ Here... South Africa-based SABC-TV3 aired QHell 
HoleQ this week, a horrifying documentary on prison conditions 
across Zimbabwe.  Footage, taken over three months using smuggled 
cameras, showed overcrowded, filthy prison cells, starvation among 
prisoners, and interviews with prisoners who described appalling 
conditions and bodies left rotting for days in prison cells.  In 
response, Justice Minister Patrick Chinamasa said, QSABC is lying. 
We do not allow cameras into our prisons. We have made 
investigations and found out that the footage is not from Zimbabwe. 
 Prison officials where the footage was taken are now reportedly 
under investigation for Qcompromising state security. 
Nevertheless, the government recently agreed to allow the 
International Committee of the Red Cross to assist with improving 
prison conditions. 
 
¶10.  Exam Council Corruption... Education Minister Coltart has 
uncovered corruption in the marking of O and A level exams by the 
Zimbabwe Schools Examination Council (ZIMSEC).  He found ghost 
markers and irregularities that will cause further delays both in 
the payment of markers and in the release of the long overdue 2008 
exam results. 
 
¶11.  Labor Struggles... Unemployment, dwindling wages, conflicting 
laws, splinter unions, and internal squabbles have eroded the 
Zimbabwe Congress of Trade UnionQs influence.  For a detailed 
QZimbabwe Congress of Trade UnionQs influence.  For a detailed 
analysis see Harare 275 and 276. 
 
¶12.  Two Staffdels on Their Way...  Over the next two weeks post 
will host congressional staff delegations from the Senate Foreign 
Relations Committee and from the House Committee on Foreign Affairs. 
 
 
¶13.  Family Planning Contributing to Health Success...  Preliminary 
results from a yet-to-be-released study indicate that ZimbabweQs 
maternal mortality rate is now about 715 per 100,000 births, about 
2,700 deaths annually.  This is an increase from a 2005/2006 survey, 
and constitutes an increase of about 30% since 2000.  Interestingly, 
the new data show that only 6% of maternal deaths are due to 
post-abortion complications Q 4 to 5 times lower than in other 
developing countries in Africa.  Since the number and timing of 
 
HARARE 00000285  003 OF 004 
 
 
pregnancies affect the reproductive health risks for women, it may 
well be that high levels of contraceptive prevalence in Zimbabwe are 
contributing to the low numbers of abortions and post-abortion 
complications, without which the maternal mortality rate in Zimbabwe 
could well have been 24% higher.  The same data indicates perinatal 
mortality in Zimbabwe is 29 per 1,000, about 10,800 infant deaths 
per year.  Other developing countries with similar child mortality 
rates often have perinatal mortality of around 40 or 45.  The 
reduced rate in Zimbabwe may also be related to high levels of 
contraceptive use.  In sum, the 58% prevalence of modern 
contraceptive use among married women in Zimbabwe appears to be 
saving lives.  If so, USAIDQs continuing investments in family 
planning are a significant contributor to that preventive health 
success story. 
 
¶14.  King of Pop Supports GOZ... On April 1, the government 
mouthpiece The Herald reported that Michael Jackson was coming to 
Zimbabwe to sustain the QmomentumQ from last weekQs Tourism 
Stakeholders Conference, confirm Zimbabwe as a safe tourist 
destination, and donate money to Zimbabwe.  On April 2, the 
newspaper confirmed it was all an April FoolQs joke. 
 
-------------------------- 
Economic and Business News 
-------------------------- 
 
¶15.  Scoping Mission for Donor-GOZ Needs Assessment... The World 
Bank, AfDB, UNDP, and the EC, in coordination with the Ministry of 
Finance, will undertake a scoping mission from April 6-17 to lay the 
groundwork for a sectoral-based needs assessment in May.  The 
mission will clarify the role of the donors and government in the 
needs assessment, agree on a timeline and framework, identify team 
composition, and establish key sectors and priorities to be 
reviewed.  The needs assessment will cover six sectors, including 
economic growth, social protection, infrastructure, agriculture 
recovery, basic services, and government.  As a joint donor-GOZ 
effort, it will be the basis for recovery and development programs. 
 
 
¶16.  Prices Falling for the Masses... With the introduction of 
dollarization, PricewaterhouseCoopers has resurrected its monthly 
cost of living survey.   For February 2009, it determined a 14.44% 
drop in the monthly cost of living for low-income earners.  For 
high-income earners the index actually rose 7.62%, driven by 
increases in domestic employee salaries, telephone bills, school 
fees, and vehicle maintenance. 
 
¶17.  Biti Gets Tough with Tax Evaders... In his review of the 2009 
Budget, Finance Minister Biti directed the Zimbabwe Revenue 
Authority to strictly enforce tax laws including seizure of assets 
of tax evaders and auctioning them to recover lost revenue.  Stiff 
penalties are intended to instill discipline among tax payers who 
had grown accustomed to evading taxes in recent years. 
 
¶18.  A Whiff of Recovery on Local Exchange... The Zimbabwe Stock 
Exchange recorded its first notable increase in volume this week 
QExchange recorded its first notable increase in volume this week 
since re-opening two months ago.  Market capitalization (shares 
times their price) recovered to US$1.588 billion after having hit a 
low of US$1.275 billion in mid March. 
 
¶19.  Deloitte Mired In Controversy... At an Extraordinary General 
Meeting of wireless provider Econet last week, auditor Deloitte 
appears to have inflated the total ballots cast while disregarding 
key proxy votes.  The irregularity boosted the vote in favor of a 
resolution to enter into a US$93.9 million installment sale 
agreement with Econet Wireless Global, a Strive Masiyiwa investment 
vehicle.  Threats of suits and countersuits abound.  Econet/Masiyiwa 
is also a key shareholder in the disastrous merger last year of 
Kingdom Bank and Meikles Africa which has also ended up in the 
 
HARARE 00000285  004 OF 004 
 
 
courts over allegations of misdoings. 
 
¶20.  Quote of the Week: 
 
QI have not bought any cars for anyone... We either had to leave 
them to rot or sell them, and get half their value.  It was cheaper 
to keep them.  It was a matter of practicality.Q  --Finance Minister 
Tendai Biti on the ministersQ Mercedes Benzes. 
 
MCGEE