09HONGKONG688
COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR USCC VISIT TO HONG KONG,
Wed Apr 15 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Hong Kong
VZCZCXRO0225
PP RUEHGH
DE RUEHHK #0688/01 1051020
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 151020Z APR 09
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7399
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 3090
RUEHGH/AMCONSUL SHANGHAIUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 HONG KONG 000688 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/CM -- PLEASE PASS USCC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL OREP HK
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR USCC VISIT TO HONG KONG, 
09-12 MAY 2009 
 
REF: STATE 36319 
 
¶1.  Consulate General Hong Kong warmly welcomes the visit of 
Chairman Bartholomew and the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission (USCC) delegation to Hong Kong May 9-12 
¶2009.  Control Officer for the visit is Political Officer 
Benjamin Weber, office telephone:(852)2841-2110; mobile 
telephone:(852) 9631-8557; office fax:(852)2526-7382; State 
email address: weberb@state.gov.  The Consulate is located at 
26 Garden Road, Central.  The after-hours and emergency 
number (available 24 hours/day) at Marine Post One is (852) 
2841-2230. 
 
Country clearance does not automatically provide security 
clearance and access to the Consulate General.  The RSO 
Office must still be provided with proof of security 
clearance level via official channels for those personnel who 
intend to visit the Consulate General.  This proof should 
include the level of clearance granted, and should be 
included in the country clearance request or follow-on cable. 
 
¶2.  Transport from the airport:  Per request, post will 
arrange airport transport and meet-and-assist. 
 
¶3.  Money exchange: 
 
A)  The Hong Kong dollar is pegged in value against the U.S. 
dollar, with the rate set at approximately 7.8 HKD per one 
USD.  Upon arrival in Hong Kong, money exchange (Thomas 
Cooke) is available in the area immediately outside of 
baggage claim/customs.  Rates are not favorable, so we advise 
against changing large quantities of money at the airport 
exchange.  However, there are ATM machines (currently 
connected to the Cirrus and Plus systems plus Visa and Master 
Card for cash advances) offering good exchange rates located 
just inside the public arrivals area.  Note: the location of 
the ATM machines is not well marked. 
 
B)  Credit cards are widely accepted in Hong Kong and cash 
can be obtained from automatic teller machines.  Currency 
exchange is available at your hotel.  It is also available at 
the Bank of America branch at the Consulate General Monday, 
Wednesday and Friday from 9:30 am to 1:30 pm with a daily 
limit of USD 2000. 
 
¶4.  Accommodations:  Reservations have been made at the Grand 
Hyatt in Wanchai within per diem.  One breakfast per room is 
included in the room rate.  Rooms are being held under the 
credit card number provided, but post understands individual 
travelers will settle bills themselves. The per diem rate for 
Hong Kong is USD 479 (335 for lodging & 144 for M&IE). 
 
¶5.  Visas:  No/no visa is required for Hong Kong for American 
citizens making TDY visits of under 90 days.  No visa should 
be requested from the Chinese Embassy for entry into Hong 
Kong for this category of visitor.  Holders of Official or 
Diplomatic passports planning a short pleasure trip to 
Mainland China in addition to their official duties while in 
Hong Kong must obtain a PRC visa before departing the US. 
These visas take several days or more to acquire in Hong Kong 
in Official or Diplomatic passports, and Post cannot expedite 
the process.  All travel to the Mainland, even short day 
trips to Shenzhen, requires a PRC visa.  For more information 
regarding visa requirements for other nationalities, refer to 
the Hong Kong immigration website: 
 
http://www.info.gov.hk/immd/english/topical/e /1.htm 
 
¶6.  Telecommunications:  U.S. government-provided Blackberry 
communicators generally work in Hong Kong without difficulty. 
 Travelers wishing to use cell phones should review their 
phone's operational bands (Hong Kong uses GSM 900 and 1800) 
and their provider's roaming charges.  Consulate can assist 
with official fax and other communications. 
 
¶7.  Threat Assessment:  The Department of State issued a 
worldwide caution on June 6, 2006 to remind U.S. citizens of 
the continuing threat of terrorist actions and anti-American 
violence against U.S. citizens and interests overseas. 
Ongoing events have resulted in demonstrations and associated 
violence in several countries; such events are likely to 
continue for the foreseeable future.  Current information 
suggests that al-Qa'ida and affiliated organizations continue 
to plan terrorist attacks against U.S. interests in many 
regions, including Europe, Asia, Africa and the Middle East. 
These attacks may employ a wide variety of tactics including 
assassinations, kidnappings, hijackings and bombings.  The 
terrorist groups may target facilities or public areas where 
U.S. citizens and other foreigners congregate or visit, 
 
HONG KONG 00000688  002 OF 002 
 
 
including residential areas, business offices, clubs, 
restaurants, places of worship, schools, hotels, public 
transportation systems, and aviation and maritime services. 
U.S. Government facilities worldwide remain at a heightened 
state of alert.  As the Department continues to develop 
information on any potential security threats to U.S. 
citizens overseas, it shares credible threat information 
through its Consular Information Program available on the 
internet at http://travel.state.gov. In addition to 
information on the internet, travelers may obtain up-to-date 
information on security conditions by calling 1-888-407-4747 
toll-free in the U.S. or outside the U.S. and Canada on a 
regular toll line at 1-202-501-4444. 
 
¶8.  Health Information:  China and Southeast Asia have been 
the world epicenter for several viral illnesses in recent 
years such as SARS and Avian Flu.  While there are currently 
no specific health warnings, travelers to Hong Kong are 
encouraged to visit the Hong Kong Center for Health 
Protection website: http//www.chp.gov.hk/ or the CDC website: 
http://www.cdc.gov for up-to-date advice and information on 
local health issues. 
 
Hong Kong has high public health standards, and health care 
in Hong Kong is similar in quality to that found in the U.S., 
although it can be extremely expensive.  Hospitals and 
clinics expect payment when service is rendered and do not 
accept health insurance for payment. Pharmacies will accept 
only prescriptions from local physicians and may not be open 
after usual business hours. It is recommended that the 
traveler bring an adequate supply of prescription medications 
for the duration of their stay. 
 
¶9.  Protection of Intellectual Property:  The protection of 
intellectual property rights is a key U.S. policy goal.  The 
Consulate General works closely with local authorities in 
Hong Kong and Macau to strengthen the enforcement of existing 
laws against illegal production and sale of copyright and 
trademark protected products - such as CD's, DVD's, and brand 
name clothing, sporting goods, and pharmaceutical products. 
Post appreciates visitors' support of the policy of the 
United States and the Consulate's active efforts to stem the 
flow of pirated and counterfeit goods. Please keep this in 
mind as you shop here in Hong Kong and Macau. 
 
¶10. Electronic Devices: The Consulate strictly controls the 
entry of laptop computers, personal digital assistants (PDAs) 
and other electronic devices into the Consulate office 
building.  All government equipment of this nature must be 
inspected by the Information Management or Security sections 
before entering the Consulate.  If you plan to bring official 
electronic equipment to post, please advise the Control 
Officer of the type of equipment, make/model, and serial or 
other control number.  Providing this information in advance 
will speed the entry of the equipment into the Consulate. 
Upon arrival, Post 1 will confirm authorization of electronic 
equipment.  Personally owned or unapproved USG equipment may 
not enter the building, but may be left with Consulate guards 
for safekeeping. 
 
¶11. Airport Departure Procedures:  Hong Kong International 
Airport has adopted the same practices as American carriers 
in the United States regarding carrying liquids/gels on board 
all aircraft, regardless of carrier (both American and 
foreign).  Travelers will be able to travel with a one 
quart/liter (maximum) plastic bag and all contents of this 
nature - e.g., face cream, tooth paste, deodorant, perfume, 
etc. - must fit into this single plastic bag. No individual 
container in the bag may be more than three ounces. 
Exceptions may be made on a case by case basis for 
prescription medication and baby formula. 
 
¶12. For more information, you may wish to consult the 
following web pages: 
 
Consulate General Hong Kong: 
http://www.hongkong.usconsulate.gov 
Hong Kong Tourist Association: http://www.hkta.org 
Hong Kong Trade Development Council: 
http://www.tdctrade.com.hk 
 
¶13.  Proposed schedule will be sent via email. 
DONOVAN