09HONGKONG679
MEDIA REACTION: THAILAND; ISRAEL AND PALESTINE; U.S.
Tue Apr 14 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Hong Kong
P 140955Z APR 09
FM AMCONSUL HONG KONG
TO SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7390
INFO WHITE HOUSE WASHDC
USDOC WASHDC
AMEMBASSY BEIJING 
AMCONSUL SHANGHAI
AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU 
AIT TAIPEI 0266
CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS HONG KONG 000679 
 
 
DEPT FOR INR/R/MR, INR/IC/CD, I/FW 
DEPT FOR EAP/PD, EAP/CM, EAP/P 
DEPT FOR VOA/BRF, TV-WPA 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
PRC POSTS FOR PA 
AIT 
USPACOM FOR FOR CIS PD ADVISER 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: THAILAND; ISRAEL AND PALESTINE; U.S. 
MILITARY SPENDING 
 
TOPICS: 
¶1. Thailand 
¶2. Israel and Palestine 
¶3. U.S. military spending 
 
HEADLINES AND EXCERPTS: 
 
¶1. Thailand 
 
"Why will yesterday's peaceful coup will become today's bloodshed?" 
 
The center-left Chinese-language Sing Tao Daily News said in an 
editorial (4/14):  "The situation in Thailand is getting tense. 
Following the Thai government resorting to force to clear sites, 
protestors shed the first blood.  The clash this time gives HK 
people a different impression from the peaceful demonstrations and 
coups in the past.  It shows that social contradictions in Thailand 
have become more serious.  The political situation in Thailand can 
no longer be understood with traditional wisdom....  Thailand has 
had elections for many years.  And the country had always been under 
the rule of the traditional established power.  The emergence of 
Thaksin had undermined this balance.  In the meantime, he failed to 
obtain an overall control of the powerful.  Thus, the seeds of this 
bloody conflict were sown." 
 
"Compromise only answer for Thailand" 
 
The independent English-language South China Morning Post commented 
in an editorial (4/13):  "Thailand's battered image has been wrecked 
by anti-government protests that forced the cancellation of the 
weekend summit of Asian leaders in Pattaya.  Thai Prime Minister 
Abhisit Vejjajiva had insisted the postponed meeting go ahead to 
prove his grip on power and the nation's stability.  He has been 
left humiliated and the economy will suffer from lost trade, 
investment and tourism.  The state of emergency that has been 
imposed and arrests of the organizers will not create calm; that can 
only come about through the rival sides talking to one another and 
reaching a compromise that leads to the restoration of genuine 
democracy...." 
 
"Political struggles will check Thailand's development" 
 
The center-left Chinese-language Sing Tao Daily News remarked in an 
editorial (4/13):  "Following the challenge of the opposition party, 
the ASEAN meeting was forced to be cancelled.  Thai government 
announced the arrest of the plotters.  The situation in Thailand is 
getting more tense.  The Hong Kong government urged Hong Kong people 
who plan to go to Bangkok to think about rescheduling their trip. 
The recent struggles between the two rival powers in Thailand - the 
'yellow-shirted army' and the 'red-shirted army' - are getting more 
and more intense.  Even though there has not yet been any serious 
bloody clash, the image of Thailand has already been severely 
impaired and the government is getting weaker and weaker....  Even 
though the dispute this time can be solved peacefully, social 
differences will only be widened with the two conflicting powers in 
Thailand refusing to give in.  If such a situation lasts for a long 
time, it will definitely weaken the long-term development of 
Thailand." 
 
"Political crisis is disturbing Thailand, fragile economy adds 
troubles" 
 
The independent Chinese-language Ming Pao Daily News had an 
editorial (4/12):  "...Apart from political disputes, Thailand is 
also facing a fragile economy.  The International Monetary Fund 
anticipates that Thailand's economy will contract to 4 percent. 
Stock markets of other Asian countries have gradually recaptured 
their losses from the beginning of this year.  Thailand's stock 
index has dropped 1.4 percent.  Foreign investors may not be willing 
to continue to invest in Thailand due to its instability.  With the 
not-yet-over financial tsunami plus the continuation of political 
disputes, where will this Buddhist country go?  It arouses much 
concern." 
 
¶2. Israel and Palestine 
 
"Peace talks between Israel and Palestine can hardly start now" 
 
The pro-PRC Chinese-language Macau Daily News remarked in an 
editorial (4/14):  "Palestinian leader Abbas called Israeli Prime 
Minister Netanyahu on April 12 to pass along his wishes on the 
Jewish Passover Holiday....  The telephone conversation between 
Israeli and Palestinian leaders on April 12 has a positive meaning: 
it shows that the two sides did not close the door for dialogue, 
despite some disputable remarks.  To a certain degree, it may even 
show that the cool relations between the two governments have traces 
of a thaw since Israel launched the 'Operation Cast Lead' against 
Gaza at the end of last year.  The future direction of 
Israeli-Palestinian peace talks will be determined by the pressure 
of the U.S., which has important influence, and the willingness of 
Israel and Palestine.  Judging from the present situation, the 
relations of the two sides do not have the prerequisite to make any 
progress." 
 
¶3. U.S. military spending 
 
"U.S. adjusts its military spending and changes its strategy" 
 
The pro-PRC Chinese-language Macau Daily News remarked in an 
editorial (4/10):  "U.S. Defense Secretary Gates announced on April 
6 the 2010 Defense Budget of the U.S., which suggested a significant 
reduction in spending on developing and purchasing expensive 
armaments.  The spending that will be affected includes the most 
advanced F-22 fighters and the strategic missile defense system. 
The report suggests putting more resources into equipping for the 
needs of the U.S. military in Iraq and Afghanistan.  This is a major 
adjustment of the existing structure of U.S. military procurement. 
It shows that the U.S. military strategy and tactics have huge 
changes....  At present, it is unlikely that the world will have any 
large-scale military conflict.  The biggest problem that U.S. is 
facing is the war in Iraq and Afghanistan.  Hence, the U.S. would 
rather reduce its spending on preparing for conventional wars with 
big powers such as Russia and put more into the war in Iraq and 
Afghanistan, so that the U.S. can quickly extricate itself from the 
difficulties." 
 
DONOVAN