09JAKARTA739
Major Economies Forum and Indonesia
Tue Apr 28 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHJA #0739/01 1180841
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 280841Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2210
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS JAKARTA 000739 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/MTS AND OES 
PASS TO TODD STERN AND JONATHAN PERSHING 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV KGHG EAID PREL ID
SUBJECT: Major Economies Forum and Indonesia 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  The Indonesians welcome U.S. reengagement and 
leadership on the climate change negotiations.  They are interested 
in exploring pragmatic and tangible measures the U.S.  and Indonesia 
canjointly undertake to advance an ambitious outcome o the 
negotiations.  The more technically savvy eaders on their 
inter-agency team are open to a ore forward leaning posture on 
contentious issuesraised by the G77.  Indonesia's participation inthe ongoing Major Economies Forum meeting is an oportunity to 
signal support for the pragmatists ad to initiate a serious 
discussion about the rol they might play, especially in the areas 
of adapation and avoided deforestation.  End Summary. 
 
he Preliminaries: Signs of Hope 
------------------------------- 
¶2. (SBU) On April 24, USAID Misson Director met Agus Purnomo, Head 
of Indonesia' National Climate Change Commission (NCCC) Secretarat 
to discuss the Major Economies Forum (MEF) meting in Washington, 
D.C.  Purnomo was heavily inolved in preparing the Inddonesian team 
for the meting and is in constant communication with Ministr 
Rachmat Witoelar, their head of delegation.  Spcial Envoy Stern met 
Purnomo during his visit toJakarta, and Deputy Envoy Pershing met 
him in Bon last month. 
 
¶3. (SBU)  Purnomo expressed apprecation for and relief at the 
reengagement of the nited States in international climate change 
negoiations, while recognizing the complex domestic an 
international dimensions of the process.  Basedon his discussions 
with  Deputy Envoy Pershing, Purnomo sees th`t h(  U.S. ppproach is 
still evolving, but believes that pror"ess will be impossible 
without U.S. leadership. The threshold test for our leadership will 
be ameeting of minds between the United States and Chin.  He sees 
that as the key to unlocking the problem set posed by the Major 
Economies. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Purnomo was somewhat dismissive of the "background" noise 
created by the posturing of the G77 countries and others, which he 
characterized as pandering to domestic stakeholders.  He was equally 
cautious in his assessment of the contribution of NGOs to the 
process, depicting many of them as underwhelming in their 
understanding of the technical issues. 
 
What Can Indonesia Do? 
---------------------- 
¶5. (SBU) Purnomo did not expect the upcoming presidential elections 
or its outcome (he projects President Yudhoyono's victory) to alter 
the Indonesian approach to the climate change negotiations.  He 
talked frankly about tensions in Indonesia's inter-agency 
discussions.  Indonesia's diplomacy is often process oriented and 
timid, Purnomo said.  He contrasted with what he saw as effective 
approaches by the Australians, South Africans and some of the Nordic 
countries.  Purnomo regretted that technical capacity on this issue 
is severely limited and the new NCCC is still being organized and is 
under resourced. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Purnomo would like Indonesia to play a more forward leaning 
role in the process.  Despite limitations, Purnomo believes that he 
and the NCCC have made considerable progress in improving 
understanding and influencing the GOI to be more proactive.  Purnomo 
has some ideas, elements of which he raised at his meeting with 
Special Envoy Stern and later discussed with Pershing -- mostly, a 
list of research oriented initiatives (some items might be replayed 
during this week's MEF meeting).  Purnomo noted that the Indonesian 
delegation might raise a request for assistance of 50 million 
dollars for geothermal development -- refe cting the GOI's keen 
interest in renewable eneryy and clean technology. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Policy and political economy issues in the energy sector in 
Indoe sia are obstacles to developing renewable energy.  Purnomo 
acknowledged those difficulties and is p en to leveraging 
discussions with us on these knnds of topics as a means for breaking 
loose some of the policy constraints.  However, he was not certain 
that the GOI side has enough technical depth right now to do this 
without assistance. 
 
What Can We do? 
--------------- 
¶8. (SBU) Purnomo is looking for some pragmatic and tangible means by 
which we can partner to positively influence both reductions in 
emissions and act as a chip that could be used successfully in the 
negotiations.  USAID is currently working with the NCCC to explore 
providing some short term technical assistance to refine his agenda. 
 EPA and Millennium Challenge Corporation staff have recently been 
in Jakarta and had some promising discussions with the GOI. 
Adaptation and avoided deforestation (REDD) are other possible areas 
which we might want to talk to the Indonesians about more seriously. 
 Washington thoughts about how these initiatives are being used with 
other partners would be welcome. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Comment:  We encourage Washington to signal USG support for 
Indonesia's engagement as a serious partner in climate change 
negotiations, openness to seeking assistance to support that 
engagement, as well as offering to send a high level official from 
the Department to build on the dialogue and map out an agenda for 
cooperation, specifically on adaptation and REDD.  End Comment. 
 
HUME