09LONDON956
UK POLITICAL SNAPSHOT:  GLOOMY BUDGET AND A NEW
Fri Apr 24 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL//NOFORN
Embassy London
VZCZCXRO8594
PP RUEHDBU RUEHFL RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHNP RUEHROV RUEHSR
DE RUEHLO #0956/01 1141640
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 241640Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY LONDON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 2094
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC PRIORITYC O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 LONDON 000956 

NOFORN 
SIPDIS 

EO 12958 DECL: 04/24/2019 
TAGS PGOV, PREL, UK 
SUBJECT: UK POLITICAL SNAPSHOT:  GLOOMY BUDGET AND A NEW 
SCANDAL TORPEDO BROWN’S POLL NUMBERS

REF: A. LONDON 949  B. LONDON 831  C. 08 LONDON 2163

Classified By: PolMinCouns Gregory Berry, reasons 1.4 b, d

¶1. (C/NF) Key points:
-- Poll numbers for PM Gordon Brown and his Labour Party have dropped following the April 22 budget presentation, with an April 24 poll showing the opposition Conservative Party with an 18 point lead over Labour. If an election were held now, according to these poll numbers, the Tories would win a staggering 150-seat majority in Parliament.
-- The past two weeks have been wretched for Brown and Labour, who have endured a gloomy budget presentation and a particularly ugly new scandal, popularly known as “Smeargate,” involving a top Brown advisor’s plan to plant false rumors on the internet about senior Conservative Party figures. Even after the PM personally apologized for Smeargate, the media and the Tories have sought to implicate more of Brown’s close allies. The scandal also may have forced Brown to cancel what a plan to call the next general election this spring, when he had hoped to capitalize on his successful performance at the G-20 summit.
-- Brown’s attempts to close loop holes in the parliamentary Second Homes Allowances, which according to media reports many of the most senior members of Brown’s Cabinet have used for personal gain, have been opposed by the Conservatives and third-party Liberal Democrats; one Tory MP told us Brown’s plan would allow “endemic featherbedding and graft.” End key points.

Labour Poll Numbers Collapse Following Gloomy Budget, New Scandal
--------------------------------------------- -------- 

¶2. (SBU) David Cameron and the opposition Conservative Party have an 18 point lead in the polls over Gordon Brown and the Labour Party, according to the first poll following the April 22 presentation of the budget. A YouGov poll for the Daily Telegraph published April 24 found the Conservatives are at 45 percent, up four points from March, while Labour is down four points to 27 percent and the third-party Liberal Democrats are at 18 percent. According to these figures, if the elections were held today, the Tories would sweep to power with an astonishing 150-seat majority in Parliament - more than double the 63-seat majority that Labour now holds. Sixty-nine percent of respondents said they were dissatisfied with Brown’s performance as Prime Minister, while 56 percent said they were satisfied with Cameron’s performance as Tory Leader. Thirty-nine percent thought the Conservatives would be more likely to run the economy well, while only 24 percent approved of Labour’s current handling of the economy.

¶3. (C/NF) The causes of this collapse in Brown and Labour’s poll numbers, which had rebounded slightly following the G-20 before subsiding again (Ref B), are a gloomy budget presentation by Chancellor Alistair Darling on April 22 (Ref A), mounting media reports of MP abuse of a parliamentary allowance for second homes which has engulfed Brown and many members of his cabinet (Ref B) -- and a new and particularly ugly scandal. Dubbed “Smeargate” by the media, it erupted on April 10, when the media obtained leaked emails from PM Special Adviser Damian McBride in which McBride attempted to launch an internet smear campaign against Cameron, Shadow Chancellor George Osborne, Osborne,s wife Frances, MP Nadine Dorries, and another unnamed Tory MP. The smears themselves, which have been described in salacious detail on the internet, were more delicately described in the April 14 Guardian as including “rumors involving the wife of the Shadow Chancellor, the health of Cameron, the personal relations of MP Nadine Dorries and accusations that a Tory MP was promoting his partner’s business interests in the Commons.”

¶4. (C/NF) McBride resigned on April 11, claiming that he had merely written up a list of “stories doing the rounds in Westminster,” and that he had never actually intended them to be published. Unpopular within the Labour Party according to our contacts, and a particularly unpleasant person based on our own experiences with him, McBride was one of Brown’s closest advisors, having followed him to No. 10 Downing Street from the Treasury. Brown disclaimed all knowledge of McBride’s antics, but critics were quick to point out McBride’s close relationship to Brown, and that McBride had used his No. 10 email account to send the smear rumors. In any case, they argued, PM Brown holds final responsibility
LONDON 00000956 002 OF 003
for any such tactics coming out of No. 10. After private written apologies to the parties concerned didn’t work, Brown apologized personally for Smeargate on April 17. Nonetheless, his poll numbers dropped, with 37 percent of voters in an April 19 poll by News of the World saying they found Labour less trustworthy than before Smeargate broke. The media sought to implicate more members of Brown’s inner circle, including Education Secretary Ed Balls, who was forced to deny that he runs a “smear unit” inside Downing Street. Former Labour MP Alice Mahon resigned from the Labour Party April 18, telling the press, “I can no longer be a member of a party that at the leadership level has betrayed many of the values and principles that inspired me as a teenager to join.” Although Mahon maintained a low profile during her tenure in Parliament, her resignation was head line news. And Unison, a public-sector union representing 1.3 million workers, announced publicly that it would withhold GBP 1.8 million in annual dues to the Labour Party - one-tenth of Labour’s yearly funding - if Brown didn’t put a stop to smear tactics.

“Smeargate” Wrecks Gordon Brown’s Plans for Early Elections
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 

¶5. (C/NF) Perhaps most damaging of all, however, Smeargate effectively ended what may have been Brown’s plan to call a general election this spring, based on the rise in the polls he received following his solid performance at the G-20. Labour Prospective Parliamentary Candidate for Burton Ruth Smeeth (strictly protect) told us April 20 that Brown had intended to announce the elections on May 12, and hold them after a very short (matter of weeks) campaign season. Labour had been “just” 7 points behind the Conservatives in some polls taken right after the G-20 Summit, which other Labour contacts had told us was close to an acceptable standing from which to launch a campaign, but the drop in Labour’s poll numbers following Smeargate forced Brown to abandon his plan, a despondent Smeeth said. (Note: This information has not been reported in the press. End note.)

Opposition Parties Oppose Plans To Abolish Second Homes Allowance
--------------------------------- 

¶6. (SBU) At the same time as the budget and Smeargate dominated the headlines, Brown and Labour were continuing to take media fire over the controversial Second Homes Allowance, which is designed to cover the costs that MPs incur by maintaining a home in their constituencies as well as a residence in London. In recent weeks, the media has highlighted attempts by prominent Government ministers to maximize their claims against this allowance in ways that, while not strictly illegal, amount to bilking the tax payer. The politicians in the UK snared in the public outrage over the practice include Chancellor of the Exchequer Alistair Darling, Home Secretary Jacqui Smith, and even Brown himself.  Talks among party leaders on the PM’s plans to abolish the Second Homes Allowance and replace it with a daily attendance allowance was rejected by both the Tories and the Lib Dems, however, during a tense and heated meeting April 22 that broke down after 40 minutes. Tory MP Keith Simpson (strictly protect) told us April 23 that the Conservatives at first thought they would have no option but to back the proposed reforms or face criticism from Labour. Once the Tories understood, however, that the public perceived the proposal for a daily allowance as a copy of the system used for European Parliamentarians - a system which he described as allowing “endemic featherbedding and graft” in Brussels - the Tory leadership decided it was politically acceptable to attack the reform proposals. Simpson told us that the inability of the Brown Government to achieve cross-party support for the reforms is a sign of how “listless and ineffective this government has become,” because this kind of reform is something “any effective government could have been able to nail down long before going public with it.”

Comment
------- 

¶7. (C/NF) While the media has begun to trot out the usual pundits who claim that Brown can’t last until the next election, as we have reported, there is virtually no chance either that he will step down voluntarily, or that an alternative leader will step forward to challenge him. Not only is replacing a sitting Labour leader an arduous task procedurally (Ref C), but we assess it unlikely that any Labour politician with his or her eye on the future would want to take on the sinking ship that is the current Labour Party at this time of crisis. It is more likely that Labour will go down in the next election - and then will begin the
LONDON 00000956 003 OF 003
process of rebuilding.
Visit London’s Classified Website: http://www.intelink.sgov.gov/wiki/Portal:Unit ed_Kingdom
LEBARON