09PANAMA298
U) PANAMA AND THE 2009 SUMMIT OF THE AMERICAS
Thu Apr 09 00:00:00 +0200 2009
SECRET
Embassy Panama
VZCZCXYZ0000
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHZP #0298/01 0992031
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
R 092031Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY PANAMA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3251
INFO RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHDC
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHMFISS/CDR USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FL
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHDCS E C R E T PANAMA 000298 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/08/2019 
TAGS: PINR PGOV PREL ECON
SUBJECT: (U) PANAMA AND THE 2009 SUMMIT OF THE AMERICAS 
(C-AL9-00153) 
 
REF: SECSTATE 20677 
 
Classified By: Classified by Ambassador Barbara J. Stephenson for reaso 
ns 1.4(b) and (d) 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1. (C/NF) Panama's main priority for the 17-19 April 2009 
Summit of the Americas (SOA) was addressing the global 
economic crisis, and Delia Villamonte, Panamanian MFA DG for 
International Organizations and Conferences, was optimistic 
that President Obama would be a positive broker for 
consensus.  According to Villamonte, the GOP would seek USG 
support to undertake actions to mitigate the global economic 
crisis, reform the banking system, promote governability, and 
strengthen security.  Villamonte did not raise any areas 
where Panama would diverge from USG priorities, but noted 
that President Martin Torrijos was firmly opposed to pursuing 
any parallel declarations, with the exception of a 
declaration to address the global economic crisis.  The 
Panamanians would not back efforts by Venezuelan President 
Hugo Chavez to steal the spotlight or promote an alternate 
agenda, but neither would the Panamanians be able to quiet an 
anticipated outburst from Chavez.  End summary. 
 
------------------------------ 
Everybody's talking 'bout econ 
------------------------------ 
 
¶2. (C/NF) Asked about the issues that the GOP would like to 
see the U.S. address at the SOA, Villamonte responded that 
Panama's priorities were: 1. addressing the global economic 
crisis, 2. addressing banking sector reform, 3. promoting 
governability, and 4. promoting regional security efforts. 
Villamonte did not provide specifics, but noted that all four 
had an international scope.  She said that the SOA should 
address issues that affect all of the regions' countries, 
rather than "wasting time on divisive issues or issues 
particular to one country, while everyone's economies are 
suffering."  When asked about parallel declarations, 
Villamonte said that Torrijos was firmly opposed to any 
parallel declarations that would distract attendees from the 
main task at hand, the economic crisis.  Torrijos would be on 
board for a parallel declaration that dealt with the crisis, 
but no other.  When asked whether Panama felt pressure from 
other governments to reform the international financial 
system or international financial organizations such as the 
World Bank (e.g. from socialist-leaning governments), 
Villamonte responded, "The dialogue is out there, but our 
economic system does not allow us to engage in 
anti-capitalist dialogue."  She also cautioned against 
allowing the big, powerful countries to exploit or push aside 
the smaller ones.  When POLOFF raised "the Cuba issue," 
Villamonte steered the conversation back to the "very 
serious" global economic crisis.  (Note: Torrijos is among 
the Latin American presidents to visit Cuba recently.) 
 
----------------------------------------- 
All we are saying, is give Obama a chance 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (C) Villamonte noted that the dynamic U.S. president's 
attendance at the SOA represented a great opportunity to 
forge consensus on the economic problems that affect the 
whole region.  Impressed by Obama's performance at the G-20 
Summit, Villamonte was optimistic that he could parlay this 
dynamism into real results with his first encounter with 
Latin American heads of state.  Villamonte noted that Obama's 
recent comments in Turkey about the United States' positive 
relationship with the Muslim world were "very good and 
clear," and that "it needed to be said."  Villamonte said 
that Obama's comments showed that he had a gift for diplomacy 
and oration, and that he could use those skills at the SOA to 
help create consensus on the economic crisis. 
 
--------------------------------- 
Everybody's talking 'bout Chavism 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶4. (S/NF) POLOFF broached the subject of a potentially 
disruptive Chavez outburst during the SOA; Villamonte 
responded that, "We know he is going to do something, but he 
is a democratically-elected president and it is not as though 
we can tell him to be quiet."  When it comes to Chavez's 
 
upstaging antics, although Panama would probably not 
intervene to stop him, Villamonte succinctly dismissed the 
notion that Panama would back him, by saying, "We do not get 
involved with any of that."  Villamonte did not mention 
whether she had information on other leaders intending to 
undercut or upstage the summit process or to stage parallel 
anti-U.S. or anti-globalization summits. 
 
¶5. (C) Villamonte noted that Panama was sending a small 
delegation.  In addition to President Torrijos, First Vice 
President and MFA Samuel Lewis and herself, she ticked off a 
list of a few other senior officials who would attend, 
including the Minister of Labor, Edwin Salamin, the Minister 
of Economy and Finance, Hector Alexander, and a single 
protocol officer, Flavio Mendez. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6. (S/NF) The GOP generally agrees with U.S. priorities and 
is looking for partnership rather than antagonism at the SOA. 
 This is in-keeping with the positive, close relationship the 
U.S. has had with the GOP over the course of the Torrijos 
administration.  Villamonte's ho-hum response to POLOFF's 
comments on Chavez's attempts to undercut the dialogue and 
"the Cuba issue" is in synch with Panama's overall view of 
its position on the regional stage.  The GOP highly values 
the U.S. as its largest economic and political partner, but 
at the same time the GOP is exploring other beneficial 
relationships as Panama increasingly comes into its own, 
particularly as a regional economic and business hub.  Post 
does not expect surprises from the GOP at the SOA, and 
anticipates that the GOP will exhibit its strong partnership 
with the U.S. and will help champion responsible efforts to 
address the global economic crisis. 
STEPHENSON