09PRETORIA806
SOUTH AFRICA VOTES: SITUATION REPORT #2
Wed Apr 22 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Pretoria
------------------57F665  221553Z /38    
O 221537Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY PRETORIA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8216
INFO SOUTHERN AF DEVELOPMENT COMMUNITY COLLECTIVE
AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVEUNCLAS PRETORIA 000806 
 
FOR AF/S WILLS, JAMES AND MARBURG 
FOR DRL WILLET AND GILBRIDE 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: KDEM ASEC SF
SUBJECT: SOUTH AFRICA VOTES: SITUATION REPORT #2 
 
¶1. Summary:  South Africans remain focused on the unfolding drama of national elections as voting continued through midday.  Voter turnout remains strong overall, but there are significant 
differences between polling places.  Observer teams are reporting minor irregularities and procedural problems, many of them related to shortages in election materials and supplies.  None of our teams 
reported incidences of violence or physical intimidation; nor irregularities on such a scale as to undermine the overall integrity of the electoral process.  Prominent voters and analysts have 
already begun to assess the significance of the elections.  End summary. 
 
----------------------- 
Supply Chain Challenges 
----------------------- 
 
¶2. Observer teams are reporting significant differences in turnout among polling places.  Some polling places are dealing with lines as long as 350 persons while others are virtually empty.  This dramatic 
variation may be the result of the Independent Electoral Commission's newly developed capability to allow voters to vote at any polling station nationwide. 
 
¶3. The large turnout beteen 0700 and noon slacked off as the afternoon wore on.  In many polling stations, around half of registered voters had cast their votes before lunch.  With the polls 
open until 2100, it is conceivable that seventy to eighty percent of registered voters will have made their choice. 
 
¶4. In the town of Phoenix, outside of Durban, IEC officials reported that  such a high number of out-of-district voters had turned up at one polling place that the polling station ran out of the special 
form required for out-of-district voting.  Quite a few smaller polling stations  with under 2000 voters failed to provide separate ballot boxes for national and provincial votes.  However, IEC and party agents at these polling stations agreed to use only one ballot box at a time.  At overly subscribed polling stations, Embassy observers expressed uncertainty that all voters would be accommodated by the time polls close at 2100.  The IEC has provided assurances that all who are in line to vote when polls close will be accommodated. 
 
------------------------------------ 
IEC Official Shot in Robbery Attempt 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶5.  IEC officials were quick to clarify that an incident early on election day in which and IEC polling official was shot and injured was the result of a foiled robbery attempt.  In the Alexandra section of Johannesburg, approximately 300 persons are staging a service delivery protest to signal their dissatisfaction with the government's performance on providing low-income housing.  Protesters carry placards and shout slogans such as, "No house; no vote!"  This protest has not affected voting.  None of our observer teams reported any security incidents. 
 
---------------- 
Media Highlights 
---------------- 
 
¶6.  Local media broadcast IEC Chairperson Brigalia Bam's midday press conference in its entirety.  Dr. Bam welcomed the "overwhelming" response of South African voters and proclaimed that 
a "carnival mood" is prevailing across the nation.  During the day, reports flowed in as prominent South Africans cast their ballots. Local television featured footage of a frail Nelson Mandela as he 
cast his ballot.  Cameras also caught President Motlanthe, ANC leader Jacob Zuma, and DA leader Helen Zille as they cast their votes.  Former President Mbeki, asked by a reporter how he voted, 
quipped, "I am sure that question is unconstitutional; this is a secret ballot." 
Qsecret ballot." 
 
LA LIME