09SOFIA154
SOFIA'S MEAN STREETS
Thu Apr 02 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Sofia
R 021403Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY SOFIA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 5890
INFO EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVEC O N F I D E N T I A L SOFIA 000154 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
EUR/CE - TOM YEAGER 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 04/02/2019 
TAGS: PGOV PREL BU
SUBJECT: SOFIA'S MEAN STREETS 
 
Classified By: Charge Alex Karagiannis for reasons 1.4 (b) and (d). 
 
¶1.  (C)  Summary:  Sofia's streets are a showcase for 
potholes and uncollected garbage.  Lined by decaying soviet 
style blocks and uncompleted new construction (mixed with 
some glitzy modern buildings), they are ugly.  While the 
ordinary crime rate is low, organized crime violence is a 
recurrent feature as rivals compete for turf and engage in 
contract killings.  This landscape is the visible result of 
years of pervasive political corruption and the persistent 
failure in Bulgaria,s law enforcement and public 
administration systems.  While the Socialist(BSP) led 
government tries to convince the public and the EU that it is 
seriously fighting crime and corruption, every day the 
average person sees massive flouting of the law.  Gangsters, 
thugs, and mutri (shady businessmen) in expensive cars show 
off their ill-gotten wealth.  They easily slip through the 
cumbersome and corrupt justice system (no major OC figure has 
ever spent significant time in jail).  Some young people see 
mutri as role models: cool, feared, and above the law.  A 
coarsening of society is taking place.  Tired and cynical 
about government institutions and politicians, Bulgarians 
have come to accept corruption as part of the normal 
landscape and find it easier to cope with it rather than to 
change it.  This mood will likely dominate as Bulgarians go 
to the polls this summer.  End Summary. 
 
---------------- 
UGLY AND BOORISH 
---------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Arriving in Sofia by air, a traveler is unsure if 
Bulgaria is yet a modern EU country.  Airport Terminal 2 is 
clean, modern, and efficient; Terminal 1 is old, dingy, and 
cigarette-smoke infused.  Once a traveler hits the airport 
access road and the main thoroughfares, the picture gets 
starker.  Drab, decrepit soviet style blocks rise up, in 
stark juxtaposition to the Porsche dealership.  Crumbling 
streets with unevenly patched pavement, potholes that can 
pass for tank traps, and sidewalks crammed with parked cars 
are routine.  Basic infrastructure is mediocre to poor.  A 
years-long garbage mess (no room in landfills) has gotten 
worse over a contract dispute with the collection companies; 
refuse is both scattered and piled high.  Packs of wild dogs 
roam widely, even in central residential areas and what 
passes as the leafy, upscale suburban neighborhoods.  What 
had been a rather green, complacent, modestly architecturally 
interesting city with a pleasant historic center has become a 
car-choked, trashy mess. 
 
¶3.  (C)  Bad as that is, the organized crime situation is 
ugly as well.  Ordinary crime is pretty low, and most 
citizens feel safe.  But crimes directed at and by the bling, 
shady nouveau riche -- intimidation, extortion, kidnappings 
-- have become more visible, and those criminals are more 
arrogant.  The raw statistics indicate failure or 
unwillingness to deal with serious crimes:  since 1997, there 
have been over 130 contract murders, with only a handful of 
arrests and just five convictions.  What previously had been 
professional killings (both shootings and bombings) with no 
collateral damage, have now gotten sloppier; in one instance 
a drive-by machine gun spray failed to do the job outside a 
popular restaurant, but did terrorize other patrons.  One 
prominent, perhaps shady, lawyer was gunned down just days 
ago in a provincial capital. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Over the past six months, there have been bombings 
at so-called gentlemen,s clubs -- as organized crime 
families play out their turf wars.  The number of kidnappings 
of wealthy (and perhaps sleazy) businessmen has gone up; 
it,s a lucrative new racket.  Recently, in one very crude, 
but effective extortion case, one hotel owner received a 
hand-grenade with the pin removed.  Organized criminals and 
their no-neck, black-leather-clad body guards flaunt and 
disobey the law; big, black SUVs are the rage, barreling down 
streets, ignoring traffic and parking regulations.  Seeing no 
force to control them, many ordinary Bulgarians have followed 
suit, running lights, passing against oncoming city traffic, 
and the like.  Young people find mutri -- cool guys above the 
law with money and status -- an attractive role model.  In a 
hilarious interview that unwittingly confirms the view that 
muscle and money are what matter, the new "Miss Bulgaria" 
spoke openly that she is not some "cheap prostitute" and how 
her Russian "businessman" boyfriend helps get nice things -- 
in what is widely considered to have been a rigged selection. 
 The overall attitude amounts to private gain and social 
indifference. 
 
----------------------------------- 
PUBLIC SERVICES -- CRIMINAL NEGLECT 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  (C)  Sofia's dilapidated condition does not come from a 
poor economy.  National growth has averaged about seven 
percent for five years.  The central government has 
maintained large fiscal reserves and not spent wisely on 
basic infrastructure.  Meanwhile, corruption siphoned off the 
nation's wealth to shady businesses, government officials and 
political parties, imposing a heavy toll on public services. 
Potholed and poorly lit roads are the norm.  Sofia's garbage 
collection crisis, recalling scenes of Naples, now in its 
sixth week, is symbolic of an indifferent, sometimes testy 
relationship between the municipal and central governments as 
they play a blame game in advance of summer elections.  The 
most vital public services, law and order forces, have gone 
from bad to worse.  Almost a year after the forced 
resignation of disgraced Interior Minister Petkov, there are 
few tangible changes at that sprawling, dysfunctional agency. 
  Things are little better at the newly created State Agency 
for National Security (DANS).  Intended to target high level 
organized crime and corruption, DANS is instead politicized; 
some officials have links to criminals and shady businesses. 
 
¶6.  (C)  Meanwhile, old scandals fester and new ones emerge. 
The line-up is extensive; a short list of the most prominent 
case includes Sofia,s heating utility; Sofia,s garbage 
service; the state Road Infrastructure Fund; misuse of 
multiple EU SAPARD and PHARE funds; multiple agricultural and 
environmental programs; numerous dubious land swaps; the 
National Revenue Agency; and the Customs Agency, notorious 
for its many senior officials known by their criminal 
nicknames such as "The Penguin" and "Silicon Girl."  Looking 
at summer parliamentary elections, Bulgarians understand that 
mainline parties profit from corruption and have no real 
interest in reform.  A new party, Leader, the personal 
project of a shady businessman (unknown five years ago and 
today the second wealthiest Bulgarian), has a genuine chance 
to enter parliament.  Though formed on the premise that it is 
more cost effective to own your own party than to pay off 
other politicians, Leader,s clever slogans of protest, 
populism and nationalism appeal to alienated voters. 
 
¶7.  (C)  COMMENT:  Sofia is not Bulgaria, so the picture here 
may be more intense than elsewhere.  Nor is cynicism about 
politicians and government anything new.  Bulgarians tend to 
look outside themselves for hope; many value the abstraction 
of the EU far above any of their own politicians or 
institutions.  Neither Sofia,s streets nor the mutri culture 
will likely be cleaned up quickly under such conditions. 
But, high frustration and resignation levels are now mixed 
with some real anger.  If a new government makes a clean-up a 
priority, it could tap into and motivate citizen support. 
END COMMENT. 
 
 
Karagiannis