09STATE43041
CYPRUS - GUIDANCE FOR APRIL 30 SECURITY COUNCIL
Tue Apr 28 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0010
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #3041 1182158
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 282139Z APR 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 5843
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS IMMEDIATE 0199
RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA IMMEDIATE 5080UNCLAS STATE 043041 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL UNSC KPKO PBTS GR TU CY UK
SUBJECT: CYPRUS - GUIDANCE FOR APRIL 30 SECURITY COUNCIL 
CONSULTATIONS 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request:  USUN is instructed to draw 
from the points below during UN Security Council 
consultations on Cyprus scheduled for April 30, 2009. 
 
¶2. (U) Begin points: 
 
-- Thank you Mr. President.  I would like to welcome Special 
Advisor Downer to the Council and thank you for your briefing 
today and for your strong support for Cypriot-led efforts to 
reach a comprehensive settlement. 
 
-- Mr. Downer, I was greatly encouraged to hear the optimism 
you expressed that the two sides are taking advantage of this 
unique opportunity in time to reach a lasting and durable 
settlement.  Mr. Christofias and Mr. Talat have made 
commendable progress since these negotiations began.  Both 
leaders have obviously placed great emphasis, personally, 
politically and publicly, on reaching an end to the impasse. 
As a result of their leadership, the Cypriot communities are 
moving closer to mutual agreement to resolve long-standing 
differences. 
 
-- Both leaders have also continued to project public signals 
of goodwill and unity that are essential to the success of 
the negotiations, such as through the recently announced 
confidence building measures (ambulance crossings, water 
conservation, cultural preservation, and criminal 
intelligence sharing).  Agreement and commitment to make 
decisive progress on implementation of these and other 
measures will be required. 
 
-- We also take very much to heart your reminder that a 
resolution lies with the communities themselves.  It is 
essential to provide the two leaders the negotiating room 
they need to find a solution that makes sense for Cypriots. 
At the same time, we must also recognize that there will be 
some difficult give and take in the next phase of 
negotiations, and the negotiations run the risk of getting 
bogged down in arguments about the past, instead of looking 
to the future.  The leaders will need all of our support and 
encouragement to focus on what will best allow Cyprus to move 
forward, including by seriously considering what compromises 
may be necessary to bring the talks to a successful 
conclusion. 
 
-- The Cyprus conflict is one of the longest-standing 
questions that have seized this Council.  We have tried many 
times to find our way toward a solution, only to have the 
process stall.  We therefore understand the need to avoid 
establishing a rigid timeline and unrealistic expectations. 
But we must balance our caution about proceeding too quickly 
with a sense of urgency.  We truly do have an unprecedented 
opportunity here, and we should not let it pass.  If there 
are ways to increase the momentum during this next phase, 
then we should consider them, so that the two sides can fully 
exploit this opportunity.  I would welcome any further 
thoughts Mr. Downer would want to provide about how the 
Council can help in keeping up the momentum. 
 
-- Mr. President, as President Obama recently stated, the two 
Cypriot leaders have an opportunity through their commitment 
to negotiations under the United Nations Good Offices 
Mission.  The United States is willing to offer all the help 
sought by the parties as they work toward a just and lasting 
settlement that reunifies Cyprus into a bizonal and 
bicommunal federation. 
CLINTON