09YEREVAN257
EU-ARMENIA PARLIAMENTARY COOPERATION DOCUMENT
Wed Apr 15 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Yerevan
VZCZCXRO0179
RR RUEHAG RUEHAST RUEHDA RUEHDBU RUEHDF RUEHFL RUEHIK RUEHKW RUEHLA
RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHNP RUEHPOD RUEHROV RUEHSK RUEHSR RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHYE #0257/01 1051021
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 151021Z APR 09
FM AMEMBASSY YEREVAN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8935
INFO RUEHZL/EUROPEAN POLITICAL COLLECTIVE
RUEHLMC/MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORPORATION WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 YEREVAN 000257 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PHUM PINR KDEM EU AJ TU AM
SUBJECT: EU-ARMENIA PARLIAMENTARY COOPERATION DOCUMENT 
 
YEREVAN 00000257  001.2 OF 004 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY AND COMMENT:  Armenian and European 
parliamentarians agreed to a "Final Statement and Recommendations of 
the EU-Armenia Parliamentary Cooperation Committee meeting" (text 
below) on April 8.    The text lists 41 points of interest in 
EU-Armenia relations, and is remarkable for its comprehensive 
inclusion of subjects that expose Armenia to controversy, such as 
its handling of the post-election period in March 2008, even if the 
wording on several sensitive points seems somewhat finessed. We 
regard this as a useful reminder to the Armenian authorities that 
the international community remains concerned about democracy and 
human rights issues. The text was not released and has not been made 
public to date. 
 
¶2. (SBU) BIO NOTE:  Avet Adonts is chairman of the Armenian 
parliament's European Integration Committee, is a member of the 
governing coalition, and is understood to be the pick to be the next 
Armenian Ambassador to the EU, NATO, and Belgium, starting sometime 
this summer.  Adonts was previously former President Kocharian's 
foreign policy adviser and has held the personal rank of ambassador 
since that time.  Adonts is smart, capable, a proficient English 
speaker, and one of the few true professionals in the Prosperous 
Armenia party stable.  He has been a good embassy contact; a 
defender of GOAM policy but one who can engage thoughtfully on 
difficult issues. 
 
END SUMMARY AND COMMENT 
 
¶3. (SBU) Begin text of document: 
 
EU-Armenia Parliamentary Cooperation Committee 
 
TENTH MEETING 
7- 8 April 2009 
YEREVAN 
Final Statement and Recommendations 
pursuant to Article 89 of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement 
 
 
Under the co-chairmanship of Mrs Marie Anne ISLER BEGUIN 
(Greens/EFA, France) and Mr Avet ADONTS (Prosperous Armenia Party), 
the tenth meeting of the EU-Armenia Parliamentary Cooperation 
Committee was held in Yerevan on 7-8 April, 2009. The Committee 
exchanged views with Deputy Foreign Minister, Mrs Karine Kazinian, 
representing the Government of the Republic of Armenia, Mr Thomasz 
Knothe, Ambassador of Poland, representing the Czech Presidency of 
the Council of the European Union, and Mr Raul de LUZENBERGER, Head 
of the European Commission Delegation to Armenia, representing the 
European Commission. 
 
 
The Parliamentary Cooperation Committee 
 
¶1.  welcomes and supports the continuous European aspirations 
expressed by Armenia and calls on the European Commission to 
continue to assist Armenia in achieving the objectives of the ENP 
Action Plan; 
 
¶2. stresses that proper implementation of the ENP Action Plan will 
reinforce an increasingly close relationship, going beyond 
co-operation, to involve a significant measure of economic 
integration and a deepening of political cooperation; takes note 
with satisfaction of the fact that during past years important steps 
have been taken to enhance political dialogue and to establish 
cooperation in foreign policy matters; notes that Armenia has widely 
aligned with CFSP declarations and is generally very active in 
cooperating on foreign policy issue but stresses the importance for 
the development of the EU-Armenia partnership of full respect for 
international commitments concerning human rights and democracy; 
 
EU-Armenia relations 
 
¶3. underlines again the importance of the full implementation of the 
Partnership and Cooperation Agreement which remains the cornerstone 
and legal basis of the EU-Armenia relationship; taking into account 
the fact that the initial period of application of the PCA ends this 
year and the substantial efforts Armenia has made in a number of 
areas over the last years; welcomes the establishment of the 
interdepartmental commission to oversee the implementation of the 
ENP Action Plan; 
 
¶4. calls on the European Commission to ensure that there will be a 
significant increase and reallocation in funding for the European 
Neighbourhood Policy, in order to make up for the limited 
administrative capacity of the country; it, therefore, welcomes the 
signature of the General Terms of Reference on the project of the EU 
Advisory Experts Group on 6 November 2008; and notes with 
satisfaction that the first experts have already arrived in Armenia 
and started their activities; 
 
¶5. welcomes the opening of a full European Commission Delegation in 
 
YEREVAN 00000257  002.2 OF 004 
 
 
Yerevan, which will help increase the effectiveness of EU' s 
activities and visibility in Armenia; 
 
¶6.  welcomes positive results of the feasibility study for the 
possible establishment of a free trade agreement between the EU and 
Armenia which will also look at regional trade and economic 
integration aspects; hopes that the negotiations of the deep and 
comprehensive FTA will start in the near future; 
 
¶7. stresses the need for the conclusion of visa facilitation and 
readmission agreements between the EU and Armenia and the launch of 
dialogue on mobility issues; supports the proposal on the 
establishment of EU-Armenia Cooperation Subcommittee on Justice, 
Liberty and Security; 
 
¶8. welcomes the Declaration of the European Council on the 
establishment of the Eastern Partnership which confirms the growing 
EU engagement in the South Caucasus and expresses its hope that the 
initiative will promote tailor-made and targeted cooperation, taking 
into account the needs of individual partners; stresses the 
importance of the multilateral track of the Eastern Partnership 
since inclusive regional cooperation based on shared values will 
contribute much to confidence building; welcomes Armenia's positive 
response to the initiative of establishing parliamentary assembly 
EURONEST; 
 
Internal situation of Armenia - respect for human rights and rule of 
law 
 
9 welcomes the election of Mr Serzh Sargsyan as President of Armenia 
in February 2008; expresses concerns over the following 
demonstrations which resulted in clashes between the police and the 
demonstrators on March 1, 2008 and numerous arrests of the 
opposition supporters; 
 
¶10. notes with satisfaction the adoption of the Law on Amending and 
Supplementing the Law on Conducting Meetings, Assemblies, Rallies 
and Demonstrations in line with the Council of Europe standards and 
expects its quick and full implementation; reiterates its demand 
that freedom of assembly should also be guaranteed in practice in 
Armenia; in this respect, it welcomes that the recent opposition 
rallies, including the one on 1 March 2009 took place unimpeded; and 
urges the Armenian authorities to release all persons deprived of 
their liberty in relation to events of March 1 and 2, 2008, who did 
not personally commit violent crimes; 
 
¶11. welcomes the establishment by the President of Armenia of a 
"fact-finding group of experts to inquire into the events of March 1 
and 2, 2008" and welcomes the decision of the opposition to fully 
participate in the work of this group; 
 
¶12. welcomes the amendments to the Criminal Code (done in 
cooperation with the Council of Europe) which clearly define 
usurpation of power (Article 300) and mass disorder (Article 225) 
and allow to revise the charges brought against the persons detained 
in relation to events of March 1 and 2; stresses that it is the 
application of these amendments that will ultimately matter; 
welcomes the increasing number of pardons granted by the President 
of Armenia; 
 
¶13. stresses the importance of the implementation of existing legal 
and institutional reforms in the field of human rights and the rule 
of law; takes note of amendments to the Rules of Procedures of the 
National Assembly of Armenia aimed at strengthening the role of the 
opposition in the legislative; 
 
¶14.  recalls the vital role played by a free and independent media 
as a precondition for the development of democracy; stresses the 
need to ensure the freedom of independent central and provincial 
media outlets; urges the Armenian authorities therefore to 
investigate seriously all the cases of harassment of journalists; 
 
¶15. draws the attention to the ruling by the European Court of Human 
Rights concerning the case of the  "A1 +" broadcaster; calls on the 
licensing authority to ensure that the broadcasting law is respected 
in a way to enable the unhampered functioning of independent media 
outlets; 
 
¶16. calls on the Armenian government to ensure freedom of religion 
and freedom of the conscientious objectors and expresses hope that 
the new legislation in this field will meet Council of Europe 
standards; 
 
Economic policies 
 
¶17.  notes that a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement 
between the EU and Armenia would lead to Armenia's genuine 
integration with the EU in the area of trade and economy, thus 
bringing the medium and longer term economic benefits to the 
Armenian and European companies and consumers; 
 
YEREVAN 00000257  003.2 OF 004 
 
 
 
¶18. welcomes the declared priority and efforts of the Armenian 
Government to improve tax administration and customs aimed at 
further improvement of the business environment, reduction of the 
shadow economy and increased competitiveness; 
 
¶19. underlines the importance of further EU involvement including by 
means of a special technical assistance in gradual approximation of 
Armenian's trade and investment related legislation with relevant EU 
law and procedures; 
 
¶20. calls on the Armenian government to implement its reform 
programme focusing on economic development, fight against 
corruption, tax and customs reforms and improving the investment 
climate, in accordance with the objectives of the ENP Action Plan; 
urges the Armenian government to finalise the 2008-2012 
anti-corruption programme; 
 
¶21. notes that the small size of the Armenian economy and its 
vulnerability to external shocks as well as its limited reserves to 
combat effects of the global crisis help to explain the current 
economic crisis in Armenia; welcomes steps to restore macroeconomic 
stability through increased cooperation with international and 
European financial institutions; 
 
Regional issues 
 
¶22. acknowledges the significant negative impact of the 
Georgian-Russian conflict on Armenia's economy, mainly due to the 
temporary disruption of transport routs and the deterioration of the 
investment climate; welcomes Armenia's balanced and unbiased 
position during and following the August events in South Ossetia; 
 
¶23. welcomes the Decision of the European Council on the Eastern 
Partnership which will create new opportunities for tailor-made, 
targeted, enhanced and inclusive regional and multilateral 
cooperation; 
 
¶24. welcomes the initiative of the President of Armenia Mr. Serzh 
Sarkissian to engage into a dialogue with Turkey and to invite the 
President of Turkey Mr. Abdullah G|l to Armenia and commends the 
decision of the latter to accept the invitation; 
 
¶25. hopes that the process of full normalization of Armenian-Turkish 
relations will include the lifting of the land blockade imposed on 
Armenia, opening of borders, and establishment of diplomatic 
relations; 
 
¶26. takes due note of the idea of a Caucasian Platform for Stability 
and Cooperation and considers this as a positive sign in the right 
direction; 
 
¶27. expresses its support for Armenia's presidency of the 
Organisation of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC) and 
encourages the Armenian authorities to use this regional framework 
in order to promote economic development, security and stability of 
the Black Sea region as a whole; 
 
¶28. welcomes Armenia's participation in the Ministerial summit of 
TRACECA intergovernmental commission in Baku in December 2008 
despite unnecessary diplomatic obstacles; stresses the strong 
desirability of further infrastructure development which includes 
all the countries of the region and therefore strengthens stability, 
economic and trade development; further calls on all actors to take 
concrete steps to create the necessary conditions; 
 
¶29. strongly encourages the Armenian authorities to enhance their 
contribution to the implementation of urgent security measures at 
the Medzamor power plant and to speed up its definite 
decommissioning; calls on the Armenian authorities to take into 
consideration using renewable energy sources given the high risk of 
earthquakes in this area; urges the European Union to continue its 
technical and financial support to this action; 
 
¶30. underlines the importance of regional structures such as the 
Regional Environmental Centre (REC) for the implementation of 
projects within the framework of the Black Sea Synergy; calls on the 
Armenian authorities and on the European Commission to enhance their 
support to this structure; 
 
The Nagorno Karabakh conflict 
 
¶31. expresses its support to the efforts of the Minsk Group and its 
three co-chairs aimed at reaching a peaceful settlement of the 
Nagorno Karabagh conflict; 
 
¶32. welcomes the meetings of the Presidents of Armenia and 
Azerbaijan, held in St Petersburg, Moscow and Zurich and the signing 
by the Presidents of Armenia, Azerbaijan and the Russian Federation 
on November 2, 2008 of a common declaration confirming their 
 
YEREVAN 00000257  004.2 OF 004 
 
 
commitment to solve the Nagorno Karabagh conflict in peaceful 
political manner, based on the principles and norms of the 
international law; in this regard recalls that this is the first 
joint document since the cease-fire agreement signed in 1994, in 
Bishkek; 
 
¶33. stresses the unacceptability of militaristic rhetoric and hate 
propaganda and welcomes the readiness of Armenia to develop 
confidence building measures; underlines the importance of regional 
cooperation in order to improve the atmosphere for the solution of 
the conflict; in this respect, welcomes the appeal of the OSCE Minsk 
Group Co-Chairs to develop confidence building measures and 
consolidate cease-fire; 
 
¶34. reiterates its belief that there is no alternative to the 
peaceful resolution of the conflict; in this regard, refers to the 
Statement of OSCE Minsk Group Co-Chairs of 19 February 2009; 
 
 
¶35. hopes that the peaceful solution will be reached via 
negotiations respecting the three following principles: right for 
self-determination, territorial integrity, and non-use of force or 
threat of force; 
 
¶36. asks the European Commision to explore the possibility of 
providing  humanitarian aid and assistance, in form of local 
confidence-building and local economic rehabilitation projects to 
Nagorno Karabagh, with a view to helping   resolve the conflict 
there; 
 
¶37. deplores that hundreds of thousands of Armenian refugees, 
victims of ethnic cleansing in late 1980s-early 1990s are still 
deprived of their right to return safely and in dignity to their 
homes; 
 
¶38. welcomes the Declaration of the Foreign Ministers of the 
Co-chair countries issued in Helsinki in November 2008 and the 
Declaration adopted unanimously by the Foreign Ministers of the OSCE 
participating states stressing that the military option as a 
solution to the Nagorno Karabagh conflict should be excluded and 
that parties should commit to political, peaceful settlement; 
 
¶39. calls upon the parties to the conflict to withdraw snipers from 
the line of contact in accordance with the Joint Declaration of 
Foreign Minister of OSCE MG Co-chair countries made on 4 of 
December, 2008 in Helsinki; 
 
¶40. attaches importance to the involvement of representatives of 
Nagorno-Karabakh in the negotiations 
 
¶41. stresses that reconciliation between the Armenian and 
Azerbaijani peoples, the enhancement and deepening of the regional 
cooperation in the South Caucasus is essential for regional 
prosperity, security and stability. 
 
End text. 
 
Yovanovitch