07CASABLANCA148
FROM DENIAL TO FEAR - THIS SUMMER, CASABLANCANS TALK ABOUT
Fri Jul 27 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Casablanca
VZCZCXYZ0010
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHCL #0148/01 2081358
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 271358Z JUL 07
FM AMCONSUL CASABLANCA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7786
INFO RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT 8044
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 0801
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS 2910
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS 2035
RUEHNK/AMEMBASSY NOUAKCHOTT 2271
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 0569
RUEHMD/AMEMBASSY MADRID 3739UNCLAS CASABLANCA 000148 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PREL PGOV PHUM MO
SUBJECT: FROM DENIAL TO FEAR - THIS SUMMER, CASABLANCANS TALK ABOUT 
TERROR THREAT 
 
 
¶1.  (U) This cable is sensitive but unclassified, please protect 
accordingly. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Summary: Despite the calm facade in Casablanca since the 
GOM raised the terrorism threat level on July 6, there is little 
doubt that its impact has been significant.     The July 
announcement raised questions here about personal safety as well as 
concerns about the effect on Morocco's economy, particularly its 
profitable tourism sector.  Many Casablancans we have spoken to are 
convinced that the terror threat is exaggerated, while others have 
clearly changed their views on the tranquility they once took for 
granted. Either way, the subject of terrorism in Morocco is finding 
its way into every conversation during the long Casablanca summer. 
End Summary. 
 
------------------------------- 
Morocco Raises its Threat Level 
------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU) On July 6, the GOM raised its terrorism threat level to 
maximum.  The government reported that it had no specific threat 
information but was raising the level due to a number of factors, 
among them, the upcoming Throne Day holiday, celebrating the 
monarchy, and the return of thousands of Moroccans living abroad for 
the annual summer pilgrimage to the homeland.  Most recently, in a 
move which reinforced concerns here, the Al-Qa'ida Organization in 
the Islamic Maghreb has publicly warned of its intention to proceed 
with a violent campaign against targets in North Africa. 
 
-------------------------------------- 
Reactions to Maximum Threat Level Vary 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Initial responses to the increase in the threat level 
ranged from minimal to dramatic throughout the city.  One contact 
related a story, the day after the threat level announcement, 
regarding the reaction of her father.  The father, a political party 
founding member and close personal friend and informal advisor to 
the King, called her from his hospital bed in Paris to tell her not 
to go out of the house for the weekend due to the imminent danger. 
Other contacts have said that, as with the March and April bombings 
in Casablanca, they were initially cautious about where they went in 
the city, staying away from crowded spots most likely to be 
targeted.  Still others when asked what they thought of the maximum 
threat level announcement replied "what announcement?" 
 
¶5.  (SBU) While some Casablancans are choosing to stay away from 
large gatherings, for others the choice is being made for them.  The 
president of a Casablanca NGO and recipient of MEPI funding told 
poloff that the organization was forced to cancel a July event to 
promote youth involvement in the upcoming September elections.  The 
NGO canceled the event when local government officials refused to 
allow it to go forward due to insufficient security forces in the 
neighborhood.  The inability to provide sufficient security is 
surprising considering Casablanca is in the process of deploying 
thousands of new police officers in the city.  The NGO is hopeful 
that local officials will allow them to reschedule the concert in 
August. 
 
¶6.  (U) In a show of support for the GOM, one Moroccan business 
contact expressed his backing for the Minister of the Interior's 
call for Moroccan citizens to be watchful of what is happening 
around them.  He believes that the time has come for "all of us to 
take responsibility."  This sentiment has not been echoed by all 
Moroccans however.  An article on terrorism in the recent issue of 
weekly news magazine, Le Journal, suggests that the GOM wants its 
citizens to become "informers."  The article goes on to say that if 
this is the case, it proves that Moroccan security and intelligence 
forces are incapable of accomplishing the task of stopping 
terrorists. 
 
------------------ 
Economic Backlash 
------------------ 
 
¶7.  (U) In the past few weeks, more than one shop owner in the 
popular Maarif shopping district has said that their business is 
down.  "Why didn't they (the GOM) just keep their mouths shut" a 
shopkeeper asked poloff recently while discussing the threat level 
announcement, "there is nothing we can do about it and it just 
scares people away."  While there appear to be many peopleQn the 
streets of Casablanca this July, some locals say it is far fewer 
than normal for this time of year, a time when many Moroccans living 
abroad normally come home for a summer holiday.  Restaurant owners 
note that business is generally down this summer, because of 
security fears, they believe. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Moreover, there is concern that the current security 
situation may affect Morocco's important tourism industry.  The 
sector, which in 2005 was responsible for nearly 10 percent of 
Morocco's GDP, has been growing exponentially for the past few 
years.  The question on many Casablancans' minds is whether the 
threat of terrorism in the kingdom will affect this trend.  A recent 
newspaper article claimed that after the March and April bombings 
there were cancellations of reservations in tourist destinations 
like Marrakech and Agadir and more after the threat level was raised 
in July.  These claims will be difficult to substantiate, however, 
until after the high tourist season ends. In Casablanca, the owner 
of a new boutique hotel catering to European businessmen told poloff 
that his business has definitely slowed since the terrorist 
incidents in late spring and has not picked back up. 
 
------------------- 
Optimism or Naivete 
------------------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Comment:  There are still many in Morocco, including local 
government officials, who seem convinced that Algeria's large-scale 
terrorism will never touch them.  Some cite the increased police 
presence in Casablanca as a good sign that the GOM has the situation 
in hand.  Checkpoints have become commonplace in and around the 
city.  Increased arrests of drug smugglers and illegal migrants, 
they claim, demonstrate that the GOM is in control.  But most 
importantly, the optimistic tell us, is the fact that terror and 
suicide bombing is not part of Moroccan culture.  However, more 
pessimistic Casablancans admit sadly that culture is always evolving 
and that Moroccan extremists are now a reality. End Comment 
 
GREENE