07MADRID1325
SPANISH SECURITY ASSURANCES FOR P-3 SPARE PARTS
Thu Jul 05 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Madrid
VZCZCXYZ0009
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHMD #1325 1861359
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 051359Z JUL 07
FM AMEMBASSY MADRID
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2941
INFO RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDCUNCLAS MADRID 001325 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PM/RSAT FOR SAUNTE FURNACE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MARR MASS SP
SUBJECT: SPANISH SECURITY ASSURANCES FOR P-3 SPARE PARTS 
PROGRAM 
 
REF: SECSTATE 20963 
 
¶1. Spain welcomes the opportunity to join the P-3 spare parts 
exchange program.  It has delivered to Post a letter signed 
by the MOD Director General for Armament and Material (DGAM) 
providing end-use, security, and retransfer assurances 
related to the program. 
 
¶2. For the Kingdom of Spain, Royal Decree 1782/2004 is the 
controlling legislation for end-use issues.  Article 33 of 
the Royal Decree identifies the MOD DGAM as the Government's 
representative for "control documents applicable to the 
import-introduction of defense material."  Therefore, Post 
understands that the DGAM is the appropriate Spanish 
government official with authority to sign an agreement such 
as this on behalf of the GOS. 
 
¶3. Post has pouched Spain's letter to L/PM as requested 
(pouch registry #247167) and emailed a scanned copy to 
PM/RSAT.  The letter reads as follows. 
 
Begin text. 
 
Ministry of Defense of the Kingdom of Spain 
Secretary of State of Defense 
 
SIPDIS 
Armament and Materiel Directorate 
 
The General Director for Armament and Materiel, for and on 
behalf of the Spanish Government, presents his compliments to 
the Department of State of the United States of America and 
has the honor to refer to the United States requirement that 
the Kingdom of Spain provide adequate end-use, retransfer and 
security assurances before the Government of the United 
States of America may consent to another government's request 
to retransfer US government-granted or sold defense articles, 
related training or other defense services. In this regard, 
with respect to a program in which the governments of 
Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Germany, Greece, 
Japan, the Republic of Korea, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, 
Portugal, Spain and Thailand would like to transfer among 
themselves common and unclassified P-3 spare parts, 
subsystems, accessory attachments, support equipment, and 
related technical data, the Kingdom of Spain provides the 
following assurances: 
 
(a) The Kingdom of Spain shall not, unless the prior written 
consent of the Government of the United States of America has 
first been obtained: 
 
(I) Permit any use of such common and unclassified P-3 spare 
parts, subsystems, accessory attachments, support equipment, 
related technical data, or any article or data derived from 
such articles or data, by anyone not an officer, employee or 
agent of the governments of Argentina, Australia, Brazil, 
Canada, Chile, Germany, Greece, Japan, Republic of Korea, New 
Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Portugal, Spain or Thailand; 
 
(II) Transfer, or permit any officer, employee, or agent of 
the Kingdom of Spain to transfer such common and unclassified 
P-3 spare parts, subsystems, accessory attachments, support 
equipment, related technical data, or any article or data 
derived from such articles or data, by gift, sale or 
otherwise; or 
 
(III) Use, or permit the use of such common and unclassified 
P-3 spare parts, subsystems, accessory attachments, support 
equipment, related technical data, or any article or data 
derived from such articles or data, for purposes other than 
those for which provided. 
 
(b) The Kingdom of Spain will maintain the security of such 
common and unclassified P3 spare parts, subsystems, accessory 
attachments, support equipment, related technical data, or 
any article or data derived from such articles or data and 
will provide substantially the same degree of security 
protection afforded to such common and unclassified P-3 spare 
parts, subsystems, accessory attachments, support equipment, 
related technical data, or any article or data derived from 
such articles or data, by the Government of the United States 
of America. 
 
Madrid, 31 May, 2007 
/s/ (illegible) 
Jose Julio Rodriguez Fernandez 
 
End text. 
AGUIRRE