07OTTAWA1359
CANADA'S RESPONSE TO INTERNET FREEDOM RESTRICTIONS IN CUBA
Fri Jul 13 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ottawa
VZCZCXRO2285
RR RUEHAO RUEHCD RUEHGA RUEHGD RUEHGR RUEHHA RUEHHO RUEHMC RUEHNG
RUEHNL RUEHQU RUEHRD RUEHRG RUEHRS RUEHTM RUEHVC
DE RUEHOT #1359/01 1941620
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 131620Z JUL 07
FM AMEMBASSY OTTAWA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6143
RUEHUB/USINT HAVANA 0021
RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES COLLECTIVE
RUEHWH/WESTERN HEMISPHERIC AFFAIRS DIPL POSTSUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 OTTAWA 001359 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CCA, WHA/CAN 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINT PREL ECON TINT CU CA XL XG
SUBJECT: CANADA'S RESPONSE TO INTERNET FREEDOM RESTRICTIONS IN CUBA 
 
REF: STATE 89911 
 
OTTAWA 00001359  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Embassy Ottawa delivered information regarding the lack 
of internet freedom in Cuba to Foreign Affairs Canada's Cuba desk on 
July 6.  Canadian officials expressed  concern for Cubans' lack of 
internet access and reassured us that they place no credibility in 
Cuban claims that this is due to USG sanctions.  DFAIT officials 
were intrigued by the scope and scale of the USINT internet effort 
and promised to consider whether and how they might emulate our 
efforts.  DFAIT officials also briefly discussed Canada's 
"two-track" strategy for engagement with Cuba. End summary. 
 
 
¶2. Emboffs delivered on July 6 reftel information regarding the lack 
of internet freedom in Cuba to Michael Kaduck, Deputy Director for 
Cuba, Dominican Republic and the Central American states and Louise 
Crosby, Cuba Desk Officer at the Department of Foreign Affairs and 
International Trade (DFAIT).  We stated that Cuban government claims 
that USG sanctions are responsible for the country's restrictive 
internet laws and low levels of internet accessibility lacked 
validity.  DFAIT officials expressed concern for Cubans' lack of 
internet access, and dismay at Havana's accusations directed toward 
the USG and reassured us that they were well aware of the lack of 
credibility to the claims.  DFAIT officials agreed with the USG 
assessment that poor infrastructure and Cuba's restrictive internet 
laws are responsible for the lack of unobstructed internet access 
for Cubans. 
 
¶3. Emboffs suggested to DFAIT officials that the Canadian Embassy in 
Havana consider offering services similar to those currently 
provided by USINT Havana, such as internet workstations to allow 
Cubans access to the internet and long-distance communications 
without strict monitoring by the Castro regime.  DFAIT officials 
were intrigued by the scope and scale of the USINT internet effort 
and promised to consider whether and how they might emulate our 
efforts.  DFAIT officials acknowledged the importance of internet 
access and unrestricted information sharing among Cuban civil 
society groups and those outside Cuba.  The Canadian government 
views the unimpeded access to technology and information as being 
instrumental to the development of a strong civil society and 
functioning democracy.  Canada is constantly monitoring the 
situation in Cuba and will continue to provide what it deems as an 
appropriate level of representation and involvement.  Kuduck and 
Crosby did offer the caveat, however, that Canada's diplomatic 
presence in Cuba is modest (seven Canadian officers) and it was 
unlikely that there would be a Canadian effort to provide internet 
access in the very near-term. 
 
Canada's "two-track" strategy for engaging Cuba 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶4. Kaduck and Crosby also described Canada's two-track engagement 
strategy.  The GOC is trying to position itself to better facilitate 
an orderly transition from the Castro regime to a new government and 
therefore within the last year, Ottawa has taken a somewhat more 
active stance toward Cuba.  It is a "two track" approach, where 
Canadian officials engage with both the top level of the Cuban 
government and with a broader swath of the Cuban citizenry, 
including civil society groups in an attempt to slowly change the 
mindsets of the population of Cuba, without being seen as 
interfering in Cuba. Our interlocutors noted the approach needs to 
be very carefully balanced in order to be accepted by both groups. 
 
¶5. For example, Canada's Deputy Foreign Minister Len Edwards visited 
Q5. For example, Canada's Deputy Foreign Minister Len Edwards visited 
Cuba in May 2007 and met with, among others, Cuban First Deputy 
Foreign Minister Bruno Rodrguez Parrilla. In a statement Edwards 
noted that both countries recognized the need to continue to deepen 
trade, investment, and tourism ties. 
 
¶6. To balance these interactions, the GoC also sponsors Canadian 
speakers to come to Cuba to meet with a broad range of Cuban 
citizens.  For example, the Canadian Embassy in Havana hosted 
Supreme Court of Canada Justice Michel Bastarache in Cuba from 
February 23 to 28, 2007.  The centerpiece of Justice Bastarache's 
visit was his speech at the historic "Aula Magna" of the University 
of Havana, in which he discussed Canada's system of government and 
the transformative nature of the Canadian Charter of Rights and 
Freedoms on Canadian society.  The audience was composed of 
academics, law students, government officials, Havana-based 
diplomats and the Cuban media.  The Canadian government has also 
invited eleven Cuban economists later this autumn to attend a forum 
hosted by Carleton University (in Ottawa) on the Cuban Economy and 
the potential for a transfer to a market economy.  This forum, it is 
anticipated, will help bring new insights on freedom and market 
economies to the Cuban public. 
 
¶7. This cable was prepared jointly by ECON Intern Ben Mazer and POL 
Intern Brittany Breakwell. 
 
Dickson 
 
OTTAWA 00001359  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
 
 
Official conversations took place on May 25, 2007 in Havana between 
the First Deputy Ministers of Canada and Cuba, Leonard J. Edwards 
and Bruno Rodrguez Parrilla. 
During the meeting, Rodrguez Parrilla said that Cuban-Canadian 
relations are "an example of exchange between two countries with 
different systems but similar interests". He also highlighted their 
common stance on many international situations, and expressed 
gratitude for Canada's support at the UN General Assembly to the 
resolution condemning Washington's embargo against the island. 
For his part, Edwards noted the continuation of bilateral relations 
 
despite some differences, and the two countries' capacity to talk 
sincerely and with "mutual respect" about all topics. Edwards also 
said this visit was a great opportunity to exchange opinions with 
Cuban leaders and review the state of bilateral trade relations. 
"Both parts coincided on the need of continuing deepening trade, 
investments, tourism and other spheres of cooperation" between the 
two countries, he reported. 
 
 
 
On April the 6th, 2006 a big reception was held at the Embassy of 
Cuba to celebrate the occasion. Officials of the Canadian 
Government, Members of the Parliament, businessmen, scholars, 
journalists, friends of Cuba, members of the Cuban community in 
Canada, and members of the Diplomatic Corpse were among those seen 
in the celebration. 
 
Rafael Dausa, Cuban Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs,  attended 
this important event as part of his one-week official visit to 
Canada from the 3rd to the 9th of April. 
 
The Cuban Ambassador, Ernesto Sent,  was in charge of the ceremony 
opening speech, highlighting the solid links between the two 
countries in different fields such as tourism, trade, investments, 
and cooperation and  expressed the interest that Cuba has in 
strengthening the bilateral relations under the conditions of mutual 
respect and understanding. 
 
Speeches were also delivered by important personalities in Canadian 
politics: Andy Mitchell, Minister of Agriculture; Peter Harder, 
Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs; and Senator Marcel Prudhomme. 
 
Minister Andy Mitchell highlighted the excellent results of his 
recent visit to Cuba and the meeting with the Cuban President, Fidel 
Castro. He also expressed his satisfaction with the Cuban decision 
to open again its borders to Canadian cattle imports as well as with 
the new trading contracts recently signed between the two countries. 
He also predicted the interest of Canada to widen and increase the 
commercial and economic links with the Cuban nation. 
 
The 60th Anniversary of Diplomatic Relations offers a good 
opportunity to promote better understanding between the people and 
Governments of the two countries. 
Canadian authorities have expressed deep concern and strongly 
protested to Cuban authorities the incarceration and harsh 
sentencing of 75 Cuban dissidents in March and April 2003. Senior 
government officials have directly raised concerns about the health 
and prison conditions of the "75" at meetings with senior Cuban 
officials. Given the peaceful nature of the dissidents' activities, 
Canada's position is that the severe restrictions on freedom of 
expression cannot be justified on the grounds of national security. 
The Canadian government has therefore requested the release of the 
imprisoned dissidents, with immediate consideration for those in 
poor health. 
The last public statement this government has made about Cuba was 
last summer (2006), when Foreign Affairs Minister Peter MacKay 
Qlast summer (2006), when Foreign Affairs Minister Peter MacKay 
emphasized Canada's "sovereign, independent position vis-a-vis our 
relations with Cuba." In Novemberm 2006, Canada was among 183 other 
countries to vote against the U.S. embargo of Cuba at the United 
Nations General Assembly.