09ANKARA1414
TURKISH MEDIA REACTION
Wed Sep 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO7574
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #1414/01 2730551
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 300551Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0853
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 0058
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 6297
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 4174
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 7571
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 7463
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 4051
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFIUU/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFIUU/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFIUU/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 001414 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU PREL KPAO
SUBJECT: TURKISH MEDIA REACTION 
TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 29, 2009 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Gordon: Sargsyan Should Go to the Turkey-Armenia Soccer Game 
Islamist-oriented Zaman reports Deputy Assistant Secretary for 
Europe and Eurasia, Phillip Gordon, stated after Monday's meeting 
between Secretary Clinton and Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu that 
Turkey and Armenia should be lauded over their efforts regarding the 
normalization process despite all the opposition at home.  Gordon 
also said Armenian President Sargsyan should go to the soccer game 
between the Turkish and Armenian teams in Turkey, which would be a 
"good sign." 
 
Papers report Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu met Monday with 
Secretary Clinton in New York.  Prior to their meeting, Clinton 
said, "The foreign minister and I spoke on a range of issues that 
are important, including energy and Turkey's EU accession process 
and the normalization efforts with Armenia and the situation in 
Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iran, the Middle East."  Clinton added, "And 
I very much appreciate the strong commitment that the Turkish 
government has made to the Armenia normalization process, and I also 
am very grateful for the strong relationship that the US and Turkey 
have had, which continues today."  Davutoglu said that relations 
between the two countries have set a model, as President Obama 
described earlier, and stressed that Turkey would continue to 
improve its ties with the US. 
 
'Ethnic Conflict' Breaks Out in Soccer on Eve of Turkey-Armenia Game 
 
Cumhuriyet, Radikal, Milliyet, Haberturk and Aksam report during a 
weekend soccer game between the clubs of Bursa and the mainly 
Kurdish city of Diyarbakir, Bursa fans mounted tensions by chanting 
slogans against Diyarbakir fans, calling them "PKK supporters" and 
"Ocalan's team."  The police had to intervene to protect Diyarbakir 
fans from the mounting tensions.  The head of Diyarbakir Sports 
Club, Cetin Sumer, said they will withdraw from Turkey's Soccer 
League in reaction to the racist slogans chanted, and asked that the 
Bursa team will be penalized.  He added that after the game, 
Bursaspor supporters attacked Diyarbakirspor fans.   Mainstream 
Aksam says officials were concerned that the same thing might be 
repeated during the upcoming October 14 soccer game between Turkey 
and Armenia, which will also take place in Bursa.  President 
Sargsyan is expected to travel to Turkey to watch the game. 
 
ECHR Rules Turkey to Pay Compensation to Iranian Refugees 
Mainstream Sabah reports on its front page the European Court of 
Human Rights (ECHR) fined Turkey to pay Euro 20,000 each to two 
Iranians, members of the opposition group People's Mujahedeen, for 
forcing them to return to Iran after they applied for asylum after 
they fled and entered Turkey illegally in 2008.  The Iranians, Hamit 
Karimniya and Muhsin Abdulhani, said Turkish authorities forced them 
to go back despite the fact that they would be given capital 
punishment at home.  The ECHR also ruled that the two will not be 
sent back.  The ruling is important in the sense that it will set a 
precedent for other cases in Turkey, says Sabah. 
 
Turkey to Invest USD 350 Billion in Transportation, Communications 
Papers report Prime Minister Erdogan told the third "Transportation 
Council" held in Istanbul that Turkey will make USD 350 billion of 
transport and communications infrastructure investments over the 
next 25 years.  Erdogan also said a couple more airports and a third 
bridge over the Bosphorus would be built in Istanbul. 
 
Al-Qaeda Threatens Turkey (Hurriyet) 
Media outlets report that in a new voice recording released Monday, 
al-Qaeda's number two in command, Ayman al-Zawahiri, "warned" Turkey 
over taking over the ISAF command in Afghanistan.  "By doing so, 
Turkey will partner with the others in shedding Muslims' blood in 
Afghanistan," said Zawahiri.  He also called on Turkish people to 
"oppose" their government's troop dispatch policy, report papers. 
 
US Report: Child Labor Used in Productions in Turkey 
 
ANKARA 00001414  002 OF 003 
 
 
Mainstream Hurriyet and leftist Taraf report the Trafficking Victims 
Protection and Reauthorization Act (TVPRA) report claimed that in 
Turkey, child labor was used in the production of eight commodities 
in Turkey.  Turkey's Labor Ministry reacted to the report, saying 
the claim was "not true."  A statement by the Labor Ministry said, 
"We are doubtful about the motives of the report.  Our government, 
however, is ready for all cooperation with the US on the matter." 
 
Turkey's EU Path Ambiguous Under New German Coalition 
Media speculate on the impact of the German elections which have 
brought more ambiguity to Turkey's EU membership process, as the 
Social Democrats, who were supportive of Turkey's European bid, will 
likely be replaced by the less enthusiastic Free Democrats, FDP. 
Mainstream Sabah headlines, "Merkel To Turn Into Iron Lady," and 
reports, "Germany will follow a tougher policy on refugees and on 
Turkey."  Mainstream Milliyet and leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet 
carry the same headline, "Turkey is The Loser in German Elections," 
and report, "following the elections landing Angela Merkel and her 
party back to the power, Berlin's policy on Turkey's EU bid is 
expected to be 'privileged partnership' instead of full membership." 
 Islamist-oriented Zaman writes in "She Will Get Closer to Sarkozy," 
that "Social Democrats who were to prevent German Chancellor Merkel 
from becoming  "Sarkozy" on Turkey's EU membership, will not be in 
the new government.  Meanwhile, liberal Radikal is more optimistic 
about the outcome of the German elections. The paper reports, "FDP, 
the party expected to form a coalition government with Christian 
Democrat leader Merkel, said that the term of 'privileged 
partnership' was outdated." 
 
In a related story, mainstream Milliyet, liberal Radikal, 
Islamist-oriented Zaman and others report "three Turkish 
parliamentarians won seats in the German parliament for the first 
time." 
 
Editorial Commentary on German Elections 
 
Sami Kohen wrote in mainstream Milliyet: "The composition of new 
German cabinet will not bring any good news for Ankara.  Given FDP's 
participation in the coalition, along with Angela Merkel's position 
vis-`-vis Turkey's EU membership process, Ankara's relationship with 
Germany will be more difficult than Merkel's first term." 
 
Yavuz Donat wrote in mainstream Sabah: "There is not an entire 
negative picture after German elections. The coalition partner FDP 
has been labeled as a reason for worry for Turkey, however it was 
FDP who was fighting for the implementation of European Court of 
Human Rights decisions in favor of Turkish citizens.  More 
importantly, this time anti-Turkish rhetoric has never been used 
during the election campaign.  None of the German parties tried to 
defame Turks in order to garner votes which comes as the most 
valuable gain for Ankara." 
 
Iran Tests Longest-Range Missiles 
Media focus on the danger of the range of Iran's missile program, 
which is controlled by Iran Revolutionary Guard, and Monday's tests 
of upgraded versions of the medium-range Shahab-3 and Sajjil 
missiles.  Most media reprinted graphic showing the range of 
missiles, noting that the warheads are able to reach up to 2,000 
kilometers and puts Israel, U.S. military bases in the Middle East, 
and parts of Europe within striking distance.  They also note that 
the missiles threaten Turkey.  Islamist oriented Zaman headlines 
"Iran's Defiance to the Western world."  Leftist Taraf writes, "Iran 
missile range is capable of hitting Ankara."  A visual demonstration 
gave an alarming tone to the readers of Hurriyet, mainstream as well 
as Taraf, leftist that current Iranian missiles and the developing 
ones can go up to Russia and most of Europe, including entire 
Turkey.  Meanwhile, Islamist oriented Yeni Safak highlighted Iranian 
Atomic Agency Chief's remarks to state television as he expressed 
Iran's readiness to open nuclear facilities for IAEA inspection. 
 
Opinion makers mostly dealt with Prime Minister Erdogan's analogy 
 
ANKARA 00001414  003 OF 003 
 
 
between Iran nuclear and Israel nuclear programs.  In liberal 
Radikal, Cengiz Candar supports "PM Erdogan did the right thing by 
emphasizing Israel's nuclear capacity and called for a debate in a 
comprehensive manner instead of obsessively focusing on Iran only." 
Sahin Alpay calls for further action about Gaza in Islamist oriented 
Zaman: "PM Erdogan emphasized the human drama in Gaza and mentioned 
the use of phosphorus bombs.  That is very right but he should not 
stop there.  The Golstone Report must be brought into the 
international spotlight for action."  In English language daily 
Today's Zaman, Kerim Balci noted a double standard by making a 
reference to PM's approach: "Thinking that Iran cannot shoulder the 
responsibility of having nuclear weapons is prejudice whereas 
thinking that the keys of the Israeli nuclear missiles will never 
pass into the hands of irresponsible rulers is naivet."  He 
concludes:  "However the double standard on the issue does not give 
Iran, or any other regional power, the legitimate right to produce 
nuclear missiles." 
 
 
TV News (CNN Turk) 
 
Domestic 
 
Q The trial of DTP leader Ahmet Turk, deputy chairperson Emine Ayna 
and MP Selahattin Demirtas over making PKK propaganda will continue 
Tuesday in Ankara.  The deputies, covered by parliamentary immunity, 
refuse to show up in the court. 
Q Turkey's main Kurdish party DTP will hold its convention in Ankara 
on October 4. 
Q Independent Istanbul MP Ufuk Uras and eight noted intellectuals 
filed a complaint against army chief General Ilker Basbug on Monday, 
arguing that the officer has exceeded his authority and delivered 
political speeches during a recent visit to southeast Turkey. 
Q At the opening of the new education year ceremony in Istanbul 
University, President Yunus Soylet announced they were making 
preparations for the opening of a "Kurdology Institute" within the 
university. 
Q Opposition CHP deputy group leader Hakki Suha Okay's brother, 
Mustafa Fehmi Okay, who was implicated in the production of drugs 
earlier this month in Istanbul, was detained by police Monday. 
Q Turkey's first attack helicopter co-produced by the Italian 
Agusta-Westland, T129 ATAK, has successfully completed its first 
test flight, at Augusta Westland's facilities near Milan. 
 
World 
 
Q World Bank-IMF annual meetings will be held in Istanbul on October 
6-7. 
Q The Green Party in Germany has gained more than 10 percent in 
Sunday's general election, but its co-leader Cem Ozdemir, whose is 
of Turkish origin, was not elected to the parliament. 
Q China prepares to mark the 60th anniversary of the communist state 
on October 1. 
Q US Marines and Afghan soldiers kill 40 Taliban fighters in a joint 
operation in Afghanistan's west. 
Q Syria hosts a meeting of 50 Labor and Communist parties from 43 
countries. 
Q At least 13 civilians are killed in separate battles between 
Islamic militiamen and the African Union peacekeeping force in 
Somalia. 
 
JEFFREY