09BASRAH52
BASRAH: THE PORT OF UMM QASR AND AN OVERVIEW OF IRAQ'S PORT
Thu Sep 17 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
REO Basrah
VZCZCXRO8009
RR RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHDH RUEHDIR RUEHIHL RUEHKUK RUEHTRO
DE RUEHBC #0052/01 2601334
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 171334Z SEP 09
FM REO BASRAH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0915
INFO RUEHBC/REO BASRAH 0953
RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD 0493
RUCNRAQ/IRAQ COLLECTIVE
RUCNIRA/IRAN COLLECTIVE
RULSDMK/DEPT OF TRANSPORTATION WASHINGTON DC
RHEHAAA/NSC WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 0001
RUEHCP/AMEMBASSY COPENHAGEN 0013
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0067
RUEHKU/AMEMBASSY KUWAIT 0013UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 BASRAH 000052 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EWWT EAID KSEC PREL PBTS ELTN IZ
SUBJECT: BASRAH: THE PORT OF UMM QASR AND AN OVERVIEW OF IRAQ'S PORT 
SYSTEM 
 
BASRAH 00000052  001.2 OF 006 
 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: The port of Umm Qasr, Iraq's only deepwater 
port, with significant U.S. assistance, has made major progress 
in its rehabilitation since 2003, following years of wars, 
damage and sanctions, and must continue to play a central role 
if Iraq's post-war economic recovery is to be sustainable.  Most 
of Iraq's food imports and much of its imported goods enter via 
Umm Qasr, and the port has seen growing volumes in recent years, 
reflecting Iraq's continuing economic and security improvements. 
 Underscoring its security-related importance, Umm Qasr is also 
home to the Iraqi navy and close to Iraq's two international oil 
export terminals.  Since 2003, the port has undergone major 
improvements in the areas of security, shipwreck removals, 
dredging, and commercial development.  However, bureaucracy, 
technical shortfalls, and human resource deficiencies hamper 
more rapid development.  The United States plays a crucial role 
in the port's continued transformation, overseeing improvements 
in security, rehabilitation, and commercialization.  In 
particular, the U.S. Coast Guard is working with port 
authorities to achieve the International Maritime Organization 
certification for International Ship and Port Facility Security 
(ISPS) certification, which would reduce ship and cargo 
insurance and spur greater port business.  Other foreign donors, 
particularly the Japanese, are also active in providing 
assistance.  In the future, the GOI envisions a new megaport in 
Al Faw on the Persian Gulf, to fill a perceived need for a large 
regional port.  But even if such a plan ever advances, it is at 
least a decade away, and is not without major bureaucratic, 
engineering and financial challenges.  Thus, for now and at 
least the next decade, the Port of Umm Qasr will be Iraq's only 
major port, and a key to continued economic growth.  End 
Summary. 
 
Port of Umm Qasr history 
------------------------ 
 
¶2.  (U) Umm Qasr (umm KA-sir) is said to be near the site of 
Alexander the Great's landing in Mesopotamia in 325 BC.  During 
World War II the Allies established a temporary port there to 
unload supplies to dispatch to the Soviet Union.  Construction 
of today's port followed a few years after the Iraqi Revolution 
of 1958, and was intended to serve as Iraq's major port and 
reduce its dependence on the disputed Shatt al-Arab waterway 
that marks the border with Iran.  In the 1960s and beyond, a 
newly industrializing Iraq began to ship goods to the region 
from newly-built factories via Umm Qasr.  The port became a 
symbol of progress and independence of the Revolution.  During 
three recent wars from 1980 to 2003, however, its facilities and 
harbor were severely damaged or impaired with ship wrecks, 
unexploded ordnance (UXO) and silted waterways.  The city of Umm 
Qasr was one of the first Iraqi cities captured in the 2003 Iraq 
invasion; after it was de-mined and reopened, it played an 
important role in the shipment of humanitarian supplies. 
 
Central economic lifeline 
------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (U) Thirty miles south of Basra city at the southern end of 
the Khawr Abd Allah waterway at the Kuwaiti border, the Port of 
Umm Qasr is Iraq's only deep-water port and primary port of 
entry for cargo and food, and key to maritime transportation and 
trade.  Some 85 percent of Iraq's bulk food supply, including 
350,000 monthly tons of wheat, comes through the port.  Divided 
into North, Middle and South Ports, it has 22 operational 
berths, 33 warehouses, and two container cranes.  Drafts range 
from about 4 to 10.5 meters.  In 2008, about eight million tons 
of cargo and 100,000 twenty-foot-equivalent units (TEUs) arrived 
(few exports leave from Umm Qasr), a 20 percent increase from 
2007, and compared to about 5.99 million tons in 2007.  These 
numbers reflect continuing economic and infrastructure 
improvements, as more ships and cargo are arriving, and all 
berths are routinely occupied.  Weekly, thousands of Iraqi 
trucks carry containers off to the interior of Iraq.  Umm Qasr 
also has decent road and rail links to Basra and Baghdad, and is 
reasonably well-provided with water and electricity. 
 
¶4. (U) According to most port consultants, Umm Qasr is a decent, 
if modest-sized port (ranking around 200th worldwide in terms of 
volume or weight), and has the potential to expand capacity. 
While current generation container ships carry about 20,000 
TEUs, the maximum capacity ship that can normally access Umm 
Qasr is about 6000 TEU.  According to port consultants, with 
 
BASRAH 00000052  002.2 OF 006 
 
 
proper improvements, its annual intake could eventually reach 
500,000 TEU.  The main imports are wheat, cement, sugar and 
rice.  And while Iraq imports about 30 million tons/year of 
goods, over 50% of this is transported overland via neighboring 
ports, hence the need to further develop Umm Qasr.  Primarily a 
commercial port, Umm Qasr also has a passenger terminal, with 
ferry service to/from Dubai twice per week, and carries around 
1500-1800 passengers per month, or around 20,000 annually.  The 
port also has GOI customs and immigration team units for 
incoming ferry passengers. 
 
Security status 
--------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) Umm Qasr is also home to the Iraqi Navy which, as well 
as protecting port traffic, has the vital role of guarding (with 
U.S. assistance) the two nearby offshore oil terminals of Al 
Basrah and Khor Al Amaya in the Persian Gulf, through which 
around 95 percent of exported oil passes, around 1.4 million 
barrels/day, and accounting for around 75 percent of Iraq's GDP. 
 Perimeter and port security is performed by Iraqi marines and 
police, mentored by U.S. military units.  However, while the GOI 
port security manager informally runs overall security with 
participation of a dozen GOI agencies, there is still no legally 
established entity in charge. 
 
Rehabilitation, shipwreck removal, dredging 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Hundreds of wrecks, objects and UXO remain throughout 
southern Iraqi ports, rivers, channel approaches and sea lanes, 
mainly a result of the 1980-1988 Iran-Iraq War.  As a result of 
efforts since 2003, about three-dozen priority wrecks that had 
clogged these areas in and around Umm Qasr and the Shatt Al-Arab 
have now been removed.  Turkey-based Tuzla Shipyards has been 
the main GOI contractor for this effort.  Other priority 
clearance and dredging has also been done, as well as some yard 
and crane rehabilitation -- but much more work remains.  These 
efforts will enable the port to receive more and larger vessels 
in the future.  Port authorities are also planning the 
construction of four more container berths, each with a 500,000 
tons/year capacity, which would increase total annual port 
capacity by 2 million tons.  Additional warehouses, yards, and 
truck parks are also being developed.  These and other capacity 
improvements related to berth depth and gantry crane repair 
could increase annual handling capacity by another two million 
tons.  Some of these projects will be funded by Commander's 
Emergency Response Program (CERP) funds. 
 
Commercial efforts lifting volume, bringing new private 
operators 
--------------------------------------------- -------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) While the GOI has ruled out any outright port 
privatization, the Ministry of Transportation (MOT) and General 
Company of Ports, Iraq (GCPI) have prepared short and long term 
development plans for all of Iraq's ports, and seek partners to 
manage and operate a number of major investment projects.  They 
and international port operators and investors recognize Umm 
Qasr's vital economic role.  In Umm Qasr's South Port, 
U.S.-based American United Logistics (AUL) and France-based 
CMA-CGM each recently won three-year contracts to provide 
general cargo, container, warehousing and staging services. 
Although not a significant private operator incursion (and both 
would have preferred longer terms), it is a small but important 
first step for a small private sector foothold in the Port.  It 
is also an opportunity for port management and workers, so long 
cut off from the world, to gain a better understanding about 
global port operations.  The GCPI has pledged to put North Port 
out to a short term management arrangement and South Port to a 
long term concession.  The Port has hosted nine recent investor 
visits in the last 12 months. 
 
But technical, human resource problems limit Umm Qasr's growth 
--------------------------------------------- ----------------- 
 
¶8. (SBU) While Umm Qasr has done a credible job at 
rehabilitation and expansion since 2003, it is unlikely to ever 
gain the substantially extra capacity and deeper drafts to allow 
it to become a major regional hub.  Umm Qasr was actually 
designed to service only third generation container ships, about 
 
BASRAH 00000052  003.2 OF 006 
 
 
270 meters long, up to 3500 TEUs, and 11 meter drafts.  Today, 
less than 7% of the world's commercial fleet is third generation 
or smaller, and less than 1% of ships being built are that 
small.  Even with regular dredging, maximum water depth is 
around 10-11 meters, and the typical maximum ship is a Panamex, 
relatively small by global standards.  The port is also 
handicapped by its long, single, and narrow inland approach 
channel, which still has wrecks, silt, UXOs and minefields 
(although priority obstacles have been removed). 
Still-unresolved territorial disputes with Kuwait (and Iran in 
the case of two smaller ports) hinder further needed dredging 
and wreck removals near border areas.  Lack of adequate 
navigation aids impacts safety, so that only smaller vessels can 
regularly access berths.  This in turn translates into higher 
fuel and shipping charges, longer transit times, and shipping 
agents opting for foreign ports, all costs ultimately borne by 
Iraq in terms of higher subsidies or cost of goods.  Meanwhile, 
eighth and ninth generation container ships, carrying 14-18,000 
TEUs are already on the drawing boards around the world. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Human resource problems are also evident.  Decades of 
wars, sanctions and attendant isolation have contributed to a 
general resistance to needed management improvements and new 
ideas.  The port has a bloated workforce: according to port 
consultants, the work done by the 5,000-odd workforce could be 
accomplished by around 1,000 workers.  A port that advertises 
16-hour days actually sees most of its staff leaving at around 
3pm.  A typical day at the port is a pandemonium of trucks, 
containers, cars and people moving in all directions; the port 
lacks even the most basic traffic or safety plan.  Many basic 
services -- warehousing, hotels, restaurants, banks -- are 
sub-par or non-existent (and great opportunities for such 
businesses are squandered).  There still is no established 
central legal authority for overall security.  Customs and 
immigration capacity is also weak.  Ideally, the port should 
hire a management consultant to oversee a badly needed 
integrated commercial-security-rehabilitation vision for the 
port.  While the GOI agreed to hire U.S.-based port consultant 
Cornell Group to assist in restructuring and concessioning the 
port for development and operation, this has not yet occurred. 
 
Many GOI agencies vie for control 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Iraq's ports are managed by the Basra-headquartered 
GCPI, a semiautonomous agency under the MOT, and with whom the 
PRT and Embassy Baghdad enjoy good relationships.  However, 
while the GCPI might exert nominal control, in fact, over a 
dozen GOI ministries and agencies have a role at the Port of Umm 
Qasr, a fact which complicates coordination here and at other 
ports.  GOI agencies include the ministries of Finance, Defense, 
Interior, Trade (operating a grain silo), Industry and Minerals 
(operating a cement factory), Construction and Housing, 
Agriculture, as well as the Iraqi marines, Customs, Immigration, 
Port Police, and intelligence services. 
 
Some U.S. re-deployment efforts to go through Umm Qasr 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) As the United States begins the long drawdown of 
troops and material from Iraq (retrograde operations), the Port 
of Umm Qasr will also play a role.  Currently there is 
intermodal movement of containers from the Taji Army base, 20 
miles north of Baghdad, to Umm Qasr.  The containers are 
transported by the U.S.-backed Iraqi Trucking Network to the 
Iraqi railways station in Baghdad, and from here moved by rail 
to the Port of Umm Qasr, as well as to ports in Iraq, Jordan and 
Kuwait. 
 
Extensive USG involvement in the ports 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶12. (SBU) The Port Development Advisory Team (PDAT), an Embassy 
Baghdad multi-agency unit led by the Office of the 
Transportation Attache, advises and mentors the civilian port 
leadership in the areas of security, rehabilitation, and 
commercialization.  PDAT enjoys excellent relations with the 
GOI, including the dozen-odd GOI ministries and agencies at the 
port, as well as private sector and third country stakeholders. 
PDAT also coordinates the disparate USG agencies providing 
support in these areas (detailed below) and monitors and 
 
BASRAH 00000052  004.2 OF 006 
 
 
provides guidance on the multinational rehabilitation efforts 
involving wreck removals, dredging, equipment upgrades, cranes, 
fire fighting, rail improvements, electrical power lines, and 
guard towers. 
 
¶13. (SBU) The U.S. Coast Guard's Port Advisory Coordination 
Element (PACE) is working with GOI port authorities to achieve 
the International Maritime Organization's (IMO) International 
Ship and Port Facility (ISPS) certification, which could sharply 
cut shipping insurance costs (now at "war risk" premium) and 
draw new port investment, and benefit Iraqi consumers.  PACE 
consists of a USCG maritime security advisor to Embassy 
Baghdad's Office of the Transportation Attache (OTA) and MNF-I, 
three people at the Port of Umm Qasr, and facilitates the 
detailed changes to port security needed to achieve ISPS 
accreditation.  The first step remains to achieve the 
still-lacking legal security framework in the port.  The PACE 
team, which has also assisted other foreign countries in this 
area, integrates with the PDAT and Port of Entry Training Teams 
(POETT), already at Umm Qasr, who work closely with political, 
economic and port management leaders.  The ISPS Code is a 
performance based standard which establishes a set of measures 
to enhance security of ships and port facilities, and is the 
sole blueprint recognized by IMO to meet the standards of Safety 
of Life at Sea. 
 
¶14. (SBU) PACE assists Ministry of Transport, GCPI, and local 
staff to detect security threats and take preventive measures 
against them.  PACE establishes roles and responsibilities, 
ensures efficient collection and dissemination of security 
information, and provides a methodology for security 
assessments.  A standardized, consistent framework for 
evaluating risk is the primary goal, which enables GOI decision 
makers to offset changes in threat with changes in vulnerability 
for ships and port facilities and determine appropriate security 
levels and corresponding security measures.  The consequences of 
failing to comply or maintain continuous compliance could be 
serious, including damaging Iraqi commercial maritime interests. 
 
 
¶15. (SBU) A U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) POETT, a 
U.S. Army eleven-person contingent, advises and mentors GOI 
immigration and customs personnel at the North Port.  GOI 
security personnel are trained in people and baggage search to 
ensure the safety of ferry passengers traveling between Dubai to 
Iraq. 
 
¶16. (SBU) The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) Gulf Region 
South has also overseen the construction of security towers, 
electrical substations, dredging, and a roll-on/roll-off berth 
in North Port.  USACE is also building new piers and a seawall 
on the Iraqi Naval Base in South Port. 
 
¶17. (SBU) Several U.S.-led military support teams based near the 
Port of Umm Qasr mentor a variety of GOI security, police and 
military forces related to overall port security.  These 
Military Transition Teams (MITT) work closely with Iraqi 
security, police and military groups to ensure port perimeter 
security, help professionalize Iraqi security forces, interdict 
the flow of lethal accelerants, increase capacity, and otherwise 
improve overall stability. 
 
Other foreign government involvement 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶18. (U) The United States, United Nations and other foreign 
donors have provided millions of dollars in reconstruction since 
2003 (including to the nearby 46,000-person town of the same 
name, and many of whose residents are employed directly or 
indirectly by the port).  The Japan International Cooperation 
Agency (JICA), working with Japan-based Nippon and GCPI, has a 
$270 million Ports Redevelopment Program soft loan package for 
dredging, shipwreck removals, marine and land equipment 
procurement, civil and utility works, port operation and 
maintenance training for the ports of Umm Qasr and Khor Al 
Zubayr.  The three-year project aims to rehabilitate operations 
and increase efficiency by the reconstruction of port facilities 
and shipping lanes, equipment upgrade, and the use of relevant 
consulting services.  The initial phases of the project beginS 
this fall. 
 
 
BASRAH 00000052  005.2 OF 006 
 
 
¶19. (SBU) While the vast bulk of British forces departed Iraq in 
July 2009, a small group of mostly naval personnel was to remain 
at the Port of Umm Qasr, to mentor the Iraqi Navy in port 
safety, security, vessel boarding, and search and seizure 
techniques.  Due to the still-pending GOI Council of 
Representatives ratification of the UK-GOI security agreement 
(which anticipates such a continued small Royal Navy presence), 
these forces have departed Iraq, putting an end at least for now 
their once extensive and historic role in Umm Qasr -- and Basra 
Province. 
 
¶20. (SBU) The Danish Government, working with the United Nations 
Development Program (UNDP), has a $2.25 million aid program in 
2009-2010 to provide the sea lanes near the ports of Umm Qasr 
and Al Zubayr with navigational aids and lightening buoys, to 
ensure the safe passage of large commercial vessels.  Inadequate 
navigational aids impede 24-hour access, entail higher freight 
and insurance costs, and cause importers to avoid these ports 
and instead transit through neighboring countries.  The Danes 
also have a capacity-building program to improve management, 
procurement, operations and maintenance, as well as the 
upgrading of a maintenance vessel which the GCPI has committed 
to upkeep. 
 
¶21. (SBU) In 2004-05, the UNDP led the effort to dredge the 
entire 50 mile approach channel from the Persian Gulf to Umm 
Qasr, and increased capacity of the Iraqi dredge fleet.  Through 
the World Maritime University, it has also supported port 
management by conducting a three-week continuing education 
program for port workers, in areas such as port planning, port 
performance measurement and port management structures. 
 
Iraq's other ports 
------------------ 
 
¶22. (U) Four other smaller ports round out the port picture in 
Iraq.  Al Maqil, the original port of Iraq, is in downtown Basra 
on the Shatt al-Arab waterway, 40 miles up from the Persian 
Gulf.  Built by the British in 1914, it handles a variety of 
cargos, including oils and containers.  It has 15 commercial 
berths with a 250,000 ton/year capacity, storage sheds, yards 
and other service facilities.  Since suffering damage during the 
Iran-Iraq war its capacity has been limited.  Abu Fulus, 12 
miles down the Shatt Al-Arab southeast of Basra, serves feeder 
vessels and dhows.  Built in 1970, it has three berths, with 
plans to increase capacity to 750,000 tons/year.  Khor al 
Zubayr, 36 miles south of Basra city and 12 miles north of Umm 
Qasr, was built in 1979 to establish a second outlet for 
international trade.  The GCPI plans to nearly double the 
current 4 million ton/year capacity with the construction 13 
multi-purpose commercial berths.  Al-Faw port, on the Persian 
Gulf 55 miles south of Basra on the Iranian border, was heavily 
used in the 1970s but was badly damaged in the 1980-1988 
Iran-Iraq War.  Heavily blocked by wrecks and silt, and capable 
of handling only smaller vessels, it is currently little used. 
 
Hope or hype? New megaport proposed in Al Faw 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶23. (SBU) As a possible remedy to Umm Qasr's long term physical 
limitations, the GOI has identified the port town of Al Faw, on 
the Persian Gulf, as a possible location for a modern deepwater 
megaport able to handle eighth generation, post-2006 
mega-container vessels, with drafts of over 16 meters.  Such a 
port could eventually have 50-100 berths and cost upwards of $20 
billion.  While the Ministry of Transport and GCPI have widely 
discussed this option for several years and have received some 
investor expressions of interest, it is still largely just a 
plan. 
 
¶24. (SBU) Such a port would be the most modern in the region. 
Aside from a good location on the Gulf, some GOI officials and 
port experts contend that Iraq and the northern Gulf region need 
such sufficient capacity to handle the growing volumes of 
international trade.  No such international hub in the region 
exists, although various countries including Kuwait and Iran 
have reportedly considered making such a big investment.  Such a 
port would rival UAE's Jebel Ali in the southern Gulf and could 
serve local, regional and global markets.  Iraq, with its 
sizeable and growing market, central geographical position and 
new-found stability and security, would be an ideal location. 
 
BASRAH 00000052  006.2 OF 006 
 
 
With relatively decent rail and road networks, such a port might 
also reduce transit times of goods moving between the Far East, 
Turkey and Europe by several days -- and restore Iraq's own 
historic role as an east-west transportation link.  And given 
that so much Iraqi-bound cargo still arrives overland via ports 
in Kuwait, Jordan and Turkey, such a facility could gain back 
this market share. 
 
¶25. (SBU) However, given that there is virtually no chance that 
the GOI could self-finance such a project, private investment -- 
foreign and/or Iraqi -- is key.  But such private investment 
would inevitably imply at least some private sector control, 
something the GOI might find hard to accept.  Such a massive and 
complex project could also prove too much for the glacial and 
limited abilities of the GOI bureaucracy.  Also, industry 
experts contend that the heavy silt swept down the Shatt al-Arab 
waterway would require constant and costly dredging.  And as 
there is presently no rail connection to Al-Faw, such an 
installation would be costly.  Perhaps the most fundamental 
problem of all is the fact that Iraq simply has more pressing 
demands right now: for a nation barely able to provide even the 
minimum of essential services and security for its citizens, and 
unable to feed itself, advocating for a new world class megaport 
right now might represent a case of mismatched priorities. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶26. (SBU) While the Port of Umm Qasr still has many limitations 
and problems, it is important to remember how far it has come 
since 2003.  With the continued involvement of the USG and other 
nations, security, rehabilitation and commerce-related 
improvements should continue.  And while a new megaport is good 
to plan for, for the next decade or so, Umm Qasr is Iraq's only 
realistic port option.  The USG and GOI goals for Umm Qasr 
continue to be modest and realistic: bringing its capacity to an 
optimal level so it can play a role in Iraq's continued economic 
recovery.  But like Iraq as a whole, due to wars, sanctions and 
isolation, in many ways port officials are still largely stuck 
in a three-decade-old vision that needs reform if they hope to 
keep up with the lightening speed of international maritime 
operations.  And while we are all impatient to see the port 
improve (and especially since the U.S. role is steadily 
diminishing), it will be up to Iraq to progress or not, on its 
own terms, and on its own time. 
NALAND