09BEIJING2489
MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN, U.S.-CHINA TRADE DISPUTES,
Tue Sep 01 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO5873
RR RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2489 2440935
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 010935Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5848
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHMFIUU/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HIUNCLAS BEIJING 002489 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/CM, EAP/PA, EAP/PD, C 
HQ PACOM FOR PUBLIC DIPLOMACY ADVISOR (J007) 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PREL ECON KMDR OPRC CH
 
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN, U.S.-CHINA TRADE DISPUTES, 
ENVIRONMENT 
 
-------------------- 
  Editorial Quotes 
-------------------- 
 
¶1.  TAIWAN 
 
"U.S. secretly pushing cross-Strait military relations for own 
benefit" 
 
The China Radio International sponsored newspaper World News Journal 
(Shijie Xinwenbao)(09/01)(pg 4): "During a recent visit to Taiwan, a 
researcher at an American think tank said the two sides of the 
Strait can now begin to develop a 'military mutual trust system.' 
This indicates that the Obama administration intends to push Taiwan 
towards the early development of a 'military mutual trust system' 
with the Mainland.  In fact, the U.S. does not worry about whether 
or not this system would harm U.S. interests, since it believes that 
Taiwan is unable to rid itself of U.S. influence and unable to 
unilaterally hold talks with the Mainland over a "military mutual 
trust system" without U.S. involvement.  What's more, by promoting 
'cross-Strait military mutual trust,' the U.S. can benefit in three 
ways: placate the Mainland, interfere in the cross-Strait issue, and 
further U.S. interests, specifically by urging the Mainland abandon 
the use of force as a viable means of resolving the Taiwan issue and 
by gaining more military information on the Mainland by pushing it 
to be more transparent with Taiwan.  For the Mainland, a necessary 
precondition for establishing a "military mutual trust system" is to 
agree on China's unification, a condition Taiwan does not accept. 
In fact, the U.S. knows that cross-Strait disputes are beneficial to 
its interests.  The U.S. does not want to see the Mainland and 
Taiwan get too close and unite." 
 
¶2.  U.S.-CHINA TRADE DISPUTES 
 
"The final fight" 
 
Guangdong 21st Century Publishing Company's business newspaper 21st 
Century Business Herald (21 Shiji Jingji Baodao) (09/01)(pg 3): 
(Related to the U.S.-China tire trade issue) "The Obama 
administration cannot ignore the voice of China.  The U.S. special 
protection measures on tires have caused widespread unease in many 
related industries in China.  Leaders of some Chinese industry 
associations have advocated strong retaliatory measures to prevent 
the U.S. from adopting similar special protection measures against 
other industries in the future.  At the end of September, Obama will 
host the G20 summit in Pittsburg and meet with Chinese leaders.  It 
will be very embarrassing at that time if Obama decides to impose 
high punitive tariffs on Chinese tires.  If he decides to do this, 
Obama, who has always been an advocate of free trade, will 
inevitably face criticism for adopting protectionist policies and 
potentially starting a trade war.  Cooper Tires, the fourth largest 
tire company in the U.S., has taken a stand against the proposed 
special protection measures.  Chinese experts argue that Cooper 
Tires' position means a lot for China since it shows that some U.S. 
companies believe they do not need the protections.  Most of Chinese 
companies are starting to prepare for both possible outcomes of 
Obama's decision on the issue." 
 
¶3.  ENVIRONMENT 
 
"Practical measures must be taken to develop a low-carbon economy" 
 
The official Communist Party international news publication Global 
Times (Huanqiu Shibao)(09/01)(pg 15): "On August 12, the State 
Council passed a draft environmental law to regulate greenhouse gas 
emissions and create a long-term strategy for addressing climate 
change within various levels of government.  Thus, the regulations 
necessary for the creation of a low-carbon economy have been 
formally laid out.  Most companies in China cannot afford to invest 
in low-carbon production methods due to the huge cost and delayed 
profits.  Many companies are forced to adopt energy-intensive 
production methods due to the lack of manpower, resources, and 
budget.  What's more, local governments often fail to effectively 
maintain environmental protection facilities built with central 
government money because they are unwilling to pay for maintenance 
out of local funds.  The most difficult obstacle for China is the 
attitude of its citizens.  There is still a large gap between the 
views of Chinese citizens and the views developed countries' 
citizens on environmental protection.  China must make progress in 
developing a low-carbon economy; otherwise, it will be unable to 
have a smooth economic transformation." 
 
 
HUNTSMAN