09BEIJING2490
SEPTEMBER 1 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: BURMA BORDER, NORTH KOREA,
Tue Sep 01 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO5923
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2490/01 2441017
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 011017Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5849
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 002490 
 
AMEMBASSY ANKARA 
AMEMBASSY ALGIERS 
AMEMBASSY KABUL 
AMEMBASY BUENOS AIRES 
AMEMBASSY BOGOTA 
USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 
NSC WASHDC 
CIA WASHDC 
DOE WASHDC 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MNUC CH AS RS CO KN TU
 
SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 1 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: BURMA BORDER, NORTH KOREA, 
JAPAN ELECTION, INDIA BORDER, AFGHAN ELECTION 
 
¶1. Key points at the September 1 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- China hoped that the Burmese Government would properly handle its 
domestic issue and guarantee the safety of Chinese citizens and 
their property in that country. 
 
-- The Burmese Government had apologized to China for Chinese 
casualties, thanked China for accepting those who escaped the 
fighting, promised to protect Chinese citizens and their property 
and restore peace and stability along the border. 
 
-- China had noted that the situation in North East Asia had 
recently become "less tense" and China hoped that all parties could 
work together to strengthen peace and stability in the region. 
 
-- Following the Japanese election, the spokesman called Japan "an 
important neighbor" adding that China was ready to strengthen 
cooperation and continue high-level exchanges to jointly contribute 
to peace and stability in the region. 
 
-- Indian accusations that China had violated its borders were 
false. 
 
Burma Border Clash 
------------------ 
 
¶2.  China hoped that the Burmese Government would properly handle 
its domestic issue and guarantee the safety of Chinese citizens and 
their property in that country said spokesperson Jiang Yu at the 
September 1 regularly scheduled MFA press conference.  China and 
Burma were "friendly neighbors" and peace and stability were in the 
best interests of both China and Burma, said Jiang.  Out of 
"humanitarian considerations," the Yunnan Provincial Government had 
accommodated over 10,000 people, some of whom had since returned 
home.  The Yunnan Government guaranteed their safety and would 
provide them with daily necessities they required.  The emotional 
state of those staying in Yunnan was "stable." 
 
¶3. Jiang had "not heard" whether the Burmese Government warned China 
before it began its military operation.  However, Jiang pointed out, 
the Burmese Government had since apologized to China for Chinese 
casualties, thanked China for accepting the refugees and promised to 
protect Chinese citizens and their property and to restore peace and 
stability along the border.  China and Burma had remained in close 
contact since the start of the incident and China hoped the Burmese 
Government would create peaceful conditions under which those who 
fled Burma could return home, Jiang added. 
 
North Korea Nuclear Issue 
------------------------- 
 
¶4. The North Korean nuclear issue could only be resolved through 
political and diplomatic means, said Jiang.  China had noted that 
the situation in North East Asia had recently become "less tense" 
and China hoped that all parties could work together to strengthen 
peace and stability in the region. 
 
¶5. Asked about the visit then underway by DPRK Vice Foreign Minister 
Kim Yong-il, Jiang said Kim would exchange views on bilateral 
relations and other issues of common interest with officials at the 
MFA.  The 60th anniversary of relations and year of friendship 
between China and North Korea were "of great significance," noted 
Jiang. 
 
Election in Japan 
----------------- 
 
¶6. China had "taken note" of the outcome of the Japanese elections, 
said the spokesperson.  Japan was "an important neighbor" and China 
was ready to strengthen cooperation and continue high level 
exchanges to jointly contribute to peace and stability in the 
region.  Asked about the Yasukuni shrine issue, Jiang said that 
China's position on the issue was clear and Japan should treat 
historical issues in a manner conducive to relations with other 
countries. 
 
India-China Border Skirmish 
---------------------------- 
 
¶7. The Indian Government accusations that China had violated its 
borders were false, said Jiang.  Chinese border patrols were 
 
BEIJING 00002490  002 OF 002 
 
 
conducted in accordance with established rules and China would not 
cross the border by land or by air.  Media reports of a military 
conflict on the border were also "groundless" as both China and 
India had previously agreed that before final resolution of the 
border dispute, both sides would make joint efforts to maintain 
peace and stability in the area. 
 
Afghan Election 
--------------- 
 
¶8. China had taken note of the "smooth" presidential election in 
Afghanistan, said Jiang.  The election was an internal affair of 
Afghanistan and China respected the choice of the Afghan people. 
China hoped the country established peace and security at an early 
date, said Jiang. 
 
Iranian Nuclear Issue 
--------------------- 
 
¶9. Vice Foreign Minister He Yafei would attend the September 2nd 
meeting of the Political Directors General meeting on the Iranian 
nuclear issue to be held in Frankfurt, said Jiang.  China was ready 
to work with other parties to seek an enduring and comprehensive 
settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue. 
 
Visit of Argentine Foreign Minister 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶10. Foreign Minister of Argentina, Jorge Taiana would visit Beijing 
and Tianjin from September 5-8, said the spokesperson.  Taiana would 
meet with Vice President Xi Jinping and Foreign Minister Yang 
Jiechi.  China's relations with Argentina had been "smooth and 
fruitful" with frequent high-level exchanges, mutual trust and sound 
cooperation in international affairs.  The upcoming visit would 
strengthen the strategic partnership, said Jiang. 
 
Health of Colombian FM 
---------------------- 
 
¶11. Press accounts reporting that Colombian President Alvaro Uribe 
had contracted H1N1 prompted press questions about the health of a 
Colombian delegation visiting Beijing. The spokesperson advised that 
Colombian Foreign Minister Jaime Bermudez had had a physical exam 
following his arrival in China, and was found to be in good health. 
Bermudez would continue his visit and would meet with Xi Jinping and 
Yang Jiechi in addition to other officials. 
 
Dalai Lama Taiwan Visit 
----------------------- 
 
¶12. Jiang referred questions on the Dalai Lama's visit to Taiwan to 
relevant authorities. 
 
Anniversary of WWII 
------------------- 
 
¶13. Noting that September 1 marked the 70th anniversary of the Nazi 
invasion of Poland, the spokesman advised reporters that to remember 
history was to create a better future.  Jiang added that China hoped 
for a better outlook for stability and enduring peace in the future. 
 
 
 
HUNTSMAN