09BEIJING2720
SEPTEMBER 22 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: UIGHUR LEADER, JOURNALITS
Tue Sep 22 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO1886
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2720/01 2652318
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 222318Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6176
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHMFIUU/DEPT OF ENERGY WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 002720 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM MNUC PARM SENV CH KN KS JP RS
SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 22 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: UIGHUR LEADER, JOURNALITS 
BEATEN, DAI DPRK VISIT, JAPAN 
 
¶1. Key points at the September 22 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- Dolkun Isa, the Uighur leader recently refused entry into South 
Korea, was suspected of various crimes and wanted by Chinese and 
international police 
 
-- The MFA passed along the concerns of Kyodo journalists who said 
they had been beaten in the Beijing Hotel by Chinese security forces 
while they attempted to photograph rehearsals for the National Day 
parade. 
 
-- During his visit to North Korea, Presidential Envoy Dai Bingguo 
exchanged views with North Korean leaders on bilateral relations, 
denuclearization, peace and stability of North East Asia and 
presented a letter from President Hu Jintao. 
 
-- During Chinese President Hu Jintao's meeting with Japanese Prime 
Minister Yukio Hatoyama on September 21 in New York, Hu presented a 
five-point plan to develop bilateral relations. 
 
-- China attached great importance to the United States' leading 
role in tackling climate change and China looked forward to the 
upcoming climate change conference in Copenhagen. 
 
World Uighur Congress Leader 
---------------------------- 
 
¶2.  Dolkun Isa, the Uighur leader recently refused entry into South 
Korea, was the Secretary General of the World Uighur Congress and a 
major leader of the East Turkistan Liberation Organization, said 
spokesperson Jiang Yu at the regularly scheduled September 22 MFA 
press conference.  Isa was suspected of various crimes and wanted by 
Chinese and international police.  Jiang said that China had 
contacted the South Korean Government to make its position on the 
matter clear.  Fighting East Turkistan organizations was an integral 
part of the fight on terror, said Jiang.  The international 
community should work together to fight all terror including that 
committed by East Turkistan organizations. 
 
Kyodo Journalists Beaten 
------------------------ 
 
¶3. The MFA passed along the concerns of Kyodo journalists who said 
they had been beaten in the Beijing Hotel by Chinese security forces 
while they attempted to photograph rehearsals for the National Day 
parade, said Jiang.  The police had not yet reported back to the MFA 
so Jiang was unclear whether any violence had taken place. Jiang 
said that she "understood" foreign journalists' wish to cover the 
National Day ceremony and would actively coordinate with journalists 
to ensure smooth coverage.  However, "in keeping with international 
practice," during major events China would adopt "temporary measures 
as needed." Both the Chinese government and the Beijing Hotel had 
informed the journalists not to film the rehearsals.  However, the 
journalists had disobeyed.  Whatever the reason for the event, 
however, Jiang said that she "felt sorry" about the unpleasantness. 
Jiang encouraged journalists to be patient with police and comply 
with regulations.  The regulations were designed to ensure 
journalists were given a "splendid show."  Pressed, the spokesperson 
did not specify what the punishment for not obeying regulations was. 
 
 
North Korea Travel 
------------------ 
 
¶4. During his visit to North Korea, Presidential Envoy Dai Bingguo 
exchanged views with North Korean leaders on bilateral relations, 
denuclearization, peace and stability of North East Asia and 
presented a letter from President Hu Jintao.  The two sides agreed 
to strengthen cooperation in all fields and to promote bilateral 
relations.  The spokesperson stressed that as a "close neighbor of 
the Korean Peninsula" China would closely follow denuclearization 
there.  The resolution of these issues through dialogue was the 
consistent policy of China and the Six-Party Talks were a good means 
to have dialogue.  China hoped that all parties would work together 
to promote denuclearization.  The spokesperson had no information to 
release regarding a rumored visit by Premier Wen Jiabao to North 
Korea in early October. 
 
 
Hu Jintao on Japan 
------------------ 
 
¶5. During Chinese President Hu Jintao's meeting with Japanese Prime 
Minister Yukio Hatoyama on September 21 in New York, Hu stressed the 
importance of China-Japan bilateral relations to both countries, 
said Jiang.  China was ready to work with Japan to achieve mutually 
beneficial relations, Hu told Hatoyama.  Hu made five proposals for 
the improvement of relations: 1. Strengthen high-level contact, 2. 
Strengthen business ties, 3. Strengthen people to people exchanges 
 
BEIJING 00002720  002 OF 002 
 
 
¶4. Strengthen cooperation in East Asian affairs to support 
denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula and encourage dialogue on 
critical global issues such as the financial crisis, climate change 
and energy, and, 5. Properly handle disputes.  It was natural to 
have disputes but the two sides should focus on the larger issues Hu 
told Hatoyama.  History and Taiwan were real issues in the 
relationship and China hoped that Japan would honor its commitments 
and properly handle these issues. 
 
¶6. Asked about Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama's proposal for an East 
Asian Community, Jiang said that strengthening regional cooperation 
was the "trend of the times" and China hoped that all countries 
would promote political mutual trust and seek "win-win" 
relationships. 
 
Hu Jintao on Climate Change 
--------------------------- 
 
¶7. President Hu would attend the UN Climate Change Summit on Tuesday 
in New York, said Jiang.  China attached great importance to the 
United States' leading role in tackling climate change, the 
international community should work together on the issue and China 
looked forward to the upcoming climate change conference in 
Copenhagen, she added.  China also hoped the Copenhagen conference 
would allow countries to build consensus and inject political 
importance to the fight against climate change. 
 
Nuclear Nonproliferation and Disarmament 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  China hoped the upcoming UN Summit on Nuclear Nonproliferation 
and Disarmament would explore practical ways to strengthen 
nonproliferation, disarmament and the peaceful use of nuclear power, 
said the spokesperson.  Asked about press reports about past 
China-Pakistan cooperation on nuclear development, Jiang said that 
China had always been committed to its obligations as a member of 
the Non-Proliferation Treaty and opposed all forms of nuclear 
proliferation. 
 
Japan, China, South Korea Talks 
------------------------------- 
 
¶9. China, Japan and South Korea were consulting on the specific 
dates for a three-way meeting among leaders. 
 
Tibet Closure 
------------- 
 
¶10. The spokesperson had not heard reports that Tibet would be 
closed to foreign tourists during the National Day celebrations and 
referred reporters to the Tibet foreign affairs office. 
 
Russian Leaders 
---------------- 
 
¶11. The spokesperson had no official information regarding a rumored 
visit by Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin to Beijing in early 
October.  Jiang noted that 2009 marked the 60th anniversary of 
bilateral relations between China and Russia and a celebratory 
conference would be held to commemorate the event.  President Hu 
would meet Russian President Dmitry Medvedev on September 23 in New 
York.  During the meeting Hu and Medvedev would discuss the 
China-Russia strategic partnership, the future of bilateral 
relations, international and regional issues and other issues of 
common interest. 
 
Global Economy 
-------------- 
 
¶12. The global economy was stabilizing but a complete recovery would 
be a long process, said Jiang.  Countries should coordinate their 
macroeconomic policies.  China would continue to push forward with 
its stimulus package. 
 
News Assistants Cyber Targets 
----------------------------- 
 
¶13. Recent foreign media reports suggested that Beijing-based 
foreign correspondents and their local assistants had been targeted 
by emails laden with malicious computer software in attacks tied to 
the run-up to the National Day military parade on October 1.  In 
response to a reporter's questions, Jiang claimed that she had not 
heard reports that news assistants were becoming targets of emails 
containing malicious code. 
 
HUNTSMAN