09BEIJING2596
SEPTEMBER 10 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: GUANTANAMO UIGHURS, INDIA
Thu Sep 10 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO2890
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2596/01 2532320
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 102320Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 5999
RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 002596 
 
NSC WASHDC 
CIA WASHDC 
DOE WASHDC 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV MNUC CH AS KN IR IN JP LG UP MP YI
 ZI 
SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 10 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: GUANTANAMO UIGHURS, INDIA 
BORDER, UAE AIRCRAFT 
 
¶1. Key points at the September 10 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- China opposes any country accepting Uighur detainees after their 
release from Guantanamo. The individuals should be repatriated to 
China as soon as possible. 
 
-- China and India were making joint efforts to "safeguard peace and 
tranquility" along their common border. 
 
-- The Indian detainment of the UAE aircraft originally bound for 
China was a "technical issue" between the UAE and India. 
 
-- The date for the trilateral meeting between China, South Korea, 
and Japan had not been set. 
 
-- China would continue to "facilitate" the work of foreign 
journalists in Xinxiang, but journalists should respect the law and 
the police. 
 
-- China hoped relevant parties would step up diplomatic efforts to 
resolve the Iranian nuclear issue. 
 
-- China hoped parties at the World Economic Forum in Dalian would 
work to address the financial crisis. 
 
Uighurs in Guantanamo 
--------------------- 
 
¶2.  At the September 10 session of the regularly scheduled Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs (MFA) press briefing spokesperson Jiang Yu said 
that China's position on Uighur detainees at Guantanamo is 
"consistent and clear." China opposes any nation accepting the 
detainees after release from U.S. custody, and holds that the 
individuals should be repatriated to China "as soon as possible." 
 
Sino-Indian Border 
------------------ 
 
¶3. Asked about media reports of Chinese military personnel crossing 
the border into India, Jiang responded that both the MFA and the 
Ministry of National Defense (MND) had previously stated that China 
and India were making "joint efforts" to ensure "peace and 
tranquility" along their shared border in order to avoid damage to 
bilateral relations.  The two sides were working toward a fair, 
reasonable, and mutually acceptable solution. 
 
 
Aircraft Detained in India 
------------------------- 
 
¶4. Asked about the United Arab Emirates aircraft detained in India 
on September 6 before reaching its intended destination in China, 
Jiang answered that this was a "technical issue" between the UAE and 
India. 
 
Trilateral Meeting 
------------------ 
 
¶5. Jiang said that no date had been set for the trilateral meeting 
between China, South Korea, and Japan.  Once confirmed, a specific 
date would be announced to the public. 
 
Journalists in Urumqi 
--------------------- 
 
¶6. Jiang said the MFA was "not concerned" about reports of a 
confrontation between police and Hong Kong journalists in Urumqi 
because China continued to provide "facilitations" to the press. 
China maintained a "principled position" towards foreign 
journalists.  However, the press corps had an obligation to respect 
both the law and the police who were "just doing their work." 
 
¶7. A Hong Kong journalist present at the press conference claimed 
that he had recently been "beaten up" by local police in Urumqi and 
asked what type of "certification" was needed to report on events in 
Xinjiang.  Jiang responded that she was aware of his "keen interest" 
but could offer no further comment.  Events in Urumqi were a 
domestic matter and questions should thus be addressed to the local 
authorities.  The matter had been "properly settled," and local 
authorities had released "plenty of information" for those who wish 
to follow up, Jiang added. 
 
Iran 
---- 
 
¶8. When asked about Iran's proposal for renewed talks on the nuclear 
issue, Jiang responded that China hoped that relevant parties would 
 
BEIJING 00002596  002 OF 002 
 
 
step up diplomatic efforts and move towards a "proper settlement." 
 
 
World Economic Forum in Dalian 
------------------------------ 
 
¶9. Approximately 80 countries would attend the upcoming World 
Economic Forum in Dalian, Jiang said.  High-level officials from 
Latvia, Singapore, Ukraine, Mauritius, Serbia, Vietnam, and Zimbabwe 
were among those who would attend.  China hoped that the delegates 
would work to revitalize economic growth and hold in-depth 
discussions on how to address the current financial crisis.  There 
was a need to send a "stronger signal" in this regard, Jiang added. 
 
African Union Commission Visit 
------------------------------ 
 
¶10. Jiang was unsure whether China's special envoy to Sudan, Liu 
Guijin, would meet with the chair of the African Union Commission, 
Jean Ping during his current visit to China. 
 
HUNTSMAN