09GUANGZHOU534
Senior Citizens Seize, Hold Suspect Wastewater Plant to
Thu Sep 10 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Guangzhou
VZCZCXRO2274
RR RUEHAST RUEHDH RUEHDT RUEHHM RUEHLN RUEHMA RUEHPB RUEHPOD RUEHSL
RUEHTM RUEHTRO
DE RUEHGZ #0534/01 2530915
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 100915Z SEP 09
FM AMCONSUL GUANGZHOU
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0907
INFO RUEHGZ/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE 0253
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 0707
RUEHGH/AMCONSUL SHANGHAI 0194
RUEHSH/AMCONSUL SHENYANG 0204
RUEHCN/AMCONSUL CHENGDU 0195
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 0266
RUEHIN/AIT TAIPEI 0190
RUCNARF/ASEAN REGIONAL FORUM COLLECTIVE
RUEHZN/ENVIRONMENT SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COLLECTIVE 0017
RHMFIUU/HQ EPA WASHINGTON DC 0027
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC 0244
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC 0240
RHHMUNA/CDR USPACOM HONOLULU HI//J00/J2/J3/J5// 0015UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 GUANGZHOU 000534 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/CM, DRL AND OES/PCI 
EPA FOR OFFICE OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV PHUM ECON PGOV CH
SUBJECT: Senior Citizens Seize, Hold Suspect Wastewater Plant to 
Preserve "Evidence of Pollution" 
 
REF A: BEIJING 2548; REF B: BEIJING 2121 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000534  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
(U) This document is sensitive but unclassified.  Not for internet 
distribution.  Please protect accordingly. 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: Residents of villages neighboring a controversial 
wastewater treatment facility near Quanzhou, Fujian Province, 
expelled workers and occupied the plant August 26 in protest of 
government claims that the plant's discharges were safe and that the 
local water source was unaffected by pollutants.  An estimated 
10,000 villagers clashed with police and detained two local 
officials August 31 after one of the officials physically assaulted 
a female villager near the plant.  The police pulled back and the 
officials were released the following day.  Since the incident, 
elderly villagers have continued to occupy the wastewater facility, 
and there has been no regular contact between the villagers and the 
government.  Residents are hopeful that high-level government 
authorities might resolve the situation, but have said they would 
respond forcefully if police attempt to retake the facility by 
force.  Congenoff met with villagers near the site on September 5 to 
hear their story and encourage a peaceful resolution to the 
standoff.   End summary. 
 
Pollution Concerns and Cover-up: "Preserving the Evidence" 
-------------------------------- ------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Though they could not agree on the precise date, villagers 
involved in the incident told Congenoff during his visit to the area 
near the village on September 5 that representatives from the local 
environmental protection bureau (EPB) visited Houshan Village in 
Fengwei Township in Fujian around August 20, apparently in response 
to complaints about noxious fumes emanating from a water treatment 
plant.  Houshan residents claim that their village suffers 
uncommonly high rates of cancer and other illness, which they 
attribute to poorly treated or untreated discharges from a nearby 
tannery and other industry.  When EPB officials returned August 26 
to examine the water at the plant, villagers were told that the 
water was harmless and that the discharges met environmental 
standards.  The officials also suggested that the wastewater would 
not pose any threat to the villagers' health and that it was safe to 
be discharged directly into the sea, according to Houshan residents. 
 The villagers, suspecting corrupt motives behind the officials' 
unwillingness to address the pollution problems, told us they then 
became angry and decided to occupy the plant.  They forced the plant 
workers to leave and have occupied the plant since August 26. 
 
¶3. (SBU) According to the villagers, when local officials returned 
to the wastewater treatment plant August 31, the villagers expected 
them to discuss the case and seek an acceptable resolution. 
Instead, the officials planned only to discharge the wastewater 
directly into the sea and subsequently rinse the holding tanks with 
clean water, said the villagers, who opposed the plan.  The 
villagers suspected that the local officials hoped to eliminate 
evidence of the extent and type of pollution causing sickness and 
discomfort in the nearby villages. 
 
Problem Escalates From Confrontation to Minor Riot 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Estimates differ on the number of villagers who confronted 
approximately 2,000 police August 31, but media report at least 
10,000 and the villagers themselves claim as many as 20,000, noting 
that people came from several nearby villages to participate. 
According to the Houshan villagers, the confrontation began when the 
township's deputy party secretary hit or slapped a woman outside the 
plant and then attempted to flee by car.  Several villagers 
prevented his escape, after which the official exited his vehicle 
and punched a villager blocking his way, according to the villagers, 
who said the angry crowd then destroyed the official's car.  The 
official and a colleague were detained by the villagers. 
 
¶5. (SBU) When riot police arrived and fired tear gas into the crowd 
of protestors, villagers responded by throwing stones.  The 
villagers claim that, not having heard gunshots before, they did not 
initially realize that police were using non-lethal means against 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000534  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
them.  Believing they were under attack from firearms, the villagers 
began to panic and then responded using force, according to the 
villagers.  Only minor injuries were sustained during the 
confrontation, during which the police withdrew. 
 
Police Withdraw After Scuffle; Calm Ensues; Stand-off Continues 
------------------------------ ------------ ------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) The plant is now "guarded" by elderly volunteers -- mainly 
women -- to prevent officials from entering.  According to the 
villagers, these efforts are truly grassroots; there is not even 
anybody organizing the coverage by the volunteers.  There have been 
no police at the water treatment facility since the August 31 
incident, though residents claim there is a plainclothes police 
presence in their village.  Officials, according to the villagers, 
have fled the village in fear of being beaten or otherwise 
assaulted.  On September 9 a villager told Congenoff by telephone 
that although the village remains calm, village residents are 
becoming increasingly angry that officials -- at any level -- appear 
unwilling to engage in discussing solutions to the problem.  The 
villagers are considering filling the wastewater holding tanks with 
soil, hoping the soil will absorb the polluted wastes and reduce the 
stench.  The villagers claim to have closed all of the pipes through 
which wastewater enters and exits the facility.  The villagers say 
they will not allow the government to restart the plant, and that if 
police attempt to retake the plant by force the villagers will 
respond likewise. 
 
Villagers: No Abuse of Officials 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Villagers disputed Xinhua reports of abuse against the two 
officials seized during the August 31 riots and later released. 
They told Congenoff that not only was violence not used against the 
officials, but that they were provided water and a bed during their 
detention.  Moreover, it was decided to release the officials at 
04:00 the next morning because some villagers worried that if the 
officials were released during the day their personal safety could 
not be guaranteed if angry villagers learned of their presence. 
 
No Communication with the Government 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶8. (U) Apart from a hope that unspecified "higher authorities" will 
step in to handle the situation, Houshan villagers do not have a 
plan to resolve the standoff.  As of September 5, the villagers had 
no regular communication with authorities.  When asked what message 
they would like to convey to the government, they answered, "We have 
no intention of harming anyone, including government officials, 
because we love this country.  A handful of government officials 
ignore the needs of the community.  These officials are greedy and 
corrupt."  To resolve the situation, either the treatment plant has 
to move or the government must provide new residential areas away 
from the pollution, said the villagers, who also claimed not to fear 
retribution from local officials. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Villagers seemed hopeful that a September 4 visit by a 
couple of individuals claiming to be from the Ministry of 
Environmental Protection's East China Environmental Inspection and 
Assessment Center would prove a positive development.  These 
individuals, whose visit was arranged through the village's Senior 
Citizens' Association, took samples from the plant for analysis, the 
villagers said.  Villagers later told Congenoff by phone that they 
were looking into the possibility of having a Fuzhou-based 
environmental NGO visit to take samples, thus providing third-party 
confirmation. 
 
Some Media Attention 
-------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Hong Kong-based journalists from NHK recently filmed 
extensively at the treatment facility, according to the villagers. 
Local print and television journalists, too, have visited, but have 
yet to report on the incident, except for a September 2 article in 
Xinhua.  Reuters has reported the August 31 incident, as have 
 
GUANGZHOU 00000534  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
several regional websites generally critical of the Chinese 
Government.  Contributors to one Fujian-focused local 
Chinese-language Internet message board called for high-level 
government involvement to solve the stalemate, though one 
contributor pessimistically characterized the entire wastewater 
incident as par for the course in a "river crab society" -- a 
pejorative homophone of China's "Harmonious Society" campaign. 
 
Situation Stalemated, Villagers Prepared For Long Haul; 
USG Attention Appreciated 
------------------------------- ---------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) Comment:  Villagers, it seems, have completely lost 
confidence in government at virtually all levels.  They lack 
communications lines with government so re-establishing trust and 
finding a solution will be difficult.  They are hunkered down for 
the long haul, with elderly citizens ready to wait it out with no 
intention of backing down.  The villagers appreciated Congenoff's 
visit, and, no doubt, provincial and local officials are by now 
aware of the visit.  We have no current plans for any further 
actions by the Consulate, but we will continue to monitor this 
situation and report any developments.  End Comment. 
 
GOLDBECK