09JAKARTA1473
Food Security in Indonesia - It's About Fish
Thu Sep 03 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Jakarta
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHJA #1473/01 2461019
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 031019Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY JAKARTA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3237
INFO RUEHZS/ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS COLL
RUCPDOC/DEPT OF COMMERCE WASHINGTON DC
RUEHRC/USDA FAS WASHDC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 3073
RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5974
RUEHBY/AMEMBASSY CANBERRA 3651
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 5404
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS JAKARTA 001473 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR COS, F, OES AND EAP 
COMMERCE FOR NOAA 
USAID FOR ANE, EGAT 
BANGKOK FOR RDM/A 
NSC 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR EAID KGHG SENV PGOV ID
SUBJECT: Food Security in Indonesia - It's About Fish 
 
¶1. Summary:  Post proposes the establishment of an Indonesia-U.S. 
Center for Sustainable Ocean Fisheries.  This joint research 
institute would explore and study waters that house the world's 
highest ocean biodiversity.  The resulting science discoveries would 
help drive Indonesia and regional ocean fisheries policies onto a 
sustainable path for ocean food resources and the marine ecosystem. 
They would provide applied science solutions for local communities 
and commercial ports in Indonesia through networks of education 
extension services.  These understudied waters are critical not only 
to the 120 million people living in the maritime nations of the 
Coral Triangle, but also for Americans and global consumers of 
pelagic fish species.  For example, 90 percent of the world's tuna 
catch originates in this region.  The establishment of such an 
institute would address both food security and climate change 
adaptation in the largest majority Muslim country in advance of 
climate change talks in Copenhagen in December.  End Summary. 
 
Vision 
------ 
 
¶2. The Indonesia-U.S. Center for Sustainable Ocean Fisheries will 
allow American and Indonesian scientists to collaborate on research 
that will yield the knowledge and techniques needed to safeguard the 
region's marine ecosystems - while feeding the millions that depend 
on the ocean for sustenance. 
 
The Center would support: 
-- Marine ecosystem monitoring 
-- Research 
-- Institutionalized fisheries stock assessment programs 
-- Development and analysis of marine resources management 
approaches and options 
-- Delivery of policies and advice to marine resource managers and 
users 
 
Core Objectives 
--------------- 
 
¶3. The center will obtain critical knowledge about the marine 
ecosystem that will improve the management and use of Indonesia's 
"Amazon of the Sea."  It will create opportunities for U.S. 
institutions and researchers to expand research in marine science 
and coastal ecosystems in an area that has been virtually closed to 
U.S. scientists.  The core partnerships featured in this center 
include U.S. universities and research institutions, such as the 
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, the University of Washington or 
others, and U.S. science agencies, like NOAA, working together with 
Indonesian research institutions, agencies, and education networks. 
The center will provide reliable information for fisheries managers 
and help build a culture of basing policy decisions on sound 
science. It will promote interactions among U.S. and Indonesian 
institutions, scientists, and marine resource managers. 
 
Additional Benefits 
------------------- 
 
¶4. The center will: 1) extend our partnership to science cooperation 
as articulated in President Obama's Cairo Speech; 2) address the 
inseparable linkages between climate change impacts on 
coastal/marine-dependent communities and food security, outlined in 
Secretary Clinton's delivered remarks at the World Ocean Conference 
(WOC) in Indonesia in May 2009; 3) build on Indonesia's demonstrated 
commitment to sustainable ocean fisheries and climate change 
adaptation in the WOC and President Yudhoyono's Coral Triangle 
Initiative (CTI); 4) build on our commitment as the largest 
bilateral partner of the CTI; and 5) Provide scientific complement 
to USAID Indonesia's substantial Marine Resources Program investment 
over the next five years. 
 
Rationale 
--------- 
 
¶5. In Indonesia, food security depends on healthy marine resources. 
Over 65 percent of Indonesia's protein supply comes from fisheries 
products.  Indonesia is home to the world's most diverse marine 
ecosystems.  It is at the heart of the region that produces nearly 
90 percent of the world's tuna catch. The Coral Triangle is home to 
the world's largest stocks of commercially-important tuna species. 
Approximately thirty four million Indonesians depend on this 
biodiversity for their livelihoods.  But overfishing, habitat 
destruction, and the impacts of climate change threaten the 
archipelago's food security.  These factors, combined with lack of 
basic data about coastal and pelagic fisheries on which Indonesians 
depend undermine Indonesia's efforts to manage its fisheries 
sustainably and adapt to climate change. 
 
Potential Partners 
------------------ 
 
¶7. The Indonesia-U.S. Center for Sustainable Ocean Fisheries would 
be a partnership among Indonesian and U.S. science agencies and 
academic institutions.   A network of existing "sea partnership" 
institutions would deliver new knowledge and techniques directly to 
the agencies and organizations that need it through local 
universities and field agents.  The Ministry of Fisheries and Marine 
Affairs and Fisheries Research Officials are enthusiastic about 
becoming a partner, if not the leader of the institute.  Founding 
partners in Indonesia could be the, Ministry of Marine Affairs and 
Fisheries, the University of Indonesia, and Bogor Agricultural 
University (IPB). 
 
¶8. The Indonesia-U.S. Center for Sustainable Ocean Fisheries will 
have its greatest impact if it reinforces and complements existing 
investments and addresses the most urgent issues in fisheries 
management.  This center could become one of the first science 
cooperation activities under the new U.S.-Indonesia Science and 
Technology Agreement currently in the final stages of negotiations. 
 
 
Hume