09NAIROBI2031
SOMALIA - American Corner Update
Mon Sep 28 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Nairobi
VZCZCXRO5774
OO RUEHDE RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUEHNR #2031 2711117
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 281117Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY NAIROBI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1113
INFO RUCNSOM/SOMALIA COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS NAIROBI 002031 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT FOR AF/E AND AF/PD 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL KDEM KPAO SO
SUBJECT: SOMALIA - American Corner Update 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  The Somalia Unit has recently made tremendous 
progress in implementing the long-awaited American Corner in 
Mogadishu, Somalia.  We recently arranged the delivery of a shipment 
of material that had been sitting in Nairobi for several years.  We 
also organized the travel of our newly-appointed American Corner 
Coordinator for training in Addis Ababa, with a stop in Nairobi for 
consultations.  He will gradually increase the visibility of the 
American Corner as a vehicle for outreach and engagement with the 
Somali populace.  End summary. 
 
----- 
Setup 
----- 
 
¶2. (SBU) The Somalia Unit recently arranged the delivery of a 
shipment of material, designated as the initial startup gear for an 
American Corner in Mogadishu, which had been sitting in Nairobi for 
several years.  A recent International Visitor Leadership Program 
(IVLP) alumnus provided support in Mogadishu, including meeting the 
aircraft and arranging for its delivery to the university. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Owing to the volatile situation in Mogadishu, the 
university's classes are not being held at the main campus, but have 
been dispersed around the city.  However, with the September opening 
of the academic year, the university plans to establish the 
university library in a central location in Mogadishu.  The American 
Corner will be established at that location, with the understanding 
that it can be moved as conditions allow classes to resume at the 
main campus. 
 
--------------------- 
Coordinator Training, 
Implementation Plans 
--------------------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) With the generous assistance of Embassy Addis Ababa, our 
newly-appointed American Corner Coordinator, Adam Ahmed Hussein, was 
able to attend a training session in Addis in mid-August.  Hussein 
learned the general workings of an American Corner, got ideas for 
programs, and traded ideas with his Ethiopian counterparts.  The 
training coordinators informed us that Hussein was a significant 
contributor during the sessions.  Post thanks Embassy Addis Ababa 
for allowing Hussein to participate in this training. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Hussein requested that Post allow a slightly unorthodox 
ramp-up of the American Corner, but one that we agree is necessary 
in light of the volatile security situation in Mogadishu.  Hussein 
will set out the materials without significant fanfare at first, but 
will monitor their usage and begin advising users that the materials 
are from the American government and people.  As the usage and 
popularity increase, he will begin branding as appropriate, and 
eventually label the area as an American Corner.  We noted to 
Hussein that we respect his awareness of the security situation, but 
we need to lean as far forward as possible, given that this is in 
fact an outreach mechanism. 
 
----------- 
Way Forward 
----------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) The Somalia Unit will dedicate some FY09 program funds to 
augmenting the material that was shipped to Mogadishu.  Among the 
items we will acquire immediately are computers with webcam 
capability for possible video conferences, and select books and 
educational materials.  We are extremely optimistic about the 
success of this American Corner. 
 
RANNEBERGER