09PARIS1227
UNGA 65: FRANCE'S PRIORITIES
Wed Sep 09 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Paris
VZCZCXYZ0006
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHFR #1227/01 2521027
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 091027Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY PARIS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7115
INFO RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 7259
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA PRIORITY 2333
RUEHTC/AMEMBASSY THE HAGUE PRIORITY 3234
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA PRIORITY 3033
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 1737
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS PRIORITY 2702UNCLAS PARIS 001227 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR IO/UNP, EUR/WE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KUNR AORC KNPR APER UNGA UNGA FR
SUBJECT: UNGA 65: FRANCE'S PRIORITIES 
 
REF: A. STATE 90254 
     ¶B. PARIS POINT 27 AUGUST 2009 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  President Sarkozy's August 26 speech to 
French ambassadors provides clear insight into France's 
priorities for UNGA and the Pittsburgh G20 summit.  These 
include, greater "global governance," including economic 
regulation and broader efforts to address climate change; UN 
reform; bold steps in pursuit of Middle East peace; a serious 
approach towards nuclear nonproliferation; and continued 
actions to fight terrorism.  On September 2, Marc Giacomini, 
MFA's DAS-equivalent for UN and International Organizations 
provided PolCouns additional information on specific 
resolutions France will likely present or support during 
UNGA.  These include addressing child soldiers (with the hope 
of resolving past U.S. opposition), "the Elimination of All 
Forms of Religious Discrimination," and perhaps a resolution 
on "violence against women" in a manner that Giacomini hopes 
will complement a possible U.S. proposal on violence against 
girls.  France expects to support resolutions on Burma and 
North Korea, and Giacomini expects "intense discussions" on 
non-proliferation issues between France and its partners in 
the run-up to UNGA.  END SUMMARY. 
 
SARKOZY'S PRIORITIES TO FRENCH AMBASSADORS PREVIEWS UNGA 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
¶2.  (SBU) In remarks to the annual French Ambassador's 
Conference on August 26 (ref B), President Sarkozy emphasized 
a number of themes that will likely form the framework of his 
interventions at UNGA 65: 
 
-- Global Governance:  in his remarks on the upcoming Summit 
in Pittsburgh, Sarkozy was clear that France will push for 
"new global regulations" to increase the state's role in 
economic coordination and response and to address climate 
change.  Related to the economy, Sarkozy's vision includes 
more efforts at ending "bank secrecy" vis-a-vis tax 
authorities, uniform rules on financial markets traders' and 
executives' bonuses, and greater regulation of hedge funds. 
On addressing climate change, Sarkozy proposed new pricing 
mechanisms for the global oil trade, "equitable sharing" of 
civil nuclear energy, and instituting carbon taxes and 
trading ("de-carbonized growth"); 
 
-- UN Reform:  France, working with the U.K., is likely to 
support an interim Security Council reform as a first step 
towards greater reform.  In addition, Sarkozy stated that 
"all the major UN bodies and specialized institutions must 
change, with an obsessive focus on effectiveness;" 
 
-- Broader reach for some international organizations: 
Sarkozy advocated for the creation of "a real World 
Environmental Organization" to coordinate the "proliferation" 
of international organizations addressing environmental 
issues.  France proposes that this World Environmental 
Organization, as well as the International Labor 
Organization, be directly involved with the WTO, the IMF, and 
the World Bank whenever key aspects of labor or climate 
agreements are challenged.  The goal is to place labor law, 
environmental law, and trade law on an equal footing. 
 
-- Middle East Peace:  Providing certain conditions are met, 
Sarkozy proposes holding a summit this fall under the 
auspices of the Union for the Mediterranean (UfM) to support 
the peace process and press all parties involved to assume 
their responsibilities; 
 
-- Nuclear Nonproliferation:  Sarkozy underlined the need for 
a strong multilateral approach regarding North Korea and 
Iran.  He chided Iran for not responding to the negotiation 
offers put forward by the "six parties" (France, U.S., 
Germany, Russia, China, and the U.S.).  He added, "let's be 
clear:  if Iran doesn't change its policy, we are headed 
straight for a crisis;" 
 
-- Fighting Terrorism:  Sarkozy noted the on-going threat of 
international terrorism and the specific need to help 
Afghanistan consolidate the benefits of its recent elections 
and to support Pakistan in its more active engagement against 
terrorists.  France will also increase its assistance to 
African countries faced with a growing threat from al-Qaeda. 
Sarkozy added, "France will not allow al-Qaeda to establish a 
sanctuary on our doorstep, in Africa."  (Note:  France is 
organizing a high-level conference on security/terrorism in 
Sahel counties on September 10, with bilateral meetings with 
the U.S. in the morning and adding EU partners for the 
afternoon sessions.  End note.) 
 
THE MFA ON FRANCE'S PRIORITIES FOR UNGA 65 
------------------------------------------ 
¶3.  (SBU) PolCouns, accompanied by Poloff, discussed U.S. 
UNGA 65 priorities (per Ref A) on September 2 with Marc 
Giacomini, MFA's DAS-equivalent for the UN and International 
Organizations, who was joined by Cecile Vigneau, Deputy 
Director for Human Rights.  Giacomini expressed his 
appreciation for the information and said "there is much here 
that we can work on together."  He added it was not yet clear 
if Foreign Ministers were expected to go to Pittsburgh or 
remain in New York with Secretary Clinton.  Giacomini also 
noted that the UNGA would face some time constraints, given 
the late start due to the Eid holiday plus the major Global 
Fund event and the Pittsburg G20 gathering. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) While not offering a comprehensive assessment of 
French objectives, Giacomini briefly presented France's broad 
list of UNGA 65 priorities: 
 
-- In the 3rd Committee, France plans to raise again 
"children's rights," including restrictions on child 
soldiers.  Giacomini acknowledged past U.S. difficulties with 
this approach, due to issues related to military schools and 
also a firm minimum military age of eighteen.  He hoped we 
could come to an agreement on having the minimum age be 
applicable only for combat deployments; 
 
-- France wants to debate a resolution on "The Elimination of 
All Forms of Religious Discrimination," as a counter-measure 
to efforts to codify "the right of religion," which France 
views as potentially discriminatory and could restrict free 
speech and cultural diversity.  Giacomini admitted that this 
proposal will face difficulties in UNGA, especially from the 
OIC; 
 
-- France expects to support resolutions on Burma and North 
Korea and will likely offer a resolution in concert with the 
Netherlands condemning violence against women.  Giacomini 
noted that France welcomes the opportunity to consult closely 
with the U.S. on this since he understands the U.S. is 
considering a resolution on violence against girls as one 
follow-on item from the Secretary's July trip to Eastern 
Congo; 
 
-- There may also be an effort by France and other European 
countries to pursue a resolution on "enforced 
disappearances;" 
 
-- Giacomini expects "intense discussions" on 
non-proliferation issues in the run-up to the UNGA.  In other 
meetings, France has expressed concerns about the relative 
role of disarmament in our non-proliferation efforts and the 
need to continue to focus on Iran and North Korea. 
 
THE BROAD THEMES 
---------------- 
¶5.  (SBU) Giacomini confirmed that France will talk about the 
need for improved "global governance" on both economic and 
environmental issues.  A priority under this theme will be 
better coordination at helping emerging economies meet new 
standards.  Developed countries will need to improve their 
approaches to financing development in a way that promotes 
sustainability.  In France's view, engaging Brazil on these 
issues will be key. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Addressing climate change will be another French 
priority.  Giacomini stated it was understood, and welcomed, 
that the U.S. is developing a new position on climate change, 
but that "we" need to "set an example" for developing 
countries, in particular by stabilizing the level of 
atmospheric carbon dioxide. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Regarding the global economic recession, Giacomini 
confirmed that France would be prepared to "fully engage" in 
Pittsburgh.  According to Giacomini, France's position is 
that there cannot be a return to "business as usual," as that 
will inevitably lead to another crisis.  There will need to 
be new models for global regulation -- understanding that we 
have different visions of the path to recovery, and different 
constraints.  It is clear, however, that central banks cannot 
"fund the global economy," Giacomini stated. 
RIVKIN