09PHNOMPENH663
AMBASSADOR'S MEETING WITH SIEM REAP GOVERNOR SOU PHIRIN
Thu Sep 03 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Phnom Penh
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHPF #0663/01 2460957
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 030957Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY PHNOM PENH
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1151
INFO RUCNASE/ASEAN MEMBER COLLECTIVEUNCLAS PHNOM PENH 000663 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR EAP/MLS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PHUM PREL CASC KTIP CB
SUBJECT:  AMBASSADOR'S MEETING WITH SIEM REAP GOVERNOR SOU PHIRIN 
 
REF: PHNOM PENH 379 
SENSITIVE BUT UNCLASSIFIED.  NOT FOR INTERNET DISSEMINATION. 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY:  During an August 21 meeting with Siem Reap 
Governor Sou Phirin (joined by other government officials such as 
the Siem Reap Prosecutor and Military Commander), the Ambassador 
discussed H1N1 prevention methods, tourism and tourist safety, 
trafficking in persons, and land issues.  The Ambassador highlighted 
a recent child sexual exploitation case involving an American 
citizen as well as ongoing land disputes.  END SUMMARY. 
The State of Siem Reap 
---------------------- 
¶2.  (SBU) The Ambassador began the meeting by asking the governor 
about the state of the economy in Siem Reap.  Sou Phirin expressed 
his thanks to the United States for allowing exports from Cambodia 
and for their role in sustaining Cambodia's garment industry.  On 
tourism, the governor spotlighted its safety and affordability, and 
noted that although Siem Reap has seen a decline in visitors 
overall, there has been an increase in visitors from North America. 
He expressed a desire for a full U.S. economic recovery, noting 
Cambodia's dependence on the U.S. economy. 
H1N1 and Tourist Safety 
----------------------- 
¶3.  (SBU) The Ambassador asked Phirin about precautions to prevent 
the spread of H1N1 among Siem Reap's visitors and its local 
population.  The governor responded that there were only seven 
reported cases of H1N1 in Siem Reap, all of which involved visitors 
from the United States, Pakistan, Thailand, Nigeria, and the 
Philippines.  He claimed that no Cambodians had been infected so 
far.  In an effort to prevent the spread of H1N1, passengers from 
international flights are screened at the airport and prevention 
information is provided daily via radio and television 
announcements.  The governor stated that officials would make every 
effort to care for suspected H1N1 patients within Siem Reap but, if 
necessary, they would be transferred to Phnom Penh for treatment. 
Trafficking in Persons and Sex Tourism 
-------------------------------------- 
¶4.  (SBU) The Ambassador reaffirmed the United States' commitment to 
pursuing legal action against Americans who commit sex crimes within 
Cambodia.  She expressed surprise that Jack Sporich, an American 
citizen and convicted sex offender, was released on bail after six 
months in pre-trial detention within Siem Reap province.  (NOTE:  To 
the Embassy's knowledge, no other prisoner has been released on bail 
after their initial six-month detention period.)  The Prosecutor 
stated that Sporich was facing charges for indecent acts -a 
misdemeanor that carries a maximum sentence of three years in 
prison.  Persons charged with a misdemeanor cannot be held in 
pre-trial detention for more than six months under Cambodian law. 
As Sporich had already been detained for over six months, his lawyer 
was able to argue successfully for his release.  The Ambassador 
appealed to the governor to consider the potential damage to 
Cambodia's reputation if it is seen as a place where it is easy to 
abuse children.  She urged the governor to be vigilant in fighting 
trafficking and abuses against women and children. 
¶5.  (SBU) The governor stated that he fully supported the 
Ambassador's remarks and that he too wanted to enhance the rights of 
women and children.  Governor Sou Phirin added that while Sporich 
was accused of indecent acts, he had not been accused of rape 
because he was caught trying to persuade a young boy into his home, 
not in the process of, or after the fact of rape.  That was the 
factual basis that made the difference between charges for "indecent 
acts" and more serious felony charges.  (NOTE:  Sporich returned to 
the United States in the custody of U.S. officials on August 30 
under authority of the PROTECT ACT.)  The Ambassador added that it 
is the responsibility of government officials and development 
partners to provide more education and job opportunities and improve 
the health of the local population in order to discourage child sex 
tourism. 
Land Disputes 
------------- 
¶6.  (SBU) Noting that the Embassy regularly receives information 
related to land disputes from NGOs and individuals, the Ambassador 
asked for the governor's perspective on land cases.  Governor Phirin 
stated that land disputes within Siem Reap stem from one of two 
categories:  the first involves the use of land that belongs to the 
state; the second pertains to the succession of land ownership from 
the former generation before 1975.  Governor Phirin stated that most 
land cases were not difficult to resolve as the parties involved 
were inclined to settle them via commune council arbitration.  He 
stated that the commune councils also attempted to settle the 
disputes involving the landless and poor. 
¶7.  (SBU) The Ambassador mentioned that she has heard of cases 
involving violence and urged that they be resolved peacefully. 
(NOTE:  One of Siem Reap's most recent land dispute cases involving 
violence was between the Chi Kraeng and Anlong Samnor communes. 
Police officers entering the commune to issue an arrest warrant 
fired shots and injured three people.  See Reftel.)  Governor Phirin 
stated that the government wants to conciliate and mediate land 
dispute problems, and expressed regret that provincial authorities 
had used guns in the Chi Kraeng case. 
COMMENT 
------- 
¶8.  (SBU) The governor spoke openly during the meeting and seemed 
particularly attentive to the strong economic ties between the U.S. 
and Cambodia represented by tourism and foreign assistance.  The 
governor also seemed open to continued collaboration between 
Cambodia and the U.S. in Siem Reap. 
RODLEY