09STATE100145
UNAMA: GUIDANCE FOR SEPTEMBER 29 SECURITY COUNCIL
Fri Sep 25 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0004
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #0145 2681822
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O P 251803Z SEP 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK IMMEDIATE 0000
INFO UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHBUL/AMEMBASSY KABUL PRIORITY 0000UNCLAS STATE 100145 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL UNSC AF
SUBJECT: UNAMA: GUIDANCE FOR SEPTEMBER 29 SECURITY COUNCIL 
BRIEFING 
 
¶1. (U) This is an action request.  USUN is instructed to draw 
from the points in paragraph 3 below during consultations 
following the quarterly UN Security Council briefing on the 
UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) scheduled for 
September 29, 2009. 
 
¶2. (U) Objectives: 
 
-- Acknowledge the difficulty of the Presidential elections 
-- Point out that there is a process in place that is 
responding to claims of fraud 
-- Highlight the other important work that is UNAMA,s mission 
 
¶3. (U) Begin points: 
 
-- On behalf of the United States, let me first thank the 
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Kai Eide, 
for his briefing today and for his leadership at the helm of 
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan during a 
critical time.  The United States continues to strongly 
support UNAMA in its efforts to achieve the goals of Security 
Council Resolution 1868. Working in concert with the 
Government of Afghanistan and the international community, 
UNAMA's work remains unfinished, but important strides have 
been made in the last three months that merit our 
consideration. 
 
-- The ongoing Afghan electoral process has not been easy, 
but we applaud the courage of Afghan voters and the 
dedication of officials who have participated in polling, 
tallying and adjudicating results.  The United States will 
continue to encourage all parties to respect the Afghan 
institutions that have conducted these elections and will 
determine their outcome.  While there have been serious 
allegations of fraud, we are pleased to see people seeking to 
resolve their concerns through the formal adjudication 
process and not through violence.  The international 
community must support the Independent Election Commission 
and the Electoral Complaints Commission as they complete the 
difficult work of counting ballots and investigating and 
adjudicating incidents of fraud, in accordance with their 
responsibilities under Afghan law.  When the new Afghan 
government is inaugurated, we must all quickly begin to work 
with it to help build its capacity to meet the needs of the 
Afghan people.  Even as we approach the conclusion of this 
electoral season, however, we must also begin preparations 
for the 2010 parliamentary elections, which the 
Secretary-General's report rightly indicates must start 
immediately. 
 
-- In addition to its critical role in elections, UNAMA is 
indispensable as the coordinator of international assistance. 
 We will work closely with the Afghan government and with 
UNAMA to ensure that aid is properly aligned with Afghan 
priorities.  We have already seen good progress in this area 
with regard to agricultural programs, where the United States 
plans to double assistance next year, in keeping with Afghan 
priorities.  International efforts to assist Afghanistan are 
most successful when they respond to needs identified by 
Afghans themselves, and the United States renews its 
commitment and urges other donors to work with UNAMA to 
reduce inefficiencies and ensure the appropriate and 
effective delivery of aid. 
 
-- The United States is also pleased to see progress on 
UNAMA's efforts to expand its presence throughout 
Afghanistan.  As the Secretary-General's report indicates, 
UNAMA is on track to reach a total of 17 provincial offices 
by the end of this year.  This expanded provincial presence, 
called for in Security Council Resolution 1868, will enable 
UNAMA to better monitor and coordinate aid programs on the 
ground.  The United States urges the UN to approve the 2010 
UNAMA budget increase and all member states to support 
UNAMA's outreach to the provinces by providing the personnel 
and resources necessary to achieve this goal. 
 
-- U.S. and ISAF troops continue to make significant efforts 
to avoid civilian casualties, exemplified by General 
McChrystal's emphasis that military operations prioritize the 
protection of the civilian population.  This effort, which 
puts the Afghan people at the center of the mission, reflects 
the reality that the large majority of civilian deaths are 
caused by ruthless acts of terrorism by insurgent groups, 
which operate without regard for Afghan lives.  The United 
States regrets any loss of innocent life during military 
operations and goes to great lengths to avoid civilian 
casualties.  When they do occur, we provide humanitarian 
assistance to affected communities and conduct thorough, 
joint investigations with the Afghan government to determine 
the facts. 
 
-- The United States continues to believe that UNAMA is an 
essential element of our common efforts to support the Afghan 
people in their struggle to rebuild their country and defeat 
a determined enemy.  We will continue to support UNAMA's 
critical mission, for the benefit of Afghanistan and the 
peace and security of the region. 
 
-- Thank you. 
CLINTON