09STATE97233
MISSILE TECHNOLOGY CONTROL REGIME (MTCR): CHINA'S
Fri Sep 18 00:00:00 +0200 2009
SECRET
Secretary of State
VZCZCXYZ0001
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHC #7233 2611806
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
P R 181747Z SEP 09
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 0000
INFO MISSILE TECHNOLOGY CONTROL REGIME COLLECTIVES E C R E T STATE 097233 
 
SIPDIS 
PARIS FOR EST: NOAH HARDIE 
BRASILIA FOR POL: JOHN ERATH 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/18/2034 
TAGS: MTCRE ETTC KSCA MNUC PARM TSPA FR BR
SUBJECT: MISSILE TECHNOLOGY CONTROL REGIME (MTCR): CHINA'S 
BALLISTIC MISSILE-RELATED EXPORT CONTROL RECORD 
 
Classified By: ISN/MTR Acting Director Ralph Palmiero. 
Reasons:  1.4 (B), (D), (H). 
 
¶1. (U)  This is an action request.  Please see paragraph 2. 
 
¶2. (C)  ACTION REQUEST:  Department requests Embassy Paris 
provide the 
interagency cleared paper "China's Ballistic Missile-Related 
Export 
Control Record" in paragraph 3 below to the French Missile 
Technology 
Control Regime (MTCR) Point of Contact (POC) for distribution 
to all Partners. 
Info addressees also may provide to host government officials 
as appropriate. 
In delivering paper, posts should indicate that the U.S. is 
sharing this paper 
as part of our preparation for the Information Exchange that 
will be held in 
conjunction with the MTCR Plenary in Rio, November 9-13, 
¶2009. 
NOTE:  Additional IE papers will be provided via septels. 
END NOTE. 
 
¶3. BEGIN TEXT OF PAPER: 
 
(SECRET REL MTCR) 
China's Ballistic Missile-Related Export Control Record 
 
Introduction 
 
Since the 2008 Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) 
Plenary, 
Chinese firms have continued to provide MTCR-controlled and 
non-Annex items 
to ballistic missile programs in countries of concern, 
demonstrating continued 
weaknesses in Beijing's export control enforcement efforts. 
These weaknesses 
probably stem from a number of factors, including China's 
reliance on foreign-provided 
information (rather than through its own preventive 
enforcement efforts) to prompt 
proliferation-related investigations, its failure to know 
their customers, its 
reluctance to enforce its catch-all controls, and its 
insufficient efforts to 
penalize firms involved in ballistic missile-related sales. 
This, in turn, 
reflects a lack of political will by Chinese authorities, 
some of whom probably 
continue to view ballistic missile-related transfers as less 
of a priority than 
nuclear-, chemical-, or biological-weapon-related transfers. 
 
Chinese Firms Continue to Evade Restrictions 
 
Chinese firms over the past year have offered or sold 
MTCR-controlled and 
non-Annex items to ballistic missile-related entities in 
foreign countries, 
including Iran, Pakistan, and Syria.  In some cases, sales 
have continued 
despite extensive information provided by the U.S. to Chinese 
authorities 
outlining our concerns about these firms' activities. 
 
Chinese authorities and firms fail to conduct sufficient 
evaluations of 
missile-applicable transactions, or to take steps to know 
their customers. 
Other firms that are aware of the vulnerabilities in China's 
export control 
system take steps to conceal sensitive transactions and avoid 
detection, 
including by adopting new names and falsifying shipping 
documentation. 
Additionally, some firms may take advantage of government 
connections to 
skirt Chinese regulations. 
 
Recent activities of concern include the following: 
 
The Chinese firm LIMMT continues to sell MTCR-controlled and 
non-Annex 
items to Iran's missile programs. 
 
Chinese firms continue to sell items with ballistic missile 
applications 
to a Syrian ballistic missile entity. 
 
China-based Shanghai Technical By-Products International 
Corporation 
continues to work with Iranian ballistic missile entities to 
provide 
items with ballistic missile applications. 
 
Chinese firms continue to sell equipment to Pakistan's 
ballistic missile entities. 
 
Chinese firms also have continued to market short-range 
ballistic missiles, 
including the B611M, P12, and SY400, at domestic and 
international arms shows. 
Although these systems have range and payload capabilities 
that fall below MTCR 
Category I thresholds, we remain concerned that the sale of 
these systems could 
destabilize sensitive regions, facilitate WMD development, 
and potentially advance 
a new customer's domestic research and development (R&D) and 
production capabilities. 
 
The B611M is marketed as a 260-km-range system that carries a 
480-kg warhead, 
uses a dual launcher, and is capable of achieving an accuracy 
of 50 meters. 
 
The P12 is marketed as a 150-km-range system that carries a 
450 kg warhead, 
uses a dual launcher, and is capable of achieving an accuracy 
of 30-50 meters. 
 
The SY400 is marketed as a 150-200-km-range system that 
carries a 200-300 kg 
warhead, uses a launcher that carries eight missiles, and is 
capable of achieving 
an accuracy of 50 meters. 
 
Continued Enforcement Shortfalls 
 
As we noted in 2008, a number of factors have hindered 
Beijing's export 
control enforcement efforts.  These include:  a reliance on 
foreign tips 
(rather than its own enforcement efforts) to spur action in 
stopping exports 
of concern, a reluctance to invoke catch-all controls to 
prevent a proliferant 
transfer, lax expectations regarding a firm's responsibility 
to know its 
end-user, and insufficient efforts to penalize firms involved 
in ballistic 
missile-related sales.  As demonstrated by the examples in 
the next section, 
we have seen little evidence over the past year that these 
issues have been addressed. 
 
We frequently share with the Chinese government information 
related to 
cases of missile proliferation concern in order to get 
Beijing to investigate 
and/or stop the activity.  Occasionally, Chinese authorities 
will request 
additional information about the entities or goods involved 
in a specific 
transaction, and the U.S. consistently responds to these 
requests. 
More often, however, they simply note the demarche and 
indicate that it will be 
referred to the proper authorities.   Moreover, Chinese 
officials provide only 
limited feedback on these cases and the status of their 
investigations, claiming 
on one occasion earlier this year that "China's business is 
its own business." 
 
And even in those cases where China does provide updates, 
Chinese enforcement 
action appears spotty at best.  For example, in one case we 
have been discussing 
with Beijing over the course of several years, Chinese 
officials assured us that 
the government had closed down a company involved in 
ballistic-missile related 
sales and barred it from exporting.  Despite these 
assurances, however, we 
continue to see that same company engage in proliferant 
behavior. 
 
In another case involving a Chinese entity that has been 
routinely engaged 
in transactions of missile-related items, we encouraged China 
to enforce 
its catch-all controls.  Chinese officials responded that 
catch-all controls 
"are not meant to catch everything," and did not provide any 
additional 
information on how or if it utilizes catch-all controls. 
 
The weaknesses in China's enforcement regime indicate a 
continued lack of 
political will by Chinese authorities.  Some Chinese 
officials probably continue 
to view ballistic missile-related transfers as less of a 
priority than nuclear-, 
chemical-, or biological-weapon-related transfers.  Other 
officials clearly remain 
reluctant to use China's catch-all controls to prevent the 
transfer of non-Annex 
items, even in cases where the item has a clear ballistic 
missile application and 
evidence shows that the end-user is a ballistic 
missile-associated entity. 
 
US Government Sanctions Applied 
 
This lack of political will is demonstrated in the recent 
case of two proliferating 
Chinese entities.  Effective February 2, 2009, the United 
States levied sanctions 
against two Chinese entities for their supply of 
MTCR-controlled items to Iran's 
ballistic missile program.  Pursuant to these sanctions, all 
new individual U.S. 
export licenses for MTCR Annex items to the sanctioned 
entities and all new U.S. 
government contracts relating to MTCR Annex items with the 
sanctioned entities 
will be denied for a two year period.  An additional sanction 
in this case bans 
all imports into the U.S. of products produced by the 
sanctioned entity for two years. 
 
These penalties were levied following repeated discussions 
with Chinese 
authorities about these companies' proliferation activities 
and the need 
for Beijing to take steps to end their missile supply 
efforts, which China 
did not take. The two entities sanctioned/designated were: 
 
Dalian Sunny Industries/LIMMT:  LIMMT supplied or attempted 
to supply 
Iran's military and missile organizations with items 
including graphite, 
tungsten, gyroscopes, and accelerometers; 
 
Bellamax:  Bellamax supplied or attempted to supply Iran's 
military 
or missile organizations with items including steel alloys, 
gyroscopes, 
and ball bearings. 
 
Outlook 
 
Until China addresses the persistent shortfalls in its export 
control 
enforcement, ballistic missile programs in countries of 
concern probably 
will continue to seek and receive MTCR-controlled and 
non-Annex items from Chinese firms. 
 
China probably will be more inclined to be responsive in 
cases where a 
foreign government provides detailed tipoff information and 
where China 
assesses that the transfer in question involves an item 
explicitly listed 
on its export control list. 
 
Self-initiated efforts by Beijing to stop shipments (without 
the aid of 
foreign information provided via demarche), more rigorous 
implementation 
of its catch-all provisions, and the consistent imposition 
and public 
announcement of penalties against entities found guilty of 
export control 
violations will all be signs that Beijing is taking steps to 
further improve 
its export control enforcement. 
 
END TEXT OF PAPER. 
 
¶4.  (U)  Please slug any reporting on this or other MTCR 
issues for ISN/MTR. 
A word version of this document will be posted at 
www.state.sgov.gov/demarche. 
CLINTON