09TELAVIV1997
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Thu Sep 10 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHTV #1997/01 2531035
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 101035Z SEP 09 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3380
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAHQA/HQ USAF WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEADWD/DA WASHDC PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/CNO WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC PRIORITY
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 5935
RUEHAS/AMEMBASSY ALGIERS PRIORITY 2512
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN PRIORITY 6524
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA PRIORITY 6745
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT PRIORITY 5991
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO PRIORITY 4614
RUEHDM/AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS PRIORITY 6837
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 3613
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 1828
RUEHRB/AMEMBASSY RABAT PRIORITY 0502
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 8015
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH PRIORITY 3021
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS PRIORITY 7007
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 9060
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH PRIORITY 1831
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM PRIORITY 2749
RHMFISS/CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL PRIORITY
RHMFISS/COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE PRIORITY
RHMFIUU/COMSIXTHFLT  PRIORITYUNCLAS TEL AVIV 001997 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
SECDEF WASHDC FOR USDP/ASD-PA/ASD-ISA 
HQ USAF FOR XOXX 
DA WASHDC FOR SASA 
JOINT STAFF WASHDC FOR PA 
CDR USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL FOR POLAD/USIA ADVISOR 
COMSOCEUR VAIHINGEN GE FOR PAO/POLAD 
COMSIXTHFLT FOR 019 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
SIPDIS 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR IS
 
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Iran 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
Major media reported that PM Benjamin Netanyahu has shortened his 
planned visit to the U.N. from four days to two.  Officials in 
NetanyahuQs bureau are quoted as saying that the central reason for 
that decision was the presence of Iranian President Mahmoud 
Ahmadinejad and the fact that the two are supposed to sit just two 
seats away from one another.  Israel Hayom quoted a high-ranking 
Israeli diplomatic source as saying: QIn an historical perspective, 
Netanyahu does not want to be in the same auditorium and certainly 
not to have his picture taken with a Holocaust-denier, who openly 
declares that he wants to destroy the State of Israel,Q   The media 
also quoted officials in the PMQs bureau as saying that despite the 
tight schedule, the three-way meeting among President Barack Obama, 
Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu, and Palestinian Authority 
Chairman Abu Mazen is likely to be held.   Netanyahu is not going to 
be present when President Obama makes his introductory statements to 
the U.N. Israel Hayom quoted a highly-placed official in the PMQs 
bureau as saying: QWe have informed the Americans the reason for his 
absence, and they showed understanding.Q  Netanyahu is also 
scheduled to meet with King Abdullah of Jordan. 
 
 
 
The media reported that a QsmokescreenQ continues to surround PM 
NetanyahuQs QmysteryQ trip on Monday.  Media quoted his military 
secretary Meir Kalifi as saying: QFor state security one may 
sometimes not tell the whole truth.Q  HaQaretz said that Netanyahu 
aides are Qmired in anarchy, turf wars, and lies. 
 
Yediot reported that the QLauder documentQ outlining a report on a 
possible withdrawal from the Golan, which the daily says is being 
published for the first time, exposes some of what was discussed 
behind closed doors.  The document, which Ron Lauder, a close 
confidant of PM Netanyahu, gave to President Bill Clinton, contains 
an Israeli commitment to withdraw from the Golan to the June 4, 1967 
lines.  In return, the Syrians reportedly undertook to permit an 
American-French early-warning station to be established on Mt. 
Hermon.  Speaking on Israel Radio this morning, Danny Yatom, who was 
head of Mossad during PM Netanyahu's first term, said that the 
Premier then agreed to withdraw from the entire Golan in a future 
peace deal with Syria.  Yatom told the radio that although 
Netanyahu's agreement didn't bind him now, "he has to admit" that he 
did agree to withdraw from the territory.  Environmental Protection 
Minister Gilad Erdan (Likud) denied Yatom's claim, but told the 
radio that anyway, there was no reason to bring up the past.  Yediot 
reported that Netanyahu continues to deny at present that he agreed 
to a complete withdrawal from the Golan. 
 
Leading media quoted U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon as saying 
yesterday that Israel's plans to continue building settlements in 
the West Bank were "contrary to international law."  According to 
AFP, Ban "noted with deep concern" DM Ehud Barak's approval of 455 
new housing units in West Bank settlements on Monday.  The Jerusalem 
Post reported that yesterday Education Minister Gideon SaQar (Likud) 
told a group of visiting Conservative British parliamentarians that 
Israel will continue to build schools, kindergartens, and class 
rooms in West Bank settlements as they are needed.  SaQar cited 
Qnatural growth. 
 
Leading media reported that yesterday Iran presented world powers 
with a proposal for new talks with the West, although Iranian 
President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad has ruled out negotiations over 
uranium enrichment.  Israeli spokesmen were quoted as saying that 
Ahmadinejad is only playing for time.  Media quoted Glyn Davis, the 
U.S. envoy to the International Atomic Energy Agency, as saying 
yesterday that ongoing enrichment activity is moving Iran "closer to 
a dangerous and destabilizing possible breakout capacity."  Davis 
spoke of "serious concerns" in Washington that Iran is now either 
very near or already has enough low-enriched uranium to produce one 
nuclear weapon.  This could happen if Iran made a decision to 
further enrich the material to weapons grade.  The Jerusalem Post 
reported that several hundred Jewish leaders and activists are 
planning to arrive in Washington tomorrow to urge top Obama 
administration officials and U.S. congressmen to take action on 
Iran. They are pushing for Congress to quickly pass an Iran 
sanctions bill sponsored by U.S. House Foreign Affairs Committee 
Chairman Howard Berman and otherwise take serious economic and 
diplomatic steps to pressure Iran to abandon its pursuit of nuclear 
capabilities that threaten Israel. 
 
Leading media reported that yesterday only four QrebelQ Likud 
Knesset members attended the protest meeting against PM NetanyahuQs 
reported acceptance of a settlement freeze in the territories.  The 
media cited NetanyahuQs pressure in the matter. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that for the first time, the High Court 
of Justice yesterday ordered the state to demolish illegal 
structures built by Palestinians in the West Bank.  Until now, the 
court had only ordered the state to implement demolition orders 
against illegal construction by Jewish settlers, since these were 
the only kinds of petitions that had been filed. 
 
All media reported that yesterday former PM Ehud Olmert vindicated 
the 2005 withdrawal from Gaza, saying the disengagement was "the 
right thing at the right time" and did not set back Israel's 
security.  Olmert blamed false hopes and officials for the failures 
of disengagement and resettlement of Gaza evacuees.  Olmert was 
appearing before a state inquiry commission regarding how the 
authorities handled the former Gaza settlers. Testifying for three 
hours, Olmert dismissed the argument that the pullout led to 
increased terror.  Olmert reminded the commission that after the 
unilateral evacuation, former U.S. President George W. Bush wrote a 
letter to Israel stating that the Palestinian leaders were 
responsible for solving the Palestinian refugee problem.  He also 
reportedly said that Israel's borders do not necessarily have to 
return to the 1967 borders in order to reach an agreement.  HaQaretz 
reported that the Gush Katif council of Gaza settlers slammed 
Olmert's comments, saying, "The former prime minister blamed 
everyone but himself for the judicial failures preceding the 
withdrawal." 
 
Yediot reported that PM Netanyahu as decided to bring Shas Party 
Chairman and Inteior Minister Eli Yishai into the QsextetQ forum of 
ministers that makes the most sensitive decisions.  Yediot reported 
that senior members FM Avigdor LiebermanQs Yisrael Beiteinu 
criticized the move, saying it is turning the forum into Qcoalition 
gifts. 
 
Yediot reported that yesterday the IDF held maneuvers simulating 
fighting on both the Syrian and the Lebanese fronts.  This is the 
third large exercise conducted in the north this year. 
 
Yediot quoted the BBC as saying yesterday that for the first time an 
Israeli source -- a Qsenior figure close to Israeli intelligenceQ -- 
acknowledged his countryQs involvement in the affair of the Russian 
ship QArctic Sea,Q which was allegedly transporting weapons destined 
for Iran. 
 
Yediot reported that some senior Israeli officials are trying to 
thwart the appointment of Egyptian Culture Minister Farouq Hosni to 
the post of secretary-general of UNESCO, despite NetanyahuQs promise 
to President Hosni Mubarak that Israel will not disrupt HosniQs 
nomination. 
 
HaQaretz reported that earlier this week Jerusalem District Court 
Judge Noam Sohlberg ordered the Jerusalem Municipality to stop work 
on an infrastructure project that the city has undertaken in the 
City of David area of the Silwan neighborhood, south of the Old 
City.  Sohlberg ordered the work halted in response to a petition 
filed by Palestinian residents of Silwan with the support of two 
non-profit groups, Bimkom and the Association for Civil Rights in 
Israel.  The petitioners contended the project was not designed to 
benefit the 7,000 Palestinians who live in the neighborhood and were 
not involved in the plans, but would instead benefit the right-wing 
non-profit organization Elad and the tourists who visit the area. 
Sohlberg rejected most of the petitioners' arguments but ruled that 
some of the work was carried out illegally and without proper 
permits. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted the Environmental Protection Ministry as 
saying yesterday that it has hired the international consulting 
company McKinsey to map IsraelQs emissions sources and provide 
technological and behavioral recommendations for reduction.  The 
report will form the basis of IsraelQs national emissions reduction 
strategy. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that Honest Reporting, the 
Jerusalem-based media watchdog that campaigns on behalf of Israel, 
has claimed success in its drive to force Facebook to allow users in 
the Golan to list themselves as living in Israel. 
 
Leading media reported that yesterday Israeli archeologists unveiled 
historic artifacts from a cave in the Judean Hills believed to have 
been used by Jewish refugees during the Bar Kochba rebellion 
in132-135 CE.  The discovery includes a large assortment of coins 
from that era. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that yesterday FM Lieberman signed the 
first agreement between Israel and the Economic Community of West 
African States (ECOWAS) in Abuja, Nigeria.  ECOWAS is comprised of 
fifteen West African states, and three member states -- Guinea, Mali 
and Niger -- do not have diplomatic relations with Israel.  Jean de 
Dieu Somda, Commission Vice President, signed the agreement on 
behalf of ECOWAS.  The agreement is for cooperation in the fields of 
education, agriculture, culture, economic relations and other fields 
to be agreed upon by the two sides.  In addition, Lieberman and 
Somda signed an agreement between ECOWAS and MASHAV-Israel Center 
for Economic Cooperation, which states that the two sides will work 
together to initiate projects, with an emphasis on reducing poverty 
and preservation and protection of the environment.  The Jerusalem 
Post reported that yesterday Israeli Tourism Minister Stats 
Misezhnikov and Mongolian Tourism Minister signed a tourism 
cooperation agreement in Jerusalem.  The accord focuses on desert 
tourism. 
 
The Jerusalem Post reported that the Israeli travel agency 
Yambateva, which specializes in organized tours to exotic locations, 
has announced a merger with Maroc Tours and that it will open local 
offices in Marrakesh. 
 
The Jerusalem Post quoted Finance Minister Yuval Steinitz as saying 
that officials from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development criticized the countryQs policy of buying dollars to 
weaken the shekel. 
 
HaQaretz reported that yesterday Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez 
accused Israel of perpetrating genocide against the Palestinians. 
 
HaQaretz quoted Dr. Matthew Tarosky, Deputy Director of the U.S. 
Food and Drug AdministrationQs Division of Bioresearch Monitoring, 
as saying that the FDA intends on opening a Middle East office, and 
that it most likely will be located in Israel. Tarosky spoke 
yesterday at a conference in Tel Aviv sponsored by the Israel Life 
Science Industry and the Industry, Trade, and Labor Ministry on 
"Regulatory Pathways to Medical Device Marketing in the U.S."  The 
conference was designed to help Israeli firms meet U.S. medical 
equipment regulations. 
 
Maariv reported that foreign workers in Israel are forming a union. 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
¶I.  "Netanyahu DoesnQt Have to Say a Word" 
 
Yitzhak Klein, Director of the Israel Policy Center, whose mission 
includes reinforcing IsraelQs character as a Jewish, democratic 
state, wrote in the conservative, independent Jerusalem Post (9/10): 
QFew Israelis now believe there are genuine prospects for peace, and 
they blame the Palestinians.  Washington doesn't share this Israeli 
consensus, so shouting it from the rooftops would be unwise.  But 
Netanyahu doesn't need to lecture his people about anything.  He, 
his chief cabinet members from Ehud Barak to Benny Begin, and the 
broad Israeli mainstream are all in tacit agreement.  As long as 
Barack Obama is in the White House they're all willing to pay lip 
service to a Palestinian state, just so long as nobody seriously 
contemplates creating one.  If Israelis didn't share this view, they 
would have elected Tzipi Livni in February.... [In a September 7 
op-ed article, former Jerusalem Post managing editor] Jeff Barak 
praised President Obama's posturing on peace and settlements.  Alas 
for the President, Obama's initial positions on this and other 
foreign policy issues, such as Iran, aren't surviving in the real 
world very well.  Support for the President's foreign policy is 
eroding within his own party.  Obama's anti-settlement policy is 
likely to fade out quietly before too long.  That would be a good 
thing. Israelis have a serious problem with the Palestinians, and 
the kind of policy advocated by Jeff Barak and Barack Obama is not 
going to solve it.  The real obstacle to peace is Palestinian 
intransigence on Israel's very right to exist. That's the issue 
that's holding up progress, and nothing can happen until it's 
resolved. 
 
II.  "BibiQs Semester Report" 
 
Senior commentator Ari Shavit wrote in the independent, left-leaning 
Ha'aretz (9/10): QWhile the U.S. President's wings melt, the Israeli 
Prime Minister is slowly growing his own.  Day by day and week by 
week, Netanyahu is moving away from the demonic image that had been 
attached to him and is fortifying his status as the legitimate 
Israeli captain of this time.... Three months after being announced 
to the world, the Bar-Ilan formula is clearly working.  It unites 
the Israelis in support of a sober, realistic two-state solution. 
It is bringing many in the West to support recognizing Israel as a 
Jewish state and demilitarizing the Palestinian state.  It obliges 
the Palestinians to decide whether they want real peace or a 
step-by-step plan for the destruction of Israel.  Within a very 
short amount of time, Netanyahu has managed to redefine the peace 
process.  Now it is clear to all that the burden of proof and 
contribution not only rests on Israel's shoulders, but also on the 
Palestinians, the Arab states and the international community. 
After Olmert and Livni gave everything without receiving anything, 
Netanyahu is conducting a reasonable, mature policy.  But these 
achievements [including the political and economic ones] are not 
enough.  Netanyahu's government still lacks the main thing -- 
vision.  It is still not clear where it is really heading. 
 
III.  "The Emotional Blackmail Returns" 
 
Settler leader Israel Harel wrote in HaQaretz (9/10): QIf the 
thousands who demonstrated in Rabin Square in Tel Aviv in favor of 
releasing terrorists in exchange for Shalit would demonstrate in 
favor of denying the rights of these imprisoned terrorists, and 
would keep it up as they did with the demonstrations and rallies in 
favor of closing the transaction at any price -- no government, 
certainly not a right-wing government, would be able to withstand 
the pressure.  When family visits to the Hamas murderers are no 
longer allowed and other perks are canceled, the Palestinian 
families who miss their loved ones will go into action.  The main 
demonstrations for the release of Shalit would then move from Rabin 
Square to Palestine Square in Gaza. 
 
 
 
 
IV.  "The Mother of All Missed Opportunities" 
 
Liberal columnist Larry Derfner wrote in The Jerusalem Post (9/10): 
QThe Palestinians in the West Bank are doing what we've dreamed the 
Palestinians would do for more than a century -- and we refuse to 
see it.  They've effectively stopped terrorism.  They're building up 
their economy.  They're enforcing the law.  They're being trained by 
the Americans and they're cooperating with Israeli military and 
intelligence.  They're arresting Islamic militants by the thousands, 
and they're not hesitating to shoot it out with them.  This hasn't 
been going on for a week or a month, either; it's been going on for 
over two years.... [Salam] Fayyad was favored by the Bush crowd even 
more than [Mahmoud] Abbas, possibly because he got his MBA and PhD 
degrees at universities in the great state of Texas.  These are the 
people whom Israel ignores.  These are the Palestinian leaders whom 
Israel persists in considering hopeless, intransigent, utterly 
undeserving of trust.  Meanwhile, even Roni Daniel, the 
gloom-and-doom military affairs reporter for Channel 2-TV, has been 
talking about the Qnew atmosphereQ in the West Bank -- the safety, 
the commerce, the sense of freedom that's come with the IDF's 
removal of so many checkpoints and barriers -- a policy that began 
under pressure from Bush. 
 
--------- 
¶2.  Iran: 
--------- 
 
Block Quotes: 
------------- 
 
"The Missile Crisis 
 
Middle East affairs commentator Dr. Guy Bechor, a lecturer at the 
Interdisciplinary Center, wrote on the online service Gplanet.co.il 
(9/10): QThe worst part about the whole affair [of the hijacked 
Russian ship] is the absolute absence of any international 
coordination about the Iranian nuclear program.  Israel is operating 
almost alone, the United States is barely in the picture (with the 
exception of rhetorical participation), France, Germany and England 
are operating alone, Russia is operating alone, and China is 
operating alone.  The immediate and clear lesson to be learned from 
this missile affair is that an international summit meeting is 
needed so that the world might finally unite and form a firm and 
joint policy against Iran, which has been playing the entire 
international community.  It is clear that Ahmadinejad is enjoying 
this international isolation or, what might better be called the 
pathetic international weakness. 
 
CUNNINGHAM