09USUNNEWYORK854
UNSC: MONTHLY MEETING ON THE MIDDLE EAST SEPTEMBER
Wed Sep 23 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USUN New York
VZCZCXRO2836
OO RUEHROV RUEHTRO
DE RUCNDT #0854/01 2662114
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 232114Z SEP 09
FM USMISSION USUN NEW YORK
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7209
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHGG/UN SECURITY COUNCIL COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 USUN NEW YORK 000854 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KHUM KBIO UN IS LE IV SO
SUBJECT: UNSC: MONTHLY MEETING ON THE MIDDLE EAST SEPTEMBER 
2009 
 
REF: SECSTATE 95932 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  UN Special Coordinator for the Peace 
Process Robert Serry briefed the Security Council during its 
monthly meeting on the Middle East on 17 September.  He 
focused on the prospects for a two-state solution to the 
Israel-Palestinian conflict.  Serry noted efforts aimed at 
the development of a Palestinian state and the expected 
Palestinian elections.  He reported Israel's ongoing 
settlement activity and 619 obstacles to movement in the West 
Bank.  Serry noted the release of the Goldstone report, to be 
considered by the UN Human Rights Council (HRC) on September 
29 in Geneva.  He also briefed on the rocket attacks from 
Southern Lebanon on September 11 and the impasse in forming a 
Lebanese government. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Summary Continued: Amid praise for U.S. efforts to 
bring Israel and the Palestinians back to negotiations, all 
Council members expressed concerns over continuing Israeli 
settlement activity.  The Libyan PermRep said that it is 
disappointing that progress on the peace process is no longer 
about ending "Israeli occupation" but has been "reduced to 
the issue of ending settlements."  Members called for the 
opening of crossings into Gaza, with many voicing concern 
about the humanitarian situation given the lack of 
reconstruction and the approach of winter.  Most members 
noted the release of the Goldstone report, but deferred 
comment on the substance of the report until after the HRC's 
review.  Comments on Lebanon centered on support for efforts 
to form a unity government and condemnation of the September 
11 rocket attacks on Israel from southern Lebanon. 
Ambassador Rice delivered the U.S. statement (reftel), 
including comments on the Goldstone report.  End summary. 
 
----------------------------- 
Special Coordinators Briefing 
----------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) UN Special Coordinator for the Peace Process Robert 
Serry briefed the Security Council during its monthly meeting 
on the Middle East on 17 September.  (Note: The full text of 
the briefing can be found at: 
http:www.un.org/Depts/dhl/resguide/scact2009. htm)  Serry said 
that for Israel-Palestinian negotiations to work, both 
parties must adhere to their Roadmap obligations and robust 
third-party support would be helpful.  He noted Israeli 
Defense Minister Barak's authorization on September 7 of the 
construction of 455 housing units in the West Bank, including 
around Jerusalem, and the fact that the next day the Israel 
Lands Administration accepted bids for construction of 486 
apartments in Pisgat Zeev in East Jerusalem.  Serry reminded 
members that the Secretary General has called on Israel to 
freeze all settlement activity including natural growth and 
to dismantle outposts erected since March 2001.  Serry drew 
attention to the OCHA report of 619 obstacles to movement in 
the West Bank, but commended the recent Government of Israel 
(GOI) announcement of its intention to remove 100 earth 
mounds.  (Note: Not all of the earth mounds are counted as 
obstacles to movement in the OCHA report.) 
 
¶4. (SBU) Serry noted with concern a recent statement from 
Hamas leader Meshal that Hamas continues to purchase, 
manufacture, and smuggle weapons into Gaza.  Serry called the 
longer-term consequences of Israel's blockade of Gaza "deeply 
worrying" and "un-sustainable," and noting the need for 
immediate access for agricultural inputs, water and 
sanitation equipment, materials for shelter repair, and 
educational materials.  He said that as efforts are made to 
re-launch the peace process, the situation in Gaza cannot be 
left to "further deteriorate and unravel."  He briefed the 
council that despite "extensive and constructive high-level 
discussions with the Israeli government" on the proposal for 
UN-led pilot reconstruction projects, there has been no 
positive response from the GOI.  He reported that the GOI 
cites the continued detention of Gilad Shalit as the key 
obstacle to allowing even limited civilian reconstruction. 
Earlier in the briefing Serry called for the release of both 
Shalit and a number of the 10,000 Palestinian prisoners held 
by Israel. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Recalling the Palestinian intention to complete 
preparation for statehood in less than two years, Serry 
called for support for those efforts including during the 
September 22 Ad Hoc Liaison Committee meeting.  He noted 
President Abbas' intention, under Palestinian law, to decree 
that Presidential and legislative elections be held in the 
West Bank and Gaza in January 2010.  Hamas has refused to 
cooperate with these elections, stating that it will not 
permit elections to be held in Gaza until an agreement on 
national unity has been reached.  Serry called for all 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000854  002 OF 003 
 
 
factions to engage in internal dialogue under Egyptian 
auspices. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Serry noted the release of the Goldstone report, 
which will be formally presented to the Human Rights Council 
(HRC) on September 29.  He expressed his hope that Lebanon 
can form a government quickly.  He reported that on September 
11 two rockets were launched against Israel from southern 
Lebanon, a clear violation of UNSCR 1701, and that  Israel 
retaliated by launching 12 artillery shells.  Serry also said 
that UNIFIL shared its investigative report of the July 14 
arms cache explosion in southern Lebanon with the two parties 
on September 11. 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
Council Consultations: Peace Process and Gaza 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
                 ¶7. (SBU) Council members then moved into 
consultations.  Austria, Costa Rica, Croatia, Japan, Mexico, 
Russia, and the UK praised the involvement and efforts of 
Special Envoy Mitchell to bring Israel and the Palestinians 
back to negotiations.  The Russian Federation and France 
called for attention to the Lebanon and Syria tracks.  The 
Libyan PermRep said that it is disappointing that progress on 
the peace process is no longer about ending "Israeli 
occupation," but has been "reduced to the issue of ending 
settlements."  The Russian Deputy PermRep said that he still 
hopes an international conference in Moscow will occur before 
the end of the year; the French supported the conference as 
an important step.  Austria, France, Russia, and the UK all 
noted the upcoming Quartet meeting on September 24.  China, 
Costa Rica, Croatia, France, and the UK mentioned steps that 
regional Arab states could take to facilitate a return to 
negotiations, as outlined in the Arab Peace Initiative (API). 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica, Croatia, 
France, Japan, Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, and Uganda 
called for the opening of the Gaza crossings and commented on 
the humanitarian situation in Gaza.  The Chinese Deputy 
PermRep urged full implementations of UNSC 1860, emphasizing 
that eight months have already passed without full 
implementation.  France called for the release of Gilad 
Shalit.  The Libyan PermRep described Gaza as besieged and 
noted that winter is coming and there has been no improvement 
in the humanitarian situation. 
 
------------------------ 
Criticism of Settlements 
------------------------ 
 
¶9. (SBU) All council members expressed concerns over 
continuing Israeli settlement activity.  Croatia and France 
both called settlements an "obstacle to peace."  The Japanese 
PermRep called for a settlement freeze in the West Bank and 
Jerusalem, including on natural growth of existing 
settlements.  The Turkish Deputy PermRep said that expanding 
settlement activities are contrary to international law and 
fundamental human rights.  The Mexican PermRep called the 
approval of more than 400 new housing units "deplorable" and 
said that East Jerusalem should be included in any settlement 
freeze.  The Vietnamese PermRep expressed "acute concern" 
over settlements and called for the revocation of recent 
Israeli approvals of new construction.  The Russian Deputy 
PermRep noted that new construction "does not lead to an 
encouraging environment for mediation efforts." 
 
--------------------------------- 
Internal Palestinian Developments 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Japan and the UK praised Palestinian Prime Minister 
Fayyad's efforts to develop the institutions of a functioning 
state in two years time.  The Croatian PermRep commended the 
reversal of the downward economic trend in the West Bank, as 
noted in a recent IMF report.  Austria, China, Costa Rica, 
Japan, France, Russia, Turkey, and Vietnam spoke of the need 
for unity between Palestinians political factions.  The 
Turkish PermRep noted that it would be difficult for 
Palestinians to engage in negotiations without unity and 
welcomed upcoming Palestinian legislative elections.  Costa 
Rica, France, Russia, and Uganda praised Egypt's efforts to 
mediate between Palestinian factions. 
 
--------- 
Goldstone 
--------- 
 
USUN NEW Y 00000854  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
¶11. (SBU) The majority of members mentioned the Goldstone 
report, but deferred comments on substance until after the 
HRC review.  The Libyan PermRep said that the HRC chose "a 
Jew, a South African judge, and a man who had dealt with 
these issues in Africa" to carry out the mandate to 
investigate what happened in Gaza and that the report is 
"balanced."  The Libyan PermRep asked rhetorically "Will 
Israel remain a state above the law?"  The UK Deputy PermRep 
noted that it is still "digesting" the report which raises 
serious issues about the differentiation between combatants 
and noncombatants by both parties.  He added that the report 
should first be considered by the HRC and should not distract 
the parties from resuming negotiations.  The Mexican PermRep 
noted that peace will only be possible if all parties reject 
violence against civilians and respect international 
humanitarian law.  The Austrian PermRep expressed full 
support for the mandate of the fact-finding mission, and said 
that the report must be taken seriously.  The French PermRep 
said that as a matter of principle, France calls for the 
respect for international humanitarian law everywhere, at all 
times, by all parties.  Costa Rica, Croatia, and Russia said 
they were reviewing the report and would follow-up with 
additional comments after presentation to the HRC.  Burkina 
Faso, Croatia, Turkey, Uganda and Vietnam also noted the 
Goldstone report, without substantive remarks. 
 
------- 
Lebanon 
------- 
 
¶12. (SBU)  Austria, Burkina Faso, Croatia, France, Mexico, 
and Vietnam condemned the September 11 rocket attacks against 
Israel from Lebanese territory.  The Chinese PermRep called 
for all states to fully implement UNSC 1701.  The French 
PermRep noted that UNIFIL is already investigating the 
incident in cooperation with Lebanese Armed Forces.  The 
Russian Deputy PermRep said Russia was pleased that events 
did not lead to a more widespread disruption.  Burkina Faso, 
Costa Rica, Croatia, Turkey, Uganda, and Vietnam expressed 
support for efforts to form a unity government in Lebanon. 
The Libyan PermRep criticized the fact that a right wing 
government in Israel is not criticized by the international 
community, while Hizballah participation in a Lebanese 
government is deemed "Islamist." 
 
-------------- 
U.S. statement 
-------------- 
 
¶13. (SBU) Ambassador Rice delivered the U.S. remarks 
(reftel), including a comment on the Goldstone Report.  Rice 
said that the Goldstone Report should be handled at the HRC. 
She expressed confidence that, "as a democracy, Israel has 
the institutions to review the allegations about its 
behavior." 
 
------------------------------ 
Serry on Palestinian Elections 
------------------------------ 
 
¶14. (SBU) Responding to requests from members for additional 
details on the Palestinian political process, Serry said that 
the Basic Law under which the Palestinian Authority operates 
requires that new elections be announced in October for the 
following January 2010.  He noted that the new Egyptian 
mediation package offers a compromise that includes elections 
in the first six months on 2010, but that the proposal 
requires a reply from all Palestinian political parties. 
Serry said that it is clear that elections will have to take 
place in both the West Bank and Gaza. 
RICE