09WELLINGTON320
Embassy Wellington: Samoa/New Zealand Situation Report
Wed Sep 30 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Wellington
VZCZCXRO7652
OO RUEHAP RUEHNZ
DE RUEHWL #0320/01 2730656
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O R 300655Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY WELLINGTON
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0155
INFO RHHMUNA/USPACOM HONOLULU HI
RHMFISS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RUEHAP/AMEMBASSY APIA 0020
RUEHNZ/AMCONSUL AUCKLAND 0037
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 WELLINGTON 000320 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR P, CA, EAP, EAP/ANP, DS/IP, DS/IP/EAP, SES-O 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC CASC NZ WS
SUBJECT: Embassy Wellington: Samoa/New Zealand Situation Report 
 
REF: EMAILS FROM POST TO DEPARTMENT OPERATIONS CENTER 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY - On September 29, 2009, Embassy Wellington's 
Emergency Action Committee met to discuss the recent earthquake off 
the coast of Samoa and ensuing tsunamis in the region.  Embassy 
Wellington remains in contact with Embassy Apia, providing support 
and communication assistance as appropriate.  An up-to-date 
Situation Report for Embassy Apia begins in paragraph two (2).  In 
relation to New Zealand, the EAC agreed to release an external and 
internal warden message urging people in low lying areas in New 
Zealand to move to higher ground as a precaution.  Following the 
"All-Clear" announcement by the Government of New Zealand, the 
Charge d'Affaires ordered a resumption of normal operations 
throughout New Zealand.  During the New Zealand tsunami warning, 
Embassy Wellington remained in contact with Consulate Auckland, the 
U.S. Antarctic Program in Christchurch, the Department's Operations 
Center, and DS Command Center.  END SUMMARY 
 
 
 
¶2. (SBU) Embassy Apia Situation Report (1500 hrs local) - All Chief 
of Mission and Peace Corps personnel are accounted for and 
uninjured.  The Embassy just received the first report of an 
American casualty - a U.S. Citizen resident of Samoa reportedly 
drown.  The Embassy is in contact with the next of kin located in 
Samoa.  The Embassy has been monitoring local hospitals and found 
only one (1) injured American whose condition is not serious. 
 
 
 
¶3. (SBU) Casualty numbers are growing rapidly.  The National 
Hospital reports 17 casualties in the morgue and 20 more bodies in 
route from the south coast, with more casualties to be transported 
in additional vehicles. Of the 37 casualties reported, three are 
believed to be tourists; their nationalities have yet to be 
identified.  There are at least another 50 persons reported missing 
and that number may increase dramatically.  The hospitals around 
the country are also handling hundreds of cases of injured persons. 
 
 
 
 
¶4. (SBU) Operations are now being run from the Embassy, housed in a 
commercial office building in Apia.  The Embassy has power and 
appears to be undamaged by the events.  An Embassy staff member has 
reached the heavily damaged southern coast of Samoa's Upolu Island. 
He reports significant damage - homes washed off foundations, cars 
strewn about, washed-out roads, and power lines down.  The Samoan 
Government is moving to open roads with heavy equipment and restore 
power. 
 
 
 
¶5. (SBU) Embassy Wellington will send a Political Officer, who 
holds a Consular commission, to Embassy Apia tomorrow, September 30 
(in Samoa), to provide assistance with ACS work and reporting 
requirements.  The Government of Samoa's (GOS) Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs (MFA) has invited the Charge to attend a crisis assessment 
session at 1600 hrs (local). 
 
 
 
¶6. (SBU) The MFA is meeting with the High Commissions of Australia 
and New Zealand concerning emergency assistance, including search 
and rescue resources.  The GOS has not officially requested 
assistance from the United States, but informed the Embassy they 
may seek assistance depending on the outcome of the current 
meeting.  Embassy Wellington's Defense Attach???? Office has already 
been in contact with Pacific Command (PACOM) in the event a request 
is made. 
 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) Background: Wellington remained in touch with the Acting 
Charge d'Affaires in Apia who initially reported the earthquake 
produced unknown damage on the island and minor damage to the 
official residence.  The earthquake occurred prior to the Embassy 
(Lock-and-Leave) opening, so no personnel were in the building. 
The Charge was in communication with the Peace Corps Director, and 
both were in the process of initiating their respective phone tree 
notification plans - accounting for all personnel and directing 
people to seek higher ground.  The Charge's residence in Apia was 
designated the alternate Command Post as it is on high ground.  In 
 
WELLINGTON 00000320  002 OF 002 
 
 
a subsequent call the Charge confirmed accountability of all 
personnel.  Embassy Wellington continued to monitor the situation 
throughout the morning and relaying situation reports to the 
Department for Embassy Apia. 
 
 
 
¶8. (SBU) New Zealand Situation Report - Following the 8.3 magnitude 
earthquake off the coast of Samoa early Wednesday (New Zealand 
time) morning, Post convened an Emergency Action Committee (EAC), 
chaired by the Charge d'Affaires, to discuss the situation in Samoa 
(Embassy Apia, Samoa is a constituent post supported by Embassy 
Wellington), and the tsunami warning issued by the Government of 
New Zealand (GNZ).  The meeting included all available EAC members 
and the Consulate General in Auckland via conference call. 
 
 
 
¶9. (SBU) The EAC decided to issue a Warden Message to the American 
public in New Zealand, advising a potential tsunami may be 
radiating across the South Pacific following the earthquake and 
urged people in low-lying areas to immediately seek higher ground 
as a precautionary measure.  At the same time, the EAC agreed to 
initiate the passage of an internal message through the phone tree 
system advising both official and local staff as well as official 
family members of the situation and directing those in low lying 
areas to move to two designated sites on higher ground as a 
precaution.  This message was passed to the U.S. Antarctic Program 
in Christchurch, NZ who also directed staff to higher ground.  The 
Consulate General in Auckland, NZ moved operations to the Consulate 
General's residence, situated on higher ground, as a precaution as 
the commercial office building housing the Consulate is located 
near the harbor and the Consulate's alternate power source 
(generator) was located in the below-ground basement. 
 
 
 
¶10. (SBU) The resulting tsunami that hit New Zealand was measured 
at 40cm.  Once the tsunami threat diminished, the New Zealand 
Ministry of Civil Defense gave the "All-Clear" for the country at 
approximately 1230 hrs (local).  Following this announcement, the 
Charge d'Affaires issued an order to resume normal operations 
throughout New Zealand. 
 
 
 
¶11. (SBU) Embassy Wellington and Consulate Auckland are conducting 
after-action all-hands meetings with Mission personnel to discuss 
each post's reaction to events, solicit feedback on ways to 
improve, and express the importance of emergency preparedness. 
CLARKE