05JERUSALEM2739
WB/G SITREP: JUNE 30, 2005 (1800 HOURS LOCAL) --
Thu Jun 30 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Jerusalem
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 JERUSALEM 002739 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
NEA FOR FO; NEA/SA/EX FOR AUSTIN-FERGUSON; DEPT FOR 
DS/IP/ITA; DEPT FOR DS/IP/NEA; NSC FOR ABRAMS/DANIN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PTER PBTS PHUM KWBG KPAL IS ASEC
SUBJECT: WB/G SITREP: JUNE 30, 2005 (1800 HOURS LOCAL) -- 
CLASHES CONTINUE NEAR AL-MOWASSI IN GAZA; IDF FORCES MOVE 
INTO NABLUS AFTER THREE SOLDIERS GO MISSING 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) SUMMARY: UNRWA and Israeli media reported that five 
Palestinians were injured, one of them seriously, as 
stone-throwing clashes between Palestinians, Israeli 
settlers, and Israeli security forces continued for a fourth 
day in al-Mowassi.  A large IDF force entered Nablus after 
three IDF soldiers were reported missing. The PA Ministry of 
Interior denied Israeli media reports that Colonel Nabil 
Tamous of the Preventive Security force in Gaza would head 
the special security force to deal with Gaza disengagement. 
END SUMMARY. 
 
--------- 
West Bank 
--------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Deaths: Nil. 
 
-- Injury:  In Aida refugee camp near Bethlehem, Palestinian 
media sources reported that three youths were lightly injured 
on June 29 in clashes with the IDF. 
 
-- Arrests: In the West Bank, Palestinian sources reported 
that six Palestinian Islamic Jihad members were arrested in 
Hebron by the IDF on June 29. 
 
-- Arrests: Palestinian media reported that unspecified 
Israeli military sources confirmed that a Palestinian 
policeman, Wisam Radi (age 30), was arrested on May 22 for 
participating in the October 2000 lynching of two Israeli 
soldiers. 
 
-- Security Incidents: Israeli media reported that a large 
IDF force had entered Nablus after an IDF jeep was found 
empty in Nablus. Media reports stated that unspecified 
Israeli and Palestinian security sources believed three 
soldiers were missing. 
 
-- Security Incidents: In Jenin, Palestinian police continue 
to search for Saed al-Amin. Al-Amin is believed to be 
responsible for the killing of a Palestinian policeman last 
week in Jenin and the torching of a car belonging to Jamal 
al-Shati, a PLC member. 
 
¶3. (SBU) POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS: 
 
-- On June 30, the PA Ministry of Interior released a 
statement denying Israeli media reports that Colonel Nabil 
Tamous of the Preventive Security force in Gaza would head a 
special security force to deal with Gaza disengagement. The 
statement said that the special security force will operate 
under the direct command of the Ministry of Interior and 
National Security Nasir Yusif. 
 
---- 
Gaza 
---- 
 
¶4. (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death: Nil. 
 
-- Injury: UNRWA reported that one Palestinian was injured 
June 28 when IDF patrol boats opened fire on Palestinian 
fishing boats operating offshore near Gaza City. 
 
-- Injuries/Riots/Arrests: UNRWA and Israeli media reported 
that five Palestinians were injured, one of them seriously, 
June 29 as stone-throwing clashes between Palestinians and 
Israeli settlers, and Israeli settlers and IDF troops and 
Israeli Border Police continued for a fourth day in 
al-Mowassi.  According to reports, the situation deteriorated 
rapidly after graffiti saying, "Muhammad is a Pig" was 
discovered on the wall of the Palestinian home the settlers 
occupied.  Israeli media reported that journalists in the 
scene dragged the critically injured Palestinian youth to 
safety.  The IDF subsequently evacuated the settlers from the 
house they have been occupying; 35 settlers were arrested, 
according to Israeli media, and IDF declared the area a 
closed military zone.  Following this confrontation, 
Palestinian militants fired a barrage of rockets and mortars 
on the area overnight (see "Mortars/Rockets/Shootings"). 
Hamas and DFLP claimed responsibility for the attack.  Two 
Palestinians were shot and wounded by IDF responsive gunfire, 
according to UNRWA. 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets/Shootings: The IDF reported that 
Palestinian militants fired a total of 15 mortar shells in 
nine separate attacks on IDF and Israeli settler targets in 
the southern Gaza Strip June 29-30.  UNRWA reported that a 
total of 26 mortars and homemade rockets were fired in the 
same period.  Militants also launched four shooting attacks 
in the same period.  One Thai agricultural worker was 
critically injured when a mortar landed near Gadid settlement 
(see "Injury/Riots"). 
 
-- Mortars/Rockets: IAF helicopters fired a missile at what 
Palestinians claim was a metal working shop in Bayt Hanoun 
and that the IDF claims was a weapons cache.  No injuries 
were reported. 
¶5. (SBU) BORDER CROSSINGS: 
-- Route Four (Salahadeen Road), the main north-south traffic 
artery, was open June 30, with a major detour at Netzarim 
Junction. 
 
-- Erez Crossing was open June 28, and 4,365 laborers and 422 
merchants crossed into Israel. 
 
-- The Erez Industrial Zone was open June 28, and 569 
laborers entered. 
 
-- Sufa Crossing was closed for Palestinian laborers June 30, 
but was open for the import of aggregates used in 
construction. 
 
-- Karni Terminal was open June 30. 
 
-- Rafah was open June 30 for both arrivals and departures. 
Palestinians reported that only 100 or so Palestinians per 
day are allowed to move each way and that there is a backlog 
of some 1,000-2,000 people waiting to cross 
 
-- Tel al-Sultan checkpoint was closed June 30.  Toufah 
checkpoint was open for residents of al-Mowassi, except males 
aged 16-30. 
 
------ 
Israel 
------ 
 
¶6. (SBU) ATTACKS: 
 
-- Death/Injuries: The IDF and Israeli media reported that 
Hizballah rocket fire killed one IDF soldier and wounded 
three others in Har Dov June 29.  The IDF responded by 
attacking five Hizballah targets in Lebanon. 
 
-- Clashes/Injuries: Israeli media reported that several 
Israeli disengagement opponents were injured during an 
attempt to block traffic on major thoroughfares and at major 
junctions throughout Israel June 29.  According to press 
reports, drivers kicked and beat at least two teenagers lying 
across the Ayalon freeway during the road-blocking action. 
Elsewhere, rightwing activists scattered nails and spilled 
oil on roads.  Three policemen were lightly injured near 
Safed, in northern Israel.  It took police approximately 90 
minutes to clear the roads completely. 
PEARCE