08JERUSALEM371
SETTLER LEADERS AND CONSUL GENERAL AGREE TO
Thu Feb 28 00:00:00 +0100 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Consulate Jerusalem
VZCZCXRO9999
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHJM #0371/01 0591626
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 281626Z FEB 08
FM AMCONSUL JERUSALEM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 0735
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC PRIORITY"C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 JERUSALEM 000371 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
NEA FOR FRONT OFFICE. NSC FOR ABRAMS/SINGH/PASCUAL 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 02/26/2018 
TAGS: KWBG PBTS PREL PHUM IS
SUBJECT: SETTLER LEADERS AND CONSUL GENERAL AGREE TO 
DISAGREE 
 
Classified By: Consul General Jake Walles, per reasons 1.4 (b) and (d) 
 
¶1.  (C)  SUMMARY: Settler leaders Dani Dayan (Yesha Council 
Chairman), Pinchas Wallerstein (Yesha Director General), 
Shaul Goldstein (Gush Etzion Regional Council Chairman), and 
Ron Nachman (Ariel Mayor) shared their views with the Consul 
General February 25, agreeing from the outset to disagree. 
The settler leaders said they think the U.S. Ambassador in 
Tel Aviv is their appropriate interlocutor, since they are 
Israeli citizens, but welcomed the engagement with a senior 
USG official and urged the Consul General and the Secretary 
to visit their settlements. END SUMMARY. 
 
""Stereotyped and Demonized"" 
--------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (C)  In a February 25 meeting at the Consulate General, 
Dani Dayan (Yesha Council Chairman), Pinchas Wallerstein 
(Yesha Director General), Shaul Goldstein (Gush Etzion 
Regional Council Chair), and Ron Nachman (Ariel Mayor) 
thanked the Consul General for the unusual meeting, saying 
""everybody talks about us, but not to us.""  Dayan said ""We 
are one of the most stereotyped and demonized populations in 
the world, but first and foremost, we are 300,000 human 
beings.""  Goldstein noted that he had never been to the 
ConGen before, but has frequently attended protests in the 
park across the street.  They added that, as Israeli 
citizens, they believe their appropriate interlocutor is the 
U.S. Ambassador in Tel Aviv, but all acknowledged the 
long-standing division of labor between Embassy Tel Aviv and 
ConGen Jerusalem. 
 
No Agreed Upon Solution 
----------------------- 
 
¶3.  (C)  The settler leaders rejected the USG ""fixation"" with 
""establishing a terrorist state"" and said 
""creating a Palestinian state is erroneous and suicidal"" and 
""will only lead to violence.""  Yesha Council Chairman Dayan 
said removing settlers from ""Judea and Samaria"" will usher in 
Hamas ""within weeks, months, or years."" The GOI, he argued, 
should retain security control from the Mediterranean to the 
Jordan river. ""From my bedroom I can see the Azrieli Towers 
in Tel Aviv - it's either me in that bedroom or Hamas and PIJ 
terrorists,"" he said.  He dismissed any question about the 
morality of his position, saying that he refused to visit 
South Africa during the apartheid era and that the ""moral 
balance between Jews and Palestinians is in (the Jews') favor 
by far.""  He said repeated Jewish efforts to reach compromise 
before and after the creation of Israel have been met with 
violence, and if Palestinians have no political rights, ""only 
they are to blame."" 
 
¶4.  (C) Ariel Mayor Nachman said his preferred vision for the 
Palestinians is Egyptian control of Gaza and Jordanian 
control of parts of the West Bank where there are no 
settlers.  If this arrangement requires moving any 
settlements, reciprocity would require moving Palestinian 
villages he said, although he admitted the Arab world opposes 
this solution. 
 
The John Wayne of the Settlers 
------------------------------ 
 
¶5.  (C)  Nachman urged the Consul General to visit Ariel, 
shouting ""I want to host you and show that we don't have 
horns.""  He compared West Bank settlers to those who settled 
the western U.S. and applauded ""America's real legacy,"" which 
he said is ""John Wayne"".  Nachman said he hates the 
separation barrier (which juts 22 km into the West Bank, 
encompassing his settlement), but he believes it protects him 
from Palestinians in neighboring Salfit.  Nachman said he has 
reached out to the Salfit and Nablus mayors to ""cooperate"" on 
water, solid waste, and sewage service. ""I control the valve 
for Salfit's water and electricity supply and could turn them 
off at any time,"" he said, adding that he has not done so. 
 
""Why are we an Obstacle to Peace?"" 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶6. (C)  Gush Etzion Regional Council Chairman Shaul Goldstein 
said ""even if we leave Judea and Samaria tomorrow, what 
person on earth could say there will be peace?  Why are we an 
obstacle to peace?""  He rejected that Palestinians have any 
economic potential, posing bluntly ""What have Palestinians 
contributed to society in the last 100 years?"" He said ""Give 
them a state and they'll do nothing with it.""  Goldstein said 
he does not see long-term solution, but he said local 
contacts will be helpful in the short-term and will produce 
 
JERUSALEM 00000371  002 OF 002 
 
 
""the peace of the simple people.""  He asked the USG to help 
""convince"" neighboring Palestinians to meet with settlers, 
noting that ""We try but Ramallah says no.""  Nachman agreed 
that settlers are not the obstacle to peace, insisting ""We 
want peace more than Meretz and the professional peaceniks."" 
 
¶7.  (C)  Pinchas Wallerstein countered USG pressure on the 
GOI to evacuate the outposts, saying ""be honest and consider 
those that will be left behind"" and complaining that three 
years after Gaza ""disengagement,"" evacuees still do not have 
permanent homes.  He said the GOI uses ""American pressure"" on 
outposts as an excuse with settlers and he wants the Consul 
General's ""staff at the table"" when the settlers next meet 
with the GOI. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8.  (C) The U.S. Consul General in Jerusalem had not met with 
settler leaders for some time, and the settlers - despite 
their grumbling about not receiving July 4 invitations - 
welcomed the opportunity to express their views.  Notably, 
they did not brief the press on the meeting, suggesting that 
they did not see want to burn a new interlocutor, but rather 
want a direct USG channel for their views.  The meeting also 
provided us new insight on  some of the intra-settler 
dynamics, with the somewhat overbearing mayor of Ariel 
insisting on center stage, and causing almost physical 
discomfiture to the calm, more strategic-minded heads of the 
Yesha and Gush Etzion Councils.  Nachman's vision of 
cooperation with his neighbors while he controls Salfit's 
water will obviously not resonate with Palestinians. 
Wallerstein is the long-standing elder, but he spoke little 
and his body language seemed to indicate that he has seen it 
all before. 
 
WALLES 
"