09JERUSALEM186
JERUSALEM MEDIA REACTION (01/26):  WEST BANK:  "CLEAN,
Mon Jan 26 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Consulate Jerusalem
VZCZCXRO4902
OO RUEHROV
DE RUEHJM #0186/01 0261049
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 261049Z JAN 09
FM AMCONSUL JERUSALEM
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3938
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC
RHEHNSC/WHITE HOUSE NSC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC
RUEKJCS/DIA WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RUEADWD/DA WASHINGTON DC//DAS-ZD/DACS-ZK//
RUEAHQA/CSAF WASHINGTON DC//POLAD//
RHMFIUU/CMC WASHINGTON DC
RUENAAA/CNO WASHINGTON DC//POLAD//
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVE
RUEHTU/AMEMBASSY TUNIS 7506
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 4491
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 4339
RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 5833
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 4255
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 2827UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 JERUSALEM 000186 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS BBG 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR ABRAMS 
CMC WASHINGTON DC FOR POLAD 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON FOR HKANONA AND POL - TSOU 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL KMDR KPAL KWBG KPAO IS
SUBJECT: JERUSALEM MEDIA REACTION (01/26):  WEST BANK:  "CLEAN, 
SILENT OCCUPATION MODEL" 
 
------------- 
Main Stories: 
------------- 
Al Quds and Al Ayyam lead with details of truce proposals between 
Hamas and Israel.  Israel has offered an 18-month truce and Hamas 
has countered with a proposal for one year, according to reporting 
on Hamas discussions in Cairo.  Al Quds quotes Hamas spokesman Ayman 
Taha stating in Cairo on January 25, that Hamas rejects linking the 
release of captured Israeli soldier Shalit to the opening of Gaza 
crossings.  Taha also rejected the manipulation of Gaza 
reconstruction issues in efforts to politically blackmail Hamas. 
The paper adds that Egyptian Intelligence Chief Sulayman is 
scheduled to meet with a PLO delegation on January 26 to discuss a 
Gaza truce, opening crossings and lifting the Gaza "siege." 
Meanwhile, Al Ayyam's front page cites DPA in quoting Turkish 
Premier Erdogan stating that Turkey is willing to send civilian 
observers, but not military troops, to stabilize the Gaza ceasefire. 
 
 
In coverage of U.S activities, Al Quds and Al Ayyam cite the Sunday 
Times in front page reporting about U.S. Naval vessels tracking 
Iranian ships suspected of carrying arms to Hamas in Gaza.  The 
papers quote U.S. officials revealing that the U.S. "Joint Mission 
Squad 151" has been deployed to Gulf of Aden to carry out the 
mission. 
 
Regarding special envoy Mitchell, Al Hayat Al Jadida's front page 
cites AFP when quoting experts from the Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace, noting that President Obama's appointment of 
Mitchell is an indication of Obama's, "serious wish for progress" in 
the Middle East.  Middle East expert Marina Ottaway reportedly 
highlighted that Obama resisted pressure by the "Jewish lobby" to 
appoint Dennis Ross or Dan Kurtz, because he understood that those 
candidates would be, "met with uneasiness in the Arab world." 
Meanwhile, the front pages of Al Quds and Al Ayyam highlight an 
Israeli radio report noting that Mitchell is likely to endorse the 
Road Map peace plan. 
 
In further U.S. policy news, Al Hayat Al Jadida's front page 
highlights comments by former U.S. senior official and current 
International Crisis Group Middle East program director Robert 
Malley stating in an undated interview, that boycotting Hamas has 
been a mistake and the U.S. should reconsider its policy towards the 
group.  Meanwhile, on an inside page, Al Quds runs an AFP report 
that next month will witness intensive U.S. diplomatic efforts in 
Damascus, starting with a U.S. congressional visit to Damascus. 
Another inside page in the same paper, highlights an AFP story about 
President Obama reversing former President Bush's decrees one by 
one, including decisions on Guantanamo "prison", economic policy and 
abortion. 
 
Calls for Palestinian unity made by EU ministers on January 26, lead 
news in Al Hayat Al Jadida and feature on all front pages.  The 
ministers clarified that unity is needed to allow for the reopening 
of Gaza crossings and provision of European humanitarian assistance 
to Gaza, according to reporting. 
 
Arms smuggling to Hamas is front page news in Al Ayyam and Al Quds. 
Citing AFP, Al Ayyam quotes Hamas member in Lebanon Osama Hamdan 
stating on January 26 that Hamas will continue to bring arms into 
the Gaza Strip and the West Bank.  Al Quds and Al Ayyam cite DPA in 
front page reporting on related comments by Israeli Foreign Minister 
Livni stating on January 26 that Israel will "attack" Gaza once 
again if necessary to prevent arms smuggling.  On a different issue, 
 
JERUSALEM 00000186  002 OF 003 
 
 
Livni is quoted in the two papers warning of, "a conflict and break" 
in Israeli-U.S. relations should opposition leader Netanyahu become 
Israel's Prime Minister. 
 
Al Quds' front page cites the Avitab website, a source close to 
Hashemi Rafsanjani, revealing that the Israeli military killed 
military advisors from Iran's Revolutionary Guard during the recent 
military operation in Gaza.  The Iranian advisors were training 
Hamas militants on the use of Grad missiles to be fired at Israel, 
according to reporting. 
In coverage of Gaza developments on the ground, Al Quds and Al Hayat 
Al Jadida's front pages report on the death of an infant in Gaza who 
succumbed to respiratory complications following the "annihilating, 
phosphorus bomb smoke" that filled her house when Israel bombed it 
during the recent conflict.  The papers also cite Reuters in 
reporting that Egypt evacuated the Rafah border crossing on January 
25 after receiving reports of planned Israeli strikes on the 
Palestinian side of the crossing.  The papers report that Gaza 
"government" buildings and schools were also evacuated.  Hamas 
spokesman Ihab Ghussayn later denied the reports of impending 
Israeli attacks and called them, "rumors from suspicious parties," 
that his government will track down, according to coverage.  In 
separate reporting, Al Quds' front page runs January 25 statements 
by Hamas spokesman Fawzi Barhum confirming that Hamas leader Mahmud 
Zahhar is in good health, thereby denying reports that Zahhar was 
injured in the "war on Gaza." 
Al Ayyam front pages statements by Palestinian Authority (PA) 
officials regarding Gaza.  The paper quotes PA Premier Fayyad from 
January 25 meetings with the EU Development and Humanitarian 
Commissioner Luis Michel and Middle East Quartet Envoy Tony Blair, 
demanding guarantees that there be no repeat of the "aggression" on 
Gaza and announcing a European pledge of 52 million Euros in 
assistance to the Palestinian people.  In separate reporting, the 
paper cites Reuters when quoting PA Foreign Minister Al Malki 
stating in Brussels on January 25 that Israel cannot prevent the 
trial of its military personnel for war crimes.  -------------- 
WEEKEND NEWS: 
-------------- 
 
Sunday, January 25 
News of Special Envoy for Middle East Peace Mitchell's arrival in 
the region led in Al Ayyam and Al Hayat Al Jadida.  The papers 
reported that a senior Palestinian official told AFP that President 
Abbas will receive former Senator George Mitchell to, "discuss means 
for reviving the Israeli-Palestinian peace process."  According to 
Western diplomats, "it is expected that Mitchell will arrive in the 
region within the next few days in what appears to be a quick 
engagement of American efforts towards peace in the Middle East, 
reporting continued. 
 
"As a result of Israeli restrictions and internal Palestinian 
division, reconstruction efforts in the Gaza Strip face several 
obstacles," according to front page headlines in all dailies.  The 
papers detailed the obstacles in the way of reconstruction 
including, "Israel's rejection of international calls to fully 
reopen the crossings into that Gaza Strip, in reaction to Hamas' 
insistence that it oversee all international assistance.  The 
reporting also highlights Israel's refusal to allow the Palestinian 
Authority to transfer cash to Gaza banks. 
 
"Governmental and UNRWA schools resume their work in the Gaza Strip 
after one month of closure," according to all front pages. 
Reporting notes that many schools suffered significant structural 
damage and make-shift tents had been set up in some areas. 
 
JERUSALEM 00000186  003 OF 003 
 
 
 
Saturday, January 24 
In U.S. diplomacy news, Al Hayat Al Jadida and Al Ayyam announced on 
front pages that, "Clinton calls President Abbas and a large number 
of foreign leaders" while a second front page story in Al Hayat Al 
Jadida headlined that, 
"Palestinian National Authority (PA) welcomes the appointment of 
Mitchell as envoy for the peace process."  The article quoted chief 
PA negotiator Ahmad Quray, stating that, "the appointment by 
President Obama of Mitchell on the first day after his inauguration 
along with the phone calls he made to President Abbas and regional 
leaders, in addition to the decision to send Mitchell to the region 
as soon as possible, reflect a positive atmosphere and indicate a 
real interest on the part of Obama's administration in [solving]the 
Palestinian question." 
 
Lead headlines in Al Quds and Al Ayyam stated that, "100,000 
Palestinians displaced and the number of victims is alarming."  The 
articles outlined destruction of Gaza infrastructure and a U.N 
estimate that "hundreds of millions of dollars" will be needed to 
meet reconstruction needs.  The U.N. also called for the "full" 
reopening of all the crossings into the Gaza Strip, "echoing the 
call of the American President Barack Obama..."  Al Hayat Al 
Jadida's lead headline added, "A French warship to be stationed off 
the coast of Gaza to fight arms trafficking- Israel refuses 
international calls for reopening the crossings and agrees to 
security arrangements with Egypt." 
 
-------------- 
BLOCK QUOTES: 
-------------- 
 
1)  Al Quds editorial runs under the title, "Perpetuating division 
is not acceptable" (01/26):  "If the statements, leaked by the media 
yesterday [and attributed] to a Hamas official in Cairo are true; 
that the movement prefers to finalize the issue of calm with Israel, 
lift the siege and open the crossings before returning to the 
internal dialogue issue... then Palestinian citizens at home and in 
the diaspora fail to comprehend [why Palestinian parties are] 
opening direct or indirect communication channels with Israel, 
...while internal Palestinian dialogue channels remain closed and 
the state of division between the two parts of the homeland becomes 
more permanent..." 
2) Khaled Hrub opines in Al Ayyam under the title, "Occupation not 
the weapons of the resistance perpetuate conflict" (01/26): 
"International and regional blanket excitement, from Washington to 
Brussels through Tel Aviv and some Arab capitals, inspired by the 
goal to halt arms smuggling into Gaza, is a flagrant reversal of 
priorities and a [present] to the occupation force... The resistance 
has the right to bear arms as long as occupation exists.  Any 
attempt to stop any form of resistance and opposition to the Israeli 
occupation, and the strengthening of the "clean, silent occupation" 
model, as is the case in the West Bank, is miserable, from a 
humanitarian point of view, and is politically short-sighted." 
WALLES