06SANJOSE486
BIOTECHNOLOGY EXPERT WILLIAM PARROTT VISIT
Fri Mar 03 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy San Jose
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SAN JOSE 000486 
 
SIPDIS 
 
USDA FOR FAS BIOTECH UNIT BSIMMONS 
USDA FOR FAS/FAA JEANNE BAILEY 
USDA FOR FAS/ICD LITA ECHEVERRI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EAGR ECON TBIO ETRD KPAO CS BEXP SENV ETRD
SUBJECT:  BIOTECHNOLOGY EXPERT WILLIAM PARROTT VISIT 
 
 
¶1.   Summary.  On November 7th and 8th, 2005 Dr. William 
Parrott, University of Georgia Professor and biotechnology 
expert, visited Costa Rica to meet with GOCR officials from 
the Ministries of Health and Economy as well as with 
Legislative Assembly staff.  Dr. Parrott was also 
interviewed by the Director of "Radio Monumental," a local 
radio station.  According to a new General Health Law, 
currently with the Legislative Assembly, biotechnology 
products would have to be labeled.  The Ministry of Health 
has also drafted a "Law on Living Modified Organisms and 
their by-products," which would regulate different aspects 
of biotechnology products, including importation and 
labeling of processed products.  Dr. Parrott's visit was a 
good opportunity to present the U.S. position on these 
topics and to address different issues of interest to Costa 
Rican regulators.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  In the morning of November 8th, Dr. Parrott visited the 
Ministry of Health where he met four officials, including 
staff from the Food and Drugs Registration and Controls 
Department, the Research Department and the Legal Department 
of the Ministry.   The discussion during this meeting 
revolved around Costa Rica's draft of the "Law on Living 
Modified Organisms and their by-products." Under the 
proposed law, Costa Rica plans to regulate products derived 
from modern biotechnology, including processed food 
products.  Dr. Parrott responded to several questions and 
Ministry of Health officials showed a clear interest in 
obtaining additional scientific information and training in 
different aspects of biotechnology.  They indicated that 
Ministry personnel at the field level lack the necessary 
knowledge about biotechnology to respond to attacks from 
anti-biotech groups. 
 
¶3.  Later in the morning, Dr. Parrott met with Legislative 
Assembly staff (about 12 people), including advisors and 
personnel from the Technical Services Department.  Dr. 
Parrott made a formal presentation during this meeting, 
followed by several questions and comments from 
participants.  During this meeting, participants expressed 
interest in obtaining information about the cost of 
implementing a traceability program for biotech products, 
recognizing that it would be extremely expensive for a 
developing country. 
 
¶4.  During the afternoon Dr. Parrott visited the Ministry of 
Economy (MEIC) where he met with officials from the Consumer 
Protection Commission and from the Technical Regulations 
Department.   Dr. Parrott made a formal presentation 
emphasizing the problems involved in choosing a threshold 
level for labeling of biotechnology products. 
 
¶5.  On the afternoon of November 8th, Dr. Parrott was 
interviewed by the Director of Radio Monumental, Amelia 
Rueda.  The interview was transmitted during a morning 
program a day or two after the interview.  The interview 
consisted of general questions regarding biotechnology and 
gave Dr. Parrott an opportunity to provide a scientific 
point of view regarding agricultural biotechnology. 
 
-------- 
COMMENT 
-------- 
 
¶6.  Government officials and legislative staff are clearly 
thirsty for information regarding agricultural 
biotechnology.  With this visit we targeted officials who 
had an interest in public health.  Most recognized the 
needless economic disruptions that would result from 
implementation of the radical proposals from the anti-GMO 
camp, but they felt ill-equipped to make the counter 
arguments.  Dr. Parrott's explanations refuting the claims 
of adverse health effects from consuming transgenics were 
particularly effective.  To date, the Costa Rican Government 
has resisted implementing measures that would impede 
commercialization of transgenics and their products unduly. 
However, initiatives to fill the gap in the regulatory 
framework for biotechnology, which currently does not 
address food safety, raise the specter of new and 
potentially cumbersome regulations in the future.  Post will 
continue monitoring the situation and sharing information 
with our government contacts, as well as seeking out 
additional opportunities to educate on agricultural 
biotechnology through State and USDA/FAS programs. 
 
LANGDALE