06SANJOSE1009
FERNANDO BERROCAL, MINISTER OF PUBLIC SECURITY
Thu May 11 00:00:00 +0200 2006
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy San Jose
VZCZCXYZ0008
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSJ #1009/01 1312246
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 112246Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 4972
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RHMFISS/HQ USSOUTHCOM MIAMI FLC O N F I D E N T I A L SAN JOSE 001009 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/08/2016 
TAGS: PGOV PREL PINR CS
SUBJECT: FERNANDO BERROCAL, MINISTER OF PUBLIC SECURITY 
 
 
Classified By: Amb. Mark Langdale for reasons 1.4 (b&d) 
 
¶1. (C) On May 8, 2006, Fernando Berrocal Soto was sworn in as 
Minister of Public Security and Government, along with the 
rest of Oscar Arias's cabinet.  Berrocal has little 
background in security issues but extensive political and 
international experience, including two stints as Costa 
Rica's Permanent Representative to the United Nations and 
Ambassador to the former Soviet Union.  A journalist and 
attorney specializing in international law, Berrocal is a 
strong supporter of the International Criminal Court (ICC) 
and shares President Arias's disdain for military spending 
and unilateral foreign policies.  Berrocal was a key adviser 
to Arias during the campaign and was a member of Arias's 
legal team monitoring the manual recount of the ballots.  At 
age 61, Berrocal is the third oldest member of the new Arias 
cabinet (average age is 51). 
 
¶2. (U) Berrocal was born February 19, 1945 in San Jose Costa 
Rica.  He studied economics and social sciences at the 
University of Rome and earned a law degree from the 
University of Costa Rica (UCR) in 1969.  Berrocal began his 
career as a journalist at La Prensa Libre, one of Costa 
Rica's leading daily newspapers.  From 1973-1975, he was 
alternate commissioner, with the rank of ambassador, to the 
Central American Common Market.  At age 30, Berrocal was 
assigned as Costa Rican Ambassador to the Soviet Union for 
three years.  In 1978, Berrocal worked for the Latin American 
Economic System (SELA) at its headquarters in Caracas, and 
served as Deputy Permanent Secretary during 1980-1982. 
Berrocal then served as Minister of Presidency (similar to 
Chief of Staff) under President Monge until beginning his 
first stint as Costa Rica's UN PermRep in 1984.  Oscar Arias 
replaced Berrocal in 1986 at the beginning of his first 
presidential term.  Berrocal returned to Costa Rica, joined a 
private law practice and remained involved in the affairs of 
the National Liberation Party (PLN--to which Arias also 
belongs) until he was again named Costa Rican PermRep to the 
UN by President Figueres in 1994.  Berrocal served as Permrep 
throughout the Figueres Administration (1994-1998). 
 
¶3. (C) At the UN, Berrocal presided over the G-77 in 1996 and 
Costa Rica's presidency of the Security Council in 1997. 
From these platforms, Berrocal sought to restrict enforcement 
actions against Iraq to the previously approved sanctions. 
He particularly resisted expanding U.S. enforcement of No-Fly 
Zones in Iraq.  Berrocal also frequently advocated for the 
Arias Foundation's Code of Ethics for Arms Sales during his 
time at the UN.  Despite opposite positions on Iraq, Berrocal 
told us he remains a close personal friend of then U.S. 
Ambassador to the UN, Bill Richardson.  Berrocal hopes his 
relationship with Richardson, now Governor of New Mexico, 
will produce resources for Costa Rica, perhaps through 
sister-city arrangements. 
 
¶4. (U) Having returned again to Costa Rica and private law 
practice, Berrocal remains an outspoken supporter of the ICC 
and critic of U.S. efforts to obtain bilateral agreements 
based on Article 98 of the Treaty of Rome which he believes 
undermine the court.  Berrocal moderated academic conferences 
on the ICC in 2002 and 2003.  On both occasions, his remarks 
characterized the ICC as similar in importance to the 1648 
Treaty of Westphalia and the 1945 establishment of the United 
Nations.  Berrocal's 2002 speech noted with approval that 
even the world's sole superpower had been "forced" to submit 
to international law and the decisions of Security Council. 
 
¶5. (U) Berrocal has published numerous books and articles, 
primarily addressing economic and social issues from a 
social-democratic perspective.  He also wrote a lengthy op-ed 
condemning Fidel Castro's April 2003 crackdown on dissent 
which netted a personal friend, Raul Rivero, from Berrocal's 
days as Ambassador in Moscow.  In his legal practice, 
Berrocal obtained asylum in Costa Rica for Venezuelan 
coup-plotter Carlos Ortega in 2003 and successfully delayed 
efforts by the Costa Rican government to strip Ortega of his 
status in 2004 after Ortega called for the overthrow of 
Chavez from Miami and returned clandestinely to 
Venezuela--both in violation of the terms of his grant of 
asylum.  Until Ortega was arrested in Venezuela, Berrocal 
insisted that Ortega was in Costa Rica and claimed to have 
regular meetings with him. 
 
¶6. (C) For the past two years, Berrocal has worked closely 
with Rodrigo Arias, brother and closest adviser to President 
Oscar Arias on developing the Arias platform and an agenda 
for governing.  For several months during the campaign, 
Berrocal was on the short list of potential candidates for 
Vice President.  Once Laura Chinchilla, an expert on security 
issues, was selected as First Vice President, Berrocal's 
diplomatic experience and background in international law 
would have made him a compelling choice to head the Foreign 
Ministry.  President Arias decided, however, to keep tight 
reins over the Foreign Ministry by appointing a young 
protege, Bruno Stagno. 
 
¶7. (C) In meetings with EmbOffs since his nomination, 
Berrocal has been open to suggestions and sincere in his 
desire to address problems within the Ministry.  Berrocal was 
particularly interested in our opinions of many top officials 
within the Ministry and left those we identified as effective 
in their positions.  Although many of his questions have been 
basic, Berrocal has shown himself a quick study and is laying 
out a logical vision for his tenure.  Berrocal admires Mayor 
Rudolf Giuliani and credits his "zero tolerance" policies for 
restoring security to New York City.  Berrocal has 
acknowledged publicly that he needs to address corruption 
problems within his Immigration Department and, in an unusual 
step, has requested a fresh audit of the weapons in the 
national armory before accepting responsibility for them.  An 
audit had just been completed by the outgoing Minister. 
Berrocal has also made a concerted effort to smooth relations 
with the Attorney General, who is part of the judicial branch 
of government. 
 
¶8. (U) Berrocal is married to Grethel Obando.  They have six 
children and six grandchildren.  Berrocal speaks English and 
Italian. 
LANGDALE