09SANJOSE921
COSTA RICA RESPONSE TO USTR REQUEST FOR INFO ON CBI-
Tue Oct 27 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy San Jose
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSJ #0921/01 3002048
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 272048Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1352
INFO RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDCUNCLAS SAN JOSE 000921 
 
STATE PASS TO OPIC 
STATE PASS TO USTR 
STATE PASS TO EXIMBANK FOR CREQUE 
STATE PASS TO FEDERAL RESERVE MIAMI BRANCH MANIERO 
TREASURY FOR OASIA/INC 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/EPSC:SGARRO, EEB/TTP/BT:RMANOGUE AND DGROUT, 
EEB/TPP/IPE:JURBAN 
 
PLEASE PASS TO USTR FOR DOLIVER, AMALITO AND KSHIGETOMI 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON ETRD KIPR EINV PREL PGOV CS
SUBJECT: COSTA RICA RESPONSE TO USTR REQUEST FOR INFO ON CBI- 
BENEFICIARY COUNTRIES 
 
REF:  SECSTATE 75599, SANJOSE 811, SAN JOSE 07 1963 
 
¶1.  The following is Post's response to reftel A.  The text replies 
to specific keyed reftel questions and updates Post's 2007 
submission (reftel C) to USTR's request regarding CBI beneficiary 
countries.  Questions can be directed to Economics Specialist, Kevin 
Ludeke at +506 2519-22261, Fax +506 2220-2470, or 
LudekeKJ@state.gov. 
 
¶2.  Costa Rica 
-- Population:  4,533,000 
-- Per Capita GDP:  $6,544 
-- Exports to U.S.:  $3,926 million 
-- Imports from U.S.:  $5,682 million 
-- U.S. Trade Balance:  +$1,755 million 
 
The Department of State's Economic Engagement Statistics are the 
source for the above date.  All data are 2008 annual figures. 
 
¶3.  Commitment to the World Trade Organization (WTO) and Completion 
of CAFTA-DR:  Costa Rica participates actively in the WTO and has 
taken its obligations under the Uruguay Round seriously.  In 2000, 
Costa Rica ceased granting financial investment subsidies and tax 
holidays to new exporters.  A law designed to bring the Free Trade 
Zone regime into compliance with WTO standards is currently under 
debate in the National Assembly.  Although the WTO deadline for 
compliance was extended through the year 2014, the export sector 
pressed for prompt resolution of a new regime.   Costa Rica is 
currently negotiating free trade agreements with China and Singapore 
and as a block with its Central American neighbors with the European 
Union.  These negotiations and the January 1, 2009 entry-into-force 
of CAFTA-DR are clear signs of Costa Rica's commitment to free trade 
principles. 
 
¶4.  Protection of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR):  Costa Rica 
has been on the Watch List since 2002 when it was moved from the 
Priority Watch List.  Costa Rica is a party to all major 
international intellectual property agreements with the exception of 
the Budapest Agreement.  In part due to a Priority Watchlist Country 
designation in 2001, the GOCR took steps at that time to combat 
piracy and passed several IPR protection laws including the 
requirement for the GOCR to not use pirated software. 
 
As a necessary condition for CAFTA-DR entry-into-force (EIF), Costa 
Rica passed a set of new IPR laws, significantly strengthening the 
IPR legal framework.  Other heartening signs include a significant 
budget increase and corresponding increase in staffing levels at the 
patent and trademark office during the Arias Administration 
(2006-2010), continued efforts by the Judicial School to prepare 
judges and prosecutors in IPR, and sporadic action by uniformed 
police in confiscating pirated DVD's and CD's. 
 
However, the Prosecutor's Office has shown very little political 
will to pursue IPR violators, in part due to scarce resources and 
other "higher priorities."  Criminal and civil remedies are 
available but the onus is on the victim of the crime, i.e., the 
victim not only has to investigate the violation through detective 
work but also, in most cases, needs to request seizure of the 
property, pay for all required analysis, and employ legal counsel to 
bring the case to trial. 
 
¶5.  Provision of Internationally Recognized Worker Rights:  Costa 
Rica extends all internationally recognized worker rights to its 
citizens, though union leaders continue to call for enhanced 
protections for private sector employees who want to unionize. 
Costa Rican law guarantees the right of association, the right to 
organize and bargain collectively, and prohibits forced labor. 
Costa Rican law sets a minimum age for employment at 15; however, 
teenagers between 15-18 years of age may work for a maximum of six 
hours daily and 36 hours weekly with special permission from the 
National Institute for Children (PANI).  The law prohibits night 
work and overtime for minors.  Activities considered to be unhealthy 
or hazardous typically require a minimum age of 18.  In addition, 
the law entitles working minors to attend educational establishments 
through school arrangements and timetables adapted to their 
interests and employment conditions and to participate in 
apprenticeship training programs.  The law provides for a minimum 
wage set by the National Wage Council, which is updated annually. 
The constitution sets workday hours, overtime remuneration, days of 
rest, and annual vacation rights.  Costa Rican law also enshrines 
 
acceptable occupational safety and health standards.  The Labor 
Ministry, in cooperation with PANI, generally enforces regulations 
related to children's employment effectively through inspections in 
the formal sector; the regulations are not enforced effectively in 
the informal labor sector as a result of inadequate resource 
allocations by the government.  According to the ILO, working minors 
ages 15 to 18 sometimes receive less than the minimum wage, which 
was corroborated by the chief of the Labor Ministry's Office for the 
Eradication of Child Labor. 
 
¶6.  Implementation of Commitments to Eliminate the Worse Forms of 
Child Labor:  In 2001, the Costa Rican Legislative Assembly ratified 
Resolution 182 of the ILO related to eliminating the worst forms of 
child labor, including the sexual exploitation of children. 
 
Child labor is a problem mainly in the informal agricultural, 
fishing, construction, and service sectors of the economy.  Children 
work in the production of bananas, coffee, and sugarcane.  Some 
indigenous children from Panama migrate seasonally to Costa Rica 
with their families and work in agriculture.  Child labor is used in 
domestic work and family-run enterprises.  Child prostitution and 
other types of child sexual exploitation remain serious problems. 
 
The government has a number of policies and programs that seek to 
address child labor.  Policies include the National Agenda for 
Children and Adolescents 2000-2010; the Second National Action Plan 
for the Prevention and Eradication of Child Labor and Special 
Protection of Adolescent Workers 2005-2010; and the Third National 
Plan to Eliminate Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children. 
 
The Conditional Cash Transfer program "Avancemos", which pays 
stipends to the families of children who stay in high school, has 
become one of the Arias administration's signature programs.  The 
program currently benefits over 130,000 high school students or 
roughly 100,000 families.   Stipends range from USD 26 per month for 
seventh graders up to USD 87 per month for twelfth graders.  The 
program stipulates only two requirements:  the family income is less 
than a prescribed threshold and the child attends high school. 
Direct funding for Avancemos in 2008 (before administrative costs) 
was USD 77 million, or one-fourth of one percent (.25 percent) of 
gross domestic product.  This high level of funding demonstrates the 
Costa Rican government's commitment to keep children out of the 
labor market and in the school system.  Other projects to address 
child labor are described in the Department of Labor's report 
entitled, "Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor", available at 
www.dol.gov/ilab/programs/ocft/PDF/2008OCFTre port.pdf. 
 
¶7.  Counter-Narcotics Cooperation:  While Costa Rica remains a 
significant transshipment point for the smuggling of cocaine from 
South America to the United States and Europe, Costa Rican law 
enforcement officials fully cooperate with U.S. counter-narcotics 
efforts.  Costa Rica continues to work closely with the United 
States in implementing the comprehensive Maritime Counter-drug 
Cooperation Agreement signed with the United States in 2000. 
Additionally, Costa Rica will receive over $10 million in 
counter-narcotics assistance from the U.S. via the multi-year Merida 
Initiative. 
 
¶8.  Implementation of the Inter-American Convention Against 
Corruption (IACAC):  Costa Rica ratified the IACAC.  Domestic law 
imposes a requirement that senior government officials file personal 
financial reports while in office.  The Controller General's Office 
plays an active role both in filing those reports and monitoring 
potentially corrupt activity.  The GOCR is currently prosecuting 
cases involving two ex-presidents who are charged with having been 
involved in two different corruption/kickback schemes.  One of the 
trials concluded on October 5 with a conviction and a five year 
sentence for former President Rafael Angel Calderon Fournier 
(1990-1994).  He accepted bribes to secure a contract for medical 
equipment between a Finnish firm and the Costa Rican government in 
¶2004.  The trial against former President Miguel Angel Rodriguez 
(1998-2002) will start soon.  . 
 
Costa Rica has a robust financial enforcement system presided by the 
National Council of Financial System Supervision (CONASSIF) and 
composed of three Superintendents that report to CONASSIF.  CONASSIF 
operates two boards:  a seven member board for banking and stock 
exchange oversight and an eight member board for pension fund 
oversight.  The Central Bank appoints the board members. 
Know-your-customer provisions are now implemented by all banks in 
 
the country such that no bank account or company owning a bank 
account can remain anonymous.  Additionally, the Costa Rican Drug 
Institute (a rough equivalent to the U.S. Office of National Drug 
Control Policy) is charged with anti-money laundering 
responsibilities and carries out measures that also help in the 
fight against corruption.  In 2008 Transparency International ranked 
Costa Rica 47 out of 180 countries in its Corruption Perception 
Index. 
 
¶9.  Transparency in Government Procurement:  While the Government of 
Costa Rica generally requires all procurement to be done through 
open bidding, problems and complaints occur.  Costa Rican government 
procurement practices are complex and cumbersome, resulting from the 
many layers of government supervision in place to prevent illegal 
practices.  Bid awards are frequently delayed by appeals by the 
losing parties or the Office of the Controller's efforts to regulate 
government purchases and procedures.  The aforementioned corruption 
scandals (paragraph 8) both involved state monopolies.  In the case 
concluded in October, the convicted former President was the key 
political lobbyist for a medical-supplies company that channeled 
kickbacks to public officials for a social security contract.  In 
the other case, ex-President Rodriguez, still in office at the time, 
allegedly received kickbacks from a company that had "won" a 
contract with the state-owned telecommunications company. 
 
----------------- 
Additional Issues 
----------------- 
 
¶10.  Expropriation:  The Government of Costa Rica has expropriated 
large tracts of rural land for national parks, biological reserves, 
indigenous reservations, and public works projects during the past 
30 years.  The Costa Rican Constitution stipulates that no land can 
be expropriated without prior payment and demonstrable proof of 
public interest, but disputes often arise over title to the property 
and the amount of compensation.  Expropriation processes follow 
clear legal processes (valuation, notification, appeal, etc.) but 
often last far longer than the subjects of the expropriation feel to 
be reasonable.  Current and past governments have made some efforts 
to resolve several pending expropriation cases involving U.S. 
citizens, but long-standing cases remain and several new cases have 
come to our attention. There are cases where arbitral awards by the 
ICSID or by local arbitration in favor of U.S. citizens have been 
honored.  Out of 183 countries surveyed in the World Bank's "Doing 
Business 2010" index, Costa Rica ranks 132 in "enforcing contracts" 
and 165 in "protecting investors", which accurately reflects the 
difficulties American investors experience in Costa Rica. 
 
¶11. Other Free Trade Agreements and Adverse Effects:  The GOCR has 
free trade agreements with the following countries/groups (year in 
which ratified):  Panama (originally in 1973, updated 2008), Mexico 
(1995), Canada (2001), Chile (2001), the Dominican Republic (2001), 
CARICOM which comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Belize, 
Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, Saint 
Lucia, St. Vincent's and the Grenadines, Suriname, and Trinidad and 
Tobago (2005).  None of these agreements appears to have had any 
adverse effects on U.S. commerce.  The Government of Costa Rica is 
currently negotiating free trade agreements with China, Singapore, 
and (together with its Central American neighbors) the European 
Union. 
 
¶12.  Government Broadcasting:  There are no government-owned 
broadcasting entities that broadcast copyrighted materials without 
the express consent of U.S. copyright-holders. 
 
¶13. Extradition:  Costa Rica does have an extradition treaty with 
the U.S. and GOCR personnel work with Post personnel in arranging 
extraditions. 
 
¶14.  Economic Review:  Costa Rica has experienced significant 
economic growth in recent years as it continues to pursue an 
economic strategy based on trade liberalization and investment 
promotion.  While this growth trend has reversed with the current 
global economic crisis, Costa Rica's economy nevertheless appears to 
be more resistant to the downturn than those of some of its major 
trade partners.  Annual Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), which is 
both a key indicator of investor confidence and an important driver 
of export and tourism growth in the country, has grown continuously 
since 2003 and reached USD 2.016 billion in 2008.  The tourism and 
export sectors have been particularly notable recipients of FDI in 
 
recent years.  Annual real GDP growth in recent years rose from 4.3 
percent in 2004 to a high of 8.8 percent in 2006, down slightly in 
2007 (7.8 percent) then down significantly to 2.6 percent in 2008. 
The Central Bank estimates annual GDP growth for 2009 to be -1.3 
percent -- and may dip lower than -2 percent -- while the investment 
promotion agency CINDE estimates that FDI in 2009 may be down 30 
percent. 
 
The CAFTA-DR entry-into-force (EIF) January 1, 2009 is one of the 
positive countercyclical factors working to dampen the effects of 
the current global recession in Costa Rica.  The telecommunications 
and insurance sectors are both opening up to competition as a 
consequence of commitments made by Costa Rica in the CAFTA-DR 
framework and both market openings will likely provoke significant 
investment and competitive activity.  The Arias Administration is 
also budgeting counter cyclical spending in 2009 and 2010 after 
having posted a government budget surplus in 2007 and presided over 
a major reduction in outstanding government debt as a percentage of 
GDP. 
 
¶15. Equitable and Reasonable Access for U.S. Goods:  Through 
implementation of CAFTA-DR, Costa Rica has assured the U.S. of its 
commitment to provide equitable and reasonable access for U.S. goods 
and services to its market.  The Arias Administration continues to 
conduct its commercial policy in a way consistent with its 
commitments made under CAFTA-DR. 
 
¶16. Export Subsidy, Export Performance or Local Content 
Requirements:  We know of no Costa Rican export subsidies or 
performance requirements.  Costa Rica does currently offer Free 
Trade Zone incentives (see paragraph 3) and there are de-facto sugar 
subsidies generated by a protected internal market.  In either case, 
Costa Rica is acting in a manner consistent with its international 
commitments. 
 
¶17. Contribution to CBI Region:  Costa Rica continues to be the 
leading example of economic and political stability in the Central 
American region.  Both CAFTA-DR and the pending trade agreement 
between Central America and the European Union (EU) have helped 
motivate the Central American countries to work together.  However, 
on the latter, progress is still slow due to political, historical, 
and cultural differences both within the Central American block and 
with the EU. 
 
¶18.  Self-Help Measures for Economic Development:  The 
Administration of President Oscar Arias (2006-2010) has pursued an 
explicit policy of trade and business-friendly policies (successful 
passage of CAFTA-DR) coupled with a strong social-welfare 
orientation.  An analysis of the 2007-2009 period reveals a notable 
increase in spending on infrastructure, education, health, support 
for workers, and the judiciary as a percentage of the total budget 
(reftel B).  The increases are remarkable when compared to budgets 
of the previous administration (2003-2006 budgets) and considering 
that an estimated 90 percent of the budget consists of mandated 
expenses and debt payments.  Much of this spending has been 
presented conceptually as part of the so-called "complementary 
agenda" to CAFTA-DR with such initiatives as improvement of customs' 
clearing systems, roads and other infrastructure, and investment in 
education and training to ensure the flourishing of small- and 
medium-size businesses. 
 
¶19.  Administrative Cooperation with the U.S.:  To our knowledge, 
the GOCR has consistently communicated and cooperated with the U.S. 
in addressing any issues that arise under the umbrella of bilateral 
or multilateral agreements.  The Ministry of Foreign Trade (COMEX) 
is often the lead agency in coordinating any trade and investment 
related disputes and has shown itself to be a reasonably responsive 
agency. 
 
------- 
SUMMARY 
------- 
 
¶20.  Costa Rica continues as a responsible trade and political 
partner with the U.S.  While the country displays a series of 
shortcomings -- notably in the intellectual property rights (IPR) 
field and more generally in a lack of procedural efficiency -- it 
has also made sustained efforts in a number of the areas of concern 
highlighted in this cable.  Worker rights, prevention of child 
labor, anti-corruption, and anti-narcotics are all areas in which 
 
Costa Rica has worked to improve.  The recent Entry-Into-Force of 
CAFTA-DR is a reaffirmation of the country's commitment to free 
trade principles and continued close relations with its neighbors 
and trade partners. 
 
BRENNAN