09SANJOSE128
PART 2 OF 2: COSTA RICA'S 9TH ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN
Fri Feb 27 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy San Jose
VZCZCXYZ0007
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSJ #0128/01 0582305
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 272305Z FEB 09
FM AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 0528UNCLAS SAN JOSE 000128 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR WHA/CEN, WHA/PPC SMILLER, G/TIP, G ACBlank, G/TIP 
BFLECK, INL, DRL, PRM 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: ELAB KCRM KFRD KWMN PHUM PREF SMIG KTIP ASEC CS
SUBJECT:  PART 2 OF 2: COSTA RICA'S 9TH ANNUAL TRAFFICKING IN 
PERSONS (TIP) REPORT 
 
REF: A) 08 SAN JOSE 911  B) 08 STATE 132759  C) 08 SAN JOSE 194  D) 
08 SAN JOSE 833  E) 08 STATE 93829  F) SAN JOSE 0040 
 
¶1. (U) This cable is Part 2 of 2 and continues section numbering 
from Part 1 (septel), in according with TIP reporting instructions. 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
III. INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION - CONTINUED 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
¶E. LAW ENFORCEMENT STATISTICS: 
 
(1) (SBU) JUDICIAL BRANCH:  The Judicial Branch (Prosecutor's 
Office) has not yet provided Post with statistical information nor 
answers for the TIP Report, though personnel stated they were 
working on it.  If/when Post receives information from the Judicial 
Branch, we will forward septel. 
 
(2) (U) By the end of the reporting period, the Judicial Branch had 
not released its official statistics for 2008 (the report is usually 
published during the second semester each year). Official statistics 
for 2007 from its website were as follows: 
 
Number of 2007 cases received by the Prosecutor's Office: 
--Trafficking in persons ("Trata de personas") 9 
--Pandering ("Proxenetismo") 92 
--Aggravated pandering ("Proxenetismo Agravado") 24 
--Remunerated sexual relations with minors ("Relaciones sexuales 
remuneradas con menores") 99 
--Attempted Remunerated sexual relations with minors ("Relaciones 
sexuales remuneradas con menores-tentativa de") 20 
 
Number of sentences imposed during 2007: 
--Trafficking in persons ("Trata de personas") 2 
--Pandering ("Proxenetismo") 2 
--Aggravated pandering ("Proxenetismo agravado") 1 
--Remunerated sexual relations with minors ("Relaciones sexuales rem 
con menores de edad") 3 
--Sexual relations with minors ("Relaciones sexuales con menores de 
edad") 15 
 
UNICEF reported that of the above nine trafficking cases in 2007, 
the two above were sentenced and the other seven were absolved. 
 
(3) (SBU) Please note that the 2008 Trafficking in Persons Report as 
published, in the Costa Rica "Prevention" section, stated that the 
government prosecuted 77 cases relating to commercial sexual 
exploitation of minors (Ref C).  This was a mistake.  Post's 
information stated that 77 cases were "opened," not prosecuted. 
 
(4) (U) According to the UNODC/ILANUD "Diagnostic of National and 
Regional Capacities for the Criminal Prosecution of the Crime of 
Trafficking in Persons" report, which was undertaken in conjunction 
with regional Prosecutors' Offices, in 2008 there were three cases 
of trafficking reported and under investigation in the country, and 
there was one sentence imposed. 
 
(5) (U) Trafficking activities have sometimes been classified and 
tried as lesser crimes, such as pimping or sexual exploitation, due 
largely to the lack of updated TIP statutes in the country (Ref A). 
The early 2009 legislative changes should enhance the GOCR's ability 
to investigate and prosecute traffickers, which  in turn should 
facilitate compilation of TIP law enforcement data.  Currently, the 
National Institute for Children (PANI, Spanish acronym) gathers some 
data from the 911 emergency line. 
 
(6) (U) As mentioned in Section I, the National Coalition, working 
with Save the Children and the non-profit Paniamor Foundation, 
undertook in 2008 the Fourth Geographical and Social Mapping of 
Trafficking of Children and Adolescents for Costa Rica.  The purpose 
of defining trafficking routes is to better identify:  TIP cases, 
where they occur, major internal and international TIP routes, and 
the factors that give rise to or facilitate TIP activities along 
those routes.  Using special software that permits locating compiled 
information on a map, the Mapping project will help systemize data 
that is not found through formal channels but can shape and focus 
prevention programs. 
 
¶F. SPECIALIZED TIP TRAINING: 
 
(1) (U) During the reporting period, the Ministry of Public Security 
and/or the Migration Directorate, led by the National Coalition, 
trained or sensitized 973 police officers, immigration officials, 
immigration police officers, OIJ officers, national health system 
workers and others.  Eighty percent of those were police officers 
from around the country.  The government distinguishes between 
sensitivity training of eight hours or less (provided to 667 
persons) and "training" of 16 hours or more (provided to 306 
officials). 
 
 
(2) (U) Additionally, UNICEF joined with the above government 
institutions, using educational materials developed in conjunction 
with the "No te Dejes Enganar" media campaign (see Section V), to 
train 50 community police officers and police instructors following 
a "train the trainer" approach (Ref A).  The TIP theme was thus 
included in the National Police Academy curriculum in 2008, and TIP 
training will became a formal part of the Academy curriculum 
starting in 2009. 
 
(3) (U) In August, the Ministry of Public Security held two joint 
training activities for Costa Rican and Nicaraguan police officers 
to improve bilateral institutional coordination.  In 2008, IOM 
conducted two cross-border workshops in the northern zone (Los 
Chiles and Penas Blancas) in which immigration authorities, police 
and civil society from Costa Rica and Nicaragua participated. 
 
(4) (U) The Coalition also conducted, together with eleven 
institutions, training on the Protocol for the Repatriation of 
Children Victims of Trafficking to Consular Officers and other 
officials involved in the issue.  A total of five officers in the 
Costa Rican Consulates in Managua, Rivas and Chinandega (all in 
Nicaragua) received training. 
 
¶G. INTERGOVERNMENTAL TIP COOPERATION: 
 
(1) (U) In keeping with G/TIP's Recommended Long-Term Action Plan 
(Ref E) calling for more regional cooperative efforts, the GOCR 
hosted a regional conference of national anti-TIP Coalitions from 
November 10-12, 2008.  Representatives attended from Mexico, 
Guatemala, Nicaragua, El Salvador, Honduras, Panama and the 
Dominican Republic.  IOM and the ILO made presentations regarding 
international agencies and resources fighting TIP, and country 
delegations gave "best practices" presentations regarding their 
respective efforts and repatriation protocols (see also Section VI 
nomination for Best Practices). 
 
(2) (U) Costa Rica participates in regional fora and conferences 
that deal with TIP issues, including the Regional Conference on 
Migration, the Central American Trafficking Network, and the Central 
American Integration System (SICA, Spanish acronym).  In February 
2009, Vice Minister Duran participated in a regional human smuggling 
conference in Mexico supported by G/TIP. 
 
(3) (U) The National Coalition held two information-exchange 
seminars with officials from Nicaragua and Panama as part of its 
efforts to compile data for the above-mentioned 2008 Fourth 
Geographical and Social Mapping of Trafficking of Children and 
Adolescents for Costa Rica, conducted with Paniamor and Save the 
Children. 
 
(4) (U) During the first 2009 work session of the Central American 
Council of Public Ministries, February 10-11, 2009, General 
Prosecutors from Central American countries gathered and discussed 
trafficking in persons and its relation to organized crime. 
Additionally, they were on hand for the release of UNODC/ILANUD's 
"Diagnostic of National and Regional Capacities for the Criminal 
Prosecution of the Crime of Trafficking in Persons," which was 
completed with the participation of regional Public Ministries and 
General Prosecutor's Offices.  The General Prosecutors discussed 
ways to implement the report's suggestions. 
 
¶H. (U) EXTRADITIONS:  The law provides for the extradition of 
foreign individuals residing in Costa Rica who are wanted in other 
countries for many crimes, including TIP.  There were no requests 
for extraditions this year for that crime.  According to Costa Rican 
laws, the extradition of its own nationals is prohibited (Article 3 
of the Extradition Law).  The government was not planning to modify 
its laws to permit extradition of its own nationals. 
 
¶J. (SBU) INVOLVEMENT OR TOLERANCE OF TIP BY GOCR OFFICIALS:  The 
National Coalition reported that there were no cases of an official 
who was complicit in TIP crimes during the reporting period.  No new 
information was available regarding a judicial investigation of one 
case reported in Ref C.  Please see Ref D for a discussion of the 
2008 Dominican case.  According to Paniamor, the Paniamor/Save the 
Children Mapping meta-analysis (covering 2005-2007) detected 
official complicity, but no further information was available due to 
the confidential nature of the Mapping background data.  Paniamor 
distributed the complete Mapping report to relevant government 
agencies.  NGOs reported that police complicity is evident at the 
street level, where traffickers seemed pre-informed of police 
operations.  Post has no further information to prove or to disprove 
the forgoing information. 
 
¶K. PROSTITUTION & PIMPING: 
 
(1) (U) Prostitution is legal in Costa Rica. The legal minimum age 
to engage in prostitution is 18 years; Article 160 of the criminal 
 
code prohibits remunerated sex with minors.  The Ministry of Health 
is responsible for regulating hygiene/health matters related to 
those who are involved in prostitution.  One observer told us, 
however, that there is a lack of regulation because many foreign 
prostitutes do not comply with check-ups. 
 
(2) (U) Pandering ("proxenetismo") - promoting prostitution of 
persons, inducing them or recruiting them for this end - is 
criminalized by Article 169 of the criminal code with two to five 
years imprisonment.  Article 170 of the criminal code defines 
aggravated pandering ("proxenetismo agravado") and establishes a 
punishment of four to 10 years imprisonment if the victim has not 
yet reached the age of 18.  In Article 171, pimping ("rufianera") 
is punished with a penalty of imprisonment from two to eight years, 
with prison from four to 10 years if the victim is under the age of 
13, and with prison from three to nine years if the victim is over 
13, but has not reached the age of 18.  Law No. 8590 dated July 18, 
2007, increased the age of victims from 12 to 13 years. 
 
¶L. (U) INTERNATIONAL PEACEKEEPING EFFORTS:  Costa Rica does not have 
a military and does not contribute troops to international 
peacekeeping efforts.  TIP crimes have extraterritorial coverage 
(Articles 5-7 of the criminal code) if committed by members of the 
Costa Rican foreign service abroad. 
 
¶M. CHILD SEX TOURISM: 
 
(1) (U) Authorities identified child sex tourism as a problem, with 
Costa Rica as a destination country.  TIP crimes have 
extraterritorial coverage under Article 7 of the criminal code.  The 
government and several advocacy groups continued awareness campaigns 
publicizing the dangers of sex tourism and its association with 
child sexual exploitation.  As of the end of 2008, approximately 240 
tour companies had signed a conduct code as part of a global 
initiative against the commercial sexual exploitation of children, 
promoted by the World Tourism Organization and End Child 
Prostitution in Asian Tourism. 
 
(2) (SBU) Previously, immigration officials identified the U.S., 
Canada, and Germany as the primary countries of origin for sex 
tourism (Ref C).  The Paniamor/Save the Children Mapping project 
showed the main clients for child sexual exploitation and 
trafficking coming from the U.S., Sweden, Germany and Italy. 
According to Post's RSO, one U.S. Citizen was actively sought in 
Costa Rica for having had sex with a 12-year old female; he was 
located and arrested in Cuba and then returned to the U.S.  No U.S. 
citizens were extradited from Costa Rica for crimes relating to 
child sexual exploitation during the reporting period. 
 
---------------------------------------- 
IV. PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶A. PROTECTION AFFORDED TO VICTIMS & WITNESSES: 
 
(1) (U) The Victim and Witness Protection Act, passed in February 
2009, provides new protections, including the creation of a Witness 
Protection Program.  It remains to be seen, in practice, how 
effective the new law will be.  A summary of key points of the 
legislation follow: 
 
a. Legal protection to victims of crime and witnesses during the 
judicial process: 
 
--establishes legal procedures to provide for victims and witness 
protection; 
 
--establishes witness identity protection during the preliminary and 
intermediate stages of the judicial process; 
 
--makes improvements to the Victim's Attention Office ("Oficina de 
Atencion a la victima") within the Prosecutor's Office, including 
funding for this office to provide assistance to victims of crime; 
 
--creates a Witness Protection Program and Protection Teams 
("Equipos de Proteccion"); and 
 
--widens the options available to victims (psychological, legal and 
medical assistance; finding a job; migratory status and leaving the 
country; identity protection). 
 
b. Right to information on developments of the case and right to 
confidentiality for victims and witnesses: 
 
--ensures that victims have the information they need; and 
 
--places greater restraints on information exempt from public 
disclosure and provides prison penalties from two to eight years and 
from six to twelve years for those who disclose such information. 
 
 
c. Reforms to the Criminal Code and the Criminal Procedures Code: 
 
--conciliation process is not available to the accused if he/she has 
utilized the conciliation process previously; and 
 
--makes amendments regarding TIP to Article 172 of the criminal code 
(above). 
 
END LEGISLATIVE SUMMARY. 
 
(2) (U) Recognizing the need for an inter-institutional, integrated 
response to protect and assist victims, the National Coalition's 
Subcommittee on Protection developed a protocol for immediate victim 
assistance ("Modelo de Atencion Inmediata"), which seeks to identify 
whether a person is a TIP victim and to mobilize support for him/her 
immediately upon the first encounter with the victim (by Immigration 
police, for example), or upon receiving a "denuncia" (tip) about a 
potential victim (Ref A).  The protocol, to be implemented by 
Executive Order, defines steps that governmental institutions will 
take to detect, identify, protect and provide integrated assistance 
(medical treatment, physical security, psychological assistance, 
etc.) to a victim, with an aim of avoiding "re-victimization."  It 
takes into account human rights principles, individual attention, 
internal and international trafficking, and it promotes an 
integrated response.  (NOTE: G/TIP's Barbara Fleck has a copy of the 
complete protocol.) 
 
(3) (U) Interestingly, the Immediate Attention protocol calls for a 
designated person from each of five Executive Branch agencies and 
two Judicial Branch agencies to be assigned to be on call for the 
Immediate Attention Team and to be given necessary resources to 
fulfill their duties on a 24/7 basis -- including computer access or 
a laptop, pager or cell phone, overtime pay, security, and access to 
transportation if necessary.  The protocol also invites the 
participation of the International Organization for Migration, the 
UN Human Rights Commission, and the International Labor Organization 
throughout the process.  In addition, PANI developed its own 
protocol to provide assistance to victims that may be identified as 
a result of the UNICEF/National Coalition's "No te Dejes Enganar" 
media campaign and is working on merging its internal protocol with 
the Coalition's. 
 
(4) (U) UNICEF reported that the Ministry of Public Security is 
working with UNICEF to establish "Safe Places" for children in 
communities. 
 
B & C. VICTIM CARE FACILITIES/SHELTERS: 
 
(1) (SBU) The National Coalition's Immediate Attention protocol 
highlights access to adequate shelters as an important need. 
Currently, there are no specialized shelters dedicated solely to TIP 
victims (NOTE: see Ref C for a description of existing alternatives 
- the INAMU shelter, the PANI shelter, and the Migration holding 
facility).  Shelters do not discriminate between nationals and 
non-nationals, and the INAMU and PANI shelters provide integrated 
services to victims.  As these shelters were operated by government 
institutions, their funding came from the GOCR budget, but exact 
figures for budgetary resources dedicated to TIP victims at these 
shelters were not available. 
 
(2) (SBU) The government provided shelter and integrated services to 
at least two trafficking victims in 2008 at the National Institute 
for Women (INAMU) shelter (one case was the Guatemalan in Section I) 
for as long as was necessary.  The Coalition recognizes that the 
security situation at both the INAMU and PANI shelters is not 
well-suited to protecting victims of organized crime.  Currently, 
the only shelter alternative for adult males is the Migration 
deportation holding facility, which the Coalition knows is not 
ideal.  The Coalition's Protection Subcommittee is studying ways to 
solve the shelter problem.  In the meantime, the above shelter 
alternatives will have to be utilized for TIP victims on a 
case-by-case basis. 
 
¶D. (U) MIGRATORY RELIEF:  Working with IOM and UNHCR, the GOCR 
granted refugee status to a TIP victim for the first time in 2008. 
Immigration Law 8487 grants some victims official resident status 
through the category of "special denouncers or witnesses in judicial 
or administrative processes."  Costa Rica also has a "Protocol for 
Repatriation of Children and Adolescent Victims of Trafficking" 
signed by several government agencies in 2006 (Ref C).  The 
government may issue special visas to victims of trafficking who are 
willing to assist in the prosecution of traffickers. If victims 
cooperate as witnesses, they can be granted a special legal status 
determined by the court (Ref C).  Victims are also allowed to file 
civil suits against traffickers. 
 
E & F. (U) LONG-TERM SHELTER/HOUSING BENEFITS:  The GOCR does not 
provide long-term shelter or housing benefits specifically to TIP 
 
victims.  The National Coalition may refer cases to NGOs such as the 
Rahab Foundation for assistance with restoration and rebuilding 
their lives. 
 
¶G. (SBU) TOTAL NUMBER OF TRAFFICKING VICTIMS/ SHELTERING/ 
GOCR-FUNDED ASSISTANCE:  As noted above, IOM reported four known 
victims during the reporting period.  The Coalition was working with 
approximately 30 possible trafficking victims (including IOM's four) 
during the reporting period.  The judicial branch, through the 
Coalition, reported five cases.  OIJ reported two TIP cases under 
investigation (including the Dominican case), involving multiple 
potential victims (Ref D).  Two victims were sheltered by INAMU 
during the reporting period, using GOCR budgetary resources. 
 
¶H. (U) IDENTIFYING TIP VICTIMS:  The Immediate Assistance Protocol 
is a formal mechanism on which police (including Migration Police) 
can rely; they can activate the Immediate Assistance Team in the 
case of suspected or potential victims in a round-up, for example. 
The authorities have inspected known establishments but they 
normally concentrate on (and deport) immigration law violators. 
However, the National Coalition has focused training on Immigration 
Police (facilitated by the fact that the Immigration Police also 
fall within the purview of the Ministry of Public Security, which 
heads the National Coalition).  Officers are being trained to be 
more sensitive to identifying potential victims among those 
detained.  In addition, as part of training in conjunction with 
UNICEF (see Section III), 50 community police officers were trained 
during the reporting period to serve a preventive role in terms of 
TIP in their communities. 
 
¶I. (U) RIGHTS OF VICTIMS RESPECTED:  The rights of trafficking 
victims are respected in general, in that they are not treated as 
criminals.  The objective is to provide legal and psychological 
assistance, especially during depositions, to prevent 
re-victimization.  However, in 2008, some victims were treated as 
illegal immigrants, or, in the case of the Dominicans, as parties to 
sham marriages.  Current immigration law does not include a 
temporary parole for trafficking victims. 
 
¶J. (SBU) VICTIM ASSISTANCE IN INVESTIGATIONS & TRIALS:  The Judicial 
Branch has not provided statistics regarding the number of victims 
who have assisted in prosecutions during the reporting period to 
Post.  Post will update septel if/when received.  Legal redress is 
not impeded, per se.  However, as a practical matter, victims are 
often hesitant to file "denuncias" (official complaints) to start an 
investigation.  However, OIJ may begin an investigation without a 
denuncia, and NGOs may assist victims by filing denuncias on behalf 
of victims. 
 
¶K. (U) DOES GOCR PROVIDE TRAINING IN IDENTIFYING VICTIMS?  Yes. 
Please see preceding paragraphs. 
 
¶L. (SBU) There are no programs in place to provide assistance to 
nationals repatriated as victims of trafficking.  The Costa Rican 
victim that returned from Mexico (see Section I) was assisted 
primarily by IOM and returned to her family home. 
 
¶M. (SBU) IOs & NGOs WORKING WITH VICTIMS:  The primary international 
organization working with trafficking victims is IOM.  UNHCR, ILO, 
and UNICEF are also heavily involved in anti-TIP efforts.  NGOs 
include Save the Children (Sweden), Alianza por tus Derechos, and 
the Rahab Foundation.  Local NGO Paniamor is mapping trafficking 
routes and also supporting the GOCR with a case-management and data 
collection system called SISCESCO (Ref A).  The National Coalition 
reported that, in addition to the above agencies, it works with NGOs 
CIDEHUM (on migrant human rights) and DNI (on children's issues). 
In general, the government coordinates with the public and private 
sectors on anti-trafficking initiatives. 
 
------------- 
¶V. PREVENTION 
------------- 
 
¶A. MEDIA CAMPAIGN: 
 
(1) (U) In October 2008 the Ministry of Public Security, the 
National Coalition, UNICEF and PANI launched the media awareness 
campaign called "No te Dejes Enganar" (Don't let them lie to you) in 
Costa Rica.  UNICEF developed the regional campaign with DOS/INL 
FY2006 funds.  The campaign seeks to educate adolescents, families 
and communities about the risks and consequences of trafficking, 
with the above-mentioned complimentary community police training. 
It also encourages the public to report TIP suspicions to the 911 
emergency line.  The campaign includes TV ads, radio spots and 
"muppies" (posters); training materials for police, parents and 
teachers; and informative age-appropriate educational materials 
geared toward adolescents. 
 
(2) (SBU) The Coalition dedicated part of its FY2008 government 
 
funding to the media campaign.  PANI spent an additional $25,000 of 
its FY2008 funds for ad placement.  UNICEF hopes the campaign will 
reach half the Costa Rican population - about 2,000,000 people - 
over a six-month period.  UNICEF also hopes to reach 15,000 adults 
and teenagers with materials distributed by community police 
officers that UNICEF trained in conjunction with the campaign (see 
Section III). 
 
¶B. (SBU) BORDER SCREENING FOR TIP VICTIMS, PREVENTION:  As mentioned 
above, the National Coalition has trained Costa Rica's personnel 
assigned to both the northern and southern borders; has jointly 
trained border personnel with Nicaraguan and Panamanian officials; 
and has held joint workshops with officials from the two countries 
to compile data for the Mapping project.  However, as noted in the 
above-mentioned Mapping, the borders remain porous, with more than 
100 "blind spots" reported.  The PANI exit permit required for 
minors to leave the country is a tool utilized by the government to 
monitor possible trafficking in minors. 
 
¶C. (U) IS THERE A MECHANISM FOR COORDINATION BETWEEN AGENCIES, 
INTERNALLY, INTERNATIONALLY, AND MULTILATERALLY?  As noted, the 
organization in charge of coordinating national anti-trafficking 
efforts is the National Coalition, headed by one of the 
vice-ministers of Public Security.  The Coalition includes 
representatives from various government ministries and agencies as 
well as observers from international organizations, NGOs, the 
judicial branch, the Ombudsman's Office and the Legislative 
Assembly.  The Coalition participates with regional organizations, 
in multilateral fora, and in conferences. 
 
¶D. (U) NATIONAL PLAN OF ACTION THAT ADDRESSES TIP:  The Coalition's 
National Plan against Trafficking in Persons 2008-2010 is included 
in the government's National Development Plan 2006-2010.  The 
National Plan of Action against TIP addresses   prevention; 
protection; victim assistance; sanctions; legislation; and public 
policies. 
 
¶E. (U) OTHER MEASURES:  During the year, the government also took 
the follow steps to reduce the demand for commercialized sex in 
Costa Rica: 
 
--PANI conducted 40 workshops with the tourism sector on the 
prevention of child sexual exploitation; 
 
--the public University of Costa Rica (UCR) School of Psychology 
continued a study of the effects of child sexual exploitation on 
victims and called for stronger preventative and prosecutorial 
measures; and 
 
--the National Commission to Combat the Commercial Sexual 
Exploitation of Children and Adolescents (CONACOES) and the ILO 
developed a training module on sexual exploitation. 
 
Additionally, the NGO Alianza por tus Derechos, along with the 
British Embassy, published a booklet for children called "Learning 
to Say No is your Right." 
 
¶F. (U) MEASURES TAKEN TO REDUCE SEX TOURISM BY COSTA RICANS:  Post 
is unaware of any GOCR measures to reduce sex tourism by Costa Rican 
nationals. 
 
¶G. (U) REQUIRED OF COUNTRIES INVOLVED IN PEACEKEEPING:  Not 
applicable. 
 
----------------------------- 
VI. BEST PRACTICES NOMINATION 
----------------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) REGIONAL TIP CONFERENCE:  In keeping with G/TIP's Recommended 
Long-Term Action Plan (Ref E) calling for more regional cooperative 
efforts, the GOCR hosted a regional conference of national anti-TIP 
Coalitions from November 10-12, 2008.  Representatives attended from 
Mexico, Guatemala, Nicaragua, El Salvador, Honduras, Panama and the 
Dominican Republic.  The International Organization for Migration 
and the International Labor Organization made presentations 
regarding international agencies and resources fighting TIP, and 
country delegations gave "best practices" presentations regarding 
their respective efforts, including repatriation protocols. 
Complete minutes of the conference, including conference 
results/conclusions, were emailed to G/TIP's Fleck on February 13, 
¶2009. 
 
------------------------ 
VII. TIP HERO NOMINATION 
------------------------ 
 
¶3. (U) Post nominated Mariliana Morales, founder and director of the 
Rahab Foundation, in Ref F. 
 
------------------------- 
EMBASSY POINTS OF CONTACT 
------------------------- 
 
¶4. (U) Until April 3, Cheryl Neely, Political Section, 
506-2519-2256, neelycl@state.gov.  After April 3, the contact is 
Tyler Sparks, 506-2519-2256, sparkstk@state.gov. 
 
CIANCHETTE