10SANJOSE130
COSTA RICA 2009 END-USE MONITORING (EUM) REPORT
Tue Feb 02 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy San Jose
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHSJ #0130/01 0331939
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 021934Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY SAN JOSE
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0318
INFO WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SAN JOSE 000130 
 
SIPDIS 
DEPT FOR INL/LP, INL/RM, WHA/CEN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SNAR AMGT PGOV PINR PREL AFIN CS
SUBJECT: COSTA RICA 2009 END-USE MONITORING (EUM) REPORT 
 
REF: 09 STATE 119905; 09 SAN JOSE 933 
 
¶1. Per Ref A, Embassy San Jose provides the following information 
regarding EUM of resources acquired with U.S. Department of State 
International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs (INL) funds. 
 
 
 
¶2. EUM Program Coordinator: NAO Robert B. Andrew, IVG 220-2253, 
andrewrb@state.gov.  The NAO is part of the Embassy's 
Political/Economic Section. 
 
 
 
¶3. Inventory System: Embassy San Jose NAS section maintains an 
inventory of donated property using an excel spreadsheet; however, 
we are developing a more efficient system using Microsoft Access. 
 
 
 
 
¶4. Embassy's Narcotics Affairs Officer and Program Assistants are 
responsible for the EUM.  On-site inspections are performed and the 
equipment donated is checked against an inventory log. 
 
 
 
DEA Special Agents and Office of the Defense Representative staff 
periodically visited Costa Rican counternarcotics installations and 
verified the proper use and continued maintenance of equipment 
acquired with INL funds. 
 
 
 
¶5.  The Drug Control Police (PCD), National Police Academy, Costa 
Rican Coast Guard (SNGC), Air Surveillance Section (SVA), Canine 
Unit of the Ministry of Public Security (MPS)and Ministry of 
Justice (MOJ), Narcotics Section, Financial Crimes/Money Laundering 
Unit, Audio/Photograph Unit of the Forensics Lab, 
Surveillance/Monitoring Unit, Cybercrimes Unit, Judicial School and 
Canine Unit of the Organization for Judicial Investigations (OIJ), 
Supreme Court's Child and Sex Exploitation Unit (CSE) from the 
Prosecutors Offices, Costa Rican Institute on Drugs (ICD), and 
Intelligence and Security Bureau (DIS) from the Ministry of the 
Presidency all used INL-funded equipment and training in their 
operations according to the terms of the Letters of Agreement 
(LOA's) signed with the GOCR. 
 
 
 
¶6. All donated equipment is documented with a specific document 
signed by an Embassy representative and the senior official from 
the recipient GOCR agency.  The donation document specifies the 
equipment being donated and notes the inventory and manufacturer's 
serial number.  The documents include the following text:  "If the 
donated items do not meet the user's needs, according to the letter 
of agreement, then the items may not be reassigned to another 
Department and the U.S. Embassy Political Section must be notified 
immediately." 
 
 
 
¶7. On-site scheduled inspections of all GOCR recipients were 
performed in November and December, 2009 and January, 2010, except 
for the Prosecutor's offices in Limon, Perez Zeledon, Quepos and 
San Carlos. We also have not yet visited the border installation at 
Penas Blancas, which we will visit in mid-February and we will 
report septel.  Visits to these outlying areas are infrequent due 
to limited INL funding and insufficient staff. 
 
 
 
Scheduled visits (12) were as follows: 
 
 
 
November 9, 2009: OIJ's Canine Unit 
 
November 10, 2009: MPS's CSE Unit and Police Academy, San Jose 
Facility. 
 
November 11, 2009: MPS's Police Academy, Pavas Facility. 
 
December 7, 2009: MPS's Canine Unit. 
 
December 14, 2009: MPS's Immigration Department, Prosecutor's 
Office in San Jose, and the following OIJ units: Surveillance and 
 
Monitoring; Narcotics; Money Laundering and Economic/Financial 
Crimes and Cyber Crimes. 
 
January 12, 2010:  MPS's Drug Control Police (PCD). 
 
January 14, 2010: MPS's Air Surveillance Section (SVA). 
 
January 15, 2010:  OIJ's Forensic Lab and Judicial School, Heredia 
 
January 19, 2010: Costa Rican Drug Institute (ICD) 
 
January 22, 2010:  Ministry of the Presidency's Intelligence and 
Security Bureau (DIS) and Interpol 
 
January 26, 2010:  MPS's Coast Guard (SNGC). 
 
 
 
INL performed 12 on-site inspections and visited 16 counterpart 
sites mostly in San Jose and Heredia. A total of 1045 items (80% of 
all donated items) were subject to this inspection method. 
 
 
 
On November 23, 2009, the NAO made an unscheduled visit to inspect 
donated items to the Costa Rican coast guard at Quepos on the 
Pacific coast. 
 
 
 
Also, unscheduled visits were completed all year-round by NAO 
Officer, DEA Special Agents and Office of the Defense 
Representative staff, as scheduling and funding permit. 
 
 
 
¶8. Other secondary methods of monitoring resources are written 
reports and/or computerized records with GOCR inventory numbers, 
and signed by head offices, indicating the status of the equipment. 
NAS staff also regularly discusses the status of INL-funded 
commodities/projects with host government officials.  Approximate 
20 percent of donated items are monitored using secondary methods. 
 
 
 
¶A. Computers and Peripherals, and other Equipment 
 
 
 
Coast Guard (SNGC): In CY 02, CY 03, CY 04 and CY 06 NAS provided a 
Sony Notebook Pentium 4 laptop, a Sony Camcorder, a Sony digital 
camera, a HP office hey print/copy/scanner/fax, a UPS and two USB 
memory sticks. Out of service equipment include: a Panasonic fax, 
two Panasonic VCRs, a Toshiba 1400 laptop that could not be 
repaired, an Infocus LCD Projector.  The rest of the equipment is 
being used for its intended purpose. 
 
 
 
National Police Academy: In CY 01 NAS provided two Dell laptops, 
one scanner, two color printers, one digital camera, one camcorder 
and two video projectors.  One of the Dell laptops was stolen but 
replaced, and the screen of the other one is not working so it is 
used with a projector.  In CY 05, NAS provided a computer, Toshiba 
laptop with case, two Epson printers, Microsoft Office software and 
a video projector.  In CY 07, INL provided a Toshiba Laptop, screen 
with tripod and an Infocus LCD Projector.  The laptop, which has 
not worked since it was donated, has yet to be fixed by the Police 
Academy.  The projector works for 10 minutes, gets warm and then it 
turns off; it has also not yet been repaired.  According to Academy 
officials, the laptop and projector have not been working well 
since they were donated.  Out of service equipment include two 
Epson color printers and one Dell laptop. This equipment is 
distributed between the National Police Academy's headquarters at 
the MPS building and the Academy's facility in Pavas, and is being 
used for its intended purpose. 
 
 
 
Supreme Court Judicial School: In CY 05 NAS provided one Intel 
Pentium 4 computer, one Toshiba laptop with case, two Epson 
printers, a 700VA UPS, one surge protector, one Microsoft Office 
license and an Epson Powerlite projector. Due to lack of funding 
for cartridges, the Epson Ink jet printer is not currently in use. 
The rest of the equipment is being used for its intended purpose. 
 
MPS Child and Sex Exploitation (CSE) Unit: In CY 06 NAS provided 10 
computers, 10 Epson printers, MS Office 2003 and Windows XP Pro 
software, 10 surge protectors, three Toshiba laptops and one Epson 
projector.  One of the computers is damaged and has been sent to 
the MPS repair shop. Some printers have run out of toner and the 
Unit does not have enough funds in their budget to buy new ones. 
The equipment is used for the investigation of CSE cases. 
 
 
 
Intelligence and Security Bureau (DIS): In CY 06 NAS provided six 
Dell computers, one Canon digital copying machine, and one ScanJet 
for the Interpol office.  In CY 07 one HP LaserJet printer was also 
donated.  The equipment has been very useful to speed up 
investigations; officers have been able to dedicate more time to 
investigate each case since nearly all paper files were moved to 
the computers. 
 
 
 
Precursor Control (ICD): In CY 00 NAS provided a Dell server with 
monitor.  In CY 02 NAS funded the purchase of a Jaguar computer, an 
antivirus software package, an HP deskjet printer, one Epson and 
one HP printer, and a Powerlite LCD projector.  The Dell server and 
Jaguar computer are obsolete, but are in good condition.  The 
equipment was originally donated to the Ministry of Health, which 
at the time had responsibility for precursor chemical control.  In 
2004 the precursor chemical office was moved from the Health 
Ministry to ICD's headquarters.  This equipment is now located in 
their headquarters and continues to be used for its intended 
purpose. 
 
 
 
OIJ Money Laundering Unit: In CY 04 and 05, NAS provided three 
Toshiba laptops, eight computers, two HP scanners, two HP printers, 
two memory sticks, eight flash memory, two Intimus 502 shredders, 
two high volume shredders, two file cabinets, one HP LaserJet, one 
Panasonic fax, one digital camera, one camcorder, and one copying 
machine. They reported that the two HP printers and the fax machine 
are damaged and have been sent to the repair shop. The rest of the 
items are being used for their intended purposes. 
 
 
 
OIJ Cyber Crimes Unit: In CY 04, 05, and 06 NAS provided six Dell 
computers, two DAT external tape drives, four ATA Raid controller, 
two wireless PC cards, two drivelock USBs, three drivelocks in a 
caddy, six SCSI cards, four promise SATA 150 controller cards, four 
Encase Forensic software and upgrade packages, four Forensic 
Toolkit Accessdata packages, one password recovery kit, one 
wireless Access Pont, and two OmniFlash Ide Uno.  All the equipment 
is being used for its intended purpose. They reported that two Dell 
Monitors and one DAT External tape drivers are damaged and couldn't 
be fixed. 
 
 
 
Immigration Directorate: In CY03 INL provided 10 Jaguar 1500 
Pentium 4 computers to be installed at the Juan Santamaria 
International Airport to enhance the arrival-departure information 
system. NAS also provided 3 Ricoh Scanners, one HP multifunctional 
scanner/printer/copier. They reported that 7 of the computers are 
damaged, two are being used in regional offices and one is at IT 
office, the rest of the equipment works properly. 
 
 
 
OIJ Narcotics Section: In CY 01, 02, 03, 04 and 06 NAS provided a 
Cannon Digital Copier, two Jaguar high performance Pentium IV 
computers, an Apple computer with DVD recorder, three HP DeskJet 
printers -two have been sent to the repair shop, only one is being 
used-, two Epson digital cameras, two Sony camcorders, two 
Panasonic camcorders, three Sony Mavica digital cameras -one was 
damaged and couldn't be fixed; three Sony Mavica photo printers 
-not frequently used due to the high cost of the paper it prints 
on- and one LaserJet printer.  All of the equipment is being used 
to support on-going counternarcotics operations/initiatives. 
 
 
 
OIJ Photographic and Audiovisual Section of the Forensic Science 
Laboratory: In CY 06, 07 and 09 NAS donated two voice-activated 
recorders, four color black and white miniaturized cameras, 3 ultra 
miniaturized button cameras, 25 telephone microphones, four 2GB 
Secure Digital cards, two AstroScope Night Vision modules, two 
adapters for a Canon and a Sony camcorder and ArcView software. 
With the new equipment, the unit was able to record drug 
 
transactions in dark environments where they were not able to 
operate before. The unit reported that the donated equipment has 
contributed to enhancing the response capacity, improved the 
quality and definition of the evidence gathered for prosecuting 
drug and sex crimes as well as reduced costs. In 2009 this Section 
investigated 1088 cases, but we do not have information on how many 
were successfully prosecuted or sent to court.  The equipment has 
been used all around the country and is well taken care of.  The 
Section maintains a log with the information of the person that 
will be using the equipment and condition in which it was 
handed-over.  With this equipment they can now support various 
investigation requests that they were not able to do in the past 
due to lack of equipment. 
 
 
 
OIJ Surveillance and Monitoring Unit: In CY 07 NAS provided four 
Sony HandyCams, four Sony digital cameras, eight memory sticks, 
four rechargeable batteries and two double chargers.  The equipment 
is used to investigate all major cases around the country. 
 
 
 
CSE Prosecution Units in San Jose, Perez Zeledon, Quepos, Limon and 
San Carlos: IN CY 02, 03, and 04 NAS provided three HP IPAQ pocket 
PCs, three HP foldable keyboards for HP IPAQ pocket PCs, three 
DeskJet printers, 8 cassette recorders and one scanner for the Unit 
in San Jose. This unit reported that the HP IPAQ have been sent to 
the repair shop on July 2009.  For the other four prosecution 
units, in CY 05 and 06 NAS provided eight Dell computers, MS Office 
2003 software, eight Epson printers, four HP ScanJet, four 
Panasonic faxes, four Canon copying machines and four Canon digital 
cameras.  A written report from the Chief Prosecutor's Office 
indicated that one copier machine is damaged at the CSE Prosecution 
office in San Carlos; the rest of the equipment is in good 
condition and is being used for its intended purpose. The equipment 
contributed to more efficient prosecutorial actions. 
 
 
 
Drug Control Police (PCD): From CY 01-07 INL provided three Jaguar 
computers, one Dell Optiplex computer, one Imac Ruby computer, a 36 
GB hard disk, an Apple computer with DVD burner, computer software 
and licenses, computer 48-port switch, a 4-port analog module for 
connectivity outside San Jose, one HP printer, two ScanJet, one 
Applied Magic video editor, and Mapinfo geographic information 
system (GIS) software. In CY-08 NAS provided 3 Analyst's Notebook 6 
& Chart Reader 6, 3 Analyst's Notebook , 1 Patter Tracer TCA, 1 
Pattern Tracer TCA Telephone Call Analysis User Guide, 4 iBase 
Designer, 1 iBase Designer, 1 iBase Designer guide, 3 iBridge  1 
iBridge, 1 iBridge Designer Guide, 1 USB dongle (SN 078236) and 2 
DSC-H7 Sony Cybershot Digital Cameras. In CY-10 NAS donated the 
latest upgrade to the i2 Analyst's Notebook. 
 
 
 
The Jaguar computers are still working but they are way beyond 
their useful life. They reported that the HP printer was damaged 
and was irreparable. The rest of the equipment is being used for 
its intended purpose. 
 
 
 
 
 
OIJ K-9 Unit: In CY 01, 02 and 03 NAS provided three Jaguar Pentium 
III computers, one HP DeskJet printer, one HP LaserJet, one HP 
ScanJet, three UPS, two 24-switch ports, two optical fiber 
converters, one Sony camcorder, and one memory stick.  The HP 
ScanJet is damaged and is currently not being used. This equipment 
is at the OIJ's K-9 Unit in Heredia and is being used for its 
intended purpose. 
 
 
 
ICD: From CY 01-07 NAS provided two Jaguar computers, one digital 
camcorder, one Cisco ASA Platform, three Dell power connect 
switches, four Dell Optiplex computers, software, an Epson 
Powerlite projector, an Epson printer, a HP deskjet printer and one 
Dell PE server. They reported that the HP printer has been disposed 
of as it couldn't be fixed and the Cisco ASA platform was changed 
for another one at their expense; also the HP deskjet was 
irreparably damaged. 
 
 
 
Guardian Software: NAS funded the purchase of computer software in 
2003 that enabled ICD to electronically communicate with the El 
 
Paso Intelligence Center (EPIC) using the DEA Guardian software in 
the format required by EPIC.  This software is outdated but still 
in use. 
 
 
 
¶B. Communications Equipment 
 
 
 
SNGC: In CY-08 NAS provided 5 XTS4250 and 2 XTL 5000 Motorola 
Radios, 12 Furuno GP37 DGPS/WAAS Navigator and 5 GPSMAP 76CSX 
#010-00469-00, 5 Garmin Cigarette Lighter adapter and 5 Garmin 
Marine Mount f/72. 
 
 
 
¶C. Aircraft 
 
 
 
In CY08 Post donated a Piper PA-34-200T Seneca II aircraft to the 
Ministry of Public Security's Air Surveillance Section(SVA). This 
is a fixed wing aircraft used for transportation of official 
government members, surveillance and as an air ambulance. Head of 
the SVA reported that this aircraft has not been used in 
approximately six months due to some mechanical problems. The 
Ministry of Public Security has allocated funds for the repair 
costs on the engine and the propellers. 
 
 
 
¶D. Vehicles 
 
 
 
2002 Ford Econoline Duty XLT Truck for ICD: From CY 02-05 NAS 
provided vehicles and equipment for ICD under the CICAD/Mobile 
Enforcement Team Project.  INL funded the purchase of a customized 
Ford Econoline utility truck, Econoline Wagon 15-passenger utility 
van, two Yamaha XT225 motorcycles, trailer, Honda generator, tools, 
and equipment for the truck.  The MET conducted counternarcotics 
operations as well as a number of cross-border training exercises 
with counterparts in Nicaragua and Panama, however starting in CY08 
and after a court ruling, ICD can no longer conduct interdiction 
operations; instead it provides logistic support and training for 
the Uniformed Police (Fuerza Publica)to carry these operations. 
 
 
 
After several years of numerous maintenance problems with the 2002 
Ford Econoline truck (MET) and consultations with ICD, we agreed 
that the best way to use the truck was to trade it in for a new 
Toyota Hi Lux (Costa Rican plate number 243085) diesel pick-up. 
They moved the back part of the old MET truck to the new vehicle. 
ICD reported that the specialized tools are kept in three different 
locations: on the truck, at ICD's main building and at warehouse of 
their property in San Joaqu????n de Flores. 
 
 
 
2003 Ford E-150 eight-passenger van for PCD: In CY 03 Post INL 
donated a Ford van under the Ministry of Public Security/Drug 
Control Police Project to support PCD operations throughout the 
country.  It continues to be useful for transporting groups of PCD 
Officials to conduct counternarcotics operations around the 
country. 
 
 
 
2003 Ford E-350 15-Passenger van for MPS K-9 Unit: In CY 03 NAS 
donated a Ford van under the Ministry of Public Security/Canine 
Unit Project to support MPS's K-9 Unit operations.  In CY-04 tools 
were provided for the van and are kept in a locked box and used as 
needed.  The head of the K-9 Unit reported that 15 days prior to 
the inspection the vehicle was in a minor accident and was being 
repaired. 
 
 
 
2003 Toyota Rav-4s for OIJ: In CY 03 NAS purchased two Toyota 
RAV-4s for the OIJ under the Supreme Court/OIJ Narcotics Section 
Project to conduct undercover surveillance operations.  In October 
2008 both vehicles were traded in as a down payment for two new 
2008 Daihatsu Terios plate numbers 728551 and 1-739947. 
 
2003 FORD F-250 XL Truck for SNGC: In CY 03 NAS funded 50 percent 
of the purchase cost of a Ford F-250 truck under the Colombia 
Supplemental Project, which allowed the SNGC to transport patrol 
craft to various Coast Guard stations around the country.  The SNGC 
provided 50 percent of the funding for this vehicle with the 
understanding that it would be subject to the same end use 
monitoring requirements as any other vehicle purchased completely 
with INL funds.  This vehicle is being used for its intended 
purpose. 
 
 
 
2003 CHEVROLET GEO TRACKER for MPS K-9 Unit: In CY 03 NAS purchased 
this vehicle for a then-funded customs advisor to provide mobile 
technical assistance and training to establish a sustainable and 
effective counternarcotics cargo inspection regime within PCD, 
Ministry of Finance (PCF), and OIJ to include their K-9 Units.  The 
customs advisor departed in 2004 and his position was not filled. 
In 2007 this vehicle was donated to the MPS K-9 Unit to help them 
deploy around the country.  The chief of the K-9 unit reported that 
the steering system was being repaired at the time of our 
inspection. It is being used for its intended purpose. 
 
 
 
¶E. Vessels 
 
 
 
COASTAL PATROL CRAFT: Costa Rica received three 82-ft 
decommissioned USCG cutters as a donation of Excess Defense 
Articles in 2001.  Transfer packages for these vessels were 
supported with Post's INL funds, and included the re-fitting of all 
electronics and communications systems, training for the SNGC 
crews, and a full complement of spare parts. 
 
 
 
The ships 82-3 "Juan Rafael Mora" and 82-2 "Juan Santamaria" are 
based in the Pacific port of Puntarenas.  The 82-4 "Pancha 
Carrasco" is stationed in the southern Pacific port of Golfito. 
 
In 2008, NAS provided spare parts and labor costs for the repair of 
the refrigerators on the the 82-2 "Juan Santamaria" and 82-3 "Juan 
Rafael Mora". Also in CY09 NAS funded repair for the air 
conditioning system in the 82-3 "Juan Rafael Mora" and two 
generators in the 82-4 "Pancha Carrasco". All three vessels are 
operational and being used for their intended purpose.  NOTE: These 
three 82-foot patrol boats are scheduled to be completely 
overhauled using FY2008-2009 Merida FMF funds.  END NOTE. 
 
 
 
 
RIGID HULL INFLATABLE PATROL CRAFT (RHI): Six RHI fast patrol craft 
were transferred to SNGC from CY 00-02 under the Coast Guard 
Organization Project.  Each RHI was equipped with two Honda 130 hp 
outboard engines and complete rigging, electronics, and safety 
equipment at the Coast Guard Station in Puntarenas. None are 
operational and all of the salvageable equipment from each vessel 
has been removed to and is being used on other SNGC vessels.  These 
locally-manufactured vessels experienced numerous problems with the 
inflatable section of their hulls.  In CY 06 SNGC requested 
authorization to remove the radar, communication and navigation 
equipment to install them on other vessels as needed; as of 2009 
most of the equipment had been transferred for use on other 
vessels, with some of the equipment remaining in storage at the 
SNGC Station in Quepos. 
 
 
 
 
FIBERGLASS FAST BOATS: Two 26-foot fiberglass fast boats were 
donated to the Ministry of Public Security in CY 02 under the 
Colombia Supplemental Project.  Each fast boat was equipped with 
two 120 horsepower Mercruiser diesel engines, complete rigging, 
electronics, and safety equipment. Currently there is one 
operational, the other is being repaired. All 4 Mercruiser  Diesel 
engines have been replaced by engines confiscated from traffickers. 
When operational, these vessels are being used for their intended 
purposes. 
 
 
 
¶F. Canine Program 
 
Ministry of Public Security K-9 Unit: In CY 03 NAS contracted with 
CSI International for five narcotics detection dogs with a one-year 
training and certification package.  Of the five original dogs, all 
have been retired or died with only one still active, but will be 
retired soon due to spinal problems. 
 
 
 
¶G. Construction Projects 
 
 
 
Ministry of Public Security Penas Blancas Border checkpoint:  In CY 
02 NAS funded the construction of a counternarcotics inspection 
station at Penas Blancas, the main border crossing point between 
Costa Rica and Nicaragua.  In CY 03 NAS funded the purchase of 
tools, furniture, and other equipment to outfit the inspection 
station.  Also in CY 03, NAS secured the donation of a used 
40-kilowatt Cummins diesel-powered electrical generator from 
Embassy San Jose for the border inspection station.  Construction 
was completed in November 2003 with the exception of minor 
modifications.  The inspection station was formally donated on 
April 2004. 
 
 
 
We will inspect the Penas Blancas facility in mid-February 2010 and 
will report septel. 
 
 
 
Coast Guard Station in Quepos:  NAS funds were used to construct a 
3000 square foot, two-story building with a storage/maintenance 
facility for two fast boats.  The building also includes a 
dormitory for 15 personnel, kitchen, dining facility/conference 
room, operations center, and storage facilities.  New and old 
furniture were donated to outfit the station.  The Coast Guard 
station is located in the Pacific port of Quepos and has been 
operational since November 2003.  The station and furniture were 
formally donated to the SNGC on February 2004.  The NAO visited the 
building in November 2009 and noted that the overall condition of 
the building was good.  The building is being used for its intended 
purpose. 
 
 
 
¶H. Miscellaneous Equipment 
 
 
 
Immigration Directorate: In CY 02 NAS provided a Panasonic fax 
machine, 60 optical passport readers, five mobile inspection 
terminals and funded the development of related specialized 
software.  They reported that the fax machine, 40 optical readers 
and four mobile inspection terminals have been irreparably damaged. 
The remaining 20 readers are being used in regional offices; one 
inspection terminal is in use at the IT section. The software is 
performing as expected.  In CY 05 NAS provided a Brother Intellifax 
4100 Machine which is in use at the records department. 
 
 
 
In CY 03 and CY 04 NAS provided security ink and stamps along with 
appropriate security lockers, and the GOCR intended to purchase 
additional ink and stamps to supply all ports of entry around the 
country, although it was not until CY07 that they were finally 
used. The ink stamps were replaced in 2009 by an electronic stamp 
at the Juan Santamaria International Airport in San Jose and at the 
Golfito port of entry. 
 
 
 
Air Surveillance Section (SVA):  From CY 02-04 NAS donated six 
Garmin handheld GPSs and two 400-IFR GPSs for the SVA's aircraft, 
spare parts and two six-man aviation life rafts with canopies, two 
Tasco 7x50 binoculars, one projector, one Toshiba notebook laptop, 
and furniture for the Tactic Monitoring Office. The unit reported 
one binocular lost during an operation in 2009. The donated GPS 
navigation systems have been installed in aircrafts MSP003/MSP019 
and are functioning properly.  One of the life rafts is damaged and 
cannot be used anymore, thus it will be removed from the inventory. 
In CY08 NAS donated 4 HGU-56/P helmets, 20 shoulder holsters with 
double harness, 20 paddle Roto Taurus 92 & 99 Roto-Holster paddle, 
double mag pouch Beretta 9mm Roto paddle and 23 Nomex flight suits. 
Also in CY09 INL provided an Aspen Avionics Electronic Flight 
Instrument System that was installed in aircraft number MSP017, one 
HP 110-125 mini laptop and a Canon D60 digital camera.  The 
equipment is being used for their intended purpose and is kept at 
 
the SVA Operations Section.  This unit maintains a log with the 
information of the person that will be using the equipment and 
condition in which it was handed-over. 
 
 
 
Intelligence and Security Bureau (DIS): in CY07 NAS provided a 
Pelco Spectra Dome Security Surveillance B&W Camera that was 
installed at the DIS main building. INL also donated a rapid eye LT 
Recorder Video Unit, three wall mounts for the Spectra mini smoked 
dome, three spectra, three power source for Domos, one 17-inch 
monitor, one Dome control module, a code converter RS232 to RS485 
for PTZ control, three video baluns for UTP cable use and three 
Spectra III UTP Video Modules.  This equipment will be installed at 
the Immigration cubicles at the Juan Santamaria Airport once some 
new construction is completed.  They reported that part of the 
equipment has been temporarily installed at the DIS building.  In 
CY2008 eight Phyton Level IIIA ballistic vests were donated to the 
DIS. All of the equipment is operational and is kept at the DIS 
facility. 
 
 
 
PCD: In CY 01 NAS provided four complete contraband detector kits 
to the PCD.  Complete kits are currently deployed with PCD units 
located at Corredores in the south of Costa Rica and the port of 
Limon.  This equipment has proven highly effective in detecting 
cocaine located in hidden compartments, fuel tanks, and tires of 
tractor-trailers crossing into Costa Rica.  An additional kit used 
for training by Post's Customs Advisor was donated to the PCD in 
¶2004. All of this equipment has been heavily used and is getting 
old and worn out.  Some parts are moved from one inspection point 
to another depending on which parts of the kit are in good working 
condition.  The optic fibers are worn out and scan images are 
blurry.  Costly re-calibration of the density meters is required 
with increasing frequency.  In CY09 two additional CT-30 kits and 
two Cellebrite UFED Ruggedized Portable Systems were donated; the 
latter permits the user to extract data from cell phones and PDAs. 
In Costa Rica it will be used for conducting criminal and 
counternarcotics investigations on narcotraffickers' cell phones, 
and gather evidence for use in prosecution. With the Merida 
Initiative, we expect U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) to 
donate another 14 kits. 
 
 
 
Undercover Surveillance Equipment:  In CY 03, CY 04 and CY 06 NAS 
funded the purchase of equipment to provide video and audio 
surveillance for PCD operations.  This equipment was highly 
versatile, essential for officer/agent safety, and has been used 
for documentation of undercover narcotics purchases, providing 
valuable documentary evidence used in criminal judicial 
proceedings.  However, some of this equipment, such as the Nokia 
cell phone audio transmitter, is outdated and easily recognized 
during operations and requires an oversize shirt for PCD's 
officials.  All this equipment is well maintained and is being used 
for its intended purpose. 
 
 
 
OIJ Narcotics Section: Cameras, audio/video and other equipment: 
From CY 02-04, NAS donated two Epson digital cameras, two Sony 
digital camcorders, two telex copyette duplicators, four DTMF 
decoders, two Panasonic Digital camcorders, one Honda generator, 
three Sony standard cassette transcribing machines, three Sony 
micro cassette transcribing machines, three Sony Digital cameras, 
three Sony photo printers, two micro recorders disguised as 
cigarette packs, two micro recorders disguised as eyeglass cases, 
six double cassette decks, one card with 24 ports for Hicom 350 
communication system, eight telephones, 15 folding police batons, 
39 GE cassette recorders, 15 GE mini cassette recorders, two 
parabolic microphone handheld unit and reflectors, one Epson 
projector, six Sony radio cassette recorders, two Black & Decker 
cordless drills, four SME L400II modified cassette recorders, two 
MiniDV Sony camcorders, 20 remote GE tape recorders, four standard 
cassette transcribers and dictator, and two voice activated 
recorders. 
 
 
 
During our inspection, we found out that the microcassette 
transcribing machines were not in use due to MPS' limited funding 
for cassette tape. They reported that one of the Panasonic Digital 
Camcorders was lost after an operation. Otherwise, all this 
equipment is being used for its intended purpose. 
 
CSE Prosecution Units in San Jose, Perez Zeledon, Quepos, Limon and 
San Carlos: Cameras, audio and other equipment: NAS provided in CY 
02, 03, and 06 two micro cassette recorders, one transcriber, one 
night vision scope, four Nokia digital cameras, five cell phones 
and four lines, eight desktop cassette recorders and one piece of 
specialized transmission/reception equipment to the CSE in San 
Jose.  Additionally, four Canon digital cameras and eight voice 
activated recorders were distributed to offices in the other four 
parts of the country.  According to a December 2009 letter that we 
received from the Attorney General's office, all of the equipment 
is functioning properly and is being used for its intended 
purposes. 
 
 
 
Demand Reduction Campaigns: In 2003 NAS funded the purchase of a 
synthetic drugs master video, with CD-ROM, VHS copies and 
brochures.  In 2005 Post funded a new master video to continue with 
this program.  It was used to start a pilot program under the 
National Plan against Drugs implemented in public and private 
schools.  Students' inquiries led to design printed material.  In 
2007 printed and recorded material from this master video was 
funded to continue with this campaign. 
 
 
 
¶9. Unmonitored Resources - N/A 
 
 
 
¶10. Repair and Maintenance of Commodities - Maintenance of some 
equipment and the minor structural and drainage problems at Penas 
Blancas border checkpoint and Quepos coast guard station continue 
to be a minor problem mostly due to lack of resources. 
 
 
 
¶11. Lack of Use and Misuse of Commodities - N/A 
 
 
 
¶12. Disposal of Commodities - N/A 
 
 
 
IMPACT 
 
 
 
¶13. Following the implementation of the bilateral maritime 
agreement (the first in the region), Embassy San Jose engaged in a 
$2.15 million, three-year (2000-2003) SNGC Development Plan using 
Colombia Supplemental funding ($1.9 million) and Post's INL funds. 
As a result, the SNGC experienced significant growth, increased its 
operational capability, and became a more professional 
organization. 
 
 
 
Per Ref B, in 2009, Costa Rican authorities seized 20.6 metric tons 
(MT) of cocaine, of which 13.8 MT were seized on land or air and 
6.8 MT were seized in national and/or join