08RIODEJANEIRO236
Prominent Brazilians Ponder Foreign Policy Challenges and
Fri Sep 05 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Rio De Janeiro
VZCZCXRO6352
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHRI #0236/01 2491444
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 051444Z SEP 08
FM AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4602
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA 0939
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 5174
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 3445
RUEHZA/WHA CENTRAL AMERICAN COLLECTIVE
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 RIO DE JANEIRO 000236 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL SENV ETRD ECIN BR
SUBJECT:  Prominent Brazilians Ponder Foreign Policy Challenges and 
Priorities 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary.  The Brazilian Center for International Relations 
(CEBRI) commemorated its 10th anniversary with a special forum in 
Rio de Janeiro on September 2, 2008 which featured prominent 
Brazilian policymakers and academics speaking on the theme of 
"Challenges to Brazil's Foreign Policy."  CEBRI was modeled after 
the U.S. Council on Foreign Policy, and is widely considered the 
most prestigious think tank in Brazil on foreign policy and 
international relations.  Conference participants packed the halls 
of Itamaraty Palace, the former Foreign Ministry, to hear remarks 
from a distinguished list of speakers including current Foreign 
Minister Celso Amorim, Presidential Foreign Policy Advisor Marco 
Aurelio Garcia, and former President Fernando Henrique Cardoso.  Key 
themes that emerged from the discussion as challenges to Brazil's 
foreign policy were the need to balance historical principals such 
as multilateralism and regional integration against pursuing 
Brazil's own national interests; how best to realize the goal of 
global (versus regional) leadership on issues such as energy, trade, 
and climate change; and the need to foster more innovation within 
Brazil and the region to strengthen South America's standing in the 
world.  A synopsis of forum discussions follows below.  End 
Summary. 
 
The Government's Perspective 
---------------------------------- 
¶2.  (U) Foreign Minister Celso Amorim opened the conference by 
noting that there are indeed many challenges to Brazilian foreign 
policy, but chose to focus on two main themes.  First, he stressed 
the primacy of multilateralism in Brazilian foreign policy from both 
a political and an economic perspective.  For example, even though 
Mercosur or a potential 4+1 trade agreement with the U.S. might be 
of interest to Brazil - the country's main priority is emphatically 
on World Trade Organization (WTO) negotiations, according to Amorim. 
 The same can be said of Brazil's view of the United Nations on 
international security issues.  Amorim cited his recent conversation 
with U.S. Senator Chuck Hagel on Brazil's command of Haiti 
peacekeeping efforts and said that such action by Brazil could only 
be imaginable in the context of the UN.  Second, Amorim reaffirmed 
South American integration as the key element of Brazil's foreign 
policy looking forward, noting that Brazil's prosperity is 
intrinsically linked to that of its neighbors.  He explained that 
Brazil is striving to integrate more deeply with other South 
American countries to strengthen their collective voice on the world 
stage.  For his part, President Lula's International Advisor Marco 
Aurlio Garcia noted that Brazil is becoming more multi-polar and 
multilateral in its international relations strategy.  He said that 
on trade, President Lula is committed to WTO and that reaching 
agreement there takes priority over pursuing separate agreements 
with Mercosur, the U.S., or the European Union.  He touched on South 
American integration, saying that trade is an important issue but 
that it should not be viewed as the primary tool by which to 
integrate.  Brazil, he said, needs to look to integrate with its 
neighbors on a wide range of issues such as democracy, social 
development, agricultural and industrial policy, and technology 
transfer. 
 
Former President Fernando Henrique Cardoso 
------------------------------------------ 
¶3.  (U) Former President Fernando Henrique Cardoso challenged Brazil 
to take bolder positions on foreign policy.  The country's goal 
should not be limited to being just a regional leader.  Brazil's 
challenge, he said, is that it needs to move from adolescence into 
adulthood in international relations; it should avoid being overly 
romantic and overly arrogant.  Brazil needs to come out in front and 
take strong positions.   It cannot afford to hide behind political 
alliances and regional integration for fear of showing any crack in 
what we all know is a tenuous solidarity among neighboring states. 
Brazil cannot expect to shape its foreign policy with third world 
country ideals, because Brazil does not identify with most countries 
of the third world.  He criticized the singular focus on the WTO 
Doha round without thinking about other alternatives such as 
bilateral trade agreements.  Brazil should build bilateral 
agreements with other countries, he argued, saying that until now 
Brazil has only one commercial and partial agreement with Mexico 
that was signed during his administration. 
 
Regional Integration 
-------------------- 
¶4.  (U) Deputy Foreign Minister Samuel Pinheiro Guimaraes echoed 
Amorim's comments on the importance of regional integration. 
However, he noted that Brazil is very different from its neighbors. 
Despite the many similarities that existed in the 1960s, the 
dynamism of Brazil's economy especially sets it apart from the rest 
of South America.  He cited diversification of exports as the main 
factor which has made Brazil more competitive internationally, and 
which has led to a growing trade surplus with the countries of South 
America.  Diplomat Joao Baena Soares argued that regional challenges 
 
RIO DE JAN 00000236  002 OF 003 
 
 
require priority attention because South America is so important for 
Brazil.  The continuity of a consistent and predictable foreign 
policy, generous with its neighbors is in Brazil's national 
interest, he insisted.  Baena Soares did say, though, that he does 
not believe that Brazil is ready to play the role of a global actor 
on behalf of the region.  Researcher Maria Regina Soares de Lima 
highlighted Brazil's many competing alliances as a challenge to 
foreign policy.  In addition to the goal of regional integration 
with South American neighbors, Brazil's foreign policy is also 
focused on building coalitions with other groups of countries with 
perceived overlapping interests such as China, India, Mexico, and 
South Africa. 
 
South-South Dialogues and the G-8 
--------------------------------- 
¶5.  (U) University of Sco Paulo Professor Gilberto Dupas noted 
Brazil's strength in international negotiations and said that Brazil 
should take advantage of this to increase its weight in global 
governance, such as in the G-8.  However, there is an increasing 
lack of credibility of many of the other south-south and regional 
groups to which Brazil belongs.   According to Dupas, the G-4, G-20 
and Mercosur clearly do not move beyond the national interests of 
each member country to accomplish the goals for forming such groups. 
 Former Chancellor Francisco Rezek declared that, while it is 
important that Brazil invests in defense, the country has other 
competing needs for public resources which should be the priority. 
According to him, ethanol is a golden opportunity of growth for 
Brazil.  However, environmental rules should not be disregarded. 
Asked about what Brazil expects from the US, former Deputy Foreign 
Minister Marcos Azambuja answered that Brazil wants full access to 
financial markets and high technology. 
 
Environment, Energy and Food Supply 
----------------------------------- 
¶6.  (U) Former Foreign Minister Luiz Felipe Lampreia and former 
National Petroleum Agency (ANP) Director Sebastiao do Rego Barros 
agreed that Brazil needs to change its position in relation to 
international negotiations on climate change.  Brazil has increased 
its emissions significantly during the past years, contributing to 
the increase in average worldwide temperature by 2-6 degrees 
centigrade from 1990-2007, the highest registered change in 
temperatures in world history.  They argued that Brazil, which they 
called one the ten biggest polluters of the planet, should accept 
targets to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.  Lampreia also noted 
that Amazon deforestation has increased by 64 percent in the one 
year period between August 2007-August 2008, a sacrifice which has 
not necessarily been taken for the benefit of economic growth or an 
increase in agricultural production.  He noted a very large and 
organized campaign to smear biofuels, preying on fears of 
deforestation or decreased food supply. 
 
Commerce and Innovation 
----------------------- 
¶7.  (U) Former Ambassador to the U.S. Roberto Abdenur said that 
innovation is the key to Brazil's development.  According to him, 
Brazil had a steep increase in science production, but the country 
still needs more innovation.  Abdenur also cited that the 
internationalization of Brazilian corporations and intellectual 
property are two themes that need special attention as part of 
development policy.   Finally, Director of the Brazilian Economic 
Committee for Latin America and the Caribbean Renato Baumann said 
that Brazil needs to integrate more deeply with Mercosur countries. 
He affirmed the importance of innovation, but said that Brazil 
should try to accomplish innovation together with neighboring 
countries through technology exchange. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Comment. It appears that Brazil's policy elite is 
struggling seriously with the question of whether the old ways of 
doing diplomacy make sense in light of Brazil's growing economic 
heft and global aspirations.  We are already beginning to see 
Brazilian interest in a more activist foreign policy outside of 
South America-e.g., in their leadership in the WTO and in Haiti 
peacekeeping, in their growing interest in playing a role in the 
Middle East Peace Process, and in their increased outreach to 
Africa.  The current debate suggests that, over the next decade, we 
could well see this trend intensify.  Indeed, following the CEBRI 
forum, an equally distinguished group which again included Foreign 
Minister Amorim gathered in Rio de Janeiro to discuss "How Brazil 
Can Be the Best of the BRIC Countries."  Among other things, the 
group discussed political coordination with other BRIC countries, 
South American integration and the value of Mercosur as a trade 
bloc, and the importance of Brazil's global leadership in the 
context of multilateral organizations such as the UN and the WTO. 
Leading 2010 presidential contender Sao Paulo Governor Jose Serra 
and former diplomat Sergio Amaral (a key foreign policy advisor to 
Serra) both clearly signaled that foreign policy objectives under a 
 
RIO DE JAN 00000236  003 OF 003 
 
 
new administration might well take a different approach to Mercosur 
and South American integration, looking to advance Brazil's 
political and trade agenda in a more pragmatic way.  End Comment. 
 
¶9.  (U) This cable has been coordinated with and cleared by Embassy 
Brasilia. 
 
MARTINEZ