05KABUL5186
PRT/FARAH: SEXUAL POLITICS OVERSHADOW AS
Wed Dec 21 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 005186 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SA/FO, SA/A, S/CT, EUR/RPM 
NSC FOR AHARRIMAN, KAMEND 
CENTCOM FOR POLAD, CG CFA-A, CG CJTF-76 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV AF
SUBJECT: PRT/FARAH: SEXUAL POLITICS OVERSHADOW AS 
PROVINCIAL COUNCILORS SWORN IN 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary:  Five men and three women were sworn in 
as Provincial Councilors in Farah Province November 10. 
Gender division was overcome with the decision to elect a 
woman to the Vice Chairperson position.  Aside from a 
momentary gaffe from Governor Wasefi as he tried to make 
the selections himself, the Councils leadership selection 
went smoothly.  End Summary. 
 
--------------- 
The Swearing In 
--------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Amidst sprays of plastic flowers and the strains 
of the national anthem played on a hand-held cassette 
player, eight of nine Provincial Council members were 
proudly sworn in November 10 in Farah Province.  After 
verses from the Koran were sung by a local mullah, three 
women and five men swore the oath of office at the 
Governors compound.  Governor Wasefi, pistol at his side, 
orated the introduction including calls for righteousness 
and refraining from poppy cultivation.  President Karzais 
message lauding the return to democracy and the wish for 
positive relations between governed and governors was well 
received.  JEMB, UNAMA and media representatives were 
present; however, ranking government officials and family 
members were noticeably lacking in this well publicized 
event. 
 
¶3. (SBU) Notably absent was the Council member elected by 
the district of Purchaman in northern Farah Province, a 
a 
two-day journey from Farah City.  He did not participate in 
the November 12 election of the Meshrano Jerga and has not 
been seen in the city since his election. 
 
----------------- 
Politicians Speak 
----------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU) Gholam Faroq Khan Farah, of Bala Baluk District, 
spoke of his loyalty to the people he will to represent and 
to the government of Afghanistan.  He promised to build a 
positive coalition within the governing body to effect 
progress for his constituents.  Nafasgul Kiedmat, one of 
the three female Council members, spoke of the need for the 
group to choose honest, educated people to lead.  She 
called for actors, not speakers, and outlined her platform 
of security, womens rights, calling for steps to be taken 
against warlords and corruption. 
 
-------------------- 
The Governors Gaffe 
-------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU) After these speeches, the Governor tried to 
dismiss the proceedings, saying that the group had no 
further business for the day.  He was quickly reminded by 
y 
the PRT Poloff that the Council had yet to decide upon 
their chairperson, vice chairperson or secretary.  Governor 
Wasefi announced that he would choose the chairperson who 
would, in turn, choose the other officials.  Poloff gently 
explained that idea was contrary to JEMB dictates and the 
National Provisional Election Officer (NPEO) could outline 
the official selection process, to which the governor 
deferred. 
 
---------------- 
Sexual Politics 
---------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) After the NEPOs explanation, members retreated 
to an adjoining room to confer and vote.  A source inside 
the group divulged that they were initially divided along 
gender lines, but quickly developed the art of coalition 
building.  The final section was made after more than an 
hour of discussions: Chairperson: Haji Abdul Basir from 
Khutmeliq, Farah District.  Vice Chairperson: Balquis 
Roshan, (female) Farah City, Farah District.  Secretary: 
Ziaudin (individual has no other name), Shewan City, Bala 
Boluk District. 
 
-------- 
Progress 
-------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Comment:  Governor Wasefi made great progress in 
his acceptance of the Provincial Council since Poloff began 
meeting regularly with him in early October.  As late as 
November 1, when Poloff asked Wasefi when he expected to 
host the Provincial Council meeting, he replied, I dont 
know and I dont care.  He has demonstrated a propensity 
to collect power by marginalizing groups he sees as 
threatening, problematic, or difficult to control.  A 
recent example was his pointed lack of inclusion of mullahs 
at a counter-narcotics shura Nov 2.  His hard-line stances 
appear to be softening, however; at more recent CN shuras 
on November 29 and December 15, mullahs were included and 
invited to speak. 
 
¶8.  (SBU) Comment continued:  The sexual division in the 
voting for council leadership positions was not unexpected 
in a society still used to treating women as second-class 
citizens.  Governor Wasefi remarked to the female PRT 
PRT 
Poloff during a break that the men carry women on their 
shoulders, implying that women were incapable of holding 
power by themselves.  The fact that the men relinquished 
even one of the leadership positions was a positive step 
towards working together. 
 
¶9.  (SBU) Comment continued:  Gender politics continues to 
be an undercurrent in Farah politics.  Subsequent meetings 
with the three female officials during November and 
December were heavy with anti-male comments demonstrating 
their continued bullying.  Poloff counseled the women to 
focus on ideas rather than gender.  Male council member 
Dadiki met reluctantly Nov 28 with Poloff shielding his 
face with his hand so as not to acknowledge her, directing 
his attention only to the male interpreter.  After an hour 
of discussion he allowed the hand to drop and two hours 
later he made eye-contact and spoke directly with Poloff. 
Change will come to Farah, if slowly. End Comment. 
 
 
NEUMANN