06KABUL5397
COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR THE VISIT OF PM/WRA
Tue Nov 07 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXYZ0049
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBUL #5397 3111229
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 071229Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 3979
INFO RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 4378UNCLAS KABUL 005397 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
PM/WRA (FOR EPATTERSON AND SMORIMOTO) 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OTRA PARM PREL MARR MASS ASEC AF
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR THE VISIT OF PM/WRA 
PATTERSON AND ARNETT 
 
 
 ¶1. (U) Embassy Kabul warmly welcomes PM/WRA Policy Advisor 
Eric Patterson and Technical Advisor Eric Arnett and grants 
country clearance for the visit from November 15 to November 
18,2006. 
 
¶2. (U) Control officer for the visit is Political-Military 
Affairs Officer Todd Bullock. Mr. Bullock's contact 
information follows: 
-- tel (work): 93-0-70-10-8160 
-- cell tel.: 90-0-798-018-941 
-- UNCLAS e-mail: bullockjt@state.gov 
 
¶3. (U) Embassy Kabul will provide transportation, security, 
escorts and lodging. Visit schedule will be provided 
separately. 
 
¶4. (U) Post recommends that all travelers review information 
about traveling to Kabul on Post's website: 
http://kabul.state.gov. 
 
¶5. (SBU) Threat Assessment/Security Guidelines follow: 
 
a. The security environment in Kabul and throughout 
Afghanistan is dangerous.  There is continued potential for 
attacks against U.S. citizens and interests in Afghanistan. 
Terrorist actions may include, but are not limited to rocket 
attacks, suicide operations, assassinations, kidnappings, 
hijackings, shootings or bombings. The potential exists in 
Kabul and the rest of the country for demonstrations, riots, 
bombings, and other violent actions against U.S. citizens and 
interests. 
 
b. Visitors are advised to maintain a level of vigilance and 
to heighten their security awareness while at post. Americans 
citizens have been victimized by vehicle-borne explosives and 
roadside bombs within the last year. Occasional rocket 
attacks in the vicinity of the Embassy compound are 
unpredictable and random.  There have been incidents of 
carjackings and robberies directed against NGOs, journalists 
and diplomats carried out by aggressive and armed persons. 
The proliferation of weapons on the street is extensive. 
Host country and ISAF forces have had some success in making 
arrests and seizing weapons. However travel outside of Kabul 
remains extremely dangerous in many places, and travel within 
Kabul after dark should also be avoided.  Due to restrictions 
travelers should be prepared to expect delays and possible 
cancellations of events in Kabul and of proposed out-of-Kabul 
travel. 
 
c. All personnel are required to attend a RSO Security 
briefing after travel.  Verification of security clearance 
level is required prior to issuance of an identification 
card.  Persons who will require unescorted access in the 
controlled access areas (CAA) are responsible for ensuring 
that security clearances are transmitted to post prior to 
their arrival. 
 
d. The U.S. Embassy maintains a 2400 curfew. However, changes 
in threat conditions may result in an earlier curfew on a 
temporary basis. The RSO must clear any travel outside of the 
city, as well as any proposed travel after dark. Travel 
during daylight hours is permitted, but must be performed in 
an armored vehicle. Anyone traveling off the compound must 
sign out on departure and back in upon returning to the 
compound.  Personnel are advised to carry a radio or cell 
phone to maintain contact in the event of an emergency. 
 
e. Though the compound has been checked for mines and 
unexploded ordinance (UXO), there remains the remote 
possibility that a UXO or mine could remain. While in 
Afghanistan, do not touch anything suspicious, avoid picking 
up souvenirs and immediately report any suspicious device to 
RSO personnel. Outside the compound, red rocks are uncleared 
mine areas, while white rocks are considered mine free areas. 
Be advised, however, there remains a 10% chance that 
unexploded mines remain in the mine cleared areas. For this 
reason, during all travel in Kabul and out of the city, 
travelers should remain on hard surface roads at all time. 
NEUMANN