06KABUL4114
PRT:PANJSHIR: MASSOUD COMMEMORATION DRAWS PEACEFUL
Wed Sep 13 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBUL #4114/01 2561325
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 131325Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2431
INFO RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS KABUL 004114 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PINR AF
SUBJECT: PRT:PANJSHIR: MASSOUD COMMEMORATION DRAWS PEACEFUL 
CROWD 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (SBU) The ceremony for slain mujahideen commander Ahmed 
Shah Massoud, held September 10 in Panjshir, attracted some 
five thousand people and went off peacefully.  U.S. 
participants included Ambassador Neumann and CJTF-76 
Commanding General, Major General Freakley.  The event had 
many dimensions:  Massoud commemoration, Panjshir pilgrimage, 
national reflection and mujahideen reunion.  It also had 
positive side-effects.  It strengthened provincial capacity, 
especially in terms of planning and security; highlighted the 
importance of the reconstructed road; led to reconciliation 
between Governor Bahlul and NDS Director Saleh; and bolstered 
Panjshir-Kabul governmental ties.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------- 
Large Crowds and Special Guests 
------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  September 9 marked the fifth anniversary of the 
assassination of Ahmed Shah Massoud.  Thousands gathered 
September 10 in Panjshir, next to his tomb and not far from 
his home.  According to the Governor, the crowd totaled 
around five thousand people, &for Panjshir the largest 
gathering in memory.8  The majority of them were former 
mujahideen from inside the valley; but many Afghans from 
other provinces also attended.  Our contacts report that two 
factors helped draw the big crowd:  the importance of 
&martyred8 Massoud and the prospect of a free lunch. 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  Visitors from Kabul included those with Panjshiri 
roots such as First VP Massoud, Ambassador to Great Britain 
Ahmed Wali Massoud, Senators Fahim Khan and Mohammed Arif 
Sarwari, NDS Director Saleh and Army Chief of Staff Bismallah 
Khan.  GOA ministers and parliamentarians also attended. 
U.S. visitors included Ambassador Neumann, MG Freakley 
(CJTF-76), acting USAID mission director Carl Abdou Rahmaan 
and COL Schlatter (Task Force Tiger, CJTF-76).  The Senior 
Civilian Representative, Ambassador Everts, represented 
NATO/ISAF.  The Governor told us that Embassy representatives 
were present from Iran, Russia and Tajikistan as well. 
---------------------------------- 
Themes and Special Nod to the U.S. 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  In addition to the usual speeches, the official 
program provided for chanted tributes to Massoud, often 
punctuated with shouts of approval from former comrades in 
the audience.  Governor Bahlul, head of the planning 
committee, led off with words of welcome before turning -- 
&a deliberate political decision,8 he told us ) to the 
U.S. Ambassador.  In his remarks, the Ambassador cited the 
USAID-funded road construction in Panjshir as a symbol of 
opportunity, connection to the outside world, and fulfillment 
of a pledge made at last year,s anniversary.  He also called 
on Afghans to overcome their internal divisions in order to 
deal better with the challenges facing the country.  VP 
Massoud echoed this last theme, emphasizing the importance of 
all Afghans pulling together in developing their democracy. 
In his speech, SCR Everts said Afghans should continue the 
Massoud legacy of seeking a peaceful, democratic, prosperous 
Afghanistan. 
 
--------------------- 
PRT Support for Event 
--------------------- 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  The PRT had worked closely with provincial 
officials to help plan the event, which, in terms of 
magnitude, has a unique place in the Panjshir calendar.  The 
PRT coordinated on security arrangements, transportation 
modalities, invitation issuance and program elements.  After 
the event, the Governor dropped by to express his gratitude 
for the teamwork ) as well as to inform us of his decision 
to attend a 9/11 commemoration at Bagram hosted by MGEN 
Freakley.  He said his attendance in Bagram was 
&symbolically fitting,8 given the Afghan and American 
experience in September 2001. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  The event was well organized, apart from the 
traffic jam at its conclusion.  It had many dimensions: 
Massoud commemoration, Panjshir pilgrimage, national 
reflection and mujahideen reunion.  It also had various 
 
positive 
spinoffs.  For example, it strengthened provincial 
administrative capacity through the intense planning in the 
run-up.  It helped integrate into the provincial security 
team the new Chief of Police, who had been somewhat of an 
outsider since his arrival this spring.  It brought back 
former Foreign Minister Abdullah, who has been absent from 
his Panjshiri estate for months but returned to host the 
September 10 lunch.  It highlighted the importance of the 
reconstructed main road, used by thousands traveling up and 
down the valley on September 10.  It led to a personal 
reconciliation of Governor Bahlul and NDS Director Saleh, two 
Panjshiris who have been feuding lately but agreed at the 
ceremony to let bygones be bygones.  Finally, it bolstered 
the Panjshir-Kabul connection, one of the weak points in 
terms of good governance, through the Kabul police 
reinforcements and the many GOA visitors. 
NEUMANN