06KABUL5619
COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR U.S. GOVERNORS TO AFGHANISTAN
Wed Nov 29 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXYZ0001
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBUL #5619/01 3330209
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 290209Z NOV 06
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 4299
RUEHKU/AMEMBASSY KUWAIT 0389
RUEHRL/AMEMBASSY BERLIN 2054
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD 4448
RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD 0157
RUEHFT/AMCONSUL FRANKFURT 0930
RUEHDL/AMEMBASSY DUBLIN 0145UNCLAS KABUL 005619 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SCA/FO DAS GASTRIGHT, SCA/A 
STATE PASS TO USAID FOR AID/ANE, AID/DCHA/DG 
NSC FOR HARRIMAN 
OSD FOR KIMMITT 
CENTCOM FOR CG CFC-A, CG CJTF-76 POLAD 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: AMGT ASEC OTRA AF
SUBJECT:  COUNTRY CLEARANCE FOR U.S. GOVERNORS TO AFGHANISTAN 
 
REF:  STATE 189991 
 
¶1.  U.S. Embassy welcomes the visit of Governors Pataki, 
Kulongoski, Corzine, and Huntsman as well as Anthony Welcher, 
Dan Wilmot, Traci Scott, Rob Wilkins, MG Michael Sumrall, and 
Col. Kurt Vogel and grants country clearance for the period 
November 30 to December 1, for the governors to visit troops, 
visit USAID sites and meet President Karzai.  Control officer is 
Kimberly McClure, email address mcclurekm2@state.gov; telephone: 
011-93- 70-108-173 or 011-93-70-234-575.  All travelers who 
possess U.S. Department of State badges should bring their ID 
for identification purposes and to obtain an Embassy ID.  The 
delegation holds the following clearances: 
 
Gov. George Pataki, Secret, TP# 110905641 
Gov. Ted Kulongoski, Secret, TP# 202262656 
Gov. Jon Corzine, Secret, TP# 113297068 
Gov. Jon Huntsman, Secret, TP# 017812428 
Anthony Welcher, Top Secret, DP# 900401944 
Dan Wilmot, Top Secret, DP# 900435419 
Traci Scott, Top Secret, TP# 802151397 
MG Michael Sumrall Top Secret OP#801627853 
Col. Kurt Vogel, Top Secret, OP# 801611537 
Rob Wilkins, Top Secret, OP# 801990215 
 
¶2.  VISAS:  A visa for Afghanistan MUST be obtained prior to 
arrival; visas on arrival are not available. You may need a visa 
for the cities you transit, as well. U.S. citizens do not 
require a United Arab Emirates (for Dubai) visa for stays of 
less than 30 days. 
 
¶3.  The New Embassy Compound (NEC) construction project is 
underway.  During the period of your stay, dust and/or mud, 
noise and disruptions will be a constant feature. 
 
¶4.  IMPORTANT:  Appropriate Clothing 
 
WOMEN:  Women are encouraged to wear trousers or long dresses 
(hemline to the ankle), full-length sleeves and a modest 
neckline (no sleeveless or low necked tops).  Many women carry a 
shawl or wrap.  Some women choose to have a head covering. 
 
MEN:  For meetings with Afghan officials, especially those at 
the Palace, men are encouraged to wear business suit and 
necktie. 
 
Wearing tight or revealing clothing is unacceptable both for 
official meetings and any time you are in public.  For both men 
and women going off the Embassy compound it is appropriate to 
wear long pants or jeans and a shirt with a long tail and 
sleeves below the elbow.  Wearing shorts and low waist pants and 
jeans revealing the bellybutton is not appropriate when out in 
the host country community. 
 
¶5.  TRAVEL OPTIONS TO KABUL 
 
The recommended travel route to Kabul is through Dubai.  This 
requires Embassy Kabul assistance to book flights from Dubai 
into Kabul.  The traveler?s assigned Embassy control officer 
should submit a GSO Travel Services Request with USG travel 
orders/fiscal data and the requested flight dates and times 
attached.  Payment in cash is required for any traveler not on 
USG orders.  For USAID travelers please e-mail Seetha Chayapathi 
schayapathi@usaid.gov) or Baryalai Wazeen (bwazeen@usaid.gov) to 
arrange travel services. 
 
The traveler is responsible for booking their hotel reservations 
in Dubai. 
 
Flights are available daily into Kabul although they may be 
cancelled or delayed on short notice, especially during the 
winter months.  Please note that the Embassy is closed on Friday 
and cannot provide customs, immigration, or baggage expediting 
on that day. 
 
a.  Dubai:  United Nations Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS) and 
KamAir flights may be booked  through the Embassy Kabul GSO 
Travel Office.  Ariana Afghan flights are not authorized for 
travelers on USG orders.  Passengers are allowed 30 kg (66 lbs.) 
of luggage with a $5.00 (UNHAS) or $3.00 (KamAir) per kilo 
overweight charge payable in local currency. UNHAS flies to 
Kabul on Sunday, Tuesday and Thursday, and KamAir operates 
daily.  UNHAS flight check-in is at 1000 in Terminal 2 for a 
1200 departure, and the KamAir flight check-in is at 0500 in 
Terminal 2 for a 0700 departure. For UNHAS flights, the 
passenger will receive an electronic confirmation from the 
Embassy Travel Office a few days before they travel.  For KamAir 
flights, tickets can be picked up at the check-in counter in 
Terminal 2.  Please be sure to identify yourself as a U.S. 
Embassy passenger to be assured they can give you your boarding 
pass. 
 
b.  Alternate routes to Kabul 
 
DELHI: Indian Airlines flies between Delhi and Kabul on Tuesday, 
Thursday and Saturday, departing Delhi at 1110, and KamAir flies 
from Delhi on Monday and Thursday, departing Delhi at 0930. 
These flights may be booked through a commercial travel agent, 
but you must inform your Embassy control officer and the Embassy 
Travel Office, at KabulGSOTravel@state.gov, of your arrival date 
and time so you can be added to the expediting and vehicle 
roster. 
 
ISLAMABAD: Due to security concerns and logistics problems, Post 
does not recommend transit through Islamabad. Transit through 
Pakistan requires country clearance and a valid visa and all 
arrangements for air travel, transport and hotels in Islamabad 
must be coordinated in advance with the Kabul Support Unit (KSU) 
at the U.S. Embassy in Islamabad. Please contact KSU at 
crockercb@state.gov if transit through Islamabad is required. 
 
BAKU: Azal Airlines flies from Baku to Kabul on Sunday, Monday, 
and Wednesday with a departure time of 0800. This flight may be 
booked through a commercial travel agent, but you must inform 
your Embassy control officer and the Embassy Travel Office, at 
KabulGSOTravel@state.gov, of your arrival date and time so you 
can be added to the expediting and vehicle roster. 
 
¶6.  Communications:  IDD telephone is 00-93-2-290005 and 290002. 
Embassy INMARSAT is 011-873-762-104-846.  24-hour Marine Command 
Post INMARSAT for emergencies is:  00-873-761-837-725.  Fax (not 
reliable) is 00-93-2-2301364.  USAID/Afghanistan can be reached 
from the U.S. at (202) 216-6288.  Post has unclassified and 
classified e-mail, record traffic, OPENNET Plus, and limited 
Internet capabilities. 
 
a.  Email Access:  Access to State Department email (for State 
Department employees only) ? to avoid creating duplicate email 
addresses within the State.gov system, post prefers not to 
provide a TDY e-mail address for visitors here less than 60 
days.  To access your ?home office? email while at Post, please 
bring with you the following information: 
 
--Name of your MS Exchange Server:  i.e., KABULSNTSB 
--Mailbox name, normally your NT login ID:  i.e., DoeJM (you 
will also need to remember the NT login password from your 
account). 
--Name of your NT Domain:  i.e., KABULDOM1 
 
b.  Official travelers on temporary duty, including non-State 
personnel, must coordinate the transport of official portable 
computers (unclassified or classified) that will be used within 
USG facilities with the RSO and ISSO.  Please include make, 
model and serial number in correspondence to Post.  Department 
of State policy prohibits the connection of official, portable 
computers to OpenNet or ClassNet without the explicit approval 
of the Post ISSO.  12 FAM 625.2.1 states that privately owned 
computers are not installed or used in any Department of State 
office building. 
 
¶7.  Lodging is scarce and will be allotted according to the 
following priority:  permanent staff staying a year or more, 
long-term TDY staff, short-term TDY staff and visitors.  Most 
TDYers will be housed in multi-bunk rooms in trailers.  Sheets, 
blankets, pillows and towels are provided.  Rooms may be cool at 
night.  Self-service laundry facilities are available.  An 
American-style cafeteria provides breakfast, lunch, and dinner, 
along with coffee, tea, and soft drinks within per diem rates. 
You may wish to bring towels, layered clothing for warmth, a 
small flashlight, and over-the-counter medicines as needed, hand 
lotion, lip balm, shower shoes, and snacks.  On the compound, 
American dress is the norm, but most women bring long sleeved 
garments, light jackets or shawls to cover their arms for trips 
off compound.  Two Embassy gyms are available to all compound 
residents. 
 
¶8.  Money:  Travelers should bring cash dollars.  TDYers should 
bring enough cash for their stay or a debit card, as an ATM 
machine is available.  Credit cards and checks are not accepted 
in Kabul but U.S. dollars are widely accepted. 
¶9.  Fiscal Data: In accordance with Department of State policy, 
post will direct charge each agency, organization or visiting 
delegation for the actual costs attributed to its visit. These 
costs include, but are not limited to, American and locally 
engaged staff overtime; field travel by Embassy employees; 
transportation costs for official vehicles; phone usage; and the 
cost for representational events. All/all visitors requesting 
administrative support services must provide the Embassy with 
authorization and fiscal data (e.g., travel orders) against 
which the costs for requested items can be charged. This 
information should be cabled or emailed to the Embassy in 
advance of your arrival. Please note that without a fund cite 
and authorization, post may not be able to provide vehicles, 
drivers, or other services. 
¶10.  Ground Transportation:  Travelers will be met at the 
airport upon arrival by an Embassy expediter, driver, and 
security officer.  The GSO Motor Pool has limited capabilities 
and will give priority to official travel, with personal travel 
available only if vehicles and drivers are available.  USG 
employees are not authorized to use public transportation. 
 
¶11.  Medical:  Kabul is a Class 1 Medical Clearance Post.  If 
you have any significant medical problems, you should avoid 
travel to Afghanistan.  In accordance with 3 FAM 1931.3 "Failure 
to obtain post-specific approval before traveling abroad may 
result in the individual being denied participation in the 
medical program and access to health units abroad."  Excursion 
Civil Service, WAE and TDY personnel who will be at Post more 
than 60 days are required to contact MED Clearances at 202-663- 
1668 or email medclearances@state.gov to arrange or verify MED 
approval to come to Post well in advance of their departure 
date. 
 
a.  Contractors or other long-term TDY employees who are not 
direct hire USG employees are not covered under the Department 
of State Medical Program, do not have Post Health Unit 
privileges, are not covered by M/DGHR/MED for medevac and should 
be covered by medevac insurance through their contracting 
company. 
 
b.  The Embassy Health Unit is staffed by a Foreign Service 
Health Practitioner and a Locally Employed Physician.  An 
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) hospital offers 
limited treatment capabilities. 
 
c.  Kabul is in a malaria zone from March to November.  During 
this time it is important to begin anti-malarial medication 
before arriving at Post.  Either Mefloquine 250 mg weekly or 
Doxycycline 100mg daily are approved for malarial prophylaxis. 
These medications must also be taken for 4 weeks after departing 
Post. 
 
d.  Individuals with sickle cell trait should carefully consider 
the altitude of this Post before applying for assignment here. 
Short-term (TDY) assignments carry an added risk because of the 
lack of time for acclimatization.  Dehydration and stress from 
exercise or illness compound the basic risks of high altitude. 
 
e.  Visitors should bring cold and intestinal medicines, saline 
nasal spray, lip balm, sunscreen, dry skin care, insect 
repellent with DEET, and tissues.  If you wear contacts, bring 
an ample supply of cleaning solution and two pairs of your 
prescription glasses.  The dry, dusty climate can make wearing 
contacts uncomfortable.  If you are taking prescription 
medication (i.e. for hypertension or other) bring sufficient 
amounts for more than the expected length of your stay as 
pharmaceuticals are limited. 
 
¶12.  Security Guidelines: 
 
a.  The security environment in Kabul and throughout Afghanistan 
is dangerous.  There is continued potential for attacks against 
U.S. citizens and interests in Afghanistan.  Terrorists do not 
distinguish between official and civilian targets.  Terrorist 
actions may include, but are not limited to, rocket attacks, 
suicide operations, assassinations, kidnappings, hijackings, 
shootings or bombings.  Potential exists in Kabul and the rest 
of the country for demonstrations, riots, bombings, and other 
violent actions against U.S. citizens and interests. 
 
b.  Visitors are advised to maintain a level of vigilance and to 
heighten their security awareness while at post.  American 
citizens have been victimized by vehicle-borne explosives and 
roadside bombs within the last year.  Occasional rocket attacks 
in the vicinity of the Embassy compound are unpredictable and 
random.  There have been incidents of carjackings and robberies 
directed against NGOs, journalists and diplomats carried out by 
aggressive and armed persons.  The proliferation of weapons on 
the street is extensive.  Host country and ISAF forces have had 
some success in making arrests and seizing weapons.  However 
travel outside of Kabul remains extremely dangerous in many 
places, and travel within Kabul after dark should also be 
avoided.  Due to restrictions on travel and limitations on 
available resources, TDY travelers should be prepared to expect 
delays and possible cancellations of events in Kabul and of 
proposed out-of-Kabul travel. 
 
c.  All personnel are required to attend a RSO Security Briefing 
after arrival.  Verification of security clearance level is 
required prior to the issuance of an identification card. 
Persons who will require unescorted access in the controlled 
access areas (CAA) are responsible for ensuring that security 
clearances are transmitted to post prior to their arrival. 
 
d.  The U.S. Embassy maintains a 2400 curfew.  However, changes 
in threat conditions may result in an earlier curfew on a 
temporary basis.  The RSO must clear any travel outside of the 
city, as well as any proposed travel after dark.  Travel during 
daylight hours is permitted, but must be performed in an armored 
vehicle.  Anyone traveling off the compound must sign out on 
departure and back in upon returning to the compound.  Personnel 
are advised to carry a radio or cell phone to maintain contact 
in the event of an emergency. 
 
e.  Though the compound has been checked for mines and 
unexploded ordinance (UXO), there remains the remote possibility 
that a UXO or mine could remain.  While in Afghanistan, do not 
touch anything suspicious, avoid picking up souvenirs, and 
immediately report any suspicious device to RSO personnel. 
Outside the compound, red rocks are uncleared mine areas, while 
white rocks are considered mine free areas.  Be advised, 
however, there remains a 10% chance that unexploded mines remain 
in the mine cleared areas.  For this reason, during all travel 
in Kabul or out of the city, travelers should remain on hard 
surface roads at all times. 
 
NEUMANN