07KABUL515
CABLE/PRT JALALABAD: 6 MONTH REPORT ON SECURITY,
Wed Feb 14 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO7941
RR RUEHDBU RUEHIK RUEHYG
DE RUEHBUL #0515/01 0451911
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 141911Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6161
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHZG/NATO EU COLLECTIVE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHINGTON DC
RHMFIUU/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3661
RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 KABUL 000515 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SCA/FO DAS GASTRIGHT, SCA/A, NATO/ISAF/AUS/NZ 
STATE PASS TO USAID FOR AID/ANE, AID/DCHA/DG 
NSC FOR HARRIMAN 
OSD FOR KIMMITT 
CENTCOM FOR CG CFC-A, CG CJTF-76 POLAD 
RELEASABLE TO NATO/ISAF, NZ, AUS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MCAP MOPS PREL PGOV PTER PHUM AF
SUBJECT: CABLE/PRT JALALABAD: 6 MONTH REPORT ON SECURITY, 
POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary:  Nangarhar province is an important 
urban and agricultural center along Afghanistan's 
eastern border.  During the past six months, the 
security climate has witnessed increased enemy 
activity, including IED attacks and ambushes of PRT 
convoys.  The paving of roads and a dramatic reduction 
of poppy cultivation were major achievements; however, 
corruption and weak infrastructure (electricity and 
civil aviation capacity) limit the viability of 
competitive alternatives to poppy growing.  Inadequate 
health care and education limit labor productivity. 
The establishment of a functioning Provincial 
Coordinating Council is a positive development.  There 
have not been many gains in the lives of women, who 
remain confined to the home due to cultural 
restrictions.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (U) Nangarhar province is the most densely 
populated province in Afghanistan, with the second 
largest population, but one of the smallest land areas 
of any province.  An important agricultural province, 
dominated by the fertile Kabul River valley, the 
province's mild climate allows many farmers to grow 
three crops a year.  Jalalabad, the capital city, is 
the cultural, political, and economic center for the 
whole eastern region and acts as the major market and 
supply source for the region.  The current population 
of Jalalabad is estimated at half a million people and 
is rapidly growing.  The province shares a long border 
with Pakistan, and the major highway connecting Kabul 
and Islamabad runs east-west across the width of the 
province, connected to Pakistan at the Torkham border. 
A high volume of Pakistani imports come through 
Jalalabad on to Kabul and the rest of Afghanistan. 
 
------------------ 
Security Situation 
------------------ 
 
¶3.  (SBU) During the past six months, Nangarhar 
experienced an increase in enemy activity leading up 
to the celebration of Eid.  This included an ambush on 
a PRT convoy, and an IED attack in Khogyani that 
killed the district subgovernor, police chief, and NDS 
chief. Another IED attack in the same district 
targeted a UNOPS vehicle there in conjunction with 
USAID-funded road work. A security officer was 
seriously injured.  Following Eid, there has been a 
steady amount of IED incidents.  These have included 
an IED attack on the subgovernor of Kama on January 
18, and a similar attack the following week on the 
subgovernor of Pachir Wa Agam.  There are continuing 
reports of insurgents' plans to target ISAF and Afghan 
security forces.  The people of Nangarhar are still 
largely supportive of the Afghan government and ISAF, 
and have in many cases turned in IEDs from around the 
province.  The arrest of Dr. Mohammed Hanif, former 
Taliban spokesman, as he was crossing from Pakistan 
into Nangarhar, was another major victory. 
 
---------------------------------- 
Political Situation and Governance 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (U) Corruption and bribery are almost universally 
acknowledged as "enemy number one" in the province. 
Residents believe that until corruption is curbed, the 
battles against poppy and terrorism cannot be won. 
The visit of Afghan Attorney General Sabit in December 
brought high hopes to many in the province, but most 
feel disappointed that he ultimately only arrested the 
"small fish" and none of the "big guys".  Some of 
those arrested have already been released. 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Another major change was the departure of 
 
KABUL 00000515  002 OF 004 
 
 
both the Chief of Police and the Commander of the 
Border Police in mid-January.  General Abdul Basir 
Salangi, who had a history of corruption and human 
rights violations, was transferred to Parwan province 
as Deputy Governor.  The ABP Commander, General Haji 
Abdul Zahir, has been reassigned to head the Eighth 
Brigade in Takhar Province.  Many people, including 
Governor Sherzai, had pushed for the removal of both. 
 
¶6.  (SBU) The establishment of a functioning 
Provincial Coordination Council in the governor's 
compound was a step forward.  The Nangarhar Provincial 
Council is active, yet still unsure of its role or 
authority.  They appear to be splitting into two rival 
groups, one led by the charismatic and dynamic 
Chairman Fazlhadi Muslimyar, and the other by Tahir 
Omar, son of Sherzad District "strong man" Zabid 
Zahir.  The Provincial Development Council, on which 
the PC is represented, unfortunately does not function 
well, and as a result the PDC has to date failed to 
draft a Provincial Development Plan. 
 
¶7.  (U) Governor Sherzai remains popular.  His 
aggressive anti-poppy campaign has shown results, with 
President Karzai acknowledging in a "Larry King Live" 
interview on CNN the dramatic decrease in poppy 
production in Nangarhar in 2005 (a decline of 96%.) 
Although poppy production increased during 2006, the 
Governor is aggressively pursuing an ambitious goal of 
zero poppy production in 2007. 
 
¶8.  (U) The police suffer from a lack resources and 
personnel.  There are not enough police officers in 
the districts, and in many places a number of them are 
"loaned" to VIP's or other high officials rather than 
staying in the district where they are assigned.  Lack 
of fuel for vehicles hampers their ability to 
investigate crimes or respond to calls for help. 
There is a large Regional Training Center for the 
police run by INL outside of Jalalabad, and the Joint 
Interagency Coordination Group of CSTC-A just 
announced plans to add new programs, tripling the size 
of the facility.  There are also plans to build new 
police headquarters in every district.  The ASP 
program started building several district center 
facilities last spring, but due to a concern regarding 
payment to contractors in Nangarhar all work was 
suspended while payments were reviewed. The ASP 
recently agreed that funds should be released to 
complete construction and as a result, the district 
center construction in Nangahar should be completed in 
the summer of 2007. 
 
¶9.  Nangarhar's complex relationship with its neighbro 
Pakistan has worsened during the past six months. 
While almost everyone in Nangarhar spent some time 
living in Pakistan during either the Russian 
occupation or the Taliban times, and most still have 
family members living in Pakistan, there is a wide- 
spread belief that Pakistanis are causing all the 
security problems in the province.  The issue of the 
border and teh Durand Line, the status of Pakistan's 
Northwest Frontier Province, and President Musharraf's 
proposal to build a wall and mine the border all 
contributed to the uneasy relationship. 
 
------------------ 
Economic SituationQ----------------- 
 
¶10.  (U) The paving of roads in Nangarhar province 
during the past six months is one of the province's 
greatest successes.  The highway from Jalalabad to 
Torkham Gate was completed and dedicated by President 
Karzai and Pakistani PM Aziz in September 2006.  The 
 
KABUL 00000515  003 OF 004 
 
 
road from Jalalabad to Kabul has had improvements 
also, which led to increased trade and investment 
along this major artery from Kabul to Islamabad. 
Meanwhile, most of the main roads in Jalalabad City 
have also been paved. 
 
¶11.  (U) Over 2,000 trucks cross the Torkham border 
point, approximately 76 km from Jalalabad, every day. 
However, there are many issues over tolls and tariffs, 
both legal and illegal, and a large group of Nangarhar 
businessmen recently called a meeting with the 
Governor to complain.  They threatened a general 
strike if the situation is not resolved.  Another 
problem is that the new Torkham highway is already 
deteriorating, due to the huge loads being carried by 
the jingle trucks (semis).  There is a weighing 
station at the border that is supposed to limit the 
weight of trucks on the new road, but it has not 
prevented overloaded trucks from using the road. 
 
¶12.  (U) Business owners in Jalalabad complain that 
there has been less spending this past year, as a 
result of lower incomes after the 2005 reduction in 
poppy cultivation.  While USAID has a very active 
Alternative Livelihood program, the loss of income 
from the highly profitable poppy has hurt the region's 
economy. 
 
¶13.  (U) Public Services - The availability of power 
in Jalalabad has deteriorated in the last six months. 
The major source of power, the Russian built Darunta 
Dam, continues to deteriorate.  Even if it were fully 
functional, the system was built to support 50,000 
people in Jalalabad, not the current population of 
500,000.  There are about 12 hours of electricity 
every third day for city dwellers, and no provincially 
supplied power outside the city. However, USAID will 
soon begin some $8 million of rehabilitation or 
replacement work on the dam's three operational 
generation units. When the work is completed in mid- 
2009 the three units should have a peak capacity of 10 
- 12 mw, doubling current electricity output. 
 
¶14.  (U) There is a serous shortage of teachers and 
school buildings in Nangarhar.  Teachers complain 
loudly, and justifiably, about the ridiculously low 
salaries and large student-teacher ratios.  Many 
teachers only have a twelfth grade education 
themselves.  Schools do not have enough classrooms, 
and some do not have any building at all.  In the 
district of Dur Baba, none of the eight schools have a 
building and all classes are conducted outside undeQ 
trees or tarps. 
 
¶15.  (U) Nangarhar has two large hospitals that 
service the whole eastern region, but one of them, the 
University Hospital, has been struggling during the 
past six months due to lack of funds.  The lack of 
electricity and running water is a constant problem. 
There are stories of people being asked to come up 
with payments during the middle of an operation, due 
to the hospital running out of fuel to power the 
generator for the equipment needed to continue the 
operation. 
 
------------------------- 
Cultural/Social Situation 
------------------------- 
 
¶16.  (U) Nangarhar has a major university, and a good 
education system compared to other Pashtun areas. 
However, it still lags behind other parts of the 
country in terms of education and women's rights. 
While there are three women on the Provincial Council 
and three in Parliament, women are almost invisible 
 
KABUL 00000515  004 OF 004 
 
 
outside the family home or compound.  When they do 
venture out, they are almost always completely covered 
by a burka.  They have a very real fear of being 
kidnapped or even killed if they do not follow the 
strict rules of behavior. 
 
¶17.  (U) Nangarhar does have its own TV station (NTV) 
and a number of radio stations.  The Indian government 
is supporting the development of a local cable 
channel, and many people, especially in the city, do 
have access to news from the various media. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶18.  (U) Given Nangarhar's strategic location as a 
trade center along the Pakistani border, greater 
investment in the province would play a key role in 
boosting the national economy by expanding imports and 
exports.  The ROZ initiative could provide a positive 
impetus in this direction.  However, unless new 
infrastructure is provided (electricity), existing 
infrastructure is maintained (roads), the Jalalabad 
airport reconfigured to support commercial traffic, 
and corruption reduced, Nangarhar is unlikely to 
attract significant new investment.  There is also a 
critical need for increased provision of services like 
health care and improved education to boost 
productivity and raise the quality of life. 
NEUMANN