07KABUL4172
COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR DR. JONAH BLANK
Sat Dec 22 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBUL #4172/01 3560835
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 220835Z DEC 07 ZFF4
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2006
INFO RUEHAD/AMEMBASSY ABU DHABI PRIORITY 1916
RUEHBK/AMEMBASSY BANGKOK PRIORITY 1897
RUEHIL/AMEMBASSY ISLAMABAD PRIORITY 5989
RUEHFT/AMCONSUL FRANKFURT PRIORITY 1081UNCLAS KABUL 004172 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AMGT ASEC OTRA AF
SUBJECT: COUNTRY CLEARANCE GRANTED FOR DR. JONAH BLANK 
 
REF: STATE 167796 
 
¶1.  U.S. Embassy Kabul welcomes the visit of Dr. Jonah Blank, 
Senate Foreign Relations Staffer and grants country clearance 
for the period December 29 to January 01, for fact-finding 
relating to ongoing war issues in Afghanistan.  Control 
officer is Political Officer C John Long, email address 
longcj2@state.gov; cellular telephone: 011-93-079-771-009, 
office number 011-93-070-108-224.  All travelers who possess 
U.S. Department of State badges should bring their ID for 
identification purposes and to obtain an Embassy ID.  Dr. 
Blank holds a TS/SCI clearance. 
 
¶2.  VISAS:  A visa for Afghanistan MUST be obtained prior to 
arrival; visas on arrival are not available. You may need a 
visa for the cities you transit, as well. U.S. citizens do 
not require a United Arab Emirates (for Dubai) visa for stays 
of less than 30 days. 
 
¶3.  IMPORTANT:  Appropriate Clothing 
 
WOMEN:  For meetings with Afghan officials, especially at the 
Palace, women are encouraged to wear long dresses (hemline 
line below the calf) or trousers, sleeves below the elbow and 
a modest neckline (no sleeveless or low necked tops).  Many 
women carry a shawl or wrap.  It is always appropriate to 
have a head covering - scarf or shawl - in official meetings. 
 
MEN:  For meetings with Afghan officials, especially those at 
the Palace, men are encouraged to wear business suit and 
necktie. 
 
Wearing tight or revealing clothing is unacceptable both for 
official meetings and any time you are in public.  For both 
men and women going off the Embassy compound it is 
appropriate to wear long pants or jeans and a shirt with a 
long tail and sleeves below the elbow.  Wearing shorts and 
low waist pants and jeans revealing the bellybutton is not 
appropriate when out in the host country community. 
 
¶4.  TRAVEL OPTIONS TO KABUL 
 
The recommended travel route to Kabul is through Dubai.  This 
requires Embassy Kabul assistance to book flights from Dubai 
into Kabul. The traveler is responsible for booking their 
hotel reservations in Dubai. 
 
Flights are available daily into Kabul although they may be 
cancelled or delayed on short notice, especially during the 
winter months.  Please note that the Embassy is closed on 
Friday and cannot provide customs, immigration, or baggage 
expediting on that day. 
 
a.  Dubai:  United Nations Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS) 
and KamAir flights may be booked  through the Embassy Kabul 
GSO Travel Office.  Ariana Afghan flights are not authorized 
for travelers on USG orders.  Passengers are allowed 30 kg 
(66 lbs.) of luggage with a $5.00 (UNHAS) or $3.00 (KamAir) 
per kilo overweight charge payable in local currency. UNHAS 
flies to Kabul on Sunday, Tuesday and Thursday, and KamAir 
operates daily.  UNHAS flight check-in is at 1000 in Terminal 
2 for a 1200 departure, and the KamAir flight check-in is at 
0500 in Terminal 2 for a 0700 departure. For UNHAS flights, 
the passenger will receive an electronic confirmation from 
the Embassy Travel Office a few days before they travel.  For 
KamAir flights, tickets can be picked up at the check-in 
counter in Terminal 2.  Please be sure to identify yourself 
as a U.S. Embassy passenger to be assured they can give you 
your boarding pass. 
 
b.  Alternate routes to Kabul 
 
DELHI: Indian Airlines flies between Delhi and Kabul on 
Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday, departing Delhi at 1110, and 
KamAir flies from Delhi on Monday and Thursday, departing 
Delhi at 0930. These flights may be booked through a 
commercial travel agent, but you must inform your Embassy 
control officer and the Embassy Travel Office, at 
KabulGSOTravel@state.gov, of your arrival date and time so 
you can be added to the expediting and vehicle roster. 
 
ISLAMABAD: Due to security concerns and logistics problems, 
Post does not recommend transit through Islamabad. Transit 
through Pakistan requires country clearance and a valid visa 
and all arrangements for air travel, transport and hotels in 
Islamabad must be coordinated in advance with the U.S. 
Embassy in Islamabad. 
 
BAKU: Azal Airlines flies from Baku to Kabul on Sunday, 
Monday, and Wednesday with a departure time of 0800. This 
flight may be booked through a commercial travel agent, but 
you must inform your Embassy control officer and the Embassy 
Travel Office, at KabulGSOTravel@state.gov, of your arrival 
date and time so you can be added to the expediting and 
vehicle roster. 
 
¶5.  Telephone:  International direct dial country code for 
Afghanistan is 93.    Embassy can be reached at the following 
numbers: 
 
   a.  93-70-10-8001 via international direct dial from 
anywhere 
      in the world. IDD toll charges apply. 
 
   b. 1-301-490-1042 (Embassy VOIP) from within the US, only 
      domestic long distance will be charged. 
 
   c. 1-202-216-6288 (USAID VOIP) to reach USAID in Kabul 
from 
      within the US, only domestic long distance will be 
      charged. 
 
   d. DSN 318-237-3912 from any Department of Defense 
facility. 
 
 
¶6. EMAIL:  Post has unclassified and classified e-mail, 
record traffic, OPENNET Plus, and limited Internet 
capabilities. 
 
a.  E-Mail Access:  State Department employees only.  Local 
computer accounts are not created in Kabul for TDYs of less 
than 90 days.  State Department TDY personnel in Kabul can 
access their home e-mail system through the use of Outlook 
Web Access (OWA).  Personnel should check with their local 
systems administrators prior to departure to ensure their 
network is part of the Department's Active Directory, and to 
get the name of their local domain.  This domain will be 
selected from the login screen from Kabul.  Active Directory 
was created and installed to allow users to log in and access 
their e-mail from anywhere in the world, thereby avoiding the 
excessive workload on IRM staffs that is caused by creating 
local accounts.  At any given time we are hosting numerous 
TDYs and it is not possible to create local accounts for 
short stays.  Systems administrators should instruct the 
users in the use of OWA prior to departing.  A word of 
caution:  Active Directory allows users to log in from 
anywhere.  However, it will also download your desktop to 
Kabul.  Any unnecessary items such as large documents, 
PowerPoints, photographs etc., should be removed from your 
desktop.  Our network service can be slow, and the initial 
log in could take a long time if it is downloading 
unnecessary files. 
 
b.  Official travelers on temporary duty, including non-State 
personnel, must coordinate the transport of official portable 
computers (unclassified or classified) that will be used 
within USG facilities with the RSO and ISSO.  Please include 
make, model and serial number in correspondence to Post. 
Department of State policy prohibits the connection of 
official, portable computers to OpenNet or ClassNet without 
the explicit approval of the Post ISSO.  12 FAM 625.2.1 
states that privately owned computers are not installed or 
used in any Department of State office building. 
 
¶7.  Lodging is scarce and will be allotted according to the 
following priority:  permanent staff staying a year or more, 
long-term TDY staff, short-term TDY staff and visitors.  Most 
TDYers will be housed in multi-bunk rooms in trailers. 
Sheets, blankets, pillows and towels are provided.  Rooms may 
be cool at night.  Self-service laundry facilities are 
available.  An American-style cafeteria provides breakfast, 
lunch, and dinner, along with coffee, tea, and soft drinks 
within per diem rates.  You may wish to bring towels, layered 
clothing for warmth, a small flashlight, and over-the-counter 
medicines as needed, hand lotion, lip balm, shower shoes, and 
snacks.  On the compound, American dress is the norm, but 
most women bring long sleeved garments, light jackets or 
shawls to cover their arms for trips off compound.  Two 
Embassy gyms are available to all compound residents. 
 
¶8.  Money:  Travelers should bring cash dollars.  TDYers 
should bring enough cash for their stay or a debit card, as 
an ATM machine is available.  Credit cards and checks are not 
accepted in Kabul but U.S. dollars are widely accepted. 
¶9.  Fiscal Data: In accordance with Department of State 
policy, post will direct charge each agency, organization or 
visiting delegation for the actual costs attributed to its 
visit. These costs include, but are not limited to, American 
and locally engaged staff overtime; field travel by Embassy 
employees; transportation costs for official vehicles; phone 
usage; and the cost for representational events. All/all 
visitors requesting administrative support services must 
provide the Embassy with authorization and fiscal data (e.g., 
travel orders) against which the costs for requested items 
can be charged. This information should be cabled or emailed 
to the Embassy in advance of your arrival. Please note that 
without a fund cite and authorization, post may not be able 
to provide vehicles, drivers, or other services. 
¶10.  Ground Transportation:  Travelers will be met at the 
airport upon arrival by an Embassy expediter, driver, and 
security officer.  The GSO Motor Pool has limited 
capabilities and will give priority to official travel, with 
personal travel available only if vehicles and drivers are 
available.  USG employees are not authorized to use public 
transportation. 
 
¶11.  Medical:  Kabul is a Class 1 Medical Clearance Post.  If 
you have any significant medical problems, you should avoid 
travel to Afghanistan.  In accordance with 3 FAM 1931.3 
"Failure to obtain post-specific approval before traveling 
abroad may result in the individual being denied 
participation in the medical program and access to health 
units abroad."  Excursion Civil Service, WAE and TDY 
personnel who will be at Post more than 60 days are required 
to contact MED Clearances at 202-663-1668 or email 
medclearances@state.gov to arrange or verify MED approval to 
come to Post well in advance of their departure date. 
 
a.  Contractors or other long-term TDY employees who are not 
direct hire USG employees are not covered under the 
Department of State Medical Program, do not have Post Health 
Unit privileges, are not covered by M/DGHR/MED for medevac 
and should be covered by medevac insurance through their 
contracting company. 
 
b.  The Embassy Health Unit is staffed by a Foreign Service 
Health Practitioner and a Locally Employed Physician.  An 
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) hospital 
offers limited treatment capabilities. 
 
c.  Kabul is in a malaria zone from March to November. 
During this time it is important to begin anti-malarial 
medication before arriving at Post.  Either Mefloquine 250 mg 
weekly or Doxycycline 100mg daily are approved for malarial 
prophylaxis.  These medications must also be taken for 4 
weeks after departing Post. 
 
d.  Individuals with sickle cell trait should carefully 
consider the altitude of this Post before applying for 
assignment here.  Short-term (TDY) assignments carry an added 
risk because of the lack of time for acclimatization. 
Dehydration and stress from exercise or illness compound the 
basic risks of high altitude. 
 
e.  Visitors should bring cold and intestinal medicines, 
saline nasal spray, lip balm, sunscreen, dry skin care, 
insect repellent with DEET, and tissues.  If you wear 
contacts, bring an ample supply of cleaning solution and two 
pairs of your prescription glasses.  The dry, dusty climate 
can make wearing contacts uncomfortable.  If you are taking 
prescription medication (i.e. for hypertension or other) 
bring sufficient amounts for more than the expected length of 
your stay as pharmaceuticals are limited. 
 
¶12.  Security Guidelines: 
 
a.  The security environment in Kabul and throughout 
Afghanistan is dangerous.  There is continued potential for 
attacks against U.S. citizens and interests in Afghanistan. 
Terrorists do not distinguish between official and civilian 
targets.  Terrorist actions may include, but are not limited 
to, rocket attacks, suicide operations, assassinations, 
kidnappings, hijackings, shootings or bombings.  Potential 
exists in Kabul and the rest of the country for 
demonstrations, riots, bombings, and other violent actions 
against U.S. citizens and interests. 
 
b.  Visitors are advised to maintain a level of vigilance and 
to heighten their security awareness while at post.  American 
citizens have been victimized by vehicle-borne explosives and 
roadside bombs within the last year.  Occasional rocket 
attacks in the vicinity of the Embassy compound are 
unpredictable and random.  There have been incidents of 
carjackings and robberies directed against NGOs, journalists 
and diplomats carried out by aggressive and armed persons. 
The proliferation of weapons on the street is extensive. 
Host country and ISAF forces have had some success in making 
arrests and seizing weapons.  However travel outside of Kabul 
remains extremely dangerous in many places, and travel within 
Kabul after dark should also be avoided.  Due to restrictions 
on travel and limitations on available resources, TDY 
travelers should be prepared to expect delays and possible 
cancellations of events in Kabul and of proposed out-of-Kabul 
travel. 
 
c.  Verification of security clearance level is required 
prior to the issuance of an identification card.  Persons who 
will require unescorted access in the controlled access areas 
(CAA) are responsible for ensuring that security clearances 
are transmitted to post prior to their arrival. 
 
d.  The U.S. Embassy maintains a 2400 curfew.  However, 
changes in threat conditions may result in an earlier curfew 
on a temporary basis.  The RSO must clear any travel outside 
of the city, as well as any proposed travel after dark. 
Travel during daylight hours is permitted, but must be 
performed in an armored vehicle.  Anyone traveling off the 
compound must sign out on departure and back in upon 
returning to the compound.  Personnel are advised to carry a 
radio or cell phone to maintain contact in the event of an 
emergency. 
 
e.  Though the compound has been checked for mines and 
unexploded ordinance (UXO), there remains the remote 
possibility that a UXO or mine could remain.  While in 
Afghanistan, do not touch anything suspicious, avoid picking 
up souvenirs, and immediately report any suspicious device to 
RSO personnel.  Outside the compound, red rocks are uncleared 
mine areas, while white rocks are considered mine free areas. 
 Be advised, however, there remains a 10% chance that 
unexploded mines remain in the mine cleared areas.  For this 
reason, during all travel in Kabul or out of the city, 
travelers should remain on hard surface roads at all times. 
 
WOOD