08KABUL2978
DRL DAS BARKS-RUGGLES: U.S. COMMITTED TO
Tue Nov 11 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO8210
PP RUEHPW
DE RUEHBUL #2978/01 3161407
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 111407Z NOV 08
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 6116
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 KABUL 002978 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR SCA/FO, SCA/A, S/CRS 
STATE PASS TO USAID FOR AID/ANE, AID/DCHA/DG 
NSC FOR JWOOD 
OSD FOR MCGRAW 
CG CJTF-101, POLAD, JICCENT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PHUM KPAO AFIN
SUBJECT: DRL DAS BARKS-RUGGLES: U.S. COMMITTED TO 
SUPPORTING AFGHAN HUMAN RIGHTS ADVOCACY 
 
REF: A. KABUL 310 
     ¶B. KABUL 2562 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY: In October 15-16 meetings with visiting DRL 
DAS Erica Barks-Ruggles, representatives from media outlets, 
Ministry of Women's Affairs (MOWA), Parliament, Afghanistan 
Independent Human Rights Commission (AIHRC), Equal Access, 
Afghan Landmine Survivors' Organization (ALSO), and The Asia 
Foundation (TAF) discussed the challenges of human rights 
work in Afghanistan. DAS Barks-Ruggles led discussions 
focused on how the U.S. could most effectively partner with 
Afghan institutions in advancing human rights.  Afghan 
journalists emphasized that media has come a long way in the 
last seven years, but journalists continue to face pressure 
from the government, anti-government actors, and have 
difficulty reporting in insecure areas.  Minister of Women's 
Affairs Ghazanfar discussed MOWA's difficulties partnering 
with other ministries in implementing programs benefiting 
women.  Women parliamentarians cited security concerns but 
expressed determination to continue their work.  AIHRC staff 
gave an overview of human rights trends including increased 
sexual abuse and violence, but mentioned several positive 
developments including the new trafficking in persons law. 
Equal Access, ALSO, and TAF staff gave an overview of their 
programs focused on human rights and Islam, advocacy for 
disabled people, and capacity building in Afghan government 
offices, respectively. 
 
Afghan Media: Expanding, Under Pressure 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) DAS Barks-Ruggles asked a group of Afghan 
journalists to discuss the status of free media in 
Afghanistan and the challenges they face.  Parwiz Shamal from 
Tolo TV said the situation for media has improved over the 
last seven years and is generally comparable to the situation 
in neighboring countries.  Mustafa Basharat from Pahjwok 
Afghan News noted Afghan media had developed over the past 
seven years from almost nothing to 11-12 television stations, 
35 radio stations, and 400-500 newspapers.  Limitations on 
media freedoms stem from media self-censorship and government 
pressure, Arif Frahmand from Hash-e-Sobh newspaper said. 
Frahmand and several other journalists, including Radio 
Asadi's Freeba Zahir, reported that many Afghan government 
officials or political parties use media outlets as voice 
boxes for their propaganda, estimating that half of all 
Afghan media outlets are propaganda machines for other 
countries or Afghan politicians or political parties.  Khwaja 
Basir from Wakht News Agency said he noted decreasing 
government support of free media, and that journalists faced 
pressure from both government actors and the Taliban.  He 
said in the past year 400 cases of threats against journalist 
were reported.  Finally, Pahjwok's Basharat and several 
others said journalists' lack of access to insecure areas 
significantly hinders reporting in many areas of the country. 
 
¶3. (U) DAS Barks-Ruggles told the journalists that they are 
doing a tough job, and that the U.S. is committed to 
supporting free media in Afghanistan, as a strong independent 
media is essential to Afghanistan's nascent democracy.  DAS 
Barks-Ruggles then answered questions from the journalists on 
the record on such subjects as human rights, civilian 
casualties, and elections.  She noted while the U.S. is proud 
of our efforts to help protect human rights in Afghanistan, 
we know that significant human rights issues remain.  She 
emphasized that the U.S. deeply regrets any civilian 
casualties, and that U.S. is doing everything possible to 
minimize civilian casualties.  She also highlighted the USG's 
commitment to supporting free, fair, transparent, and secure 
Afghan elections.  Hasht-e-Sobh newspaper and Radio Asadi 
reported positively on DAS Barks-Ruggles' comments, 
characterizing her remarks as expressing support for human 
rights and the Afghan electoral process. 
 
¶4. (SBU) In a separate meeting Moby Media Group Director Zaid 
Mohseni told DAS Barks-Ruggles that Moby Group's Tolo T.V. 
and its affiliated stations face more interference from the 
government than from the Taliban.  The Taliban do not have a 
problem with Tolo, he said, in part because Tolo airs in an 
indirect manner, such as paraphrasing, content from Taliban 
sources.  He said the Taliban are increasingly media savvy 
and have business cards, web sites, and press releases.  They 
always are available to discuss their view, as contrasted to 
GoIRA officials who many times do not respond to media 
inquiries. Tolo T.V. developed and airs several public 
 
KABUL 00002978  002 OF 005 
 
 
service announcement-type commercials including several 
warning about the dangers of IEDs and buried munitions, one 
encouraging service in the Afghan National Army, and one with 
an anti-suicide bomber message.  Mohseni said Moby Media 
Group's Arman Radio carried a lot of information about the 
recently started voter registration process, and that in 
several provinces 50% of voters surveyed said they heard 
about voter registration through Arman.  Lemar, Moby's 
Pashto-language television station, is the most popular 
station in the Pashtun tribal areas in Pakistan, although it 
is frequently banned by Pakistani authorities, Mohseni said. 
 
 
MOWA: Focused but Under-Resourced 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) MOWA Minister Dr. H.B. Ghazanfar told DAS 
Barks-Ruggles that the situation for girls and women in 
Afghanistan has improved over the last seven years, noting 
that women make up twenty-eight percent of the Parliament, 
hold high ranking positions at universities, and 
approximately 300 women now own their own companies.  That 
said, Afghan women still face many challenges such as 
poverty, illiteracy and violence.  Many girls still do not 
attend school, and many are forced into early marriage.  Some 
are treated like animals and are bartered in tribal 
agreements.  Even in the most "liberal" and educated 
families, women are not treated as equals to men, she said. 
MOWA's work in Kabul revolves around initiating 
implementation of the ten year National Action Plan for the 
Women of Afghanistan (NAPWA).  In addition, MOWA counselors 
in Kabul and in the provincial Department of Women's Affairs 
(DOWA) offices daily see hundreds of women seeking help 
resolving legal, economic, educational, and health problems. 
If the issue is not one MOWA can solve, MOWA refers the woman 
to another service provider or organization that can address 
the situation, including many NGOs and UN offices.  She noted 
MOWA faces staff and budget shortfalls.  The majority of 
problems facing women occur in rural areas, and MOWA does not 
have the resources to do more than occasionally visit these 
areas and express support to the women living there. 
Furthermore, MOWA's work in the provinces is extremely 
dependent on security conditions.  In Oruzgan, Khost, and 
Paktika, the DOWA offices are not able to be very active due 
to ongoing security concerns.  She said generally good 
security in the provincial centers of Herat, Balkh, and 
Jowzjan allows for many programs to be conducted in those 
provinces. 
 
¶6. (SBU) DAS Barks-Ruggles asked what kind of cooperation 
MOWA received from other government ministries including the 
police.  Ghazanfar said some ministries are more cooperative 
than others, citing MOWA's coordination with the Ministry of 
Education as particularly positive.  She said that 
cooperation from the Ministry of the Interior, up until the 
recent past had been very good as well, noting that dozens of 
women had trained to be police officers and coordination 
between MOWA, police, and women's shelters had improved.  MOI 
changed its policy, however, and is no longer providing 
security to the provincial DOWA offices.  Cooperation between 
MOWA and other ministries frequently stalls as other 
ministries claim they do not have the budget to implement 
"women's" projects.  Ghazanfar's deputy said MOWA is lobbying 
to have a MOWA technical advisor work inside each ministry 
during the budget drafting process to ensure that funds are 
included for women's programs.  DAS Barks-Ruggles said that 
it is important that women be represented in other ministries 
and that women's issues are mainstreamed and not just handled 
by MOWA.  Ghazanfar agreed that one cabinet position and one 
ministry are insufficient to represent 12 million Afghan 
females.  Sometimes it is difficult for her to advocate 
during cabinet meetings as it is apparent that women's issues 
are not a priority for other ministries and she is the only 
woman in the Cabinet.  Her deputy noted that MOWA is working 
with the civil service commission towards a goal of having 
ministries' staff be 30 percent women by 2010.  DAS 
Barks-Ruggles expressed admiration for the extremely 
difficult work MOWA does on a daily basis and emphasized that 
the U.S. is committed to working with MOWA to advance women's 
rights in Afghanistan. 
 
Female MPs: Facing Insecurity, Lacking Advocacy Skills, But 
Determined 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
 
KABUL 00002978  003 OF 005 
 
 
¶7. (SBU) DAS Barks-Ruggles met with four female members of 
the Wolesi Jirga (the National Assembly's Lower House): 
Fatima Aziz from Kunduz, Saltanat Kohi and Fawzia Raufi from 
Faryab, and Nasima Niazi from Helmand.  DAS Barks-Ruggles 
asked what challenges they faced as women parliamentarians. 
Kohi said women MPs do not often advocate forcefully with 
their male MPs or with other government officials, and that 
the Parliament Women's Affairs Committee is weak.  Raufi said 
that the women present were members of a group of about 12 
female MPs from different backgrounds, all of whom are 
independent and not belonging to any political grouping.  The 
members meet and discuss issues, and when there is a vote 
they ask for and respect each other's opinions, trying where 
possible to coordinate their votes.  DAS Barks-Ruggles 
expressed concern about the morality bill recently drafted by 
a Wolesi Jirga committee (reftel), and asked for the women's 
opinions about the bill.  Niazi said all the female MPs were 
strongly opposed to the law and had told the male MPs that 
they would not accept it and would not vote for it. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Raufi said female MPs faced many security concerns 
and expected that these concerns would increase during the 
Afghan elections.  Niazi said because of poor security in 
Helmand, she cannot travel alone and that if she travels with 
a security detail she is also a target.  Aziz said during the 
2005 parliamentary election she campaigned door-to-door, but 
this local level of campaigning would be impossible for the 
2010 elections because of poor security.  All expressed 
concern for their personal safety and for that of their 
families.  Niazi noted that her children have been pulled out 
of school and complained that they are not allowed to play 
outside as she and her family are afraid they will be 
kidnapped or killed by the Taliban.  DAS Barks-Ruggles told 
the MPs that the U.S. takes these concerns very seriously and 
is committed to supporting women's participation in the 
2009-2010 elections.  It is important that other Afghan women 
see the female MPs out campaigning and meeting with 
constituents.  DAS Bark 
s-Ruggles asked how the international community could improve 
security for women participating in the elections.  Niazi 
suggested that the U.S. publicly support Afghan women's 
participation in the government.  Bark-Ruggles reiterated 
that the U.S. strongly supports Afghan women registering to 
vote, voting, running for election, and serving in elected 
office. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Niazi told DAS Barks-Ruggles, "I will give you the 
assurance that we will not quit our jobs halfway through.  We 
have to wear burqas to go into certain areas, but as soon as 
we are in a safe place, we tear them off and talk to the 
Afghan people we represent."  She reiterated that the Afghan 
female MPs need U.S. support.  Kohi said that women in 
high-level federal positions in Afghan government benefit 
from training programs offered by the international community 
and urged that these programs continue.  She noted, however, 
that women in the provinces could also benefit from 
international support including capacity-building training. 
DAS Barks-Ruggles mentioned the U.S. is trying to expand 
programs that work with the informal justice sector in rural 
areas, educating both men and women on their rights and 
obligations. 
 
AIHRC: Accomplishments and Concerns 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) Nader Naderi Afghanistan Independent Human Rights 
Commission (AIHRC) spokesperson thanked DAS Barks-Ruggles for 
her public comments emphasizing the importance of human 
rights in Afghanistan.  Naderi said Afghanistan had some 
significant human rights achievements, citing the new law on 
countering human trafficking and introducing a draft law to 
protect juvenile offenders as positive steps taken by 
Parliament.  Furthermore, four hundred lawyers have 
registered in the newly established bar association, and the 
commission on senior appointments reviewed 20 senior level 
government nominees in its first month.   This commission 
checks candidate backgrounds against several sources 
including the Disbandment of Illegal Armed Groups (DIAG), 
National Directorate of Security (NDS), the courts, and AIHRC 
before clearing the candidate for appointment. 
 
¶11. (SBU) Naderi summarized human rights concerns as follows: 
killings and other atrocities by anti-government forces 
continue and are rarely covered in the media, while 
government forces continue to act with impunity and 
 
KABUL 00002978  004 OF 005 
 
 
corruption remains a serious problem threatening Afghanstan's 
insitutions.  AIHRC will soon release a report covering 
civilian casualties by government and anti-government forces. 
 The latter is not often reported and more needs to be done 
to expose the toll anti-government forced have taken on the 
population.  Fifty percent of girls' schools in Helmand, 
Paktika, Zabul, and Oruzgan provinces are not operating due 
to security concerns, and insurgents killed hundreds of 
teachers and students during the past year.  Government 
arbitrary detention of people without charges is still a 
major concern. NDS operated some detention facilities and NDS 
officials frequently make excuses in order to prevent AIHRC 
monitoring visits.  He said violence against women and child 
sexual abuse are widespread problems, stating that AIHRC 
received reports of 36 cases of child sexual abuse in the 
last six months.  Farid Hamidi, AIHRC Commissioner for the 
Investigations Unit said President Karzai has 83 death 
sentences pending for his confirmation.  AIHRC has serious 
concerns about these death sentences due to the high level of 
corruption in the Afghan judicial system and many instances 
of trials that are not fair and independent.  The continued 
imprisonment of Pervez Kambakhsh (reftel) is another area of 
concern, Naderi said. 
 
¶12. (SBU) DAS Barks-Ruggles asked how the US could support 
the mission of the AIHRC.  Naderi asked that the U.S. support 
a mechanism to vet political candidates in Afghanistan's 2009 
elections for past human rights abuses.  DAS Barks-Ruggles 
suggested that a positive policy could be that if a person 
failed vetting for a senior position done by the senior 
appointment panel, then the person would not be eligible to 
run for office.  Public statements by U.S. officials against 
increasing impunity in Afghanistan are very helpful, as are 
similar statements during bilateral meetings, Naderi noted. 
In reference to the Kambakhsh case, Naderi urged the U.S. to 
continue to raise the case during bilateral meetings with 
Afghan officials, but to avoid public statements.  He also 
recommended releasing any U.S. reports on the results of 
civilian casualty investigations in Dari and Pashto. 
Finally, he asked that human rights training be emphasized 
during U.S.-supported police training. 
 
Equal Access: Human Rights and Islam 
------------------------------------ 
 
¶13. (SBU) Equal Access staff briefed DAS Barks-Ruggles on 
several Equal Access programs including the DRL-funded Aspire 
program which works with religious leaders and members of 
civil society in hosting roundtable discussions emphasizing 
similarities between human rights principles and Islam. 
Aspire project manager Abdul Samad Seraj discussed the recent 
roundtable in Jalalabad, reporting that the participants had 
a very positive discussion focused on women's rights and 
Islam.  Dave Larson, Equal Access Senior Program Manager, 
noted follow up surveys indicated that participants were 
spreading the message of the compatibility between human 
rights and Islam.  Seraj said one Jalalabad mullah and 
roundtable participant that initially strongly opposed the 
idea of any link between Islam and human rights became a 
strong advocate for human rights and now has a weekly 
television show promoting human rights.  DAS Barks-Ruggles 
asked if security concerns affected Equal Access' work in the 
provinces.  Larson said that security is getting worse, 
reporting that it is now necessary to confirm security 
conditions with private and government security companies and 
that more illegal checkpoints were appearing.   Equal Access 
staff often must take different, longer routes because the 
direct route roads are closed.  Some districts in Kapisa 
where they used to work are no longer accessible due to poor 
security concerns. 
 
ALSO: First Afghan Peer-to-Peer Support Organization 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶14. (SBU) DAS Barks-Ruggles met with founders and staff of 
the Afghan Landmine Survivors' Organization (ALSO) a year-old 
Afghan NGO that provides peer support to disabled people and 
advocates for a ban on landmines.  ALSO co-founder Sadiq 
Mohibi told DAS Barks-Ruggles that disabled people in 
Afghanistan face enormous obstacles, for example, only 1% of 
government buildings are handicapped accessible.  The Wolesi 
Jirga recently approved a bill giving some additional 
government benefits to disabled people.  ALSO lobbied 
extensively for the bill by meeting with individual 
parliamentarians and parliamentary committees, and by holding 
 
KABUL 00002978  005 OF 005 
 
 
awareness-raising workshops about the challenges faced by 
disabled Afghans.  The bill is currently under debate in the 
upper house.  ALSO peer counselors coordinate with Kabul 
authorities to meet disabled people at the hospital or home 
and offer support for their reintegration into society. ALSO 
peer trainers assisted 205 disabled people in the last six 
months, reported Mohibi.  ALSO lobbies the Ministry of Public 
Health for additional services for all disabled people, but 
with a focus on women and children.  DAS Barks-Ruggles told 
the ALSO staff she was impressed by their perseverance, that 
getting started was always the hardest part and she 
congratulated ALSO on that accomplishment. 
 
TAF: Capacity Building with GoIRA Ministries 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶15. (U) The Asia Foundation (TAF) staff briefed DAS 
Barks-Ruggles on several programs including work with the 
Office of the State Minister for Parliamentary Affairs 
(OSMPA), the Independent Directorate for Local Governance 
(IDLG), and MOWA.  The work with the OSMPA focused on 
training and orientation of staff and preparation of a manual 
explaining parliamentary procedure.  The work with IDLG 
focused on supporting policy and institutional development. 
The work with MOWA included facilitating the creation of 
standardized procedures for the DOWA offices and supporting 
MOWA senior management capacity and leadership development. 
 
¶16. (U) DAS Erica Barks-Ruggles cleared on this message. 
WOOD