09KABUL1299
KARZAI SIGNS ELECTION NON-INTERFERENCE DECREE
Fri May 22 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
R 220430Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 9022
INFO AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE
AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRESUNCLAS KABUL 001299 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR S/SRAP HOLBROOKE, SCA/FO, SCA/A 
STATE PASS USAID 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM AF
SUBJECT: KARZAI SIGNS ELECTION NON-INTERFERENCE DECREE 
 
REF: KABUL 1022 
 
¶1. President Karzai has signed and published a decree prohibiting 
official interference in the election process.  The decree has the 
key elements the USG and international community has urged Karzai to 
include.  We will now turn our attention to the government's 
implementation of the decree provisions.  The decree is based on the 
decree on government non-interference for the 2005 elections 
 
¶2. Full text follows: 
 
President Karzai's decree on Non-Interference in Election Process of 
1388 (2009) 
 
Considering that as per the provision of the Constitution and the 
elections law, eligible nationals, including the women and men 
retain the right to participate through their free, secret and 
direct votes in the elections.  In order to maintain the safety and 
realization of the objectives and facilitating the free, just and 
transparent elections free from interference of the officials of 
government departments during the presidential elections and the 
provincial councils during the 1388 HS the following is approved: 
 
Article 1: 
The officials of the government including the ministers, general 
directors, deputy ministers, judges, the attorneys and the chairmen 
of the government department, the governors and their deputies and 
all the employees of the Ministry of Defense, the Interior Affairs 
Ministry and the General directorate of National Security are 
obliged to follow up the following points: 
 
¶1. Should strictly observe non-interference during the elections 
expecting in instance that law has anticipated them, 
 
¶2. Prevent influencing the voters with the aim to reveal their votes 
and compelling them to vote to the specific candidates that would 
disrupt the freedom of vote, its secrecy and its direct voting 
essence, 
 
¶3. Non-interference in meetings, preparing of meetings, gatherings 
and the peaceful campaign process of candidates during the election 
process, 
 
¶4. Preventing of abuse of government power to the interest of one 
candidate 
 
¶5. Preventing the collection with changing of complexion, posters 
and other publicity materials of the candidates, 
 
¶6. Maintaining of the security of the voters and candidates, 
 
¶7. Prevention of dismissal and assignment of persons at the 
government posts for election objectives, 
 
Article 2: 
In case of violation of the above provisions, the violators shall be 
punished in accordance with the provision of law, 
 
Article 3: 
All the UN branches and the foundations under its coverage and the 
international community are asked to act impartially during and 
after the elections. 
 
Article 4: 
This decree is enforced after its signature and all the related 
government organs are obliged for its strict execution. 
 
 
EIKENBERRY