09KABUL1136
FEFA: THE AFGHAN VOICE IN ELECTION OBSERVATION
Mon May 04 00:00:00 +0200 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO5683
PP RUEHDBU RUEHPW
DE RUEHBUL #1136/01 1241422
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 041422Z MAY 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 8731
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 001136 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV KDEM AF
SUBJECT: FEFA: THE AFGHAN VOICE IN ELECTION OBSERVATION 
 
REF: KABUL 891 
 
¶1.  SUMMARY:  Domestic observation will be key to Afghan 
perceptions of legitimacy in the August 20 presidential and 
provincial council elections.  The Free and Fair Election 
Foundation of Afghanistan (FeFA), an umbrella organization of 
over 15 civil society groups, will serve as Afghanistan,s 
only major domestic observer group.  With assistance from 
UNDP, FeFA has developed an observation plan for the current 
electoral cycle, focusing on data collection and analysis; 
FeFA plans to rally around 8,000 observers for election day. 
FeFA still faces the challenges of working out cooperating 
mechanisms with other observer bodies, developing the quality 
of its reporting analysis, and articulating a post-election 
plan.  END SUMMARY. 
 
FeFA TRACKS CANDIDATE REGISTRATION 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶2.  FeFA's Kabul headquarters staff and provincial 
representatives are currently observing the candidate 
registration period, which began April 25 and ends May 8. 
Registration is occurring in provincial capitals for 
provincial council candidates and in Kabul for presidential 
candidates (reftel).  The political campaign period, running 
from June 16 to August 17, will mark the second observation 
period.  The final observation period incorporates voting day 
and the counting process; this phase will include roughly 
7,600 observers in polling centers and engage the 400 
district trainers as mobile observation teams.  If a run-off 
is required, FeFA will implement the same observer deployment 
plan used for voting day. 
 
RIGHT-SIZING THE OBSERVATION PLAN 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  FeFA soon will expand its staff beyond its permanent core 
of 25 headquarters employees.  FeFA has identified and 
trained long-term volunteers to fill its 34 provincial 
representative (PR) positions - one per province.  FeFA is 
also hiring one women's outreach officer in every province 
with the goal of recruiting 40 percent female staff; 20 
percent more than in previous electoral cycles. 
 
¶4. FeFA will also identify 7,600 voting day observers, 
recruiting individuals to work in their home districts.  By 
enlisting locals, FeFA hopes community support will reduce 
security risks for observers in polling centers.  Observers 
will work up to 10 days and receive stipends for food, 
transportation and security as their only form of 
remuneration.  If a run-off occurs, staffing periods would 
extend to cover the second round. (Four to six weeks before 
voting day, FeFA will engage 400 district trainers. 
Reporting to the PRs, these trainers will lead recruitment 
and observer training at the district level.) 
 
UNDP ASSISTS IN FOCUSING FEFA EFFORTS 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶5.  UNDP is reviewing FeFA's USD 2.6 million proposed work 
plan for elections observation.  UNDP officials anticipate 
finalizing the agreement with FeFA within the week.  The plan 
is scaled down from FeFA's first proposal for the 2009 
elections, which had a USD 8 million price tag and strayed 
from its core mission of election observation.  FeFA's 
revised plan includes observation of the major portions of 
the electoral process (candidate registration, campaign 
period and voting day/counting), but focuses on data 
collection, analysis and subsequent reporting as its core 
activities. 
 
BETTER QUALITY REPORTING? 
-------------------------- 
 
¶6.  FeFA and UNDP recently collaborated to improve the 
quality of FeFA's reporting.  Imperfect methodology and a 
poor understanding of its mission had weakened FeFA's 
analysis in the past.  A UNDP liaison officer advised FeFA in 
developing the plan for upcoming observation, focusing staff 
on the observer role and improving their understanding of 
data collection requirements. 
 
¶7.  The officer believes FeFA's future reports will reflect 
an improved methodology.  FeFA plans to produce: a report on 
the candidate registration period; two reports on the 
campaign period; at least two statements over the course of 
voting day; a statement on counting after 24 hours; a final 
report on the elections.  After election day, FeFA will hire 
staff to analyze and draft the final report, focusing on 
direct, secret and free voting and free participation.  It 
estimates completing this final report three months after 
voting day.  (A run-off would initiate another round of 
reporting.) 
 
KABUL 00001136  002 OF 002 
 
 
 
ESTABLISHING COORDINATION WITH KEY PARTNERS 
------------------------------------------- 
 
¶8.  FeFA is preparing to coordinate with other observer 
missions.  As a member of the Asian Network for Free Election 
(ANFREL), FeFA invited ANFREL to participate in the 
elections. ANFREL requires funding which is not currently 
available, although donations from Australia or The Asia 
Foundation for ANFREL observation may be under consideration. 
 FeFA welcomed the opportunity to coordinate with 
international observer missions to deconflict mandates and 
promote the best possible observation effort. 
 
¶9. FeFA also hopes to engage with the Electoral Complaints 
Commission (ECC).  FeFA has published a report on 
recommendations for the ECC, emphasizing the importance of 
eliminating candidates with DIAG connection.  FeFA plans to 
meet with the ECC soon to discuss its recommendations and how 
to improve both organizations' contributions to democratic 
process. 
 
FeFA's FUTURE 
------------- 
 
¶10.  Focusing on observation should enable FeFA to capitalize 
on its strengths.  UNDP reps believed that through 
coordination on FeFA's observation plan, FeFA better 
understands its role, particularly distinguishing FeFA as an 
organization from the electoral observation project.  FeFA 
needs sustainability between electoral cycles and hopes to 
expand its activities, to work with civil society. 
RICCIARDONE