09KABUL3659
Kajaki Dam Turns on the Lights in Afghanistan's South
Thu Nov 12 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO6015
RR RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL
DE RUEHBUL #3659/01 3161350
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 121350Z NOV 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 3161
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 003659 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
DEPT PASS AID/ANE; AID/EGAT 
 
E.O. 12958 N/A 
TAGS: EAID ENRG ECON SENV AF
SUBJECT: Kajaki Dam Turns on the Lights in Afghanistan's South 
 
REF: A. KABUL 3186 
¶B. KABUL 2688 
¶C. KABUL 2670 
 
¶1.  (SBU) Summary: Despite security issues that continue to affect 
the Kajaki dam project, USAID recently completed refurbishing a 
second hydroelectric turbine at the dam in Helmand province.  This 
turbine, together with another rebuilt by USAID in September 2005, 
has boosted the power generation capacity of the Kajaki hydropower 
plant to approximately 33 megawatts (MW), of which 12 MW are now 
being transmitted to Kandahar City and 18 MW to communities in 
Lashkar Gah, Musa Qala, and Sangin.  Providing power to Helmand and 
Kandahar helps create jobs and deter insurgency elements. 
Attempting to co-opt these positive developments, Taliban groups 
have tried to claim the dam renovation was due to their threats.  A 
concerted Afghan-led public affairs strategy is effectively 
addressing this misinformation campaign.  End summary. 
 
Kajaki Dam History 
- - - - - - - - - 
 
¶2.  (U) In 1953, the U.S. government funded Kajaki dam to provide 
irrigation in the Helmand River Valley.  During the mid-1970s, USAID 
installed two 16.5 MW turbine generators in the hydropower plant 
located at the foot of the dam.  These units deteriorated during 
twenty-five years of neglect resulting from the Soviet invasion and 
subsequent Taliban regime. 
 
Progress 
- - - - - 
 
¶3.  (U) With the recent refurbishment of the second turbine, the 
Kajaki dam now produces 33 MW of electricity.  Of this 33 MW, 12 MW 
go to Kandahar city, three times the power the city received from 
Kajaki in 2008, according to local electric utility staff.  The city 
now enjoys daily 24-hour power in contrast with widespread power 
rationing prevalent through June of this year.  (However, 
insufficient line capacity continues to restrain full transmission 
to the city and not all consumers receive equal benefits.)  In 
addition, nearby communities receive 18 MW of power:  Lashkar Gah 
7.5 MW, Sangin 4 MW, and Tangi-Kajaki-Musa Qala 6.5 MW. 
 
¶4. (U) Afghans first cite employment and access to electricity when 
asked to identify the "biggest problem in your local area" 
(according to ISAF and Asia Foundation surveys), and increased power 
from Kajaki addresses both.  The refurbishment project directly 
employed Afghan powerhouse workers, Afghan machinists, and Afghan 
subcontractors, while greater access to more reliable and cheaper 
power will stimulate economic development and spur further job 
creation. 
 
Combating Taliban Misinformation 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 
¶5.  (SBU) Attempting to co-opt these positive developments, Taliban 
groups have tried to claim the dam renovation was accelerated due to 
their threats.  A concerted Afghan-led public affairs strategy is 
effectively addressing this misinformation campaign.  Helmand 
Governor Galabuddin Mangal has asked to visit the dam with Helmand 
media in the upcoming weeks, and the PRT is supporting Governor 
Mangal's request.  The Embassy is also exploring the possibility of 
a joint event at Kajaki with President Karzai and Ambassador 
Eikenberry.  While we will publicize progress at Kajaki Dam, we will 
be careful not to overstate the improvements, since significant work 
is still needed at the site and security remains an issue.  To 
highlight overall gains in the energy sector, the Embassy is 
launching an awareness campaign including interviews, press releases 
and television spots to highlight gains in the energy sector. 
 
Future Steps 
- - - - - - - 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Realization of Kajaki's full potential to generate 51.5 MW 
of power will require the installation of the third turbine and an 
upgrade of transmission lines.  The security situation around Kajaki 
makes the future of that phase of the project uncertain.  USAID 
support will also help commercialize and improve Kandahar City's 
electrical utility.  Long-term success for the municipal utility 
(and Afghanistan's entire energy sector) depends on security and 
ability to collect fees to pay for operation, maintenance, and 
infrastructure investment. 
 
¶7.  (SBU) Over the next 18 months, USAID will work with national 
utility DABS to improve the efficiency of the Kandahar City power 
grid.  A first step will be an assessment of physical infrastructure 
needs in the city.  In addition, USAID has released tenders for two 
new electricity sub-stations for the Kajaki system and will build or 
refurbish additional sub-stations and new transmission lines, 
depending on the security situation. 
 
 
KABUL 00003659  002 OF 002 
 
 
Comment 
- - - - 
 
¶8.  (SBU) It is noteworthy that the Taliban, who have little value 
to provide Afghan citizens, feel sufficiently threatened by projects 
such as the Kajaki dam renovation that they are trying to take 
credit for it in the eyes of the local populace.  We are stepping up 
our public diplomacy game to ensure the project is recognized as 
part of a long-term USG commitment and strengthens the credibility 
of the Afghan government in the eyes of its citizens.  End comment. 
 
 
Eikenberry