09KABUL159
Herat: Development Needed in Shindand District
Wed Jan 21 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO1413
RR RUEHPW
DE RUEHBUL #0159/01 0211254
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 211254Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6951
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 000159 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SCA/FO, SCA/A, EUR/RPM 
STATE PASS TO AID FOR ASIA/SCAA 
NSC FOR WOOD 
OSD FOR WILKES 
CENTCOM FOR USFOR-A COS, CG CJTF-101 POLAD 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL ETRD EAID AF
 
SUBJECT: Herat: Development Needed in Shindand District 
 
Summary 
------- 
¶1.  Development lags in the critical district of Shindand, astride 
the ring road, the last spot of poppy cultivation in Herat province 
and center of intensified Taliban activity after the August 2008 
Azizabad civilian collateral damage incident.  A refined development 
program emphasizing water for agriculture, roads, and a district 
hospital would greatly complement ongoing security efforts by Afghan 
National Army (ANA), Afghan National Police (ANP) forces, and 
Coalition Forces to stabilize this important district.  A meeting of 
Italian Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT), Regional Command-West 
CIMIC, ARSIC West Civil Affairs, USAID, and State officers on 
January 16 was the first step to coordinate such efforts. 
 
Development Lags 
---------------- 
¶2.  Shindand lags far behind other districts in the province in 
development.  While 70 percent of all villages in Herat province 
have benefitted from a community-chosen National Solidarity Program 
project, only 11 percent of Shindand's approximately 450 villages 
have benefited.  The Ministry of Rural Reconstruction and 
Development (MRRD) would like to focus on Shindand in 2009. 
Shindand's Zirkoh valley is particularly problematic:  it is the 
only poppy-growing area left in Herat province, infiltrated with 
Taliban seeking to exploit collateral damage incidents and beset by 
tribal disputes. 
 
Top Three Priorities for Development 
------------------------------------ 
¶3.  Dr. Homayoun Azizi, the Chairman of the elected Herat Provincial 
Council, is an influential politician with no political party 
affiliation.  He emphasized three priorities for development 
projects for his home district -- water for agriculture, 
asphalt-paved roads, and a district hospital. 
Traditional karezes (a series of wells and linked underground 
channels that uses gravity to bring ground water to the surface) 
have fallen in disrepair.  Refurbishment of karezes would be an 
investment in agriculture, the chief livelihood of the residents. 
Many residents of Shindand are unemployed, impoverished, and 
hopeless.  Using local labor, perhaps in exchange for food or cash, 
would inexpensively complete the project and provide inhabitants 
with a sense of hope for the future in a district where residents 
are susceptible to Taliban influence.  In addition to refurbishing 
karezes, building a small dam at Band-e Wakhal in the eastern, 
upland part of Shindand would increase the flow of water in the 
karezes.  The dam would also help alleviate seasonal flash-flooding. 
 The technical impact and feasibility of this dam has yet to be 
determined. 
 
¶4.  In addition to the increased volume of water for agriculture is 
the Shindand Agricultural Research Center, established by the U.S. 
military civil affairs team at Shindand Air Base, with USAID support 
for three Afghan agronomists who are recent graduates of Herat 
University Agriculture Faculty.  However, this research station, 
which already has been active in wheat, fruit trees, grape orchards, 
bee keeping, and fish ponds, needs an owner, some assistance to help 
it become self-sufficient, sustainable over the long run. 
 
¶5.  Paved roads are Dr. Azizi's second priority.  The Italian-led 
PRT is widening and graveling the 28-km road running from the Ring 
Road to the Shindand district center and building a connecting 
bridge across the Zirkoh River in the problematic Zirkoh Valley. 
Dr. Azizi insists that for economic and security benefits, paved 
roads are far superior to gravel roads.  A recent shura in Shindand 
agreed on only one project unanimously: asphalting this 28-km road. 
Note:  Due to limited funds, the Italian PRT will not fund or 
construct large infrastructure projects such as dams or paved roads. 
 
 
¶6.  Dr. Azizi's third priority is a district hospital which is also 
lacking in Shindand, but was included in the the Afghanistan 
National Development Strategy.  The provincial health department 
director, Dr. Reshad, confirmed Dr. Azizi's belief that if the 
existing community health center is upgraded to a district hospital 
or a brand new district hospital is built, the Afghan government 
would be able to staff it.  NOTE:  ARSIC West received plans from 
Kabul for a district hospital in Shindand with the notation that 
this is a high priority of President Karzai for Shindand.  In a trip 
to Azizabad after the August 8 collateral damage incident, he 
promised the people of Shindand a district hospital. 
 
Possible Funding Sources 
------------------------ 
 
¶7.  CERP funds, the Italian PRT small infrastructure projects, 
 
KABUL 00000159  002 OF 002 
 
 
possible Cooperazione Italiano projects, possible USAID resources, 
and the MRRD focus on Shindand, are all possible funding sources for 
a concentrated, truly focused effort on key development projects to 
reinforce and further recent security gains.   ARSIC West civil 
affairs team have access to CERP funds and are looking for effective 
projects to reinforcing the ANA and build synergy between security 
and development efforts, especially in southern Herat province. 
 
¶8.  In a January 16 meeting at Regional Command-West, which included 
ARSIC West Civil Affairs, RC-West CIMIC, PRT CIMIC, and DOS and 
USAID representatives, participants shared information on existing 
and proposed projects for Shindand.  Various proposals were made by 
Afghan actors regarding different funding sources and ways to 
implement Afghan priorities with Afghan buy-in. 
 
WOOD