10KABUL567
OPERATION MOSHTARAK - SITUATIONAL UPDATE FOR FEBRUARY 14,
Mon Feb 15 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO3702
RR RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL
DE RUEHBUL #0567/01 0460936
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 150936Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5600
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 KABUL 000567 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SRAP, SCA/FO, SCA/A, EUR/RPM 
STATE PASS TO AID FOR ASIA/SCAA 
USFOR-A FOR POLAD 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL MOPS PGOV EAID AF
 
SUBJECT: OPERATION MOSHTARAK - SITUATIONAL UPDATE FOR FEBRUARY 14, 
2010 
 
REF: (A) KABUL 554, (B) KABUL 543, (C) KABUL 466, (D) KABUL 115, (E) 
09 KABUL 4187 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary. Operations continued on February 14, with the 
heaviest activity taking place in northern Marjah, but media reports 
have remained extremely positive about the current status of 
Operation Moshtarak.  Governor Mangal convened a budget conference 
in Lashkar Gah to develop line-item operational budgets and capital 
investments required to deliver the agreed upon packages of services 
for Nad Ali District.  Deputy Governor Sattar announced the upcoming 
registration for a cash-for-work program to a well-attended shura in 
northern Nad Ali in the Showal area, where attendees expressed 
concern over the security situation in their district but remained 
enthusiastic about the overall situation.  A ministerial delegation 
from Kabul arrived in Lashkar Gah today to discuss the operations 
with provincial and district leadership and to bring central 
government support for the future outcomes.  End Summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Operations continued in Nad Ali district on February 14, 
with the heaviest activity taking place in northern Marjah.   ISAF 
reporting indicates that the enemy is trying to flee to Nawa and 
Pakistan.  The following is a situation report, reflecting the 
activities taking place on February 14, 2010. 
 
POLITICAL UPDATE 
---------------- 
 
Provincial: 
 
¶3. (SBU) In north Nad Ali, Helmand Deputy Governor Sattar hosted a 
successful shura, attended by over 200 village elders and residents. 
 The main topic of discussion was the latest security situation in 
the district, but the residents remained confident in the operations 
and looked forward to upcoming development opportunities to begin, 
strongly requesting for schools and clinics to be placed in their 
area.  Sattar also announced that registration for a "Cash for Work" 
program would begin within the next few days, to the delight of the 
shura attendees. 
 
¶4. (SBU) The civilian personnel at the Regimental Combat Team (RCT) 
at FOB Dwyer have established a briefing, twice daily, for Nad Ali 
Deputy District Governor Haji Zahir (who will be located in Marjah) 
on the on-going operations, including any items of note on the ISAF, 
ANSF, enemy and civilian casualties.  Additionally, Zahir is in 
constant communication with Mangal's office daily. 
 
National: 
 
¶5. (SBU) In a strong showing of central government support, a 
ministerial delegation - which included Interior Minister Atmar, 
Deputy Interior Minister Mangal, Defense Minister Wardak, and Deputy 
Defense Minister Bismullah Khan - traveled to Helmand with Commander 
of the ISAF Joint Command to meet with provincial and district 
leadership and to view the conflict area.  Hosted by Governor 
Mangal, the delegation will participate in a series of meetings to 
be fully briefed on the latest of Operation Moshtarak and the next 
steps forward. 
 
MEDIA 
----- 
 
¶6. (SBU) The international media continued to be positive in its 
assessment of the operation, with the only negative news being the 
late-breaking statement by President Karzai on the alleged civilian 
casualty incident in Marjah.  Reporters are showing increased 
interest in the civilian story, with such outlets as CNN, the 
Associated Press and the Financial Times calling to ask about plans 
for governance and stabilization in Marjah.  They are fascinated by 
the degree of planning and coordination involved in the 
stabilization effort, including the fact that the Deputy District 
Governor-Designate and the future District Support Team are already 
working together and poised to enter as soon as conditions permit. 
The PRT Lashkar Gah Lead gave a five-minute live interview on Sky 
News, answering questions on the civilian effort.  The Afghan-run 
Tolo TV has been running an excellent piece that explains the entire 
operation, including extensive quotations from Governor Mangal and 
several Afghan generals. 
 
GOVERNANCE AND DEVELOPMENT UPDATE 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) At the February 14 Helmand District Delivery Program (DDP) 
Budget Workshop, USAID-funded trainers from the re-launched 
provincial Civil Service Institute facilitated Ministry Directors to 
develop line-item operational budgets and capital investments 
required to deliver the agreed upon packages of services for Nad Ali 
 
KABUL 00000567  002 OF 002 
 
 
District.  Directors were grouped according to the eight strands of 
the Afghan National Development Strategy (ANDS) and were mentored by 
PRT staff.  As expected, operating budgets and capital requests were 
significant -though most were tempered with reality.  However, 
expectation management is key at this point, and the PRT will work 
with the various provincial and district officials to ensure full 
understanding of all stabilization and development initiatives. 
 
¶8. (SBU) The next step in Helmand's DDP process is the collation and 
summarization of budgets, which is being completed by local 
Independent Directorate for Local Governance (IDLG) staff.  Then, 
the Governor and Provincial Development Council (PDC) will approve. 
Once this approval is obtained, the "donor conference" is likely to 
be held on or about February 17.  The objective for this conference 
will be to secure donor commitments for as many capital investments 
(schools, clinics, office buildings, vehicles, etc.) from the 
various civilian and military funding streams.  Capital expenses not 
picked up by donors will be submitted to the Ministry of Finance for 
funding by the UK under their DDP support mechanism.  For USAID, the 
donor conference is about matching existing USAID programming to new 
ministry requests for development items apart from buildings in Nad 
Ali. 
 
¶9. (SBU) At the Governor's request, Helmand PRT is planning a Nadi 
Ali Stabilization launch event on or about February 18  in Lashkar 
Gah.  High-level Embassy participation by USAID Mission Director 
Bill Frej is planned to demonstrate sustained civilian support for 
Governor Mangal's efforts, with plans by the UK and Danish 
Governments to do the same.  The event plans to cover the entire 
civilian effort, with the Governor taking the lead and introducing 
the ongoing DDP process and other projects, including USAID's 601 
road through Marjah. 
 
IDP UPDATE 
---------- 
 
¶10. (SBU) To date, the Department of Refugees and Repatriation in 
Lashkar Gah has registered 941 internally displaced families, and 
approximately 200 families received humanitarian assistance from the 
Department.  (Note:  Of the total number of registered families, 
only two families have requested tents for shelter purposes, which 
mean that most families are able to find adequate shelter during 
these operations with GIRoA assistance. End note.)  As the fighting 
likely increases, the number of IDP families is expected to also 
increase, but the PRT is continuing to work with the UN and the 
Helmand Department of Refugees and Repatriation to prepare for any 
sudden upticks in numbers. 
 
¶11. (U) This cable was drafted by the U.S. civilian personnel based 
in Helmand.