10KABUL376
Embassy Kabul Clarifications to Sweden's Interim Reply on
Sun Jan 31 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Kabul
VZCZCXRO3644
RR RUEHDBU RUEHPW RUEHSL
DE RUEHBUL #0376/01 0311326
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 311326Z JAN 10 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY KABUL
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 5215
INFO RUCNAFG/AFGHANISTAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHSM/AMEMBASSY STOCKHOLM 0308UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 08 KABUL 000376 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR SRAP, SCA/FO, SCA/A, EUR/RPM 
STATE PASS TO AID FOR ASIA/SCAA 
USFOR-A FOR POLAD 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: MOPS MARR PREL EAID AF SW
SUBJECT:  Embassy Kabul Clarifications to Sweden's Interim Reply on 
Life-Support MOU 
 
REF: (A) Stockholm 796  (B) State 129187 
 
KABUL 00000376  001.2 OF 008 
 
 
¶1.  (SBU) This is an Action Request.  Embassy Kabul recommends that 
Department instruct Embassy Stockholm to deliver the following 
points in response to Stockholm 796 and reftels: 
 
-- The U.S. Government is pleased that your Government welcomes the 
expansion of USG civilian presence in the Swedish PRT.  We would 
like to offer clarifications to your questions, in order to allow 
your Government to deliver a formal reply. 
 
-- We understand that the Swedish PRT is somewhat limited in its 
ability to provide security and mobility for an increasing number of 
civilians in your PRT.  For our own civilians, all the areas in the 
Swedish PRT are "self-drive."   As such, we have inserted amended 
language on ground movement in paragraph V.F. of the attached 
amended version of the MOU. 
 
-- (SBU) The official opening of the U.S. Consulate in Mazar-e 
Sharif will not obviate the unique governance and development 
responsibilities of our civilians at the PRT.  Therefore, we intend 
to establish and maintain a civilian presence in Sar-e Pol, Samangan 
and Jowzjan in addition to the consulate.  Since all the PRTs in the 
Swedish region would be covered by this Memorandum of Understanding, 
and because our civilians are all currently under "self-drive" 
regulations, we consider the amended language in the latest version 
of the MOU sufficient to address this concern. 
 
-- (SBU) We understand your government, along with the German 
government, is engaged in discussions with the Government of Turkey 
over how a possible establishment of a "humanitarian" Turkish PRT in 
Jowzjan would affect the regional security and force protection 
responsibilities of Swedish troops.  We would be interested 
exchanging views on this matter.  In Jowzjan, we currently 
contemplate placing U.S. civilian representatives at a U.S. FOB to 
be completed in April 2010.  In the meantime, we have provided a 
copy of the MOU to the Turkish Embassy for their information 
informing them of our current life-support discussions with all 
Coalition Partners.  If we decide we would like to place U.S. 
civilians at the Turkish PRT at some point in the future, we would 
negotiate an appropriate MOU with Turkey at that time. 
 
¶2. Full amended text of MOU: 
 
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING 
between 
EMBASSY OF THE KINGDOM OF SWEDEN, AFGHANISTAN 
and 
U.S. MISSION AFGHANISTAN 
for the 
Provision of Life, Security and Mobility Support at Swedish-Operated 
Facilities in Afghanistan 
 
 
The purpose of this Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) is to specify 
Logistic Support, Supplies and Services (LSSS) requirements, 
authorities and responsibilities between Sweden and the U.S. 
Mission-Afghanistan (Mission) (the Participants) for the support of 
U.S. Government personnel under the authority of the U.S. Chief of 
Mission (U.S. COM) in Afghanistan (hereinafter referred to as "U.S. 
Mission personnel").  The Participants intend that U.S. Mission 
personnel should be located on Swedish-operated posts, bases, camps, 
or stations (Swedish-operated facilities) and should be part of the 
Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) to support the stabilization, 
reconstruction, counterinsurgency (COIN) and development strategy 
for Afghanistan. 
 
¶I. BACKGROUND 
 
The reconstruction and development of Afghanistan is a NATO priority 
which includes support to COIN and stabilization, the promotion of 
reconciliation, support for economic development, and building the 
capacity of Afghan provincial governments to hasten their transition 
to self-sufficiency.  The U.S. strategy and efforts in Afghanistan 
are rapidly expanding and developing and include an increase in the 
number of U.S. Government (USG) civilian experts, working under the 
authority of the U.S. COM, and coordinated by a Senior Civilian 
Representative (SCR) in each of the four geographic regions of 
Afghanistan, supporting reconstruction and development of the 
country.  In order to effectively and efficiently meet NATO 
objectives in Afghanistan, including those pertaining to COIN and 
stabilization, there is also a need to locate U.S. Mission personnel 
at NATO Coalition Partner PRTs and Regional Commands (RCs).  The 
U.S. COM intends to locate up to four (4) U.S. Mission personnel at 
Swedish-operated facilities.  Should the number of U.S. Mission 
personnel need to be increased, consultations between the 
 
KABUL 00000376  002.2 OF 008 
 
 
Participants should be held prior to the addition of U.S. Mission 
personnel at a Swedish-operated facility. 
 
II. DEFINITIONS 
 
a) Combat Operating Post/Base (COP/B) - Usually occupied by a 
platoon/battery/company/troop-sized element capable of quick 
reaction in support of operations, security, civic assistance, or 
humanitarian assistance relief.  A COP/B is dependent upon a Forward 
Operating Base (FOB) for logistical support and is characterized by 
limited infrastructure.  A COP/B may consolidate to a FOB as a 
contingency matures or may be turned over to Host Nation forces for 
continued improvement. 
 
b) District Support Team (DST) - A combined civilian and military 
action group which is responsible for integrating the activities of 
all elements of the group in an assigned district.  The DST 
activities are conducted across all Lines of Operation (LOO), 
security, governance, development and strategic communications 
within the Commander International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) 
Shape, Clear, Hold, Build.  DSTs are embedded into a maneuver 
battalion or company. 
 
c)Forward Operating Base (FOB) - A FOB supports tactical operations 
normally with established support facilities.  It is established to 
extend command and control or communications or to provide support 
for training and tactical operations.  Facilities may be established 
for a temporary period or an extended period and may include an 
airfield or an unimproved airstrip. 
 
d) Logistic Support, Supplies and Services (LSSS) - Such assistance 
may consist of food, water, bath and sanitation, morale, welfare and 
recreation and operational facilities, furnished accommodations, 
office space, expendable office supplies such as stationery, office 
machinery such as copiers, faxes, scanners and printers, 
transportation, petroleum, oils, lubricants, communication services, 
engineering services, medical services, mortuary services, base 
operation support (and construction incident thereto), storage 
services, use of facilities, spare parts and components, repair and 
maintenance services, basic utilities/services (e.g., power, water, 
sewer, fire protection, drainage, waste management, hazardous 
material management, and environmental services) and, fortification 
and construction materials. This term also includes the temporary 
use of vehicles and other non-lethal items of military equipment, 
where such temporary use is permitted under respective national laws 
and regulations. 
 
e) Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) - A combined civilian and 
military team that operates under joint policy guidance from the 
Base Commander and the Swedish Embassy which aims to perform 
development, reconstruction and governance activities and to serve a 
monitoring and reporting function.  Unlike DSTs, PRTs are stand 
alone organizations. 
 
f) Regional Command (RC) - The RCs coordinate all regional 
civil-military activities conducted by the military elements of the 
PRTs, DSTs and military Task Forces (TFs) in their Area of 
Responsibility (AOR). 
 
g) Senior Civilian Representative (SCR) - The lead American civilian 
in each geographic region of Afghanistan who coordinates the work of 
all USG civilians under U.S. COM authority within that region to 
ensure coherence of political direction and development efforts, and 
implements U.S. policy and guidance. 
 
h)Stabilization Coordination Center (SCC) - The tactical and 
strategic hub at RCs where a joint force of civilian personnel and 
military partners implement COIN and stabilization activities. 
 
i)Task Force (TF) - Brigade combat teams with specific AORs which 
may perform development and reconstruction activities to implement 
the COIN and stabilization strategy. 
 
j)U.S. Mission personnel - USG personnel under the authority of the 
U.S. Chief of Mission in Afghanistan, to include Locally Employed 
Staff (LES) and Third Country Nationals (TCNs) employed by the USG. 
 
 
k)U.S. Civilian Team Leader - The lead of the U.S. Mission personnel 
at each of the coalition-led facilities as designated by the SCR. 
 
III. GENERAL PROVISIONS 
a)This MOU sets forth the understandings of the Participants 
regarding their respective roles and responsibilities in locating 
U.S. Mission personnel on a Swedish-operated facility.  The LSSS 
should be provided to U.S. Mission personnel on a reimbursable 
 
KABUL 00000376  003.2 OF 008 
 
 
basis. 
 
b)This MOU is not intended to identify each and every LSSS 
requirement or to prejudice the ability of the Participants to make 
requests for LSSS not specifically stated herein.  Rather, this MOU 
is intended to address the majority of LSSS issues and to provide 
baseline direction for LSSS responsibilities.  Except in emergency 
circumstances, additional LSSS beyond that provided herein should 
take the form of a written request in accordance with Annex A.  Such 
requests may be for reimbursable or non-reimbursable support. 
 
c) This MOU applies to personnel under the authority of the U.S. COM 
in Afghanistan, except as otherwise provided herein. 
 
d) Nothing in this MOU constitutes an obligation of funds by either 
Participant, but clarifies the roles and responsibilities of both 
Participants in supporting the U.S. Mission personnel located at 
Swedish-operated facilities.  Any transfer of funds for the support 
of U.S. Mission personnel located at Swedish-operated facilities, 
should be through a separate obligating instrument, subject to the 
availability of funds and in accordance with any attached Annexes. 
 
e)Participants should consult on a regular basis regarding planned 
staffing patterns, financial information and the need for LSSS, 
security and mobility support requirements for incoming U.S. Mission 
personnel at Swedish-operated facilities. 
 
f) U.S. Mission personnel remain subject to U.S. COM authority for 
all guidance and direction including political, economic, 
development and diplomacy, with respect to their activities in 
country.  The U.S. COM provides U.S. Mission personnel with guidance 
and direction regarding those activities, as the U.S. COM deems 
appropriate.  U.S. Mission personnel present at Swedish-operated 
facilities should not be in uniform, carry a weapon (unless 
authorized by U.S. Diplomatic Security), participate in the 
supervision or interrogation of prisoners, or engage in combat or 
law enforcement activities. 
 
g) Invoicing and reimbursement arrangements, in accordance with 
Annex A, should be established between the USG and SWEDEN  to 
address LSSS requirements for U.S. Mission personnel residing and 
working at Swedish-operated facilities.  Such arrangements should 
also set forth the USG's responsibility for furnishing its personnel 
with any support and/or equipment deemed necessary by the respective 
USG agency, but not furnished by Sweden , which may include vehicles 
and drivers for use on Swedish-operated facilities, personal 
protective equipment (e.g., body armor), office equipment, 
information technology (IT) (e.g., computers, printers, radios, 
dishes, mobile phones, commercial internet, televisions and 
telephone networks), and related services for use by U.S. Mission 
personnel at the relevant facility or facilities.  Annex A provides 
information regarding invoicing and reimbursement of costs incurred 
by Sweden for U.S. Mission personnel of the individual USG agencies, 
subject to the availability of funds. 
 
h) This MOU does not impose, nor is it intended to impose, any legal 
commitments or obligations on the Participants. 
 
IV. FORCE PROTECTION RESPONSIBILITY 
 
a) The Participants understand that Sweden will provide U.S. Mission 
personnel force protection within the perimeter of the 
Swedish-operated facility at the same level as that provided to all 
other personnel residing on the Swedish-operated facility. 
 
b) While present at a Swedish-operated facility, U.S. Mission 
personnel are expected to comply with all guidance and direction 
provided by the Base Commander relating to all matters of security, 
force protection and freedom of movement on and off the 
Swedish-operated facility. 
 
¶V. RESPONSIBILITIES OF SWEDEN 
 
As described below, Sweden intends to provide LSSS to U.S. Mission 
personnel to the same standard as that provided to Swedish staff 
located within the Swedish-operated facility. 
 
¶A.  Accommodations and Office Space 
 
¶1. Sweden, should provide U.S. Mission personnel, except LES, with 
furnished residential accommodation in containerized housing units 
(containers) or in a purpose built accommodation block or 
accommodation pods.  Units of accommodation should be hardened 
against the effects of blast.  Where necessary, additional U.S. 
Mission personnel and/or visitors may be housed in overflow 
accommodations in hardened containers of varying specifications. 
 
KABUL 00000376  004.2 OF 008 
 
 
The nature and timing of staff attachments mean that no account can 
be taken of grade or seniority in allocating accommodations, which 
may be on a shared basis. 
 
¶2. Sweden should provide U.S. Mission personnel with shared, 
furnished office space, office machinery such as copiers, faxes, 
printers and scanners and IT/Communications, such as Sweden.  In the 
office space, Sweden will provide access to telephones, except 
mobile phones, with telephone outlets in the office spaces, as 
reasonably required, and computer network connectivity for the U.S. 
Mission-supplied hardware.  At peak periods some element of sharing 
of desk space may be required. 
 
¶3. In the accommodations, Sweden will use its best endeavors to 
provide wiring for internet, television and telephone lines, 
according to the prevailing situation and limitations in the 
Swedish-operated facility. In the office space, Sweden should 
provide access to telephones with telephone outlets in the office 
spaces, as reasonably required, and computer network connectivity 
for the U.S. Mission-supplied hardware. 
 
¶4. Sweden should dedicate parking spaces for U.S. Mission personnel 
vehicles, if applicable. 
 
¶B.  Life Support 
 
Sweden intends to provide general life support to U.S. Mission 
personnel at the same level provided to Swedish staff at the 
Swedish-operated facility. Sweden intends to provide all services 
including food, water, electricity, lighting, 
air-conditioning/heating, drainage and sewerage and plant 
maintenance for the accommodations and office space and maintain all 
internal and external fixtures, plumbing, water, and electrical 
requirements of the accommodations and office space to include 
ongoing maintenance and general repairs required to maintain 
serviceability of the facility due to normal use. 
¶C.  Medical Services 
 
Sweden intends to provide resuscitative medical care.  Resuscitative 
care is the aggressive management of life and limb-threatening 
injuries.  Interventions include emergency medical treatment, 
advanced trauma management, and lifesaving surgery to enable the 
patient to tolerate evacuation to the next level of care. 
Resuscitative care also includes medical care when life, limb, or 
eyesight is jeopardized and dental care.  Examples of an emergency 
include: refills of prescription/life-dependent drugs, broken bones, 
lacerations, broken teeth or bridgework, or lost crowns or fillings. 
 If required, MEDEVAC should be provided.  Primary medical or dental 
care is authorized for U.S. Mission personnel on a cost 
reimbursement basis based on the existing capabilities of Medical 
Treatment Facilities (MTF) at the Swedish-operated facilities. 
Primary care includes inpatient and outpatient services; 
non-emergency evacuation; non-emergency pharmaceutical support; 
non-emergency dental services and other medical support as 
determined by appropriate military authorities based on 
recommendations from the joint force command surgeon and existing 
capabilities of the forward-deployed MTFs.  Sweden intends to 
transfer remains of U.S. Mission personnel for U.S. mortuary 
services provided at Bagram Airfield. 
 
¶D.  Security 
 
¶1. Security of staff is paramount.  All U.S. Mission personnel are 
expected to comply with all security regulations and instructions as 
specified by the Base Commander.  The U.S. COM retains ultimate 
security responsibility for U.S. Mission personnel located at 
Swedish-operated facilities.  U.S. Mission personnel are expected to 
follow the same security guidance as applies to Swedish staff at the 
Swedish-operated facility. 
 
¶2. All U.S. Mission personnel, except LES, are expected to attend a 
security induction briefing and benefit from any daily intelligence 
summaries, threat assessments and threat mitigation measures which 
are constantly reviewed for the PRT staff.  All U.S. Mission 
personnel, except LES, should have 24-hour access to the security 
management team.  Radios (together with 24-hour monitored security 
operations room and maintenance back-up) may be allocated to U. S. 
Mission personnel, except LES, to assist in their security.  LES 
should receive a verbal briefing and attend a security meeting every 
two weeks. 
 
¶E.  Ground Movement 
 
¶1. The Participants understand that the monthly flat rate fee covers 
transport outside the Swedish-operated facility.  Ground movement 
capability is critical to the success of the joint civilian military 
 
KABUL 00000376  005.2 OF 008 
 
 
mission.  The Participants understand that the PRT Base Commander 
will provide ground movement for U.S. Mission personnel.  Readily 
available ground movement capability is critical to the success of 
the reconstruction, COIN, stabilization and development strategy for 
Afghanistan.  The Base Commander will make every effort to 
accommodate requests by the U.S. Mission personnel team leader for 
such transportation. 
 
¶2.     The Participants understand that the Base Commander will 
incorporate the U.S. Mission personnel team leader into stability 
and security efforts.  This integration will facilitate the 
comprehensive and integrated approach in the development and 
execution of shape, clear, hold, build operations in support of the 
overall campaign plan.  The Participants understand that this 
integration will facilitate a joint assessment of the request for 
transportation and weigh it against COIN and stabilization 
objectives, logistical capabilities, and force security concerns, 
and will prioritize travel requests accordingly 
 
¶3. The Participants understand that the Base Commander will ensure 
that Coalition Forces assigned to ISAF under his control, within the 
means and capabilities available, will provide secure travel for the 
U.S. Mission personnel to conduct official business in the assigned 
area of operation.  The Participants understand that the number of 
trips provided will depend on the capacity available and will be 
assessed according to the same standard as for all the other members 
of the Swedish-operated facility, based on current joint operational 
priorities and assessed threat. 
 
¶4. The U.S. Mission personnel team leader will submit a prioritized 
list of movement requests for ground transportation assets at least 
48 hours in advance of travel. 
 
¶F. Self-Drive Movements 
 
The Participants understand that the Swedish-operated facility 
military units will provide a Quick Reaction Force (QRF) and Medical 
Evacuation (MEDEVAC) for U.S. Mission personnel assigned to the 
Swedish-operated facility (excluding LES) as needed.  U.S. Mission 
personnel assigned to the Swedish-operated facility are expected to 
advise the PRT Base Commander and staff of any off-compound travel. 
U.S. Mission personnel are required to provide the PRT Base 
Commander and security staff with all travel itineraries in advance 
of a trip and to coordinate communication, ideally with at least two 
methods of communication (cell phone, satellite phone or radio) with 
the PRT Base Commander and security staff for emergency purposes. 
U.S. Mission personnel are required to test these communications 
measures with the PRT Base Commander's staff prior to departing from 
the Swedish-operated facility. 
 
¶G.  Reimbursement. 
 
On a quarterly basis, Sweden should invoice the DOS at Embassy Kabul 
for services provided to the U.S. Mission personnel located at 
Swedish-operated facilities.  The USG intends, subject to the 
availability of funds, to pay Sweden a flat rate per person, in 
accordance with Annex A.  Such invoices should contain the costs of 
the LSSS provided to each U.S. Mission personnel. 
 
VI. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE U.S. MISSION 
 
¶A. Mission Responsibilities.  The U.S. Mission intends to do the 
following with respect to U.S. Mission personnel located at a 
Swedish-operated facility: 
 
¶1. Inform individual USG agencies with personnel located at the 
Swedish-operated facilities that the agencies are responsible for 
furnishing IT, (e.g., laptops, one shared small printer, and mobile 
phones) as necessary for their agency personnel to be fully 
functional and provide for the maintenance and functionality of 
their IT/Communication and any supplied laptops and printers. 
 
¶2. Direct U.S. Mission personnel to comply with all guidance and 
directions relating to all matters of security, force protection, 
and freedom of movement on and off the facility, as set forth in 
this MOU. 
 
¶3. Direct U.S. Mission personnel to adhere to all policies, 
directions, and Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) regarding 
proper licensing of vehicles, badge procedures, and base access for 
USG employees, including LES and TCNs.  The U.S. Mission should 
maintain and update its knowledge regarding such policies, 
directions and SOPs. 
 
¶4. Ensure that only U.S. Mission personnel with appropriate security 
clearance levels are located at the Swedish-operated facilities. 
 
KABUL 00000376  006.2 OF 008 
 
 
Also ensure that access to classified information is consistent with 
the requirements of the NATO security regulations or bilateral 
security agreements between Sweden and the U.S. 
 
¶5. Inform individual USG agencies that they are responsible for 
providing vehicles and drivers for transportation on the 
Swedish-operated facilities, as necessary.  Individual USG agencies 
should provide for the maintenance of such vehicles for this 
purpose.  All maintenance support provided by Sweden for fuel, 
equipment or vehicles for individual USG agency personnel located at 
Swedish-operated facilities should be on a reimbursable basis by the 
U.S. Mission through the DoS to Sweden. 
 
¶6. Direct U.S. Mission personnel to adhere to Standards and Tenants 
Policy for Swedish-operated facilities. 
 
¶7. Inform individual USG agencies that they are responsible for 
providing all personal protective equipment including body armor for 
their personnel, as necessary.  Any body armor or personal 
protective equipment provided by Sweden for U.S. Mission personnel 
should be on a reimbursable basis. 
 
¶8. Direct U.S. Mission personnel to coordinate with the 
Swedish-operated facility personnel and the PRT Base Commander 
regarding the base access of any LES or TCNs working for the U.S. 
Mission. 
 
¶9. Clear U.S. Mission personnel to be located at Swedish-operated 
facilities.  U.S. Mission personnel, including LES and TCNs cleared 
by the U.S. Regional Security Officer, Embassy Kabul, should be 
issued access badges to permit them access to the Swedish-operated 
facility by the relevant security personnel or the PRT Base 
Commander. 
 
¶B. Funding:  Reimbursement to Sweden by the USG for U.S. Mission 
personnel located at Swedish-operated facilities should be 
accomplished in accordance with Annex A, on a quarterly basis, and 
is subject to the availability of funds. 
 
VII. DISPUTE RESOLUTION PROCESS 
 
Any dispute about the interpretation or application of this MOU 
should only be resolved by consultations between the Participants 
and should not be referred to any national or international tribunal 
or third party for settlement. 
 
VIII.EFFECTIVE DATE, MODIFICATION AND TERMINATION 
 
¶1. Activities under this MOU are intended to commence on the date of 
the last signature.  This MOU may be modified by mutual written 
consent.  Any modifications to Annex A resulting from any new 
internal rules or procedures should be approved by both Participants 
and confirmed by exchange of letters.  This MOU should remain in 
effect unless discontinued by either Participant, which should 
provide ninety days' written notice to the other Participant. 
 
¶2. This MOU should comprise two copies signed in the English 
language. 
 
 
 
KARL W. EIKENBERRY 
Ambassador      Ambassador 
U.S. Embassy Embassy of the Kingdom of Sweden 
Kabul, Afghanistan Kabul, Afghanistan 
 
 
Date       Date 
 
ANNEX A 
DETAILED SUPPORT ARRANGEMENTS 
 
¶I. PURPOSE 
 
a) The purpose of this Annex is to facilitate the provision of 
mutual Logistic Support, Supplies and Services (LSSS) from Sweden to 
U.S. Mission personnel located at Swedish-operated facilities in 
Afghanistan as provided for in the MOU. 
 
b) Sweden should use its best endeavors, consistent with national 
priorities, to satisfy requests, but it is understood the provision 
of such LSSS is subject to the availability of the requested LSSS 
and funds.  Additional LSSS may be provided as mutually determined. 
 
 
II. FINANCIAL PROVISIONS 
 
KABUL 00000376  007.2 OF 008 
 
 
 
Monthly Support Costs 
 
Area of SupportCost Per Person Per Month (   )Accommodation 
(Office & Residential) Office Support Services (telephone, 
internet, stationery, office machinery such as copiers, faxes, 
printers and scanners, IT equipment, except mobile phone 
service)Management Staff support costsCost of Life Support, 
including 
- Food 
- Access to Primary Medical Care* 
- Access to medical repatriation and any other medical costs* 
(* - Primary healthcare and medical repatriation arrangements may 
change during the lifetime of this agreement) 
Total Monthly CostTotal Monthly Cost for LSSS under the MOU 
Note:  All the above costs are variable, based on the head-count in 
post each month.  Sweden should issue invoices based on these quoted 
figures, using the head-count for each month.  Invoices are 
nvoices are 
anticipated to be at least one quarter behind.  These figures should 
be reset for subsequent financial years. 
 
III. BILLING DATA 
 
These fees are payable at the end of each quarter, for the first 
time for the period from the date of which this MOU takes effect. 
If this MOU takes effect on a date other than the 1st day of a 
month, the amount payable for the first and last months of the 
period of the MOU should be reduced pro rata.  The billing above 
should be based on a full month rate.  If a person stays at a 
Swedish-operated facility for 14 consecutive nights or more, that 
individual should be included in the head-count figure for that 
month during which the stay occurred.  Should U.S. Mission personnel 
arrive at the Swedish-operated facility prior to and including the 
15th of the month, a full unit price should be charged.  After the 
15th of a month, the Swedish PRT Team should charge half of the 
monthly flat rate.  Payment should be made to the following 
account: 
 
Account name: 
Sort code: 
Account number: 
Swift: 
IBAN: 
Bank address: 
 
IV. PROCEDURES FOR ORDERING LSSS 
 
A) For ongoing services such as food, lodging, petroleum, oil and 
lubricants, the Swedish PRT Team and the DOS should establish 
appropriate procedures to clearly identify, record and control the 
quantity and monetary value of the LSSS requested/provided and the 
terms and method of delivery.  Any procedures/forms used should 
facilitate the proper completion, support, submission and payment of 
invoices as detailed above. 
 
B) The ordering and provision of LSSS that are not for ongoing 
services should be subject to the following procedures: 
 
¶1. The DOS Point of Contact (POC) should initially contact the 
Swedish PRT POC to determine availability and price for a requested 
LSSS prior to placing an order.  The Swedish PRT POC should inform 
the DOS POC placing the order of availability and price, location 
and other necessary information in writing. 
 
¶2. The DOS POC should forward a written order form to the Swedish 
PRT POC to provide the LSSS. 
 
¶3. The DOS POC should not initiate any request for LSSS unless funds 
or other agreed payment means are available. 
 
¶V. POINTS OF CONTACT 
 
¶A. Technical Points of Contact 
U.S. Government-U.S. Embassy, Kabul 
Coordinator 
Interagency Provincial Affairs 
U.S. Embassy Kabul 
Great Masood Road 
Kabul, Afghanistan 
202-216-6288 ext. 8186 
 
 
 
Government of the Kingdom of Sweden 
 
 
KABUL 00000376  008.2 OF 008 
 
 
 
 
¶B. Financial POCs 
U.S. Government-U.S. Embassy, Kabul 
Financial Management Office 
U.S. Embassy Kabul 
Great Masood Road 
Kabul, Afghanistan 
202-216-6288 ext. 8429 
 
Government of the Kingdom of Sweden 
 
¶C. Security POCs 
U.S. Government-U.S. Embassy, Kabul 
Regional Security Office 
U.S. Embassy Kabul 
Great Masood Road 
Kabul, Afghanistan 
202-216-6288 ext. 8361 
 
Government of the Kingdom of Sweden 
 
ANNEX B 
FURNISHINGS 
 
 
The following is intended to be an illustrative list of furnishings 
for accommodations and office spaces at Swedish-operated 
facilities: 
 
 
 
EIKENBERRY