04BRASILIA3175
LULA'S INTERNATIONAL TRAVEL SCHEDULE FOR 2005
Mon Dec 27 00:00:00 +0100 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS BRASILIA 003175 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV BR
SUBJECT:  LULA'S INTERNATIONAL TRAVEL SCHEDULE FOR 2005 
 
 
¶1.  According to the Ministry of External Relations, 
Brazilian President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva will make at 
least thirteen international trips during 2005, continuing 
the feverish pace of his first two years in office.  Lula's 
principal foreign policy objectives during his travels will 
continue to be to obtain international support for a 
permanent Brazilian seat at the United National Security 
Council and to enhance South-South strategic cooperation. 
Throughout his travels, the President will also emphasize 
investment opportunities in Brazil. 
 
¶2.  Following is Lula's planned international itinerary: 
 
a.January: Davos, Switzerland, to attend the 
World Economic Forum; 
b.February: Guiana (courtesy visit) and Suriname 
(Caricom meeting) -- the last two South 
American countries unvisited by Lula; 
c.March: Montevideo for Uruguayan President 
Vasquez's inauguration; 
d.April: Africa (most likely Nigeria, Senegal, 
and Tunisia) - this would be Lula's third 
African trip; 
e.May: Japan and South Korea for "reciprocal" 
visits (Presidents Junichiro Koizume and Roh 
Moo-Hyun visited Brazil in 2004); 
f.June:  Asuncion for a Mercosul meeting, and, 
 and, 
if invited, Scotland for G-8 Summit; 
g.July: Paris for the celebration of French 
National Day, Lisbon for a summit meeting of 
the Community of Portuguese Speaking Countries 
(CLDP; 
h.September: New York for the opening of UNGA; 
i.October: Moscow (President Putin visited 
Brazil in late 2004); 
j.December:  Montevideo to attend a Mercosul 
meeting. 
 
¶3.  In addition, on May 10-11, Brazil will host the Arab- 
Latin American Summit.  Following past practice, it is also 
very likely that Lula will travel extensively to other 
regional capitals for various events not yet scheduled. 
 
¶4.  Comment:  While complaints may continue to arise about 
Lula's frequent absences from Brazil, on the whole the 
President's travels generally generate positive publicity 
and garner public support for Brazil's, and Lula's, 
emerging image as a world leader.  But one aspect of his 
travels may gain heightened press coverage in 2005.  The 
new Presidential aircraft, an Airbus A-391, will likely 
ely 
enter service in February.  Over the next few months, 
Brazilian pundits may enjoy citing the number 
56,713,976.00, the cost in dollars of the new aircraft. 
 
DANILOVICH