05BRASILIA119
BRAZIL INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT 2005
Wed Jan 12 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 11 BRASILIA 000119 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS TO USTR 
STATE FOR EB/IFD/OIA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: EINV KTDB BR OPIC USTR
SUBJECT: BRAZIL INVESTMENT CLIMATE STATEMENT 2005 
 
REF: 04 STATE 250356 
 
¶1.   This cable transmits Mission Brazil's submission 
of the 2005 Investment Climate Statement. 
 
Introduction - Openness to Foreign Investment 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
¶2.   Openness to Foreign Investment.  Brazil knows that 
achieving sustained, rapid growth depends on foreign 
investment and has lifted many restrictions in recent 
years to encourage such investment.  The 1962 Foreign 
Capital law and subsequent amendments govern most 
foreign investment.  Foreign investors have been 
permitted to invest in the Brazilian stock market since 
¶1991.  The Brazilian Congress approved constitutional 
amendments in 1995 to eliminate the distinction between 
foreign and national capital.  New rules, which 
liberalized considerably foreign investment in equities 
and put foreign investors essentially on an equal 
footing with Brazilians, took effect in 2000.  During 
the high point of the privatization program, Brazil was 
the second largest destination for foreign investment 
among emerging markets, with a peak inflow of $32.8 
billion in 2000; the country remains a leading 
investment destination. 
 
¶3.   Constitutional amendments passed in 1995 opened 
formerly closed sectors, such as petroleum, 
telecommunications, mining, power generation, and 
internal transport to foreign investors.  In 2002, 
Congress approved a constitutional amendment permitting 
foreign investors to own up to 30% of media companies. 
Restrictions remain on foreign investment in a limited 
number of sectors:  nuclear energy, health services, 
media, rural property, fishing, mail and telegraph, 
aviation and aerospace.  In December 2004, the Congress 
approved and the President signed, the Public-Private 
Investment (PPP) bill that promotes joint ventures in 
infrastructure investment.  The law creates a federal 
guarantee fund to protect investors in federal PPPs. 
In almost all cases, at least 30% of project must be 
private investment funds. 
 
¶4.   New or expanded foreign investment in the banking 
sector is technically forbidden by the Constitution of 
¶1988.  However, since 1995 entry or expansion has been 
approved on a case-by-case basis; the vast majority of 
requests for entry or expansion have been granted. 
Foreign banks currently account for one third of the 
total net worth of the banking system and 27% of total 
banking system assets. Since 1996, the insurance sector 
has been open to foreign investors, and most major US 
firms are already represented, mainly via joint venture 
arrangements.  Brazil maintains a government-owned 
reinsurance monopoly, the Brazil Reinsurance Institute 
(IRB).  Plans to privatize the IRB were delayed by 
court challenges.  While the Supreme Court decided in 
September 2004 that the privatization was 
constitutional, the Lula administration has not decided 
to resubmit to Congress a bill privatizing IRB.  A 2003 
Constitutional amendment allows the regulation of the 
reinsurance sector, and permits new market entrants. 
Implementing these provisions would require passage of 
a complementary law, which is not yet on the 
Congressional agenda. 
 
¶5.   In 1991, Brazil embarked on the world's largest 
privatization drive, selling off more than US$ 100 
billion worth of assets.  Since 2002, however, 
privatization has virtually stopped.  Through 2004, 
Brazil realized $87.5 billion in sales revenue and 
another $18.1 billion in debt transfer as a result of 
the national privatization program.  Foreign investment 
accounted for $42 billion, or 48% of the total.  One 
third of the foreign investment was from the US ($14 
billion).  With the exception of power-generation 
sector, most of the largest state enterprises have been 
sold, and privatization activity has died down since 
2001:  in 2002, it totaled only US$ 2 billion; in 2003 
there were no privatizations; and through the first 
half of 2004 the sole new privatization was that of the 
State Bank of Maranhao, for US$ 26.6 million. 
¶6.   The privatization of the energy sector also was 
halted.  In December 2004, Brazil conducted its first 
auction of long term energy supply contracts under a 
new energy regulatory framework advanced by the Lula 
administration in which the federal government now 
plays a more central role in establishing energy demand 
forecasts and energy prices.  Analysts, companies and 
regulators have expressed concern that the more 
centralized government role and low auction prices will 
inhibit private investments. 
 
¶7.   During the early 1990s, foreign direct investment 
(FDI) was a crucial source of financing for Brazil's 
balance of payments.  However, since 2001 the trade 
balance has improved sharply, helping produce actual 
current-account surpluses in 2003 and 2004.   This 
trend has enabled Brazil easily to weather the steep 
continuing decline of FDI, from $ 22.5 billion in 2001 
to $16.6 billion in 2002 and just $10.1 billion in 
¶2003.  FDI in 2004 is estimated to have increased to 
about $16 billion. 
 
¶8.   Brazil has undertaken a significant reduction in 
trade barriers in recent years. In 2004, Brazil's 
average Normal Trade Relations (NTR) tariff was 10.8%, 
versus 32% percent in 1990, according to the Foreign 
Trade Secretariat of the Ministry of Development, 
Industry and Foreign Trade. 
 
Conversion and Transfer Policies 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶9.   There are few restrictions on converting or 
transferring funds associated with an investment. 
Foreign investors may freely convert Brazilian currency 
in the unified foreign exchange market wherein buy-sell 
rates are determined by market forces.  All foreign 
exchange transactions, including identifying data, must 
be reported to the Central Bank.  Foreign-exchange 
transactions on the current account have been fully 
liberalized in practice, and in 2000 the Central Bank 
greatly simplified requirements for capital-account 
transactions. 
 
¶10.  Foreigners investing in Brazil must register their 
investment with the Central Bank within 30 days of the 
inflow of resources to Brazil.  Registration is done 
electronically.  Investments involving royalties and 
technology transfer must be registered with the patent 
office (INPI) as well.  Investors must have a 
representative in Brazil and register with the 
Brazilian securities commission (CVM).  Subsequent 
transactions, such as reinvestment of profits, may also 
have to be registered with the Central Bank. 
 
¶11.  Foreign investors, upon registering their 
investment with the Central Bank, are able to remit 
dividends, capital (including capital gains), and, if 
applicable, royalties.  Remittances must also be 
registered with the Central Bank.  Dividends cannot 
exceed corporate profits.  The remittance transaction 
may be carried out at any bank by documenting the 
source of the transaction (evidence of profit or sale 
of assets) and showing that applicable taxes have been 
paid. 
 
¶12.  Foreign loans obtained abroad no longer require 
advance approval by the Central Bank, provided the 
recipient is not a government entity (loans to 
government entities still require prior approval). 
Upon concluding the transaction, the loan must be 
registered electronically with the Central Bank.  In 
most instances, the registration is completed 
automatically.  Automatic registration is not issued 
when the costs of the operation are "not compatible 
with normal market conditions and practices."  In such 
instances, the loan is reviewed by the Central Bank; if 
the Central Bank does not respond within five working 
days, the registration is considered complete. 
 
¶13.  Interest and amortization payments specified in 
the loan contract can be made without additional 
approval from the Central Bank.  That also applies to 
early payments, if there is a provision in the contract 
for early payment.  If the contract does not have such 
a provision, early payment requires prior approval by 
the Central Bank.  According to Central Bank officials, 
this requirement is to ensure accurate records of 
Brazil's stock of debt, and all requests have been 
approved since the new guidelines were issued in 2000. 
 
¶14.  In addition to payments associated with registered 
loans and investments, there are other approved 
procedures for transferring funds abroad that in 
practice can be used for a wide range of purposes. 
 
¶15.  Capital-gain remittances are subject to a 15 
percent income withholding tax.  Repatriation of an 
initial investment is exempt from income tax. 
Beginning in 2000, lease payments were assessed a 15 
percent withholding tax.  Remittances related to 
technology transfers are not subject to the tax on 
credit, foreign exchange, and insurance (IOF), although 
they are subject to a 15% withholding tax and an extra 
10% Contribution of Intervention in the Economic Domain 
(CIDE).  Loans with terms of 90 days or less must pay 
the IOF (5%), while those of longer maturity do not. 
In 2002, Brazil eliminated the application of the 
financial transaction tax (CPMF), which is currently 
0.38%, to stock market transactions.  Brazil has no 
double taxation treaty with the US, but does have such 
treaties with a number of other countries, including, 
among others, Germany, Japan, France, Italy, the 
Netherlands, Canada and Argentina. 
 
Expropriation and Compensation 
------------------------------ 
 
¶16.  There have been no expropriatory actions in Brazil 
in the recent past nor any signs that the current 
Government is contemplating such actions.  In 1999, a 
state government sought and obtained a court ruling 
canceling contractual obligations, signed by the prior 
state government, associated with the partial 
privatization of a state electricity company.  The U.S. 
investors are appealing the court ruling.  In 2003, a 
newly inaugurated government in another state refused 
to honor a number of contracts the previous state 
government had signed with a range of Brazilian and 
foreign investors; the parties involved continue to 
negotiate these contract disputes and have had recourse 
to local courts.  Some claims regarding land 
expropriations by state agencies many years ago have 
been judged by courts in US citizens' favor.  There 
remain individuals who have not yet been compensated 
because the states have appealed these decisions. 
 
Dispute Settlement 
------------------ 
 
¶17.  Brazil is not a member of the International Center 
for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID - also 
known as the Washington Convention), but it is a party 
to the New York Convention of 1958 on the recognition 
and enforcement of foreign arbitration awards.  In 
August 1995, Brazil ratified the 1975 Interamerican 
Convention on International Commercial Arbitration, as 
well as the 1979 Interamerican Convention on 
Extraterritorial Validity of Foreign Judgments and 
Arbitral Awards. 
 
¶18.  Arbitration clauses in contracts are not 
automatically enforceable.  Foreign arbitral awards 
require confirmation by a court of the country in which 
the award was rendered and by the Brazilian Supreme 
Court.  This confirmation is procedural in nature, and 
not meant to consider the merits of the case. 
Confirmation by the Supreme Court allows the claimant 
to enforce the arbitral award through Brazilian courts. 
The Supreme Court has confirmed foreign arbitral awards 
between two private parties in multiple cases. 
 
¶19.  There is some legal controversy in Brazil over 
binding foreign arbitration between foreign investors 
and state entities.  Some Brazilian legal 
interpretations claim this is prohibited under 
Brazilian law on the grounds that it infringes the 
sovereign rights of the state.  The Federal Government 
nevertheless maintains, in the absence of a definitive 
judicial ruling on the issue, that it can agree to 
binding foreign arbitration and routinely enters into 
contracts that allow for such arbitration. 
 
¶20.  This legal uncertainty, as well as congressional 
politics, has held up ratification of Bilateral 
Investment Agreements that Brazil has signed with about 
fourteen countries (not including the US), which call 
for arbitration by either ICSID or a panel set up under 
the United Nations Rules for International Commercial 
Law.  Given the doubts about the applicability under 
Brazilian law of these international arbitration 
provisions to Brazilian government entities, the 
government in December 2003 withdrew the agreements 
from consideration for Senate ratification. 
 
¶21.  Brazil has a functional commercial code that 
governs most aspects of commercial association, except 
for corporations formed for the provision of 
professional services, which are governed by the civil 
code.  In December 2004, Congress approved an overhaul 
of the bankruptcy code.  The reforms create a system, 
modeled on Chapter 11 of the U.S. bankruptcy code, 
which allows a company in financial straits to 
negotiate a restructuring with its creditors outside of 
the courts.  In the event a company does fail despite 
restructuring efforts, the reforms give creditors a 
better chance at recovering their debts.  An 
overburdened court system is available for enforcing 
property rights but decisions can take years.  Judicial 
reform measures enacted in December 2004 streamline 
administrative procedures, and, by introducing the 
concept of binding precedent, should, over time, make 
judicial decisions more predictable. 
 
Political Violence (As It May Affect Investments) 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶22.  Brazil's major urban centers suffer from 
significant drug trafficking-related and organized 
crime-related violence.  Poverty, gangs, drugs and a 
lack of government resources have combined to erode 
state authority in some urban slums (favelas).  There 
have been episodes of drug-related violence prompting 
major police crackdowns, particularly in Rio de 
Janeiro.  Police have been implicated in significant 
human rights violations, including extra-judicial 
killings, abuse of prisoners, and other criminal 
activity.  Since mid-2003 the Landless Workers' 
Movement  (MST) has continued its aggressive invasions 
of a variety of agricultural interests, both domestic 
and foreign, in its campaign to force redistribution of 
land.  In rural areas, powerful landowners, sometimes 
aided by police or private security agents, have used 
violence to settle land disputes, including but not 
limited to those with the MST or indigenous peoples, 
and to influence the local judiciary. 
 
Performance Requirements and Incentives 
--------------------------------------- 
 
¶23.  Geographic preferences consist of tax benefits for 
investment in less developed parts of the country, such 
as the Northeast and the Amazon, with equal application 
to foreign and domestic investors.  These benefits have 
succeeded in attracting some major foreign plants to, 
for example, the Manaus Free Trade Zone, but most 
foreign investment remains concentrated in the more 
industrialized southern part of Brazil.  Individual 
states have sought to attract investment by offering ad 
hoc tax benefits and infrastructure support to specific 
companies.  Some municipalities provide land on 
favorable terms for industrial development. 
 
¶24.  In firms employing three or more persons, 
Brazilian nationals must constitute at least two-thirds 
of all employees and receive at least two-thirds of 
total payroll.   Foreign specialists in fields where 
Brazilians are unavailable are not counted in 
calculating the one-third permitted for non-Brazilians. 
 
¶25.  The Special Agency for Industrial Financing 
(FINAME) of the National Bank for Economic and Social 
Development (BNDES) provides financing for purchases by 
Brazilian firms of Brazilian-made machinery and 
equipment -- capital goods with a high level of 
domestic content.  The government also has a series of 
smaller programs designed to assist small and medium 
sized businesses export. 
 
Right to Private Ownership and Establishment 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶26.  Foreign and domestic private entities may 
establish, own, and dispose of business enterprises. 
 
Protection of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶27.  Brazil is a signatory to the GATT Uruguay Round 
Accords, including the Trade Related Aspects of 
Intellectual Property (TRIPS) Agreement, signed in 
April 1994.  Brazil is a member of the World 
Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) and a 
signatory of the Bern Convention on artistic property, 
the Washington Patent Cooperation Treaty, and the Paris 
Convention on Protection of Intellectual Property.  In 
August 1992, Brazil removed its reservations and fully 
accepted the Stockholm revision of the Paris 
Convention.  Brazil has not yet ratified the WIPO 
Treaties on Copyright and Performances and Phonograms. 
As a result of continuing problems regarding protection 
of intellectual property rights, principally in 
enforcement, Brazil remains on the Special 301 priority 
watch list following the early 2004 review. 
 
¶28.  Patents. In most respects, Brazil's 1996 
Industrial Property law brings its patent and trademark 
regime up to the international standards specified in 
the TRIPS Agreement.   However, the law includes 
compulsory licensing and local working requirements 
which may be TRIPS-inconsistent.  The law would 
theoretically permit the grant of a compulsory license 
if a patent owner has failed to "work" (i.e. locally 
manufacture) the patented invention in Brazil within 
three years of issuance.  Brazil has agreed to consult 
with the US before any potential invocation of the 
local working requirement; to date, Brazil has yet to 
grant a compulsory license. 
 
¶29.  Trademarks. The fraudulent use of internationally 
"famous" marks has been a problem in Brazil.  However, 
the Industrial Property Law has provided improvements 
in Brazil's trademark regime, including better 
protection for internationally known trademarks.  Some 
foreign firms have been successful in court actions 
against trademark infringement.  Trademark licensing 
agreements must be registered with the National 
Institute of Industrial Property (INPI) to be 
enforceable; however, the failure to register licensing 
agreements will no longer result in cancellation of 
trademark registration for non-use. 
 
¶30.  Copyrights.  Brazil's copyright law generally 
conforms to world-class standards.  Likewise, its 
software copyright protection law contains provisions 
that introduce a rental right and an increase in the 
term of protection to 50 years.  Despite passage of 
these copyright laws in 1998, widespread piracy of 
copyright and trademark material remains a problem. 
Government efforts to stem the flow of pirated goods 
through its ports and across the border with Paraguay 
have, to date, been largely unsuccessful.  The US 
private sector estimates that trade losses from 
copyright infringements (including from piracy of 
videocassettes sound recordings and musical 
compositions, books and computer software) were $907 
million in 2003. 
¶31.  In May 2001, the Government created an inter- 
ministerial committee to address copyright piracy, but 
a national strategy for combating piracy on a 
comprehensive scale has yet to emerge.  A sting 
operation at a border crossing in Foz do Iguacu in 
early 2003 also resulted in the arrest of a number of 
government officials involved with smuggling 
operations.  A significant number of raids and seizures 
were carried out in 2004 in the same border region, as 
well as in Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro.  The judicial 
system, however, remains an ineffective deterrent. 
 
¶32.  To enhance enforcement efforts, the Brazilian 
Congress passed a law in July 2003 that establishes 
prison terms of two to four years for copyright 
violations, not only for those selling pirated 
products, but also for those convicted of renting, 
smuggling, hiding or acquiring counterfeit copyright 
products.  The new law also establishes procedures for 
making arrests and destroying confiscated products.  A 
much-publicized Special Congressional Inquiry into IPR 
piracy completed its report in June 2004, amidst 
considerable sensation after a reputed piracy kingpin 
was arrested on charges of trying to bribe the chairman 
of the inquiry commission. 
 
¶33.  Integrated Circuit Layout Designs.  A government- 
drafted bill to provide protection for the layout 
design of integrated circuits (computer mask works) was 
introduced in the Brazilian Congress in April 1996. 
The draft law was still under discussion in 2004. 
However, the Government's Industrial Policy measures 
announced in early 2004 prioritize passage of this bill 
to stimulate innovation in local production. 
 
Regulatory System (as it pertains to investments) 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶34.  Although some improvements have been made, the 
Brazilian legal and procedural system is complex and 
overburdened.  State courts in particular can be 
subject to political influence.  The central government 
has historically exercised considerable control over 
private business through extensive and frequently 
changing regulations.  The bureaucracy has broad 
discretionary authority. 
 
¶35.  Taxes are numerous and burdensome, but do not 
discriminate between foreign and domestic firms, 
although in a few instances there have been complaints 
that the value-added tax collected by individual states 
(ICMS) is set to favor local companies.  Taxes on 
commercial and financial transactions are particularly 
burdensome, and businesses complain that these taxes 
hinder international competitiveness of Brazilian 
products.  Brazil has separate value-added tax systems 
run by the federal and state governments, and also 
imposes several invoice taxes that are cumulative.  In 
2002, one of the invoice taxes was converted to a value- 
added tax.  In 2003, the administration presented tax 
reform legislation to congress that would simplify the 
value-added tax collected by the states and convert 
another invoice tax to a value-added tax, but this 
draft legislation was subsequently deferred until at 
least 2005. 
 
¶36.  Regulatory agencies for sectors such as 
telecommunications, energy and transportation are a 
relatively young phenomenon in Brazil.  ANATEL, the 
country's telecommunication agency, handles licensing 
and assigns bandwidth.  The National Petroleum Agency 
(ANP) is commended by the industry for its fair 
handling of auctions of oil exploration blocks and its 
willingness to assist industry in seeking to simplify 
regulatory procedures such as environmental licensing. 
Conversely, in the electric power sector, many 
companies have complained about the high level of 
regulatory risk, for example the tariff review process 
and the implementation of the Brazil's new energy 
policy.  The federal government in 2003 passed 
legislation setting fixed three-year terms for 
directors of the regulatory agencies.  New legislation 
to further clarify the roles and responsibilities of 
the regulatory agencies and consolidate into one the 
multiple laws governing each separate regulator 
currently is being considered by the Congress. 
 
Bilateral Investment Agreements (BITs) 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶37.  Brazil has signed Bilateral Investment Agreements 
(BITs) with fourteen countries.  There are two Mercosul 
investment-related agreements:  the Buenos Aires 
Protocol ("extra-bloc") and the Colonia Protocol 
("intra-bloc"); the latter has not been signed by 
Brazil.  Seven of the bilateral investment treaties 
have been sent to the Brazilian Congress, but have not 
been ratified.  All of these treaties pending 
ratification were withdrawn from Senate consideration 
by the Executive in late 2003.  The Executive cited the 
need for further review of the treaties so as to avoid 
potential juridical conflicts.  At issue are the 
international arbitration clauses of these treaties, 
which may not be binding on Brazilian government 
agencies under Brazilian law. The US signed an 
Investment Warranty Treaty with Brazil in 1965 (OPIC). 
The US and Brazil currently have no plans to discuss a 
BIT. 
 
OPIC and Other Investment Insurance Programs 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶38.  Programs of the Overseas Private Investment 
Corporation (OPIC) are fully available, and activity 
has increased in recent years.  The size of OPIC's 
exposure in Brazil may occasionally limit its capacity 
for new coverage.  For more information on OPIC, please 
go to http://www.opic.gov. 
 
¶39.  Brazil became a member of the Multilateral 
Investment Guarantee Agency in 1992. 
 
Capital Outflow Policy 
---------------------- 
 
¶40.  There are few restrictions on converting or 
transferring funds associated with an investment. 
However, the Central Bank has broad administrative 
discretion in regulating remittances, which in the past 
has created problems for foreign investors.  At this 
time, foreign investors may freely convert Brazilian 
currency at the "commercial" rate.  The Central Bank is 
working on a new regulatory regime for capital flows to 
simplify bureaucratic requirements while retaining 
necessary reporting requirements. 
 
¶41.  There has been a relaxation since 1991 of the 
restrictions on the remittances of royalty payments for 
patent and trademark use between subsidiaries 
established in Brazil and the parent office 
headquartered overseas and on remittances of franchise 
contract royalties.  A 1992 INPI resolution simplified 
procedures and, in particular, eliminated a number of 
requirements (but not all) concerning technology 
transfer agreements.  No royalties or other fees may be 
transferred between related companies for the use of 
software. 
 
Labor 
----- 
 
¶42.  The Brazilian labor force comprises nearly 84 
million workers in a wide range of occupations and 
industries.  Nearly half of the labor force is employed 
in the service sector, roughly a quarter in 
agriculture, and the retail and manufacturing sectors 
combine to employ another quarter.  The participation 
of women, who now account for over 40 percent of the 
labor force, continues to grow.  The labor market has a 
high rate of informal sector employment; most sources 
estimate that at least half of all workers are not 
formally registered, pay no income taxes, and do not 
enjoy full protection under the law.  About a quarter 
of all workers are self-employed. 
 
¶43.  Unemployment - Significant. The Brazilian 
Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) calculates 
an average unemployment rate for the country based on 
data collected monthly in Brazil's six largest 
metropolitan areas.  According to this survey, the 
unemployment rate in November 2004 was 10.6%.   This 
average masks some significant variation, from a high 
of 15.9% in Salvador to a low of 7.8% in Porto Alegre. 
 
¶44.  Real Wages Halt Decline, Disparities Significant. 
Real wages in 2004 halted an almost decade long slide. 
Real wages were up 2.6% in November 2004 over November 
¶2003.  The average monthly wage in Brazil's six largest 
cities was approximately 905 Reals (approximately $332) 
in November 2004, and the minimum monthly wage was 
raised from 240 Reals ($80) to 260 Reals ($87) in April 
¶2004.  These averages gloss over some stark wage 
inequalities, as the wealthiest 50% of the Brazilian 
population earn nearly 90 percent of the total income. 
Earnings also vary significantly by region and 
industry.  The typical industrial worker in Sao Paulo, 
for example, earns about three times as much as the 
average retail worker in the northeastern state of 
Bahia. 
 
¶45.  Differences in earnings are caused in part by the 
regional disparity in educational attainment and in the 
availability of skilled workers.  According to a 2002 
survey by IBGE, 60 percent of the population has fewer 
than 8 years of schooling, with this number reaching 45 
percent in the Southeast (including Rio and Sao Paulo) 
and 70 percent in the Northeast (including Recife and 
Salvador).  Illiteracy rates also exhibit regional 
disparities.  The IBGE reports that about 11 percent of 
the population is illiterate, with 7 percent illiteracy 
in the Southeast and 21 percent in the Northeast. 
 
¶46.  Unions Play a Significant Role.  Labor unions, 
especially in sectors such as metalworking and banking, 
tend to be well-organized and aggressive in defending 
wages and working conditions.  In more remote areas 
with smaller local unions, however, unions tend to be 
less effective.  Union members account for 
approximately 12 percent of the workforce, but unions 
represent more than twice this number in collective 
bargaining.  Unions, which are funded largely by a 
mandatory tax equivalent to one day's wages per year, 
are obliged to represent all formal sector workers in a 
professional category and geographical area, regardless 
of membership status. 
 
¶47.  The Ministry of Labor estimates that there are 
over 16,000 labor unions in Brazil, but Ministry 
officials note that these figures are inexact.  Local 
unions often associate with state federations and 
national confederations in their professional category. 
In addition, four major labor federations, known as 
"centrals," have emerged: the Workers' Unitary Central 
(CUT), the Union Force (Forca Sindical - FS), the 
Workers' General Confederation (CGT), and the Social 
Democratic Union (SDS).  Labor unions channel much of 
the political activity of the labor movement.  They 
also organize strikes and salary campaigns involving 
multiple professional categories and represent workers 
in many governmental and tripartite councils.  While 
some labor organizations and their leadership operate 
independently of the government and of political 
parties, others are viewed as closely associated with 
political parties. 
 
¶48.  Extensive Regulation, Slow Legal System.  The 
labor code is highly detailed and relatively generous; 
formal sector workers are guaranteed 30 days of annual 
leave, an annual bonus equal to one month's salary, and 
severance pay in the case of dismissal without cause. 
Brazil also has a system of labor courts that are 
charged with resolving routine cases involving unfair 
dismissal, working conditions, salary disputes, and 
other grievances.  Currently, over 2.5 million cases 
languish in the labor court system, where they may 
remain unresolved for four or five years.  The 
Brazilian government is attempting to reduce this 
backlog and increase the efficiency of the labor courts 
through recent initiatives to expedite legal procedures 
and increase the number of claims that are resolved 
before reaching the courts. 
¶49.  Labor courts have the power to impose an agreement 
on employers and unions if negotiations break down and 
either side appeals to the court system.  As a result, 
labor courts routinely are called upon to determine 
wages and working conditions in industries across the 
country.   The system is tantamount to compulsory 
arbitration and does not encourage collective 
bargaining.  In recent years, however, both labor and 
management have become more flexible and collective 
bargaining has assumed greater relevance.  The Inter- 
Union Department of Socioeconomic Studies and 
Statistics (DIEESE) no longer collects data on the 
number of strikes each month.  Strikes have been a 
frequent occurrence, however, particularly among public 
sector unions.  During 2004, federal police, health 
workers, social security workers, university staff, and 
customs officers were out on strike. 
 
Major Foreign Investors 
----------------------- 
 
¶50.  According to the Central Bank's most recent 
foreign-capital census (December 2000), the US was the 
largest single foreign investor in Brazil followed by 
Spain, Netherlands, France, Germany and Portugal. 
Investment from the Cayman Islands began growing 
rapidly in 1995 and is thought to represent mainly 
repatriation of Brazilian capital entering the country 
as foreign investment and, to a lesser extent, 
investment activity by other national groups. 
Investment from Spain and Portugal surged beginning in 
1998 due to involvement in telecom privatizations and 
greatly increased investment in the banking sector by 
Spain. 
 
¶51.  The stock of direct foreign investment in Brazil 
stood at $103 billion as of December 2000, the most 
recent year for which detailed data is available.  Of 
this, the US had the largest share at about $24.5 
billion (24%).  Spain had 11.9% of the total ($12.2 
billion) and The Netherlands 10.7% ($11.0 billion). 
Investment inflows since 2000 (not net of capital 
repatriation or depreciation) have amounted to about 
$65 billion. 
 
¶52.  Four US companies - GM, Bunge, Cargill and IBM - 
are among the top twenty domestic firms.  Six of the 
top ten importing firms in 2003 were foreign: Nokia, 
Motorola, Bunge, Volkswagen, Ford Motor Co. and 
DaimlerChrysler.  Five of the top ten exporters -- 
Bunge, Volkswagen, Cargill, General Motors and Ford -- 
represented foreign investment. 
 
Efficient Capital Markets and Portfolio Investment 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶53.  Banking Shakeout Results in Improved System.  The 
Brazilian financial sector is large and sophisticated, 
in part a legacy of the high inflation period when good 
financial management was critical to financial 
survival.  Despite current moderate inflation rates, 
bank-lending spreads remain extremely high due to 
taxation, repayment risk, lack of judicial enforcement 
of contracts, high mandatory reserve requirements and 
administrative overhead. 
 
¶54.  Brazilian banks have weathered a difficult period 
of consolidation and streamlining over the last decade. 
The elimination of high inflation in the mid-1990s, and 
with it the disappearance of so-called "float income," 
led to liquidity problems among many banks.  A series 
of failures, mergers, and acquisitions took place in 
1996 and 1997; three of the country's ten largest banks 
failed and were taken over by other banks, and some 20 
smaller banks were liquidated.  Today, the financial 
sector is fairly concentrated, with the 10 largest 
institutions accounting for over 65% of financial 
sector assets.  Lending by these institutions is 
likewise focused on the largest companies, leaving 
small and medium-sized companies underserved.  The 
surviving banks have returned to profitability; the 
largest banks attained record profits in 2002 and 2003 
despite the weak economy. 
 
¶55.  Most government-owned banks, in particular those 
that were owned by state governments, have been 
privatized.  These insolvent institutions were taken 
over by the federal government, liquidated, privatized, 
or transformed into development agencies.  Three 
federally owned banks, the largest in the country, 
still play a prominent role in the financial system. 
These federal banks, while in better shape than their 
state-level counterparts, were also undercapitalized 
and carrying poorly performing loans, many the result 
of the loss-making "social" lending.  These banks have, 
to an extent, recapitalized by selling back government 
bonds.  Extraordinary bank profits in 2002 and 2003 
also have improved the health of their balance sheets. 
As part of an effort to prevent the need for future 
recapitalizations of these federal banks, the 
government now requires that loss-making social lending 
programs by any government-owned bank be supported with 
an explicit government subsidy. 
 
¶56.  Dealing with the bank failures and consolidations 
of the last several years has led the Central Bank to 
strengthen bank audits, implement more stringent 
internal control requirements, and tighten capital 
adequacy rules to better reflect risk.  It also 
established loan classification and provisioning 
requirements.  These measures are applied to private 
and publicly owned banks alike. 
 
¶57.  Stock Markets Not an Option For Most Companies. 
Only a few, primarily large, corporations raise capital 
through the Brazilian stock exchanges.  In 2003, two 
new issues in the primary market raised $174.3 million. 
In June 2004, Brazilian airline Gol executed an initial 
public share offering simultaneously on the Sao Paulo 
and New York stock exchanges.  Nevertheless, the total 
number of companies listed on the Sao Paulo stock 
market (BOVESPA) fell to 361 as of June 2004, compared 
to 399 in 2002 and 428 in 2001.  Some companies find 
the benefits of maintaining a listing on the stock 
exchange do not justify the cost.  Total turnover in 
the secondary market was $68.1 billion in 2003. 
Trading is highly concentrated, with the top 10 stocks 
accounting for over 50 percent of turnover.  Some 71 
Brazilian firms, including Petrobras, Embraer, Banco 
Itau, CVRD, Brasil Telecom and Ambev, are also listed 
on the NYSE via American Depository Receipts (ADR's). 
 
¶58.  In 2000, with the intent of promoting the stock 
market and improving liquidity, the numerous regional 
stock markets agreed to consolidate.  All stock trading 
is now done on the Sao Paulo stock market, while 
trading of public securities is conducted on the Rio de 
Janeiro market.  The Sao Paulo stock market also 
launched a "New Market," in which the listed companies 
would comply with strict corporate governance 
requirements.  As of June 2004, the new market has 31 
listed companies. 
 
¶59.  Until recently, up to two-thirds of a 
corporation's capital could be preferred (non-voting) 
shares, so that it was possible to achieve majority 
control of voting shares, in some cases, by holding 
only 17 percent of total capital.  In 2001, the 
Congress approved a law that limits preferred shares 
for new issuances to 50 percent.  The same proposal 
strengthens rights for minority shareholders. 
 
¶60.  The Brazilian Securities Exchange Commission (CVM) 
directly regulates the stock exchanges, brokers, 
distributors, pension funds, mutual funds, and leasing 
companies.  In 2001, new legislation granted the CVM 
independence and established stronger penalties against 
insider trading. 
 
¶61.  In January 2000, Brazilian regulators removed a 
number of remaining restrictions on foreign portfolio 
investment.  As a result, foreign investors - both 
institutions and individuals - can directly invest in 
equities, securities and derivatives.  The foreign 
investors are required to trade derivatives and stocks 
of publicly held companies on established markets. 
 
¶62.  Export Credit Availability.  BNDES, the government 
national development bank, is the primary Brazilian 
source of longer-term credit, and also provides export 
credits.  FINAME (Special Agency for Industrial 
Financing) provides foreign and domestic companies 
operating in Brazil financing for the manufacturing and 
marketing of capital goods.  FINAMEX (Export Financing) 
is a part of FINAME, which finances capital good 
exports for both foreign and domestic companies.  An 
export credit program for capital and some consumer 
durable goods, known as PROEX, was established in 1991. 
PROEX receives funds from the National Treasury to 
offer assistance in the areas of interest rate 
equalization, capital and other goods exports, and 
service exports. 
 
¶63.  Other Issues: Accounting and Mergers.  Wholly 
owned subsidiaries of multinational accounting firms, 
including the major US firms, are present in Brazil. 
The failure of major banks and large businesses during 
1995, notwithstanding positive financial statements 
prepared by the major accounting firms, raised doubts 
about the credibility of these financial statements. 
Beginning in 1996, auditors have been personally liable 
for the accuracy of accounting statements prepared for 
banks. 
 
¶64.  Brazilian law recognizes mergers, in which one 
company loses its separate identity by being merged 
into another, and consolidations, in which the pre- 
existing companies are extinguished and a new entity 
emerges.  The procedures for both are essentially the 
same.  Sales of Brazilian companies usually result from 
private negotiations, rather than stock exchange 
activities.  Acquisitions resulting in market 
concentration in excess of 20 percent are subject to 
review by the Administrative Council for Economic 
Defense (CADE) under Brazil's 1994 Anti-trust Law. 
 
DANILOVICH