05BRASILIA387
BRAZILIAN CONGRESS CHOOSES DARK HORSE AS NEW
Wed Feb 16 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Brasilia
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRASILIA 000387 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: PGOV BR
SUBJECT:  BRAZILIAN CONGRESS CHOOSES DARK HORSE AS NEW 
HOUSE SPEAKER 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY.  In a surprising and potentially serious 
setback for the Lula administration, the Brazilian Chamber 
of Deputies (lower house) on February 14 chose dark horse 
Federal Deputy Severino Cavalcanti (Progressive Party -'PP') 
to be its next Speaker.  Cavalcanti took over immediately 
and will preside over the Chamber for the next two years -- 
the second half of President Lula's term.  The choice came 
after a hotly-contested campaign in which Lula's Workers' 
Party (PT) failed to settle on a single candidate. 
Cavalcanti's PP party is the right-most member of President 
Lula's governing coalition, so the Speakership has not 
slipped completely out of the administration's grasp, but 
his victory over two PT candidates could complicate the 
administration's legislative agenda and is clearly a 
punishment for the PT's inability to resolve its internal 
schisms.  Cavalcanti is a back-bencher who has not 
established a record during his ten years in Congress.  In 
his home state of Pernambuco he is seen as an old-style 
politico without core beliefs.  Thus, Cavalcanti is 
unlikely to be as influential as outgoing Chamber Speaker 
Joao Paulo Cunha (PT).  Separately, the Brazilian Senate 
easily chose Renan Calheiros from the PMDB party's pro-Lula 
wing as the new Senate President.  The 2005 Congressional 
session is now underway.  END SUMMARY. 
 
SEVERINO CAVALCANTI IS THE NEW SPEAKER 
-------------------------------------- 
¶2. (SBU) Late on February 14, after two rounds of voting, 
the Brazilian Chamber of Deputies selected an 
undistinguished back-bencher to be its next Speaker. 
Severino Cavalcanti of Pernambuco, aged 74, is a high 
school graduate who has spent his entire career with what 
is now the right-wing Progressive Party (PP) --which at the 
time he joined was the party of Brazil's military regime. 
Cavalcanti is now in his third four-year term in Congress 
and has an undistinguished record, never chairing a 
committee or sponsoring significant legislation.  He is not 
highly regarded even in his home state of Pernambuco, where 
pundits and politicians we spoke with painted a portrait of 
a career politico with no real beliefs or projects and who 
is seen as not completely trustworthy.  He is seen as a 
passionless politician from the mold of traditional 
northeastern "colonels" whose survival is rooted in 
backroom deal-making.  Cavalcanti's home base is the semi- 
rural "Mata Norte" region of Pernambuco's interior, and he 
also wins votes from the state's conservative evangelicals. 
 
PT SCHISM LEAVES ROOM FOR A DARK HORSE 
-------------------------------------- 
¶3. (SBU) The failure of the PT to elect its own Speaker is 
easily explained:  it never settled on one candidate. 
Under a long-standing unwritten rule (the "Rule of 
Proportionality"), Brazilian legislatures at all levels 
allow the party with the largest caucus to nominate the 
Speaker, who is generally approved in a floor vote without 
serious objection even from the opposition parties.  In a 
domino effect, this same rule then foresees selection of 
the Chamber's other leadership posts --and the committee 
chairs-- according to caucus size, so that opposition 
parties are guaranteed of getting a few choice posts if 
they play by the rule.  The Workers' Party, with 90 Federal 
Deputies in the 513-seat Chamber, is the largest caucus and 
easily elected Joao Paulo Cunha to serve as Speaker in 
2003-2005. 
 
¶4. (SBU) But Speakers can serve only one two-year term, so 
in a bitter internal struggle last month, the PT selected 
Federal Deputy Luis Eduardo Greenhalgh to succeed Cunha as 
Speaker.  Despite the Rule of Proportionality, Greenhalgh 
faced resistance to his candidacy: he is from Sao Paulo at 
a time when many fear the government has become too Sao 
Paulo-centric; he is seen as aloof and arrogant; and he is 
a human rights lawyer who represented the Landless Movement, 
alienating landowners and conservatives.  As soon as the PT 
named Greenhalgh its official candidate, another PT Deputy, 
Virgilio Guimaraes, announced himself as the party's 
"alternate candidate".  In contrast to Greenhalgh, 
Guimaraes is gregarious, from Minas Gerais, and is an old- 
style union boss popular with the Chamber's rank-and-file. 
Despite concerted arm-twisting by President Lula and nearly 
every other Workers' Party heavyweight in the past few 
weeks, Guimaraes refused to give up his candidacy.  Three 
other Deputies, including Severino Cavalcanti, then saw the 
confusion in the PT and threw their names into the ring as 
well. 
 
¶5. (SBU)  The PT's failure to settle on one candidate 
annulled the "Rule of Proportionality".  With two PT 
candidates in the running, other parties could not be 
induced to vote for Greenhalgh.  In the first round of the 
floor vote, Greenhalgh received 217 votes, 50 short of 
victory.  Cavalcanti qualified for the second round with 
124 votes, while challenger Guimaraes was knocked out with 
117 votes.  In the second round which lasted late into the 
night, Cavalcanti handily beat Greenhalgh 300-195, and the 
PT's nightmare was realized.  This is the first time that 
the largest party has not held the Speakership.  Worse, the 
domino effect of the selection system left the PT 
completely shut out of the Chamber's seven leadership posts. 
After Cavalcanti, the Chamber's First Vice President will 
be Inocencio Oliveira (PMDB-Pernambuco).  Thus, the PT will 
have to find ways to exercise influence at the committee 
chair level, where it will be well represented. 
 
THE AUTOPSY -- THE PT POINTS FINGERS 
------------------------------------ 
¶6. (SBU) The PT has only itself to blame.  Guimaraes' 
insistence on challenging the official PT candidate broke 
the discipline of the Rule of Proportionality and allowed 
even parties within the PT's coalition to vote at will. 
Guimaraes is likely to be punished for inflicting this mess 
on his party and President Lula, and there is clearly 
sentiment for a severe sanction among PT members with whom 
we spoke.  Some also note that the PT's defeat is based in 
a long-running debate that clogged Congress for much of 
2004 --an attempt to allow reelection of the Chamber 
Speaker and Senate President-- that short-circuited the 
PT's internal debate over who would be its nominee for 
Speaker. 
 
NEW SENATE PRESIDENT IS RENAN CALHEIROS 
--------------------------------------- 
¶7. (SBU) In the Senate, the voting was much smoother.  The 
PMDB is the Senate's largest party, and Renan Calheiros of 
the PMDB's pro-Lula wing was unopposed in his bid for the 
Senate Presidency.  Calheiros, from Alagoas state, is 
generally well-regarded but lacks the well-honed political 
skills of his predecessor, Senator Jose Sarney. 
 
CABINET SHUFFLE HANGING FIRE 
---------------------------- 
¶8. (SBU)  President Lula planned to shuffle his cabinet 
ministers last month in a way that would reward loyal 
coalition parties with a greater cabinet presence.  He held 
off to see how the parties supported the PT's candidate for 
Speaker.  With the confusion surrounding Cavalcanti's 
selection, the calculus of the cabinet shuffle has changed, 
meaning Lula is likely to wait a bit longer before making 
any moves. 
 
COMMENT - WHAT THIS MEANS FOR LULA'S AGENDA 
------------------------------------------- 
¶9. (SBU)  The Speaker controls the Chamber's agenda, 
decides which bills come to a vote, resolves procedural 
disputes, and --after the Vice President-- is the second in 
line to replace the President.  Joao Paulo, PT Mayor of 
Recife, the capital of Cavalcanti's home state of 
Pernambuco, did not mince words.  Hours after the Chamber 
vote, he slumped in his chair and told us that Cavalcanti's 
selection was "the worst defeat yet for this government". 
Joao Paulo said he has never trusted Cavalcanti going back 
to when they served together in the state assembly.  He 
observed that "now every bill that Lula sends to Congress 
will require negotiations and compromises".  Luciana Santos, 
Mayor of the nearby city of Olinda, commented that 
Cavalcanti "has no ideology and no projects" --a 
"physiologist" in the Brazilian lexicon.  She noted that 
Cavalcanti is derisively called the "leader of the 
Congressional union" because his biggest issue is to raise 
pay for congressmen. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Cavalcanti may rise to the occasion and prove 
himself a skilled leader and statesman.  Deputy Roberto 
Jefferson, President of the coalition's PTB party noted, 
"Severino isn't in the opposition.  He belongs to the 
coalition.  There's no crisis at all.  He'll work with 
coalition party leaders and administration officials."  In 
his acceptance speech, Cavalcanti himself said, "There is 
no way that I'm looking to create obstacles" for Lula.  Yet 
not many in Lula's coalition are optimistic today.  The 
administration has struggled mightily over the past two 
years to pass its extensive legislative agenda, suffering 
some black eyes and often making unwelcome compromises on 
the substance of bills.  The early assessment is that 
Cavalcanti's election as Speaker of the Chamber will only 
complicate Lula's efforts over the next two years. 
 
¶11. (U) AMCONSUL Recife assisted in this report. 
 
DANILOVICH