07BRASILIA208
BRAZILIAN POLITICAL ROUNDUP, JAN. 29-FEB. 5, 2007
Tue Feb 06 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO9650
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #0208/01 0371722
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 061722Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8038
INFO RUEHAC/AMEMBASSY ASUNCION 5931
RUEHBU/AMEMBASSY BUENOS AIRES 4576
RUEHMN/AMEMBASSY MONTEVIDEO 6741
RUEHSG/AMEMBASSY SANTIAGO 6082
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 6209
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 3825
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 9165
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BRASILIA 000208 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV BR
SUBJECT: BRAZILIAN POLITICAL ROUNDUP, JAN. 29-FEB. 5, 2007 
 
REF: A. BRASILIA 107 
     ¶B. BRASILIA 140 
     ¶C. BRASILIA 149 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  Summary.  The new Congress took office and each 
house elected a leader from the pro-government coalition, 
although the choice in the Chamber of Deputies widened a 
painful split in the government's base.  President Lula da 
Silva must now find ways to repair the damage, and he may use 
ministerial appointments to advance the process, or he may 
reward the faithful.  The large party blocs in the Chamber 
took shape, but it is not clear they will last.  The 
government's bloc is larger than ever, with well over 50 
percent of deputies. The opposition lost members, as some 
deputies switched parties.  End summary. 
 
53rd Congress Opens in Atmosphere of "Renewal" 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶1.  (SBU)  The 53rd Congress of Brazil opened on February 1 
with the swearing in of 513 Federal Deputies from 20 parties 
in the Chamber of Deputies, and 81 Senators, 27 of them newly 
elected or reelected, from 13 parties. 
 
¶2.  (SBU)  Media coverage highlighted expectations that the 
new Congress will be more "ethical" than the 52d Congress, 
whose four years produced some of the worst and largest cases 
of official corruption in Brazilian history, resulting in 
numerous congressional committees of inquiry and the 
resignations of cabinet ministers and members of Congress. 
Federal Deputy Ricardo Izar (Brazilian Labor Party - PTB), of 
Sao Paulo, chairman of the Chamber's Ethics Committee, told 
the Chamber's news service on February 1 that "the last 
Congress was the worst in the Chamber's history," and said he 
hoped the next one would be better because 46 percent of the 
deputies were new. 
 
Congressional Leadership Elections 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶3.  (SBU)  The first order of business for the Senate and 
Chamber of Deputies was the election of the leadership.  The 
Senate and Chamber of Deputies leadership consist of the 
presidency, six lower positions, and four positions for 
alternates.  A heated contest for the Chamber presidency had 
developed in the run-up to opening day, revealing a major 
split in the government's base, which opened up the 
opportunity for a third candidate from a major opposition 
party.  The Senate contest was a calmer, less divisive 
exercise, and the opposition candidate never appeared likely 
to win. 
 
Emergence of Two Pro-Government Blocs 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (SBU)  In order to guarantee a position on the 
leadership, in principle decided on the basis of 
proportionality, two small parties, the Communist Party of 
Brazil (PCdoB) and the Brazilian Socialist Party (PSB) ) 
both supporting incumbent Aldo Rebelo (PCdoB, Sao Paulo) for 
president of the Chamber -- announced on January 17 they were 
forming a bloc (ref A).  Soon after, the Democratic Labor 
Party (PDT), and two tiny parties, the National Mobilization 
Party (PMN), and Party of the Nation's Retirees (PAN), joined 
them.  The bloc's strength is about 68 deputies.  (Note: 
numbers are inexact because some deputies are still in the 
process of switching parties.  We are using official Chamber 
of Deputies figures.)  The two other groups of allied parties 
soon responded: The result was the formation a "megabloc" of 
all the parties supporting the candidacy of Arlindo Chinaglia 
(Workers Party - PT), of Sao Paulo, to be president of the 
Chamber of Deputies, as well as another smaller bloc of 
opposition parties. 
 
¶5.  (SBU)  These parties make up the megabloc: 
 
Brazilian Democratic Movement Party (PMDB) 
Workers Party (PT) 
Party of the Republic (PR) 
Brazilian Labor Party (PTB) 
Progressive Party (PP) 
Christian Social Party (PSC) 
Christian Labor Party (PTC) 
 
BRASILIA 00000208  002 OF 003 
 
 
Labor Party of Brazil (PTdoB) 
 
(Note: Although in opposition to each other over the 
leadership, Chinaglia's bloc and Rebelo's bloc are both 
largely composed of parties officially in, or allied with, 
the government coalition of President Lula, hence the split 
in the government base.  Political commentator and blogger 
Fernando Rodrigues is calling Rebelo's bloc the "governistas 
de oposicao," or the pro-government opposition.)  The 
"megabloc's" strength is estimated at 283 deputies, so large 
that it was dubbed the "tectonic plate." 
 
Opposition Bloc 
--------------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU)  The new, real opposition bloc includes the 
Brazilian Social Democracy Party (PSDB), the Liberal Front 
Party (PFL), and the Socialist People's Party (PPS), with a 
combined strength of about 140 deputies.  It supported the 
candidacy of Gustavo Fruet (PSDB, Parana) for the Chamber 
presidency.  The PFL was an eleventh hour addition, as its 
Chamber leader, Rodrigo Maia, of Rio de Janeiro, had pledged 
the PFL's support to Aldo Rebelo until January 31.  A few 
parties, notably the Green Party (PV) and Socialism and 
Freedom Party (PSOL), remain outside the new blocs. 
 
Chinaglia Wins Chamber Presidency 
--------------------------------- 
 
¶7.  (SBU)  In theory, the Chinaglia bloc should have been 
able to win the presidency on the first round of voting, 
since a win requires only a simple majority of 257, and his 
bloc had 283 deputies. 
 
¶8.  (SBU)  The result of the first round of voting was 
Chinaglia, 236 votes, Rebelo, 175, and Fruet, 98.  In the 
second round, Chinaglia won with 261, while Rebelo came in a 
close second with 243.  Some observers said Chinaglia's 
victory was only possible with PSDB support.  Some PSDB 
figures declared their support for Chinaglia in the second 
round (including the new PSDB Chamber leader, Antonio Carlos 
Pannunzio, of Sao Paulo), but blaming the PSDB begs the 
question of why he didn't get more if his megabloc alone 
should have garnered him 283 votes.  The answer is probably 
that many PMDB members bucked their party's commitment and 
voted for Aldo.  All sides expected some "treason," in spite 
of party commitments, since the voting is secret. 
 
Senate Presidency ) Pro-Government Incumbent Reelected 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶9.  (SBU)  Incumbent Senate President Renan Calheiros (PMDB), 
of Alagoas, easily defeated challenger Jose Agripino (PFL, 
Rio Grande do Norte) by 51 to 28.  Agripino was the candidate 
of the PSDB and PFL, which together have 30 senators. 
 
¶11.  (SBU)  On February 1, the PFL, PSDB, and PPS formalized 
an agreement to form an opposition bloc in the Senate, with 
31 of the 81 Senators.  A small number of Senators from other 
parties, such as Jarbas Vasconcelos (PMDB), of Pernambuco, 
are expected to vote with the opposition much of the time. 
 
President's Message to Congress: Approve the PAC 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
¶12.  (SBU)  On February 2 Congress held its opening ceremony 
in a joint session in the Senate.  Dilma Rousseff, chief of 
the Civil Household, delivered a message from President Lula 
that was read by the Chamber's first secretary.  (Lula was in 
Sao Paulo to attend Holocaust Remembrance ceremonies.) 
Lula's message to Congress focused on the Accelereated Growth 
Program ("PAC"; refs B and C), and he pledged his personal 
attention to its success.  Senate and Chamber Presidents 
Calheiros and Chinaglia also spoke in support of the PAC, 
although they noted that both houses of Congress will make 
changes as they see fit. 
 
PAC: Governors Want Federal Funds in Exchange for Support 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
¶13.  (SBU)  Twelve of Brazil's 27 governors met in Brasilia 
on January 29 to draw up a list of financial demands that the 
federal government would have to satisfy in order to win 
 
BRASILIA 00000208  003 OF 003 
 
 
their support for the Growth Acceleration Program.  The price 
tag comes to 15.5 billion reais (about USD 7 billion), 
according to press reports.  The governors would like to see 
more federal revenues channeled to their states budgets, 
certain types of tax relief, and relief for certain state 
debts to the federal government.  The gathering covered the 
political spectrum, with eight from the government coalition 
(four PMDB, two PT, one PP, and one PR) and the others from 
the opposition (three PSDB, one PFL).  The non-partisan 
meeting was more about pork barrel than ideology.  The 
governors will formally present their demands to the Lula 
administration in late March, according to media reports. 
(Note: The PAC must be approved by Congress, not governors. 
Governors can influence the process by controlling funds for 
legislators' pet projects.  End note.) 
 
Party Switching: Coalition Wins, Opposition Loses 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶14.  (SBU)  Some deputies and senators switched parties after 
election day on October 1, adding numbers to the government 
coalition's side.  (Party affiliation, especially in the 
Chamber of Deputies, is a moving target, and continues to 
evolve.)  Numerically, the chief winner in the Chamber was 
the Party of the Republic, a new party formed by the fusion 
of the Liberal Party and the Party of the Reconstruction of 
the Nation (PRONA).  It gained eight or nine deputies.  The 
biggest loser was the PPS, which lost three seats.  The 
opposition bloc of the PSDB, PFL and PPS together lost about 
eight seats.  The most notable switches and those with the 
greatest impact were in the Senate, where the switches, and 
the return of one senator on leave, tipped the balance, gave 
Lula's coalition a majority, and made the PMDB the largest 
party, with 20 senators. 
 
¶15.  (SBU)  Comment: The divisive Chamber presidency contest 
left the coalition with wounds to tend.  Lula said he will 
try to help the healing process.  But in practical terms it 
also left him a dilemma, since there is a new alignment of 
forces.  Lula must choose whether to use his power to name 
ministers and a government leader in the Chamber to reward or 
assuage.  Pressure from the PMDB and other coalition parties 
for ministerial appointments has grown, and concessions could 
likely be at the expense of the PT, which now holds several 
ministries.  It was conventional wisdom in January that 
Rebelo, if defeated, would be appointed minister of defense. 
But after Chinaglia's victory, Rebelo told media he would not 
accept a position in the government.  A leader of the 
Chinaglia forces, Jose Mucio Monteiro (PTB, Pernambuco) is no 
longer his party's leader in the Chamber, and his name has 
surfaced in the media as a likely successor to Chinaglia as 
government leader, a job that Lula himself will decide, 
unlike other congressional leadership jobs.  The alternative 
would be to make a peace offering to the "pro-government 
opposition" by selecting the acting government leader, Beto 
Albuqueque (PSB-RS), who is close to Rebelo.  Lula is not 
giving signs as to how he will parcel out appointments.  The 
immediate impact of the rift on legislative activity may be 
limited, but the real impact could come later if in 2010 the 
split has not healed and the PT finds itself running against 
a strong candidate from the PSB such as Federal Deputy Ciro 
Gomes, of Ceara, as well as a PSDB candidate. 
 
SOBEL