08BRASILIA3
OECD DSG AT BRAZIL KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT CONFERENCE
Wed Jan 02 00:00:00 +0100 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO3444
RR RUEHRG
DE RUEHBR #0003/01 0021945
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 021945Z JAN 08 ZDK
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0750
INFO RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 5621
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 1392
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 7540UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BRASILIA 000003 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
PARIS FOR OECD 
 
E.O. 12958:N/A 
TAGS: ECON EINV SCUL PREL BR
SUBJECT: OECD DSG AT BRAZIL KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT CONFERENCE 
 
 
BRASILIA 00000003  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
¶1. OECD Deputy Secretary General Thelma Askey spoke at a conference 
in Brasilia, the "Fourth International Conference on Knowledge 
Management in the Public Sector" on December 11.  The Brazilian 
Chamber of Deputies, Planning Ministry, Presidential Council for 
Economic Development, and Long-Term Planning Secretariat organized 
the conference with the Brazilian Association of Knowledge 
Management (SBGC).  The conference explored how better to 
incorporate knowledge management into public administration in 
Brazil, drawing on local and international experiences and lessons 
learned.  The conference considered the definitions of "knowledge 
management," noted its effects on economic growth, and examined the 
specific situation in Brazil.  Other speakers included the Brazilian 
Minister of Science and Technology, the head of the Brazilian 
Chamber of Deputies, and the Casa Civil (Presidency) E-Government 
office.  End Summary. 
 
------------------------------ 
SAMPLING OF BRAZILIAN SPEAKERS 
------------------------------ 
 
¶2. Arlindo Chinaglia, Chairman of the Chamber of Deputies, opened 
the conference.  He noted knowledge management, with origins in the 
corporate sector, proves its value in the public sector if it helps 
improve the quality of services to the population. He noted the 
website Interlegis (www.interlegis.gov.br), developed by the 
Brazilian congress with IDB assistance, is an example of knowledge 
management. The website furthers government transparency and 
information sharing by facilitating public access to congressional 
activities and legislation. 
 
¶3. Sergio Resende, Minister of Science and Technology, noted that 
knowledge management is a challenge to Brazil's public sector mainly 
due to systemic education problems.   As an example, masters and PhD 
programs in the United States have existed for 150 years, while in 
Brazil these programs began 40 years ago according to the minister. 
Brazilian corporations' knowledge management challenges now include 
innovation and research and development.  The Minister added that 
the Brazilian Innovation Law provides subsidies for investment in 
technology, including e-government.  Rogerio Santana, Executive 
Secretary for e-government at the Casa Civil, Presidency of the 
 
SIPDIS 
Republic, expanded on this theme, saying knowledge management 
includes both what people know and how they share their information. 
 He mentioned the importance of a public software website, 
administered by his office, offering free software to assist local 
administrations throughout the country.  Santana noted as well that 
knowledge management is not only the federal government pushing 
information out to local entities.  Knowledge management also means 
creating opportunities for local-level talent, including indigenous 
and riverside cultures, to enrich federal level decision-making. 
 
¶4. Federal Deputy Gastao Vieira, Education Committee Chairman, 
further developed the education theme, strongly asserting Brazil 
needs to implement a literacy program for elementary schools, 
drawing on best-practices at state level for educational reform.  He 
noted a 2003 GOB report that found teacher training programs in 
Brazil are thirty years out of date.  The deputy felt the poor 
performance of Brazilian students on the OECD PISA (Program for 
International Student Assessment) exams reflected the lack of 
investment in education and Brazil's failure to set a few achievable 
priorities (e.g. an adequate syllabus, teacher training, and 
materials investment) instead of myriad overambitious goals.  He 
commented that knowledge management and international trade are also 
linked, as increased know-how raises exported products' value-added 
and trade itself increases knowledge acquisition. 
 
-------------- 
OECD DSG ASKEY 
-------------- 
 
¶5. Thelma Askey, OECD Deputy Secretary-General, spoke on a panel 
entitled "The Public Policy of Knowledge Management and the Agenda 
of Global Development" with Maristela Baioni, program coordinator in 
Brazil for UNDP. Askey underlined that knowledge management is among 
OECD governments' top five policy priorities.  OECD identifies and 
shares best practices in order to enhance this global public good 
for all countries.  OECD knowledge management goals include: 1) 
helping members adapt to change; 2) opening communication channels; 
3) furthering investment in higher education and in information 
technologies; and 4) promoting integration and exchanges among 
academic institutions, the private sector and the public sector. 
 
¶6. DSG Askey noted that the OECD has an indicator for measuring 
investment in knowledge, and that OECD member countries invest, on 
average, nearly six percent of GDP in knowledge development and 
management.  Investment mechanisms include e-government structures; 
higher education; development and implementation of research 
systems, databases and internet platforms; and partnerships among 
governments.  Askey stressed that, for the public sector, investment 
in knowledge management should target building public trust, for 
example through creation of reliable, independent statistics 
 
BRASILIA 00000003  002 OF 002 
 
 
agencies.  Askey advocated that governments should create incentives 
for knowledge sharing and should stress transparency and policy 
coherence.  Ms. Askey concluded by reiterating the importance of 
coordination among private sector, academic and public sector 
institutions, as well as the importance of sharing experiences and 
lessons learned among countries. 
 
¶7. COMMENT:  The conference provided an important opportunity for 
Brazilian government, academia and international organizations to 
share perspectives on increasing transparency and investment in 
knowledge in a democracy.  The event, co-planned by Brazil's 
executive and legislative branches with civil society participation, 
was an interesting and informative step in Brazil's on-going public 
sector reform dialogue.  END COMMENT 
 
CHICOLA