09BRASILIA1429
Brazil: DEM, Corruption, and the Decline of the Right
Fri Dec 18 00:00:00 +0100 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXYZ1644
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHBR #1429/01 3521933
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 181933Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0175
INFO RUEHBR/AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULOC O N F I D E N T I A L BRASILIA 001429 
 
SIPDIS 
AMEMBASSY BRASILIA PASS TO AMCONSUL RECIFE 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 2019/12/18 
TAGS: PGOV KCOR BR
SUBJECT: Brazil: DEM, Corruption, and the Decline of the Right 
 
REF: BRASILIA 1407 
 
CLASSIFIED BY: Lisa Kubiske, Charge d'Affaires; REASON: 1.4(B), (D) 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary.    Federal District (Brasilia) Governor Jose 
Arruda, caught on camera accepting bribes in late November, 
continues in office to fight the charges against him, ensuring a 
drawn-out and damaging scandal for the DemC3cratas (DEM), Brazil's 
leading center-right opposition party.   The Arruda scandal 
revolves around a monthly bribe system very similar to the mensalC#o 
("monthly pay-off") corruption scheme associated with President 
Lula's Workers Party (PT); this case and other recently revealed 
bribery charges will hurt the opposition's ability to sell itself 
to the electorate as champions of good governance.   The leading 
opposition party, the centrist Brazilian Social Democratic Party 
(PSDB), has only been marginally implicated to date but many fear 
additional charges pending.   DEM pushed Arruda out of the party 
and will try to showcase itself as having reacted responsibly in 
the face of scandal, but finds itself - like so many other 
center-right Brazilian parties - in the precarious position of 
having no clear message to distinguish itself on policy or 
administrative competency.   PT has been little affected by the 
latest wave of scandal, leading center-right parties within Lula's 
coalition to solidify their alliances with PT, further hindering 
the already-weak ability of the center-right to play an influential 
role in Brazilian politics.  End summary. 
 
Caught on Camera 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Governor Arruda, considered DEM's bright star of the 
future and a top-tier prospective vice-presidential candidate for 
Jose Serra, fell into disgrace when he and several political allies 
in Brasilia's state government (many from other parties) were 
caught accepting bribes on camera.  The comical, you-tube friendly 
nature of the footage - including elected officials shoving 
envelopes of money from contractors into pockets, socks, and 
blouses - will likely stick in the public consciousness for some 
time.   Despite the visual evidence and the paper trail against 
him, Arruda insists on remaining in office, fighting the charges 
against him, and running for re-election.  Dep. Onyx Lorenzoni 
(DEM-Rio Grande do Sul) and other party members told poloff (with 
no small degree of anger and frustration) that Arruda will probably 
remain in office through the October 2010 elections, despite the 
multiple legal cases against him and an impeachment motion.  On 
December 10, Arruda left DEM in advance of an internal party vote 
the following day, in which he would have been expelled from the 
party. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) The Arruda scandal revolved around monthly payments made 
by several contracting firms building the Brasilia metro system and 
other major construction projects.  As such, the scandal very 
closely resembles the mensalC#o (monthly payment) scandal that 
significantly damaged PT late in Lula's first term, and which 
created difficulties for him in his 2006 re-election campaign. 
(The present scandal is increasingly being referred to as the 
"Arruda mensalC#o.")  Two  similar monthly payment scandals have 
surfaced over the past week, including one in which the Federal 
Police has announced that it will imminently file a case against 
the construction company Camargo Correa, charging that it paid out 
approximately R30 million (17 million USD) to various politicians 
in recent years.  Initial reports released by the Federal Police 
list several opposition and coalition politicians as recipients of 
funds, including heavy hitters such as Chamber of Deputies 
President Michel Temer (PMDB-SC#o Paulo).  Federal and state 
contracts generally release funds to contracting companies on a 
monthly basis, with weak rules for detailing and justifying line 
item expenses, making it easy for the mensalC#o to become Brazil's 
bipartisan favorite corruption scheme. 
 
Effects on DEM 
 
¶4.  (C) For DEM, which has the third-largest bench in both the 
Senate and the Chamber, the Arruda mensalC#o strikes a crippling 
blow to a party that was already slowly losing support.  Dep. 
Ronaldo Caiado (DEM-Goias), leader of the party in the Chamber, 
admitted that the scandal will hurt them in the elections but 
argued that the party at least distinguished itself by taking 
action to expel Arruda, in contrast to PT, which took no action 
against offenders in its own mensalC#o scandal.   Though true, it is 
hard to see the party getting much credit from the public for such 
a stand.   As one party advisor admitted to us, DEM never did get 
around to expelling Arruda before the Governor left the party, 
largely because several leading DEM politicians stalled the action 
out of concerns about having their own ties to Arruda exposed. 
The Arruda mensalC#o may not ultimately have a large impact on DEM 
in the 2010 federal elections, Dep. Lorenzoni argued, since most of 
its key figures are well-established in their northeast and rural 
 
bases.  News of corruption in Brasilia will have limited impact, 
especially when it becomes old news by October.   But the 
vice-presidency slot on the PSDB ticket, which DEM has held in the 
last two elections, is almost certainly gone.  It will also be 
difficult for the country's largest right-of-center party to win a 
single governor's seat in the elections.  Perhaps the most serious 
problem for DEM arising from the scandal, as Dep. ACM Neto 
(DEM-Bahia) told poloff, is that his party, which planned to run on 
an effective governance platform, "does not have an identifiable 
message." 
 
Effects on the Opposition and PSDB 
 
¶5.  (C) It is not clear at this point whether or how the latest 
wave of scandal will affect PSDB and its front-running presidential 
candidate, JosC) Serra.   Two Federal District state deputies caught 
taking bribes in the Arruda mensalC#o were PSDB members, and Arruda 
has his public defenders within PSDB ranks, much to the chagrin of 
the rest of the party.  The greater worry with the Arruda mensalC#o 
is that three of the same contracting companies prominent in paying 
bribes in the Federal District are also prominent in other state 
governments with PSDB governors, including Sao Paulo (Serra) and 
Minas Gerais (AC)cio Neves).    Sen. Gim Argello (PTB-Federal 
District), vice-leader of Lula's governing coalition in the Senate, 
told poloff last week that he believes these companies were likely 
not engaging in the same practices outside Brasilia, and that the 
scandal will not affect Serra or Neves.  According to Argello, also 
a real estate investor with his own contracting interests, Arruda's 
corruption had been known among the local contracting community and 
created an environment in which bribes were necessary. 
 
¶6.  (C) Dep. Bruno AraC:jo (PSDB-Pernambuco) expressed confidence in 
his party's ability to weather the Arruda scandal, and even saw the 
benefit in PSDB gaining at DEM expense, but expressed concern that 
more news about corruption was coming and that PSDB would have to 
fight hard to burnish its image as the party of good government. 
He noted the case of Sen. Eduardo Azeredo (Minas Gerais), Chairman 
of the Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee, now under 
investigation for a mensalC#o-type scheme during his campaign for 
Governor in 1998.  AraC:jo characterized the Azeredo case as all 
smoke, no fire - but conceded that there will probably be a lot of 
smoke for PSDB to deal with in the coming months.  He also 
asserted, like other PSDB contacts recently, that an all-PSDB 
Serra-Neves presidential ticket would be the silver bullet means of 
overcoming voter concerns about corruption and good governance. 
 
Where Does the Center-Right Go? 
 
¶7.  (C) The immediate impact of the Arruda mensalC#o scandal seems 
fairly obvious: that it weakens Brazil's leading center-right party 
and challenges the opposition's claim that it would govern more 
cleanly and effectively than PT and its ally PMDB.   More broadly, 
the scandal further limits the ability of the center-right to 
articulate policy positions, both within the opposition and the 
conservative wing of the governing coalition.  The governing 
coalition's center-right parties - including PP, PR, PTB, PDT and 
parts of PMDB - have moved away from their previous independence on 
key issues and has become increasingly acquiescent to Lula's agenda 
in Congress.  All but one senator from this bloc voted for 
Venezuela's accession to Mercosul and the vote on the Pre-Salt oil 
exploration legislation is expected to yield a similar count. 
Senators from those parties, such as SC)rgio Zambiasi (PTB-Rio 
Grande do Sul) often tell us that they have concerns with some of 
the votes they're asked to cast, but there's no indication of any 
coming rebellion.  After all, as one political analyst told us, the 
leaders of many of these parties have corruption concerns 
themselves, and are safer within Lula's coalition than outside of 
it.  As Dep. Neto told poloff, "in Brazil today, a party can only 
be genuinely conservative on economics if it has no scandals." 
KUBISKE