09BRASILIA1188
BRAZILIAN UNDERSECRETARY TALKS AFRICA,
Wed Sep 23 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Brasilia
VZCZCXRO2739
PP RUEHBZ RUEHDU RUEHMR RUEHPA RUEHRN RUEHTRO
DE RUEHBR #1188/01 2661814
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
P 231814Z SEP 09
FM AMEMBASSY BRASILIA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5137
INFO RUEHZO/AFRICAN UNION COLLECTIVE
RUEHRG/AMCONSUL RECIFE 9966
RUEHRI/AMCONSUL RIO DE JANEIRO 8229
RUEHSO/AMCONSUL SAO PAULO 4585C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 03 BRASILIA 001188 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS WHA/EPSC AND EEB/BTA 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 09/23/2019 
TAGS: PGOV PREL EAID ECON IS
SUBJECT: BRAZILIAN UNDERSECRETARY TALKS AFRICA, 
ISRAEL-PALESTINE STRATEGIES 
 
REF: A. STATE 96625 
     ¶B. BRASILIA 1140 
     ¶C. BRASILIA 1112 
     ¶D. MAPUTO 966 
     ¶E. STATE 80039 
     ¶F. 08 BRASILIA 540 
 
BRASILIA 00001188  001.2 OF 003 
 
 
Classified By: Charge D'Affaires Lisa Kubiske for reasons 1.4 (b) and ( 
d). 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary.  In his September 21 introductory lunch with 
the Charge D'Affaires, Ambassador Piragibe Tarrago, the 
recently named Ministry of Exterior Relations (MRE) 
Under-Secretary for the newly created Middle Eastern and 
African Affairs portfolio, provided insight into Brazil's 
evolving development and policy objectives in each region. 
Ambassador Piragibe (he is univerally known by his first name 
at MRE) discussed potential areas for cooperation with the 
USG in Africa, citing Lusophone countries as a model, and 
spoke more generally about the challenges of being an 
emerging donor nation.  He identified Israel-Palestine as 
Brazil's key objective in the Middle East, praised recent USG 
efforts to initiate further dialogue in the region, and 
outlined Brazil's lines of assistance to the Palestinian 
Authority.  Coming to his position after three years as 
Deputy Permanent Representative to the United Nations, 
Piragibe expects to continue dialogue with high-level 
American counterparts on key issues.  Brazil's desire to be a 
player in the Middle East and Africa, combined with 
Piragibe's lack of strong views on most issues, provides us 
an opportunity to develop further U.S.-Brazil cooperation in 
both regions.  End summary. 
 
African Priorities 
------------------ 
 
¶2.  (C) As Brazil ramps up its diplomatic presence in Africa, 
Piragibe and Ambassador Fernando Simas Magalhaes, director of 
the MRE Africa department, spoke mostly about the development 
cooperation component of their emerging missions.  (Note: The 
GOB insists that it is not a donor, but rather cooperates 
with other countries.  End note.)  Piragibe said the vast 
majority of bilateral cooperation in Africa  would have a 
direct economic development focus and would be carried out by 
Brazilian ministry officials -- particularly from the 
Agriculture, Health, and Energy ministries and related 
institutes -- who would be contracted through MRE's Agencia 
Brasileira de Cooperacao (ABC).  Piragibe sees this model as 
strategically more effective for Brazil but admitted it would 
cause a constraint on resources at the ministries which could 
limit bilateral assistance potential downrange.  He praised a 
cotton production project in Mali as an example of a project 
that Brazil wants to prioritize: one that spurs both economic 
development and potential Brazilian imports of agricultural 
products. 
 
¶3.  (C) When asked about anti-corruption and democratization 
programs, Ambassador Simas in particular downplayed Brazilian 
interest, saying that Brazil did not generally try to address 
such overarching issues in its cooperation programs.  He 
added, however, that Brazil was looking at ways to strengthen 
election-related institutions, rather than participating 
directly in election monitoring.  (Comment: This is almost 
certainly an effort to maintain a plausible program on 
democratic strengthening, while avoiding the difficulties it 
encountered in its tentative foray into election observation 
in Zimbabwe last year (ref F).)  Piragibe said that Brazil's 
contributions to humanitarian assistance are generally 
purchased locally or in neighboring countries, and Simas 
mentioned in response to ref A that a donation to Kenya had 
been made recently.  Post is working to confirm the details 
of the contribution. 
 
Areas for U.S.- Brazil Cooperation? 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶4.  (C) Despite somewhat differing priorities and delivery 
mechanisms, Piragibe and Simas saw considerable room for 
U.S.-Brazilian cooperation in Africa, citing Lusophone 
countries as models.  Piragibe believed that complementary 
American and Brazilian projects in Mozambique (see ref D) 
could be broadly replicated in other countries where health 
and agriculture are primary objectives.  They also saw 
opportunities to partner more closely in institutional 
capacity building, at least in Lusophone Africa, with 
Guinea-Bissau mentioned as a country where we can expand 
 
BRASILIA 00001188  002.2 OF 003 
 
 
current U.S.-Brazilian cooperation in order to develop the 
capacity of the local parliament, judiciary, and core 
ministries.  Brazil is eager to spread beyond its traditional 
Lusophone sphere, and sees ethanol as the primary vehicle for 
spreading Brazilian expertise and influence to 
non-traditional, often English-speaking countries.  (Piragibe 
added that efforts to develop Brazilian ethanol technology in 
Africa with EU financing will benefit primarily Southern 
African countries with underdeveloped sugar industries -- 
such as Tanzania, Zambia, Mozambique, and Democratic Republic 
of the Congo.) 
 
Israel-Palestine 
---------------- 
 
¶5.  (C) In the Middle East, Piragibe identified 
Israel-Palestine dispute resolution as Brazil's primary 
interest.  He cited Brazil's large (heavily Christian) 
Lebanese-Syrian community as a motivating factor, and 
remarked that President Lula's government has been especially 
interested in becoming a player on the issue due to the 
support it receives from the Brazilian Arab community.  He 
praised the new U.S. approach to region, consistent with the 
messaging in ref C, especially Special Envoy Mitchell's 
outreach to Syria.  Piragibe said that Israel and Syria had 
recently used Brazil to pass messages, suggesting that Brazil 
is trusted in the region as a disinterested third party.  He 
noted the planned November visit of Israeli President Shimon 
Peres as part of Brazil's ongoing effort to cultivate ties 
with the region.  He said that Lula does not plan to travel 
to the Middle East in the near future, and will go to Israel 
and Palestine "only if he believes a visit will be helpful to 
the peace process."  Piragibe and Simas believed that the $10 
million promised to the Palestinian Authority (PA) in March 
had been authorized but not transferred.  (Note: This message 
that does not square with what we have heard recently from 
the Senate or from MRE desk officers, who say that Congress 
never considered the funding and that Itamaraty never lobbied 
for it.  End note.)  Piragibe added that the 
India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA) trilateral mechanism is also 
being used to support the PA.  IBSA is now building a 
gymnasium in Ramallah, he said, and has committed $3 million 
to be spent on affordable housing in Gaza.  MRE's 
humanitarian assistance wing, CG Fome, has also made 
contributions to the PA in the past year. 
 
Bio Notes 
--------- 
 
¶6.  (SBU) Ambassador Piragibe Tarrago, the new 
Under-Secretary for Political Affairs III, covering the 
Middle East and Africa, served most recently as Deputy 
Permanent Representative of Brazil at the United Nations 
(2006-2009).  In our lunch, he expressed satisfaction with 
the level of bilateral consultation between the USG and 
Brazil in New York.  He joined MRE in 1975 and has served 
mostly in economic positions, with ample experience as a 
trade agreement negotiator, including during the WTO Doha 
Round and the GATT Uruguay Round.  He also formerly served as 
the MRE Director of the Economic Affairs Department. 
Ambassador Piragibe has not previously served in either 
Africa or the Middle East; his previous overseas postings 
were all in the Western Hemisphere (New York, Ottawa, 
Caracas) or Europe (London, Geneva).  He speaks fluent 
English. 
 
¶7.  (U) The Under-Secretary for African and Middle Eastern 
Affairs position is a new one at MRE, dividing the former 
Asia, Africa and Middle East department.  Under-Secretary for 
Political Affairs II Roberto Jaguaribe (ref B) remains in 
charge of East, Central, and South Asia, including Iran. 
Under-Secretary for Political Affairs I Vera Machado handles 
Europe, the United States, and Canada.  Under-Secretary for 
South America Enio Cordeiro, his title notwithstanding, 
handles all of Latin America and the Caribbean. 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶8.  (C) As one of Brazil's top-tier diplomats accustomed to 
working with senior U.S. officials, Ambassador Piragibe will 
want to continue engaging the United States as Brazil 
continues to craft its still nascent policies toward both the 
Middle East and Africa.  Given his relative lack of 
experience in the region, Piragibe does not appear to have 
strongly formed opinions on certain critical issues, which 
 
BRASILIA 00001188  003.2 OF 003 
 
 
may provide a window of opportunity for us.  We will continue 
to coordinate with Ambassador Piragibe, the MRE Africa 
division under him, and relevant MRE development assistance 
departments about effective means of cooperation in Africa. 
In light of Brazil's growing presence and interest in Africa, 
its efforts to further develop commercial ties in the Middle 
East, and its determination to maintain a role in the Middle 
East peace process, post will seek opportunities for Piragibe 
to engage AF and NEA regarding USG priorities and interests. 
End comment. 
KUBISKE