05ROME3630
IRAQ: ITALY PRAISES REFERENDUM RESULTS
Fri Oct 28 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Rome
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS ROME 003630 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV IZ IT KDEM KPAO IRAQI FREEDOM
SUBJECT: IRAQ: ITALY PRAISES REFERENDUM RESULTS 
 
REF: STATE 199224 
 
¶1. (U)  The Italian government hailed the success of the 
Iraqi constitution as an historic step in October 25 and 26 
statements from Prime Minister Berlusconi, President Ciampi, 
Foreign Minister Fini and Defense Minister Martino. 
Translations of the statements are reprinted below. 
 
¶2. (U) Begin text of PM Berlusconi's October 25 statement. 
The positive result of the referendum on the Constitution is 
an additional historic step forward for the people of Iraq. 
It is proof that Iraq's political process successfully moves 
forward despite the numerous attempts by those who have tried 
to sabotage it using violence and terrorism.  The text that 
was approved is balanced.  It shows a sincere commitment by 
the Iraqis to put aside their ethnic and religious 
differences.  A solid base upon which to construct a free, 
democratic and united Iraq was laid down.  Italy is proud to 
have contributed together with its allies, the UN and the 
international community to this additional success of 
democracy and freedom.  End text. 
 
¶3. (U) In an October 26 message to Iraqi President Jalal 
Talabani, President Ciampi wrote, "The approval of the new 
Iraqi Constitution, thanks to the success of the popular 
referendum, is a significant step forward in the democratic 
process that your country has undertaken.  It reinforces the 
confidence in the capability of the people of Iraq to build a 
modern democracy and an efficient State of Law.  I am aware 
of the complex challenges still facing Iraq, first and 
foremost the consolidation of internal security.  The 
participation to the political process of all of Iraq's 
ethnic and religious components, in the spirit of national 
cohesion, will be determinant for the construction of a 
united and peaceful future there.  In pursuing the objectives 
of democratic renewal and improving living conditions for its 
population, your country can count on Italy's resolve to 
provide continuing support.  I am looking forward to 
receiving you in Rome soon and renew my vivid encouragement 
to continue in your commitment toward reconciliation, 
stability and development in Iraq. 
 
¶4. (U) Begin text of October 26 MFA statement.  As soon as 
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, 
Gianfranco Fini, learned from the Iraqi electoral commission 
of the "yes" victory in the referendum on the draft 
constitution, he sent his Iraqi counterpart Hoshyar al-Zibari 
the following message:  "I would like to congratulate you and 
by extension the Government and people of Iraq, on the 
success of the constitutional referendum, which marks a 
historic turning point in Iraq's march towards democracy. 
Today's result signals the beginning of a new era of dialogue 
and reconciliation between all Iraqis, beyond ethnic and 
religious differences, and proves that politics has defeated 
terrorist violence.  My country has been, and will continue 
to be in the future, a strong and unwavering supporter of 
Iraq's entire political and electoral process.  Therefore 
kindly accept my most sincere congratulations on this 
historic day, expressed in the hope that the constitution may 
serve as the basis for building a democratic and united 
Iraq."  End text. 
 
¶5. (U) Responding to press queries on October 26, Defense 
Minister Martino said that the positive result of the 
referendum was "another important step forward on the way 
toward democracy" and a "significant step forward in the 
political process that is bringing Iraq to become a modern 
constitutional democracy." 
SPOGLI