05ROME4071
IRAQ: ITALY PRAISES IRAQI ELECTIONS
Fri Dec 16 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Rome
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

161450Z Dec 05UNCLAS ROME 004071 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM KPAO PREL PGOV IZ IT IRAQI ELECTIONS
SUBJECT: IRAQ: ITALY PRAISES IRAQI ELECTIONS 
 
REF: STATE 225860 
 
¶1. (U)  PM Berlusconi issued a statement on December 15 
praising the Iraqi elections as a further step on the road to 
democracy.  Noting that first indications suggested a 
significant Sunni turnout, Berlusconi said the vote also 
marked a strike against the insurgents.  The statement also 
noted Italy's contribution to this process under a UN mandate 
unanimously adopted by the international community. Embassy 
translation of Berlusconi's statement is reprinted below. 
 
¶2. (U) Begin text. Once again the Iraqi people have 
demonstrated with their own courage their desire for 
democracy.  Today's elections, independent of the as yet 
unknown results, confirms that democracy is the path chosen 
by the Iraqis to follow towards a future of peace and 
liberty.  I am pleased that the first results indicate a 
significant voter turnout on the part of the Sunni community. 
 It is a sign of further isolation of the terrorist forces 
that want to create a civil war in Iraq and prefer hate and 
violence to democratic dialogue.  In 2005, despite the 
difficulties, the Iraqi people went to the polls three times, 
and I hope that soon they will have a fully legitimate 
government, freely elected on the basis of a new Constitution 
approved by the October 15 referendum.  We are proud to have 
contributed to this grand test of democracy following the 
unanimously adopted UN Security Council mandate.  People 
voting freely and the end of the cruel dictatorship of Saddam 
Hussein are concrete facts that were unimaginable three years 
ago.  The rest is only useless polemics. 
 
End text. 
SPOGLI