09CARACAS693
VENEZUELA HARASSES CLASSIFIED POUCH TRANSFERS
Fri Jun 05 00:00:00 +0200 2009
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Caracas
R 051618Z JUN 09
FM AMEMBASSY CARACAS
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 3148
INFO NSC WASHDCC O N F I D E N T I A L CARACAS 000693 
 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 06/02/2029 
TAGS: PGOV PINR PREL AOPR AREP VE
SUBJECT:  VENEZUELA HARASSES CLASSIFIED POUCH TRANSFERS 
 
Classified By: Classified By: CHARGE D AFFAIRES JOHN P. CAULFIELD 
FOR REASON 1.4(b) 
 
¶1.  (C) Summary:  The Venezuelan Protocol Director phoned 
Charge on June 4 to detail new procedures that compromise the 
ability of the Embassy to receive classified escorted 
diplomatic pouches.  Despite claiming to be just "tidying up" 
procedures, this action represents renewed efforts to harass 
Embassy Caracas operations.  To end this latest action and 
forestall future ones we will need to bring our objection to 
the attention of President Chavez, pointing out that actions 
like these are inconsistent with Chavez, call for 
normalization of relations including the exchange of 
Ambassadors.  End Summary. 
 
¶2.  (C) Protocol Director Ramon Gordils called Charge on June 
4 to describe new limitations on the Embassy,s receipt of 
diplomatic pouches.  He claimed that the Embassy had 
benefitted from "excessive" privileges such as permission for 
American diplomatic staff to take possession of pouches on 
the tarmac at planeside.  He also claimed that the Embassy 
was abusing its pouch privileges by sending large boxes of 
items that should be shipped as normal cargo.  This followed 
an incident on June 2 when Venezuelan officials at the 
airport denied an Embassy officer access to a classified 
diplomatic pouch and insisted on inspecting and X raying the 
pouch.  After a standoff the Venezuelans agreed to return the 
pouch uninspected, to the U.S. with the incoming courier and 
refused to embark an outgoing Embassy pouch. 
 
¶3.  (C) Charge responded that we were no longer in the 18th 
century and diplomatic correspondence required machines such 
as computers that would be compromised if they were at any 
time out of the control of our diplomatic personnel.  Gordils 
then insisted that the US did not extend privileges such as 
planeside access to foreign diplomatic couriers in the US. 
When the Charge expressed skepticism at this statement 
Gordils asked him to verify what pouch procedures were for 
foreign diplomats in the US and to get back to him. 
 
¶4.  (C) When the Charge asked Gordils who was responsible for 
making this change in procedures, Gordils claimed that there 
was really no change at all, just an "adjustment" to be 
consistent with Venezuelan law and that no one person should 
be considered responsible.  (Comment:  Obviously Gordils 
himself is responsible.)  Gordils then went on to describe a 
series of changes in pouch procedures for US Embassy and 
others (he specifically cited the UK Embassy) including the 
requirement of advance notification of pouch delivery, the 
names of Embassy personnel who would receive them, no vehicle 
access to the tarmac to pick up large pouches, and the need 
to submit "franquicias" (an official form describing 
contents) for large pouches.  Gordils finished by asking that 
these actions not be given a political interpretation or seen 
as an effort to complicate bilateral relations, Venezuela was 
just tidying up its procedures. 
 
¶5.  (C) Comment:  Protocol Director Gordils has consistently 
looked for ways to harass Embassy operations including denial 
of visas to permanently assigned and TDY staff, denial of 
authorization by some employees to import personal vehicles, 
and delays in issuance or denial of diplomatic credentials. 
He was chagrined when the Brazilians informed President 
Chavez of US complaints about the denial of visas to 
diplomats, a policy that Chavez was not aware of.  Gordils is 
now back to his old tricks.  Embassy believes the best way to 
overcome his truculence is to again make clear to President 
Chavez that harassment of Embassy Caracas is inconsistent 
with Chavez,s stated goal of normalizing relations, 
including the exchange of Ambassadors.  End Comment. 
 
 
CAULFIELD