05ANKARA489
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Fri Jan 28 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

281232Z Jan 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 000489 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, JANUARY 27, 2005 
 
 
THIS REPORT PRESENTS THE TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER THREE 
THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEAL 
Live Broadcast from TGS - Milliyet 
US Military Helicopter Crash, 31 Dead - Milliyet 
General Basbug: "We Are Concerned About Kirkuk" - Sabah 
Kirkuk Ready to Explode - Sabah 
Warning From Uniformed Official - Hurriyet 
US Senate Approves Rice as Secretary of State - Hurriyet 
Kirkuk Will Cause a Civil War - Turkiye 
A Last Warning on Kirkuk - Aksam 
NYT: "Turkey May Intervene in Iraq" - Aksam 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Kirkuk Boils - Radikal 
Harsh Warning from TGS to US and the Kurds - Radikal 
The Occupier Loses 35 Lives - Cumhuriyet 
Kirkuk to Light the Fire of Ethnic War - Cumhuriyet 
Turkey Warns Everyone on Kirkuk Issue - Yeni Safak 
 
BRIEFING 
 
TGS Press Briefing:  Today's papers give extensive front 
page coverage to yesterday's press briefing by Deputy Chief 
of the General Staff Ilker Basbug.  Speaking on the Iraq 
issue, General Basbug said that `we are following the 
election process in Iraq closely.  The press has been 
reporting that hundreds of thousands of Kurdish refugees 
have settled in Kirkuk and have been registered on electoral 
lists.  Turkey is concerned about this artificial increase 
in the  Kurdish population in Kirkuk.  We have been drawing 
attention to this issue since June in our various press 
briefings.  These developments might threaten Iraq's 
territorial and political integrity.  Such a development 
could also pose a serious security problem for Turkey.  The 
elections will be an important milestone in transferring 
sovereignty to the Iraqis.  A high participation in the 
elections will contribute greatly to the legitimacy of the 
elections.'  Commenting next on Turkish-US relations and and 
recent high-level contacts with US officials, Basbug noted 
that `the Turkish armed forces have always maintained a 
close relationship with their American counterparts. 
Turkey's relations with the United States are so broad and 
comprehensive that they cannot be reduced to any one 
specific issue. Having close contacts with our US 
counterparts does not mean that we don't have different 
opinions on different issues.    We can disagree on certain 
issues but what is important is that we openly and clearly 
discuss our opinions and concerns with each other.'  Asked 
about Kirkuk, Basbug said `there are a number of fundamental 
issues which are vital for us.  One is that Kirkuk should 
not be attached to any Kurdish region, and that Kirkuk's 
special status should be preserved.  The second is the 
protection of the Turkmen population in Iraq.  Turkey cannot 
be silent on these matters.  But at this stage, we are 
engaged in no action other than conveying our opinions and 
warnings to the relevant officials through diplomatic 
channels.  But if, in the end, the situation becomes serious 
there, then it could turn into a serious security problem 
for Turkey.  We are hoping that things will not take such a 
turn.'  Commenting on the PKK issue, Basbug said that 
`Turkey is, in the first instance, responsible for its own 
security, but the fight against terrorism also requires 
international support.  If we look at the issue 
realistically, we should not ignore the fact that the US has 
given huge support to Turkey in its fight against the PKK. 
But it should also be openly stated that the picture has 
taken a different shape after the second Iraqi war.  In 
connection with this period, the US knows perfectly well 
what Turkey expects from it regarding the PKK terrorist 
organization, especially in Northern Iraq.  There is no 
sense in repeating these expectations over and over again. 
According to our assessment of the present situation, the US 
has not reached the necessary political decision and 
decisiveness for a military operation against the PKK in 
northern Iraq.  This is the difference between our view and 
that of the US.'  Responding to a question about US concerns 
over the Iranian nuclear program, Basbug said that Turkey 
wants a peaceful and diplomatic solution to this problem. 
`But Iran has to work in harmony with the International 
Atomic Agency, and should also show the world that it will 
use its nuclear program for peaceful purposes,' he added. 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
"The Danger in Kirkuk" 
Sami Kohen observed in the mass appeal "Milliyet" (01/27): 
The summary of a report published yesterday by the 
International Crisis Group claims that Kirkuk is on the 
verge of an explosion.  According to the ICG, if the Kurds 
try to control Kirkuk after the elections, serious ethnic 
clashes will begin and will pose a huge threat to Iraq and 
the region's future stability.  The report also argues that 
if developments unfold in that way, Turkey might intervene. 
In order to prevent these negative developments, the UN and 
the US should be involved more actively on this issue. 
Moreover, Kofi Annan should send a special envoy to Iraq to 
deal only with this specific issue.  Deputy Chief of General 
Staff Basbug's statement yesterday should be evaluated 
within this framework.  Ignoring the Kurdish population 
increase in Kirkuk will only increased the tension there. 
Even though there are some exaggerated numbers circulating 
about the Kurdish population in Kirkuk, it is a fact that 
everything has been done to help facilitate this artificial 
population increase.  Turkey's concern on the issue lies in 
the possibility that a `fait-accompli' in Kirkuk will end in 
civil war.  In short, the ICG report highlights the concerns 
that Turkish political and military officials have expressed 
over the issue.  These concerns have been noted by 
international observers as well.  We hope that the Iraqi 
Kurds, the IIG, the US and the other relevant actors will 
consider these concerns." 
 
"The Election in Iraq and Tension in Kirkuk" 
Murat Yetkin commented in the liberal-intellectual "Radikal" 
(01/27):  "As the elections approach in Iraq, concerns over 
security issues are increasing in Ankara.  The statement by 
General Basbug yesterday about the possibility of Kirkuk 
tensions opening the way to civil war is a clear indication 
of this.  Responding to a question on the Kirkuk issue, 
Basbug said that Kirkuk is a serious problem, and that 
Turkey is responsible for the Turkmen population there.  If 
a civil war were to begin in Iraq because of the Kirkuk 
issue and the Kurds, it will cause problems for the entire 
region and would represent an internal security issue for 
Turkey.  Basbug said that Turkey's concerns on Kirkuk had 
been conveyed to the US by Turkish political and military 
officials.  On the PKK issue, Basbug said that if we would 
be making a mistake to ignore the fact that the US has 
always supported Turkey's fight against the PKK.  He also 
noted that  relations between Turkey and the US are too 
broad and comprehensive to be reduced to any specific issue. 
These comments made me wonder if whether these warnings were 
aimed at Turkish politicians who are trying to index the 
Turkey-US relationship to the single issue of the PKK in 
Iraq." 
"EDELMAN