05TELAVIV294
ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION
Tue Jan 18 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Tel Aviv
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 07 TEL AVIV 000294 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR NEA, NEA/IPA, NEA/PPD 
 
WHITE HOUSE FOR PRESS OFFICE, SIT ROOM 
NSC FOR NEA STAFF 
 
JERUSALEM ALSO FOR ICD 
LONDON ALSO FOR HKANONA AND POL 
PARIS ALSO FOR POL 
ROME FOR MFO 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: IS KMDR MEDIA REACTION REPORT
SUBJECT: ISRAEL MEDIA REACTION 
 
 
-------------------------------- 
SUBJECTS COVERED IN THIS REPORT: 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶1.  Mideast 
 
¶2.  Proposed Russia-Syria Arms Deal 
 
------------------------- 
Key stories in the media: 
------------------------- 
 
During the weekend, all media led with the possibility 
of IDF action to counter continued rocket strikes at 
Israeli targets from the northern Gaza Strip; a 17-year- 
old girl from Sderot was critically wounded in such an 
attack on Saturday night.  The media noted 
contradictions in official Israeli declarations and 
statements on the matter. During the weekend, all media 
reported that, demanding that the PA make a "real 
effort" to stop terror in the wake of Thursday's Karni 
Crossing attack, PM Sharon on Friday suspending all 
contact with the PA -- including any meeting with PA 
Chairman Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen).  Yediot quoted an 
expert in Israel's military industry as saying that the 
Palestinians have smuggled rockets with a 20-km range 
into the Gaza Strip, which could hit Ashkelon.  Today, 
Ha'aretz quoted a senior Palestinian defense source as 
saying that Abbas has issued orders for Palestinian 
security services in Gaza to deploy in the area from 
which rockets and mortars are being launched, with a 
special intervention force of 500-700 officers from the 
security forces to be formed for the purpose.  Maariv 
and Jerusalem Post printed similar reports.  Leading 
media quoted Abbas as saying Monday that he needs up to 
one month to organize his new regime.  In contrast to 
highlighted reports that PM Sharon gave Abbas 
additional time to prove himself, Israel Radio this 
morning quoted a senior GOI source as saying that Abbas 
knows that Israel will not exercise self-restraint, 
that he has little time to act, and that Israel is 
prepared to respond.  Deputy Defense Minister Zeev Boim 
was quoted as saying in an interview with Jerusalem 
Post that the IDF has no alternative but to launch a 
widespread operation in the Gaza Strip if Abbas fails 
to act against terrorists and prevent attacks on Israel 
within the week. 
 
This morning, Israel Radio reported that, demanding an 
end to rocket strikes, Sderot residents and left- and 
right-wing politicians are marching in the direction of 
the northern Gaza Strip of Beit Hanoun.  Some of the 
demonstrators demand that Sharon resign. 
 
On Sunday, Ha'aretz and other media reported that the 
IDF killed eight Palestinians in Gaza raids on 
Saturday. 
 
Israel Radio quoted President Bush as saying on Monday 
on U.S. TV networks that he would not rule out military 
action against Iran if that country was not more 
forthcoming about its suspected nuclear weapons 
program. 
Yediot reported that Secretary of State-designate 
Condoleezza Rice is considering visiting the Middle 
East immediately after the Senate endorses her 
nomination. 
 
On Monday, Yediot reported that the U.S. and Israel 
will conduct extensive joint maneuvers in March.  The 
newspaper quoted an Israeli military source as saying 
that the tension between the Pentagon and Israel's 
Defense Ministry does not get in the way of defense 
cooperation between the two countries. 
 
The media reported that the tension along Israel's 
northern border continued on Monday, when Hizbullah 
detonated a third mine in less than a week in the Sheba 
Farms area.  There were no casualties.  Leading media 
reported that the IDF responded by hitting a Hizbullah 
command post near Tyre. 
 
Leading media reported that a small group of Labor and 
Yahad Knesset members and left-wing activists headed to 
Ramallah on Monday to show their support for Abbas and 
to say that Israel's decision to cut all ties between 
their governments is a mistake. 
 
Visiting Luxembourg PM and current president of the EU 
Council of Ministers, Jean Asselborn, was quoted as 
saying in an interview with Ha'aretz last night: "The 
'Arafat excuse' no longer exists.  This matter has been 
resolved with the democratic election of Mahmoud 
Abbas."  Jerusalem Post quoted visiting Japanese FM 
Nobutaka Machimura as saying on Monday that there can 
be no peace without a cessation of terror.  Citing AP, 
Ha'aretz reported Monday that Machimura has asked 
Israel to end weapons sales to Japan's neighbors. 
 
Ha'aretz cited research that appeared in the annual 
report just released by Tel Aviv University's Jaffee 
Center for Strategic Studies (JCSS), Middle East 
Strategic Balance, according to which the IDF's 
qualitative edge over the Egyptian army has widened, 
and Egypt has no intention to go on the offensive.  The 
newspaper pits the annual's findings against 
expressions of concern by Yuval Steinitz, the Chairman 
of the Knesset's Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee, 
and of former head of research at IDF Intelligence Maj. 
Gen. (res.) Amos Gilad. 
 
Jerusalem Post reported that on Sunday, a PA court 
sentenced five men from the Gaza Strip suspected of 
"collaboration" with Israel to prison terms ranging 
from three to twenty years.  On Sunday, the newspaper 
reported that two young Palestinian men suspected of 
"collaboration" with Israel were murdered in the Nablus 
area over the weekend. 
On Monday, Jerusalem Post reported that Amman polling 
stations might bar Iraq-born Israelis from voting in 
Iraq's elections. 
Ha'aretz reported that, "in an apparent victory for 
radical Muslims and the left wing of the American 
foreign policy establishment," President Bush has 
failed to take any action to renominate Middle East 
scholar Daniel Pipes to the board of the United States 
Institute of Peace. 
 
Ha'aretz reported that the Tourism Ministry will 
participate in an international task force whose goal 
is to rehabilitate tourism in the countries of 
Southeast Asia devastated by the tsunami. 
 
Ha'aretz today published the results of a poll 
conducted among Palestinians by the Center for 
Palestinian Policy and Research in Ramallah in the last 
days of 2004:  some 54 percent of the Palestinians 
support a two-state solution on the basis of the 1967 
lines, with border corrections and no massive return of 
refugees.  The newspaper says that this confirms that 
there has been a change in Palestinian public opinion 
since the death of Yasser Arafat. 
 
------------ 
¶1.  Mideast: 
------------ 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
 
 
Chief Economic Editor and senior columnist Sever 
Plotker wrote in the lead editorial of mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot: "Just as the 
occupation perpetuates terror, terror can perpetuate 
the occupation.  If Abu Mazen wishes to save the 
disengagement and ensure the liberation of the Gaza 
Strip and his continued rule, he has no choice but to 
declare uncompromising war on the terror 
organizations." 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized: "It 
is precisely at this critical moment that the Prime 
Minister should meet with Abu Mazen and try to create a 
joint plan of action instead of rolling down the 
slippery slope to another round of bloodshed." 
 
Senior columnist and longtime dove Yoel Marcus wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (January 18): "The 
Prime Minister's decision to give Abu Mazen the cold 
shoulder until the terror stops is perfectly 
justified.... [Sharon] wants Gaza to be the threshold 
for continued talks and the gradual implementation of 
the road map." 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote in popular, 
pluralist Maariv: "[Abbas] is a president without 
subjects, a general without soldiers." 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized: 
"Abbas may indeed be a pragmatist who recognizes that 
the Palestinians' terror war has been 
counterproductive, but it behooves the Egyptians to 
show leadership by setting an example for him." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
¶I.  "War of the Qassams" 
 
Chief Economic Editor and senior columnist Sever 
Plotker wrote in the lead editorial of mass- 
circulation, pluralist Yediot Aharonot (January 17): 
"In about half a year, Israel will withdraw of its own 
free will and choice from the Gaza Strip, and evacuate 
its settlements from there.  The Palestinians will be 
free of the oppressive occupation, which has become 
increasingly forceful.  It would be reasonable to 
expect that in anticipation of the liberation of their 
land, the Palestinians would be occupied in plans for 
utilization of lands, restoring ruined buildings and 
roads, mobilizing donations and instating law and 
order.  But instead of expanding the civil activity and 
preparing for receiving full sovereignty, the 
Palestinians are firing Qassam rockets from Gaza at 
Israel and expanding the wave of terror attacks.... The 
terror being carried out today by the Palestinian 
organizations in Gaza does not, therefore, even have 
the pretense of a 'war of liberation.'  It is a war of 
anti-liberation: murderous showy attacks for internal 
Palestinian propaganda purposes alone.... Just as the 
occupation perpetuates terror, terror can perpetuate 
the occupation.  If Abu Mazen wishes to save the 
disengagement and ensure the liberation of the Gaza 
Strip and his continued rule, he has no choice but to 
declare uncompromising war on the terror organizations 
operating there uninterrupted.  Only if the president 
of Palestine dares to put them to the test of fire, 
will they back down in the face of his determination. 
After all, he was given a momentous mandate from the 
Palestinian people, while they were not given a thing." 
 
II.  "Time For a Joint Plan of Action" 
 
Independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz editorialized 
(January 16): "Ariel Sharon's display of anger at Abu 
Mazen (Mahmoud Abbas) after the suicide bombing at the 
Karni crossing shows that Israel has chosen to return 
to the relationship model that was unsuccessfully tried 
with Yasser Arafat, instead of taking a different path. 
If there is no sign that Abu Mazen is encouraging 
terror, if he means what he says, if he did not know 
about the attack planned a long time before it was 
carried out, it may be expected that the government of 
Israel will give him time and support so that he can 
work toward a total cease-fire.... Abu Mazen has to 
understand that time is short, and that much of what 
will happen in the near future between the Israelis and 
the Palestinians, including Israel's withdrawal from 
Gaza, depends on him and his determination.  At his 
inauguration, the new chairman condemned terror and 
called for an end to the cycle of violence. Sharon 
cannot make do with declarations and good intentions. 
It is precisely at this critical moment that the Prime 
Minister should meet with Abu Mazen and try to create a 
joint plan of action instead of rolling down the 
slippery slope to another round of bloodshed." 
 
III.  "Qassam Trap" 
 
Diplomatic correspondent Ben Caspit wrote in popular, 
pluralist Maariv (January 17): "We have to face the 
truth courageously.  At present the IDF has no solution 
for the problem of the Qassam rockets and the 
mortars.... [However,] things cannot go on like this, 
and Hamas has to be stopped.  Either it will stop of 
its own volition, or Abu Mazen will arrive at a cease- 
fire.  If not, Israel will have to do the dirty work 
itself.... Abu Mazen's problem is that even his own 
people are not giving him a chance.  Nobody is willing 
to do the dirty work.  Abu Ala is not relevant and is 
not expected to last long in his job.  Dahlan is not 
prepared to roll up his sleeves.  Rajoub is not 
prepared to get his hands dirty.  Who in God's name is 
willing to work with Abu Mazen, to do the unpleasant 
job he needs, to go out on the streets and do the dirty 
work?  So far, nobody.  He is a president without 
subjects, a general without soldiers.  In the meantime, 
Iran is also increasing its efforts.  Scarcely anyone 
is in a position to put pressure on Tehran.... If the 
world lines up behind Abu Mazen, and puts pressure on 
Israel, and Israel has to enter into negotiations and 
discuss a permanent agreement, and all our troubles 
come back in bursts, and we go back to square one, 
Sharon will be in a bind and in the end he will be 
yearning for Arafat, who is certainly watching what is 
taking place now, and enjoying every minute of it." 
 
IV.  "An Eye For an Eye" 
 
Senior columnist and longtime dove Yoel Marcus wrote in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (January 18): "The 
Prime Minister's decision to give Abu Mazen the cold 
shoulder until the terror stops is perfectly justified. 
This is no trick or gimmick to get out of implementing 
the disengagement plan.  Sharon actually prefers to 
have someone to talk to on the other side when the 
pullout goes through.... He wants Gaza to be the 
threshold for continued talks and the gradual 
implementation of the road map.... We must disengage 
from Gaza whether the Palestinians like it or not, and 
whether they cooperate or not.  At the same time, we 
cannot sit back and resign ourselves to artillery fire 
on civilian settlements in Israeli territory.... There 
is a breaking point and a time when the government must 
take off its gloves and present the other side with a 
flat ultimatum: for every indiscriminate round of fire 
on a civilian target, we will retaliate in kind on the 
closest and most populated Palestinian city.  We will 
give it to them good.  An eye for an eye." 
 
 
 
 
¶V.  "Sderot and Cairo" 
 
Conservative, independent Jerusalem Post editorialized 
(January 17): "Israeli citizens, residents of Sderot in 
particular, are losing patience with the lethargic 
Palestinian Authority, with Egypt -- and with their own 
government.  First, the Egyptians. Suleiman Awad, a 
spokesman for President Hosni Mubarak, says: 'All those 
who want violence to stop should know that Abu Mazen 
[Mahmoud Abbas] does not have a magic wand,' and that 
he cannot 'condemn' the gunmen and terrorists while 
ignoring 'the suffering of the Palestinian people.' 
Mr. Awad, no one is asking Mahmoud Abbas to wave a 
magic wand.  We are asking he employ the potent forces 
already on the ground in Gaza, including those of 
Muhammad Dahlan, to assert PA authority.  If Abbas 
can't pull that off in the next several days, chances 
are he never will.... Moderation begets moderation. 
Abbas may indeed be a pragmatist who recognizes that 
the Palestinians' terror war has been 
counterproductive, but it behooves the Egyptians to 
show leadership by setting an example for him.  What 
better time than today, in the face of rejectionist 
violence -- from Hizbullah in the North and Palestinian 
terrorists in Gaza -- for Cairo to return its 
ambassador to Israel?  Imagine how the ambassador's 
return would undermine the enemies of reconciliation. 
And if Egypt, belatedly, did the right thing, chances 
are Jordan and other Arab states would follow." 
 
----------------------------------- 
¶2.  Proposed Russia-Syria Arms Deal: 
------------------------------------ 
 
                       Summary: 
                       -------- 
Defense commentator Reuven Pedhazur opined in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz: "Israel should 
entrust the U.S. with the task of dealing with the 
issue of the sale of Russian missiles to Syria." 
 
                     Block Quotes: 
                     ------------- 
 
"Let the U.S. Deal With Syria" 
 
Defense commentator Reuven Pedhazur opined in 
independent, left-leaning Ha'aretz (January 17): "The 
fear is that terror groups that are equipped with 
surface-to-air missiles -- whether they be Russian or 
American (the whereabouts of thousands of Stinger 
missiles that were handed over to the Mujahideen during 
the war in Afghanistan remain unknown) -- will endanger 
civil aviation throughout the world.  This is the 
reason why Israel should entrust the U.S. with the task 
of dealing with the issue of the sale of Russian 
missiles to Syria.  The Americans and Europeans, and 
not Israel, should be the ones pressuring the regime in 
Moscow.... [Furthermore,] just like any other country, 
including Israel, Syria will not stop arming itself 
just because its leader is turning his attention to 
political talks." 
 
KURTZER