07BERLIN806
REPORT OF SECOND G-8 LYON-ROMA MEETING OF GERMAN
Fri Apr 20 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Berlin
VZCZCXRO1713
OO RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHLZ
DE RUEHRL #0806/01 1101027
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 201027Z APR 07
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7995
INFO RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON PRIORITY 8179
RUEHMO/AMEMBASSY MOSCOW PRIORITY 1769
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA PRIORITY 1013
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO PRIORITY 1437
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME PRIORITY 0447
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS PRIORITY 8707
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEHUNV/USMISSION UNVIE VIENNA PRIORITY 0253
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK PRIORITY 0458
RUEAHLC/DEPT OF HOMELAND SECURITY WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEAWJC/DEPT OF JUSTICE WASHDC PRIORITY
RUEFHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 BERLIN 000806 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
FOR NSC ELIZABETH FARR AND STEVE NEWHOUSE 
DOJ FOR DAG SWARTZ 
STATE FOR E, P, EEB 
UNVIE FOR HOWARD SOLOMON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KCRM KJUS OTRA PTER SNAR UNGA GM AF
SUBJECT: REPORT OF SECOND G-8 LYON-ROMA MEETING OF GERMAN 
PRESIDENCY: APRIL 16-19, 2007 
 
¶1. (SBU) SUMMARY:  The second meeting of the G-8 Lyon-Roma 
Anti-Crime and Terrorism Group (LR/ACT) under the German 
Presidency was held in Berlin from April 16-19, 2007.  The 
U.S. delegation was co-chaired by INL DAS Elizabeth Verville 
and S/CT Deputy Coordinator Virginia Palmer and included 
representatives from the Departments of State, Justice, and 
Homeland Security, and the National Counterterrorism Center. 
Highlights include: 
 
- Agreement on U.S. initiative to pursue specific projects to 
inhibit illicit cash smuggling; 
 
- Circulation by the U.S. of a revised draft of the German 
Counterterrorism Summit Statement, and brief presentation of 
substantive additions that U.S. FASS tabled in Bonn; 
 
- Agreement to U.S.-drafted G-8 Justice and Home Affairs 
Ministerial Declaration on Combating Child Pornography; 
 
- Discussion of further actions to promote substantive 
progress on the UN Convention Against Corruption (UNCAC) and 
UN Transnational Organized Crime Convention implementation; 
including designating asset recovery experts to consider how 
best to implement UNCAC asset recovery articles.  END SUMMARY. 
 
Cash Courier Initiative 
----------------------- 
 
¶2. (SBU) Lyon-Roma Heads approved the revised U.S. paper on 
inhibiting illicit cash smuggling and observed that the 
revised draft had addressed the concerns raised at the 
February meeting.  Canada and Japan continued to stress the 
importance of ensuring that the cash courier initiative 
projects not overlap with Financial Action Task Force (FATF) 
activities.  The UK noted that the initiative also could 
produce intelligence on terrorist networks and terror 
financing routes.  Germany, which had expressed opposition to 
the initiative in February, endorsed the U.S. proposal, but 
noted that it would provide specific comments in the coming 
days.  The U.S. agreed to develop project proposals that 
would avoid duplication with FATF work and encouraged other 
partners to do so as well. 
 
G-8 Summit Statement on Counterterrorism 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (SBU) The U.S. noted the importance of having a concrete 
statement which mentions specific G-8 commitments to inhibit 
bulk cash smuggling, promote economic recovery i the 
Afghanistan/Pakistan border region, preventWMD proliferation 
financing, and enhance the secrity of critical energy 
infrastructure.  The U.S circulated a revised text including 
these elements and mentioned that the U.S. Foreign Affairs 
Sos Sherpa (FASS) would be tabling the document for 
discussion at the April 16-17 FASS meeting.  The K and 
Canada provided language on radicalizationand recruitment of 
terrorists for inclusion in the statement.  Japan and Canada 
asked that the statement include a categorical rejection of 
terrorism and expressed reservations about the inclusion of 
language that directly connected economic 
stability/prosperity with counterterrorism activities. 
Another draft report will be circulated by the Presidency 
after input on the results of the FASS discussions in Bonn. 
 
Summit Report on G-8 Efforts to Strengthen the UN,s 
Counterterrorism Activities 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶4. (SBU) Heads approved in principle a draft summit report on 
Efforts to Strengthen the UN,s CT Activities and agreed to 
submit additional written comments by May 4 for inclusion in 
a revised draft the Presidency will circulate.  Heads also 
discussed an Italian draft non-paper on ways to facilitate 
 
BERLIN 00000806  002 OF 006 
 
 
the UN CTC/CTED,s delivery of technical assistance and 
agreed to provide additional comments by May 4.  After the 
paper is revised, Germany will host a meeting in New York to 
discuss how the paper might be used, ideally as the basis for 
a discussion in New York with CTC and CTED. 
 
JHA Ministerial Declaration on Combating Child Pornography 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶5. (SBU) The U.S. finalized and obtained Heads, agreement on 
its JHA Ministerial Declaration outlining the serious nature 
of the problem of child pornography and the need for strong 
action to enforce the international legal framework against 
it.  The U.S. Delegation addressed the concerns of Japan, UK, 
Russia, and Canada in order to successfully reach agreement 
on the declaration. 
 
Terrorist Use of the Internet 
----------------------------- 
 
¶6. (SBU) Heads approved a collection of G-8 national 
practices related to preventing terrorist use of the Internet 
to be included as a deliverable for the JHA Ministerial.  The 
U.S. succeeded in narrowing the scope of the project by 
revising the project from a best practices document to an 
"analysis of national practices;" Germany, France, and Russia 
pushed for follow-on work.  The U.S. resisted, but ultimately 
agreed to consider further steps after examining specific 
project proposals that may be put forward. 
 
Implementation of UNSCR 1624 
---------------------------- 
 
¶7. (SBU) Partners supported the UK effort to develop a paper 
that described the various G-8 national approaches to 
implementation of UNSCR 1624.  The UK acknowledged the 
sensitivities related to this issue and stressed that the 
paper is a compilation and a tool to assist states in 
enhancing implementation.  The UK proposed that G-8 UN 
missions in New York coordinate on an approach to the UN CTC 
to share the final paper as a UK non-paper in informal 
discussions with CTED and CTC.  Germany asked that all 
comments on the UK draft paper be submitted by May 18. 
 
Radicalization and Recruitment 
------------------------------ 
 
¶8. (SBU) Heads approved the UK,s proposal to identify, 
analyze, assess and catalogue deradicalization interventions 
from third countries at a seminar to be held in the fall in 
London.  The UK expects to invite 50 participants to the 
seminar and asked for recommendations on which third 
countries should be invited.  The UK proposes to invite 
presentations by Malaysia, Turkey, Egypt, and Jordan.  The 
U.S. previously suggested inviting Indonesia, Saudi Arabia, 
Yemen, Morocco, and Algeria.  All G-8 Partners could 
participate in the seminar.  A report on the seminar would be 
provided to the CT Practitioners Group and Heads.  There were 
sensitivities expressed in the subgroups about countries to 
be invited and all agreed to consult prior to the event. 
 
UN Related Efforts to Combat Organized Crime 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) CND: The U.S. provided a brief update to efforts 
made in the 50th UN Commission on Narcotic Drugs.  The U.S. 
noted the four resolutions adopted at the CND aimed at 
preventing the diversion of precursor chemicals used in the 
production of illicit drugs.  Also, the U.S. requested 
close-consultations with G-8 member states to coordinate any 
future recommendations on the rescheduling of substances to 
the World Health Organization.  Lastly, the U.S. expressed 
appreciation for the attention that was given to Afghanistan 
 
BERLIN 00000806  003 OF 006 
 
 
at the CND. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Crime Commission:  The U.S. previewed four focal 
points for the upcoming UN Crime Commission meetings in 
Vienna.  First, the U.S. reiterated the importance of work 
done to combat child sexual exploitation and urged support 
for a resolution it was putting forward.  Second, the U.S. 
noted it will call attention to the problem that gangs have 
caused in the U.S. and Western Hemisphere, and highlight what 
the U.S. is doing domestically and internationally to combat 
the problem.  Third, the U.S. stressed the importance of 
Indonesia and Brazil working together to come to a consensus 
on the illegal logging resolution.  Last, the U.S. raised the 
importance of governance and the need for the G-8 to work 
together to overcome budgetary issues. 
 
¶11. (SBU) UNCAC:  The U.S. reiterated the need for G-8 
members' outreach to ten other governments to encourage them 
to respond in a timely manner to the UN Convention Against 
Corruption self-assessment checklist and offer to provide 
assistance in this regard.  The U.S. welcomed France,s 
willingness to engage UNCAC parties and signatories, 
particularly those in Africa.  The UK noted it was still 
deliberating on its ten countries, but that it was funding a 
three-year program through the Commonwealth to fulfill UNCAC. 
 Canada said that it was in the process of finalizing its ten 
countries.  Germany expressed an intent to reach out to EU 
Member States.  Japan, Italy, and Russia raised concerns with 
reaching out to others as they have not "ratified" the 
Convention. 
 
¶12. (SBU) The U.S. also attempted to reinvigorate the G-8 
asset recovery initiative and Lyon-Roma attention to this 
issue.  The U.S. identified the various substantive areas in 
which Lyon-Roma could implement UNCAC asset recovery 
articles, such as increasing enhanced scrutiny, educating 
countries on mutual legal assistance, and developing 
legislative or regulatory tools to confiscate and return 
assets.  The U.S suggested holding an asset recovery meeting 
prior to the scheduled meeting(s) of the Corruption 
Convention Conference of State Parties (COSP) Working Group 
on asset recovery in August. 
Germany supported the idea and proposed an exchange of asset 
recovery points of contact to allow experts to communicate 
prior to the COSP meeting.  The U.S. offered to take the lead 
in arranging contacts once contact points are named.  Germany 
proposed a follow-up asset recovery ad hoc meeting in 
November, if any follow-on was required. 
 
New Projects 
------------ 
 
¶13. (SBU) Russia introduced a proposal on the sharing of 
counternarcotics law enforcement training experiences and 
information.  The U.S., UK, Germany, and Japan all agreed in 
concept, but requested more time to make further refinements 
to the proposal. 
 
¶14. (SBU) Japan introduced a proposal for the Migration 
Experts Subgroup (MESG) to do a best practices paper for 
ensuring that airlines comply with their duty to ascertain 
that passengers have the proper documents before boarding 
airplanes.  The U.S. expressed its full-support, but, at the 
request of the UK and Germany, it was sent to the 
Transportation Security Subgroup (TSSG) for further review. 
 
¶15. (SBU) France proposed a project on traffic recovery after 
a chemical/biological/radiological attack.  Heads postponed 
review of the project to provide the Transport Security 
Subgroup a chance to review and approve the project.  Most 
partners expressed support for the concept. 
 
JHA Ministerial Deliverables 
 
BERLIN 00000806  004 OF 006 
 
 
---------------------------- 
 
¶16. (SBU) The U.S. presented a comprehensive report for 
presentation to the JHA Ministers on the 2004 Asset Recovery 
Initiative.  The 2004 initiative encompassed many different 
projects, some of which were undertaken by Heads and others 
by the Criminal Legal Affairs Subgroup.  The report to 
Ministers summarizes all work that has been done on this 
initiative and also serves as a platform on which to deliver 
the various papers Lyon-Roma asset recovery experts have 
developed.  The U.S. will provide the final of the Report and 
recommendations on release of papers to Germany to circulate 
for final Heads approval. 
 
Afghanistan Ad Hoc Experts Meeting 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶17. (SBU) The ad hoc meeting on Afghanistan experts met on 
April 16 to discuss recent developments on counter-narcotics. 
 Despite the potential increase from last year,s record 
harvest, the UK argued there was significant progress in the 
North and other regions, attributing these successes to the 
presence of governance, stable security and access to 
alternative livelihoods.  The U.S. supported this assessment, 
arguing for a balanced approach that included incentives like 
the Good Performance Initiative as well as disincentives, 
such as targeted eradication.  The U.S. and the UK emphasized 
the growing nexus between narcotics and terrorism in 
Afghanistan and urged adoption of ideas in the March 2007 
resolution on Afghanistan.  G-8 countries appeared amenable 
to this with the exception of Italy.  The U.S. urged greater 
attention to the increasing use of Africa as a point of 
transshipment for Afghan heroin, pointing to reports from the 
UNODC, International Narcotics Control Board (INCB), 
Pakistani law enforcement, and media reports.  A number of 
delegations highlighted the importance of encouraging 
producer and transit countries to remain focused on precursor 
chemicals for heroin, working with INCB and UNODC to 
strengthen border controls and prevent diversion and 
smuggling. 
 
G-8 Prisons Ad Hoc Experts Meeting 
---------------------------------- 
 
¶18. (SBU) The U.S. chaired an experts meeting on April 16 to 
help develop next steps related to the G-8 Project on 
Terrorist Recruitment in Prisons.  The G-8 produced a 
beneficial practices document by incorporating survey 
responses and the discussions of the April 2006 experts 
meeting.  Most partners expressed support for the experts 
meetings as a means for exchanging information.  Partners 
agreed to maintain an on-going dialogue outside the context 
of Lyon-Roma meetings. 
 
Aviation Security Ad Hoc Experts Meeting 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶19. (SBU) Experts from three subgroups -- TSSG, Law 
Enforcement Projects Subgroup (LEPSG) and CT Practitioners -- 
met to discuss future threats to aviation security.  There 
was universal agreement that targeting of aviation remains a 
key strategic goal for terrorists, despite the availability 
of softer, more accessible targets.  Specifically, experts 
noted common concerns over the potential use of high impact 
devices such as IEDs, Vehicle Borne IEDs, MANPADS, liquids 
and gels explosives, weapons of mass destruction, and 
low-tech devices such as shoes, cell phones and other 
concealed or disguised objects.  The threat posed by 
insiders, suicide bombers, and stowaways was mentioned 
repeatedly.  There is broad agreement that cargo and small 
aircraft have associated vulnerabilities that need further 
exploration.  Also discussed was the possibility of 
innovations in explosives, concealment measures, 
 
BERLIN 00000806  005 OF 006 
 
 
cyber-terrorism, model aircraft, and unmanned airborne 
vehicles.  The discussions will form the basis of important 
work for current and future G-8 projects. 
 
Critical Infrastructure Protection Ad Hoc Meeting 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶20. (SBU) LEPSG and CT Practitioners subgroups reported that 
the three U.S./Russia led critical energy infrastructure 
protection projects would be completed by November.  The 
threat assessment project will be combined with an existing 
CT Practitioners project to compile analytical assessments of 
terrorist threat to oil and gas infrastructure. 
 
Subgroups 
--------- 
 
¶21. (SBU) The Criminal Legal Affairs Subgroup focused on two 
deliverables for the JHA Ministerial which will form the 
basis for discussion for Ministers in Munich.  First, the 
group completed work on several papers that are the final 
aspects of the 2004 Asset Recovery Initiative.  Also, the 
group completed a paper collecting G-8 experience 
implementing laws establishing extraterritorial jurisdiction 
over sex crimes against children committed by their nationals 
-- so-called "child sex tourism."  All of these projects were 
led by the U.S. and the completed papers, once public, will 
be of use in U.S. work on corruption and child sexual 
exploitation issues in other multilateral fora.  The group 
also participated in a nine-way videoconference organized by 
Canada among authorities responsible for extradition and 
mutual legal assistance in the G-8 states and with Eurojust. 
 
¶22. (SBU) The Migration Experts Subgroup focused on the 
terrorist expulsion project.  The group exchanged domestic 
legal authorities and discussed a draft of a findings 
document summarizing the Member States, submission.  This 
stocktaking will be a deliverable for the JHA Ministerial. 
The group also prepared for the next joint interdiction 
exercise by exchanging intelligence about fraud including the 
targeted documents.  Finally, the group had a presentation 
from Interpol on its Human Smuggling and Trafficking 
messaging database. 
 
¶23. (SBU) The Law Enforcement Projects Subgroup (LEPSG) 
considered three counter-narcotics projects.  The first is a 
Russian proposal on training of narcotics investigators.  It 
will undergo revision and be re-circulated by June 1.  The 
second is a German project on synthetic drugs which was 
concluded.  Germany will circulate a report for approval and 
submission as a ministerial deliverable.  The third is the 
U.S. project on rogue Internet pharmacies that reviewed the 
results of our questionnaire.  Draft best practices will be 
circulated prior to the next meeting.  The group also 
reviewed several law enforcement projects. In the area of 
DNA, the existing project will be advanced through an 
experts' meeting to be hosted by the U.S. in June, with the 
objective of finalizing the project and having a G-8 search 
request network operational by the November meeting.  The 
Italian draft proposal for an additional DNA project will be 
evaluated at the experts' meeting.  The U.S. reported on the 
prison radicalization experts' meeting, and LEPSG endorsed 
the conclusion that interested G-8 experts would continue to 
collaborate, outside the context of the G-8, and report back 
at the second Lyon-Roma meeting in 2008. 
 
¶24. (SBU) The High-Tech Crime Subgroup discussions included: 
Critical information infrastructure protection; law 
enforcement issues arising from Internet telephony; criminal 
exploitation of the Internet domain name system; criminal use 
of online virtual payment services; terrorist use of the 
Internet; and the spread of malicious software and 
BOT-networks.  The Chair reported on an important Council of 
 
BERLIN 00000806  006 OF 006 
 
 
Europe Cybercrime Conference and 24/7 Network workshop to be 
held 11-12 June in Strasbourg, at which the Subgroup will be 
represented. 
 
¶25. (SBU) The Transportation Security Subgroup agreed to 
complete surveys by May 31 for two projects led by the U.S. 
related to explosives detection technology research and 
development and the use of behavior observation techniques in 
the aviation environment.  Canada furthered two projects on 
security management systems and transportation security 
clearances.  Canada and Japan reviewed their joint project to 
establish best practices in auditing the security of port 
facilities.  The UK and U.S. offered suggestions on how to 
enhance the survey and end product that were approved.  The 
deadline for comments on the joint project draft survey was 
extended to May 15 and for completed surveys to July 31.  The 
chair announced that a random test of the G-8 aviation 
security point-of-contact network will be launched in the 
coming weeks. 
 
¶26. (SBU) The German chair of the Counterterrorism 
Practitioners Subgroup (CTPSG) requested an additional four 
weeks to review U.S. revisions made to a joint analytic 
assessment on terrorist safe havens, which Germany will 
recirculate to all G-8 partners for review and approval by 
the November meetings, after which it will be provided to the 
Heads of Delegation for their use within the Counterterrorism 
Action Group (CTAG).  The assessment focuses currently on the 
Pakistan/Afghanistan border areas, Yemen the southwestern 
part of the Arabian Peninsula, the Horn of Africa, and the 
Sahel and Maghreb.  The CTPSG completed its joint interim 
threat assessment that primarily focused on the threat of 
al-Qa,ida and plans to review the compilation of G-8 
partners, measures taken to counter terrorists, misuse of 
broadcasters in the next few weeks.  In addition, Germany 
made a presentation on the suitcase bombs which were found on 
German regional trains in July 2006; Italy presented on 
investigations which led to the dismantlement of a left-wing 
terrorist group; and the U.S. presented on the role and 
responsibilities of the National Counterterrorism Center. 
The U.S. announced at the Heads meeting it will host the 
third annual International G-8 Conference on Kidnappings, to 
be held in conjunction with the ad-hoc hostage negotiators 
conference being held in September.  S/CT will fund the 
conference. 
TIMKEN JR