08BERLIN558
BERLIN: INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON NUCLEAR FUEL
Wed Apr 30 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Berlin
VZCZCXRO2092
PP RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHLZ
DE RUEHRL #0558/01 1211351
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 301351Z APR 08
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 1082
INFO RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 BERLIN 000558 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PARM AORC IAEA KNPP ENRG GM
SUBJECT: BERLIN: INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON NUCLEAR FUEL 
SUPPLY - A THREE PILLAR CIRCUS 
 
SUMMARY 
------- 
¶1. (SBU) Originally intended as a venue for formally rolling 
out German Foreign Minister Steinmeier's proposal to 
establish a new IAEA-run uranium enrichment facility, the 
scaled-back "International Conference on Nuclear Fuel Supply: 
Challenges and Opportunities," hosted by Germany, the 
Netherlands, and the UK in Berlin April 17-18, was instead 
billed as a forum for consideration of "proliferation-proof" 
solutions to the demands of countries interested in 
developing small and medium scale nuclear energy programs. 
Notwithstanding the change in focus, IAEA Director General 
ElBaradei and Steinmeier both pushed the German proposal in 
their opening statements.  Apart from the Russian Fuel Bank 
proposal, however, most participants did not discuss in 
detail the various reliable accesses to nuclear fuel (RANF) 
proposals currently under consideration by IAEA members. 
 
¶2. (SBU) Both keynote speakers also injected disarmament into 
the mix with ElBaradei quoting German President Koehler as 
saying the best way to build trust is by focusing on 
disarmament, arms control, and non-proliferation.  South 
Africa's Abdul Minty subsequently raised the issue of 
"trust," referring to disarmament and to the potential 
"cartelization" of nuclear fuel services as the underlying 
motive of the RANF proposals.  Representatives of other 
potential nuclear power states picked up on this theme, 
repeating concerns about trust with regard both to nuclear 
weapons states and fuel service providers.  Panelists spoke 
on behalf of countries that rely on outside sources for 
enriched uranium, countries that produce enriched uranium for 
sale on the world market, and commercial providers of 
enriched uranium.  END SUMMARY. 
 
OPENING STATEMENTS BY STEINMEIER AND ELBARADEI 
--------------------------------------------- - 
¶3. (SBU) The conference opened with statements from German 
Federal Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and IAEA 
Director General Mohamed ElBaradei.  Both acknowledged the 
world's growing energy needs, particularly in developing 
countries, and the increasing role nuclear energy will play. 
Steinmeier focused on the need to respect the rights of 
countries to pursue the peaceful use of nuclear energy and 
emphasized the responsibility of NNWS to support 
non-proliferation.  ElBaradei made statements focusing on the 
disarmament of nuclear weapons states (NWS), singling out the 
U.S. and Russia as sending "the wrong message" to the rest of 
the world on disarmament.  ElBaradei outlined a three-stage 
vision aimed at successful nuclear fuel cooperation between 
supplier and consumer states; first, set up a system to 
assure reliable access to nuclear fuel supply, second, place 
all new enrichment and reprocessing facilities under 
multilateral control -- the core concept behind Steinmeier's 
Multilateral Enrichment Sanctuary Project (MESP) proposal --- 
and finally place ALL existing and future ENR facilities 
under multilateral control consistent with the Fissile 
Materials Cut-Off Treaty.  ElBaradei ended by emphasizing the 
importance of building "trust" between supplier and consumer 
states, which underscores his position as a mediator in the 
middle of this debate.  Both Steinmeier and ElBaradei briefly 
mentioned -- but did not stress -- that all NPT signatories 
should be held accountable for violations and failure to meet 
non-proliferation commitments. 
 
VIEWS FROM NUCLEAR POWER COUNTRIES NOT PURSUING ENRICHMENT 
--------------------------------------------- ------------- 
¶4. (SBU) Representatives from Finland, the Ukraine, and Korea 
gave presentations detailing their approaches to meeting 
their respective nuclear fuel demands.  Mr. Jae Min Ahn, 
Manager of the Korea Hydro Nuclear Corporation, said the ROK 
generates 35.5 percent of its electricity from nuclear power 
and yet is 100 percent dependent on foreign nuclear fuel 
supply.  He said the ROK approaches its fuel supply needs 
with a focus on stable security, long-term fuel contracts, 
advanced procurement, overseas investment, and 
diversification -- an approach that has yielded successful 
results.  This approach was echoed by representatives from 
the Ukraine and Finland, who voiced similar satisfaction that 
the nuclear fuel market has successfully satisfied their 
needs. 
 
THE NUCLEAR FUEL SUPPLY MARKET IS IN GOOD SHAPE 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
¶5. (SBU) Robert Vance, Energy Analyst with Canada's Nuclear 
Energy Agency, gave testimony pertaining to the healthy state 
of the nuclear fuel supply market and its excellent future 
prospects.  Vance stated uranium is very plentiful and that 
current rates of consumption would yield a 100-year supply 
(potentially thousands with next-generation reactors). 
 
 
BERLIN 00000558  002 OF 004 
 
 
SOUTH AFRICA: RESUMPTION OF FUEL PROCESSING 
------------------------------------------- 
¶6. (SBU) Ambassador Abdul Minty, South African MFA Deputy 
Director General for Nonproliferation made strong statements 
advocating the unobstructed right for countries to pursue 
nuclear energy and access to advanced nuclear fuel 
technologies.  Minty specifically took exception to the 
technology-restrictive pre-conditions weaved into earlier 
nuclear fuel assurance proposals stating "Any proposal must 
protect a state's right for all aspects of peaceful nuclear 
power."  Minty cited the last Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) 
Summit in Cuba and said NAM nations agreed to ensure the 
sovereignty/management of their own resources and agreed 
there should be no restrictions on processing rights. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Minty stated there is a "lack of trust" among the 
NAM that supplier states would not hold nuclear fuel as 
collateral to impose political agendas on consumer states. 
This is the overwhelming factor in South Africa's 
reservations about nuclear fuel assurance proposals. 
Specifically, Minty stated it is not enough to have fuel 
assurances and he "doubts" the ability of the IAEA, as a 
proposed central authority in nuclear fuel distribution, to 
withstand political pressure in its decision making. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Minty announced South Africa is significantly 
increasing its investment in nuclear energy and is seeking 
reprocessing and enrichment capabilities.  His stated reasons 
were an effort to become nuclear fuel independent citing 
concerns about the possibility of a future nuclear fuel 
supply cartel.  Minty added, in the future South Africa will 
restrict uranium exports in order to maintain a strategic 
fuel supply. 
 
NEW PLAYERS PLANNING NUCLEAR POWER PROGRAMS 
------------------------------------------- 
¶9. (SBU) Egypt and Turkey gave presentations highlighting 
their plans for nuclear power programs.  In addition, 
Albania, Morocco, and Indonesia made brief comments 
announcing their intentions to start nuclear power programs 
as well.  Mr. Aly Serry, Head of the Department for 
Disarmament Affairs - Egypt, said Egypt's nuclear power 
program is progressing in compliance with the IAEA and Egypt 
is carefully reviewing the various fuel assurances proposals. 
 Serry remarked the proposals are all very supplier-centric 
and he views these proposals as a way for NWS to regulate 
NNWS.  Serry added he has a serious problem with NPT article 
IV in connection with the proposals and interprets article IV 
as giving states access to all peaceful nuclear technology - 
something he feels is being restricted in the proposals. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Mr. Ali Tanrikut, the Vice President of the Turkish 
Atomic Energy Commission, said Turkey is pursuing a 
public-private-partnership (PPP) in its nuclear power 
program.  Tanrikut added, under PPP Turkey will encourage the 
private sector to pursue nuclear fuel fabrication in Turkey 
with an aim to decrease dependence on foreign fuel. 
 
PURSUING ENRICHMENT FOR A SMALL MARKET: DOES NOT MAKE SENSE 
--------------------------------------------- -------------- 
¶11. (SBU) Several representatives from nuclear fuel producers 
remarked that it does not make economic sense for states to 
pursue fuel enrichment unless it is on a very large scale. 
Mr. Alexey Lebedev, the Deputy Director General, Tenex - 
Russia, spoke at length about the Russian International 
Uranium Enrichment Center (IUEC) in Angarsk as a nuclear fuel 
services option so that developing countries do not have to 
embark on "very expensive" enrichment programs.  Lebedev 
stated, "We would like to advise against countries developing 
fuel processing - it is simply not economically viable."  Mr. 
Mikkola of Finland echoed this statement and said, "It is not 
economical to create nuclear fuel supplies for small markets." 
 
THE ANGARSK OPTION 
------------------ 
¶12. (U) Lebedev summarized the basic principles of IUEC as an 
IAEA safeguarded, commercially operated uranium enrichment 
service where member states are guaranteed access to Enriched 
Uranium Product (EUP) based on existing market orientated 
principles.  Lebedev described IUEC through three stages of 
evolvement; Stage I) (current stage) establishment of the 
initial share distribution of the chartered IUEC capital, 
presently 90% Tenex (Russian state owned) and 10% Kazatomprom 
(Kazakhstan), Stage II) reorganization of the Russian nuclear 
industry, and State III) inclusion of new member states 
joining the IUEC. 
 
¶13. (U) In transition to Stage II, the IUEC will create a 
nuclear materials fuel bank adhering to a draft agreement 
between the IAEA and the Russian Federation and consisting of 
 
BERLIN 00000558  003 OF 004 
 
 
120 metric ton of low-enriched uranium (LUE) to assure 
supply, delivery price, safety, physical protection and 
liability of EUP to any member state of the IAEA.  This fuel 
bank is intended to protect IAEA member states from EUP 
supply disruptions unrelated to technical or commercial 
considerations.  Stage III will begin with the pending 
membership of Armenia in the IUEC (after the exchange of 
notes).  After the membership with Armenia is finalized, the 
IUEC shares breakdown will be 51% Tenex and 10% Kazatomprom, 
10% Armenia, and 29% remaining for future IUEC member states. 
 
 
¶14. (SBU) COMMENT:  Lebedev's presentation on the Russian 
IUEC program generated a significant amount of interest from 
conference participants, particularly Canada, Great Britain, 
Brazil, Jordan, and Egypt.  IUEC is not just simply a 
proposal but a real program with a fair amount of momentum. 
This is more likely the result of countries' interest in 
short term access to nuclear fuel, rather than an indication 
of widespread support for the various multilateral fuel cycle 
initiatives.  END COMMENT. 
 
JAPANESE PROPOSAL: FOCUS ON FRONT END NFC ACTIVITIES 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
¶15. (U) Ms Tomiko ICHIKAWA, of the Japanese MFA Energy 
Division, provided a briefing outlining the Japanese IAEA 
Standby Arrangements Systems (SAS) for Nuclear Fuel Supply 
proposal.  Billed as a compatible and complementary proposal 
to the existing RANF proposals, the goal of SAS is to enhance 
transparency nd predictability of the NFC front-end market. 
Te SAS proposal framework identifies the IAEA as a entral 
information repository of IAEA member stats NFC activities: 
uranium supply, storage, convesion, enrichment, and fuel 
fabrication.  Under SS, IAEA member states would notify the 
IAEA by priodically registering their current uranium oresupply, reserve supply, conversion, enrichment, and fuel 
fabrication activities and this information would be made 
available to all IAEA members. 
 
THOUGHTS ON SHARING NUCLEAR FUEL PROCESSING TECHNOLOGY 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
¶16. (SBU) Mr. Lebedev indicated that Russia is not opposed to 
sharing (some) enrichment technology and cited Kazakhstan as 
an example where technology sharing is taking place.  Lebedev 
emphasized a "black box" approach to this technology sharing 
and stated no classified information would be shared even 
under IUEC.  Mr. Arthur de Montalembert, the Vice President 
for International Affairs and Marketing, Areva - France, 
voiced strong opposition to sharing enrichment technology 
citing nuclear enrichment as a clear dual use technology. 
 
BRAZIL: A FUTURE FUEL PROVIDER - NO CONFLICT GOOD VS EVIL 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
¶17. (SBU) Ambassador Antonio Guerreiro, the Brazilian 
permanent representative at the IAEA, made statements about 
how Brazil has become "energy self sufficient" despite being 
cut off by the U.S. in the 1970's and voiced Brazil's role as 
a future nuclear fuel provider.  Guerreiro specifically 
mentioned the agreement met last February between Brazil and 
Argentina to create a bilateral enterprise for nuclear fuel 
enrichment as an "important initiative."  Guerreiro 
emphasized Brazil's neutrality on the nuclear fuel supply 
debate between supplier verses consumer states stating 
"Brazil has no conflict between what is good and what is 
evil; we only see two legitimate points of view."  Guerreiro 
stressed countries seeking nuclear energy should be dissuaded 
from enrichment activities for economic reasons and that 
nuclear fuel assurances should not request the transfer of 
sensitive nuclear technology. 
 
A REMINDER - THIS IS ABOUT AVOIDING "FUTURE IRANS" 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
¶18. (SBU) During a panel presentation on political aspects of 
the fuel cycle, David Noble, UNVIE Nuclear Counselor, made a 
strong opening statement, "If not for the particular case of 
Iran, it is likely we would not be having a conference like 
this."  Up to this point in the conference, Iran had hardly 
been mentioned.  Ambassador Guerreiro of Brazil commented 
previously "regardless if Iran's nuclear ambitions are 
legitimately peaceful or not, these ambitions are making 
Iran's neighbors very nervous."  Noble emphasized the 
suspicious nature of Iran's "peaceful" nuclear power program 
and Iran's failure to meet its obligations to the 
international community as spelled out in three UNSCRs.  He 
said it is U.S. policy to encourage countries to consider 
Nuclear Power, but to discourage the spread of sensitive 
technologies.  Noble described practical efforts to pursue 
this path through RANF, GNEP and the U.S./Russia initiative. 
After Noble's presentation, both Minty and Serry questioned 
the U.S. commitment to meet its NPT disarmament obligations 
 
BERLIN 00000558  004 OF 004 
 
 
and accused the U.S. of continuing development of nuclear 
weapons.  Noble emphasized the fact that the U.S. has made 
considerable progress reducing nuclear weapon stockpiles and 
pointed out that ElBaradeis' assertion that all NWS are 
&extending and modernizing8 their arsenals is wrong. 
 
CONFERENCE CLOSING REMARKS 
-------------------------- 
¶19. (SBU) Even though Germany's RANF proposal to establish an 
IAEA-run enrichment facility was hardly discussed beyond 
ElBaradei and Steinmeier's keynote addresses, German MFA 
Deputy Commissioner for Arms Control and Disarmament Ruediger 
Luedeking reinforced the proposal in his conference summary 
by saying the future of fuel services runs through the IAEA. 
He also highlighted the recurring theme emphasizing the need 
to build mutual trust between NWS and NNWS.  Political 
considerations remain the only concern for future disruption 
of nuclear fuel supplies.  Luedeking summarized the 
conference offering eight points of consideration; 1) We 
should consider nuclear supply arrangements not in isolation, 
but within the strict guidelines of the NPT with a joint 
vision of creating a world free of nuclear weapons, 2) we 
should avoid created dividing lines created amongst NPT 
members and refrain from discriminatory tactics, 3) we should 
not amend or re-interpret NPT article 4, 4) there is 
recognition of the dual-use aspects of civilian nuclear 
technology, 5) the worldwide nuclear industry expansion is 
happening, 6) any nuclear supply initiative must be 
economically viable and attractive to states, 7) The IAEA is 
the right place to work out solutions, and 8) the path 
forward is dependent on future understanding and overcoming 
psychological barriers. 
 
COMMENTS 
-------- 
¶20. (SBU) Although there was little discussion of the various 
RANF proposals, the conference was extremely useful in 
bringing representatives of potential nuclear power states 
together with industry representatives.  Most of the 
developing country representatives were from technical 
agencies.  For instance, Malaysia,s delegation included the 
Deputy Director General of the Technical Services Program of 
the Malaysian Institute for Nuclear Technology, the Principal 
Assistant Director of the Malaysian Nuclear Agency, and the 
Director of the Energy Section of the Prime Minister,s 
Economic Planning Unit.  The technical details and practical 
aspects of the presentations and subsequent discussion were 
in stark contrast to the theoretical/legal points of 
ElBaradei.  Russia,s presentation by Lebedev was 
particularly useful, as were presentations by Finland, 
Ukraine and Korea, who all argued that it possible to develop 
a nuclear power program without developing indigenous fuel 
services. 
TIMKEN JR