09BERLIN1337
GERMANY'S COALITION AGREEMENT STRESSES PRIORITY OF
Mon Oct 26 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
VZCZCXRO0171
PP RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHLZ
DE RUEHRL #1337/01 2991513
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 261513Z OCT 09
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5571
INFO RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVE PRIORITY
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHINGTON DC PRIORITYUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BERLIN 001337 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL MNUC PHUM GM
SUBJECT: GERMANY'S COALITION AGREEMENT STRESSES PRIORITY OF 
TRANSATLANTIC RELATIONS 
 
¶1.  (U) Summary: The Christian Democratic Union (CDU), 
Christian Social Union (CSU) and the Free Democratic Party 
(FDP) signed a coalition agreement in the early morning of 
October 24, laying the groundwork for their next four years 
of cooperation as the country's governing coalition.  The 
agreement stresses the primacy of a unified Europe and a 
strong transatlantic relationship and indicates foreign 
policy continuity in many areas.  Highlights include: 
 
--Afghanistan conference to develop a new strategy; 
--removal of nuclear weapons from Germany via NATO; 
--increasing economic ties with Russia; 
--Turkish EU accession is an open ended process; 
--NATO can take in new members, but no mention of whom; 
--reduction of German UNIFIL role; and 
--an international conference on Middle East peace. 
 
Along with the coalition agreement, decisions on ministerial 
portfolios were also taken, with FDP leader Guido 
Westerwelle, as expected, named as Foreign Minister-designate 
(see septel on the new cabinet).  (Note: The new cabinet is 
scheduled to be sworn in on October 28 at approximately 1600 
local time.  End note.)  The agreement is comprehensive and 
includes sections on international economics and finance, the 
environment and climate change, counter-terrorism and 
domestic security, and foreign policy.  Highlights of the 
latter will be covered in this cable, with the other issues 
reported septel.  End Summary. 
 
TRANSATLANTIC RELATIONS 
----------------------- 
 
¶2. (U) The coalition agreement stresses the need for strong 
partnerships and effective multilateral structures.  It 
identifies transatlantic cooperation and the European Union 
as central to this policy.  The agreement states that the 
parties are determined to use the opportunities presented by 
the transatlantic relationship and will thereby 
systematically strengthen the German-American "relationship 
of trust."  The agreement also states that close coordination 
with the United States will strengthen German interests, 
thereby increasing Germany's weight within Europe and the 
world. 
 
AFGHANISTAN 
----------- 
 
¶3. (U) The coalition agreement reaffirms Afghanistan's 
importance as a security policy priority, noting that it 
makes Germany safer; this policy also serves as an important 
symbol that Germany is an active member of the transatlantic 
alliance.  The agreement emphasizes the importance of the 
upcoming Afghanistan conference, which Chancellor Merkel, 
President Sarkozy and Prime Minister Brown proposed earlier 
this year.  Stressing that the comprehensive approach remains 
valid, the coalition agreement expresses the expectation that 
a new Afghanistan strategy -- which is to focus on 
transferring authority to capable Afghan National security 
forces -- should be developed at that conference.  The 
agreement calls for the appointment of a special envoy on 
Afghanistan.  It also calls for a strengthening of Germany's 
contributions to international civilian police training 
efforts, particularly in Afghanistan.  Improvements in the 
staffing of Germany's international police training missions 
are to be achieved by establishing corresponding units within 
the Federal police and creating pools of available 
state-level officers.  The agreement emphasizes the need to 
help the Afghan government in developing the capacity to 
provide for its own security and indicates that Germany will 
increase its contributions to the EUPOL police training 
mission. 
 
 
IRAN 
---- 
 
¶4. (U) The agreement stresses the coalition's commitment to a 
diplomatic approach towards Iran and, together with the E3 3 
(P5 1), calls for working to prevent Iran from possessing 
nuclear weapons.  If necessary, it supports tougher sanctions 
against Iran.  The agreement calls for full transparency of 
Iran's nuclear program.  It calls for assurances that Iran's 
civil use of nuclear energy is carried out in such a way that 
security threats do not arise for other countries. 
 
DISARMAMENT 
----------- 
 
¶5. (U) The parties agreed to "stand up for" a recall of 
nuclear weapons that remain in Germany and to discuss this 
matter both inside the alliance and with the United States. 
 
BERLIN 00001337  002 OF 003 
 
 
More broadly, the agreement welcomes President Obama's 
initiatives on disarmament, including the aim toward a 
nuclear-weapons-free world.  It calls for seizing the 
opportunity to turn around the "global trend of new arms 
races" and making progress on disarmament and arms control. 
Only indirectly mentioning nonproliferation, the parties 
express concern about the "erosion" of the international 
treaty based on disarmament and an arms control framework. 
 
RUSSIA 
------ 
 
¶6. (U) The agreement recognizes Russia as an important 
partner in dealing with regional and global challenges such 
as Afghanistan, the Middle East, Iran, terrorism and climate 
protection.  It calls for supporting Russia in its continuing 
drive for modernization and in reducing its deficiencies in 
human rights, the rule-of-law, and democracy.  It calls for 
promoting dialogue within civil society.  The agreement calls 
for increasing economic ties with Russia and creating 
long-term, reliable energy partnerships without unilateral 
dependencies.  The agreement also calls for considering the 
legitimate concerns of neighboring states in shaping 
bilateral relations. 
 
 
EU ENLARGEMENT AND TURKEY 
------------------------- 
 
¶7. (U) The agreement calls for pursuing further EU 
enlargement with "a sense of proportion."  It underscores 
that the EU's ability to admit new members is of equal 
importance to the candidate's ability to meet accession 
criteria.  It characterizes EU accession negotiations with 
Turkey as "an open-ended process" which is not automatic and 
"the outcome of which cannot be guaranteed at the outset." 
It also states that if either the EU or Turkey are unable to 
fulfill membership obligations, the EU should continue to 
develop a privileged relationship with Turkey. 
 
MIDDLE EAST 
----------- 
 
¶8. (U) In addressing the Middle East, the agreement first 
recognizes Germany's "special responsibility toward Israel as 
a Jewish State."  It calls for a two-state solution for 
Israel and the Palestinians.  The agreement also calls for a 
"conference approach" in the Middle East on the basis of the 
roadmap and the Annapolis process which should include, aside 
from the parties to the conflict, the U.S., the EU, Russia, 
and the UN.  The agreement also calls for the strengthening 
of stability and sovereignty of Lebanon, the continued 
development of democracy in Iraq and its reconstruction. 
 
NATO 
---- 
 
¶9.  (U) The parties agreed that NATO remains the "strongest 
anchor" of their common security, as it binds Europe and 
America together.  In general terms, the parties call for the 
"blockades between the EU and NATO" to be overcome.  The 
coalition agreement also calls for intensifying dialogue with 
Russia through the NATO-Russia Council and to build a close 
partnership with Moscow, based on proven institutions, 
including the OSCE and Council of Europe."  "In principle" 
the German government is open to new members in the Alliance 
-- without having named any candidates.  Ukraine and Georgia 
are not mentioned in this context. 
 
DEPLOYMENTS 
----------- 
 
¶10.  (U) The agreement calls for "working at the UN" to 
gradually reduce Germany's contributions to UNIFIL's maritime 
component with the long-term aim to end participation. 
Germany currently leads UNIFIL.  The agreement also calls for 
  a "critical review" of the mandates related to piracy and 
counterterrorism off the Horn of Africa, with the end result 
perhaps being a single mandate for all German missions there. 
 
 
UN REFORM AND PERMANENT SEAT 
---------------------------- 
 
¶11. (U) The agreement expresses the parties' commitment to 
strengthening the United Nations (UN) and toward 
comprehensive reform of the UN, aiming at a better reflection 
of today's realities.  Within the context of broad reform, 
the new coalition calls for a permanent EU seat in the UNSC. 
It goes on to state that, "On the way (to the EU securing a 
seat), Germany is ready to assume greater international 
 
BERLIN 00001337  003 OF 003 
 
 
responsibility by taking a permanent seat...."  For the 
period 2011/2012 Germany will seek a non-permanent seat in 
the UNSC. 
 
 
GERMAN-FRANCO; GERMAN-POLISH RELATIONS 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶12. (U) The new government continues Germany's special 
relationship with France and plans to increase cooperation in 
the areas of education, climate protection, space as well as 
security and defense.  The coalition agreement also calls for 
deepening of "the close friendship and cooperation" with 
Poland and to better utilize the possibilities of the Weimar 
Triangle.  German-Polish cooperation should also send a new 
impetus for European unification. 
 
 
HUMAN RIGHTS 
------------ 
 
¶13. (U) The agreement calls for engaging for worldwide 
freedom of religion, with special attention paid to the 
situation of Christian minorities.  It advocates for the 
worldwide abolishment of the death penalty, torture and 
inhumane treatment.  It calls for the international 
prohibition of human trafficking, child labor, infant 
soldiers, forced prostitution, forced marriage and genital 
mutilation.  The coalition advocates an evaluation of the 
Rome statute to the International Criminal Court and a better 
enforcement of the international criminal code.  It warns 
against using the UN Human Rights Council as a playground for 
national power interests and wants its establishment as an 
international organ against human rights violations. 
 
Delawie