09BERLIN1587
MEDIA REACTION: COP15, IRAN, ITALY, GERMANY-AFGHANISTAN,
Tue Dec 15 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
VZCZCXRO6515
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHLZ
DE RUEHRL #1587/01 3491256
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 151256Z DEC 09
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6062
INFO RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVE
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 1827
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0547
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 1065
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 2570
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 1592
RUEHVEN/USMISSION USOSCE 0755
RHMFIUU/HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
RHMFISS/HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
RHMFISS/CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
RUKAAKC/UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 BERLIN 001587 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/CE, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO KGHG IR IT GM GR
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: COP15, IRAN, ITALY, GERMANY-AFGHANISTAN, 
GREECE;BERLIN 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
¶2.   (Environment)   Copenhagen Climate Summit 
¶3.   (Iran)   Nuclear Conflict 
¶4.   (Italy)   Aftermath of Attack on Berlusconi 
¶5.   (Germany-Afghanistan)   Afghanistan/ zu Guttenberg 
¶6.   (Greece)   Financial Crisis 
 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
 
ZDF-TV's and ARD-TV's primetime newscasts opened with stories on 
Defense Minister zu Guttenberg's rejection of allegations that he 
lied 
about the September 4 airstrikes.  Most newspapers led with stories 
on 
the financial debacle of Bavaria's state bank, BayernLB. 
Frankfurter 
Rundschau led with a story on the COP15.  Editorials focused on the 
 
debate about the September 4 airstrikes in Afghanistan and the 
BayernLB. 
 
¶2.   (Environment)   Copenhagen Climate Summit 
 
Sddeutsche (12/15) carried a brief front-page story under the 
headline "Poor and rich countries argue at the climate summit," 
noting 
that "the dispute between the poor and rich countries over sharing 
the 
burden of climate protection is growing more acute.  African 
countries 
temporarily called off negotiations with industrialized countries." 
 
 
ZDF-TV's Heute correspondent Volker Angres said in Copenhagen 
(12/15): 
"Ban Ki Moon will come and exert pressure at this UN conference. 
Let's hope that the state leaders will give a new impetus to the 
negotiations.  However, the presence of 190 state leaders can be 
obstructive because everybody wants to look good and nobody wants to 
 
lose face.   This means that things will be brought down to the 
smallest common denominator.  I'm not expecting a powerful 
conclusion." 
 
Regional Rhein Neckar Zeitung (12/15) editorialized: "The supposedly 
 
weak countries impressively demonstrate their numerical superiority. 
 
They are backed up by China, which likes to see itself as an 
advocate 
of the poor because it could avoid reduction goals under Kyoto. 
However, everything that carries the old label has not a chance in 
the 
Untied States....  It is now Connie Hedegaard's turn.  The head of 
the 
negotiations must find a way out of the seemingly helpless 
situation. 
A compromise might be possible because the threatened islands states 
 
must prefer a new treaty to no treaty at all.  It should also be in 
 
their interest to include China.  However, to reach that the 
industrialized countries must put more money on the table." 
 
Regional Mannheimer Morgen (12/15) opined: "Nothing is too late yet, 
 
the decisive phase of the summit is only starting now.  A success 
 
BERLIN 00001587  002 OF 006 
 
 
will 
depend on how much responsibility the U.S. and China are willing to 
 
bear.  The conference is historical in any case:  for the first time 
 
in history, developing countries did not just play the role of 
onlookers during international negotiations.  This is the only 
positive effect of climate change." 
 
Spiegel Online (12/15) led with a story saying "serious protests 
have 
shaken Copenhagen in the night to Tuesday.  At the margin of the UN 
 
climate summit, the Danish police took action with tear gas and 
water 
cannons against protesters.  The police arrested 200 people." 
 
¶3.   (Iran)   Nuclear Conflict 
 
Tagesspiegel (12/15) headlined: "Tougher Stance in Iran," and 
reported: "The dispute between the government and the opposition 
could 
soon escalate again in Iran.  Authorities announced the arrest of 
several dissidents who are accused of having destroyed photos of the 
 
revolutionary leader Khomeini....  Secretary Clinton described the 
U.S. 
policy of an extended hand as a failure so far.   As a result, she 
demanded further international pressure in the nuclear dispute with 
 
Tehran....  Meanwhile, three U.S. backpackers will be charged in 
Iran 
for illegally crossing the border."   Frankfurter Allgemeine (12/15) 
 
headlined: "Arrests in Tehran," and wrote in its intro: "The clashes 
 
between the government and the opposition seem to be escalating in 
Iran."  The paper also mentions the case of the three U.S. tourists, 
 
noting: "If found guilty they could face a death sentence.... 
Ahmadinejad recently suggested that Iran could exchange the three 
Americans against several Iranian diplomats arrested in Iraq."  FT 
Deutschland (12/15) headlined: "Tehran's regime steps up repression 
- 
opposition remains active despite powerful measures against them." 
In 
a separate splash, the paper noted: "China holds its hand over 
Iran." 
 
¶4.   (Italy)   Aftermath of Attack on Berlusconi 
 
All papers (12/15) carried reports and some editorials on the bloody 
 
attack on Italy's Prime Minister Berlusconi.  They also refer to 
conservative Italian politicians who are talking about "a climate of 
 
hatred" that has developed under Berlusconi.  Sueddeutsche Zeitung 
(12/15) opined under the headline: "Italy, Extremely Heated," and 
judged: "The crime has again set in motion the discussion over the 
state of the political debate in Italy.  The climate has heated up 
and 
the main reason is Berlusconi himself, not only because he is very 
polarizing but it is also inappropriate, because the right-wing 
press 
is now considering the party leader of the L'Italia dei Valori, 
Antonio di Pietro, as being the instigator of the crime.  For 
months, 
Italy's president has called for a more respectful discourse.  If 
 
BERLIN 00001587  003 OF 006 
 
 
this 
crime [against Berlusconi] now contributes to a moderation in tone, 
 
then this would be totally appropriate." 
 
Frankfurter Rundschau and Leipziger Volkszeitung (12/15) had this to 
 
say: "In any other country, the attack of a mentally handicapped man 
 
on the leader of the government would soon be forgotten, but in 
Italy 
it is impossible to return to everyday business.  Berlusconi's face 
 
partly covered with blood is the symbol of a country in which the 
political discussion changed to hostility and hatred a long time 
ago. 
An incident like the one from Sunday was imminent and the one who 
was 
the least surprised at the attack was Berlusconi himself.  Since 
entering Italy's politics 15 years, ago, he has considerably 
poisoned 
the political climate in the country.  Berlusconi but also the 
political hardliners in the opposing camp, such as Antonio di 
Pietro, 
have turned Italy into a country in which the trenches seem to be 
unbridgeable and the camps are no longer able to talk to each 
other." 
 
Regional daily WestfQlischer Anzeiger of Hamm (12/15) judged: "Many 
 
critics of Italy's government leader consider the attack a 
consequence 
of the totally poisoned political climate in Italy.  And quite a few 
 
people agree that Berluscone contributed considerably to this 
development.  We must assume that he will now take advantage of the 
 
attack on him.  That is why the attacker also did a great disservice 
 
to those who politically opposed Berlusconi in the past." 
 
Braunschweiger Zeitung (12/15) editorialized: "It is certainly true 
 
that Berlusconi himself has considerably contributed to inflicting 
serious damage on Italy's political culture.  He has blurred the 
limits between political and economic power.  Nevertheless, the 
secret 
delight at the attack should not be allowed.  It is appropriate to 
show sympathy.  Politicians need contact with the people--they must 
 
have a chance to shake hands and public appearances are 
indispensable 
and must remain possible." 
 
¶5.   (Germany-Afghanistan)   Afghanistan/ zu Guttenberg 
 
ARD-TV's Tagesthemen (12/14) opined: "The smart political star has 
made a mistake, which he has already admitted.  I've never heard 
something like this before from a minister.  However, he cannot 
afford 
to make another mistake....  Germany must urgently get to terms with 
a 
grand illusion: the German army is not a friendly and restrained 
army 
in Afghanistan.  It is an army that has been in a war-like situation 
 
for some time.  It fights and is also allowed to kill.  All German 
governments in recent years did not want to express this truth. 
 
BERLIN 00001587  004 OF 006 
 
 
This 
country needs an open discussion about the shortcomings, the extent 
 
and the duration of the Bundeswehr mission.  The chancellor should 
take the lead.  It's now her turn - staying quiet would be wrong." 
 
N-TV (12/14) commented: "Since August it is clear that fleeing 
Taliban 
can be hunted down and that weapons may be used.  Anyway, it is a 
very 
artificial distinction whether one attacks fuel tankers or those who 
 
kidnapped them, meaning enemy combatants....  It is high time that 
the 
lies in this whole debate are stopped.  At least since a year and a 
 
half, German troops in Kunduz are at war.  It has turned into a new 
 
Taliban stronghold.  At war there is the right to eliminate 
enemies." 
 
According to Berliner Morgenpost (12/15), "people can see in Berlin 
 
these days how difficult it is to bid farewell to wishful thinking, 
 
i.e. that Germany should serve the international community only as a 
 
peace angel, at best as a pacifist force.  A Bundestag fact-finding 
 
committee will now investigate the bomb attack near Kunduz.  We hope 
 
that all parliamentarians in the committee will ignore the usual 
partisan superficial views and instead make a contribution to 
reality 
and truth for this country."  Der Tagesspiegel (12/15) 
editorialized: 
"Is this a war or not?  Is the Bundeswehr mandate correct?  Do we 
want 
this mission?  These are questions which are being directed to the 
politicians responsible: to the chancellor, to the 'supreme 
commander.'  She must explain her position.  Now!  The Kunduz 
incident 
is threatening to become a national affair and a disaster at the 
international level." 
 
Handelsblatt (12/15) opined: "The fact that the government is trying 
 
to use all tricks to dodge its responsibility is a brazen piece of 
contempt of democracy.  It is an unmistakable sign that it has 
something to hide."   Regional daily Westdeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung 
 
of Essen (12/15) notes that "three months after the militarily 
successful but horribly misguided air strike near Kunduz, the 
illusion 
that 'we-defend-Afghanistan-and our-freedom' is collapsing.  It was 
 
built right from the start on lies and half truths."  In the view of 
 
Hannoversche Allgemeine Zeitung (12/15), "no one in Berlin wanted to 
 
realize that the fight against the Taliban is now under full swing. 
 
But if the Bundestag votes on a military mission, it must know what 
 
this operation looks like.  Now a new start in Germany's Afghanistan 
 
policy is necessary.  It is true that Angela Merkel inherited this 
mission from her predecessor, but she must now make sense of the 
 
BERLIN 00001587  005 OF 006 
 
 
mission or bring it to an end." 
 
Regional daily Nordsee-Zeitung of Oldenburg (12/15) observed: "Much 
 
more is at stake than a defense minister who has difficulty 
defending 
his position.  At issue is how little humanitarian this 
international 
[Bundeswehr] mission is and how little it is oriented to security 
efforts.  At issue is that the claim of sending responsible citizens 
 
in uniform has been forgotten.  The events surrounding the bomb 
attack 
near Kunduz suggest that the tough professionals of the KSK Special 
 
Forces are setting the tone.  But when they do what they were 
trained 
for, there will again be a great outrage.  And this is a serious 
German perception disorder." 
 
¶6.   (Greece)   Financial Crisis 
 
Several papers (12/15) reported of the Greece's financial problems. 
 
Sueddeutsche headlined: "Athens's Excesses," and sub-tiled: "Greece 
is 
Shocked at its Financial Misery."  The paper reported: "Greece is 
fighting for its credibility.  Prime Minister Papandreou planned to 
 
present a paper on the restructuring of the country's shattered 
finances, while Finance Minister Papakonstantinou is trying to take 
 
fears from the Europeans that the Greek fianc system could 
collapse.... 
One of the greatest problems of the country is the inflated state 
bureaucracy which has served all previous governments to find jobs 
for 
relatives and acquaintances." 
 
Die Welt (12/15) headlined: "IWF head Snower Warns Against Greece's 
 
Collapse," and reported: "The Kiel-based Institute for the Global 
Economy (IWF) warned against an escalation of the situation in 
highly 
indebted Greece.  Snower said: 'The situation in Greece is really 
serious, and the danger of a state bankruptcy is real.'  At the same 
 
time, the economists opposed any financial EU assistance. He said: 
'Greece must help itself. It would be wrong if Brussels came to the 
 
rescue with financial assistance.'" 
 
In a report under the headline: "Papandreou Announced 'Radical 
Reforms,'" Handelsblatt (12/15) wrote: "With a tough speech, 
Greece's 
socialist Prime Minister Papandreou prepared his compatriots for 
'radical reforms' and 'painful cuts' to come to terms with the 
current 
financial crisis and to avoid the danger of a state bankruptcy.  He 
 
said that the sovereignty of the country would be in danger and 
added: 
'Either we change of we will go down' and appealed to all Greeks to 
 
join forces to master the crisis." 
 
Under the headline: "The Greek Patient," Frankfurter Allgemeine 
(12/15) editorialized: "It is a truism but Greece should never have 
 
BERLIN 00001587  006 OF 006 
 
 
 
been accepted in the euro zone in 2001.  The collective 
irresponsibility of Greek governments is clearly older then the 
European Monetary Union.  But at the latest since the rating of the 
 
country fell below the A level, the trust bonus is over.  And the 
longer [experts] discuss whether a supranational creditor should 
help 
out - i.e. other EU member states - the more often we will hear an 
alternative demand:  the country that has never acquired the 
maturity 
to become a member of the euro zone, and must leave the monetary 
union.  However, the EU officials hope that the Greeks will manage a 
 
turnaround. But because of the tense domestic situation this is a 
risky calculation.  It is more likely that the biggest [EU members] 
 
will help out instead of Greece being excluded [from the Monetary 
Union].  This little- reassuring perspective at least allows one 
conclusion from the Greek dilemma: The acceptance of new candidates 
to 
the euro zone will require greater strictness and care." 
 
MURPHY