10BERLIN145
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-BUDGET, U.S.-NASA, U.S.-CHINA, MIDDLE
Tue Feb 02 00:00:00 +0100 2010
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Berlin
VZCZCXRO4122
RR RUEHAG RUEHDF RUEHLZ
DE RUEHRL #0145/01 0331306
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 021306Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY BERLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 6451
INFO RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHINGTON DC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEATRS/DEPT OF TREASURY WASHINGTON DC
RUCNFRG/FRG COLLECTIVE
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 1981
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0706
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 1223
RUEHRO/AMEMBASSY ROME 2724
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 1744
RUEHVEN/USMISSION USOSCE 0905
RHMFIUU/HQ USAFE RAMSTEIN AB GE
RHMFISS/HQ USEUCOM VAIHINGEN GE//J5 DIRECTORATE (MC)//
RHMFISS/CDRUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GE
RUZEADH/UDITDUSAREUR HEIDELBERG GEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 BERLIN 000145 
 
STATE FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/PAPD, EUR/PPA, EUR/CE, INR/EUC, INR/P, 
SECDEF FOR USDP/ISA/DSAA, DIA FOR DC-4A 
 
VIENNA FOR CSBM, CSCE, PAA 
 
"PERISHABLE INFORMATION -- DO NOT SERVICE" 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.0. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR US TSPA ETRD XF YM RS
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-BUDGET, U.S.-NASA, U.S.-CHINA, MIDDLE 
EAST, YEMEN, RUSSIA;BERLIN 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
¶2.   (U.S.)   Draft Budget 
¶3.   (U.S.)   Reaction to Plans to Stop Moon Mission 
¶4.   (U.S.-China)   Arms Shipment to Taiwan 
¶5.   (Middle East)   Goldstone Report 
¶6.   (Yemen)   Anti-Terror Measures 
¶7.   (Russia)   Demonstrations in Kaliningrad, Moscow 
 
 
¶1.   Lead Stories Summary 
 
Primetime TV newscasts and almost all major papers led with stories 
on Chancellor Merkel's statement that she is in favor of buying data 
on tax dodgers even though it was obtained illegally.  Headlines 
included: "Merkel: we want the data" (Frankfurter Allgemeine), 
"Merkel in favor of buying the database on tax sinners" 
(Sddeutsche), "Merkel is hunting tax evaders" (Bild).  Frankfurter 
Rundschau led with the beginning of token strikes in public 
services.  Editorials focused on the problem of tax evasion in 
Germany and the U.S. budget proposal. 
 
¶2.   (U.S.)   Draft Budget 
 
All papers (2/2) carried extensive reports on the President Obama's 
budget, noting that the budget deficit will be the highest in the 
U.S. since WW II.  Sueddeutsche Zeitung carried a front-page report 
under the headline: "1.560 Billion Dollar Deficit in the U.S. 
Budget" and wrote in a separate report on its economic pages under 
the headline: "America Running up Debts As Never Before" that the 
deficit in the budget for FY 2010 will even exceed the record 
deficit for the 2009 crisis year by 150 billion dollar.  But, at the 
same time, President Obama announced the first plans for a 
consolidation of the budget.  President Obama said: 'We will save as 
much as we can, spend as much as we must, and live according to our 
means.'  As a first step to get indebtedness under control, Obama 
said that he would freeze all available expenditure for three years 
with the exception of the defense and social security budgets." 
 
"Obama Plans 3.800 Billion Dollar Budget," headlined Die Welt (2/2) 
and reported: "that debts are reaching record levels and that 
President Obama announced a tough austerity course."  Tagesspiegel 
(2/2) headlined: "One Third Is Debt," and reported that "the 
president is now presenting concrete figures for the priorities he 
recently sketched out in his State of the Union Address."  Financial 
Times Deutschland (2/2) carried a front-page report under the 
headline: "Debts Creating Dilemma for Obama" that "with his 
financial plans, U.S. President Obama is faced with a dilemma.  On 
the one hand, there is dissatisfaction among Americans about the 
great indebtedness, while, on the other hand, Obama's Democrats are 
afraid of a sound defeat in the Congressional elections in the fall 
if the unemployment rate of currently ten percent does not decline 
by then."  In a report, headlined: "Obama Gives up the Moon to Save 
the United States," Handelsblatt (2/2) wrote: "With 1.56 trillion 
dollars, the gap in the U.S. budget is as wide as never before.  In 
order to avoid bankruptcy and to create jobs, the President relies 
on tough cuts." 
 
In an editorial Sueddeutsche (2/2) argued under the headline: "State 
Bankruptcy 2010," that "the United States needs a general overhaul 
of its budget....  The figures as such are not the real problem. 
The enormous budget deficit of this year is mostly a product of the 
past - the great recession and the spending policy of the Bush era. 
Measured against these preconditions, Obama submitted a reasonable 
budget proposal.  This is a first step to consolidate the budget, 
but no more.  The real task is still to come, since Obama's budget 
proposal reflects the past and the presence of the country's 
finances but not its future.  And this will result in an avalanche 
of costs.  The crisis can be prevented only if taxes are increased 
 
BERLIN 00000145  002 OF 005 
 
 
and cost cuts - but for both measures there are no majorities in 
Washington.  The crucial issue is not the President but Congress and 
the political culture in the capital that make pragmatic solutions 
impossible." 
 
Die Welt (2/2) editorialized under the headline: "Careless Fiscal 
Policy," that "we feel a pity even for the most powerful man in the 
world.  President Obama could have done whatever he wanted with his 
budget draft, he would have been criticized anyway.  On the one 
hand, he must guarantee that the economic recovery gets a sound 
footing and, on the other hand, Obama must pursue a drastic 
consolidation course to maintain Washington's capability to act. 
This means Obama must achieve quite a feat, but what he presented 
was an unsuccessful attempt.  The return to a sound fiscal policy 
will be postponed again.  As in the previous year, the spending of 
the government will reach 25 percent of national economic output and 
even if the economy continues to grow, the deficit will hardly fall 
below four percent.  This is careless.  The president has 
disappointed - once again." 
 
Tagesspiegel (2/2) argued under the headline: "Discouraging," that 
"in fiscal policy matters, the United States increasingly resembles 
the Europeans.  In the economic crisis, revenue declines but the 
politicians lack the courage to cut spending.  In his budget draft, 
there are billions that are based not on reason but on particular 
interests.  In two aspects, however, the United States is different. 
 Even in the crisis, there are no calls for a drastic increase in 
taxes and the Americans are so angry at the debts that Obama could 
lose the majority in Congress in the fall of this year." 
 
"Deficit Billionaire" is the headline in Frankfurter Allgemeine 
(2/2) which opined: "The President's budget draft rarely survives 
deliberations in Congress, which is keen on spending.  Each program 
that is now to be stopped or frozen has its beneficiaries and 
defenders in Congress.  That is why it would be a sensation if the 
deficit for the next year is not higher than projected.  But this 
approach to make savings has a basic flaw: the big social security 
programs and the defense budget are excluded.  The defense budget 
increases to 700 billion dollar and, for Washington's allies in 
Europe, this is an unimaginable sum." 
 
Berliner Zeitung (2/2) judged under the headline: "Forced to Make 
Savings" that "in the crisis there is no alternative [to this draft 
budget] but some day in the future, the United States must change 
course, otherwise it will be threatened with financial ruin.  With 
his draft budget, Barack Obama is planning the beginning of the 
unavoidable consolidation. As painful as a budget ceiling may be, 
all this is only the beginning.  A few cuts here and there won't be 
enough.  The United States must finally address its structural 
deficit, since it will otherwise be threatened with enormous debt 
for decades to come.  This is unpopular, but there will be no way 
around higher taxes and a reform of the social security system.... 
The alternative would be something like a political instability." 
 
In an editorial, Handelsblatt (2/2) opined: "These record number 
hide a radical change of course of U.S. politics.  As announced 
before, President Obama is radically changing course: supply side 
policies and unrealistic  moon projects will be a thing of the past. 
 Instead, Barack Obama is focusing on education, research and 
employment, and this more than ever before.  After the most recent 
election defeats, Obama has realized:Qit's the economy, stupid!'" 
 
¶3.   (U.S.)   Reaction to Plans to Stop Moon Mission 
 
Sueddeutsche Zeitung (2/2) headlined; "Moon is Becoming a Distant 
Goal," and wrote under the sub-headline: "Barack Obama gives NASA 
more Money - but Not Enough to Implement his Predecessor's Space 
Travel Dreams," and noted: "George Bush had a vision.  At the latest 
 
BERLIN 00000145  003 OF 005 
 
 
in 2020...an American would leave his footprint on the moon, but 
this is not likely to come true.  Bush's successor Barack Obama does 
not want to offer more money for such an adventure.  If the U.S. 
Congress approves his budget plan, which is by no means sure, the 
moon mission would be over.  Instead the President backs the 
privatization of manned space travel.  This would be a drastic break 
with the previous principles of U.S. space travel....  Especially 
parliamentarians from Florida and Texas, which have both NASA 
headquarters, and where thousands of jobs are in jeopardy, do not 
want to accept the end to the moon mission...and they are not 
without a chance.  In the talks about the previous budget bill, they 
were granted a right to veto any changes of the 'Constellation' 
program." 
 
In a lengthy article, Die Welt (2/2) noted under the headline: 
"Obama Stops Flight to the Moon," and reported: "President Obama has 
now shelved his predecessor George W. Bush's space travel plans. 
This is probably the most drastic change of course for U.S. space 
travel   NASA will now have to postpone the return to the moon and 
the other projects of its Constellation program to a distant 
future."  Formally, the end of the 'Constellation' program is not 
yet sealed, because Congress must approve the new budget and 
observers expect heated debates, but a drastic increase in NASA's 
budget cannot be expected." 
 
"Back to Reality" headlined Tagesspiegel (2/2) and wrote: "For cost 
reasons, the U.S. moon program will be eliminated.  In the future, 
private companies are to offer taxi services to the ISS space 
station." 
 
Berliner Zeitung (2/2) carried a report under the headline: "The 
Dark Side of the Moon," and reported: "What is the price for the 
crisis?  Well, first of all the dream of the return to the moon.  In 
view of the financial situation, there is no money available for 
symbols."  In another report, the daily wrote under the headline: 
"Return to the Moon Cancelled for the Time Being," and wrote: "Now 
NASA must seek new destinations for its astronauts.  The good news 
is that NASA will now take part in the operation of the 
international ISS space station by 2020.  This is a good sign for 
the other ISS partners." 
 
¶4.   (U.S.-China)   Arms Shipment to Taiwan 
 
Under the headline "Warning shot from Washington," an editorial in 
Sddeutsche (2/2) highlighted that "with the supplying of weapons to 
Taiwan, the U.S. demonstrates that it does not accept China's 
growing power."  The paper added: "Barack Obama has sent a clear 
message to the Chinese leadership.  The supply of weapons to Taiwan 
is clearly a political message... The timing and extent of the 
supplies make clear that Washington wants to put its irritation over 
China's increasing self-confident and arrogant foreign policy on the 
record....  Also China's attitude at the climate conference in 
Copenhagen has substantially damaged relations.  Chinese PM Jiabao 
sent a junior member of his staff to the meeting with Obama not just 
once, but several times, which the Americans clearly understood as 
an insult.  The angry response shows how much Beijing has 
miscalculated the situation... Beijing's candid threats of 
retaliation show how painful Obama's message is.  However, economic 
sanctions are a two-edged sword.  China will not want to order 
planes only from Airbus forever.  It needs the U.S. and it will 
return to a more realistic policy toward the U.S. after a while." 
 
 
Handelsblatt (2/2) opined: "This is a new tone from Beijing.  China 
wants to impose sanctions on U.S. companies that participate in the 
arms deal with Taiwan.  The Chinese government has never gone so far 
in the past.  There is no doubt: relations with the United States 
face a new low.  China is testing Obama's persistence in the fight 
 
BERLIN 00000145  004 OF 005 
 
 
over global power claims....  U.S.-Chinese relations are 
deteriorating.  China is probably deliberately damaging the 
relationship out of power calculations.  China is looking for an 
independent profile at a time when the U.S. is financially, 
economically and politically wavering." 
 
¶5.   (Middle East)   Goldstone Report 
 
Frankfurter Allgemeine (2/2) editorialized: "The so-called Goldstone 
report of the UN on the Gaza War has damaged the international 
reputation of the Israeli army - and that of Israel....  It is good 
that Israel has kept quiet about its historically known aversion to 
the UN and the Goldstone Report to investigate the allegations.  The 
support for the country's security interests also depends on whether 
the violation of martial law is investigated.  Although 
appropriateness means something else in a country that is constantly 
at war..., threats cannot justify the unlimited use of force." 
 
 
¶6.   (Yemen)   Anti-Terror Measures 
 
FT Deutschland (2/2) commented: "President Salih wants to have the 
best of both worlds.  He wants to get into the extremists' good 
books while pleasing the Americans at the same time.  The longtime 
ruler of Yemen does not care about leading his country out of its 
poverty.  He wants to stay in power.  Salih and his entourage 
therefore do not care much that two-thirds of the Yemenite people 
chew Khat at midday - a drug that is illegal in the West and the 
neighboring country of Saudi Arabia.  It is a serious obstacle to 
the country's development. As long as there is no good governance in 
Yemen and the society does not open up, the prospects for 
development will be small, regardless of how much money the West 
provides.  The U.S. and Europe cannot pick the president of Yemen, 
but they can bring their influence to bear when it comes to 
development aid and the approach to al Qaida.  Only then is the 
fight against terrorism and underdevelopment not lost right from the 
beginning." 
 
¶7.   (Russia)   Demonstrations in Kaliningrad, Moscow 
 
Die Welt (2/2) dealt with the most recent protests in Kaliningrad 
and editorialized under the headline: "Citizens onto the Barricades" 
that "the Medvedev-Putin tandem in Moscow saw the writing on the 
Kremlin's walls over the weekend.  For more than nine years, such a 
large demonstration has not taken place in Kaliningrad.  Together 
with the demands in St. Petersburg and Moscow for complying with the 
constitution and the protests in Tomsk against the fatal 
arbitrariness of the militia forces, a potential for unrest could 
develop that could even be intensified through ignorant decisions of 
the bureaucratic apparatus.  In Kaliningrad, the protesters for the 
first time turned against the political leadership in Moscow.  For 
the first time, Vladimir Putin was confronted with calls to step 
down.  The economic climate has become rougher and money is no 
longer available for everyone.  This means that the possibilities of 
the system of 'vertical power' will deteriorate.  Protesters 
demanded the right to elect the governor, a move Putin abolished 
seven years ago without producing resistance.  But the 
powers-that-be are unable to deal with such a form of resistance. 
If they continue to make international intelligence services 
responsible for the increasing uneasiness and continue to turn the 
thumbscrews, such a policy will lead into a dead-end street." 
 
die tageszeitung (2/2) centers on protests in Russia in general and 
observed under the headline: "Fear of Poverty Revolts" that "the 
systematic persecution of dissidents and the disrespect for human 
and citizens rights is an everyday fact in Russia.  Little has 
changed under President Medvedev despite announcements the opposite. 
 The fact that the security forces are using brute force against the 
 
BERLIN 00000145  005 OF 005 
 
 
protesters allows one conclusion:  The Kremlin is getting nervous. 
There have good reason to be, because the economic crisis has hard 
hit the country.  Unemployment is rapidly rising, and the 
impoverishment of many people continues to increase.  And if there 
is a reason for Russians to take to the streets, then it is the need 
to give vent to their unease about the deteriorating economic 
situation.  That is why it cannot be ruled out that the government 
could soon face mass protests.  In the long run, clubs, arrests, and 
fines will then no longer suffice." 
 
MURPHY