08AITTAIPEI613
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Fri May 02 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0009
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #0613 1230950
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 020950Z MAY 08
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 8837
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 8228
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 9473UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 000613 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - NIDA EMMONS 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
 
Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their May 
2 news coverage on the scandal over two middlemen's embezzlement of 
US$30 million that Taiwan intended to use in establishing diplomatic 
relations with Papua New Guinea; on Taiwan's President-elect Ma 
Ying-jeou's reiteration of his support of the 1992 consensus; and on 
Ma Ying-jeou being named by "Time" as one of the world's 100 most 
influential people.  In terms of editorials and commentaries, an 
op-ed in the pro-unification "United Daily News" wondered how Ma is 
going to deal with competing pressures coming from both the United 
States and China while consolidating Taiwan's own sovereignty. 
Another op-ed in the mass-circulation "Apple Daily" also questioned 
the direction of Ma's cross-Strait policy after he appointed 
pro-Taiwan independence politician Lai Shin-yuan to take charge of 
Taiwan's Mainland Affairs Council (MAC), and the implications of the 
appointment for U.S.-Taiwan and cross-Strait relations.  End 
summary. 
 
A) "Embrace the United States, or Cooperate with China?" 
 
Wu Tung-yin, a public servant, opined in the pro-unification "United 
Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] (5/2): 
 
"... The contradiction and predicament that Taiwan faces at the 
moment is that, on the one hand, [Taiwan] would like to maintain the 
status of an independent country; on the other hand, [Taiwan] would 
like to benefit from Mainland economic interest.  However, it is 
difficult for the two to co-exist.  After [Taiwan's President-elect] 
Ma Ying-jeou is inaugurated, he definitely will have to face a more 
significant decision, which is, when the Americans tell Ma's 
administration that 'I can sell you F-16 [fighter jets], will [Ma's 
administration] buy them or not? 
 
"Once [Ma] accedes to the United States' request, it immediately 
creates the phenomenon of 'Taiwan making money from Mainland on the 
one hand and buying weapons from the United States to resist the 
Mainland on the other hand.'  Can the Chinese Communists tolerate 
this state of affairs?  Two days ago, AIT Director Stephen Young 
openly said that the United States 'is committed to ensuring 
Taiwan's meaningful participation in the activities of international 
organizations.'  This move, although it doesn't really deliver 
anything [Ed.:  the original Chinese was "like drawing a pie," i.e., 
an impractical attempt to relieve one's hunger], is apparently a 
U.S. active measure to cozy up to Ma's administration. ..." 
 
B) "A Shadow is Following the Development of Cross-Strait 
Relations" 
 
Chen Yu-chun, a professor in the Graduate School of American Studies 
of Taiwan's Chinese Culture University and a visiting fellow at 
Beijing Union University, opined in the mass-circulation "Apple 
Daily" [circulation: 520,000] (5/2): 
 
"... [Taiwan's President-elect] Ma Ying-jeou expressed his will to 
visit the United States immediately after he was elected. 
Washington felt touched, although it put aside [Ma's wish] with the 
excuse that there is no precedent.  U.S. Defense Department 
officials have said that the United States and Taiwan should 
strengthen military exchanges during Ma's administration and the 
United States wants to sell 60 F-16 fighters and six submarines [to 
Taiwan].  Beijing's military is highly concerned about this.  Now, 
both sides across the Strait have said that they are willing to sit 
down and talk to end the hostility.  If Taiwan continues significant 
arms procurement from the United States and deepens its connections 
[with the United States] in military and security affairs, how will 
both sides of the Strait talk about reaching a peace agreement?  Ma 
once demanded that Beijing withdraw the missiles that were deployed 
along the coast [targeting Taiwan].  How would the Chinese 
Communists withdraw the missiles under such circumstances?  The 
United States still wants to contain China.  How Taiwan keeps 
equidistant from two strong powers, China and the United States, 
respectively, will be a test of the Ma administration's wisdom.  It 
is necessary to understand that security issues are, in fact, 
political issues.  Although it is probably fine not to touch [the 
political issues] in the short term, in the end it is still 
necessary to face [the political issues] in order to establish real, 
lasting peace." 
 
YOUNG