08ANKARA975
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT
Thu May 22 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
VZCZCXRO0903
OO RUEHDA
DE RUEHAK #0975/01 1431317
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 221317Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6364
RUEKJCS/CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEKJCS/OSD WASHDC//PA
RUEUITH/ODC ANKARA TU
INFO RUEHTH/AMEMBASSY ATHENS 8902
RUEHIT/AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 4243
RUEHDA/AMCONSUL ADANA 2946
RUEHBS/AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 6619
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 6449
RUCNDT/USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 3027
RUEUITH/DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
RHMFISS/USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
RHMFISS/39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
RHMFISS/AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
RUEUITH/AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 ANKARA 000975 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT 
THURSDAY, MAY 22, 2008 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Court of Appeals Releases Declaration Regarding Closure 
Case 
All news outlets report the Court of Appeals (Yargitay) 
officially denounced negative reactions to the closure case 
against the ruling AKP.  The Court saw this behavior "as an 
indication of the reluctance to accept the independence of 
the judiciary."  The statement emphasized what it views as 
"systematic assaults" that target the judiciary.  In 
addition, the Court underscored its view that attempts to 
harm the basic principles of the republic had intensified 
recently, and "attempts to change the constitution are in 
line with the demands of a certain political ideology," 
which "caused serious tension."  The declaration also 
called Chief Prosecutor Abdurrahman Yalcinkaya's 
indictment, which charges the AKP with anti-secular 
activities, an "institutional document." 
 
Mainstream Hurriyet says the declaration was released "To 
respond to the domestic and international accusations 
targeting the judiciary."  Mainstream Vatan says on its 
front page, "The Declaration Told The Government It Cannot 
Do Whatever It Wants." 
Leftist Taraf calls the declaration a "coup attempt" 
against a civic administration.  The pro-government Sabah 
writes, "The declaration resembles the April 27 e- 
memorandum released by the military General Staff (TGS) 
during the process of selecting a new president." 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak reports, "The Court of Appeals 
was pressuring the Constitutional Court to close down the 
AKP."  A commentary in mainstream Vatan reports, "The 
declaration was triggered when the government submitted its 
judicial reform draft to EU Commissioner Olli Rehn without 
first consulting the Turkish judiciary." 
 
Editorial Commentary on the 'Yargitay' Statement 
 
"The Judiciary and Politics" 
Taha Akyol observed in mainstream Milliyet (5/22):  "The 
Court of Appeals (Yargitay) Presidents' Committee issued a 
very harsh statement that actually defends the indictment 
against the AKP.  I agree with only one section of 
yesterday's Yargitay statement.  The draft law on judicial 
reforms should be discussed with our own judicial 
institutions before it is presented to EU Enlargement 
Commissioner Olli Rehn.  Nevertheless, the committee should 
remember the principles which establish the Judiciary's 
nonpartisanship.  In democracies, there should be no 
judicial oligarchy.  Both the government and the judiciary 
should avoid politicizing such issues." 
 
European Parliament Ratifies Its Report on Turkey's EU 
Reform Process 
All papers report on Wednesday, the European Parliament 
approved its report on Turkey, which was drafted by Dutch 
Rapporteur Ria Oomen-Ruijten.  The non-binding report 
addresses 28 issues, including the May Day events, article 
301, the closure case against the AKP, and the Ergenekon 
investigation.  The report criticizes the police's 
disproportional use of force during May Day celebrations in 
Istanbul.  In addition, the report calls the changes to 
Article 301 of Turkish Penal Code "insufficient," and urges 
the Turkish Parliament to revise the article and also 
"remove all other restrictive provisions in the penal 
code."  The report also expresses concern about the 
potential consequences if the AKP is closed, and calls for 
the Constitutional Court to act in accordance with the 
Venice Commission guidelines and European standards on the 
prohibition of political parties.  It also urges the pro- 
 
ANKARA 00000975  002 OF 004 
 
 
Kurdish DTP to "distance themselves from violence and 
terrorist organizations."   While encouraging Turkish 
authorities to "resolutely pursue investigations into the 
Ergenekon affair," the report also advises Turkey to "fully 
uncover the Ergenekon networks that reach into state 
structures, and to bring those involved to justice."  The 
report welcomes the recent adoption by the Turkish 
Parliament of the law on non-Muslim minority foundations 
and says, "The European Commission should analyze whether 
the law addresses all shortcomings faced by non-Muslim 
religious communities with regard to property management 
and acquisition, including expropriated property sold to 
third parties."  Finally, the report recommends action 
regarding Cyprus, noting, "A withdrawal of Turkish forces 
would facilitate the negotiation of a settlement." 
 
Mainstream Milliyet finds the report "balanced," saying 
that unlike earlier reports, this time the European 
Parliament draws a "complete and clear picture of Turkey." 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak carries the headline, "EP 
Report Urges Turkey to Combat Ergenekon Network." Leftist- 
nationalist Cumhuriyet carries the headline, "The EU, Once 
Again, Intervenes and Criticizes The Closure Case Against 
AKP," but notes, "The report criticizes police for using 
disproportional force against demonstrators on May 1st." 
Mainstream Hurriyet writes in, "Three Calls To Turkey," 
that the report "expresses anxiety concerning the AKP 
closure case and calls the amendments to article 301 
insufficient."  Mainstream Sabah writes, "The report wants 
Turkey to pursue reforms in human rights and democracy," 
while "The events of May 1st were also highlighted." 
Mainstream Vatan calls the report's suggestions "Three 
Important Warnings From the European Parliament to Turkey," 
and notes, "The secular government and the constitutional 
court were called on to show the highest respect for the 
law," and in reference to the May 1st events, "Civil rights 
must be protected."  Leftist Taraf writes, "From the 
European Parliament Comes Both Praise and Criticism," as 
"The report was approved by a wide margin of votes," and 
"the DTP was called on to place distance between itself and 
the PKK." 
 
Turkey Mediates Israel-Syria Peace Talks in Istanbul 
All papers report Israel and Syria announced yesterday the 
beginning of indirect peace talks under Turkey's mediation 
in Istanbul.  Turkish Foreign Ministry (MFA) Deputy 
Undersecretary Feridun Sinirlioglu and Turkish PM's Chief 
Advisor Ahmet Davutoglu joined the talks between the 
delegations led by Israeli government advisors Yoram 
Turbovitz and Shalom Turjeman and Syrian Foreign Ministry 
advisor Riyad Davudi.  Mainstream Hurriyet writes in 
"Middle East's Eye is on Istanbul," that "Israel and Syria 
announced indirect negotiations have started under Turkey's 
auspices," adding "parties were discussing possibilities 
for the return of Golan Heights to Damascus in exchange for 
a lasting peace settlement." Hurriyet also writes, "Israel 
and Syria took Ankara's suggestion for peace talks after 
eight years," and "the delegations will stay in three 
separate hotels," and "will not meet each other one-on-one 
without the Turkish delegation."    Leftist-nationalist 
Cumhuriyet reports in, "Turkey is the Official Mediator" 
that "the peace talks are at a preliminary stage to see if 
the ground is solid enough to continue.  Both sides agreed 
to continue the dialogue within the framework of the Madrid 
Conference principles."  Liberal Radikal writes in "Turkey 
is the Bridge Between Israel and Syria," that "officials 
from both sides will come to Istanbul regularly to continue 
indirect negotiations."   In "The World Praises Ankara," 
mainstream Milliyet notes leaders from the U.S., the EU, 
and the UN thanked Turkey for their efforts and called the 
 
ANKARA 00000975  003 OF 004 
 
 
efforts, "useful."  Leftist Taraf writes, "Istanbul Hosts 
Israeli-Syrian Peace," and "Israel and Syria thanked Prime 
Minister Erdogan for his efforts." 
 
Yeni Safak reports the U.S. State Department "praised 
Turkey's role" and stressed the U.S. had "no role" in this 
process.  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet reports that the 
U.S. praised Turkey for its mediation in talks between 
Israel and Syria.  Mainstream Milliyet notes David Welch, 
A/S Bureau of Middle East Affairs said "I think Turkey 
played a good and useful role in this regard."  The paper 
also quotes White House Spokesperson Dana Perino saying 
that "the U.S. did not participate in the talks and it was 
Israel's decision."  U.S. Embassy Spokesman Kathy Schalow 
said that the U.S. appreciates Turkey's continued efforts 
to play constructive role in the region. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Syria-Israel Peace Talks 
 
"In the End, Turkey Succeeded" 
Erdal Safak commented in mainstream Sabah (5/22):  "Peace 
talks between Syria and Israel were officially announced 
yesterday.  Turkey has mediated indirect talks between the 
two countries for the last four years.  Certainly, Ankara 
will not be able to continue mediating between the two 
countries on its own.  After a certain point, the U.S. will 
get involved and take some responsibility.  As a matter of 
fact, other important actors such as the EU and Russia 
should support these talks.  Nevertheless, as the only 
country trusted by both Israel and Syria, Turkey has earned 
a position of strength in the Middle East, a trump card 
with the EU, and prestige in the world.  If a peace 
agreement is reached as a result of talks, then, Turkey's 
strength and prestige will reach extraordinary levels." 
 
Northern Iraqi Kurdish Delegation Meets AKP in Ankara 
Hurriyet, Milliyet, Cumhuriyet, Radikal, Yeni Safak and 
others report that on Tuesday, a delegation from the 
Kurdish regional parliament in northern Iraq met with the 
ruling AKP deputy chair Dengir Mir Mehmet Firat, Egemen 
Bagis, and AKP Diyarbakir MP Ihsan Arslan to discuss ties. 
In the Kurdish delegation were Arez Abdullah from the 
Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK,) Heme Resit Maweti from 
Kurdistan Islamic Union (KIU,) and Hamza Eminoglu from 
KIU's Turkey representation.  Both sides stressed the 
existing problems needed to be resolved through peaceful 
ways.  The Kurds asked for more Turkish investments in 
northern Iraq.  Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet says Kurds 
invited the AKP to visit the Kurdish Parliament in northern 
Iraq, and AKP accepted. 
 
 
 
Editorial Commentary on Iran 
 
"If the US Attacks Iran, What Will Turkey Do?" 
Cuneyt Ulsever commented in mainstream Hurriyet (5/22): 
"Due to our obsession with the turban controversy and the 
AKP closure case, Turkey is unable to see the big danger 
that is so close to us.  Aside from the U.S. occupation of 
Iraq, Iran is the most successful state on the road to 
becoming an imperial power in the Middle East.  Iran's 
Shiites scare Sunnis in Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Jordan. 
Lately, not only the U.S., but many western countries, 
including the UK, Germany, and France, believe that Iran is 
making progress toward its ability to develop nuclear 
weapons.  Once Iran completes its nuclear program, a new 
Middle East will be established and Turkey's position in 
the region, and in the world, will decline.  Some experts 
in the West think that Ahmedinejad will be voted out of 
 
ANKARA 00000975  004 OF 004 
 
 
office in 2009.  The nationalists may come to power and for 
this reason the administration in Iran may want the U.S. or 
Israel to attack Iran in order to legitimize Ahmedinejad's 
stance against the West.   During all these developments, 
suppose the Turkish Prime Minister Erdogan faces the 
question, 'Strategic partner, we have decided to attack 
Iran, are you with us or not?' What would his answer be?" 
 
TV Highlights 
NTV 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Following a dysentery outbreak in the province of Aksaray 
last week, on Wednesday dysentery cases were reported also 
in Adana province.  The Health Ministry stated there was no 
typhoid, dysentery or cholera epidemic in Aksaray. 
 
- The Istanbul Governor's Office said the Selah shipyard in 
Tuzla will be shut down due to recent fatal work accidents. 
 
- The Competition Board said there was no need for an 
investigation regarding the state-owned bank loans granted 
to the Calik Group in the acquisition of Sabah-ATV media 
group. 
 
International News 
 
- Turkish and Greek Cypriot representatives met Wednesday 
to review working groups' progress in an attempt to pave 
the way for talks to reunify the divided island. 
 
- Lebanon will hold presidential elections on May 25. 
 
- Garbage is used to produce energy to power 2,500 homes in 
Southern California. 
 
 
WILSON