08ANKARA999
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT - TUESDAY, MAY 27, 2008
Wed May 28 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
O 281335Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY ANKARA
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 6404
CJCS WASHDC IMMEDIATE
SECDEF WASHDC IMMEDIATE
OSD WASHDC//PA
ODC ANKARA TU
INFO AMEMBASSY ATHENS 
AMCONSUL ISTANBUL 
AMCONSUL ADANA 
AMEMBASSY BRUSSELS 
USEU BRUSSELS
USMISSION USNATO 
USMISSION USUN NEW YORK 
DET 1 39LG ANKARA TU
USDOCO 6ATAF IZMIR TU
39OS INCIRLIK AB TU
AFOSI DET 523 IZMIR TU
39ABG INCIRLIK AB TU
AFOSI DET 522 INCIRLIK AB TU
AFLO ANKARA TUUNCLAS ANKARA 000999 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT - TUESDAY, MAY 27, 2008 
 
 
In Today's Papers 
 
Gul Meets Gerceker to Ease AKP-Judiciary Tensions 
All papers report that on Monday, President Abdullah Gul met at the 
Presidential Palace with the chief of the Court of Appeals 
(Yargitay,) Hasan Gerceker, in an effort to defuse tensions between 
the ruling AKP government and the judiciary.  Papers report Gerceker 
told Gul the declaration released last week by the Court of Appeals 
(Yargitay) did not aim to stoke tensions further. 
Leftist-nationalist Cumhuriyet quotes Gerceker as saying, "The 
government caused the tensions, not the judiciary.  Therefore, the 
Government needs to take steps to resolve the problem."  Gerceker 
also expressed unease with the Government for having submitted its 
judicial reform strategy draft to the EU before discussing the 
matter with the Turkish judiciary. 
 
Before meeting with Gerceker, Gul released a statement warning all 
state institutions.  "It is the task of all individuals and 
institutions to act in line with customs and traditions, and prevent 
the debates from reaching a point where they might damage the 
fundamental principles of the Constitution, Turkey's national 
interests and unity, as well as economic and political stability," 
the statement said.  Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak writes, "President 
Gul's 'Cankaya Declaration' responds to the declarations of the 
Court of Appeals and the Council of State with a warning for 
stability."  Papers report Gul would meet other top representatives 
of the judiciary in the coming days. 
 
Editorial Commentary on Tensions between Judiciary and Government 
 
"President Gul Intervenes in The Crisis" 
Bilal Cetin commented in mainstream Vatan (5/27):  "There is no 
doubt that President Gul is highly disturbed by the latest 
developments.  He should have intervened before the developments 
turn into a crisis, but he couldn't.  Because of his previous 
position as Foreign Minister and the inclusion of his name in the 
Chief Prosecutor's indictment, there are certain limitations on what 
he can say and do.  The President couldn't intervene to ease 
political tensions because the CHP still continues to protest Gul's 
presidency.  Moreover, the state institutions that have tense 
relations with the government do not fully trust in the President 
either.  Gul was aware of these problems before he was elected 
president but he thought he could eliminate these problems and 
strengthen mutual trust.  However, developments did not give Gul 
time to do all this and the political crisis erupted too early. 
Yesterday, after realizing the crisis is deepening, President Gul 
invited Yargitay President Hasan Gerceker to the presidential 
palace.  Prior to this meeting, Gul urged the government and the 
judiciary to be calm.  Now, he is aiming to establish peace among 
the state institutes, which is a very difficult job." 
 
Erdogan: AKP Closure Case Costs Turkey $ 25 Billion 
All papers report on Sunday Prime Minister Erdogan spoke to 
journalists aboard his plane while returning home from the 
oath-taking ceremony of Lebanon's newly elected President Michel 
Suleiman.  Erdogan characterized the role of Turkey as mediator 
between Israel and Syria as "an issue of international importance." 
He said Turkey also played a role in helping the parties in Lebanon 
reach a compromise in electing Suleiman as president.  "Turkey is 
not an Iron Curtain country, but there are efforts to build an Iron 
Curtain in Turkey," Erdogan said in response to a question on the 
possible impact of the closure case.  Erdogan said his government 
was striving to keep foreign capital in the country as investors 
become spooked by the closure case.  "We have to deal with terror, 
economic problems and the upcoming municipal elections.  Whatever is 
going to happen, it should happen without delay," said Erdogan.  He 
noted had the closure case not been launched, expected an inflow of 
foreign investments would be USD 25.  On another question, Erdogan 
said the landmines along the 967-km border with Syria would be 
swept, and the cleaned area be opened to agriculture. 
 
 
Editorial Commentary on AKP Closure Case Affecting Turkey 
 
"Messages from Beirut" 
Erdal Safak wrote in mainstream Sabah (5/27):  "During his return 
flight from Beirut, Prime Minister Erdogan told reporters, 'The AKP 
closure case has cost Turkey $25 billion in foreign investment 
because investors became nervous about Turkey's stability and 
started investing in other countries.  We would like the closure 
case to be finalized as soon as possible.  We don't want Turkey to 
be hurt by this case, we don't want the economy suffer, and we don't 
want the fight against terrorism to be affected.  This could also 
affect local elections in March.  Therefore, whatever is going to 
happen must happen.'  As our plane landed in Esenboga, the new 
Lebanese President Misel Suleyman's words were echoing in my ears 
'One person cannot save a country on his own.  All interested 
parties should contribute to it.'" 
 
Erdogan to Visit Diyarbakir Today 
All papers report that on Tuesday, Prime Minister Erdogan will 
travel to the mainly Kurdish city of Diyarbakir to announce an 
'Action Plan' for the Southeastern Anatolia Project (GAP). 
Islamist-oriented Yeni Safak says the five-year plan will cost USD 
12.5 billion.  Erdogan is expected to be accompanied by cabinet 
ministers and 75 Kurdish members of parliament.  The AKP said the PM 
would focus on the GAP project and economic issues instead of 
political matters. 
 
Meanwhile, Diyarbakir Mayor Osman Baydemir said he will not 
participate in Erdogan's program today, saying the PM had not called 
on his municipality during earlier visits to the city.  Baydemir 
said Erdogan was visiting the city not "as a Prime Minister," but 
"like a political party leader."  Turkey's main Kurdish party DTP 
said Erdogan's 'Southeast Action Plan' was actually a "political 
investment" for the forthcoming municipal elections. 
 
Greek Army Chief Grapsas Meets General Buyukanit 
Hurriyet, Sabah, Radikal, Cumhuriyet, Zaman and others report the 
Greek Chief of the General Staff, General Dimitrios Grapsas, met his 
Turkish counterpart General Yasar Buyukanit in Ankara.  General 
Grapsas said Turkey and Greece were lucky to have had great leaders 
such as Ataturk and Venizelos.  "Venizelos and Ataturk worked hard 
for peace between the two nations after the war.  Our duty should be 
remaining on their footsteps," said Grapsas.  Buyukanit voiced 
pleasure for hosting General Grapsas in Turkey.  "If we, soldiers, 
provide a secure environment, then politicians will be able to set 
up better dialogue," emphasized Buyukanit. 
 
Papers report the visit coincided with a Turkish Foreign Ministry 
(MFA) statement criticizing the Greek officials' participation in 
commemorations of the alleged "genocide" of Pontic Greeks in the 
Black Sea region after World War I.  The MFA statement said the 
commemorations harmed "the atmosphere of peace and confidence" the 
two countries were trying to build.  In 1994, the Greek Parliament 
endorsed a law claiming that Pontic Greeks had been subject to 
genocide in Anatolia. 
 
Barzani Visits the U.S. 
Mainstream Sabah report Nechirvan Barzani, the PM of the Kurdistan 
Regional Government (KRG,) told VOA after meeting Friday with 
President Bush that the KRG was "committed to combat terror" but the 
problem between the PKK and Turkey required a "political solution." 
Barzani also said the President of the Kurdish region, Massoud 
Barzani, is expected to visit the US in the near future.  The 
Kurdish administration in northern Iraq said Barzani's talks in 
Washington with President Bush, Vice President Cheney, Secretary 
Rice, and Defense Secretary Gates had been "excellent and 
productive," according to Sabah. 
 
'Diyanet' Webpage: Flirting is Adultery 
 
 
 
Liberal Radikal reports Turkey's Religious Affairs Directorate 
(Diyanet) says on its website that "all illegitimate relationships 
between men and women, including flirting, amounts to adultery."  An 
article on the Diyanet webpage warns that men and women were 
"sexually arousing" for each other, therefore the sexes needed to 
"stay distanced" from each another.  The article also says it was 
"inappropriate" for women to travel alone, or put on perfumes 
outside their homes because strong scents could be "sexually 
arousing" for men. 
 
TV News: 
CNN Turk 
 
Domestic News 
 
- Parliament Speaker Koksal Toptan said the Court of Appeals 
(Yargitay) should not have discussed its concerns regarding the 
lawsuit banning the AKP in public. 
 
- First Lady Hayrunnisa Gul triggered controversy when she wanted to 
transfer 35 pieces, including paintings, armchairs and tables used 
by Ottoman Sultans, from Istanbul's Dolmabahce Palace to the 
Presidential Palace in Ankara. 
 
- IMF Turkey representative Hossein Samiei said the Turkish 
government needs to undertake additional measures to meet its 
targets for 2009. 
 
International News 
 
- Prime Minister Ehud Olmert said Monday Israel had made no 
commitment to Syria to pull out of the Golan Heights. 
 
- "The Syrian leadership will not abandon the front lines until all 
threats from the Zionist entity have disappeared," said Iranian 
President Ahmadinejad during a meeting with the Syrian Defense 
Minister General Hassan Turkmani in Tehran. 
 
- The Taliban said it will fight on till the last foreign soldier is 
driven out of Afghanistan, but their door is always open to talks 
with other Afghan opposition groups. 
 
WILSON