08BEIJING1771
MAY 8 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: BURMA, ZIMBABWE, HU JAPAN VISIT,
Thu May 08 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO8388
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #1771/01 1291029
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 081029Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7140
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 BEIJING 001771 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV KOLY KS JA VT ZI BM
SUBJECT: MAY 8 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: BURMA, ZIMBABWE, HU JAPAN VISIT, 
DALAI TALKS, CHINESE IN KOREA, VATICAN, GRAIN PRICES 
 
 
¶1. Key points at the May 8 MFA press briefing were: 
 
-- China urged the Burmese Government to cooperate and consult with 
the international community on disaster aid. 
 
-- Contrary to media reports, the Chinese arms shipment did not 
reach Zimbabwe. 
 
-- President Hu Jintao reached an important consensus in Japan 
regarding regular high-level meetings. 
 
-- China hopes "the Dalai side" will "take concrete actions to truly 
stop separatist activities, plotting and provoking violent actions 
and disrupting the Beijing Olympics." 
 
-- Conflicts between protesters and Chinese students in Seoul and a 
recent DUI arrest of a Chinese diplomat in Korea are separate 
incidents. 
 
-- China is "willing to improve relations and conduct further 
dialogue and make progress on the normalization of relations" with 
the Vatican. 
 
-- China has pledged an additional 2 million USD to the World Food 
Program. 
 
Burma Must Cooperate and Consult with International Community on 
Aid 
--------------------------------------------- ------- 
 
¶2. At the May 8, 2008 regular MFA press briefing, MFA Spokesman Qin 
Gang urged the Burmese Government to "cooperate" and "consult" with 
the international community on disaster relief efforts. 
International assistance should "follow the principle of equality 
and mutual respect" and should "respect Burma's sovereignty."  Qin 
also urged patience and communication when dealing with Burma. 
China is prepared to send rescue and medical teams provided the 
Burmese Government agrees. 
 
¶3.  Qin listed the financial support which has been given to the 
Burmese Government by various Chinese organizations.  He announced 
that the Chinese Government would give 30 million RMB (approximately 
USD 4.2 million) in aid in addition to the USD 1 million which was 
already pledged.  Qin said the first aid shipment from China 
included tents, food and medication, though he did not know if grain 
was included. 
 
Arms Not Delivered to Zimbabwe 
------------------------------ 
 
¶4. Qin called reports that the Chinese ship the "An Yue Jiang" 
delivered arms to Zimbabwe a "fabrication."  Qin said the ship 
unloaded some non-military goods but "Zimbabwe failed to receive" 
the military goods. 
 
Hu Reached Important Consensus with Japan 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. Qin said President Hu Jintao reached an important consensus with 
the Japanese Government regarding regular high-level exchanges.  Qin 
encouraged reporters to focus on Hu's upcoming "important address" 
at a Japanese university.  There is no specific date yet set for the 
first summit between Japanese and Chinese leaders, said Qin. 
 
¶6. Asked about protests in Japan during Hu's visit, Qin said that 
"some forces and individuals conducted some activities within 
Japanese law."  However, "the majority of Japanese support 
China-Japanese friendship."  Qin said a "small handful of voices" 
will not stop the development of China-Japan relations.  The 
"Japanese Government and people support the Chinese Government's 
efforts to ensure China's territorial integrity." 
 
China's Negotiations with the Dalai Lama 
---------------------------------------- 
 
¶7. Qin said China's attitude toward negotiations with the Dalai Lama 
is "serious, honest and sincere."  China hopes "the Dalai side" will 
also be "sincere" and "take concrete actions to truly stop 
separatist activities, plotting and provoking violent actions and 
disrupting the Beijing Olympics."  Qin said no matter how loud the 
voices of protesters, the progress in Tibet will "not be blocked." 
 
 
Chinese Students in Korea and Chinese Diplomat DUI 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
¶8. Responding to a question about unruly Chinese students during 
torch relay protests in Korea and the arrest of a Chinese diplomat 
for driving under the influence, Qin said the reporter was 
inappropriately linking the two issues.  Regarding the students, Qin 
said some Chinese students had been "emotional and radical" because 
 
BEIJING 00001771  002 OF 002 
 
 
"some forces wanted to disrupt the torch."  These students were 
acting out of love for the Olympics.  The conflict had a reason and 
should be responded to calmly and objectively, said Qin.  Qin also 
expressed China's sympathy for the Koreans who were injured.  He 
pointed out that there are large numbers of Chinese living in Korea 
and most of them are law abiding.  China encourages all of its 
citizens overseas to follow the laws, regulations and customs of 
their host country. 
 
¶9. Qin said a DUI incident involving a Chinese diplomat in Korea is 
under investigation.  China requests its diplomats to follow the 
laws and regulations of the host country.  Qin encouraged the ROK to 
"remain calm and objective." 
 
China-Vatican Relations 
----------------------- 
 
¶10. Qin said he had taken note of the Pope's remarks following a 
Chinese concert at the Vatican.  The concert was a "successful 
non-governmental exchange" which China believes will strengthen 
understanding and friendship.  China is "willing to improve 
relations and conduct further dialogue and make progress on the 
normalization of relations." 
 
China Concerned about Grain Prices 
----------------------------------- 
 
¶11. Qin announced that China was "ready to provide help to the best 
of its ability" for the World Food Program (WFP).  In addition to 
the USD 2.5 million China had already pledged, Qin announced another 
USD 2 million to the WFP.  The Chinese Government is concerned about 
rising grain prices and their effect on developing countries, he 
stated. 
 
Visits 
------ 
 
¶10. Russian President Dmitry Medvedev will visit China at the 
invitation of Premier Wen Jiabao May 23-24.  The schedule for his 
visit is under consultation but he will meet with various Chinese 
leaders, including President Hu Jintao.  Thai Prime Minister Samak 
Sundaravej will visit China May 15-17.  Singapore's Foreign Minister 
George Yeo will visit May 14-18.  From May 14-16, FM Yang Jiechi 
will attend a meeting of the foreign ministers of China, Russia and 
India in Russia and attend a meeting of the BRIC countries.  Yang 
will host bilateral meetings with his counterparts while in Russia. 
 
 
RANDT