08BEIJING2086
MAY 29 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SIX-PARTY TALKS,
Thu May 29 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO5741
OO RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC
DE RUEHBJ #2086/01 1500940
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 290940Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7610
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO IMMEDIATE 1948
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL IMMEDIATE 0682
RUEHNE/AMEMBASSY NEW DELHI IMMEDIATE 4546
RUEHKT/AMEMBASSY KATHMANDU IMMEDIATE 3834UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 BEIJING 002086 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL PGOV PHUM KOLY CH JA KN KS NP IN
SUBJECT: MAY 29 MFA PRESS BRIEFING: SIX-PARTY TALKS, 
EARTHQUAKE RELIEF, MILITARY ALLIANCES, ETC. 
 
¶1.  Key points at the regular May 29 MFA press briefing: 
 
-- Current bilateral negotiations within the framework of the 
Six-Party Talks will help build mutual trust and 
understanding.  Dates have not yet been set for the next 
round of the Six-Party Talks, nor for the submission of North 
Korea's nuclear declaration.  The upcoming Beijing Olympics 
will not hinder China's participation in the Six-Party Talks. 
 
 
-- China is grateful to all countries that provided support 
for relief efforts in the wake of the Sichuan earthquake. 
The delivery of materials by planes from the Japanese Self 
Defense Forces is still being discussed. 
 
-- China is pleased by the successful opening of the recent 
Constitutional Assembly in Nepal, but will adhere to the 
principle of nonintervention and respect decisions of the 
Nepalese people. 
 
-- The U.S.-ROK military alliance is left over from history, 
as is the U.S.-Japanese military alliance.  China is in favor 
of a "new security concept" in which countries seek to build 
peace within the framework of the United Nations and in 
keeping with international norms.  The Sino-DPRK treaty of 
mutual assistance, however, is a means of building friendly 
relations between the two nations. 
 
-- Allegations that Chinese citizens are involved in 
espionage are groundless and stem from ulterior motives. 
 
-- China has taken note of actress Sharon Stone's comments 
that the Sichuan earthquake was caused by "bad karma" owing 
to the Chinese occupation of Tibet.  China has also taken 
note of her subsequent apology. 
 
-- VISITS: Indian Foreign Minister Pranab Mukherjee will 
visit China June 4-7.  South Korean President Lee Myung-bak 
is currently visiting China, and will travel to Qingdao today 
and to Sichuan tomorrow, accompanied by Chinese Foreign 
Minister Yang Jiechi. 
 
Six-Party Talks 
--------------- 
 
¶2.  At the regularly-scheduled MFA press briefing May 29, MFA 
Spokesperson Qin Gang said that the Six-Party negotiators 
began holding bilateral talks yesterday in Beijing, and the 
Chinese Vice Foreign Minister met with his American, North 
Korean and Japanese counterparts.  He will meet his South 
Korean counterpart tomorrow.  No date has yet been set for 
the next round of the Six-Party Talks.  Qin expressed hope 
that this round of bilateral negotiations will help to build 
mutual understanding and speed the second-phase of the 
agreement.  He said that all countries involved in the 
Six-Party Talks have worked hard to realize the goal of 
denuclearizing the Korean peninsula.  A date for the 
submission of North Korea's nuclear declaration has not yet 
been set, he said.  China does not plan to stop work on the 
Six-Party Talks because of the Olympics.  Asked if U.S. 
Presidential Elections or a change in administration would 
stop the Six-Party Talks, Qin said that the question should 
not be directed to him.  However, he expressed hope that 
progress can be made if all countries involved continue to 
work towards denuclearization. 
 
Japanese Military for Relief Delivery 
------------------------------------- 
 
¶3. Asked about military planes from the Japanese Self-Defense 
Force being used to deliver aid to Sichuan earthquake 
victims, Qin said that China is grateful for the many 
countries that have offered material, financial and spiritual 
support.  Some countries have used military planes to speed 
the delivery of urgently needed goods and some militaries 
have provided tents and blankets.  When asked for 
clarification as to whether Japan has or will provide aid via 
military planes, the spokesperson said that China welcomes 
aid from all countries, but that aid provided via the 
military must be "further discussed" through the relevant 
countries' Departments of Defense.  Japan's contribution is 
pending such further discussion.  When asked why the Chinese 
media were not covering the story, Qin said that what the 
Chinese media cover is up to the Chinese media.  Regarding 
the use of planes from the Japanese Self Defense Force, Qin 
said that the means of receiving aid would depend on the 
needs of the recipient country.  Asked if opposition to the 
use of Japanese military planes by Chinese Internet users 
 
BEIJING 00002086  002 OF 003 
 
 
indicated that China is not welcoming of Japanese aid, Qin 
reiterated that China is thankful to the people and 
governments who have offered aid, sympathy and support, 
including Japan. 
 
Nepal's Constitutional Assembly 
------------------------------- 
 
¶4. Asked about the recent opening of Nepal's Constitutional 
Assembly, the spokesperson said that China is glad to see the 
successful opening of the Assembly.  As a friend and 
neighbor, China hopes for progress but will adhere to the 
policy of noninterference and will respect the Nepalese 
people's choices regarding development methods and political 
systems. 
 
No More "Cold War Mentality" 
---------------------------- 
 
¶5. At the last regular press conference on May 27, Qin said 
that the U.S.-ROK military alliance represented a "cold war 
mentality."  Asked a follow-up question regarding the 
China-DPRK military alliance, Qin noted that his statements 
had drawn attention from the Korean press.  Qin said that 
China is in favor of a "new security concept," and that 
relevant countries must work to build cooperation and trust. 
The U.S.-ROK arrangement is a "special historical alliance." 
Countries should seek to make arrangements within the 
framework of the United Nations and international norms to 
support peace.  Qin said that the Sino-DPRK treaty of mutual 
assistance was a means of promoting friendly relations 
between the two countries, and that in the past few years the 
treaty had been helpful to this goal.  He noted that China 
wants friendly relations with both the DPRK and the ROK, and 
is in favor of peace and stability in the region.  When asked 
if his remarks "remain logical" when considering the 
U.S.-Japanese military alliance, Qin said that this 
arrangement is also "left over from history."  Qin expressed 
hope that the arrangement be favorable for regional stability 
and the building of mutual trust. 
 
Espionage Allegations Groundless 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶6. Asked for comment on the Chinese citizen who recently 
pleaded guilty to espionage charges in the United States, Qin 
said that any such allegations of espionage are groundless 
and stem from ulterior motives. 
 
Sharon Stone's Comments 
----------------------- 
 
¶7. China has taken note of actress Sharon Stone's remarks 
that the earthquake was a result of "bad karma" caused by 
Chinese occupation of Tibet.  Qin further noted that Ms. 
Stone has apologized for her remarks.  Qin expressed hope 
that the Chinese Government and people's relief efforts can 
be fully understood by the international community, and that 
as an actress Ms. Stone can use her position to contribute to 
mutual trust and understanding between China and the United 
States. 
 
Premier Wen on Facebook? 
------------------------ 
 
¶8. Asked for comment on Premier Wen Jiabao's page on the 
social networking website Facebook, and the more than 13,000 
people who have "friended" him, the Spokesperson said that he 
had not heard of Facebook.  However, he speculated that the 
webpage in question had perhaps been created in response to 
China's earthquake relief efforts, and expressed hope that 
the international community will see the unified efforts of 
the Chinese people and have a better understanding of China. 
 
Other Topics: Tibet Visit for Journalists, Rumors 
--------------------------------------------- ---- 
 
¶9. Asked if foreign journalists would be given permission to 
visit Tibet to cover the Olympic Torch Relay, the 
spokesperson said he would convey the request to BOCOG. 
Regarding rumors that an unnamed Chinese leader had told the 
South Korean press that Kim Jong-il had been assassinated, 
Qin said that he had not heard of it and could not confirm 
it.  He urged the journalists present to use the press 
conference for "more serious matters." 
 
¶10. VISITORS: Indian Foreign Minister Pranab Mukherjee will 
visit China June 4-7.  During the visit, Mukherjee's first to 
 
BEIJING 00002086  003 OF 003 
 
 
China since taking office, he will meet with Chinese Foreign 
Minister Yang Jiechi and other Chinese leaders, and will 
visit both Beijing and Guangzhou to oversee the opening of 
the Indian Consulate General there.  During the visit, both 
sides will discuss the implementation of the consensus on 
developing strategic cooperation, and exchange views on 
bilateral relations.  South Korean President Lee Myung-bak is 
currently visiting China and will travel to Qingdao today 
before moving on to Sichuan province tomorrow.  Chinese 
Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi will accompany President Lee to 
Sichuan. 
PICCUTA