08BEIJING2084
CHINA REVISITS MANDATORY CERTIFICATION FOR
Thu May 29 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy Beijing
VZCZCXRO5710 
PP RUEHCN RUEHGH RUEHVC 
DE RUEHBJ #2084/01 1500915 
ZNR UUUUU ZZH 
P 290915Z MAY 08 
FM AMEMBASSY BEIJING 
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7604 
INFO RUEHOO/CHINA POSTS COLLECTIVE 
RUEHIN/AIT TAIPEI 6961 
RUEHKO/AMEMBASSY TOKYO 1943 
RUEHUL/AMEMBASSY SEOUL 0677 
RUEHGV/USMISSION GENEVA 2232 
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS 
RUEAHLC/DHS WASHDC 
RUCPDOC/USDOC WASHDC 
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDCUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 BEIJING 002084 
 
State for EAP/CM JYamomoto, PSecor 
State also for EB/CIP DGross, WWitteman 
USTR for JMcHale, TWineland, TStratford 
USDOC for ITA IKasoff 
USDOC for ITA JEstrada 
GENEVA PASS USTR 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECPS ETRD PREL EINV WTRO ECON CH
SUBJECT: CHINA REVISITS MANDATORY CERTIFICATION FOR 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY PRODUCTS 
 
Ref: A. 2004 BEIJING 3621 B. 2008 BEIJING 1567 
 
¶1. (U) Summary: Deputy Assistant United States Trade 
Representative Timothy Wineland met with the Chinese 
Government and United States industry representatives 
in Beijing from May 6-16 to discuss China's 
unprecedented proposal for mandatory certification 
requirements across a wide range of security-enhanced 
information and communications technology products. 
In meetings with China's Certification and 
Accreditation Administration (CNCA), Ministry of 
Commerce (MOFCOM), and State Encryption Management 
Commission (SEMC), Wineland stressed USG and industry 
concern over the proposed regime and urged continued 
dialogue to forestall the publication of implementing 
regulations, which he warned may politicize the issue. 
Industry representatives shared with Wineland their 
varying degrees of concern over the proposed 
regulations, the history of information security in 
China, and the precedent the new regulations could set 
if implemented in their current form. The Chinese 
Government appeared committed to pushing ahead with 
the measures, but showed some flexibility in the 
timing of their ultimate implementation and was open 
to further dialogue. End Summary. 
 
Background on China's Information Security Regulations 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
¶2. (U) In August 2007, CNCA notified to the World 
Trade Organization (WTO) Technical Barriers to Trade 
(TBT) Committee 13 proposed technical regulations 
mandating testing and certification for a wide range 
of commercial, security-enhanced information and 
communication technology (ICT) products, including: 
website recovery producs, firewalls, network secure 
separation card and line selectors, secure separation 
and information exchange products, secure routers, 
smartcard chip operating systems, data backup and 
recovery, secure operating systems, secure databases, 
anti-spam products, intrusion detection systems, 
network vulnerability scanners, and security audit 
products. 
 
¶3. (U) The proposed regulations are potential trade 
barriers and are a major USG and industry concern in 
part because of past measures introduced by the 
Chinese Government in this area. In 1999, the State 
Council published the Commercial Encryption 
Administration Regulations, imposing comprehensive 
restrictions on the research, production, sale, and 
use of encryption products in China. In 2003, China 
published regulations to implement the mandatory use 
of Chinese encryption algorithms for WiFi, the 
wireless networking technology, under a standard 
called WAPI, or WLAN Authentication and Privacy 
Infrastructure (Ref A). In 2006 and 2007, China 
introduced requirements for foreign companies to 
register all encryption-enabled products they were 
using in China. On March 1, 2008, nine Chinese 
Government ministries and agencies jointly issued the 
"Regulations on Government Procurement of Information 
Products Containing Cryptographic Technology," which 
restricts government procurement of ICT products for 
national security applications to those products 
specified in a catalog of approved products maintained 
by the Ministry of Finance and SEMC (Ref B). 
 
¶4. (SBU) In addition to these regulations, China in 
December 2007 promulgated specifications related to 
the Trusted Computing Module (TCM), a Chinese domestic 
equivalent to the international standard Trusted 
Platform Module (TPM), used to develop hardware-based 
encryption in the form of a secure microprocessor chip. 
The series of ICT security-related initiatives appear 
to reflect China's continued interest in pursuing 
ambitious programs to promote domestic standards, 
control sensitive technology within its borders, and 
reduce the country's reliance on foreign technology, 
often despite international protest and without much 
regard for the practical considerations of their 
implementation. 
 
CNCA Defends Measures, but Shows Flexibility 
-------------------------------------------- 
 
¶5. (SBU) In a May 6 meeting with CNCA Chief Technical 
Supervisor Liu Weijun, Wineland emphasized the concern 
of the United States government and industry that no 
country currently requires mandatory information 
security certification and testing for commercial 
products. Liu stressed China's concerns for 
safeguarding information security, which he said was 
in China's economic, social, and political interests. 
He defended CNCA's proposed regulations as both within 
WTO rules and in accordance with international 
practice. That is, he said CNCA's notification of the 
proposed regulations to the WTO was procedurally 
correct; and the proposed certification system is in 
line with China's existing China Compulsory 
Certificate mark (CCC Mark) scheme (a compulsory 
safety mark for many categories of products), which he 
noted includes information technology products and is 
a system that is employed internationally. 
 
¶6. (SBU) Wineland stressed three main USG concerns 
stemming from a lack of information on the proposed 
regulations. First, he asked what additional 
requirements would be placed on encryption-enabled 
products during the certification process. Liu 
replied that any requirements related to encryption 
would come directly from SEMC, the agency behind 
China's 1999 encryption regulations and the 2003 WAPI 
regulations. He added that the new mandatory 
certification proposal would not create new 
requirements for encryption products, but would merely 
follow rules that are already in place, apparently 
referring to the 1999 regulations. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Second, Wineland inquired whether companies 
would be required to provide the source code of their 
products during the certification process. He pointed 
out that most countries require a limited amount of 
source code only at higher levels of security 
assurance typically used in national security 
applications. Liu replied that all products above a 
particular security assurance level would require a 
source code review. He pointed out that this would be 
equivalent to the international Common Criteria (CC) 
system, which requires source code review for products 
above Evaluation Assurance Level (EAL) 4. 
 
¶8. (SBU) Third, Wineland noted that the testing 
process for certification in most cases takes many 
months (4 to 24 months, according to the United States 
General Accounting Office, which also projected the 
cost of such testing at $80,000 to $350,000), and that 
CNCA's proposed May 1, 2009 implementation is 
therefore an area of concern among businesses. He 
requested that more information be provided about 
testing labs and processes. Liu acknowledged that the 
May 1, 2009 implementation deadline does not leave 
much preparation time, especially because the 
implementing regulations had not yet been published. 
As a result, he said that, if certain products need 
more time to prepare for implementation, CNCA would 
consider revising the timing of the requirements. 
 
¶9. (SBU) Finally, Wineland warned that, based on 
precedents set in 1999 and in 2004 with WAPI, 
encryption issues could quickly become politicized and 
might have a lasting effect on bilateral relations. 
This is especially true now, he said, when trade 
critics in the United States Congress are likely to 
seize on the issue. As a means to avoid this, 
Wineland suggested that CNCA not publish the 
regulations, which were originally expected on May 1 
(one year prior to the implementation deadline), and 
instead continue a working-level dialogue to discuss 
the details of the regulations and ways to best meet 
China's legitimate objectives in a way consistent with 
international norms. Liu was receptive to Wineland's 
warnings to avoid politicizing the issue, stressing 
that discussions of the matter should be exclusively 
technical, and that CNCA is open to talking about how 
to resolve specific disagreements on the matter to 
make the system more "scientific and reasonable." He 
said that the impending implementation regulations or 
separate guidance would spell out many of the 
program's technical details and testing requirements, 
but that their publication had already been delayed in 
response to feedback received from industry. 
 
¶10. (SBU) Wineland also suggested that China and the 
United States, in the medium term, consider 
discussions on the role of the Common Criteria 
Recognition Arrangement (CCRA), an international 
framework for specifying, implementing, and evaluating 
information technology security. Liu responded that 
China's own requirements were based in many ways on 
the international standards used in CC. 
 
Industry Comments on Proposed Regulations 
----------------------------------------- 
 
¶11. (SBU) In October 2007, following China's TBT 
notifications, and again on March 25 and April 18, 
2008, United States industry associations submitted to 
CNCA comments on China's proposed information security 
regulations. The submissions were prepared by the 
United States Information Technology Office (USITO), 
Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA), 
Software Information Industry Association (SIIA), 
Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA), Information 
Technology Industry Council (ITI), and American 
Electronics Association (AeA). 
 
¶12. (SBU) In their comments, the affected industry 
groups raised a series of concerns. First, 
multinational companies reported that in no other 
market in the world are they required to undertake 
mandatory conformity assessments in the scale or 
specificity outlined by CNCA. They questioned why 
China's information security needs differ from the 
rest of the world, and warned of a chilling effect on 
trade due to unnecessary and duplicative requirements 
and significant border delays for imports to China. 
Next, they noted that products already broadly 
utilized in the global market will be subject to 
Chinese standards that have not been vetted 
internationally for reliability, interoperability, or 
performance to users. The requirement, they said, may 
force the development of bifurcated product lines, 
causing a significant barrier to trade and the 
possibility of discriminatory treatment for overseas 
products. 
 
¶13. (SBU) Furthermore, United States businesses 
questioned CNCA's use of only Chinese domestic (GB/T 
or YD/T) standards in technical proposals, noting that 
international IT companies have had no opportunity to 
participate in the development and approval of these 
standards, some of which appear to be out of date 
compared with international standards. Companies also 
raised concerns that China's testing and certification 
labs are all affiliated with the Chinese Government, 
and are not independent, internationally-recognized 
labs that are used in other foreign countries. Among 
other issues, industry noted that the proposed testing 
regime raises concerns over confidentiality and 
intellectual property rights protection. In separate 
meetings with Wineland in Beijing, industry 
representatives elaborated on these concerns. 
SEMC Clarifies Encryption Requirements 
-------------------------------------- 
 
¶14. (SBU) Finally, industry provided a separate set of 
comments focused specifically on the implementation of 
cryptographic requirements under CNCA's proposed 
certification system. In particular, companies raised 
concerns over secure databases, secure operating 
systems, secure routers, and smartcard operating 
systems, each of which will apparently be required to 
conform to new encryption requirements, incorporated 
by reference into the CCC Mark certification process. 
In response to Wineland's questions on this matter, 
CNCA responded that encryption matters are not within 
their purview, and that such requirements are 
established by SEMC. In a May 15 meeting with 
Wineland, SEMC Director Mme. Qiang Zhijun confirmed 
the four suspected categories of secure products would 
require source code review prior to certification, and 
that in fact SEMC's regulatory authority extended only 
to those products. She did note, however, that the 13 
product categories already notified to the WTO were 
only "the first batch" of products to be certified, 
and that there will be more in the future, at which 
point SEMC's testing for encryption products could 
expand beyond the current four products. 
 
¶15. (SBU) Qiang said that SEMC would soon publish 
detailed guidelines for testing procedures related to 
encryption products. When asked, she said 
definitively that included products would not be 
required to use Chinese encryption algorithms, but 
that foreign, publicly-available algorithms could also 
be used, as long as they passed testing. In either 
case, however, she said that source code review would 
be required for testing, which would take place in 
four dedicated labs, separate from CNCA testing for 
the other product categories. SEMC's labs, she added, 
are "basically ready" for testing. When asked, she 
said that the SEMC test for the four cited products 
would be in addition to, not in lieu of, CNCA testing 
process. 
 
MOFCOM Meetings 
--------------- 
 
¶16. (SBU) In two separate meetings with MOFCOM 
officials, one with Americas DDG Wang Hongbo on May 9 
and one with WTO Affairs DDG E Defeng on May 15, 
Wineland outlined both the substantive concerns of the 
United States Government not only with the 13 draft 
regulations, but also with precedents set by China in 
the encryption sector. Wineland indicated to MOFCOM 
that, while China's draft regulations remain in draft 
form, working level consultations and dialogue are the 
preferred means of engagement and progress on the 
issue, to ensure that China's regulations in this area 
can achieve China's legitimate objectives in a manner 
consistent with international norms and practices. 
However, were China to publish the final regulations 
with a date-certain implementation deadline, this 
would necessarily elevate this issue in the United 
States to a political level, given the serious 
substantive concerns of the United States Government 
about the regulations as well as past precedent in the 
area of Chinese encryption and information security 
rules. MOFCOM officials indicated their interest in 
not politicizing this issue, and Wineland agreed that 
this is possible and preferred, so long as dialogue 
continues and final regulations are not published. 
 
 
Third Country Engagement 
------------------------ 
 
¶17. (SBU) In a meeting with European Union officials 
in Beijing on May 13, Wineland briefed the EU on USG 
concerns about the 13 regulations as well as China's 
response, and expressed USG appreciation for EU 
support for the US intervention at the March 2008 WTO 
TBT Committee meeting in Geneva, where the issue was 
raised. EU officials indicated that they would report 
United States Government concerns and China's response 
to Brussels, and looked forward to working together 
where possible. In a subsequent meeting in Tokyo on 
May 16, Wineland and Japanese trade officials also 
exchanged views on this issue (Septel). 
 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶18. (SBU) China's proposed regulations are 
unprecedented in scope because they would require 
mandatory testing and certification not only for 
products procured by the Chinese Government for 
national security applications, but for all commercial 
IT products in 13 categories, from anti-virus software 
to hardware such as routers. Furthermore, the 
proposed scheme requires conformity with China's 
domestic standards, many of which are still 
unavailable, and which do not appear to have been 
developed in an open or transparent manner. Because 
the current proposed regulations are based on (as yet 
unknown) domestic standards, the initiative is 
reminiscent of China's push for WAPI in 2003. WAPI 
was met with fierce international resistance and was 
ultimately suspended indefinitely. However, the 
Chinese Government expressed in various meetings their 
determination to move forward with the current 
measures, but showed some flexibility in the timing of 
implementation and a willingness o continue 
discussions on the topic. End Coment.