08DUBLIN282
IRISH POLITICAL PARTIES LAUNCH VIGOROUS CAMPAIGN
Tue May 20 00:00:00 +0200 2008
CONFIDENTIAL
Embassy Dublin
VZCZCXRO8778
RR RUEHAG RUEHROV
DE RUEHDL #0282/01 1411545
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
R 201545Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY DUBLIN
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9175
INFO RUCNMEM/EU MEMBER STATES
RUEHBL/AMCONSUL BELFAST 0754C O N F I D E N T I A L SECTION 01 OF 02 DUBLIN 000282 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: DECL: 05/20/2018 
TAGS: PREL PGOV EI
SUBJECT: IRISH POLITICAL PARTIES LAUNCH VIGOROUS CAMPAIGN 
IN SUPPORT OF LISBON TREATY 
 
REF: DUBLIN 265 AND PREVIOUS 
 
DUBLIN 00000282  001.2 OF 002 
 
 
Classified By: DCM Robert J. Faucher; Reasons 1.4 (B) and (D). 
 
------- 
Summary 
------- 
 
¶1.  (C) The Lisbon Treaty 'Yes' campaign seems to be gaining 
traction as the Irish political parties launch a vigorous 
campaign in favor of the treaty and a new poll indicates that 
support for the treaty is running two to one (albeit with 47 
percent of those polled undecided).  Supporters of the Lisbon 
Treaty have significant obstacles to overcome, however, in 
winning a 'Yes' vote in the June 12 Lisbon Treaty referendum. 
  Though there are still several weeks to go until the 
referendum, the 'Yes' campaign appears well on track and it 
is hard to expect the 'No' forces to prevail.  End summary. 
 
---------------- 
The Yeas Have It 
---------------- 
 
¶2.  (U) Ireland's Lisbon Treaty referendum campaign began in 
earnest during the week of May 10, with all major political 
parties launching their 'Yes' campaigns in favor of the 
Treaty.  Overnight, thousands of 'Yes' posters popped up 
throughout the country, and Treaty supporters organized 10-15 
events a day to promote support for the Treaty. 
 
¶3.  (U) Initially, and as a result of these efforts, the 
'Yes' campaign seems to be gaining ground.  A poll published 
on May 17 by The Irish Times Newspaper demonstrated growing 
support for the Treaty.  The report on the poll, headlined 
"Support for Lisbon Treaty Running at Two to One," indicated 
that 35 percent of the voters now plan to vote 'Yes,' an 
increase of nine points over a similar poll in January; while 
18 percent now say they will vote against the Treaty, an 
increase of eight points in the same period.  Nonetheless, 
the report stated that almost half of voters (47 percent, 
compared to 64 percent in January) remain undecided, or do 
not intend to vote, reflecting continuing uncertainty among 
the electorate. 
 
¶4.  (U) Reasons cited in the poll for voting 'Yes' included: 
 
-- keeping Ireland involved in the EU; 
-- ensuring Ireland's economic future; 
-- enabling the EU to function more effectively; 
-- protecting investment in Ireland; and 
-- the belief that the EU has been good for Ireland. 
 
¶5.  (U) On the 'No' side, the reasons of those polled 
included: 
 
-- the failure to understand what the treaty is about; 
-- safeguarding Ireland,s neutrality; 
-- the belief that bigger countries or Eastern European 
countries would have too much influence in the EU; 
-- maintaining Irish identity; and 
-- helping farmers in the World Trade Organization talks. 
 
¶6.  (U) On May 16, Ireland's Minister for Defense, Willie 
O'Dea, confirmed that Ireland's military neutrality would not 
be compromised by the Lisbon Treaty.  Speaking at a briefing 
on peacekeeping and the Lisbon Treaty, O'Dea said the treaty 
would help the EU play an increasing role in responding to 
crisis, and in maintaining international peace and security. 
But neither the Treaty's solidarity clause nor its provision 
calling for Member States to increase defense capabilities 
will impinge on Ireland's traditional military neutrality, 
according to O'Dea. 
 
------------- 
The Nays Have It 
---------------- 
 
¶7.  (C) During a May 16 Embassy meeting, Irish Department of 
Foreign Affairs Director General of the European Union 
Division, Daniel Mulhall, outlined some of the obstacles 
proponents of the EU Lisbon Reform Treaty need to overcome in 
order to win a 'Yes' vote in the Treaty referendum on June 
¶12.  Because of the complexity of the treaty, Mulhall said, 
which contains seven or more critical points, the Treaty does 
not lend itself easily to quickly digestible slogans that 
clamor for the attention of the voter.  "Sound bites," such 
as the alleged threats to Irish neutrality, low taxation 
levels, farming subsidies, public services, or sovereignty, 
are much more readily available to Treaty opponents, which 
have been getting their negative messages out for some months 
now he commented. 
 
DUBLIN 00000282  002.2 OF 002 
 
 
 
¶8.  (C) Mulhall also credited Treaty opponents with being 
very organized.  The 'No' campaign is being led by Libertas, 
which he said operates in a very business-like manner. 
Mulhall mused that the shine may have gone off the EU now 
that Ireland has become so economically advanced and the 
immediate benefits of EU membership have become harder to 
see.  He also noted that the farming community -- always a 
staunch supporter of the EU in the past -- was uncertain 
whether to support the Treaty for fear that the Common 
Agricultural Program (CAP) might be changed so as to become 
less advantageous to Irish farmers.  He went on to say that 
the major unions had also not yet made up their minds on the 
treaty, though two smaller unions had taken decisions - one 
'Yes' and one 'No.'  (Note: The only Irish political party to 
campaign against the Treaty, Sinn Fein, unveiled its 'No' 
campaign on May 19, saying the Treaty was bad because it 
would "reduce (Ireland's) political strength, further 
undermine neutrality, and is bad for the economy and worker 
rights."  End note.) 
 
¶9.  (C) Mulhall reiterated that the Government is required by 
law to remain neutral in the Treaty campaign, providing 
information equally about the 'for' and 'against' arguments 
concerning the Treaty.  He added, however, that unlike what 
happened in the first Nice Treaty referendum (which the 
government lost), the Irish government's referendum 
commission is forcing the 'No' side to be accurate about its 
claims of what the proposed Treaty would or would not do. 
This has forced the 'No' side to climb down on three major 
issues so far, embarrassing 'No' campaigners and helping the 
'Yes' side gain traction. 
 
¶10.  (C) In a mildly disconcerting, but not surprising 
admission, Mulhall said that the Government does not foresee 
rejection of the Treaty referendum and has no fall-back plan 
should the vote be negative.  He said he believed that even 
if the voters rejected the Treaty on June 12, Ireland would 
eventually have to support EU reforms because the EU was an 
integral part of the fabric of Ireland. 
 
¶11.  (C) These negatives notwithstanding, Mulhall was 
cautiously optimistic about the prospects for passage of the 
Treaty.  He pointed out that 95 percent of the Members of 
Parliament are in favor of the Treaty, as well as all the 
major political parties.  (Note: The only political party 
represented in the Parliament that opposes the Treaty is Sinn 
Fein, which holds a mere four seats out of the 166 total. 
End note.)  Mulhall felt that party mobilization and the 
assenting voices of senior politicians would persuade many 
party faithful to trust their leaders and get out to vote in 
support of the Treaty.  In reply to concerns about the 
head-start gained by the 'No' campaign in getting their 
message out earlier, Mulhall commented that the Irish party 
machinery was only accustomed to sustaining a four to six 
week campaign, so little ground had really been lost. 
 
------- 
Comment 
------- 
 
¶12.  (C) Ireland has clearly learned the lessons from the 
referendum on the Nice Treaty.  Low voter turn-out in the 
first Nice Treaty vote in 2001 meant the Treaty was defeated. 
 In this referendum campaign, the critical factor for the 
political parties and other Treaty proponents remains their 
ability to turn out the vote in the June 21 vote (reftel). 
Based on previous referendum results, political commentators 
tell us that the core population of voters inclined to reject 
the Treaty runs at about 20 percent of the total electorate. 
It would seem, then, that to ensure safe passage of the 
referendum, at least half the electorate needs to turn out. 
The political parties have in recent days launched a vigorous 
'Yes' campaign.  'Yes' posters on the street outnumber 'No' 
posters by a considerable margin (perhaps four or five to 
one).  Street-corner canvassing and hundreds of town meetings 
are being held by Treaty supporters (including Ministers), 
persuading voters to support the treaty one voter at a time. 
Government contacts told POLOFF on May 19 that a quiet order 
has gone out from the Prime Minister's Office that it is "all 
hands on deck" for government employees until the referendum 
is over.  Leave has been canceled, as have the overseas trips 
of Cabinet Ministers, including that of Deputy Prime Minister 
Mary Coughlan.  Though there are still several weeks to go 
until the referendum, the 'Yes' campaign appears well on 
track and it most observers here do not see how the 'No' 
forces can prevail. 
FOLEY