08STATE51536
FOLLOW-UP MAY 21 - DAY OF SOLIDARITY WITH CUBAN
Thu May 15 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Secretary of State
VZCZCXRO4628
OO RUEHAG RUEHAO RUEHAP RUEHAT RUEHBC RUEHBI RUEHBL RUEHBW RUEHBZ
RUEHCD RUEHCHI RUEHCI RUEHCN RUEHDA RUEHDE RUEHDF RUEHDT RUEHDU RUEHED
RUEHEL RUEHFK RUEHFL RUEHGA RUEHGD RUEHGH RUEHGI RUEHGR RUEHHA RUEHHM
RUEHHO RUEHHT RUEHIHL RUEHIK RUEHJO RUEHJS RUEHKN RUEHKR RUEHKSO
RUEHKUK RUEHKW RUEHLA RUEHLH RUEHLN RUEHLZ RUEHMA RUEHMC RUEHMJ RUEHMR
RUEHMRE RUEHNAG RUEHNG RUEHNH RUEHNL RUEHNP RUEHNZ RUEHPA RUEHPB
RUEHPD RUEHPOD RUEHPT RUEHPW RUEHQU RUEHRD RUEHRG RUEHRN RUEHROV
RUEHRS RUEHTM RUEHVC RUEHVK RUEHYG
DE RUEHC #1536/01 1360011
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 150002Z MAY 08
FM SECSTATE WASHDC
TO ALL DIPLOMATIC AND CONSULAR POSTS COLLECTIVE IMMEDIATE
INFO RHEHAAA/NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL WASHINGTON DC IMMEDIATEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 05 STATE 051536 
 
SENSITIVE 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PHUM PREL KPAO SOCI CU
SUBJECT: FOLLOW-UP MAY 21 - DAY OF SOLIDARITY WITH CUBAN 
PEOPLE 
 
REF:  (A) STATE 46997, (B) STATE 45792 
 
¶1.  (U) This is an action message; see paras 3-9. 
 
¶2.  (SBU) Per reftels, Embassies have been asked to 
undertake activities and encourage host governments and 
NGOs to undertake activities for a day of solidarity with 
the Cuban people on May 21. For post information only, 
President Bush is expected to host an event at the White 
House in honor of Cuban civil society and to highlight 
political prisoners on May 21. This event has not been 
announced officially, so posts are asked not to share this 
information.  This cable provides guidance and 
instructions for posts' reference and requests response 
cable reporting on actions taken in Host Country. 
 
¶3.  (SBU) ACTION REQUEST:  As per the NSC, all posts are 
requested to confirm via front channel cable all 
activities or actions to be taken by the post and/or the 
Host Government in support of the Solidarity Day event, 
such as a human rights related event with local NGOs.  At 
a minimum, all posts should seek to place an editorial 
under the Ambassador or Charge's signature in a major 
local newspaper.  (See paragraph 9).  In addition, 
descriptions of activities sponsored by posts (such as 
round-tables, exhibits, movie showings, etc.) as well as 
activities sponsored by host country nationals whether 
NGOs or Government officials should be confirmed and 
reported. 
 
¶4.  (SBU) A large number of Posts have responded to 
reftels with their plans for Cuba Solidarity Day.  All 
Posts planning events/outreach, including those that have 
already reported, are requested to report and/or reconfirm 
plans and activities NLT OOB Monday May 19.  Slug 
responses for your Regional Bureau Public Diplomacy 
Affairs Office (PD Desks). In addition, all Posts are 
requested to send after action reports and media coverage, 
per White House request, NLT COB Thursday, May 22, to your 
Regional Bureau Public Diplomacy Affairs Office (PD 
Desks).  Post should urge NGOs hosting events and 
activities to list their events in www.solidaridadcuba.org 
which provides a pinpoint map mechanism to track events. 
Events or activities wholly sponsored by the USG should 
not be posted on the web site. 
 
¶5.  (U) Paragraphs 6-9 provide documents which have been 
cleared by the White House and are for use in connection 
with Solidarity Day activities. 
--  Paragragh 6 "Day of Solidarity with the Cuban People" 
contains a backgrounder for embassy's internal use, 
explaining the genesis and rationale for this event. 
-- Paragraph 7 "Demonstrating Solidarity with the Cuban 
People's Struggle for Freedom" is a fact sheet regarding 
May 21 activities. 
--  Paragraph 8 "Responses to Anticipated Negative 
Reactions to Cuba Solidarity Day" contains points for 
posts to draw from on an "if asked" basis. 
-- Paragraph 9 "Day of Solidarity with the Cuban People" 
is the cleared op-ed for posts' use. 
 
¶6.  (U) Day of Solidarity with the Cuban People 
 
Background: 
 
At an April 7, 2007 conference on Cuba in Miami, Commerce 
Secretary and co-chair of the Commission for Assistance to 
a Free Cuba Carlos Gutierrez announced that the USG would 
participate in a "Day of Solidarity with the Cuban People" 
on May 21. The purpose of this event is to promote 
peaceful democratic change in Cuba by showing broad 
international support for the Cuban people. 
 
The current regime in Havana seeks to legitimize itself 
both at home and abroad, undertaking various economic 
initiatives, none of which addresses the economy's 
fundamental flaws, nor addresses the human rights and 
fundamental freedoms denied to the Cuban people. Raul 
Castro's succession to power was carried forward without a 
democratic vote by the Cuban people. 
 
For these reasons, the President of the United States will 
host an event on May 21 in support of a "Day of Solidarity 
with the Cuban People" to focus on the plight of prisoners 
of conscience and the lack of civil and political freedoms 
in Cuba. 
 
STATE 00051536  002 OF 005 
 
 
 
This date coincides with a period when Cubans all over the 
island commemorate Cuban patriots who have suffered at the 
hands of the regime for the cause of freedom and human 
rights, including the anniversary of the death of Pedro 
Luis Boitel, a poet-activist who died on May 25, 1972 at 
age 39 while on a hunger strike in Cuba's "Castle of the 
Prince" prison. 
 
A Call to Action: 
 
Democracy activists and non-governmental organizations 
plan to demonstrate their support for human rights on the 
island during the mid-May timeframe. 
 
The people of Cuba need to know that they have world-wide 
solidarity and support for their efforts to achieve 
genuine political and economic change in Cuba. 
 
We ask other countries to join in this effort to highlight 
the deplorable human rights situation on the island and 
the need for the unconditional release of all political 
prisoners, including Dr. Oscar Elas Biscet, who received 
the Presidential Medal of Freedom in October 2007. 
 
We urge countries to draw attention to the plight of 
Cuba's approximately 240 prisoners of conscience plus the 
additional 5,000 sentenced for dangerousness with a call 
for legitimate democratic transition in Cuba by: 
 
- Holding a press event; 
- Issuing a statement; and 
- Encouraging NGOs to organize events and issue 
statements. 
 
Cuba remains a nation where the people are denied the most 
basic freedoms and opportunities, freedoms that 
governments in our hemisphere, except for Cuba, have 
agreed to honor and defend in the Inter-American 
Democratic Charter, and much of the world community, 
including Cuba, has promised to honor through the UN 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 
 
We will call on the Cuban regime to allow its citizens to 
exercise internationally recognized civil and political 
rights and freedoms and unleash the potential of the Cuban 
people to give them an opportunity to enjoy the fruits of 
democracy and the benefits of a 21st century economy. 
 
United States policy remains clear and strong:  we seek a 
free, just, prosperous, and sovereign Cuba to join the 
community of democracies in the Americas.  We want the 
Cuban people to freely and democratically define their 
country's destiny. 
 
¶7.  (U) Demonstrating Solidarity with the Cuban People's 
Struggle for Freedom 
 
To promote peaceful democratic change in Cuba and show 
support for the Cuban people, May 21 will mark a "Day of 
Solidarity with the Cuban People."  The day will focus on 
the plight of prisoners of conscience and the lack of 
civil and political freedoms in Cuba.   The Cuban regime 
denies its people the most basic freedoms and 
opportunities that are enshrined in the Inter-American 
Democratic Charter, the UN Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights and the International Covenant for Civil and 
Political Rights. The current regime seeks to legitimize 
itself both at home and abroad through initiatives which 
fail to address fundamental economic flaws or promote 
basic freedoms denied to the Cuban people. Raul Castro's 
succession to power occurred without a democratic vote by 
the Cuban people. 
 
Countries and civil society groups worldwide have an 
opportunity to join Cuban democracy leaders and non- 
governmental organizations in commemorating May 21 as a 
"Day of Solidarity with the Cuban People".  Democracy 
leaders and non-governmental organizations plan to 
demonstrate their support for human rights on the island 
during mid-May when Cubans across the island traditionally 
commemorate Cuban patriots who have suffered at the hands 
of the regime for the cause of freedom and human rights, 
including the anniversary of the death of Pedro Luis 
Boitel, a poet-activist who died on May 25, 1972 at age 39 
while on a hunger strike in Cuba's "Castle of the Prince" 
prison. The people of Cuba need to know that they have 
worldwide solidarity and support for their efforts to 
achieve genuine political and economic freedom in Cuba. 
 
Demonstrate your solidarity for Cubans' struggle for 
 
STATE 00051536  003 OF 005 
 
 
freedom by: 
- Holding a press event; 
- Issuing a statement; and 
- Encouraging NGOs to organize events and issue statements 
which 
-- Highlight the deplorable human rights situation on 
the island; 
-- Call for the unconditional release of the 
approximately 240 prisoners of conscience (including Dr. 
Oscar Elas Biscet) plus the additional 5,000 sentenced 
for dangerousness; 
-- Call for the Cuban regime to allow its citizens to 
exercise internationally recognized civil and political 
rights and freedoms; and 
-- Call for legitimate democratic transition in Cuba. 
 
Freedom supporters in Cuba seek a free, just, prosperous, 
and sovereign Cuba to join the community of democracies in 
the Americas and want the Cuban people to define their 
country's destiny freely and democratically. 
 
Key Cuba Solidarity Day Website Links: Please link to 
these important Websites from your home page and encourage 
visitors, members and affiliates to sign the petition. 
- www.solidaridadcuba.org is a useful resource for the 
international community about how to participate in Cuba 
Solidarity Day. 
- At www.peticioncuba.org you can find and sign a 
petition for the release of Cuba's political prisoners. 
 
¶8.  (U) Responses to Anticipated Negative Reactions to 
Cuba Solidarity Day 
 
¶A. CUBA SOLIDARITY DAY IS A U.S. PROPAGANDA EXERCISE 
 
RESPONSE:  The U.S. and other governments are joining NGOs 
and citizens of democratic countries all over the world to 
show solidarity with Cubans seeking peaceful democratic 
change to their country.  Together we are calling on the 
Cuban regime to allow its citizens to exercise these 
internationally recognized civil and political rights and 
freedoms and unleash the potential of the Cuban people to 
give them an opportunity to enjoy the fruits of democracy 
and to build a 21st century economy.  The U.S. advocates 
on behalf of human rights and democracy around the world. 
It's a cornerstone of our foreign policy. 
 
¶B. U.S. PUBLIC PRESSURE IS COUNTER-PRODUCTIVE; ENGAGEMENT 
IS BETTER 
 
RESPONSE: Putting a spotlight on the plight of hundreds of 
political prisoners and their families who suffer in Cuba 
is the right thing to do. Cuba needs to let these people 
return to their families and permit them to fully exercise 
the rights as they agreed to under the U.N. Declaration of 
Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights.  History shows that the most effective 
way to protect victims of human rights violations is by 
shining a light on government abuses. 
 
¶C. CUBA HAS SIGNED U.N. RIGHTS COVENANTS AND IS ENGAGING 
WITH THE U.N. HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL 
 
RESPONSE: While Cuba has signed the international human 
rights Covenants, it remains to be seen whether they will 
proceed with ratification and actually implement the 
obligations set forth in these instruments.  We note that 
the Cuban government continues to hold hundreds of people 
prisoner simply for disagreeing with their government, 
with many sentenced to jail terms of 20-25 years. The 
regime in Havana has not taken any steps to dismantle the 
apparatus of control and repression it uses to detain and 
harass Cubans for peacefully expressing dissent. It has 
denied access to most UN Human Rights Council officials 
and ignored repeated requests by the International 
Committee of the Red Cross to visit Cuban jails. 
 
¶D. U.S. POLICY HAS FAILED TO BRING CHANGE TO CUBA 
 
RESPONSE:  The dictatorship in Cuba has failed to bring 
the real change that Cubans across the island increasingly 
want. Cuba's democratic future will be determined by 
Cubans in their country.  The sovereign people of Cuba 
deserve the same right to choose their government through 
genuinely free and fair elections that citizens in their 
neighboring countries do. It is time for Cuba to rejoin 
its neighbors, to meet the standard set by the region in 
the  Inter-American Democratic charter. 
 
¶E. U.S. SANCTIONS HURT THE CUBAN PEOPLE 
 
 
STATE 00051536  004 OF 005 
 
 
RESPONSE:  U.S. policy denies resources to the Cuban 
dictatorship and encourages private support that directly 
benefits the Cuban people. The U.S. is the largest source 
of private humanitarian assistance to the Cuban people, 
adding up to some $240 million in 2007. 
 
¶F. DISSIDENTS ARE PAID U.S. MERCENARIES 
 
RESPONSE:  Cubans who advocate peaceful democratic change 
for their country are patriots.  Democratic societies have 
an obligation to support and accompany people in 
dictatorships who seek freedom through democratic change. 
Societies that recently made the transition from closed 
societies understand the value of international solidarity 
and have in particular been firm supporters of the Cuban 
people. 
 
¶G. RAUL CASTRO IS A REFORMER; GIVE HIM A CHANCE TO MAKE 
CHANGES 
 
RESPONSE:  Measures decreed by Raul Castro to remove some 
elements of the extraordinary restrictions placed on 
Cubans do not address the fundamental flaw in Cuba's 
command economy-it is run from the top down.  They are 
tactical changes by the current government designed to the 
mitigate calls for real change on the island.  They do not 
dismantle the repressive apparatus of state control nor 
improve the conditions of the people of Cuba. The 
Washington Post points out that Cuba's so-called reforms 
in agriculture fall short of steps taken years ago by 
North Korea. 
 
¶H. THE U.S. IS HOLDING 5 CUBAN "HEROES" PRISONER AND 
REFUSES TO LET THEIR WIVES VISIT 
 
RESPONSE:  The Cuban government acknowledges that the so- 
called "Cuban Five" are agents and officers of Cuba's 
foreign intelligence service. They were convicted in 2001 
of having committed crimes in the United States as part of 
a spy group that Cuban intelligence called the "Wasp 
Network." 
 
The U.S. has granted visas for dozens of relatives to 
visit these prisoners. The U.S. government has not granted 
visas to the wives of two of the prisoners.  One of these 
women was a member of the Wasp Network who was deported 
for engaging in activity related to espionage and is 
ineligible to return to the United States.  The other was 
a candidate for training as a Directorate of Intelligence 
U.S.-based spy when U.S. authorities broke up the network. 
 
¶9.  (U) OP-ED:  Day of Solidarity with the Cuban People 
 
On May 21 we will celebrate the courage and determination 
of the Cuban people as they seek their freedom and voice 
in establishing a democratic future for their country.  On 
this day, in the United States and elsewhere, we will 
commemorate a Day of Solidarity with the Cuban People. 
 
We will call for the release of all Cuban political 
prisoners and repeal of all measures that allow the Cuban 
government to arrest citizens for carrying out acts of 
peaceful dissent.  Cubans need to know that they have 
international support in their struggle for freedom and 
human rights, as the people in Central Europe once did. 
 
(Posts may want to mention any planned local activities 
here) 
 
There has been much talk in the media about the recent 
changes that have been announced in Cuba.  Yes, Raul 
Castro has replaced his brother in some of his positions 
of authority, but this is a process in which Cuba's 
citizens had no say.  And yes, Cubans can now buy cell 
phones and microwave ovens and stay in five star hotels. 
While Cubans may welcome such changes, they are no doubt 
hoping for much more.  With the average monthly wage in 
Cuba at less then $20, these items are still largely out 
of reach and won't let Cubans do what citizens in other 
countries in the Americas are doing: seizing the 
opportunity provided by open societies and open markets. 
 
The sad fact is that Cuba's citizens still live in a 
repressive state, as they have for almost half a century. 
Last December, Cuban authorities stormed a Catholic 
church, tear-gassed parishioners, and dragged 18 
worshipers out.  A Catholic official called the episode, 
"the worst attack against a church in 45 years."  And just 
a few weeks ago, the "Ladies in White," who march 
peacefully each Sunday on behalf of freedom for their 
unjustly imprisoned loved ones, were beaten and dragged 
 
STATE 00051536  005 OF 005 
 
 
away from the " Plaza of the Revolution" when they sought 
to deliver a petition to their government asking for the 
release of political prisoners.  Is this change? 
 
So how will we know when an enduring process of democratic 
change is underway on the island?  We will know there is a 
new Cuba when Cubans have the freedom to organize, 
assemble, and speak their minds.  We will know there is a 
new Cuba when a free and independent press has the power 
to operate without censors. We will know there is a new 
Cuba when the Cuban government allows Cubans to open their 
own businesses and improve the economic well-being of 
their families.  Above all, we will know there is at least 
a start towards a new Cuba when the regime releases its 
political prisoners and engages the Cuban people in an 
open and comprehensive dialogue about the future of their 
country. 
 
Solidarity with the Cuban people means supporting their 
struggle to obtain all the freedoms enumerated in the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, as well as those in 
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. 
Cuba recently signed the latter agreement, but when will 
the government's actions comport with their commitments? 
As any Cuban political prisoner can attest, the Cuban 
state hasn't implemented the provision that says: "No one 
shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or 
degrading treatment or punishment."  Indeed, Cubans have 
been arrested and foreigners expelled for handing out 
copies of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
itself. 
 
On May 21st the United States Government will join in 
solidarity with the Cuban people, particularly the 
prisoners of conscience on the island who remain behind 
bars.  We hope you, too, will mark May 21st with a 
special observance in honor of the people of Cuba who 
continue to fight for the right to be free. 
RICE