08TORONTO168
YUSHCHENKO WELL RECEIVED IN TORONTO
Fri May 30 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consulate Toronto
VZCZCXRO7540
RR RUEHGA RUEHHA RUEHQU RUEHVC
DE RUEHON #0168 1511900
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 301900Z MAY 08 ZDK
FM AMCONSUL TORONTO
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2509
INFO RUEHKV/AMEMBASSY KYIV 0003
RUEHOT/AMEMBASSY OTTAWA 1919
RUCNCAN/ALCAN COLLECTIVE
RUEHBS/USEU BRUSSELS
RUEHNO/USMISSION USNATO 0009UNCLAS TORONTO 000168 
 
SIPDIS 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR EUR/UMB 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PGOV PREL ECON CA UP
SUBJECT: YUSHCHENKO WELL RECEIVED IN TORONTO 
 
Sensitive but unclassified - protect accordingly. 
 
¶1. (U) SUMMARY:  Ukrainian President Victor Yushchenko concluded a 
three day trip to Canada with business meetings and a speech to the 
prominent Economic Club of Toronto.  Yushchenko's speech was 
well-received, even though it was heavy on themes and short on 
specifics.  Several hundred people were in attendance, a mix of the 
Ukrainian expatriate community (which numbers approximately one 
million in Canada) and Canadian business executives interested in 
investment opportunities in the former Soviet country.  Yushchenko 
painted a broad picture of his country, focusing on the need to 
assert its independence and ties with the West through eventual NATO 
and, further down the road, EU membership.  While the 30 minute talk 
was heavy on political background, the president also touched on the 
need for increasing economic liberalization and stable energy 
supplies.  END SUMMARY. 
 
¶2. (U) Yushchenko began by stressing the ties between Canada and 
Ukraine and commented that in order to increase ties between the two 
countries, he would like to see the visa regime abolished for most 
categories of Canadians seeking to visit, study, or do business in 
Ukraine.  He painted a clear picture of the westward gaze of Ukraine 
under his leadership, including highlighting the distinct 
possibility of his country gaining associative relations with the EU 
during France's 2008 EU presidency and an impending free trade 
agreement with the EU.  He particularly noted Canada's support for 
Ukraine's NATO membership bid, calling membership essential to both 
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of his country.  Asserting 
the logical connection between common values and a common defense, 
he said NATO membership would be the path towards guaranteeing 
Ukraine's independence - an independence he said had been declared 
six times in the past century and lost five times.  He acknowledged 
that NATO membership is not favored by a majority of Ukrainians, but 
noted progress by citing figures saying support had doubled in three 
years from 17 to 36 percent, and was continuing to grow. 
 
¶3. (U) Perhaps aware of his critics back home, Yushchenko heralded 
what he termed the "new culture of serious macroeconomic stability" 
in his country.  He cited a list of positive developments, including 
high returns for foreign investors, healthy trade balances, balance 
of payments, GNP growth, new job creation, and WTO membership. 
However, in perhaps a thinly-veiled critique of his political 
rivals, he expressed dismay that his country is still suffering 
because of "socialist policies."  He specifically commented that the 
food market needs to work more efficiently: currently strict 
restrictions on grain exports despite increasing grain production 
are preventing Ukrainian farmers from taking advantage of rising 
world grain prices and distorting markets at home.  He also 
highlighted the need for stable energy supplies and policies in 
Europe.  Several agreements appear to be in process with the EU, he 
noted that a long-planned Caspian pipeline from Baku, Azerbaijan 
through Ukraine to Europe may be in the offing, and thanked Canada 
for signing a nuclear energy agreement with Ukraine to develop 
nuclear energy supplies. 
 
¶4. (U) Finally, linking Ukraine's political and economic 
aspirations, Yushchenko focused on the benefits his country expects 
to reap from hosting the 2012 UEFA soccer finals.  He commented that 
Ukraine is the first Eastern European country to host the 
championship and said this would be another shortcut to his goal for 
Ukraine of EU integration and eventual membership.  He said US$25 
billion of investment is needed to prepare his country's 
infrastructure for the event, including new hotels, new sports 
stadiums, and including US$10 billion in road repairs and 
construction. 
 
¶5. (SBU) COMMENT: As the beneficiary of several standing ovations 
and long, glowing introductions, it was obvious the president was in 
front of an admiring crowd.  While some in the audience displayed an 
obvious interest in partnering with Yushchenko's westward-leaning 
Ukraine in investment opportunities and the president's speech 
appeared geared towards encouraging those aspirations, it was also 
apparent from the undertone of the president's remarks that his 
country's transformation remains a work in progress.  Never far from 
his talking points was the fact that partnerships with governments 
of countries such as Canada and those in the EU will be critical to 
seeing him achieve what he presented as his ultimate goals of 
Western political, military, and economic integration.  END 
COMMENT. 
 
NAY