08WARSAW604
MAY 21 -- CUBA SOLIDARITY DAY
Fri May 16 00:00:00 +0200 2008
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Warsaw
VZCZCXYZ0004
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHWR #0604 1371216
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 161216Z MAY 08
FM AMEMBASSY WARSAW
TO SECSTATE WASHDC 6464UNCLAS WARSAW 000604 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE FOR WHA/CCA, EUR/PD AND EUR/NCE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KDEM PHUM PREL CU PL
SUBJECT: MAY 21 -- CUBA SOLIDARITY DAY 
 
REF: A. STATE 51536 
 
     ¶B. STATE 46997 
 
¶1.  Embassy Warsaw is working with the Government and local 
NGO's on outreach efforts related to Cuba Solidarity Day, 
described in reftels.  Poland has an excellent track record 
with respect to supporting freedom and democracy in Cuba, and 
believes that its experience in the Solidarity trade movement 
and its own transition from Communism to a vibrant democracy, 
give it particular expertise that opponents to the Castro 
regime can draw upon. 
 
NGO Outreach 
------------ 
 
¶2.  Embassy Warsaw continues its close collaboration with 
leading Polish NGO's working on Cuban outreach, including the 
Freedom and Democracy Foundation and the Lech Walesa 
Institute.  Both have active outreach programs planned for 
May 21.  Chairman of the Freedom and Democracy Foundation 
Tomasz Pisula is working with the Embassy, Capitol Hill 
offices and USG agencies to promote Cuba Solidarity Day. On 
May 21, the foundation will unveil two petitions calling for 
the release of Cuba's political prisoners.  One is currently 
being circulated among members of the Polish parliament.  We 
understand that 130 deputies have signed that petition 
already, with a goal of 170-200 deputies' signatures by May 
¶21.  The second will be a public petition available on-line 
for interested people to sign, and advertised by leading 
Polish daily Rzeczpospolita. It is not yet available since 
the foundation is working with the President's Chancellery to 
have President Kaczynski sign that petition first.  We 
understand that it is not identical to the American petition. 
 Its text is slightly different and drafted with an eye 
towards Polish audiences.  However, Mr. Pisula told us that 
he worked with U.S. officials on this text before it was 
finalized.  We will highlight the Polish and American 
petitions on our Embassy website. 
 
¶3.  The Lech Walesa Institute just launched its own internet 
site on Solidarity with Cuba.  It builds on the helpful and 
productive ties between former Polish President Lech Walesa 
and the dissident community.  Embassy Warsaw facilitated a 
DVC featuring Walesa and dissidents in Cuba in 2006.  In 
August 2007, CODEL Sires, including three Cuban-American 
Representatives, travelled to Poland to meet with Polish 
officials and the Cuban American Caucus.  The CODEL traveled 
with President Kaczynski on this plane to mark Solidarity 
Anniversary events in Lubin, Poland, in addition to meeting 
with other senior GOP officials. 
 
Embassy Efforts 
--------------- 
 
¶4.  The Embassy website already links visitors with the 
American petition in support of Cuba Solidarity Day, and it 
will provide a similar link to the Polish petition once it is 
available.  We are planning media outreach to raise awareness 
of the petition drives and Cuba Solidarity Day more broadly. 
The Press Office is working to place a post-tailored version 
of the op-ed provided reftel under Ambassador Ashe's 
signature.  The Ambassador and FM Radek Sikorski discussed 
Cuba at some length in a meeting last month.  Sikorski, like 
other senior Polish officials, is deeply committed to the 
cause of freedom in Cuba, and we will continue to consult 
with the government to coordinate our efforts. 
ASHE