05DAMASCUS5829
Damascus Media Reaction: UNSC Resolution 1636,
Mon Nov 07 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DAMASCUS 005829 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT 
VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND AFERNANDEZ, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O.12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: UNSC Resolution 1636, 
Iraq, Palestinian Territories (11/7) 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Syrian papers led with reports on Arab and 
international contacts to discuss UNSC Resolution 1636, 
citing the planned visits to Syria by Arab League SecGen Amr 
Mousa, and by UN SecGen Annan and Saudi Crown Prince Sultan 
Bin Abdel Aziz to Cairo. 
 
As for Iraq, papers reported the US "Operation Steel 
Curtain" offensive in Al-Qaem, and the Muslim Scholars 
Assembly's rejection of a request by the Iraqi government to 
retain occupation troops in Iraq. 
 
On developments in the Palestinian territories, papers 
reported that EU observers will help to reopen the Rafah 
border crossing and that Israel is trying to block the EU 
observers' role. Headlines featured Sharon's statement that 
Israel would not make any effort to ease restrictions ahead 
of Palestinian parliamentary elections if the militant group 
Hamas is allowed to participate. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2. Selected Headlines: 
 
"Arab appreciation for Syria's step to commence 
investigation into the Al-Hariri assassination" (Government- 
owned Tishreen, 11/7/05 
 
"Denunciation of pressure on Syria continues. The pressure 
aims to destabilize the region and serve the interests of 
superpowers. [Former Lebanese PM] Al-Hoss calls for 
confronting US arrogance" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 11/7) 
 
"US forces proceed with "Operation Steel Curtain" offensive 
in Al-Qaem. Muslim Scholars Assembly rejects the 
government's request to retain occupation troops" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 11/7) 
 
"Arab League SecGen Amr Mousa is to visit Syria, Saudi 
Arabia, Bahrain and the Czeck Republic within the framework 
of the Arab League move to discuss developments in the 
region after Resolution 1636" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
11/7) 
 
"Iran reiterates support of Syria. Arab lawyers criticize 
Resolution 1636: Double standards make the international 
organization lose its credibility" (Government-owned Al- 
Ba'th, 11/7) 
 
"New York Times: The Bush Administration fabricated 
connection between Iraq and Al-Qaeda" (Government-owned Al- 
Thawra, 11/7) 
 
"Four US marines killed, three injured, in various assaults 
in Iraq. The Arab League delegation intensifies contacts in 
Iraq" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 11/7) 
 
"Sharon promises to block Palestinian elections if Hamas 
runs in them" (Government-owned Tishreen, 11/7) 
 
"Four Palestinians arrested in the West Bank. Disagreement 
between Israel and the EU over the role of EU observers at 
the Rafah border crossing" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
11/7) 
 
¶3. Editorial Block Quotes: 
"The Targeting and the Truth!" 
Dr. Fayez al-Sa'igh, Chief Editor of government-owned Al- 
Thawra, commented: "The new Resolution 1636, which the 
Security Council issued recently against Syria, is based on 
a fabricated report by a German prosecutor, whose 
credibility is doubted in Germany, where some German civil 
societies are prosecuting him for violating German laws by 
associating with US research centers and receiving what 
exceeds German norms of allowable income and wealth. 
"The resolution is more packed with paragraphs against Syria 
than with what serves the case of the assassination of PM Al- 
Hariri. The strange thing is that despite the legal 
distortions, which are based on political distortions, the 
resolution was passed unanimously, which shows the enormous 
intervention and pressure by the United States and the 
efforts exerted before and during the session.... 
"But the question of the Syrian citizen is: What if Mehlis 
deliberately says, despite all this cooperation, that Syria 
did not cooperate and returns the ball to the Security 
Council, claiming that Syria did not cooperate, or 
cooperated but not in the required form? And what is the 
required form? And what also if the second report, which 
Mehlis will submit to the Security Council on December 15, 
is politicized, as the previous one has been, and becomes an 
extension of it in form, purport and aim? 
"Is it not better to have an international, regional, Arab, 
or Lebanese legal criminal authority decide and judge or at 
least review the decision on whether there was cooperation, 
complete or not, to make sure about its criminal, legal, and 
juridical conditions, especially since Syria has formed a 
committee, set it in operation, and is fully determined to 
cooperate...? 
"Halting the State of Agitation and Desecration" 
Muhammad Ali Buza, an editorialist in government-owned Al- 
Thawra, commented: "Foreign forces are using Al-Hariri's 
assassination as an excuse to interfere politically and 
militarily in the region in order to divide it into new 
cantons and spheres of influence, as a prelude to 
implementing the US-sponsored Greater Middle East plan. 
"Hawks of the US Administration, in an attempt to escape 
their crises at home and abroad, might engage in new 
adventures and reckless and uncalculated actions that will 
fan current fires and push the region toward the unknown.... 
The international community must adopt a firm and 
responsible position to curb American unilateralism and 
muscle flexing and bring balance back to international 
relations.... 
"The US campaign against Syria, the issuance of unjust 
resolutions against it, and the constant pressure to 
politicize the investigations into Al-Hariri's assassination 
are meant to weaken and blackmail the Syrian position and 
force Syria to make concessions on the hot topics and major 
issues that are linked to the Arab-Israeli conflict, 
Palestine, Iraq, and the resistance and its weapons. 
"The United Nations might turn into an instrument and 
spearhead of the American plan and an organization offering 
certificates of good conduct to Israel, the racist, 
colonialist, and expansionist entity that has the long arm 
and the major interest in everything that has taken place 
and is taking place, as its leaders and officials have 
admitted...." 
Seche