05DAMASCUS6640
Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Lebanon, Palestinian
Mon Dec 26 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS DAMASCUS 006640 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Lebanon, Palestinian 
Territories, Iraq (12/23-26) 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Weekend Syrian papers reported statements by 
Lebanese personalities emphasizing distinguished ties with 
Syria, listing among them Lebanese Minister of Energy & 
Water Mohammed Fneish who underlined the importance of 
preserving "the distinguished relations with Syria to face 
the Israeli danger;" a statement by Lebanese MP Mohammed 
Raad, who called for national dialogue including all 
national issues, above all, relations with Syria, preserving 
the resistance and its weapons, as well as revealing the 
truth about the Hariri assassination; a statement by 
Lebanese ex-minister Wiaam Wahhab emphasizing that the only 
solution for Lebanon is to form a national reconciliation 
government and to hold early parliamentary elections; and a 
statement by Kamal Shatila, Chairman of the Lebanese Popular 
Conference, saying that internationalization measures are 
part of the Greater Middle East plan. 
Syrian editorials also continued their campaign against the 
anti-Syria forces in Lebanon led by the Progressive 
Socialist Party leader Walid Jumblat and Future Current 
leader Sa'd al-Hariri. 
As for developments in the Palestinian territories, papers 
reported Sharon's decision to establish a security zone in 
northern Gaza, and Hamas' resolve to run for candidacy in 
parliamentary election. 
 
On Iraq, papers reported demonstrations calling for new 
elections and changing the Higher Election Commission. 
Headlines featured PM Jaafari's rejection of new elections. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2. Selected Headlines: 
"Lebanese Minister of Water and Energy Mohammed Fneish 
reiterates the importance of fortifying Lebanon by 
establishing good relations with Syria. Head of al-Wafaa 
Bloc for resistance, and Member of Parliament Mohammed 
Ra'ad: We protest opening our doors to foreign intervention. 
Former Lebanese Minister Wiam Wahhab: The only solution in 
Lebanon is by forming a new national reconciliation 
government and holding early elections" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 12/26) 
"Lebanese President calls on the Lebanese to unite ranks and 
learn a lesson from miscalculating gamblers. Nasarllah 
[Secretary General of Hizbollah]: We disagree with the 
government on national issues; Israelis say: our strategy in 
Lebanon will be realized by creating a gap between Syria and 
Lebanon" (Government-owned Tishreen, 12/24) 
"Lebanese calls to cling fast to national principles. 
Lebanese MP Raad: Unilateral political decision is behind 
the crisis Shatila [Chairman of the Lebanese Popular 
Conference]: Internationalization measures are part of the 
Greater Middle East plan" (Government-owned Tishreen, 12/25) 
"Walkout will continue in the Lebanese Prime Ministry until 
further notice. Lebanese President refuses to head the 
Lebanese Cabinet. Ex-Lebanese Premiere Salim al-Hoss: 
International powers are behind the tension in Syrian- 
Lebanese relations" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 12/23) 
"Sharon approves Gaza security zone. The Palestinian 
Authority rejects elections without the participation of 
Jerusalem's inhabitants. Bethlehem celebrates Christmas" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 12/25) 
 
"Ministers of Likud and Kadima demand invasion of Gaza. The 
world celebrates Christmas amid Israeli harassment of 
pilgrims to Bethlehem. Patriarch of Jerusalem calls for the 
removal of the racist wall" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
12/25) 
"Mofaz orders tighting the siege of Palestinian territories 
and to proceed with assassinations. Head of the Palestinian 
Authority Mahmoud Abbas rejects postponement of Palestinian 
elections" (Government-owned" (Government-owned 
"Palestinian city of Al-Nasra hosts a mass rally as an 
expression of solidarity with Syria next Thursday" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 12/25) 
 
"Israeli occupation will wage war in the Gaza strip. 
Palestinians confirm Israel's intention to block Palestinian 
truth about the Hariri assassination; a statement by 
Lebanese ex-minister Wiaam Wahhab emphasizing that the only 
solution for Lebanon is to form a national reconciliation 
government and to hold early parliamentary elections; and a 
statement by Kamal Shatila, Chairman of the Lebanese Popular 
Conference, saying that internationalization measures are 
part of the Greater Middle East plan. 
Syrian editorials also continued their campaign against the 
anti-Syria forces in Lebanon led by the Progressive 
Socialist Party leader Walid Jumblat and Future Current 
leader Sa'd al-Hariri. 
As for developments in the Palestinian territories, papers 
reported Sharon's decision to establish a security zone in 
northern Gaza, and Hamas' resolve to run for candidacy in 
parliamentary election. 
 
elections. Hamas confirms its right to have candidates" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 12/24) 
 
"Protests against the outcome of the Iraqi elections 
continue. The Electoral Higher Commission receives 1500 
complaints and Jaafari rejects new elections" (Government- 
owned Tishreen, 12/25) 
 
"Iraqi demonstrations demand repeating elections and 
changing the Higher Commission. Two US soldiers are killed 
in Baghdad; six Sudanese are kidnapped" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 12/24) 
 
"Tony Blair and Donald Rumsfeld, suddenly in Iraq; 35 Iraqi 
groups threaten confrontation and reject the election 
results" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 12/23) 
 
"The US Congress endorses US-Israeli military deals" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 12/25) 
 
"Former US Senator Tom Daschle: Congress did not give the 
President a power of spying without judicial authorization. 
US House of Representatives let Bush down. Congress renews 
the Patriot Act for one month" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
12/24) 
 
¶3. Editorial Block Quotes: 
"It Has Become Intolerable, No Silence after Today" 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
said (12/23): "A gang of Lebanese who do not hide their 
hostility toward Syria have abandoned tactfulness and every 
sense of shame. They have begun to encroach, in undesirable 
insolence, upon everything related to Syria and every 
honorable and nationalist aspect of the Lebanese stage. They 
believe that through the language of curses and rude words, 
the continuation of lies, and their joining in on the US- 
Israeli pressure campaign, they will be able to convince the 
Lebanese and Arab public, and consequently the International 
Investigation Commission, of their preset positions and 
feeble 'evidence' through which they previously misled 
international justice and derailed the investigation, 
leading it only in Syria's direction. 
"This vulgar gang is knowingly leading Lebanon toward the 
unknown, adding fuel to the fire, serving the US-Zionist 
plan whether it admits or denies it, and trying to undermine 
the strong Syrian-Lebanese relationship... 
"Our people no longer accept silence in response to this 
group, whose only weapon is lying... Yes, things have come 
to a head, and silence about their involvement in the 
conspiracy against Syria and about their encroachment upon 
Syria is no longer acceptable. Their lies and allegations 
are unacceptable. Their cards, files, and dirty roles 
the resistance and its weapons, as well as revealing the 
truth about the Hariri assassination; a statement by 
Lebanese ex-minister Wiaam Wahhab emphasizing that the only 
solution for Lebanon is to form a national reconciliation 
government and to hold early parliamentary elections; and a 
statement by Kamal Shatila, Chairman of the Lebanese Popular 
Conference, saying that internationalization measures are 
part of the Greater Middle East plan. 
Syrian editorials also continued their campaign against the 
anti-Syria forces in Lebanon led by the Progressive 
Socialist Party leader Walid Jumblat and Future Current 
leader Sa'd al-Hariri. 
As for developments in the Palestinian territories, papers 
reported Sharon's decision to establish a security zone in 
northern Gaza, and Hamas' resolve to run for candidacy in 
parliamentary election. 
 
against Syria and Lebanon must be exposed, and so must their 
cooperation with the enemies of the Arab nation and their 
cold-blooded involvement in the plans of hegemony through 
which superpowers are trying to bring the region back under 
colonialist submission." 
"A Political Adolescent" 
Ahmad Dawwa, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
said (12/23): "Sa'd al-Hariri's new allegation and 
accusation against Damascus of waging war to topple 
Lebanon's democratic government, show confusion and 
imbalance.... After the false testimony in Al-Hariri's 
assassination case was exposed, the gang of deception and 
internationalization in Lebanon had to find a new accusation 
against Syria to continue to mislead the Lebanese people. 
"Syria has said nothing to suggest that it wants to change 
the democratic system in Lebanon. On the contrary FM Shara's 
statements in Cairo stressed Syria's desire to build the 
best relations with Lebanon and to maintain Lebanon's 
security and stability. 
"The fact is that the gang of deception and forgery, led by 
political novices, is the party that is interfering in 
Syria's affairs, once by leveling false accusations and once 
through calls for a regime change in Syria. Didn't Jumblat 
make such a call a few days ago?" 
"Interference in Syrian affairs has become the main 
characteristic of the statements of Lebanese politicians. 
Thus, they are nothing but parrots working as unofficial 
spokesmen for others." 
"The Guise of Modesty Has Fallen" 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented 12/24: "Some Lebanese politicians attacked Arab 
League Secretary General Amr Musa for his purported plan to 
clear the air between Syria and Lebanon. These politicians 
are launching a campaign against Musa because the success of 
his efforts would foil the conspiracy they are hatching 
against Syria. Thus the team of Sa'd al-Hariri, Walid 
Junblatt, and their partners reveal an inherent enmity not 
only toward Syria but also toward Arabism.... 
"Sa'd al-Hariri, leader of the Future Current who manages 
the anti-Syria group from afar and who is himself managed 
from nearby and afar, gave an interesting exclusive 
statement to an Arabic-speaking Channel Al-Arabiya, in which 
he attacked Syria and accused it of practicing terrorism. 
Where was Sheikh Sa'd al-Hariri when Syria was fighting 
terrorism and suffering from it? Does he remember --when he 
was a child playing with his toys--the terrorist operations 
that Syria experienced at various stages? 
"We do not want him to remember. He has no memory anyway, or 
perhaps they designed a special memory for him to 
accommodate specific and known plans and dreams. But if he 
does not remember--and this is his [only] excuse--then what 
excuse does he have for the racist terrorist attacks on 
the resistance and its weapons, as well as revealing the 
truth about the Hariri assassination; a statement by 
Lebanese ex-minister Wiaam Wahhab emphasizing that the only 
solution for Lebanon is to form a national reconciliation 
government and to hold early parliamentary elections; and a 
statement by Kamal Shatila, Chairman of the Lebanese Popular 
Conference, saying that internationalization measures are 
part of the Greater Middle East plan. 
Syrian editorials also continued their campaign against the 
anti-Syria forces in Lebanon led by the Progressive 
Socialist Party leader Walid Jumblat and Future Current 
leader Sa'd al-Hariri. 
As for developments in the Palestinian territories, papers 
reported Sharon's decision to establish a security zone in 
northern Gaza, and Hamas' resolve to run for candidacy in 
parliamentary election. 
 
Syrian workers and vehicles in Lebanon? Can he deny that 
these are terrorist acts par excellence, and that they are 
being carried out by a handful of supporters and party 
members who are fighting under the swords of Sa'd al-Hariri, 
Walid Jumblat, Marwan Hamadah, and other people showing 
ingratitude to Syria and its sacrifices and positions? How 
can Al-Hariri Junior install himself as a judge and pass a 
decisive verdict that Syria is behind the assassination of 
Lebanese figures? 
"We would like to remind this racist group of the saying: 
'People who live in glass houses shouldn't throw stones.' 
Those who incite terrorism, exercise media and intellectual 
terrorism, and use money to reach parliament and control the 
destiny of a country and to sabotage its national unity 
cannot give us lessons in nationalism or classify countries 
according to the US-Israeli way, labeling this country as 
democratic and that country as terrorist." 
Johnson-Casares