06DAMASCUS2376
Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Iraq/Italy,
Tue May 23 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0007
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #2376/01 1430655
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 230655Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 9124
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 5969
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 3831
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2345
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7037
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1008
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4410
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0633
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6774UNCLAS DAMASCUS 002376 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Iraq/Italy, 
Lebanon/Egypt, Resolution 1680, Palestinian Territories, 
Israel/US (5/22) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary: Syrian papers reported that Prime Minister Ottri 
sent cables of congratulation to Iraqi PM al-Malki and to 
Italian PM Prodi on the occasion of forming the new Iraqi and 
Italian governments. He expressed his confidence in developing 
cooperation between Syria and Italy to serve their joint 
interests. 
 
Papers reported President Mubarak's meeting with Lebanese 
President Lahoud, on the sidelines of the International Economic 
Forum for the Middle East held in Sharm al-Sheikh. Mubarak 
underlined to Lahoud that Lebanon should have good relations with 
the Arab world, particularly Syria. "I agree with President 
Lahoud's stance, which calls for unifying the Lebanese and 
putting an end to any foreign intervention in Lebanese internal 
affairs," Mubarak said. Mubarak added that "negative stances by 
some Lebanese parties, particularly negative statements and 
campaigns, would only increase doubts about Lebanon's ability to 
recover." For his part, President Lahoud underlined that all 
Lebanese seek excellent ties with sisterly Syria, adding, 
"Lebanon will be stronger through Arab solidarity". Lahoud 
pointed out that his country welcomes every effort to enhance 
security and stability in Lebanon, particularly regarding 
restoring distinguished relations with Syria. 
 
Syrian newspapers continued to criticize UNSC Resolution 1680 as 
a "violation of the UN Charter" and  "interference" in the 
domestic affairs of Syria and Lebanon. Ahmad Dawwa said in Al- 
Thawrah that Resolution 1680 shows US "despotic hegemony" and 
indicates that the US Administration has not learned from its 
mistakes. Papers also reported that the Arab Bar Association 
criticized UN Security Council resolution 1680 as a flagrant 
violation of legal principles and state sovereignty. Papers also 
reported Lebanese criticism of the resolution, from Mohammed 
Raad, Lebanese MP and Leader of al-Wafaa Bloc for Resistance, 
and Suleiman Franjieh, former Lebanese Minister, who stressed 
that Resolution 1680 is an intervention in internal Syrian- 
Lebanese affairs and sovereignty. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Prime Minister Ottri congratulates Iraqi PM al-Malki on forming 
the Iraqi government and Italian PM Prodi on forming the new 
Italian government. Ottri: Syria supports Iraq in all fields" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 5/22) 
 
"President Mubarak confers with President Lahoud in Sharm al- 
Sheikh. Murbarak: There are foreign sides seeking to destroy 
Lebanon. Warnings against the repercussions of UNSC resolution 
1680 on Syrian-Lebanese relations" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
5/22) 
 
"The Arab Bar Association condemns UN Security Council Resolution 
¶1680. A new cycle in the American plot to weaken Syria's 
steadfastness" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 5/22) 
 
"Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov: Preventing the arrival of 
assistance to Palestinians is unacceptable and the West is 
afflicted with megalomania" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 5/22) 
 
"Abbas meets Peres and Levi in Sharm al-Sheikh. A Palestinian 
woman is martyred in Nablus. The Palestinian resistance shells 
Sedrot settlement" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 5/22) 
 
"Scores of Iraqis killed in various attacks in Iraq. A security 
force is formed to keep security in Baghdad" (Government-owned Al- 
Thawra, 5/22) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
---------------------------------- 
 
"Lebanon Is Targeted before Syria" 
 
 
----------------------------------- 
 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (5/22): "Issuing a UNSC resolution asking a country to 
establish diplomatic relations with another sets a precedent in 
international relations.... 
 
"Who will guarantee that the Bush administration will not ask 
the Security Council to force Arab countries to establish 
diplomatic, economic, and other relations with Israel, even 
though it occupies their lands, besieges a peaceable people, and 
practices aggression and terrorism at the highest levels...? 
 
"Syria did not oppose the establishment of diplomatic relations 
with Lebanon. It publicly informed the Lebanese side of this. 
Nor did Syria object to the demarcation of the border, beginning 
with the north, not with the land that is under Israeli 
occupation.... 
 
"Syria announced this without UNSC resolutions, manipulations, 
threats, and pressure. The relations that have existed between 
the two countries and peoples for thousands of years are 
hundreds of times deeper than any diplomatic relations, as they 
are relations of family bonds, blood, and common destiny.... 
 
"If diplomatic relations are imposed through the force of 
international resolutions resulting from American and French 
pressure, if this takes place today amid deterioration in the 
relations between the two countries, who will guarantee that the 
relations will not be broken off tomorrow or the day after due 
to incitement by Lebanese groups that have publicly declared 
their hostility toward Syria and received anti-Syrian forces 
that harbor evil intentions with respect to this country and its 
people...? 
 
"Syria wishes everything good for Lebanon. This is why it paid a 
heavy price with the blood of its people and the sweat of its 
workers for the sake of Lebanon and its unity and prosperity. 
But in the current situation and in light of the blatant 
hostility that some Lebanese are declaring, it is difficult to 
establish diplomatic relations immediately. When these 
individuals stop their hatred toward Syria, everything will 
become possible, without international mediation and foreign 
interference that target Lebanon more than Syria." 
 
-------------------------------- 
 
"Another Wedge in the UNSC Body" 
 
-------------------------------- 
 
Ahmad Dawwa, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
wrote (5/22): "UNSC Resolution 1680 shows the power of US 
hegemony and indicates that the Bush administration has not 
learned from its mistakes.... 
 
"The Bush administration is mistaken if it believes the policy 
it adopts toward the Security Council, which is based on 
hegemony and despotism, can smooth over the failure of its 
direct Middle East policy.... 
 
"The drafters of the resolution drove another wedge into the 
body of the Security Council, setting a serious precedent for 
the Council's interference in sovereign issues, contrary to the 
UN Charter. And by failing to ask Israel to discontinue its 
land, air, and sea violations of Lebanese sovereignty, they 
proved by words and deeds that they have no credibility with 
regard to the paragraphs on Lebanon and Syria in the 
resolution.... 
 
"The Lebanese political forces that welcomed the resolution 
miscalculated its internal and external risks because the 
internationalization of the Lebanese decision in this way is a 
grave violation of sovereignty, paving the way for later 
resolutions that might greatly endanger Lebanon.... 
 
 
 
"The American failures require that the Bush administration not 
show further stubbornness and ferocity in its approach to the 
region, but return to dialogue and the language of common 
interests. To resolve existing differences, this way is much 
shorter and more effective than the policy of dictates, which 
often produces negative and disastrous results...." 
 
 ---------------------------- 
 
"Olmert's Visit to Washington" 
 
---------------------------- 
 
Maha Sultan, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(5/22): "Palestinians have the right to be worried about Israeli 
Prime Minister Ehud Olmert's upcoming visit to Washington.... 
 
"The US Administration has not hidden its intention to support 
Olmert's unilateral withdrawal plan, which he wants to impose 
not only on Palestinians but also on the international 
community.... 
 
"American statements that have tried to play down the importance 
of the visit in the past two days were meant for European 
consumption, because Bush needs Europeans in his current battle 
with Iran.... The US Administration actually does not need this 
diplomacy, because Europeans have repeatedly proven their 
subservience to American policy, whether they like it or not, 
especially when it comes to the Palestinian question...." 
 
Seche