06DAMASCUS1781
Damascus Media Reaction: Independence Anniversary,
Wed Apr 19 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0033
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #1781/01 1091306
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 191306Z APR 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8418
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 5883
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 3759
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2257
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 6967
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 0900
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4337
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0562
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6706UNCLAS DAMASCUS 001781 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Independence Anniversary, 
Syria/Iran, Syria/Palestinians, Syria/Russia, Iraq, Lebanon, 
Rumsfeld (4/14-18) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary: Papers reported the announcement by the Syrian 
government of a public fundraising campaign for the Palestinian 
National Authority to help fill the gap created by Western 
countries and Israel. The announcement was made in a joint press 
conference with Akhar Hashemi Rafsanjani, Chairman of the Iranian 
Expediency Council, at the end of the pro-Palestine conference in 
Tehran. Syrian Vice-President Shara declared that bank accounts 
would be opened to receive donations to Palestinians in the 
Occupied Territories. Mr. Shara added, "I hope that Arab 
countries will not be swayed by the pretext that these funds will 
be used for terrorist activities. This aid will serve to avoid a 
real catastrophe in Palestine." 
 
Rafsanjani described the western countries' stand on Iran's 
uranium enrichment as "unjust," and stressed that Iran's nuclear 
program was not intended to harm any country in the region. 
Shara emphasized Iran's right to possess nuclear technology for 
peaceful purposes in accordance with Nuclear Non-Proliferation 
Treaty. 
 
 
Papers also reported a statement by Oleg Persipkin, the Russian 
President's Adviser for Arab Affairs, reiterating rejection of 
pressure on Syria. Persipkin said, "Syria has made great 
sacrifices for Lebanon's civil peace and security." Persipkin was 
Russian ambassador to Lebanon between 1996 and 2000.  He chairs 
the Lebanese-Russian Friendship Association. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"President Asad and Rafsanjani conclude their talks on bilateral 
relations" (Government-owned Tishreen, 4/16) 
 
"In a joint press conference: Shara: President Asad gives 
direction to launch a public fundraising campaign for the 
Palestinian people. Rafsanjani: Aggression against Iran is not in 
the interest of America and the region" (Government-owned Al- 
Thawra, 4/17) 
 
"President Putin's Adviser: We reject pressure on Syria" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 4/17) 
 
"Parliament Speaker Abrash at the 3rd International Conference on 
Jerusalem: Ending the Israeli occupation is pivotal to stability, 
security and peace" (Government-owned Tishreen, 4/16) 
 
"Iran allocates $50 million of aid to the Palestinian people" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 4/17) 
 
"US sanctions against the Palestinian people continue. Al-Zahhar 
calls on Arab countries to fulfill their commitment and to open 
doors for popular donations" (Government-owned Tishreen, 4/16) 
 
"The crisis over Iraq premiership is over. Terrorism claims the 
lives of scores of Iraqis. US army announces the killing of three 
of its soldiers" (Government-owned Tishreen, 4/16) 
 
"The Jerusalem Conference commences deliberations in Tehran: The 
Palestinian cause is the key to the Islamic Nation's salvation" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 4/15) 
 
"SecGen of Hizbollah, Nasrallah, hopes that the debate on reform 
will not be sectarian: I will forgive those who are involved in 
the attempt on my life" (Government-owned Tishreen, 4/15) 
 
"Nine Israelis killed, scores injured in Tel Aviv operation. 
Hamas: A self-defense operation. Olmert unleashes threats against 
Palestinians" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 4/18) 
 
"Israel threatens to reoccupy the Gaza Strip. Hanieh: Endeavors 
to isolate the government will fail. Washington blocks a UN 
Security Council resolution urging Israel to refrain from 
excessive use of force against Palestinians" (Government-owned 
 
 
Tishreen, 4/15) 
 
"Republicans and Democrats urge Bush to negotiate a solution with 
Tehran. Iran: We will persist in enriching uranium" (Government- 
owned Al-Ba'th, 4/18) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
----------------------- 
 
"Rumsfeld and Generals" 
 
----------------------- 
 
Against the backdrop of the criticism of US Defense Secretary 
Donald Rumsfeld by retired Army generals, Nadya Dimyatti, an 
editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote (4/17): 
"Observers and analysts believe the storms sweeping the White 
House, from the financial scandals to the eavesdropping law to 
the leak of information to mishandling of the hurricane 
response, will not die down with the resignation of Rumsfeld 
alone, because the other important element in the equation is 
Vice President Dick Cheney, who is also being asked to step down 
against the background of many mistakes. Would Rumsfeld's 
resignation save the US Administration from the war quagmire? 
The fact is that what is needed is a radical revision of US 
Middle East policy." 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
"Bush's Justifications for Defending Rumsfeld" 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
Charles Kamilah, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, 
wrote (4/17): "President Bush did not defend Rumsfeld out of 
love for him so much as defending himself and his predicament in 
Iraq. He was trying to beautify the swamp where the amount of 
mud mixed with innocent blood is increasing. Any attempt to 
ignore this fact is a deception meant to prolong the life of an 
administration that has entered a crucial stage in its domestic 
crisis." 
 
------------------ 
 
"Not Iran's Nukes" 
 
------------------ 
 
As'ad Abbud, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
wrote (4/17): "Iran's nuclear program is being targeted not 
because of fear that Tehran might produce nuclear weapons, but 
because the West does not want Arabs and Muslims to reach an 
advanced scientific and technological level enabling them to 
keep abreast of international progress and protect their land 
and invest their fortunes. 
 
"Arabs and Muslims must focus on science and technology.... The 
Arab media must not raise fears over Iran's nuclear activity.... 
Iran is an important country in the region. It is one of the 
region's pillars. It is a free country and a decision-maker that 
does not make decisions without considering the interests of the 
world and the countries of the region. The Iranian hand has been 
extended to the sons of the region to sign a non-aggression 
treaty. There is no reason for concern. Islamic Iran is a 
peaceful country that has not engaged in any hostile action 
against any country in the region. On the contrary, it was 
subjected to real aggression and a hostile war supported by all 
the American voices in the world. It stood fast, struggled, and 
adopted a sincere position until it triumphed...." 
 
--------------------- 
 
"Until the Last Drop" 
 
 
--------------------- 
 
Izz-al-Din al-Darwish, an editorialist in government-owned 
Tishreen, commented (4/16): "The United States is using all its 
power and might to fight a small defenseless people suffering 
under the most vicious forms of occupation.... 
 
"The US Administration is issuing deterrent laws, taking strict 
measures, using all its influence at home and abroad, pressuring 
Europe and the UN Security Council, and threatening Arab and 
Islamic countries to prevent the provision of financial aid to 
the Palestinian people, who are besieged by the Israeli 
occupation from all directions.... 
 
"The true motive behind the American measures is to help Israel 
implement its plans in the Palestinian territories and force 
Palestinians to accept these plans.... Arabs and Muslims must 
rush to help Palestinians effectively...." 
 
--------------------------- 
 
"Partnership in Aggression" 
 
--------------------------- 
 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(4/15):  "The US has obstructed a UN Security Council resolution 
calling on Israel to stop its open aggression against 
Palestinians.... 
 
"Isn't this true partnership in the aggression? Can we still 
believe that the current US Administration is able to play a 
role in bringing about peace in the region....? 
 
"Washington no longer takes the feelings of Arabs or the bases 
of the peace process into consideration. Indeed, it publicly 
declared its hostility toward Arabs through its occupation and 
destruction of Iraq and the spread of chaos all over the country 
and through its full partnership in the aggression on Lebanon, 
Syria, Palestine, and the Arabs.... 
 
"It is high time that Arabs realize this fact and deal with the 
US Administration on the basis of its hostile policies and 
positions toward them and its support for and partnership in the 
Israeli aggression. The problem is that most Arabs realize this 
fact but deliberately ignore it and call on us to kiss the 
dagger that is stabbing us." 
 
Seche