06DAMASCUS3678
Damascus Media Reaction: Israeli Operation in Lebanon,
Wed Jul 26 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #3678/01 2071348
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 261348Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0587
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6135
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1165
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4551
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0770
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6909UNCLAS DAMASCUS 003678 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Israeli Operation in Lebanon, 
Terrorism, Syria/Russia, Syria/Turkey (7/26) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary: Syrian papers reported a statement by the press 
office of the Syrian Ministry of Communication and Technology 
denying reports circulated by electronic websites to the effect 
that Syria possesses information about al-Qaeda and that Syria is 
ready to offer it to the US. The statement described these 
reports as "baseless," noting "they are simply distortions of 
honorable stances of Syria." The press office noted that when it 
asked a representative of the Sky News network about the subject, 
he answered in an official statement that the "news is baseless 
and the issue was not part of any statement or debate," adding 
that the network did not attribute any of these statements to the 
minister. 
 
Papers also featured a statement by Russian President Putin upon 
receiving the credentials of Dr. Hassan Risheh, Syria's new 
Ambassador to Russia. Putin stressed that his country attached 
great importance to developing Syrian-Russian dialogue about 
urgent regional and international issues. "Russia has strong 
relations with Syria, which is considered the most important 
country in the Arab world, and will establish active cooperation 
with it in the field of confronting international terrorism," 
Putin said. The Russian President underlined that the current 
crisis in Lebanon has brought about dangerous humanitarian 
consequences, confirming the urgent need to increase the 
effectiveness of the UN in international issues. 
 
Papers also reported that Dr. Mohsen Bilal, Syrian Minister of 
Information, has described the Israeli aggression on Lebanon as 
savage and an embodiment of systematic state terrorism. Meeting a 
Turkish delegation, including parliamentary, media, cultural and 
academic personalities, headed by Mohammed Bakkar Oglo on Tuesday 
evening, Dr. Bilal criticized the US and a number of western 
countries for their bias in favor of Israel despite the crimes 
and brutal practices Israel is perpetrating against the Lebanese 
and Palestinian people. Dr. Bilal vehemently condemned terrorism, 
rejecting any link between Islam and terrorism, as terrorism is a 
crime that has no religion, color or race, while Islam is a 
religion of tolerance, coexistence and cooperation. For his part, 
Mr. Oglo strongly criticized hostile Israeli practices against 
the peoples of the region, backed by western countries, in order 
to control their resources, expressing confidence that these 
people will confront the Israeli-American schemes. He criticized 
the international community's silence on the barbaric Israeli 
crimes against Lebanon and Palestine, saying "we came here in 
order to raise our voices over this silence." 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"The Syrian cabinet is briefed by Foreign Minister al-Mouallem on 
latest political developments in the region. The cabinet hails 
steadfastness of the Lebanese resistance" (Government-owned Al- 
Thawra, 7/26) 
 
"Arab Parliamentary Union calls for an immediate end to the 
Israeli aggression against Lebanon. Speaker of Syrian People's 
Assembly al-Abrash: We must support resistance and cement its 
legitimacy" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 7/26) 
 
"Syrian Ministry of Communication and Sky News Channel deny 
reports circulated by electronic websites on Syria's possession 
of information about al-Qaeda" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 7/26) 
 
"Information Minister Bilal: The Israeli aggression against 
Lebanon embodies systematic state terrorism" (Government-owned Al- 
Thawra, 7/26) 
 
"Hizbollah Leader Nasrallah: Confrontation with Israel will enter 
the beyond-Haifa stage. Syria and Iran do not bargain on 
resistance" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 7/26) 
 
"On the eve of the Rome Conference and in the wake of US 
Secretary of State Rice's visit to Israel, Tel Aviv expands scope 
 
SIPDIS 
of aggression against Lebanon. The National resistance engages in 
fierce battles with Israeli ground troops in Bint Jbeil. Speaker 
 
of Lebanese Parliament Berri: Rice's proposals can't be 
implemented, as they threaten to incite internal sedition in 
Lebanon. Scores of Israelis killed or injured in rocket shelling 
by Lebanese national resistance. Israeli raids target the 
international peacekeeping forces in South Lebanon, killing 5 
soldiers" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 7/26) 
 
"Putin confirms strong relations with Syria, reiterating the 
importance of developing Russian-Syrian dialogue" (Government- 
owned Al-Ba'th, 7/26) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
---------------------- 
 
"History Has no Mercy" 
 
---------------------- 
 
Omar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, said 
(7/26): "The current diplomatic activity concerning Lebanon aims 
to capitalize on the results of the aggression to serve the 
American-Zionist plan.... 
 
"The United States proves every day that it is not only a 
partner in the Israeli aggression, but also the decision-maker 
.... 
 
"Before sending Condoleezza Rice to the region, President Bush 
opened Pentagon assets wide to the Israeli aggression machine to 
kill and destroy the Lebanese and their homes, installations, 
and infrastructure with smart guided bombs. Bush also stressed, 
after Rice's arrival, that there would be no immediate cease- 
fire. 
 
"The 'neocolonialists' target the entire Arab nation and thus 
press the Arab nation to rush to defend its identity and dignity 
before we all drown.... 
 
"History does not have mercy on those who turn their backs on 
their brothers." 
 
----------------------------- 
 
"Agenda of the US Aggression" 
 
----------------------------- 
 
Ali Qasim, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(7/26): "The United States insists on making more mistakes in 
the region as it refuses to stop the Israeli aggression on 
Lebanon.... 
 
"Instead of discussing the various proposals to end the 
aggression, Washington is trying to exploit the aggression to 
make up for the failure of its plan in Iraq, with a position 
that not only appears bankrupt but also carries the seeds of a 
new American crisis producing further disastrous consequences 
for the region and the world." 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
"Might Does Not Break the Will of the People" 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, said 
(7/26): "The Israeli aggression against Lebanon shows the 
impossibility of annihilating the Lebanese national resistance 
and the failure of Israel's plan to sow sedition among the 
Lebanese. 
 
"Israel is waging an American war with clear objectives. The 
evidence is that the rejection of the cease-fire came from the 
highest levels in Washington." 
 
"The Bush administration has succeeded in spreading chaos in the 
world, from Afghanistan to Iraq to the occupied Palestinian 
territories to Lebanon.... But force will not be able to impose 
a new Middle East.... Military power can kill innocent people 
and destroy the infrastructure of countries, but it cannot break 
the will of nations and their aspiration for freedom, justice, 
and a dignified life...." 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
"The Brutal War against Lebanon, Lies and Facts" 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
Salim Abbud, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(7/26): "Those who accuse Hizbollah of engaging in uncalculated 
adventures and serving a non-Lebanese agenda ignore the history 
of the Arab-Israeli conflict and the Zionist-American objectives 
in the region. 
 
"These people are the echo in the Arab world of an international 
situation that twists facts for the sake of Israel and justifies 
the positions of Arab regimes subjugated by American hegemony. 
 
"The liberation of the two captured Israeli soldiers is not the 
objective of the Israeli war on Lebanon. The declared and 
undeclared objectives of this war make us more convinced than 
ever before that Israel and the United States are the two powers 
behind the assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafiq 
al-Hariri.... The aim is to force the implementation of 
Resolution 1559...." 
 
----------------------------- 
 
"Those Who Are No Longer Shy" 
 
----------------------------- 
 
Ilyas Khuri, a commentator in government-owned Al-Ba'th, said 
(7/26): "We regret that some Lebanese politicians, who insist on 
their falsehoods and indeed on their connection with the forces 
that are launching an aggression on Lebanon and working to 
destroy it and wipe it off the region's geographic, political, 
and economic map, are not happy that Syria is sending relief aid 
to the Lebanese people and that it is hosting Lebanese refugees 
on Syrian territory. 
 
"Those politicians turn a blind eye to Israel's terrorism, 
destruction, and massacres and continue their tendentious 
campaigns, but this time against the Syrian assistance. They are 
using malicious methods to try to hinder the arrival of this 
assistance, impose a blackout on it, and deny it." 
 
Seche