06DAMASCUS4251
Damascus Media Reaction:  Lebanon, Syria/Venezuela,
Tue Aug 29 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #4251/01 2411148
ZNR UUUUU ZZH (508)
O 291148Z AUG 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1274
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6236
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4072
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2630
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7261
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1262
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4643
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0858
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6995UNCLAS DAMASCUS 004251 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction:  Lebanon, Syria/Venezuela, 
Syria/Egypt, Syria/Cuba, Iraq, Iran, Sudan, Palestinian 
Territories (8/29) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers today led with reports of the visit 
to Lebanon by UN Secretary General Kofi Annan.  Headlines 
featured Annan's meeting with Nabih Berri, Speaker of the 
Lebanese Parliament, and their press conference in Beirut, in 
which Annan expressed full solidarity with the Lebanese people 
and demanded an end to the Israeli siege of Lebanon.  Annan 
called for focusing all efforts to help the Lebanese people in 
facing their current difficult situation, and for implemention of 
UNSC Resolution 1701 by all concerned parties.  Berri noted that 
talks with the UN SecGen were useful, adding "we focused on 
Israel's continuing siege on Lebanon, which violates UNSC 
Resolution 1701." 
 
On Syrian-Venezuelan relations, papers reported the visit to 
Damascus by Mrs. Cilia Flores, Speaker of the Venezuelan 
National Legislative Council, who conferred with Dr. Mahmoud al- 
Abrash, Speaker of the Syrian People's Assembly.  Talks touched 
on the current situation in the region, and means of boosting 
bilateral relations, particularly in the parliamentary domain. 
Mrs. Flores emphasized the depth of Syrian-Venezuelan historical 
relations, which have improved following the election of 
President Chavez, stressing her country's support for Syria's 
stances on Arab issues.  She denounced continued pressures by 
the US Administration on Syria and Iran.  Dr. Al-Abrash hailed 
Venezuela's positive stances on just causes, including its 
President's recall of his country's Ambassador to Israel to 
denounce the Israeli aggression against the Lebanese and 
Palestinian peoples. 
 
On Syrian-Egyptian relations, papers reported the visit to 
Damascus of an Egyptian parliamentary delegation that conferred 
with Dr. Al-Abrash.  The delegation emphasized the deep-rooted 
ties between Syria and Egypt.  The delegation included members 
of the Egyptian parliament, representatives of non-governmental 
organizations, university teachers and others;  all expressed 
full support for Syria's positions in the face of pressures and 
challenges. 
 
On Syrian-Cuban relation, papers reported that Raul Castro, 
Acting Cuban President, received Syrian Minister of Information 
Muhsen Bilal.  The meeting was the Acting President's first with 
any foreign official.  During the meeting, Minister Bilal 
conveyed President Asad's compliments to the Acting President and 
wished a quick recovery to President Fidel Castro, enabling him 
to resume his duties as President and to chair the Non-Aligned 
Summit scheduled for mid-September in Havana.  The Acting 
President reiterated the importance of President Asad's 
participation in the Summit. 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Lebanon reiterates the importance of full Israeli withdrawal, 
lifting Israeli siege on Lebanon, releasing Lebanese prisoners. 
UN SecGen Annan in Beirut, visiting the demolished southern 
suburb, discussing post-war era:  Disarming Hizbollah is a 
Lebanese issue" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 8/29) 
 
"Israeli PM Olmert acknowledges defeat in Lebanon.  The Israeli 
government forms an investigation committee to contain the 
scandal.  Ha'aretz:  Israel is a useless American hound" 
(Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 8/29) 
 
"Lebanese MP Jumblatt meets an Israeli MP in Paris" (Government- 
owned Al-Ba'th, 8/29) 
 
"A Danish Parliament member calls for arrest of Israeli Foreign 
Minister Livni for war crimes in Lebanon" (Government-owned Al- 
Thawra, 8/29) 
 
"Al-Abrash, Speaker of the People's Assembly, discusses 
enhancement of Parliamentary relations with Mrs. Flores, Speaker 
of the Venezuelan National Legislative Council.  Mrs. Flores:  We 
support Syria's positions on facing pressures" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 8/29) 
 
 
"Cuba's Acting President Raul Castro receives Information 
Minister Bilal, describing Syria as the 'diamond and star' of the 
East, and stressing Cuba's desire for President Asad's 
participation in the NAM Summit in Havana" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 8/29) 
 
"More than eight Palestinians killed in Israeli aggression 
against the Gaza Strip" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 8/29) 
 
"Sudanese President al-Bashir rejects meeting President Bush's 
envoy" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 8/29) 
 
"Iranian President Ahmadinejad:  Our decision to possess nuclear 
technology is final" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 8/29) 
 
"More than seven American soldiers killed in Iraq.  Assaults in 
Baghdad and Mosul.  Clashes in Diwanieh" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 8/29) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
------------------------------------- 
 
"Who Violates Lebanon's Sovereignty?" 
 
------------------------------------- 
 
Muhammad Khayr al-Jammali, an editorialist in government-owned 
Al-Thawra, wrote (8/29):   "The Israeli Defense Minister has 
called on Syria to respect Lebanon's sovereignty and freedom.... 
 
"Look how the rulers of Tel Aviv falsify the facts on the 
ground. They stifle Lebanon with an unjust blockade from all 
sides and, with American support and UN cover, they bring 
international forces to protect their invading forces and cover 
their aggression and constant threats against Lebanon from 
inside its territory, and then they accuse Syria of not 
respecting Lebanon's sovereignty and freedom! 
 
"Israel's alleged interest in Lebanon's sovereignty is 
consistent with the American-French "hypocrisy" about Lebanon's 
sovereignty.  But while Israel practices military aggression 
against Lebanon's sovereignty and freedom and then accuses 
others of threatening them, the United States and France have 
adopted the method of diplomatic interference in Lebanon's 
affairs, policies, and fraternal relations with Syria.... 
 
"Those who claim to care about Lebanon's sovereignty and 
freedom, including those who constitute a local extension for 
them and who draw strength from abroad, are the only ones who 
violate Lebanon's sovereignty and who do not respect Lebanon's 
freedom and independence.  They pretend to care about Lebanon's 
sovereignty and freedom only to justify their flagrant 
interference in Lebanon and to advance their objective of 
abolishing Lebanon's identity and its Arab role, under the 
slogan of maintaining its sovereignty, freedom, and 
independence.  As for Israel, the objective is to isolate 
Lebanon from Syria so that Israel can implement its plan of 
undermining the elements of Lebanon's steadfastness, especially 
its valiant resistance, to avenge the military, moral, and 
political defeat that the resistance inflicted on Israel and its 
army...." 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
"Suspicious Moves and Legitimate Questions" 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
Dr. Khalaf al-Jarrad, Chief Editor of government-owned Tishreen, 
wrote (8/29):  "We wonder why Lebanon's February 14 group is not 
reacting to Israel's threats of new rounds of fighting in 
Lebanon and not asking its 'friends' in Washington and Paris to 
force Israel to lift the blockade of Lebanon?  Does this mean 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"This conclusion appears logical in light of the call by some 
February 14 leaders to disarm Hizbollah at a time when the 
Zionist army is still sitting heavily on part of the Lebanese 
land.... 
 
"But the more important question is:  Why has the issue of the 
Lebanese-Syrian border become the main concern for France and 
the ministers and deputies who speak for the 14 February group? 
Is the aim, as they claim, to control smuggling and the entry of 
weapons into Lebanon?  Or are there bigger and wider objectives? 
Have the mountainous, agricultural, and dirt tracks that the 
inhabitants of the Lebanese border towns use to buy their needs 
and transport their sick people to Homs hospitals in Syria 
become the source of danger in the eyes of the February 14 
leaders?  Or have they decided to remove the only lung that the 
Lebanese people use to breathe, close the gate that embraced 
hundreds of thousands of Lebanese citizens who were forced to 
leave their homes by the barbaric Zionist aggression, and punish 
the Lebanese people for their genuine and spontaneous national 
and pan-Arab choices? 
 
"Many nationalist Lebanese forces have condemned and protested 
against this focus on the Syrian-Lebanese border and the calls 
for deploying international forces along it, describing these 
calls as 'shameful' and warning that they serve Israel's 
interests, harm Lebanon's sovereignty, and create tension in 
relations between Lebanon and Syria...." 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
"Why Don't Arabs Cherish Hizbollah's Victory?" 
 
--------------------------------------------- - 
 
Dr. Buthaina Sha'ban, Minister of Expatriate Affairs, commented 
in government-owned Tishreen (8/29):  "We regret the attitude of 
some Arab officials and media toward Hizbollah's victory and 
their focus on Hizbollah's weapons while Israel is continuing 
its blockade of Lebanon and bringing to South Lebanon troops 
from countries known for their colonial past and for arming and 
fully supporting Israel to ensure Israel's security.... 
 
"While Israel continues to besiege Lebanon and kill 
Palestinians, Lebanese passenger planes are searched in Jordan 
and Arab troops guard an opening in the wall between Gaza and 
Egypt so that Palestinians will not use it to infiltrate their 
homeland and so that the grand Gaza prison will remain tightly 
closed.... While some Arabs are busy with Resolution 1701, which 
was adopted to save Israel from a miserable military defeat, 
they are saying nothing about the massacres that Israel 
perpetrated in Lebanon and they are doing nothing to promote 
Amnesty International's report on Israel's war crimes or to 
protest Washington's supply of cluster bombs to Israel.... While 
international media are busy analyzing the reasons behind 
Israel's defeat..., while Israel is setting up commissions to 
investigate why it lost the war, some Arabs are busy with 
attempts to dismantle the elements of their own power by 
disarming their resistance and implementing resolutions that 
were issued to subject their countries to the control of foreign 
powers.... While many foreigners express sympathy with Arabs, 
some Arabs are busy turning the victory into defeat and 
entrenching disdain for Arabs and their rights.... 
 
"What did Milosevic do more than Olmert, Peretz, and Halutz did, 
so that the latter three should escape punishment?  The answer 
is:  If Arabs supported themselves once, we would see the whole 
 
 
 
 
 
"We wonder how Arabs could achieve a historic victory and yet 
some Arabs do not support their victory, and indeed participate 
in the effort to undermine it.... 
 
"Many in the world have started to realize the truth about 
Israel and to understand that it, along with the 
neoconservatives, is the spearhead of the escalating brutality 
in international relations.  There is a real change in European 
public opinion in favor of Arab rights.  Will Arabs stick to 
this historic transformation in order to achieve a just and 
comprehensive peace?  Will they support it and serve as one of 
its important tools?  Or will they remain involved in the myth 
of Israel's superiority, and in friendship with the United 
States, even after the Resistance defeated the myth and the 
United States joined Olmert in his savage war?  Arabs broke free 
from the sense of weakness and humiliation when the Arab 
resistance filled Lebanon's soil with the blood of Arab pride. 
Let all of us adhere to this new dignified reality because we 
are all in one boat, whether we like it or not...." 
------------------ 
 
"Why It Is Hated?" 
 
------------------ 
 
Omar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
wrote (8/29):  "Since the invasion of Afghanistan, the US 
Administration has done nothing other than anger Arabs and 
Muslims and other free nations in the world with its 
subservience to Israeli policy and the Jewish-American lobby.... 
 
"The US Administration has turned a deaf ear to all those who 
have given it advice at home and abroad.  It has turned a blind 
eye to UN resolutions, to human rights conventions, and even to 
the principles of the American Constitution itself when it 
occupied Iraq.  It has persisted in its support for Israel and 
has sponsored the aggression against Lebanon.  It has aborted 
efforts of the Security Council and the international community 
to stop the aggression. It then obtained UNSC Resolution 1701 as 
dictated by Israel.  All this generated hate for the US 
Administration and led to demonstrations in Europe and all other 
parts of the world, including the United States itself...." 
 
Corbin