06DAMASCUS4341
Damascus Media Reaction:  Annan's Visit, Syria/Lebanon,
Wed Sep 06 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0004
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #4341/01 2490422
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 060422Z SEP 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 1380
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6248
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4083
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2644
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7270
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1272
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4652
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0867
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7004UNCLAS DAMASCUS 004341 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction:  Annan's Visit, Syria/Lebanon, 
Syria/Egypt, Iraq (9/1-4) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers led with reports of the visit to 
Damascus by UN SecGen Kofi Annan and his meeting with President 
Asad, Vice President Shar'a, Foreign Minister Walid al-Mouallem, 
and Deputy Foreign Minister Dr Faysal al-Miqdad.  Talks focused 
on the need to consolidate the Lebanese cease-fire, enforcement 
of an Israeli withdrawal from all Lebanese territories, lifting 
of the Israeli siege on Lebanon, and bringing about a just and 
comprehensive peace in the region.  Papers reported Annan's press 
statement at Damascus airport in which he described his talks 
with President Asad as "fruitful and constructive". 
 
On Syrian-Lebanese relations, papers reported that President Asad 
gave directions to rebuild three Lebanese towns, Qana, Sidqein 
and al-Qulila in a step to support the Lebanese people's 
steadfastness.  The Lebanese National News Agency said that 
Speaker of the Lebanese parliament Berri and Lebanese PM al- 
Saniora were informed about the Syrian decision.  Papers also 
reported that Dr. Mahmud al-Abrash, Speaker of the People's 
Assembly, called on members of the Assembly to stage a sit-in at 
the Assembly's headquarters on Tuesday, 5 September, in 
solidarity with the sit-in that the Lebanese Parliament is 
staging to protest the Israeli siege on Lebanon. 
On Syrian-Egyptian relations, papers reported that President 
Mubarak underscored the importance of maintaining Syrian-Egyptian 
relations.  "Syria is a sisterly country.  Syria and Egypt cannot 
do without each other," Middle East News Agency (MENA) quoted 
President Mubarak as saying during a meeting with army generals. 
End of summary. 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"President Asad reviews with UN SecGen Annan the situation in 
Lebanon;  the Israeli withdrawal and lifting of the Israeli sea 
and air siege of Lebanon, which violates UNSC Resolution 1701; 
and the opportunity of achieving a just and comprehensive peace 
in the region.  Annan:  The international community looks for 
Syria's important role... It is time to revive the peace process 
on the basis of UN resolutions" (Government-owned Tishreen, 9/2) 
 
"Syria rebuilds what Israel has demolished in Lebanon.  President 
Asad gives directions to rebuild three Lebanese towns:  Qana, 
Sidiqin and al-Qalila" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 9/4) 
"President Mubarak:  Syria and Egypt can't do without each 
other.  Deputy Foreign Minister Faisal al-Meqdad:  My visit to 
Cairo is for consultation and coordination between the two 
countries" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 9/4) 
"Lebanese MPs stage an open-ended sit-in.  Nabih Beri, Chairman 
of the Lebanese Parliament:  The Israeli siege on Lebanon is an 
act of war, in violation of UNSC Resolution 1701" (Government- 
owned Al-Thawra, 9/3) 
 
"Speaker of the Lebanese Parliament talks about breaking Israeli 
siege on Lebanon by sending Arab ships and flights to Lebanon" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 9/4) 
 
"Minister of Information Mohsen Bilal confers with members of the 
Peace Cycle Campaigners.  In an interview with Al-Akhbar daily, 
Bilal:  Annan has heard Syria's viewpoint that Israel's 
continuing occupation of the Arab territories is the main cause 
of the problem" (Government-owned Tishreen, 9/3) 
"Information Minister Bilal meets a delegation of citizens of 
occupied Golan:  Syria is determined to restore her occupied 
territories" (Government-owned Tishreen, 9/2) 
"Three Palestinians martyred, 8 wounded, and 6 homes destroyed by 
continuing Israeli terrorism in the Gaza Strip" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 9/3) 
 
"The international community continues to ignore cluster bombs 
that threaten Lebanese civilians.  The Olmert government is split 
by fiasco of the war against Lebanon.  The Lebanese Parliament 
stages a sit-in today.  Former Lebanese PM Al-Hoss criticizes al- 
Saniora for not condemning the US participation in the war 
against Lebanon" (Government-owned Tishreen, 9/2) 
"EU Foreign Ministers call for reviving the peace process on 
basis of return to 1967 borders" (Government-owned Tishreen, 9/2) 
"10 Palestinians wounded in Bel'in.  The Stockholm doners 
conference:  More than $500 million has been allocated to 
 
Palestinians, that will reach Palestinians directly apart from 
the Palestinian government" (Government-owned Tishreen, 9/2) 
"FM Mouallem holds talks with UN SecGen about the situation in 
the region in the wake of UNSC Resolution 1701, and about the UN 
role in building peace and lifting Israeli siege on Lebanon" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 9/2) 
 
"Israel responds to Annan's demands:  Our weapons are legal;  No 
pullout from Lebanon except on our conditions" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 9/2) 
 
"The Pentagon warns against a civil war in Iraq and US President 
George Bush dismisses this possibility" (Government-owned 
Tisrheen, 9/3) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
----------------------------------- 
 
"It is Time to Go Back to Damascus" 
 
----------------------------------- 
 
Abd-al-Fattah al-Awad, chief editor of government-owned Al- 
Thawra, wrote (9/3):  "When the time to talk peace comes, the 
road will always lead to Damascus.... 
 
"Those who have tried to isolate Syria with their barriers have 
undoubtedly discovered, albeit late, that their barriers 
prevented them from seeing things correctly and deprived them of 
an opportunity to learn the facts without distortion.... 
 
"Many in the world have now started to talk about peace in light 
of the failure of wars, pressures, and threats.... In the past 
few years, Syria has come under heavy pressure in the form of a 
vicious war against Syria's principles and adherence to dignity 
and right.... But Syria has succeeded in overcoming all pressure 
and has achieved political victories through the credibility of 
its positions and the proven soundness of its views about 
regional developments.... All attempts to isolate Syria have 
failed miserably.... The UN secretary general described Syria as 
an 'important regional power'.... 
 
"Israel is the main cause of problems in the region.... Any 
peace effort must force Israel to implement UN resolutions and 
accept the land-for-peace principle.... If Syria opens the doors 
wide for any proposal leading to an international commitment to 
the peace plan, it knows very well that this is not the only way 
to regain its rights.  The demand and quest for peace proceed 
from the understanding that this is the best solution, but it 
will not be the only solution.... If the American policy has led 
to disasters in the region, then listening to Syria helps 
everyone avoid these disasters, because listening to Damascus 
means listening to wisdom and peace." 
 
----------------------- 
 
"Accusations and Siege" 
 
----------------------- 
 
Ali Nasrallah, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
wrote (9/3):  "In his latest speech, President Bush, who feels 
endangered as the election draws near and his popularity drops 
to unprecedented lows, talked about defeat.  For the first time 
the vocabulary of victory and the show expressions were absent. 
This reflects his anxiety and his true inside feeling of failure 
and defeat.... 
 
"Through its mistaken policies, erroneous notions, and Zionist 
ideological extremism, the Bush administration has undoubtedly 
harmed the United States and its interests.  Its loss in the 
forthcoming Congressional election might be the result of its 
foolish policy.  Perhaps this loss will be the biggest service 
the US Administration renders to the American people, who will 
definitely reject the idea of ideological struggle and support 
 
the principle of dialogue among cultures and civilizations." 
 
-------------------------------- 
 
"Living in a Great Illusion" 
-------------------------------- 
 
Izz-al-Din al-Darwish, an editorialist in government-owned 
Tishreen, commented (9/3):  "In the past two years it was clear 
that some Western countries, specifically the USA and France, 
were publicly working to isolate Syria through attempts to 
distort its role.  They obtained UN resolutions for that purpose 
and they delegated to Israel the greatest part of the job.  And, 
regrettably, some Arab voices quickly lined up behind this 
Western-Israeli campaign.  These Arab voices went too far in 
their fantasies and they promoted the idea that Syria's role was 
coming to an end.  Naturally, the Lebanese bigmouths were at the 
head of those discordant Arab voices. 
 
"But the advocates of Syria's isolation soon found out that they 
were living inside a big illusion.  The number of visitors to 
Syria by presidents, heads of governments, ministers, and 
official and popular delegations is ever increasing, and so is 
the number of those who are convinced that it is impossible to 
bypass Syria.  Last week, for example, Damascus was the center of 
meetings, talks, contacts and visits, culminating in the visits 
of Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez and UN Secretary-General Kofi 
Annan.... 
 
"Syria has not been and cannot be isolated.  People must return 
to Syria in order to address the issues of the region because 
Syria's role is pivotal, its positions are firm and its defense 
of right and international legitimacy is principled.  The time 
when Israel dominated the affairs and capabilities of the Arab 
region is over, or is almost over.   New facts have emerged on 
the ground - facts that have led to radical changes, entrenching 
the policy of Arab resistance and opposition to all forms of 
Israeli aggression.  These are facts to which Israelis came very 
close after their latest war against Lebanon and about which many 
Americans, although from outside the administration, have spoken. 
These are facts to which the French have referred clearly and of 
which the hesitant or 'neutral' Arabs, who were overwhelmed by 
the 'extraordinary' Israeli power, have became convinced...." 
 
--------------------------------- 
 
"Syria and Its Constructive Role" 
 
--------------------------------- 
 
Samir al-Shibani, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (9/2):  "No one disagrees that Syria's approach to UN 
principles and resolutions over the past decades has been 
sincere and serious.  Syria leads the world in its concern about 
the credibility, effectiveness, and independence of this 
international organization and the need for it to stay away from 
any alliance and to reject any attempt to absorb or usurp it to 
serve this party or that.  The international organization 
asserts and entrenches its role and maintains its fairness and 
credibility to the extent that it rejects the storms of hegemony 
and the frost of unilateralism. 
 
... 
 
"Syria's belief in and commitment to international law has never 
been shaken.  In all its positions, Syria often, indeed always, 
demanded the implementation of all resolutions.  Some 
resolutions are decades old.  Had they been implemented and 
their objectives and clauses translated into action, the 
international organization would not have needed to pass many 
new resolutions.  It would have saved much effort and ended the 
suffering of peoples and the tremendous injustice done to them. 
UN SecGen Kofi Annan's statements after his meeting with 
President Asad prove that Syria is an important regional player 
and that the international community is looking to it and hoping 
 
it will play a constructive role at this delicate stage.... 
 
"Through its constructive and civilized role, which is 
consistent with its historical fate, Syria will remain at the 
head of those who abide by UN resolutions and who care about the 
prestige and reputation of the international organization." 
 
Corbin