06DAMASCUS2071
Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/US, Syria/Palestine,
Thu May 04 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #2071/01 1241308
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 041308Z MAY 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 8762
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 5922
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 3791
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2299
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 6997
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 0949
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4372
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0592
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6736UNCLAS DAMASCUS 002071 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT  FOR  PA,  NEA/ARN,  INR/IC/CD,  INR/S:STHIBEAULT  AND 
JMCCARTER,   VOA   NEWS   CA,  NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS,   DBENZE   AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/US, Syria/Palestine, 
Syria/Iran, Lebanon, Iraq, Iran's Nuclear Program (5/4) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary: Syrian papers reported that Dr. Faisal Miqdad, 
Deputy Foreign Minister, conferred with a delegation from the US 
Institute of Peace now visiting Syria. He commented that "the 
current US policy is contributing to complications in the region 
and is blocking efforts to achieve stability in the Middle 
East." Dr. Miqdad delivered a political review of Syrian policy 
vis-a-vis political developments in the region and Syria's 
principled stance on circumstances in Palestine and Iraq. 
 
Papers also reported that the US delegation met with Dr. 
Buthaina Shabaan, Minister of Expatriates, who called on the US 
Administration to reconsider its policies in the Middle East, 
noting that they serve neither US interests nor US-Arab ties. 
Shabaan emphasized that "Syria is working with the international 
community to achieve a just and comprehensive peace in the 
region in accordance with international legitimacy." She added, 
"Syria is taking firm steps in the process of reforming and 
developing all aspects of the life of Syrian society." 
 
Papers also featured a lecture delivered at Damascus University 
by Khaled Mashaal, Chairman of HAMAS' Political Bureau. Mashaal 
praised Syria's financial support of Palestinians. He said that 
"Syria's fundraising campaign represents a model of a positive 
Arab role in support of the Palestinian cause."  Mashaal 
reviewed developments in the region and the siege that "has been 
imposed on Palestinians due to their democratic choice." 
 
The Syrian press also reported that Mohammad Suleimani, Iranian 
Minister of Communications and Technology, and Amr Salem, his 
Syrian counterpart, have signed a number of agreements in the 
fields of communications and information technology, valued at 
$30 million and expected to increase to $100 million. Later, 
Minister Salem signed a contract with his Iranian counterpart to 
import $70 million worth of communication cables from Iran. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶3. Selected Headlines: 
 
"Shabaan and Miqdad confer with a delegation from the US 
Institute of Peace: US policy contributes to complications in the 
region" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 5/4) 
 
"The Syrian fundraising campaign continues. Mashaal: Syria is an 
Arab and pan-Arab model of support for the Palestinian people" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 5/4) 
 
"Author of the book of 'Hidden Evidence in Lebanon' and German 
expert in criminal science, Kolpil: The Israeli Mossad disabled 
the radars and Kolpil is ready to give evidence. A Lebanese call 
to investigate the Israeli role in the crime of the Al-Hariri 
assassination" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 5/4) 
 
"The Palestinian government rejects Chirac's suggestions to solve 
the crisis of salaries. Hahieh: We have collected the necessary 
funds, but US pressures are blocking them" (Government-owned Al- 
Ba'th, 5/4) 
 
"A car bomb targets the Mayor of Al-Anbar. 58 Iraqis killed, two 
injured in Fallujah. In its first session, the Iraqi parliament 
discusses amendment of the constitution" (Government-owned Al- 
Ba'th, 5/4) 
 
"A European draft resolution to the Security Council to impose 
sanctions on Iran. Bolton calls for an alliance of countries that 
desire to impose sanctions on Iran [in case the UNSC fails to 
endorse such a step]. Tehran denounces the US policy of 
intimidation" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 5/4) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
------------------------ 
 
"Alliance with Terrorism" 
 
------------------------ 
 
 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(5/4): "Syria is coming under various forms of pressure these 
days applied by big international and regional forces and 
 
individuals who have volunteered to do everything they are 
ordered to do.... 
 
"The US Administration has never stopped its pressure on 
Damascus, whether directly or through quarters and individuals 
who want to please the master of the White House and his 
neoconservatives, even at the expense of dignity, sovereignty, 
and the 'principles' that this anti-Syria team is falsely 
bragging about.... 
 
"These people appear ready to do anything to tarnish Syria's 
image.... Today they wanted to affirm their flagrant hostility 
toward the Syrian people -- not the regime. They declared an 
unholy alliance with a group that has committed every evil act, 
spilled the blood of the Syrian people, and committed crimes 
against humanity, not only against Syria and the Syrians [in 
reference to the Syrian Muslim Brothers who are reportedly 
visiting Lebanon].... 
 
"The new Machiavellians, from Washington to Israel to some of 
the 'neighbors', have exposed themselves and forged an alliance 
with terrorism and the terrorists who are condemned by the 
peoples of the earth and the laws of heaven, only because the 
aim is to bring Syria to its knees and force it to turn against 
its principles.... 
 
"Syria will not turn against itself or shed its skin. It will 
not disavow its principles and the ambitions of its people and 
the Arabs, even if its enemies ally themselves with the devil 
himself, as well as with terrorism, terrorists, and highway 
robbers...." 
 
----------------------- 
 
"Insistence on Failure" 
 
----------------------- 
 
Omar Jaftali, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(5/4): "The US Administration is acting against international 
legitimacy. It is using the logic of pressure and force against 
countries whose policies are based on the logic of law and the 
principles of international legitimacy, such as Syria. These 
countries reject US policy only when the Bush administration 
insists on pursuing an Israeli policy and surrendering to the 
plans of neoconservatives, who embroiled Washington in a war on 
Iraq and who insist on drawing a new map for our Arab region, 
one that serves their hostile plans and totally avoids the 
requirements and rights of the region in accordance with 
international law and UN resolutions." 
 
--------------------------- 
 
"Iran in Different Mirrors" 
 
--------------------------- 
 
Ali Abdul-Karim, a columnist in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (5/4): "There are some regional apprehensions about 
the Iranian nuclear program.... 
 
"A fair and balanced vision would show that Iran's power is a 
guarantee more than a threat, because experience has proven that 
Israeli aggression cannot be curbed by negotiations or 
international resolutions unless there is a power for Israel to 
take into consideration.... 
 
"Washington's threats to Tehran do not serve stability in the 
region, especially since the United States has turned a deaf ear 
to the calls of all countries of the region, including Iran, to 
free the entire region from weapons of mass destruction...." 
 
 
Seche