06DAMASCUS602
Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Lebanon, Iran, Danish
Mon Feb 13 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0602/01 0441344
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 131344Z FEB 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 7098
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 5789
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 3685
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2151
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 6911
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 0785
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4269
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0501
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6648UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000602 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Lebanon, Iran, Danish 
Cartoons, Iraq, Palestinian Territories (2/13) 
 
¶1. Summary: Syrian papers reported a press statement to Lebanese 
magazine "al-Mughtarib" by Lebanese FM Fawzi Salloukh saying 
"there is a need for good ties with Arab countries, especially 
Syria." Salloukh considered the continuous Israeli violations of 
Lebanon's sovereignty and the maintenance of the occupation of 
the Shebaa Farms and other Lebanese lands as issues that concern 
all Lebanese. He pointed out that UN resolution No. 425 is not 
fully implemented yet, and called upon the international 
community to shoulder responsibility regarding that matter. 
 
Papers also reported a statement to Lebanese "Al-Nour Radio" by 
Najah Wakim, Head of the Lebanese People's Party, saying that 
"there is a Lebanese national unanimity regarding weapon of 
Lebanese national resistance," and stressing that "resistance is 
still a strategic choice in facing the Israeli enemy and in 
defending the country." Salloukh confirmed that "hostility toward 
Syria just aims to open the road before Israel." He called on all 
Lebanese to enhance ties with Syria noting that "those who are 
calling for a feud with Syria are doing so with American 
support". 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2. Selected Headlines: 
 
"As demonstrations [protesting cartoons on the Prophet Mohammad] 
continue, Denmark seeks Malaysia's help to absorb Moslems' anger. 
Israeli settlers insult Islam on walls in Qalqilia" (Government- 
owned Tishreen, 2/13) 
 
"Jumblatt reiterates rejection of national resistance. Leader of 
the Lebanese People's Movement Wakim: Enmity towards Syria means 
opening the way in front of Israel.  Former Lebanese Minister 
Wahab: The March 14th Powers were disrobed before the Lebanese 
people due to their connection with foreign parties" (Government- 
owned Tishreen, 2/13) 
 
"Lebanese FM Salloukh: Resolution 425 was not carried out; 
Lebanon wants the Shebaa Farms. Wahab: The Lebanese national 
resistance and its arms are elements of power and immunity [from 
attacks]" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 2/13) 
 
"After the US scandal in Abu-Ghraib, Iraqi citizens suffer from 
British brutality" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 2/12 
"New photos unveil brutality by British soldiers towards Iraqi 
youths. Al-Jafari is designated as Prime Minister" (Government- 
owned Al-Thawra, 2/13) 
 
"Tel Aviv continues criticism of Moscow [for inviting HAMAS 
leader to Moscow. [Acting Israeli Prime Minister] Olmert 
confirms: We will confiscate Palestinian financial dues until 
HAMAS takes over authority" (Government-owned Tishreen, 2/13) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
"The Iranian Islamic Revolution: Challenges and Evolving 
Possibilities" 
 
--------------------------------------------- ------------ 
 
Dr. Khalaf al-Jarrad, Chief Editor of government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (2/13): "Iran has cooperated with the IAEA... Its 
nuclear program is meant only for peaceful purposes. Yet the US 
and its allies have turned this normal issue into a problem 
because they simply do not accept for any developing country to 
possess and locally produce advanced technology and dispense 
with experts from other countries in its development process.... 
Israel and the United States want to keep countries of the 
region in a position of subservience, weakness, and 
humiliation.... 
 
"Iran and Syria have the same objectives to reject foreign 
interference in regional affairs, to confront the neo- 
 
colonialist forces, to adhere to independence, freedom, and 
dignity, and to defend the rights of oppressed peoples, 
primarily the Palestinian people, who have been subjected to the 
most dangerous forms of mass displacement, genocide, and 
annihilation. 
"The growing relations between the two countries show that the 
solidarity of brothers and friends is the practical response to 
threats, provocations, and pressure, regardless of their source, 
size, and objective.... Syria and Iran do not seek to establish 
an alliance or to return to regional polarization, nor do they 
direct their cooperation against anyone. But it is their right - 
- indeed their duty and the duty of all Arab and Muslim 
countries -- to cooperate, demonstrate solidarity with each 
other, to integrate in the areas of industry, transport, 
tourism, trade, and scientific and technological developments, 
to defend their independent political and cultural options; and 
to search for the best ways to exchange expertise for the sake 
of comprehensive socio-economic development and effective 
societal modernization. 
 
"Iran will be able to stand fast in the face of foreign threats, 
provocations, and conspiracies. Iran's political, strategic, and 
economic cards make others think thousands of times before 
engaging in any hostile or provocative actions against it. Never 
mind the intimidation, exaggeration, noise, and the media and 
diplomatic wars launched today from many capitals against Iran, 
its elected leadership, and independent political and 
developmental inclinations...." 
 
----------------------------- 
 
"Grasping a Straw for Escape" 
 
----------------------------- 
 
Ahmad Dawwa, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
commented (2/13): "The team of deception and 
internationalization in Lebanon is playing a suspicious role 
serving foreign plans in the region.... 
 
"Washington immediately repeats the anti-Syria statements and 
positions of this team, which grasps at straws to keep it from 
drowning now that the plan it is implementing against its 
country and its neighbors has been exposed.... 
 
"This team immediately implicated Syria in the riots that took 
place in Beirut last week, but it failed to produce any piece of 
evidence to prove it, as it had promised.... In an attempt to 
distract people from this scandal, Walid Jumblatt made his 
statement that Hizbollah is a militia, although his allies in 
the Future Current acknowledged a week earlier that Hizbollah is 
a resistance movement.... Jumblatt means what he says, 
especially since an American official made a similar statement 
about Hizbollah when the Lebanese PM met the party's demands two 
weeks ago.... It is obvious that some people no longer control 
their decisions...." 
 
-------------------------------- 
 
"A Call for Acknowledging Truth" 
 
-------------------------------- 
 
Ali Nasrallah, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
wrote (2/13): "Independent Western researchers like Arthur Butz 
and Roger Garaudy continued to suffer because they conducted 
scientific research and dared to conclude that the holocaust was 
fabricated to help create a Jewish state in Palestine.... 
 
"If Western countries see the offending cartoons [on the Prophet 
Muhammad] as part of freedom of the press and speech -- which is 
not -- it is more appropriate for them to accept the results of 
academic research conducted by independent Westerners who 
support neither Zionism nor the perpetrators of the alleged 
genocide crimes against the Jews. They should respect these 
 
results and stop muzzling researchers and academicians and 
accusing them of anti-Semitism...." 
 
Seche