06DAMASCUS5379
Damascus Media Reaction:  Syria/China, Baker/Hamilton
Sun Dec 10 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #5379/01 3441314
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 101314Z DEC 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2589
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6429
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4221
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2820
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7401
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1435
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4785
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1000
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7136UNCLAS DAMASCUS 005379 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND AFERNANDEZ, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT:  Damascus Media Reaction:  Syria/China, Baker/Hamilton 
Report, Lebanon, Palestinian Territories, Iraq 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers today reported that Syrian Foreign 
Minister Walid Moualem met on Dec. 9 with Chinese Assistant Foreign 
Minister Chi Jion and an accompanying delegation.  Talks focused on 
developments in the region, particularly in Lebanon, Palestine and 
Iraq, and on bilateral relations.  Moualem stressed during the 
meeting the important role which could be played by China, as a 
permanent member of the UN Security Council, in defending the issues 
of developing countries and in establishing international peace and 
security. In a statement to reporters following the meeting, the 
Chinese official described his talks with Moualem as "very 
successful." 
 
On the Baker/Hamilton Report, papers featured an official statement 
by the Syrian Foreign Ministry describing the report as "positive." 
Papers also reported Israel's rejection of the Report's 
recommendations on the Arab-Israeli conflict and cited Israeli FM 
Livni's trip to Washington to contain repercussions of the report on 
Israel. 
 
On developments on Lebanon, papers continued to report the popular 
sit-in in Beirut, featuring a speech to demonstrators on Dec. 7 by 
Hizbollah SecGen Hasan Nasrallah calling on the current Lebanese 
government to resign, adding "it is of no use for some Lebanese 
ministers to rely on western support." Nasrallah urged foreign 
parties not to interfere in Lebanese internal affairs and raised 
suspicion about US interest in and support for the current Lebanese 
government.  Papers also reported a Friday sermon by Fathi Yakn, 
SecGen of the Islamic Action Front in Lebanon, confirming that "the 
unprecedented historical rally organized by the Lebanese opposition 
in downtown Beirut will continue until the overthrow of the US 
scheme."  Papers also reported that Lebanese President Lahoud 
refused on Dec. 9 to endorse government plans for an international 
tribunal to try suspects in the killing of former PM al-Hariri. 
Papers also cited a press report by Lebanese daily Al-Akhbar on Dec. 
7 revealing that members of the Future Block, "Al-Mustaqbal," set 
fire to three stores owned by Syrian citizens in the Sabra district 
of Beirut, threatening to liquidate anyone who testifies or 
complains against them. 
 
On Palestinian issues, paper reported that Vice President Shara met 
on Dec. 7 with Mustapha Bargouthi, Secretary of the Palestinian 
National Initiative, focusing on consultations to form a Palestinian 
national unity government.  Papers also featured a speech by 
Palestinian PM Hanieh delivered at Tehran University on Dec. 8, 
charging the superpowers and Israel with seeking, through the siege 
on Palestinians, to force Palestinians to acknowledge the usurpation 
of their territories, stop the resistance, and commit themselves to 
agreements which were signed in the past with Israel, confirming 
that this will not happen and that Palestinian resistance will 
continue until Palestinian territories are liberated. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Syrian-Chinese talks at the Syrian Foreign Ministry.  Chinese 
Assistant Foreign Minister Jion confirms identical views with Syria, 
saying that the occupation is the reason for tension" 
(Government-owned Tishreen 12/10) 
 
"German Foreign Minister rejects US criticism of his visit to Syria, 
confirming the importance of this visit" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
12/10) 
 
"A Russian diplomat:  The Golan is part of Syria" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 12/8) 
 
"Annan reiterates calls for Washington to hold dialogue with Syria 
and Iran on Iraq" (Government-owned Tishreen, 12/9) 
 
"Turkish Foreign Ministry:  Turkey attaches great importance to 
developing relations with Syria" (Government-owned Tishreen, 12/9) 
 
"The 8th day of Lebanese popular sit-in:  Joint Friday prayer and 
wide-ranging support for speech of Hizbollah leader.  Lebanese MPs 
and personalities:  The speech cuts off the road before instigators; 
 
 it dots the i's and crosses the t's.  Sheikh Fathi Yakan:  We must 
cut off the road before the team in authority.  Ra'd:  It ended 
illusions.  Sa'd: The speech paves the way for a new stage" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 12/9) 
 
"Lebanese daily 'al-Akhbar':  Members of the Future Block 
'Al-Mustaqbal' burn three stores owned by 
 Syrian citizens in Beirut 
in the district of Sabra, threatening to liquidate anyone who 
testifies or complains against them" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
12/9) 
 
"Lebanese President Lahoud turns down a draft resolution for the 
international court.  Speaker of Lebanese Parliament Berri:  The 
Parliament will not convene before the crisis is resolved.  General 
Aoun:  It is a government of corruption.... We offer al-Saniora as a 
present to the US" (Government-owned Tishreen, 12/10) 
 
"Hizbollah secretary general accuses al-Saniora of ordering the army 
to confiscate Hizbollah weapons heading to south Lebanon. Nasrallah: 
 Lebanese parties requested Olmert to stage war against Lebanon to 
terminate Hizbollah.... You called on Bush to occupy Syria" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 12/8) 
 
"Syrian Foreign ministry:  The Baker report on Iraq is objective... 
Restoring the Golan is a priority" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
12/8) 
 
"Bush to deliver an address of policy change before Christmas.  The 
Baker-Hamilton commission rejects selectivity in its 
recommendations.  Israeli Foreign Minister Livni in Washington to 
contain repercussions of the Baker-Hamilton Report on Israel" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 12/9) 
 
"Vice President Shara discusses current contacts to from a national 
unity government with Mustafa al-Barghouthi, Secretary of the 
Palestinian National Initiative" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 12/8) 
 
"Three Palestinians injured by occupation fire.  Hanieh:  The 
resistance will continue until the liberation of occupied Jerusalem" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 12/9) 
 
"The PLO Executive Committee calls for early elections.  HAMAS 
considers this a coup against democracy" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
12/10) 
 
"Zionist lobby continues its campaign against former US President 
Carter's Book, 'The Palestinian.'  Carter denounces abstention from 
criticizing Israel in the US" (Government-owned Tishreen, 12/10) 
 
"A report on the Canadian Global Research Website:  The Pentagon and 
Israeli Mossad are behind explosions in Iraq" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 12/10) 
 
"23 civilians die in Iraq, including 5 children, in US air strikes 
targeting al-Ishaki.  Three US troops killed in Baghdad" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 12/9) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
---------------- 
 
"Autumn of Lies" 
 
---------------- 
 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, commented 
(12/9):  "The US Administration, the world's master liar, has 
gradually begun to collapse under the yoke of its own lies, from the 
lie of Iraq's possession of weapons of mass destruction, to all the 
other lies that came in the form of accusations against Syria and 
Arab national resistance forces, to the big lie that the war on Iraq 
is a war against terror and for freedom, sovereignty, democracy, and 
protection of human rights.... 
 
"Followers of the American master cannot continue with their lies, 
regardless of their formidable media machine....  It is shameful and 
 
disastrous that a unilateral team in Lebanon is leading the country 
to the brink of the abyss when this team itself was willingly 
involved in hostile plans.... The governing team in Lebanon worked 
publicly and secretly to liquidate the resistance, militarily during 
the Israeli aggression, and politically after the aggression, in a 
way that serves only those who are lying in wait for Arabs and the 
region.... 
"Those who seek help from abroad against their compatriots have no 
future, regardless of their reliance on local wars and sectarian and 
denominational sedition.... 
 
"Despite this, there is still a chance for those who want to prove 
their good intentions and those who were misled by the team that 
monopolizes power, to return to their senses and to the right path. 
But this chance will not remain open forever, and it will not 
accommodate those who stabbed the homeland in the back and are still 
doing so in broad daylight.  Will this team wake up before it is too 
late?" 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
"Richard Haass:  The US Dream of a New Middle East Has Evaporated" 
 
--------------------------------------------- ---------- 
 
Dr. Sa'id Musallam, a columnist in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(12/8):  "The Lebanese opposition's activity in Beirut is a mammoth 
popular rejection of all forms of foreign trusteeship, as the 
government has turned into an executive tool manipulated through 
instructions from the White House and the American and French 
embassies in Beirut.... 
 
"Israel and the United States, supported by some Arab countries, 
tried -- but failed -- to eliminate the Lebanese resistance 
militarily and drag the whole country into the Israeli camp during 
the July/August war.  Later those forces tried to achieve through 
politics what they failed to achieve through war.... The current 
political struggle in Lebanon is between nationalist forces, that 
oppose the American plan, and forces that hijacked power and now 
lack legal, constitutional, and popular legitimacy. 
 
"The fall of the Lebanese government would mean the total collapse 
of the American-Zionist plan...." 
 
------------------------- 
 
"A Drift Towards Realism" 
 
------------------------- 
 
Hanan Hamad, an op-ed writer in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(12/9):  "US Defense Secretary-Designate Robert Gates' reference to 
Israel's nuclear weapons, his opposition to an attack on Iran, his 
remark that the United States is not winning in Iraq, his warning 
that the failure to achieve stability in Iraq within one or two 
years might lead to a regional conflagration, and his recommendation 
that contacts be made with Syria and Iran, constitute a call for a 
turn in American policy from the direction of arrogance and racist, 
fanatic ideas and discourse toward realism and objectivity.... 
 
"These indications are in accord with the Baker-Hamilton Report, 
that emphasizes this inclination to reclaim US foreign policy files 
from the hands of neo-conservatives and to replace the flagrant 
aggressive tone with a diplomatic tone.  This does not mean any 
concession on US substantive strategic demands that call for 
securing Israel's supremacy in the region." 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
"Time Is Running Out for a US Escape from Iraq" 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
Ahmad Suwwan, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, commented 
(12/9):  "There is a link between Iraq and other issues of the 
 
region.... 
 
"If the United States wants to get out of the Iraqi mud, it must 
revise its policy in Lebanon and occupied Palestine.... 
 
"The United States needs to end its occupation of Iraq, stop 
interfering in Lebanon's affairs, halt the unlimited American 
support for Israel's occupation and aggression, and deal seriously 
and positively with the countries of the region, primarily Iran and 
Syria, based on their central regional roles, their political 
credibility in securing stability and calm in the region, and their 
clear positions toward the removal of the occupation, whether the 
American occupation in Iraq or the Israeli occupation in 
Palestine...." 
 
Corbin