06DAMASCUS3177
Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Italy, Syria/Libya,
Wed Jun 28 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0005
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #3177/01 1791317
ZNR UUUUU ZZH (508)
O 281317Z JUN 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0039
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6066
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 3921
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2451
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7119
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1109
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4495
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0718
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6857UNCLAS DAMASCUS 03177 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Syria/Italy, Syria/Libya, 
Palestinian Territories, Lebanon, Iraq (6/28) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary: Syrian papers today featured a statement by Italian 
Journalist Stefanou Ciarini calling for more communication 
between Syrian and Italian intellectuals to bridge the gap 
created by 9/11 between the Islamic and Western civilizations. 
"European governments are following the US policy represented by 
the neo-conservatives who resist every approach between the West 
and the East, exploiting this gap to dominate the world," Ciarini 
said in an open dialogue with Syrian writers and authors 
organized by the Arab Writers Union. He noted that extremism 
exits everywhere, in different religious and political aspects. 
"It is enough to hear the US Administration's words to know how 
extremist they are," Ciarini added, pointing to the main role 
Syrian and Italian intellectuals can play in combating all kinds 
of extremism. About the work of journalists in Italy, he 
underlined that a journalist can write as he wants but he may be 
exposed to great pressure if he writes a story about a politician 
or an important businessman, for example. "A journalist may be 
denied promotion or be marginalized or even lose his job if he 
writes about the Palestinian issue," he said, noting that Italian 
journalists in the occupied Palestinian territories are exposed 
to various kinds of Israeli pressure. Stefanou Ciarini is a 
journalist for the Italian Paper 'Manifesto', and is well known 
for defending Arab causes. He is a member of the Sabra and 
Shatella Committee. 
 
Papers also reported that Minister of Information Mohsen Bilal 
conferred with Gouma Elmahdi Elfazani, the Libyan Ambassador in 
Damascus. Their talks concentrated on agreements between Syria 
and Libya for news and program cooperation and exchange of 
expertise among media institutions. Both sides stressed the 
importance of developing this cooperation for the improvement of 
information and enhancing relations and coordination between the 
two countries. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Information Minister Bilal to Kuwaiti daily Al-Anbaa: Syria gave 
warning about against spread of terrorism, destruction and chaos 
in Iraq; those [Lebanese] who want to open dialogue with Syria 
must be serious and honest" (Government-owned Syria Times, 6/28) 
 
"Israeli occupation continues its aggression in Gaza. One 
Palestinian martyred, five injured. Israel threatens to 
assassinate Palestinian leaders. Palestinian factions endorse the 
amended 'Prisoners Document.'  Israel rejects the document" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 6/28) 
 
"A new session of the Lebanese National Dialogue will be held 
tomorrow. No reports on proceedings and anticipated results. No 
decision on the file of defense strategy. Continuing Lebanese 
calls to persist in maintaining the arms of the resistance" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 6/28) 
 
"Prodi: Italy is keen to develop relations with Syria" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 6/28) 
 
"Italian journalist Ciarini, in a meeting with Syrian 
journalists, calls for further rapprochement among civilizations, 
free from the influence of politics" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
6/28) 
 
"Russia holds the US responsible for the killing of four Russian 
diplomats in Iraq. Three US soldiers killed in Baghdad" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 6/28) 
 
"Information Minister Bilal discusses media cooperation with 
Gouma Elmahdi Elfazani, Libyan Ambassador to Syria" (Government- 
owned TIshreen, 6/28) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
------------------------- 
 
"Terrorism and Dialogue" 
 
 
------------------------- 
 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, 
commented (6/28): "Have those who claim to be combating terrorism 
asked themselves why they have failed in their reckless war 
against terrorism...? 
 
"The Bush Administration still refuses to acknowledge its 
mistakes and that its war on terrorism has failed badly.... The 
US policy has encouraged the emergence of terrorist groups that 
did not exist before. All this is an outcome of anti-Arab and 
anti-Islam US policies.... 
 
"The US, along with other world countries, can really combat 
terrorism by collective action that must start with defining 
terrorism and differentiating between it and the legitimate right 
of resistance.... 
 
"An international consensus on combating terrorism cannot be 
achieved without appropriate language, namely the language of 
dialogue, which the Bush Administration has erased from its 
dictionary.... The US Administration must adopt the language of 
dialogue.... It first must acknowledge that killing children in 
Palestine and Iraq is real terrorism." 
 
----------------------------- 
 
"Syria's Doors are Wide Open" 
 
----------------------------- 
 
Riad Zein, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(6/28):  "Endeavors are being made to bring Syrian-Lebanese 
relations back to normal.... But some Lebanese parties have lost 
the compass to Damascus.... 
 
"President Asad was crystal clear when he called upon all 
Lebanese officials participating in the National Dialogue to 
unite ranks and be faithful to their own country and its true 
interests. 
 
"In an interview with London-based al-Hayat, the president called 
for a united Lebanon that should have no room for local or 
sectarian interests.... President Asad asserted that Syria has no 
interest whatsoever in dividing Lebanon.... 
 
"President Asad welcomed any Lebanese leader, reiterating that 
the doors of Damascus are wide open to settle any problem facing 
Lebanon. The President warned against the game of 'border 
demarcation, saying that the demarcation can start from the 
north, not from the Shebaa Farms, which are still under Israeli 
occupation. He also referred to Syria's agreement to establish an 
Embassy in Lebanon, provided that it should not be imposed from 
outside. 
 
"Will reason and logic as well as real national interests govern 
the drive of those skeptical Lebanese parties before they turn 
into real losers?" 
 
Seche