06DAMASCUS3573
Damascus Media Reaction: Israeli Operation in Lebanon,
Thu Jul 20 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0005
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #3573/01 2011252
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 201252Z JUL 06
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 0470
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1150
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4536
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 0756
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 6895UNCLAS DAMASCUS 003573 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/S:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, DBENZE AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA RWINCHESTER 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Damascus Media Reaction: Israeli Operation in Lebanon, 
Palestinian Territories, Iraq (7/20) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary: Syrian papers continued to focus on the Israeli 
military action in Lebanon. Headlines featured President Asad's 
phone call with Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyib Erdogan, 
which dealt with "the continuing Israeli aggression against 
Lebanon and Palestine." 
Papers also reported that the Regional Command of the Syrian 
Baath Party decided to form a higher popular committee to boost 
the steadfastness of the Lebanese people. The committee will set 
plans to mobilize popular capabilities and hold national 
campaigns to collect financial donations and contributions for 
the Lebanese people. 
 
Papers also reported that Foreign Minister Walid Mouallem and 
Alexander Sultanov, Russian Deputy Foreign Minister, discussed 
the dangerous situation in Lebanon, and Palestine and ways to 
reach a ceasefire. In a meeting in Damascus the two sides 
exchanged views on the situation in the region, including the 
support of the political process in Iraq. The Russian and Syrian 
diplomats reiterated the importance of ending bloodshed and 
violence in the Middle East through a political and diplomatic 
settlement for the crisis. 
 
Papers also reported that Italian FM Massimo D'Alema expressed 
appreciation for Syria's efforts to achieve stability and calm in 
the Middle East, saying that "the Italian government depends on 
Syria's constructive and efficient role to realize stability in 
the region."  D'Alema rejected allegations and accusations about 
the so-called non-positive role of Syria and Iran. He stressed 
that Syria, through its latest contacts, has shown a great desire 
to play a pivotal regional role. The Italian Minister reiterated 
criticism of the continuing Israeli aggressions against Lebanon 
and the Palestinian territories, noting that these offensives 
have surpassed the limits of logic, violated international law 
and led to catastrophic outcomes in Lebanon and Palestine. He 
warned against the possibility of expanding the war to other 
countries in the region, calling on Europe to play a key role in 
the region. He also criticized the US war on Iraq, saying that 
this war ignited hostility and terrorism against western 
countries and created a very dangerous situation in the world. 
End of summary. 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
President Asad and Turkish Prime Minister Erdogan: The 
international community is delaying enforcement of a cease-fire" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 7/20) 
 
"The Regional Command of the Baath Party forms a higher popular 
committee to support the Lebanese people" (Government-owned Al- 
Thawra, 7/20) 
 
"The EU thanks Syria for its help in evacuating its nationals; 
Foreign Minister Mouallem discusses the situation in Lebanon and 
Palestine with Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Sultanov" 
(Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 7/2) 
 
"The hysteria of the Israeli aggression expands in Palestine. 
Over 15 Palestinians martyred in Nablus and Gaza" (Government- 
owned Al-Ba'th, 9/20) 
 
"Syria's Ambassador to the UN: A US-Israeli agenda to continue 
the Israeli aggression another week" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
7/20) 
 
"Unlimited Israeli terrorism in Palestine and Lebanon.  Two 
Israeli massacres in Salaa and Sarifa. Heroic acts by the 
resistance in a ground battle with Israeli forces. Six Israeli 
soldiers killed, 14 injured, 4 Israeli tanks destroyed and an F- 
16 plane brought down" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 7/20) 
 
"Arrest of traitors who display signs for the Israeli warplanes 
to shell specific targets in Beirut" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
7/20) 
 
"Italian Foreign Minister D'Alema: The Israeli aggression against 
Lebanon has surpassed limits of logic. We rely on a constructive 
Syrian role to achieve stability" (Government-owned Tishreen, 
 
7/20) 
 
"The hysteria of Israeli aggression expands in Palestine. Over 15 
Palestinians martyred in Nablus and Gaza" (Government-owned Al- 
Ba'th, 9/20) 
"The Egyptian opposition calls for canceling Camp David Accord. A 
campaign of a million signatures in Jordan to abrogate the Wadi 
Araba Agreement" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 7/20) 
 
"An American soldier and scores of Iraqis killed in separate 
attacks in Iraq" (Government-owned Tishreen, 7/20) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
 
----------------------- 
 
"Messengers of Dictate" 
 
----------------------- 
 
Abd-al-Fattah al-Awad, Chief Editor of government-owned Al- 
Thawra, said (7/20):  "The international community is not 
playing the role of a fair broker, but rather imposing, 
adopting, and promoting Israel's conditions. 
 
"Turning to the international community is exactly like turning 
to the enemy, especially since what we now call the 
international community is controlled by the United States, 
which is in ideological and behavioral harmony with Israel. Both 
occupy Arab lands, and both perpetrate massacres against Arabs. 
 
"International envoys are coming to the region to present a list 
of conditions, not to offer proposals for solutions.... The 
solution lies in stopping Israeli barbarism and then conducting 
a prisoner swap through which the Lebanese prisoners in Israeli 
jails are liberated.... Any other proposals would only be an 
incitement to continue the aggression and kill civilians.... 
 
"The US arrogance is obvious in President Bush's remark that he 
will ask UN Secretary General Kofi Annan to contact Syria over 
the Lebanese crisis..., as if Annan were an employee of the US 
Administration...." 
 
-------------------------- 
 
"Calm Talk on a Hot Issue" 
 
-------------------------- 
 
Isam Dari, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, said 
(7/20): "It is definitely untrue that Israel's 'open war' 
against Lebanon is a reaction to Hizbollah's capture of two 
Israeli soldiers.... Israel would have invented excuses and 
justifications to do what it is doing even if the resistance had 
not captured the two soldiers.... 
 
"The aim is not to release the two soldiers in Lebanon and the 
soldier in Gaza; the target is not only Hizbollah and HAMAS. The 
aim is to undermine the approach of resistance and steadfastness 
and to tame all those who stand in the face of the Zionist- 
American plan...." 
 
----------------------------------- 
 
"When Will You Break Your Silence?" 
 
----------------------------------- 
 
Haifa Ali, a commentator in government-owned Al-Ba'th, said 
(7/20): "Israel took advantage of the international community's 
silence and collusion to direct its brutality and aggression 
toward the entire Lebanese people in an attempt to avenge its 
defeat in Lebanon six years ago.... 
 
"Israel also took advantage of some defeatist Arab positions to 
escalate its brutal aggression.... Arabs have failed to use oil 
as a weapon to pressure Israel.... Had the Gulf countries 
stopped, or at least reduced, oil exports to the US, they would 
have forced Bush to pressure Israel to stop its aggression and 
brutality. Regrettably, this did not happen, and it will not 
happen.... Arabs will not use this powerful weapon.... When Arab 
foreign ministers decided to act, their meeting in Cairo was 
very disappointing.... Arabs must produce effective Arab action 
at the Security Council before Lebanon is reduced to a heap of 
rubble." 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
"International Action and Outstanding Questions" 
 
--------------------------------------------- --- 
 
Ahmad Dawwa, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
wrote (7/20): "If the international parties were really serious 
in their effort to stop the aggression, they would at least 
pressure Israel into halting its barbaric aggression and then 
act to find a political solution. But their acceptance of this 
role while the Israeli war machine is still pounding Lebanon 
means that they work on Israel's behalf.... 
 
"The international moves came upon US guidance.... They seek to 
impose Israel's conditions and to save Israel from a new 
predicament after the Lebanese resistance managed to break the 
rules of the game and control its course in the field.... 
 
"The Resistance is able to expose and foil the conspiracies and 
achieve victory. All that the defeatist Arabs need to do is not 
stab the Resistance in the back once again...." 
 
----------------- 
 
"Neo-Rationalists" 
 
----------------- 
 
Dr. Adnan Mahmud, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
said (7/20): "The accusations that some Arabs have leveled 
against the resistance movements and their call on these 
movements to control their conduct, provide a cover and an 
excuse for Israel to kill and to practice further terrorism and 
crimes against the Lebanese and the Palestinians without fear of 
punishment.... 
 
"When some Arabs consider the capture of Israeli soldiers to 
exchange them for Arab prisoners as an uncalculated adventure, 
then the Arab peoples must really be worried about their future 
and prepare to perform their duty towards the Resistance now 
that their governments have failed to take any initiative, even 
if nominal, to disobey the US master.... 
 
"Hizbollah's capture of the Israeli soldiers is an honorable 
resistance action.... Any Arab criticism of the operation is 
naked collusion and submission to Israel..." 
 
Seche