07DAMASCUS600
POST APPROVES NSDD 38 - U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
Thu Jun 14 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0017
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0600 1650912
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 140912Z JUN 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3700UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000600 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: AODE AMGT KMRS MASS SY
SUBJECT: POST APPROVES NSDD 38 - U.S. DEPARTMENT OF 
DEFENSE, DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY REQUEST TO ADD ONE SCHOLAR 
POSITION IN SYRIA 
 
REF: A. STATE 71480 
     ¶B. NSDD 38 CASE NUMBER DOD-SYR-37736-5212007 
 
¶1.  Post approves this NSDD 38 Department of Defense, 
Department of Army request to add one Olmsted scholar 
position in Syria, for an appointment of limited duration. 
While this proposed staffing change is not reflected in the 
most recent MSP, post believes that DOD has made a persuasive 
case for posting an Olmsted scholar here in Damascus to study 
Arabic.  Syria is considered one of the best places, 
linguistically, to study Arabic in the Middle East, with rich 
possibilities for language immersion unavailable in most 
neighboring countries, given the limited number of Syrians 
who speak English here.  Such an appointment could not have 
been anticipated during the MPP/MSP process.  This is not a 
permanent appointment and will not affect the 2012 
projections in post's recent rightsizing report. 
 
¶2.  We believe approval of this position will advance 
mission's overall goals, including enhancing mutual 
understanding and people-to-people contacts (Mission 
Strategic Plan goal number seven) and represents a USG 
long-term investment towards accomplishing other key foreign 
policy goals, including preventing and responding to 
terrorism, and achieving peace and security.  There are no 
other resources at Post that could perform the function of an 
Olmsted scholar nor could this function be accomplished by 
TDY, FSN, or contract work.  The Olmsted Scholarship Program 
provides valuable training in foreign cultures, with scholars 
returning to the Army, often working as Foreign Area 
Officers.  With the need for area and language expertise, 
especially in a hard language like Arabic, this scholarship 
is invaluable. 
 
¶3.  Post believes the benefits of temporarily increasing 
staffing outweigh inherent security risks associated with 
additional personnel.  This is especially true since Post's 
key threat is an attack on the Embassy, (especially in light 
of the lack of adequate setback), and the scholar will rarely 
be inside the Embassy, certainly not on a regular basis, 
minimizing exposure to this risk and thus not raising 
appreciably the overall security exposure of Mission 
personnel.   Nonetheless, Post does face a residual security 
threat and scholar posted here should understand that in the 
event of some sort of attack on the Embassy or on Embassy 
personnel, her studies here could be truncated in the event 
of a drawdown of Mission personnel. 
 
¶4.  Post will provide minimal administrative support to the 
scholar under ICASS and estimates the cost on an annual basis 
to be approximately $7,600.  The scholar is not expected to 
be present at the embassy on a regular basis, and, hence, 
will not require office space, furniture or equipment. 
Further, she will not occupy furnished government-owned or 
-leased quarters.  The major post support will involve 
clearing a personally-owned vehicle and household goods. 
Post will also provide assistance in securing a diplomatic ID 
card and a multiple entry visa (and its subsequent extension 
of the visa as necessary), medical support and mail services. 
 The scholar must be able to sign ICASS invoices or have that 
authority delegated to the DAO in Damascus as she will be the 
sole representative of her specific agency/office at post. 
The scholar will be encouraged to exhaust all other options 
before relying on embassy support. 
 
¶5.   POC at Post for follow-up is John Finnegan, Jr., 
Management Counselor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ROEBUCK