07DAMASCUS131
Syria/ Tajikistan, Syria/Oman, Syria/Germany, Syria/Iraq,
Sun Feb 11 00:00:00 +0100 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0008
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0131/01 0421427
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 111427Z FEB 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 2939
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6565
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4336
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 2950
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7507
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1564
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 4902
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1116
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7240UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000131 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958:  N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT:  Syria/ Tajikistan, Syria/Oman, Syria/Germany, Syria/Iraq, 
Palestinian Agreement, Putin, Lebanon (2/9-11) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers on Feb. 11 reported the visit to 
Damascus by Tajik President Imamoli Rakhmanov on Feb. 9, and his 
talks with President Asad, VP Shara and FM Mouallem.  The Presidents 
called for scheduling a withdrawal of foreign troops from Iraq, 
reiterated the importance of a Palestinian national unity 
government, and called on all nations to make efforts to resume the 
Middle East peace talks to achieve a just and comprehensive peace in 
the region.  A final statement issued by the presidency said that 
Asad and Rakhmanov underscored their keenness to increase 
cooperation between the two countries in all fields, and the need to 
work to bring about peace and stability in the Middle East.  The two 
also voiced support for the political process in Iraq and the 
preservation of its territorial unity.  On Feb. 10, the two sides 
signed a number of agreements in the economic, scientific, 
technical, tourism and investment fields, Syria's official news 
agency SANA said. 
 
The visit of Omani FM Ben Alawi to Syria was the second topic in the 
Syrian Press.  President Asad and FM Ben Alawi met on _Feb. 10. 
They discussed the current regional situation and bilateral 
cooperation, expressed satisfaction over the Palestinian agreement 
to form a national unity government, and reiterated the importance 
of continuing Arab efforts to lift the siege on Palestinians. 
 
As for Syrian-Iraqi relations, papers reported VP Shara's meeting on 
Feb. 8 with Antonio Guterras, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, 
which focused on the status of Iraqi refugees in Syria.  Shara held 
the US responsible for the "humanitarian catastrophe" caused by its 
invasion of Iraq, which has led to an outflow of refugees, a SANA 
statement said.  "The invasion of Iraq has led to the outpouring of 
hundreds of thousands of Iraqi refugees to Syria and the rest of the 
neighboring countries," Shara said. The influx of refugees "has 
imposed heavy security, social and economic burdens;  the US bears 
the basic responsibility of this humanitarian catastrophe," Shara 
said.  For his part, Guterras voiced profound appreciation for 
Syria's hosting a large portion of the refugees, hailing its efforts 
to alleviate their sufferings. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Syria and Tajikistan sign nine protocols of cooperation.  The two 
countries confirm support for the Palestinian people and condemn 
Israeli aggression, call for establishment of a multi-polar world, 
denunciation of all forms of terrorism, achievement of comprehensive 
peace in the region in accordance with international resolutions, 
maintenance of Iraq's territorial unity and setting of a timetable 
for withdrawal of foreign troops" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
2/11) 
 
"President Asad and Rakhmanov of Tajikistan review bilateral 
relations and investments between Syria and Tajikistan.  Presidents 
Asad and Rakhmanov discuss the peace process and terrorism, as well 
as reactivation of the Organization of Islamic Conference" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 2/9) 
 
"President Asad and Omani Minister of Foreign Affairs Yousuf Ben 
Alawi stress the necessity for exerting efforts to lift the siege 
imposed on Palestinians.  Ben Alawi:  Syria's position is a true 
Arab one" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 2/11) 
 
"Foreign Minister al-Mouallem reviews prospects of mutual 
cooperation and regional developments with Omani Minister of State 
for Foreign Affairs Bin Alawi" (Government-owned Tishreen, 2/10) 
 
"Vice President Shara to UN High Commissioner for Refugees Guterras: 
 America is responsible for the catastrophe of Iraqi refugees" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 2/9) 
 
"Deputy PM for Economic Affairs Dardari:  A new approach for 
Syrian-German understanding.  Falter: [Head of the Middle East 
Department at the German Economic Cooperation Ministry]:  Syria has 
a pivotal role in achieving peace" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
2/11) 
 
"Deputy PM for Economic Affairs al-Dardari continues talks in 
Germany.  German Foreign Minister Steinmeier:  We call for dialogue 
with Syria" (Government-owned Tishreen, 2/10) 
 
"The UN Agency for Refugees is concerned about handling the 
conditions of Iraqis.  UN High Commissioner for Refugees Guterras: 
Syria has shown a great deal of hospitality to Iraqi refugees" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 2/10) 
 
"As Hamas and Fatah agree on a national unity government, Hanieh is 
designated to preside over the new government" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 2/9) 
 
"Arab and international welcome of the Palestinian unity deal.  US 
reservation, and Israel retaliates on Palestinians praying at the 
al-Aqsa Mosque" (Government-owned Tishreen, 2/10) 
 
"The Arab League calls for a UN Security Council session to debate 
Israeli aggression against the al-Aqsa Mosque" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 2/11) 
 
"New Chief of US Forces in Iraq warns against failure of the Baghdad 
security plan.  Three US soldiers killed in Iraq" (Government-owned 
Al-Ba'th, 2/11) 
 
"Russian news agency Interfax:  US Secretary of Defense is more 
hawkish than Rumsfeld.  Gates:  Get ready for a war with Russia and 
China" (Government-owned Tishreen, 2/9) 
 
"President Putin:  US policies dissipate peace and stability in the 
world" (Government-owned Tishreen, 2/11) 
 
"Lahoud rejects any measures on the border without the army's 
approval.  Lahoud:  Israeli endeavors to exploit UNIFIL to swallow 
Lebanese territory" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 2/11) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
------------------------------------------ 
 
"Territory within Range of US Fire" 
 
------------------------------------------ 
 
Isam Dari, Chief Editor of government-owned Tishrin wrote (2/10): 
"US Defense Secretary Robert Gates stated that Russia is not far 
from the range of US fire.... Based on these threats, we fully 
understand President Putin's fears at the US military buildup in the 
Gulf and his call for setting a timetable to withdraw foreign forces 
from Iraq.... 
 
"Russia has every right to express its legitimate fear of the 
neoconservatives' sick dreams, mythical visions, and belief in the 
creation of the American empire on the whole earth.... NATO 
expansion in the east and west poses a real threat not only to 
Russia, but also to the former Soviet republics and China.  It 
threatens world peace and security in one way or another. 
 
"All nations on earth have the right to be worried about the future 
of this planet, which is now within the range of US fire.... 
 
"In the Middle East people cannot trust this monstrous enemy, which 
not only besieges us, fights to deprive us of our daily bread, and 
loots our resources and wealth, but also occupies our countries and 
engages in destruction, theft, and spreading of sedition, and 
attempts to divide countries, incite people against one another, and 
spread chaos and corruption.... 
 
"Can anyone, after all that has happened in Afghanistan, Iraq, 
Palestine, and Lebanon, convince us and broad Arab masses that an 
administration skilled at killing Arabs and Muslims and disdaining 
their existence, culture, and beliefs can be an ally, a friend, or 
even a mediator? 
 
"Advocates and wagers of war cannot make peace anywhere in the 
world;  they only bring disasters and tribulations upon the 
 
world.... 
 
"We are not saying that Arabs must declare war on the United States, 
but they must be alert to the danger. They must raise their voices 
in protest against it, even if only once, when it kills us in Iraq, 
Palestine, Lebanon, and Somalia with its weapons and army and 
through its forward tool, Israel.  This is not an impossible demand 
if intentions are sincere and hearts are clear and if we abandon 
some of our fear and cowardice, stop putting all our eggs in the 
American basket, and say 'no', if only one time, to the orders that 
come from overseas." 
 
------------ 
 
"Why, Why?" 
 
------------ 
 
Izz-al-Din al-Darwish, an editorialist in government-owned Tishrin, 
wrote (2/9): "In light of the miserable Arab situation, it is not 
strange for Israel to encroach upon Al-Aqsa Mosque and publicly 
provoke Arabs to this extent?" 
 
"Israel is a racist, occupational entity that does not hesitate to 
do anything to serve its objectives.  This entity understands only 
the language of force.  This, simply, is the definition of Israel. 
Why, then, should we be surprised at what Israel is doing if Arabs 
insist on remaining inactive, watching from afar?" 
 
"What is more astonishing is that some Arabs stockpile more modern 
weapons than Israel does, and they have enough influence to shift 
all balances if they want to.  But they prefer to continue to lead a 
life of opulence, not caring about the rights of the homeland and 
the diktats of the Islamic faith, which include defending the holy 
places, and in our current case defending the Al-Aqsa Mosque. 
 
"Israel has managed to divide Arabs.... It is now working to hit 
Arabism in the heart, in favor of the new Middle East, perpetuate 
its occupation of Arab territories, and turn Arabs into guards for 
its borders, apologists for its occupation and Judaization plans, 
and false witnesses to its genocidal operations against humans and 
its looting of Arab wealth." 
 
"Why this suspicious Arab silence about what the Israeli bulldozers 
are doing in broad daylight near the walls of Al-Haram al-Sharif? 
Why this unembarrassed Arab rush toward Israel and what it 
wants...?" 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
"Who Is Behind Political Division within the Quartet?" 
 
--------------------------------------------- --------- 
 
Dr. Sa'id Musallam, a commentator in government-owned Al-Thawra, 
wrote (2/9):  "There were political differences between US and 
Russian positions toward a Middle East settlement, as appeared in 
the recent meeting of the international quartet in Washington. 
Russian diplomacy wants UN resolutions and the Arab peace plan to 
serve as the basis of any settlement.... 
 
"Based on this, Syria's participation in any event, arrangement, or 
settlement is essential, and no effective solutions or 
understandings can be reached without Syria's participation.... 
 
"The United States, however, rejects this Russian position and works 
to isolate Syria and exclude it from political settlements.  The 
Russian position stresses the importance of the Syrian role, based 
on Damascus' ability and sincere intentions and the positive signals 
that Syria's visitors see, especially its effective role in the 
recent meeting between the Palestinian brothers and the clear 
assistance it offered them during PA Chairman Mahmud Abbas' recent 
visit to Syria, as well as the positive role it played to facilitate 
the meeting between Mish'al and Abbas in Saudi Arabia...." 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
 
"Department of Invasion, Occupation and Terrorism" 
 
--------------------------------------------- ----- 
 
Charles Kamilah, a commentator in government-owned Tishrin, wrote 
(2/9):  "The huge and unprecedented budget of the US Defense 
Department means that this actually is a department of occupation 
roaming the world to besiege and occupy it.... 
 
"The United States is not the target of any attack on its 
territory.... Why this huge budget?  Doesn't the American citizen, 
the primary taxpayer, have the right to ask about the secret behind 
the allocation of this incredible amount of money, which would be 
sufficient to end the poverty, disease, disasters, and ordeals 
suffered by the entire population of the earth and many fold more? 
 
"This huge war budget can be seen within the context of US threats 
to Iran and the decision to establish a US military command for 
Africa...." 
 
Corbin