07DAMASCUS507
Presidential Referendum, Lebanon, Palestinian Territories,
Mon May 28 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0507/01 1481315
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 281315Z MAY 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3553
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6831
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4547
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 3183
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7691
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1772
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 5103
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1310
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7434UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000507 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Presidential Referendum, Lebanon, Palestinian Territories, 
Iraq (5/25-28) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  The main focus in Syrian papers over the weekend was 
on the presidential referendum on president Asad's new term in 
office.  Papers cited statements by Syrian officials praising 
President Asad's achievements during his first term in office. 
 
On May 27, papers featured statements by Minister of Information 
Mohsen Bilal and Foreign Minister Mouallem who talked to journalists 
after casting their votes for President Asad.  Minister of 
Information Bilal said that "Syria has never seen masses like the 
ones who have gathered spontaneously to affirm their commitment to 
sovereignty, security and stability and show their adherence to 
defeating occupation."  Bilal added that "these masses send a 
message to the whole world that President Asad represents 
sovereignty, steadfastness, national spirit and courage, and that he 
also embodies the struggle to restore occupied lands including the 
Golan, and the struggle to establish a free, independent Palestinian 
state with Jerusalem as its capital."  FM Mouallem said that Syrian 
foreign policy under the leadership of President Asad was linked to 
citizens' rights and interests, and that the firm principles of that 
policy are related to liberating occupied lands, supporting the 
resistance and the independence of decision-making.  On events in 
northern Lebanon, Mouallem told journalists that Syria has no 
relation to the so called Fatah al-Islam saying this it is a 
terrorist movement that is wanted in Syria and its leader is wanted 
by the Syrian security apparatus.  Mouallem clarified that "on May 
10th this movement issued a statement threatening to launch 
operations against Syria." 
 
In their coverage of events in north Lebanon, Syrian papers noted 
the cautious calm in the Nahr al-Bared refugee camp. 
Government-owned Al-Ba'th cited a statement by spokesman of Fatah 
al-Islam group saying that his group is determined to continue the 
fight until the end.  Al-Ba'th reported that "American military aid 
began arriving in Beirut through a direct airlift." The paper also 
cited Hizballah Secretary General Hasan Nasrallah warning against 
"turning Lebanon into an area of conflict to serve US strategy. 
 
Government-owned Tishreen on May 27 reported that "six military 
cargo planes loaded with ammunition headed toward Lebanese 
territory."  The paper quoted the CNN as saying that "American 
officials stressed that these planes will arrive in Lebanon today or 
tomorrow to re-supply the Lebanese forces with ammunition to fight 
the fundamentalist militias in Nahr al-Bared camp." 
 
Independent al-Watan on May 27 featured an interview with Lebanese 
President Emil Lahoud praising Syrian-Lebanese relations describing 
them "historic and brotherly."  He said "these relations must be an 
example in this world that searches for basis of dialogue amidst its 
struggles."  Lahoud pointed out that Syria had made initiatives to 
stop the civil war in Lebanon since its beginning in 1975, while 
others worked in the opposite direction to transform Lebanon into a 
continuous battlefield, which has cost the Lebanese people dearly. 
He stated that all the Lebanese realize the essence of the Syrian 
initiatives started by President Hafez al-Assad to stop the 
destruction in Lebanon. 
 
Independent al-Watan on May 27 reported US military shipments to the 
Lebanese Army quoting political observers as saying that "contrary 
to the American allegations," most of these supplies are sent to 
meet the needs of 60-80 American commandoes who will come to Lebanon 
and deploy secretly in Al-Qulay'at airport in the north.  Political 
observers said this American force "will carry out security 
investigations and special operations in Lebanon." 
 
Government-owned Tishreen on May 27 cited a statement by former 
Lebanese Defense Minister Abd-al-Rahim Murad seeing that "American 
fingers are behind events in the north.  In a statement to the 
paper, Murad said the governing team "is trying to cover up its 
failure and impotence" by leveling accusations at Syria. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Syrians have their say today.  VP Shara: A national guarantee. VP 
Attar: A model of ultimate faith in the necessity of achieving Arab 
 
causes.  Assistant Regional Secretary of the Baath Arab Socialist 
Party Bkheitan: A Message to the Whole World. Prime Minister Ottri: 
Expression of national choice. Defense Minister Turkmani: President 
Asad leads Syria to the highest ranks of dignity and glory" 
(Government-owned A 
l-Thawra, 5/28) 
 
"Syrian armed forces vote in the referendum on a new constitutional 
term for President Asad" (Government-owned Al- 
 
"Interior Minister: "The turnout for the referendum was huge" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 5/28) 
 
"The People's Assembly to announce results of the referendum today" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 5/28) 
 
"Syria Today, one heart and one sound: With you we will complete the 
march. Yes to the one who said no to submission and surrender" 
(Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 5/27) 
 
"Vice President Najah Attar: "President Asad has dealt with the 
current circumstances with strength and firmness.  Arab and 
international figures:  President Asad did not bow to pressures. 
Citizen of the Syrian Golan: A guarantee of liberation" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 5/27) 
 
"Arab figures:  The Syrian people's rallying behind President Asad 
has foiled conspiracies against the region" (Government-owned 
AL-Thawra, 5/25) 
 
"Head of Fateh al-Islam: The party who attacked us and the Lebanese 
army is the same" (Independent al-Watan, 5/27) 
 
"Nasrallah warns against turning Lebanon into a battlefield to serve 
US strategy:  Palestinian camps and civilians are red lines... 
Maintaining the Lebanese army is definite" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 5/26) 
 
"Hizballah Leader Nasrallah gives another chance to establish a 
national rescue government" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 5/26) 
 
"A US military bridge to Lebanon" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 
5/25) 
 
"Russia opposes endorsement of the UNSC draft resolution on the 
International Tribunal under the 7th Chapter" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 5/26) 
 
"Palestinians discuss possibilities of a ceasefire, while Israel 
proceeds with its aggression.  Martyrdom of five Palestinians in 
Gaza. Israel arrests a Palestinian minister in Jennin" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 5/27) 
 
"Death toll of US soldiers in Iraq in May is 93.  An attack against 
a UK military base in Basra.  Scores of Iraqis killed in various car 
bomb explosions" (Government-owned Tishreen, 5/27) 
 
"Robert Gates expects a difficult summer in Iraq:  No new security 
plan... No quick progress" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 5/26) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
------------------------------- 
 
"Yes, to the One Who Said: 
No to Surrender and Submission" 
 
------------------------------- 
 
Elias Murad, Chief Editor of government-owned       Al-Ba'th, wrote 
(5/27):  "Syrians today say yes to the values that President Asad 
represents.... We will say yes to President Asad because of the 
series of no's that he said:  No to the plans of hegemony over the 
region, no to the occupation and to the new Middle East plan, no to 
the American dictates, no to surrender and submission, and no to 
those who want to attack the resistance and divide and control the 
region.... 
 
 
"Presidency has changed nothing in the personality of President 
Asad, who adhered to his national and pan-Arab positions in the past 
seven years and represented the conscience of the Arab public in 
general and the Syrian public in particular.... Al-Asad also 
entrenched the culture of resistance and strengthened national unity 
in Syria...." 
------------------------------------ 
 
"Syrians Give their Decisive Word Today" 
 
------------------------------------ 
 
Samira al-Masalmeh, a commentator in independent al-Watan wrote 
(5/27):  "Syria's approach to the difficult changes and events in 
the region and beyond in the past seven years showed President 
Asad's deep wisdom and ability to address all situations.... 
 
"Al-Asad adhered to Syria's positions and principles and rejected 
bargaining, blackmail, threats, and surrender to colonialist 
dictates.... Al-Asad also managed, through his political shrewdness 
and diplomatic flexibility, to turn Damascus from a besieged city, 
as the enemies wanted it to be, to a fortress for Arab 
steadfastness...." 
 
------------------------------ 
 
"No Place for Palestinians in 
The US Presidential Race" 
 
------------------------------ 
 
Maha Sultan, a commentator in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(5/127):  "The main US presidential candidates, Republicans and 
Democrats, yesterday competed in announcing their absolute support 
for Israel....None of the candidates mentioned the issue of peace in 
the Middle East or what he or she will do to establish peace.... 
 
"If these candidates can offer all kinds of support for Israel, they 
are completely unable to provide the security Israel wants or to 
resolve the conflict the way it likes.... 
 
"Palestinians will continue to be targeted by Israel and US leaders 
as long as the international community and the Arab world continue 
to leave the entire issue to the will of the successive US 
administrations and Israel behind them...." 
 
----------------- 
 
"Selective Chaos" 
 
----------------- 
 
Hanan Hamad, a columnist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote (5/26): 
 "The US policy is leading the world to the abyss.... What proves 
this is the US contradictory examples in promoting democracy in the 
region.... 
 
"Washington completely ignored the issue of democracy in Iraq and in 
other moderate Arab countries while Palestinians continue to pay the 
price for their democratic option.... 
 
"The United States is defending the Lebanese government although 
this government has lost its legitimacy after it turned against its 
statement and its partners, especially those with whom it forged 
election alliances.... 
 
"Meanwhile, the United States turns a blind eye to Israel's arrest 
of democratically elected Palestinian ministers and 
parliamentarians.... 
 
"And while Washington led the falsely called international community 
in its refusal to stop the Israeli aggression against Lebanon in 
July, it today keeps silent on the Zionist raids on Gaza, and we see 
it establishing an airlift to transfer weapons to the Lebanese 
 
government and Nahr al-Bared in particular under the pretext of 
supporting the Lebanese Army....  For how long will this selective 
chaos continue?" 
 
----------------------------------- 
 
"The Resistance, between two Dates" 
----------------------------------- 
 
Ahmad Hamadah, an editorialist in government-owned 
Al-Thawra, said (5/25):  "May 25 2000, the day on which most of 
south Lebanon was liberated, was not an ordinary day in the history 
of Lebanon and the region.... The July 2006 war created a new 
strategic environment in the Arab-Israeli conflict and torpedoed the 
concept that the enemy tried to entrench in the Arab mind over six 
decades.... 
 
"On 25 May 2000 the experience proved that Israel cannot maintain 
occupation of the territory it seizes by force no matter what brutal 
crimes it commits.  And in July 2006, the battles proved that the 
huge arsenals of brutal, advanced, and devastating weapons cannot 
settle a conflict -- even in its military aspect -- and that those 
who use these arsenals cannot change elements of the conflict or 
impose their conditions on the other side.... 
 
"And in both dates, the world realized that brute force cannot 
conquer nations and that the culture of resistance and opposition to 
the US-Israeli plan for the region did not and will not fade out 
because it is deep rooted in the hearts of its proponents.  What is 
happening in Palestine and Iraq provides yet further proof of its 
dazzling success." 
 
Corbin