07DAMASCUS958
Lebanon, Syria/UK, Syrian-North Korea, Syria/Israel, Peace
Thu Sep 20 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0001
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0958/01 2631354
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 201354Z SEP 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 4206
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 7099
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4777
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 3442
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7897
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 2014
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 5342
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1512
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7607UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000958 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ELA, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR: JPAUNESCU AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND DFOLEY, 
IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Lebanon, Syria/UK, Syrian-North Korea, Syria/Israel, Peace 
Conference, Palestinian Territories, Iraq (9/19-20) 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers on September 20 featured a statement by 
a Syrian media source on September 19 strongly condemning the blast 
in Sin al-Feil, east of Beirut that claimed the lives of Lebanese MP 
Antoine Ghanem and other Lebanese citizens. "This criminal act 
targets efforts and endeavors exerted by Syria and others to achieve 
national accord in Lebanon," the source said confirming Syria's 
keennes 
s about security, stability and unity in Lebanon. 
Papers also reported President Asad's meeting on September 19 with a 
British parliamentary delegation from the British conservatives 
Party, headed by honorary chairman of the Middle East Council at the 
Conservatives Party, Crispin Blant, the participant chairman of the 
Council for the Advancement of Arab-British Understanding (CASBU). 
President Asad answered questions by members of the delegation with 
regard to the course of the political events in the region and 
Syria's vision of the Middle East peace process.  The president 
reiterated Syria's firm position toward the peace process and the 
necessity for the involved parties to be serious with regard to the 
aspired peace, stressing that "the peace process cannot be invested 
to achieve aims other than peace." 
 
Papers also cited a statement delivered by Ibrahim Othamn, Director 
General of the Syrian Atomic Energy Commission, at the General 
conference of IAEA in Vienna reiterating Syria's keenness to free 
the region from nuclear weapons, reminding of Syria's initiative in 
this regard. Othman demanded to subjugate Israeli nuclear facilities 
to IAEA's monitoring, criticizing the silence of some international 
sides regarding Israel's disregard for international resolutions in 
this regard. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Lebanon again in the cycle of violence; MP Antoine Ghanen 
assassinated.  The assassination sabotages Berri's initiative and 
the positive atmospheres.  Junblatt's group predicted the 
assassination two days ago.  A Syrian media source:  The crime 
targets Syrian's efforts on national Lebanese reconciliation" 
(Independent al-Watan, 9/20) 
 
"President Asad reiterates the importance of seriousness to achieve 
peace.  Rice:  The US will not pose obstacles to peace talks between 
Syria and Israel" (Independent al-Watan, 9/20) 
 
"President Asad receives a message from King Mohammed VI of Morocco 
and confers with a British parliamentary delegation:  The peace 
process cannot be invested" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 9/20) 
 
"VP Shara and Parliament Speaker al-Abrash meet a British 
parliamentary delegation.  Head of the delegation Blunt: President 
Bush doesn't have a clear vision for his upcoming peace 
conference... PM Olmert is weak and looking for a political 
achievement" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 9/19) 
 
"Rice:  The peace conference will tackle critical issues.  America 
and Israel declare Gaza 'an 
Enemy entity'" (Independent al-Watan, 9/20) 
 
"The Gulf Cooperation Council: No for a peace conference aiming to 
help Washington get out of its impasse in Iraq" (Government-owned 
Al-Thawra, 9/19) 
 
"Syria Calls for subjugating Israeli nuclear facilitates to 
International surveillance" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 9/20) 
 
"UN SecGen Ki-Moon avoids adopting a position on Israel's violation 
of Syrian airspace for 'lack of information on the incident'.  UN 
sources: Israel did not provide any clarification" (Independent 
al-Watan, 9/19) 
 
"Pyongyang: The US allegations on nuclear aid to Syria are 
unfounded" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 9/19) 
 
"Four US soldiers killed in Diyala and Ninawa.  Iraqi death toll 
reaches 3787.  Two thirds of Americans oppose Bush's performance: 
 
America is on the wrong route" (Government-owned Tishreen, 9/19) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
-------------------- 
 
"Creators of Chaos" 
-------------------- 
 
Abd-al-Fattah al-Awad, chief editor of government-owned Al-Thawra, 
commented (9/20):  "We do not need much effort to read in an open 
book the names of those who assassinated MP Antoine Ghanem. 
Extremely clearly: They are those who do not want to render Berri's 
initiative successful and who are afraid of it; those who do not 
want the Lebanese to reach a consensus or even get close to it.... 
 
"What happened is in fact a new reshuffling of cards after Berri's 
initiative became part of the serious dialogue in Lebanon, which 
received the support of most of the countries that love to see a 
stable Lebanon. 
 
"Those who assassinated Ghanem are the same ones who committed the 
previous assassinations and benefited from them just as they are 
hoping to benefit from the blood of Ghanem....  Let us expect that 
those who benefited from the assassination operation will tomorrow, 
if not today, invest it in the political auction, in which they are 
accustomed to trading at the expense of Lebanon. 
 
"Those who assassinated the Lebanese deputy are the creators of 
chaos in the region and their tools, whether inside or outside 
Lebanon.  And those are known through their speeches, proposals, and 
agenda." 
 
--------------------------- 
 
"The Game of Preconditions" 
 
--------------------------- 
 
Isam Dari, chief editor of government-owned Tishreen, wrote (9/19): 
"Israel, while refusing to talk about the piracy its warplanes 
committed by violating the Syrian airspace, is -- in the words of 
its Prime Minister Ehud Olmert -- talking about peace with Syria 
'without preconditions...' 
 
"What is new in Olmert's statement is the politeness that suddenly 
dawned on him by announcing his respect for Syria and its policies. 
Except for that, what he said was nothing but a repeat of an earlier 
talk aimed both at deception and procrastination." 
 
"If Israel indeed had a desire for peace, this peace would have been 
achieved more than 10 years ago.... It is Olmert and the Tel Aviv 
leaders who set preconditions, and the expression they use -- that 
is, without preconditions -- is in itself a precondition, which 
exposes the Israeli game that aims to deceive the Israeli and world 
public opinion and send the ball away from the Israeli court into 
the courts of others.... If Israel is honest about its announcement, 
then the road to peace is to return to the table of negotiations 
from where they left off...." 
 
------------------ 
 
"A New Innovation" 
 
------------------ 
 
Omar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(9/18):  "The US Administration is currently busy promoting on 
behalf of Israel's allegations that the Israeli aircraft conducted a 
reconnaissance flight over Syria and filmed images of possible 
nuclear installations supplied by North Korea.... 
 
"Of course, none of the US officials said that the air piracy Israel 
committed was illegal... because they ignore provisions of the 
international law whenever they like when the matter is related to 
 
Israel.... 
 
"This reminds us of the false allegations Americans and British 
marketed about Iraq's nuclear programs.... Israel was certainly not 
away from this political and media deception and was at the center 
of the prejudiced campaign against Iraq to justify its invasion.... 
 
"It is strange that Americans are speaking on behalf of Israel, 
offering it excuses, and inventing for it new false innovations by 
talking about a possible Syrian nuclear activity, while completely 
turning a blind eye to an existing Israeli nuclear danger. 
 
"We remind the US Administration that Syria was among the countries 
that were first to call for or a Middle East free of WMD and that 
and that its [the US Administration's] blatant bias toward Israel in 
such a manner harmed and continues to harm the image of the United 
States and its role...." 
 
Corbin