07DAMASCUS716
Primakov, Syria/China, Syria/Iran, Mousa, Lebanon,
Fri Jul 13 00:00:00 +0200 2007
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0002
OO RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0716/01 1940902
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
O 130902Z JUL 07
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC IMMEDIATE 3858
RHEHAAA/WHITE HOUSE WASHDC IMMEDIATE
RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 6941
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 4636
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 3285
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 7768
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 1864
RUEHAK/AMEMBASSY ANKARA 5188
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1400
RHMFISS/HQ USCENTCOM MACDILL AFB FL//CCPA//
INFO RUEHNC/AMEMBASSY NICOSIA 7509UNCLAS DAMASCUS 000716 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR PA, NEA/ARN, INR/IC/CD, INR/R/MR:STHIBEAULT AND 
JMCCARTER, VOA NEWS CA, NEA/PPD:CBOURGEOIS, AZAIBACK, AND 
AFERNANDEZ, IIP/G/NEA-SA MDAVIDSON 
WHITE HOUSE FOR NSC 
CENTCOM FOR CCPA 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: KMDR PREL KPAO OPRC SY
SUBJECT: Primakov, Syria/China, Syria/Iran, Mousa, Lebanon, 
Syria/Israel, Iraq, Palestinian Territories (9/11) 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Syrian papers on July 11 featured a press conference 
on July 11 held by Yevgeny Primakov, Chairman of the Russian Chamber 
of Trade and Industry and former Russian Premier, at the 
headquarters of the Rossiiskaia Gazeta newspaper on July 10 
emphasizing that it is impossible to achieve peace in the Middle 
East without Syria.  Primakov said "Peace on the Syrian track means 
the restoration of the Occupied Syrian Golan to Syrian sovereignty." 
 He stressed the necessity of moving simultaneously to revive the 
peace tracks in the Middle East.  Regarding the situation in 
Palestine, Primakov said that Israel and the United States want to 
deepen the conflict between Fateh and Hamas, stating that "it is 
dangerous to attempt to stifle and isolate Hamas."  He added that 
deployment of international forces in Palestinian territories will 
not help stabilize the situation in Gaza.  Primakov also stated that 
the role of the Quartet on the Middle East has been weakened, and 
that it adheres to the course of the United States, adding that Tony 
Blair won't be able to lead the Quartet, but will only carry out US 
plans in the region.  As for the situation in Iraq, Primakov called 
for conducting dialogue with Syria and Iran to find a solution to 
the Iraqi situation. He pointed out that the American invasion of 
Iraq resulted in chaos and civil war and threatened to divide 
country, all while President George W. Bush keeps talking about a 
new strategy in Iraq instead of scheduling the withdrawal of US 
forces. 
 
On Syrian-Chinese relations papers featured a statement by Premier 
of the Chinese State Council   Wen Jiabao during his meeting Syrian 
Deputy Premier for Economic affairs Abdullah Dardari in Beijing on 
 July 10 stressing his country's support to Syria's right to restore 
the occupied Syrian Golan.  Jiabao expressed China's commitment to 
boost ties with Syria and develop them in all domains. 
 
Leading articles, in government-owned Al-Thawra and Tishreen stress 
support for Arab League Secretary General Amr Musa's effort to 
achieve national reconciliation in Lebanon and they accuse the 
United States of working to foil this effort. 
 
End of summary. 
 
¶2.  Selected Headlines: 
 
"Chairman of the Russian Chamber of Trade and Industry and former 
Russian Premier Yevgeny Primakov:  No Peace in the Middle East 
without Syria.  The Quartet implements US plans" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 7/11) 
 
"China supports Syria's right to restore occupied Golan and is 
expresses concern about expanding cooperation with it" 
(Government-owned Tishreen, 7/11) 
 
"Lebanese condemnations of the roles played French and American 
ambassadors in Beirut continue.  President Lahoud:  National accord 
is the sole prelude to elect a president" (Government-owned 
Tishreen, 7/11) 
 
"French Foreign Ministry:  Hizbollah is an important political power 
in Lebanon and a substantive element in the national dialogue" 
(Government-owned Al-Thawra, 7/11) 
 
"French Foreign Minister Kouchner endeavors to contain Sarkozi's 
anti-Hizbollah statements amid fears of aborting the Lebanese 
national dialogue.  Hizbollah criticizes Sarkozi's inclination to 
please Israel.  Nationalist factions reiterate the importance of 
France's neutrality" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 7/11) 
 
"Abbas calls for deploying international forces to secure transport 
of aid to the West Bank.  Hamas rejects the Palestinian Legislative 
Council's meeting and calls for opening the Rafah crossing" 
(Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 7/11) 
 
"In the biggest US military show since the invasion of Iraq, the US 
aircraft carrier Enterprise heads to the Gulf to confront 
trouble-making countries" (Government-owned Al-Ba'th, 7/11) 
 
"Mortar shells hammer the green Zone in Baghdad.  Bush refused to 
withdraw US forces and acknowledges their difficult situation in 
 
Iraq" (Government-owned Tishreen, 7/11) 
 
"Democrats:  Withdrawal from Iraq will take place prior to April 
2008" (Government-owned Al-Thawra, 7/11) 
 
¶3.  Editorial Block Quotes: 
 
-------------------------- 
 
"When Will the War Erupt?" 
 
-------------------------- 
 
Ibrahim Darraji, an editorialist in independent al-Watan, wrote 
(7/11):  "There is a number of factors enhancing the idea of a 
possible war between Israel and Syria, such as Israel's desire to 
remove the disgrace of its successive defeats in Lebanon and to 
punish Syria for its support for the resistance movements in 
Palestine and Lebanon, and Washington's desire to take revenge 
against Damascus for its role in Iraq.... 
 
"But nevertheless the war will not take place because targeting 
Syria might set the region on fire on more than one front.  Also, 
the Lebanon war last year showed Israel that war is no longer a 
picnic where it can show its muscles and arsenal and prevail with 
the least effort and losses.... 
 
"Israel certainly realizes that Syria, in the worst-case scenario, 
will not be less than Hizbollah in its resistance, steadfastness, 
and ability to drag Israel into an untraditional war inflicting on 
Israel the heaviest losses, especially since the missiles that 
pained Israel during the July aggression are abundantly available in 
Syria, with ranges allowing them to target the entire Israel from 
mobile and unconventional launchers, which makes it difficult to 
target and destroy them...." 
 
-------------------------------- 
 
"Facts that Cannot Be Distorted" 
 
-------------------------------- 
 
Umar Jaftali, an editorialist in government-owned Tishreen, wrote 
(7/11):  "Syria has again welcomed the Arab League's efforts to find 
a compromise among the Lebanese parties. President Asad told Amr 
Musa that Syria supports his mission in Lebanon with a view toward 
achieving accord among the Lebanese and forming a national unity 
government to end the fabricated crisis and stop the deterioration 
this crisis is causing in Lebanon and its repercussions on the 
entire region.... 
 
"Syria has always supported every Arab effort to help Lebanon 
recover.... The experience of the past years has proven that Syria 
has always supported a united and healthy Lebanon within the Arab 
family.  Syria spared no effort to help Lebanon and its fraternal 
people.  It shared its daily bread with Lebanon at the hardest of 
times out of its belief that what pains Lebanon necessarily pains 
Syria and what makes Lebanon happy makes Syria happy.  This is 
despite all the attempts by some tendentious people in the past two 
years to hide these facts and sabotage the relations between the two 
countries and peoples.... 
 
"Americans must stop adding fuel to the fire of sedition and 
dividing Arab brothers.... It is regrettable that some in Lebanon 
followed this American approach, which is supported by some Western 
countries, and began to spread lies and falsehoods and distort the 
facts about the Lebanese-Syrian relationship, so much so that some 
of them trust [US] Ambassador Feltman, abide by his instructions, 
and reject a sincere Arab effort to achieve reconciliation and bring 
life in Lebanon back to normal. 
 
"This situation worries most of the Lebanese people and the Lebanese 
leaders who cherish Lebanon's national interest and Arab 
affiliation, which is documented in the Lebanese constitution.  It 
also worries Syria and all Arabs because Lebanon was and still is 
part of the one Arab body, whether Bush's administration likes this 
 
or not. 
 
"Syria once again stresses its eagerness for the success of Musa's 
second mission in Lebanon, for the achievement of Lebanese national 
accord, and for the return of a healthy Lebanon to the Arab family 
on the basis of accord, a national unity government, and adherence 
to the Lebanese constitution." 
----------------- 
 
"Way to Solution" 
 
----------------- 
 
Abd-al-Fattah al-Awad, Chief Editor of government-owned Al-Thawra, 
wrote (7/11):  "Damascus believes Amr Musa has a chance to succeed 
in his Lebanese mission only if Feltman and other active ambassadors 
in Beirut stop putting spokes in wheels and heading off Musa's 
attempt by making statements aimed at imposing certain views and 
methods.... 
 
"Recent statements by US ambassador Feltman on Lebanese politics are 
part of the attempt to foil Arab efforts, which cannot succeed 
unless they evade and prevent the American-Israeli influence on the 
parties that adopt and undertake the American-Israeli plan in 
Lebanon.... 
 
"Musa certainly found full Syrian support for his Arab efforts to 
resolve the Lebanese crisis based on the formation of a national 
unity government.... Syria believes that Arab issues can be resolved 
within the Arab framework and away from foreign interference.... 
Syria repeatedly announced full support for Lebanese accord, as this 
reflects positively on the region...." 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
"Booby-trapping of the Palestinian Situation" 
 
--------------------------------------------- 
 
Ali Qasim, an editorialist in government-owned Al-Thawra, wrote 
(7/11):  "Israel's decision to release 250 Fateh prisoners out of 
11,000 Palestinian prisoners is meant to booby-trap the Palestinian 
situation and create tension among the various Palestinian forces. 
 
"Israelis wager on Palestinian divisions to achieve what they failed 
to achieve through aggression, killing, incursion, and 
assassination....  Although the release of any Palestinian prisoner 
is a gain for the Palestinian cause, Palestinians must reject the 
Israeli step as incomplete and useless.... 
 
"Palestinians must return to the dialogue table to preserve national 
unity and not to be driven behind the wagers and assurances of the 
forces that wish the Palestinian tension will continue as this would 
only increase the suffering of the Palestinian people...." 
 
Corbin