09DAMASCUS72
CHANGE YOU CAN SEE: INAUGURAL RECEPTION AT EMBASSY DAMASCUS
Thu Jan 22 00:00:00 +0100 2009
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXRO2622
PP RUEHROV
DE RUEHDM #0072/01 0221425
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
P 221425Z JAN 09
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 5862
INFO RUEHXK/ARAB ISRAELI COLLECTIVEUNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 DAMASCUS 000072 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR NEA/ELA, NEA/PPD 
 
 
E.O.12958: N/A 
TAGS: PREL SCUL PGOV KPAO SY
SUBJECT: CHANGE YOU CAN SEE: INAUGURAL RECEPTION AT EMBASSY DAMASCUS 
DRAWS AN ENTHUSIASTIC CROWD DESPITE TEPID SARG REACTION 
 
¶1.  (U) SUMMARY: Despite SARG efforts to keep people away from our 
January 20 reception in honor of the Presidential inauguration, more 
than 240 Syrians, foreign diplomats, and Americans crowded into an 
overflowing ambassador's residence to hear Barack Obama's inaugural 
speech.  Our guests burst into applause several times during and 
after the President's address.  In post-speech comments, people told 
us they saw Obama's remarks as capturing the America they admire and 
a possible improvement in the strained U.S.-Syrian relationship. The 
enthusiastic turnout  suggests some Syrians are eager to resume 
personal ties with the Embassy, but the lack of any official SARG 
attendance or positive reaction to Obama's speech suggests the mood 
remains chilly. END SUMMARY 
 
---------- 
THEY CAME . . . 
---------- 
 
¶2. (U) A diverse crowd of foreign ambassadors, representatives of 
international agencies, students, exchange alumni, and embassy 
wardens turned out for a reception to witnes the formal transfer of 
power to a new Administration.  With events in Gaza still fresh in 
the public mind, post was pleasantly surprised by the high turnout 
and positive attitude of Syrians who attended.  Though some contacts 
regretted because of "regional events" (i.e. Gaza), fully half of 
the mission's warden network, composed largely of Syrian-American 
businessmen, was in attendance. Post received a flurry of phone 
calls from foreign missions asking to be invited or bring guests -- 
the French Ambassador brought two visiting French senators.  While 
many of our guests told us they had received instructions not to 
attend, SARG security outside the residence appeared to be less 
robust than normal and did not approach contacts entering or leaving 
the residence.  It is too early to tell whether the security will 
call guests in afterwards for interrogation as they have done for 
several recent events. 
 
-------------------------------- 
THEY SAW . . . AND WERE WOWED 
-------------------------------- 
 
¶3. (U) The  crowd's attention focused intensely on the inaugural 
speech, broadcast on two television screens. Although most were 
standing, they listened in near-total silence to the entire speech, 
without the ring of a single cellphone.  (Comment:  Syrian audiences 
are rarely this rapt or undistracted.)   Afterwards guests praised 
the speech, and many commented that they found the new President's 
words moving and an expression of the American values they cherish. 
Some quoted from it directly; several students told Emboff that they 
had skipped studying for exams the following day to attend the event 
and quipped, "We will just quote from the Obama speech instead." 
An ambassador from a major NATO country remarked, "With one speech, 
Obama has restored the international community's faith in America." 
Everyone seemed to find in the speech something relevant to his or 
her circumstances. During an interfaith conference sponsored by the 
Public Affairs Office the following day, a Syrian priest quoted 
Obama's statements on the U.S. as a country for diversity and for 
all religions as an example for Syria to follow. 
 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
Syrian Press and Government Response More Tepid 
--------------------------------------------- -- 
 
¶4. (U) Most Syrian dailies made factual, front page mention of 
Obama's inauguration, but President Asad's defense of Hamas and 
dennunciation of Israel's Gaza invasion dominated converage.  The 
first official public comments by Syrian officials on President 
Obama's assumption of office came on January 22.  All Syrian papers 
and websites lead with a SANA press release saying that President 
Asad sent a congratulatory cable to President Barack Obama: "Syria 
looks forward to fruitful dialogue with the United States based on 
common interests and mutual respect that leads to a just and 
comprehensive peace in the region based on the relevant UN 
resolutions." 
¶5. (U) All papers also featured a statement by Presidential 
Political and Media Advisor Dr. Bouthaina Shaaban saying that 
President Obama's speech "has replaced the fear that the Bush 
Administration instilled in the world with hope." 
 
¶6. (U) The government-owned Al-Baath daily commented in an editorial 
that Obama's inaguration was welcome because "it marked the end of a 
black era in the history of the U.S. domestic and foreign policy." 
Semi-independent Al-Watan carried an op-ed by Sami Moubayed, a 
political analyst with very close ties to the government:  "Some 
Syrians believe that Obama's inauguration is an important event, but 
they have no illusions that he can do miracles, because the new 
White House inhabitant will abide by mechanisms of the authority.  I 
believe that Syria, since the beginning of establishing diplomatic 
relations with Washington learned not to pin hope on individual 
roles, because the men who enter the White House are not distant 
from the well-known public diplomacy.  Therefore, Syrians have no 
 
DAMASCUS 00000072  002 OF 002 
 
 
illusions."  Moubayed added that "Obama will not be a savior for 
Syrians, but will be more fair and just than his predecessor George 
Bush." 
 
¶7. (U) COMMENT: Viewed as a focus group, our  guests expressed an 
unmistakeable sense of collective cathartic relief.  Hopeful the 
U.S. would regain a position of international leadership, quickly 
address regional tensions, and move to improve strained  U.S.-Syrian 
relations, they left upbeat and ready for the U.S. government to 
begin again.  The absence of any official reactions suggests Syrian 
leaders are waiting for specific gestures toward Damascus before 
making any judgements. 
 
CONNELLY