10DAMASCUS159
SYRIAN INTELLIGENCE CHIEF ATTENDS CT DIALOGUE WITH
Wed Feb 24 00:00:00 +0100 2010
SECRET
Embassy Damascus
VZCZCXYZ0000
PP RUEHWEB

DE RUEHDM #0159/01 0551408
ZNY SSSSS ZZH
P 241408Z FEB 10
FM AMEMBASSY DAMASCUS
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC PRIORITY 7396
INFO RUEHAM/AMEMBASSY AMMAN 7723
RUEHGB/AMEMBASSY BAGHDAD 0064
RUEHLB/AMEMBASSY BEIRUT 5236
RUEHEG/AMEMBASSY CAIRO 0007
RUEHLO/AMEMBASSY LONDON 0885
RUEHFR/AMEMBASSY PARIS 0838
RUEHRH/AMEMBASSY RIYADH 8120
RUEHTV/AMEMBASSY TEL AVIV 2493
RUEHJI/AMCONSUL JEDDAH 2740
RUEHJM/AMCONSUL JERUSALEM 1766
RHEHNSC/NSC WASHDC
RUEAHLC/HOMELAND SECURITY CENTER WASHINGTON DC
RUEAIIA/CIA WASHDC
RHEFDIA/DIA WASHINGTON DC
RUEKJCS/JOINT STAFF WASHDCS E C R E T DAMASCUS 000159 

SIPDIS 

DEPARTMENT FOR P, NEA, S/CT 

EO 12958 DECL: 02/24/2020 
TAGS PTER, PREL, PGOV, SY 
SUBJECT: SYRIAN INTELLIGENCE CHIEF ATTENDS CT DIALOGUE WITH 
S/CT BENJAMIN

Classified By: CDA Charles Hunter for Reasons 1.4 (b) and (d).

¶1. (S/NF) SUMMARY: In a surprise appearance, Syrian General Intelligence Director (GID) General Ali Mamlouk attended a February 18 meeting between Vice Foreign Minister Faisal al-Miqdad and a U.S. delegation led by S/CT Coordinator Daniel Benjamin. Miqdad explained Mamlouk had joined the meeting at the request of President Bashar al-Asad as a gesture following a positive meeting between U/S William Burns and the Syrian president the previous day. Stressing the meeting did not signal the commencement of security and intelligence cooperation between Syria and the United States, the Syrian side said the discussion could be a starting point for a blueprint regarding possible cooperation in the future.  Calling Coordinator Benjamin’s description of terrorist groups operating in the region “valid,” Mamlouk emphasized the linkage between progress on political issues in U.S.-Syrian relations and possible security and intelligence cooperation. He identified Syrian-Iraqi border security as an area where Syria could cooperate with the U.S., but only after Iraqi legislative elections in March. Mamlouk added cooperation on Syrian-Iraqi border security could lead to security cooperation in other areas.

¶2. (S/NF) Mamlouk, Miqdad, and Syrian Ambassador to the U.S. Imad Mustapha were attentive during Benjamin’s presentation on al-Qaeda, foreign fighters, and other common threats, and reacted positively to his warnings that these issues presented challenges to both the U.S. and Syria. Mamlouk and Miqdad emphasized three points regarding possible security and intelligence cooperation with the U.S.: (1) Syria must be able to take the lead in any regional actions; (2) politics are an integral part of combating terrorism, and a “political umbrella” of improved U.S.-Syrian bilateral relations should facilitate cooperation against terrorism; and (3) in order to convince the Syrian people that cooperation with the U.S. was benefiting them, progress must be made on issues related to economic sanctions against Syria including spare parts for airplanes and a plane for President Asad. “In summary, President Asad wants cooperation, we should take the lead on that cooperation, and don’t put us on your lists,” Miqdad declared. END 

SUMMARY.
SURPRISE GUEST AT MIQDAD MEETING

¶3. (S/NF) GID Director General Ali Mamlouk was the surprise guest at a February 18 meeting at the MFA hosted by Vice Foreign Minister Faisal al-Miqdad with S/CT Coordinator Daniel Benjamin, DHS A/S David Heyman, and NEA DAS Maura Connelly. Miqdad said Mamlouk’s participation in the meeting had come at the direction of President Asad following what Miqdad termed a positive meeting between Asad and U/S Burns on February 17. Syrian Ambassador to the U.S. Imad Mustapha, who translated for Mamlouk during the meeting, stated that Mamlouk’s attendance at meetings with foreign delegations was extraordinary and did not occur “even with friendly countries like Britain and France.” Mustapha explained President Asad instructed Mamlouk to attend the meeting as a personal gesture.

¶4. (S/NF) Benjamin, stressing that cooperation on counter-terrorism efforts was an essential part of the roadmap for improved bilateral relations, noted that there were issues on which we had clear differences, such as Syrian support for Hamas and Hizballah. The U.S., he continued, still viewed these groups as undermining stability and the prospects for peace in the region. Nonetheless, the two countries should still work to cooperate on immediate threats facing both the U.S. and Syria, including the proliferation of takfiri groups in the region, such as al-Qaeda, and stopping the flow of foreign fighters into Iraq. The Coordinator provided Mamlouk an overview of the threats posed by terrorist groups operating in the region from North Africa to Iraq to Yemen. Benjamin noted the challenge that these groups posed to Syria as well, illustrated by the September 2008 attack on a Syrian intelligence building. He explained the U.S. is concerned about the long-term implications of arms smuggling to Lebanon and Iraq through Syria, and observed that the disarray among the Palestinians could ultimately create an opening for groups with an al-Qaeda orientation, citing the case of Junjalat, a radical faction in Gaza.

¶5. (S/NF) Mamlouk pointed to Syria’s 30 years of experience in battling radical groups such as the Muslim Brotherhood as evidence of Syria’s commitment to the fight against terrorism. Mamlouk termed Benjamin’s description of the challenges posed by terrorist groups in the region as “valid, despite the reasons that gave rise to them.” Mamlouk repeatedly stressed his attendance at the meeting did not signal the commencement of security and intelligence cooperation between Syria and the U.S., but could be a starting point for “a blueprint for that which is not yet started.” Echoing Miqdad, Mamlouk said progress on political issues in the Syrian-U.S. bilateral relationship was “closely connected” to progress on possible cooperation on security and intelligence.
MAMLOUK DESCRIBES GID’S METHODS

¶6. (S/NF) The GID Director said Syria had been more successful than the U.S. and other countries in the region in fighting terrorist groups because “we are practical and not theoretical.” He stated Syria’s success is due to its penetration of terrorist groups. “In principle, we don’t attack or kill them immediately. Instead, we embed ourselves in them and only at the opportune moment do we move.” Describing the process of planting embeds in terrorist organizations as “complex,” Mamlouk said the result had yielded been the detention of scores of terrorists, stamping out terror cells, and stopping hundreds of terrorists from entering Iraq. Mamlouk acknowledged some terrorists were still slipping into Iraq from Syria. “By all means we will continue to do all this, but if we start cooperation with you it will lead to better results and we can better protect our interests,” he concluded.

¶7. (S/NF) According to Mamlouk, Syria’s previous experience in cooperating with the U.S. on intelligence “was not a happy one.” He stated Syria hoped any future cooperation would be “on an equal basis.” Mamlouk specified this meant Syria should be allowed to “take the lead” on anti-terrorism efforts. Alluding to the “wealth of information” Syria has obtained while penetrating terrorist groups, Mamlouk declared “we have a lot of experience and know these groups. This is our area, and we know it. We are on the ground, and so we should take the lead.”

POSSIBLE COOPERATION ON IRAQ
¶8. (S/NF) Mamlouk identified Iraqi border security as an area where Syria and the U.S. could cooperate. He described Syria as ready to move forward on tripartite border security talks, but added “we are at a freezing point until after the Iraqi elections” scheduled for March. Mamlouk added that cooperation on Iraqi border security could lead to cooperation in other areas.

¶9. (S/NF) Benjamin, noting the importance of achieving a secure and stable Iraq, stated an important measure of progress on this subject is further success on reducing the flow of foreign fighters and cracking down on their facilitators. Mamlouk said the foreign fighters come from a large number of Arab and Muslim countries and that the Syrians detain “large numbers plus their local facilitators.”  As an example, Mamlouk said he handed over 23 Saudis detained in Syria to Saudi Prince Muqrin last year. Benjamin commended Mamlouk on reducing the flow of foreign fighters, while encouraging further progress. Miqdad interjected that the issue of foreign fighters using Syrian soil is a matter of national security for Syria. “We have zero tolerance,” he said. Miqdad said Syria needs the cooperation of other countries, namely those from which the terrorists are coming.  “If we can close this circle - with us, you, and other countries - we will succeed,” he concluded.

¶10. (S/NF) Miqdad added that Syrian/Lebanese border security is also a subject on which the SARG is making progress. Stating “the past is behind us,” Miqdad said Syria is attempting to assist the Lebanese on security at ports and at the border without interfering in internal 

Lebanese affairs.
UPDATE ON TERRORIST NAMES PROVIDED BY USG

¶11. (S/NF) Alluding to previous USG requests for assistance on tracking down terrorists thought to be in Syria, the Syrian side stressed that intelligence cooperation between the U.S. and Syria should not be solely based on receiving names of terrorist suspects from the USG and checking up on those individuals. However, Mamlouk confirmed that Syria could verify the specific whereabouts of several individuals who had been discussed in previous meetings with SARG officials.

MIQDAD WANTS POLITICAL UMBRELLA TO GUIDE SECURITY COOPERATION

¶12. (S/NF) Following Mamlouk’s statements regarding possible security and intelligence cooperation, Miqdad stated he wanted to emphasize three points. First, Miqdad said that because of Syria’s “wealth of information” on following 30 years of facing security threats from takfiri groups, Syria must be able to take the lead in any joint efforts. Second, the Vice Foreign Minister said politics are an integral part of combating terrorism and warned that listing Syria as a state sponsor of terrorism and including Syria on the list of 14 countries for enhanced screening by the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) created a “contradiction” when the U.S. subsequently requested cooperation with Syria against terrorism. Miqdad stressed a “political umbrella” of improved U.S.-Syrian bilateral relations should facilitate counterterrorism cooperation.

¶13. (S/NF) Third, Miqdad stated convincing the Syrian people to support cooperation with the U.S. would hinge on progress on economic sanctions against Syria, including spare parts for airplanes and a plane for President Asad. The Vice Foreign Minister said the Syrians wanted these efforts “accelerated.” Miqdad specifically requested the USG reach out to Lufthansa Technik and “assure them of no negative consequences” if they cooperate with Syrian requests to have the purchase of spare aircraft parts approved. In response, Benjamin said the Obama administration viewed counterterrorism as a vital concern but, unlike its predecessor, it did not see counterterrorism as something that was separate from the rest of U.S. foreign policy or the sole driver of U.S. foreign policy. Rather, it was part of the fabric of policy, and the administration recognized that progress in bilateral relations would involve coordinated moves in a number of areas. Benjamin added the U.S. expected that the Syrian people would see the benefits of closer relations.

¶14. (S/NF) Miqdad also encouraged the U.S. to reconsider including Syria on the TSA’s list for enhanced screening, and praised U/S Burns for informing the SARG that the U.S. was prepared to lift its block on Syrian accession to the World Trade Organization. “In summary, President Asad wants cooperation, we should take the lead on that cooperation, and don’t put us on your lists,” Miqdad declared.
DHS BRIEFING

¶15. (S/NF) Benjamin and Heyman underscored that the TSA’s enhanced screening requirements protected travelers of all nationalities, and that the TSA does not target Syrians but applies to all travelers, including American citizens, coming to the U.S. from or through the listed countries.

¶16. (S/NF) A/S Heyman provided the Syrians with a brief overview of DHS’s mission and activities, focusing in particular on its expertise in the management of ports, airports, and land borders. He noted DHS could explore with the SARG ways to meet international security standards at ports. This, in turn, could lead to enhanced trade and travel between the two countries, and reduce obstacles to shipping between the U.S. and Syria. Heyman said the Coast Guard was prepared to send a team to Syria to work on port security with their Syrian counterparts. This type of activity could lead to measures that reduced costs and lowered barriers to shipping. General Mamlouk said the SARG would study the proposed Coast Guard visit.
UPCOMING VISITS

¶17. (S/NF) Highlighting the importance of continued U.S.-Syrian dialogue on bilateral issues, Benjamin proposed a mid-March visit to Damascus by NEA A/S Feltman and NSC Senior Director for the Middle East and North Africa Daniel Shapiro.  Benjamin invited Miqdad to a subsequent visit to Washington in April. Miqdad spoke at length about his fondness for A/S Feltman, and thanked Benjamin for the invitation to visit Washington. Benjamin added he was ready to return to Damascus at the appropriate time. Mamlouk asked Benjamin what the agenda of his next visit would be, and Benjamin explained that it would depend on the outcome of the upcoming visits.

¶18. (C) U.S. participants: S/CT Coordinator Daniel Benjamin CDA Charles Hunter DHS A/S David Heyman NEA DAS Maura Connelly NSC Director for Lebanon and Syria Meaghen McDermott S/CT Staff Patrick Worman POL/ECON Jay Munir, notetaker

¶19. (C) Syrian participants: Vice Foreign Minister Faisal al-Miqdad GID Director General Ali Mamlouk Syrian Ambassador to the U.S. Imad Mustapha MFA Americas’ Director Muhammad Khafif Miqdad Chief of Staff Husam Al’aa

¶20. (U) S/CT Benjamin cleared this message.

HUNTER