04ANKARA3908
ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT,
Wed Jul 14 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED
Embassy Ankara
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 ANKARA 003908 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EUR/SE, EUR/PD, NEA/PD, DRL 
JCS PASS J-5/CDR S. WRIGHT 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR TU
SUBJECT: ANKARA MEDIA REACTION REPORT, 
WEDNESDAY, JULY 14, 2004 
 
 
THIS REPORT WILL PRESENT A TURKISH PRESS SUMMARY UNDER 
THREE THEMES: 
 
HEADLINES 
BRIEFING 
EDITORIAL OPINION 
 
HEADLINES 
 
MASS APPEALS 
Extensive cooperation with Syria - Sabah 
Turkey and Syria begin a new era - Turkiye 
Kerry `smart,' Bush `determined' - Milliyet 
Nader is Bush's `Trojan Horse' - Aksam 
Israel seeks alternate route for security wall - Aksam 
Greek Cypriots threaten to veto EU aid for `TRNC' - Milliyet 
Bloody day in Chechnya: 43 dead - Milliyet 
 
OPINION MAKERS 
Ankara's close friendship with Damascus - Radikal 
Damascus happy with Turkey for `excluding' Israel - Zaman 
Rice: Presidential elections won't be postponed - Radikal 
Fukuyama won't vote for Bush - Zaman 
CIA looking for a director - Cumhuriyet 
Armitage the strongest candidate for CIA - Yeni Safak 
Poland a new `missile shield' for US - Cumhuriyet 
Turkey to train Iraqi police in Jordan - Yeni Safak 
Iranian youth challenge the mullahs - Cumhuriyet 
Caspian oil will save Chechnya - Yeni Safak 
 
BRIEFING 
 
Syrian PM visits Ankara:  Visiting Syrian PM Mohamad Naci al- 
Otri, speaking at a joint press conference with Turkish PM 
Erdogan on Tuesday, called for a lasting and fair peace in 
the Middle East.  Al-Otri lashed out at Israel for not 
abiding by UN resolutions, and for using excessive force and 
terror against unarmed Palestinians.  The Syrian PM added 
that the Israeli security fence would cause further 
instability in the region.  He blamed Tel Aviv for 
deliberately stalling the Middle East peace process.  On 
Tuesday, Al-Otri and Erdogan discussed energy, natural gas 
and joint investments in agriculture.  They agreed to 
increase bilateral trade to $2 billion annually by 2005. 
Syria will reduce the extent of its territorial waters from 
35 miles to 12, and four new air corridors will be opened 
between Turkey and Syria.  Syria will open a consulate 
general in the southeast Turkish province of Gaziantep in an 
effort to facilitate visa procedures for tourists, 
businessmen and truck drivers.  The establishment of a 
Turkish-Syrian joint investment bank was also discussed. 
The sides are expected to sign a free trade agreement during 
PM Erdogan's visit to Syria later this year. 
 
Israeli Deputy PM in Ankara:  Israeli Deputy PM Ehud Olmert 
arrived in Ankara late Tuesday night.  Having been denied a 
meeting with PM Erdogan, Olmert is expected to convey PM 
Sharon's message urging Ankara to tone down its criticism of 
Israeli policies to President Sezer and FM Gul.  Following 
his meeting in Ankara, Olmert will chair the Turkey-Israel 
Joint Economic Committee meeting, and will meet with Energy 
Minister Hilmi Guler on Thursday.  Observers expect the two 
sides to discuss the strain in bilateral relations at a 
dinner hosted by FM Gul in honor of Olmert this evening. 
Ankara will urge Israel to abandon violent tactics against 
Palestinian civilians, and will voice its concern over the 
Israeli security wall.  Ankara is also expected to ask 
Israel about recent reports claiming covert Israeli 
intelligence operations in support of the Kurds in northern 
Iraq. 
 
Turkey-Iran security meeting:  Turkey and Iran reached 
agreement on the text of a memorandum of understanding on 
security cooperation at the tenth meeting of the bilateral 
high security committee meeting in Ankara on Tuesday.  The 
MOU will be signed during PM Erdogan's visit to Tehran later 
this month.  The Iranians denied recent press reports 
claiming that clashes had taken place between Iranian 
security forces and PKK militants.  Ali Ashgar Ahmedi, head 
of the Iranian delegation, said that Iranian soldiers had 
been involved in skirmishes with smugglers, not with members 
of the PKK. 
 
Opposition CHP lawmakers join AKP:  Two lawmakers who 
resigned from the opposition Republican People's Party (CHP) 
last week joined the AK Party on Tuesday.  Both lawmakers 
left the CHP following the extraordinary party congress held 
last weekend, at which chairman Deniz Baykal one a vote of 
confidence.  The transfers increased the number of AK Party 
parliamentarians to 369, just above the two-thirds majority 
needed to pass constitutional changes.  The current 
distribution of seats in the parliament is as follows:  AKP 
369, CHP 171, DYP 4, Independent 6. 
 
 
EDITORIAL OPINION: 
NATO and Global Security; ICJ Ruling on Israel security wall 
 
"Trans-Atlantic Tension" 
Kamuran Ozbir commented in the nationalist Ortadogu (7/14): 
"It is easy to see President Bush's contribution to the 
tension in trans-Atlantic relations.  Bush's decision to 
oppose the Kyoto Agreement and withdraw from the anti- 
ballistic missile agreement, Defense Secretary Rumsfeld's 
irritating comments about `old Europe,' and the US 
determination to occupy Iraq without international support 
are good examples of this contribution.  In each case, 
President Bush announced his own goals without taking into 
consideration the views of others.  However, it is also 
worth mentioning Europe's contribution to this tension. 
Particularly in light of the EU and NATO summits.  The 
Europeans, led by the French, rejected Bush's sensible 
proposals that were to the benefit of both Europe and the 
US.  It seems that the French rejection of Turkey clashes 
with statements by Europeans who criticize President Bush's 
doctrine in the Middle East.  Most European leaders do not 
believe that the new government in Iraq, which was installed 
by force, will lead to a domino effect of democratization in 
the region.  But if the stick doesn't work to democratize 
the Muslim world, then the carrot will be the only 
solution." 
 
"Break Down This Wall" 
Zafer Atay wrote in the economic-political Dunya (7/14): 
"Decisions of the International Court of Justice (ICJ) are, 
in reality, more like recommendations than legally binding 
obligations.  They have more moral authority rather than 
legal force.  Of course, Israel will not obey this decision. 
The `wall of shame,' of which 200 kilometers have already 
been constructed, will be completed in 2005.  Israel will 
spend $4 billion on this wall. ...  The ICJ presented the UN 
Security Council with a request that construction of the 
wall be halted, and that the section already constructed be 
demolished.  UN Security Council decisions are binding. 
Those who do not obey these rules are subject to sanction. 
The punishment could come in the form of an embargo or even 
a military intervention.  However, Israel is not concerned 
about these binding rules, because they know that the power 
of the US is on its side.  The US has saved Israel many 
times by using its UNSC veto.  Instead of solving 
disagreements through dialogue, Israel tries to cover itself 
by creating security paranoia.  They are now building a wall 
on the West Bank and digging ditches along the Egyptian 
border.If Israel does not find these precautions adequate, 
what is next: nuclear or biological attacks?" 
 
DEUTSCH