04THEHAGUE1694
CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION (CWC): EC-37
Tue Jul 06 00:00:00 +0200 2004
UNCLASSIFIED//FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Embassy The Hague
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 06 THE HAGUE 001694 
 
SIPDIS 
 
SENSITIVE 
 
STATE FOR AC/CB, NP/CBM, VC/CCB, L/ACV, IO/S 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: PARM PREL LY CWC
SUBJECT: CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION (CWC): EC-37 
DISCUSSIONS OF TECHNICAL CHANGE TO PERMIT CONVERSION OF 
LIBYA/RABTA CW PRODUCTION FACILITY 
 
REF: A. STATE 136811 (NOTAL) 
 
     ¶B. STATE 132224 (NOTAL) 
 
This is CWC-84-04. 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary:  During EC-37, the U.S., UK, Italian and 
Libyan dels cooperated closely in actively educating and 
seeking support from other EC members regarding the proposed 
technical change that would permit Libya to seek conversion 
of chemical weapons production facilities (CWPF).  Without 
exception delegations contacted expressed support for Libya's 
objective of converting Rabta and many agreed that a 
technical change appeared the most appropriate way to address 
this issue, but most said that further consideration would be 
needed in capitals.  France emerged as the primary obstacle 
to achieving consensus on the joint proposal, actively 
shopping alternative text to other dels.  Though the French 
proposal is unlikely to gain any real support, France's 
actions will likely feed into reservations held by some dels 
about the joint approach, especially among WEOG members, 
complicating efforts to achieve consensus.  The U.S., UK, 
Italian and Libyan dels agreed, in principle, to move ahead 
with submitting the formal proposal to the OPCW in mid-July, 
and discussed modifying the original text to include a clear 
time limit for completion of conversions to address a common 
concern among EC members.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) During the Thirty-Seventh Session of the OPCW 
Executive Council (EC) meeting (June 29-July 2), the U.S., 
UK, Italian and Libyan dels cooperated closely in actively 
educating and seeking support from other EC members regarding 
the proposed technical change to the CWC Verification Annex 
that would permit Libya (and future states) to seek 
conversion of chemical weapons production facilities (CWPF). 
The four delegations were able to meet, individually or in 
small groups, with a large proportion of the EC members. 
Most dels expressed support for Libyan conversion of the 
Rabta facility and viewed pursuing a technical change as a 
reasonable approach, but indicated that this issue would need 
further consideration in capitals, particularly on the legal 
aspects of the proposed approach. 
 
¶3. (SBU) The Libyan delegation, backed by members of the 
Africa Group, took an active public role in seeking support 
for the proposal, especially among developing countries, to 
head-off concerns that this would be perceived as essentially 
a U.S./WEOG initiative.  The Libyan Ambassador, delivered a 
strong statement on the floor of the EC, seeking support for 
the proposal, followed by positive interventions from 
Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia, and Sudan. 
 
¶4. (SBU) France has emerged in a very prominent manner as the 
main obstacle to achieving consensus in the OPCW on the 
proposed technical change.  The French support pursuing a 
technical change to permit Libyan conversion, but strongly 
object to the proposed text.  France rejects the involvement 
of the EC and CSP in taking decisions on a "case-by-case" 
basis regarding the deadlines for submitting requests and 
completing conversion, arguing that this would lead to 
"unequal treatment."   Members of the French delegation were 
unable to engage in a reasoned discussion of the specific 
elements of the proposed text. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The French del rejected as insufficient an offer to 
establish a clear time limit for completion of conversion and 
proceeded to actively shop an alternative proposal whereby 
the deadline for completing conversion would be extended from 
2003 to 2009.  When confronted by the U.S. and others with 
the clear deficiencies of its proposal (e.g., would require 
future technical change, treat future States Parties 
unequally, and, as written, also extend the deadline for 
Russia), members of the French del indicated revisions could 
be made, but offered no alternative text by week's end.  The 
French Ambassador made a rare appearance on the last day of 
the EC to make a statement on the floor that France supported 
pursuing a technical change but stressed that the proposed 
approach did not meet the requirement to be "predictable and 
non-discriminatory."  (Comment:  This statement was likely in 
response to the well-received Libyan statement the previous 
day, along with the Tunisian del confronting the French del 
about its opposition.)  While the French proposal is certain 
to garner little support, its efforts to lobby other dels 
will complicate efforts to achieve consensus on this issue, 
especially among WEOG members, many of who either share some 
concerns about a "case-by-case" approach, or would be 
reluctant to isolate France.  France will apparently seek to 
raise this issue in the EU, but the UK and the Netherlands, 
which has just taken over the EU Presidency, will seek to 
block France in this regard. 
 
¶6. (SBU) See below for summary of reactions from selected 
delegations: 
 
--Other WEOG:  While WEOG reactions were generally positive 
regarding pursuing a technical change to permit Libyan 
conversion, several dels expressed uneasiness with the 
specific proposal.  The German del, upon instruction from 
Berlin, continued to question the need for a technical 
change, raising the option of an EC decision that interpreted 
away the problem.  Germany also voiced concern about the 
absence of a firm time limit for completing conversion, and 
indicated that Berlin would need to see the details of the 
Libyan conversion request in order to address long-standing 
sensitivities related to past German CW-related transfers to 
Libya before taking a decision.  After extensive discussions, 
the German del appeared to take on board arguments in favor 
of pursuing a technical change, as well as the proposed text, 
and indicated they would be willing to talk to the French. 
The Spanish rep, unconvinced by arguments related to security 
concerns and ensuring accountability, expressed concern with 
a "case-by-case" approach, and instead favored a simpler 
change with clear, predictable parameters (e.g., time 
limits).  Echoing the Spanish, the Swiss and Canadian dels 
also favored a simpler approach that established a firm time 
limit for completing conversion, though the latter appeared 
to recognize the need to ensure new States Parties convert in 
a timely manner.  The Dutch Ambassador expressed strong 
support for our proposed approach and a clear understanding 
of the underlying reasons for it. 
 
--ASIA:  A Japanese official from the MFA expressed political 
support for permitting Libyan conversion, but indicated 
officials in Tokyo would need to evaluate the legal basis for 
pursuing the proposed technical change.  South Korea 
supported the proposal, in principle, and that, with North 
Korea clearly in mind, the proposed technical change appeared 
to be the best alternative.  Members of the Indian del from 
capital expressed general support for the concept but 
indicated that they would need to examine the legal question, 
and also wanted to see further details about the proposed 
conversion.  Malaysia, which currently holds chairmanship of 
the NAM, offered public support for permitting Libyan 
conversion, but privately expressed concern about the 
proposal being perceived as a U.S./WEOG-led initiative, and 
encouraged the Libyans to take a more prominent role in 
seeking support among developing countries.  The Iranian del 
informed the UK that it supported, in principle, Libyan 
conversion, but would have to defer to Tehran, particularly 
on the legality of the proposal. 
 
--AFRICA:  While Tunisia, Sudan, Morocco and Algeria offered 
firm support, the South African del initially appeared to 
waiver on the issue of co-sponsoring the proposal, expressing 
the desire for more participation from other regions. 
However, the South African Ambassador, Priscilla Jana, 
subsequently clarified their position and unambiguously 
confirmed their support, only expressing a desire for some 
Asian or Latin American co-sponsorship.  (Note:  Italy and 
the UK indicated that Rabat had agreed to co-sponsor the 
proposal, to go along with Tunis and Pretoria.) 
 
--EASTERN EUROPE:  The Russian del expressed cautious support 
for permitting Libya to convert Rabta, noting its significant 
experience in this area, but indicated that Moscow would have 
to closely evaluate the proposal, particularly from a legal 
standpoint.  The Czech, Slovakian, and Ukrainian dels all 
indicated they did not see any problems with the proposal, 
but would have to await instructions from capitals. 
(Comment:  The UK indicated that Kiev had offered to 
co-sponsor the proposal.)  Poland, which is not currently an 
EC member, offered its full support. 
 
--GRULAC:  According to the UK, Peru, which currently chairs 
the EC, has offered to co-sponsor the proposal and seek 
support among other GRULAC members.  There are also 
unconfirmed reports that Panama has also offered to be a 
co-sponsor.  In a strange turn, the UK del also indicated 
that the Argentine Ambassador may have concerns with the 
proposed text and may propose alternative text.  The UK 
recommended the U.S. approach Buenos Aires, as appropriate, 
to cut-off opposition. 
 
¶7. (SBU) Next steps:  The U.S., UK, Italian, and Libyan dels 
agreed, in principle to take the following steps in the 
coming weeks: 
 
-- Propose to capitals that the text for the technical change 
be modified to include a clear time limit for the completion 
of conversion, in order to address concerns raised by many 
delegations and further isolate France; 
 
-- Continue to approach other EC members seeking support, 
with Libya taking the lead among developing countries, and 
including seeking a select number of additional co-sponsors 
from the Asia, East Europe and GRULAC groups. 
 
-- Demarche Paris regarding the latest version of the 
proposed technical change, encouraging them to support this 
approach, but in any case indicate readiness to further 
discuss the issue; and 
 
-- Finalize and submit the proposal package to the OPCW 
Director-General the week of July 12, consisting of (1) a 
transmission letter from the Libyan del, signed by all 
co-sponsors, (2) the text of the proposed technical change, 
and (3) supporting information (drafted by U.S.), to be 
cleared in the four capitals and offered by Libya. 
 
¶8.  (U) Javits sends. 
SOBEL