05TAIPEI4069
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Tue Oct 04 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TAIPEI 004069 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC 
BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
¶1. Summary: Major Chinese-language Taipei dailies gave 
extensive coverage October 4 to local issues such as 
the pan-Blue and pan-Green camps' integrative efforts 
within their separate alliances with regard to 
nominations for the year-end "three-in-one" elections; 
the follow-up probe into the alleged shady recruitment 
practices regarding the Kaohsiung mass rapid transit 
system; and Taipei City's victory in a NT$10.8 billion 
health insurance premium claims case.  The pro- 
independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest daily, 
ran an exclusive news story on its page two topped with 
the headline: "Taiwan and United Arab Emirates Will 
Become Strategic Cooperative Partners." 
 
In terms of the U.S. arms procurement bill, several 
newspapers reported in their inside pages remarks by 
Legislative Yuan President Wang Jing-pyng that it might 
be an appropriate time for lawmakers to deal with the 
U.S. arms procurement bill after the year-end "three-in- 
one" elections are concluded.  In response to reports 
that KMT Chairman Ma Ying-jeou has decided to allow 
legislators to review the U.S arms procurement bill, 
these news stories quoted Ma as saying the KMT Caucus 
in the Legislative Yuan, not him alone, will make that 
decision.  The centrist "China Times," however, 
reported on its page four that the KMT will only agree 
to purchase one item listed in the entire U.S. arms 
procurements package - the P-3C anti-submarine aircraft 
- under the condition that the budget earmarked for the 
P-3Cs needs to be included in Taiwan's annual budget. 
 
¶2. Several newspapers editorialized on President Chen 
Shui-bian's overseas trip, in which he visited eight 
foreign countries within thirteen days.  An editorial 
in the limited-circulation, conservative, pro- 
unification, English-language "China Post" approached 
the issue of Taiwan's self-defense from a new angle: 
it commented on U.S. Pacific Fleet Commander Admiral 
William Fallon's recent remarks in which he advised 
Taiwan to strengthen its defenses with, among other 
things, `land mines.'  According to the editorial, the 
controversial U.S. arms deal with Taiwan, which has 
been rejected 30 times by Taiwan's Legislative Yuan, 
should be called off and that "to plant mines on the 
island's beaches to repel potential mainland invaders 
is a bad idea."  End summary. 
 
"No Mines for Taiwan, Please" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language 
"China Post" [circulation: 30,000] (10/4): 
 
". Admiral Fallon, who has led the Pacific Command 
since March, started to build military ties with 
Beijing during a maiden visit there early September. 
And the admiral has advised Taiwan to strengthen its 
defenses with, among others, `land mines,' according to 
a report of Singapore's Strait Times last week. 
 
"Taiwan's military authorities have been told to buy 
more `strictly defensive weapons,' instead of hi-tech 
weapons that could be employed in offensive operations. 
Those include `missiles for aerial interceptors, ground- 
based anti-aircraft missiles, transport helicopters, 
and mines to defend the beaches against amphibious 
assault, and transport helicopters.' 
 
"Fallon has also recommended to the Pentagon that the 
arms package featuring offensive weapons that the U.S. 
offered to sell Taiwan in 2001 but has been rejected 30 
times by the island's legislature `be allowed to fade 
away.' 
 
"Given Taiwan's reluctance, the controversial arms deal 
should be called off.  But to plant mines on the 
island's beaches to repel potential mainland invaders 
is a bad idea.  Beijing has deployed at least 700 
missiles targeting Taiwan, why would it resort to a 
costly amphibious invasion? . 
 
"For whatever purpose, Taiwan refuses to be like 
Vietnam, Afghanistan or the no-man's land in Korea. 
When war is over, the mines remain, a legacy with no 
point but brutally and sadness." 
 
PAAL