05TAIPEI2651
G/TIP DELEGATION JUNE 8-12 VISIT TO TAIWAN
Thu Jun 16 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 002651 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: CM PGOV PHUM PREL SMIG TW TIP
SUBJECT: G/TIP DELEGATION JUNE 8-12 VISIT TO TAIWAN 
 
¶1. (SBU) Summary: G/TIP made Taiwan its first stop in Asia 
after the release of the 2005 Trafficking in Persons (TIP) 
report.  The delegation responded to questions about Taiwan's 
downgrade to Tier 2 and reviewed improvements Taiwan has made 
in screening TIP victims, providing victim protection, and 
improving facilities and services available to victims.  The 
delegation expressed the hope that Taiwan will continue the 
progress it has made in tackling TIP and urged Taipei to take 
additional steps including establishing a government-wide TIP 
task-force to direct TIP policies, drafting comprehensive TIP 
legislation, and further improving the screening process for 
identifying TIP victims.  The delegation met with officials 
at the Ministries of Interior (MOI), Justice (MOJ), Foreign 
Affairs (MOFA), consulted NGOs, and visited the new center 
for TIP victims in Ilan.  End summary. 
 
¶2. (SBU) In a meeting with the MOI's Immigration Bureau, 
officials highlighted the steps they have taken to protect 
PRC TIP victims and discussed Taiwan's 2005 TIP report 
downgrade.  Immigration authorities argued that Taiwan cannot 
allow PRC TIP victims any alternatives but to return to the 
PRC because illegal PRC immigrants are a threat to Taiwan's 
national security.  The immigration officials asserted that 
the PRC is the largest source of illegal immigration to 
Taiwan and is continuing to rise.  This trend is posing 
greater risks on Taiwan's national security and becoming an 
ever increasing financial burden.  MOI officials told AIT 
that Beijing recently started repatriating a greater number 
of illegal PRC citizens than in the past.  In addition, MOI 
informed the delegation that they now submit a separate list 
of TIP victims to the Red Cross for priority repatriation to 
the PRC. 
 
¶3. (SBU) MOJ public prosecutors stated that TIP cases are 
covered under existing criminal statues and that there is no 
need for further TIP legislation.  According to prosecutor Ko 
Yi-fen, most criminals involved in TIP offenses are charged 
against Chapter 26, Article 296-1 of the Criminal Code, 
"Offenses Against Personal Liberty," which includes TIP.  The 
MOJ prosecutors also charge defendants under articles 23-25 
of the Child and Juvenile Sexual Transaction Prevention Act 
while PRC nationals are charged with violating Taiwan's 
national security laws. 
 
¶4. (SBU) Foreign brides were the primary focus of the 
delegation's meeting with MOFA Bureau of Consular Affairs 
officials, who expressed the greatest concern over Taiwan's 
downgrade that the delegation encountered during its visit. 
According to MOFA, Vietnamese women still account for the 
majority of foreign brides in Taiwan and in response, Taipei 
has implemented more stringent interviewing requirements to 
identify fraudulent marriages.  The Taiwan government has 
also opened offices in Vietnam and interviews every couple 
applying for entry into Taiwan.  Marriage registration must 
be completed in both countries and all documentation is 
scrutinized.  Suspicious cases are given only a 30-60 day 
visas and Taiwan authorities follow up after the women arrive 
in Taiwan.  Visas for marriages determined to be fraudulent 
are canceled.  In addition, MOFA pointed out that Taipei has 
allocated approximately 100 million USD over the next 10 
years for language training, cultural awareness, and 
counseling services to assist foreign brides with their 
adjustment to life in Taiwan. 
 
¶5. (SBU) The delegation met with DPP Legislative Yuan (LY) 
member Bi-khim Hsiao, who is working with Taiwan NGOs to 
draft a comprehensive TIP law.  Hsiao agreed with G/TIP that 
in addition to separate TIP legislation, a TIP task-force 
must be established and more comprehensive screening 
procedures implemented to distinguish between TIP victims and 
illegal immigrants.  Hsiao was very candid about the lack of 
interest in Taiwan about TIP, telling the delegation that 
Taiwan public opinion is not sympathetic to PRC victims and 
that TIP legislation will have little chance of passage by 
the LY.  Hsiao noted the government is most focused on issues 
of national security and domestic policy, relegating TIP 
legislation to the bottom of the priority list.  Hsiao also 
remarked that Taiwan's domestic political climate these days 
is so tense that any bill submitted by a Pan-Green lawmaker, 
such as herself, would immediately be blocked by the Pan-Blue 
in the LY. 
 
¶6. (SBU) MOI Immigration Bureau Commissioner Wu Chen-chi met 
the G/TIP delegation and AIT officers at the Ilan detention 
center to show the newly constructed facilities for TIP 
victims and to answer questions.  The Ilan center recently 
converted to a women only facility, combining all PRC female 
immigrants together in one complex.  TIP victims are located 
in a separate newly constructed facility without bars and 
includes a common area with ping-pong tables, organized 
activities, and television sets.  There are currently 82 TIP 
victims, including 11 minors, housed in this new facility. 
Officials in Ilan told the delegation that the PRC has 
recently begun repatriating their nationals more quickly than 
before.  Commissioner Wu expressed his determination to work 
closely with G/TIP and AIT to return Taiwan to Tier 1 next 
year. 
 
¶7. (SBU) The delegation also met with Taiwan NGOs Taipei 
Women,s Rescue Foundation (TWRF) and International Campaign 
to End Child Prostitution in Asian Tourism (ECPAT).  Queried 
by G/TIP for their assessment of the TIP problem and possible 
solutions, both NGOs focused on the need for more government 
action to combat TIP.  The NGOs asserted that a TIP 
task-force is vital to tackling the problem and that it 
should be headed by a senior Taiwan official, who is 
appointed by the president and given the power to tap into 
government agencies for resources to meet end goals.  They 
also noted that programs to further public awareness on TIP 
are necessary to change public opinion, which sees PRC 
immigrants as a political rather than a human rights issue. 
 
¶8. (SBU) ECPAT director Ingrid Liao also argued that 
comprehensive TIP legislation is necessary to protect the 
victims and prosecute the criminals.  Liao told the 
delegation that laws currently used in TIP prosecution need 
to be expanded.  For example, she noted victims who 
voluntarily come to Taiwan illegally are considered criminals 
even if they are abused or exploited after arrival.  Liao 
also raised the need for additional guidelines for police, 
immigration authorities, and judicial officers to help them 
distinguish between trafficked victims and illegal 
immigrants.  Both NGOs hope that education and training can 
be provided to Taiwan law enforcement authorities so they can 
quickly recognize TIP victims. 
 
Comment: 
-------- 
 
¶9. (SBU) The G/TIP delegation expressed appreciation for 
Taiwan's progress on tackling TIP in such a short period of 
time, particularly noting the new center for TIP victims in 
Ilan.  The delegation, however, urged that Taiwan continue 
the progress it has made to date on TIP and reinforced the 
NGO recommendations that Taiwan establish a government-wide 
TIP task-force to coordinate and promote TIP policies, draft 
comprehensive TIP legislation, and implement more 
comprehensive screening protocols to identify TIP victims. 
AIT intends to work with G/TIP over the coming months to 
assist Taiwan in taking these additional steps to combat TIP 
in Taiwan.  For example, AIT and G/TIP are co-sponsoring a 
TIP conference from June 13-16 with the TWRF to train Taiwan 
law enforcement officials and prosecutors in screening TIP 
victims. 
PAAL