05TAIPEI54
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Fri Jan 07 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TAIPEI 000054 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-CHINA-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
 
A) "Noble Taiwan Will Not Become Apathetic Because of 
International Isolation" 
 
The centrist, pro-status quo "China Times" 
editorialized (1/7): 
 
"Inevitably, Taiwan people feel aggrieved after Taiwan 
donated money and sent people to relieve the tsunami 
disaster in South Asia but was excluded from 
participation in the tsunami relief world summit.  The 
reaction [of Taiwan people] is rational. Since the 
international reality is so severe, Taiwan should not 
give up so easily.  Taiwan should, instead, proactively 
devote the power of all [Taiwan] people continuously, 
and carry out the relief job solidly in order to speak 
loudly for Taiwan by making contributions that will 
truly benefit those who suffered [in the disaster]." 
 
B) "An `Anti-Annexation' Law Won't Ease PRC Tension" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification English-language 
"China Post" said in an editorial (1/7): 
 
"The move by the Cabinet Wednesday to drop an article 
from a draft of revisions to the Referendum Law that 
would have granted the people the right to initiate 
constitutional amendments marked a reversal of a major 
legislative plan in the face of pressure coming from 
the United States. 
 
"But as it was trying to repair strained relations with 
Washington, the administration made a new legislative 
attempt that is bound to add to tension with Beijing. 
The Cabinet included in the bill, which is subject to 
approval by the Legislative Yuan, a new provision that 
would allow the people to hold a referendum on 
territorial changes. 
 
"But the attempt to use an `anti-annexation' law to 
counter an `anti-secession' law does not seem to be 
helpful.  Beijing would not withdraw its plan to create 
the legislation just because of Taipei's decision to 
respond in kind.  Nor would Beijing be likely to change 
its longstanding policy of using force because of a 
concern that an invasion could anger the people of 
Taiwan and stir them to hold a popular vote to say no 
to its action.." 
 
C) "Chen's Proposal is Very Pragmatic" 
 
The pro-independence English-language "Taipei times" 
said in an editorial (1/7): 
 
"As for the new proposal to approve changes to national 
boundaries through referendums, many believe this is a 
move to counter China's anti-secession law. 
 
"Presumably, in the event of Chinese military 
aggression justified by law Taiwan may be able to 
declare this a change of national boundaries or the 
exclusion of the Chinese Mainland from the definition 
of national boundaries.  This would not impact the 
status quo of the Republic of China's (ROC) 
sovereignty, and technically it would still conform 
with the US policy of `maintaining the status quo.'  It 
also shouldn't violate any basic principles of the pan- 
blue camp." 
 
PAAL