05TAIPEI2572
Taiwan Supports WCO Framework of Standards to
Sun Jun 12 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

122309Z Jun 05UNCLAS TAIPEI 002572 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/TC, 
DEPT PLEASE PASS TO AIT/W 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ETRD TW
SUBJECT: Taiwan Supports WCO Framework of Standards to 
Secure and Facilitate Global Trade 
 
REF: State 94927 
 
¶1. On June 8, Econoff delivered reftel talking points on the 
World Customs Organization Framework of Standards to Secure 
and Facilitate Global Trade to Taiwan Directorate General of 
Customs, Clearance Operation Department Deputy Director 
William Wang (Wang Liang) and four other Directorate General 
of Customs officials.  Wang indicated that Taiwan fully 
supports the Framework.  However, he had six suggestions 
that should guide its implementation as follows: 
 
(i) Framework should promote trade facilitation. 
(ii) The Framework measures should be agreed upon by all 
economies involved in implementation. 
(iii) Effort should be made to minimize the costs of 
implementing the Framework. 
(iv) The Framework should have measurable performance 
indicators. 
(v) The Framework should be flexible enough to allow various 
measures to be adjusted to the needs of individual 
economies. 
(vi) More advanced economies should provide practical 
assistance with real resources to less advanced economies in 
addition to advice.  As an example he mentioned that the 
U.S. should provide risk assessment software in addition to 
advice on how to set up a risk assessment system to target 
customs inspections. 
 
¶2. Wang also took the opportunity to point out that the U.S. 
had sometimes failed to follow through on requests made by 
Taiwan customs officials.  He said that visiting U.S. 
customs officials had occasionally indicated that they would 
assist Taiwan in some way, but had not followed through. 
Hsu Jen-chih, Department of Collection and Procedures 
Section Chief, added that Taiwan has questions about the 
practical implementation of some of the Framework's measures 
and hopes for further consultations or training from the 
U.S. on implementation. 
 
¶3. Econoff thanked Wang for his suggestions on the 
implementation of the Framework and assured him they would 
be relayed to Washington.  He emphasized that the U.S. 
agrees that the Framework should facilitate trade in 
addition to enhancing security.  Econoff said the U.S. would 
also seek to ensure that the Framework's initiatives are 
cost-effective.  Citing the Container Security Initiative 
and Megaports programs, he noted that the United States has 
dedicated considerable resources that indicate U.S. 
commitment to this issue.  Econoff asked Wang to keep AIT/T 
informed of requests they made to visiting U.S. customs 
officials so that AIT/T could follow up on their behalf. 
 
PAAL