05TAIPEI3491
China Petrochemical Development Again Cited For
Mon Aug 22 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TAIPEI 003491 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON AND AID 
 
DEPT FOR EAP/RSP/TC AND OES/PCI 
 
USDOC FOR 6200/ITA/TD/ENVIROTECH EXPORTS 
 
FROM AIT KAOHSIUNG BRANCH OFFICE 
 
EPA FOR OIA - DAN THOMPSON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: SENV ECON TW ESTH
SUBJECT: China Petrochemical Development Again Cited For 
Pollution 
 
REF: Taipei 2997 
 
¶1.  Summary.  China Petrochemical Development Corporation 
(CPDC), already facing soil and groundwater pollution 
problems in its plant in Anshun, Tainan City (see reftel), 
was cited after a recent survey conducted by Kaohsiung 
City's EPA (KEPA) that determined that total petroleum 
hydrocarbon (TPH) levels in the soil at the site of its 
plant in Kaohsiung City exceed KEPA's regulations by a 
factor of sixteen. CPDC's Kaohsiung plant is located within 
the area of the proposed Kaohsiung Multifunctional Commerce 
and Trade Park.  KEPA has announced that the area is now a 
controlled site, which precludes construction of commercial 
buildings on the site. CPDC has acknowledged the research 
results and has promised that it will submit a proposal 
aimed at remedying the environmental violations by mid- 
October 2005. End Summary. 
 
¶2.  China Petrochemical Development Corporation (CPDC) began 
producing various chemicals in 1969.  In the early 1970s, 
the company built a plant on Chung Shan Road, one of the 
major streets connecting Kaohsiung's train station and the 
Hsiao Kang International Airport in Kaohsiung City. The CPDC 
Kaohsiung plant, occupying 17.5 acres of land, used benzene, 
toluene, and xylene to produce caprolactam, a material used 
to produce nylon.  The plant stopped operations in 2001. 
 
¶3.  Kaohsiung's EPA began monitoring the Kaohsiung CPDC 
plant in 2002.  It conducted research, focusing on the 
levels of benzene and toluene present in the site's soil and 
groundwater. KEPA's report indicated that the volatile 
organic compound (VOC) level in the soil of the site was too 
high, as were levels of benzene and toluene.  KEPA demanded 
that CPDC bring the pollutant levels within standards. 
 
¶4.  However, when KEPA conducted another round of tests in 
2004, results showed that the situation had worsened. KEPA 
collected 35 samples of soil at the plant's 26 locations. 
The soil at four locations was found to have TPH levels that 
reached 16,580.4mg/kg, more than sixteen times TEPA's limit 
of 1,000mg/kg.  In early August 2004, KEPA declared the 
plant a controlled site prohibited from conducting both 
industrial and commercial operations. KEPA also demanded 
that CPDC submit a proposal to the city's soil and 
groundwater pollution improvement panel by mid-October 
detailing plans to improve the situation. According to KEPA 
officials, a 15-member panel led by the Deputy Mayor of 
Kaohsiung, Cheng Wen-long, will review the proposal, and 
KEPA will monitor the process of removing the pollutants. 
Since the plant is located within the city's proposed 
Multifunctional Commerce and Trade Park area, the 
development of the park will be delayed. 
 
 
 
 
Thiele 
Paal