05TAIPEI2501
MEDIA REACTION: Cross-Strait Relations, Taiwan's
Wed Jun 08 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.

080546Z Jun 05UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 02 TAIPEI 002501 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ROBERT 
PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: Cross-Strait Relations, Taiwan's 
Bid to Join WHO 
 
 
SUMMARY: 
 
¶1. Taiwan dailies June 8 focus their front-page news 
coverage on two main domestic political issues:  a non- 
existent scandal made up by a city councilor, and the 
passage of constitutional amendments.  The pro-independence 
"Liberty times," Taiwan's largest daily, and the 
conservative, pro-unification "United Daily News" carried 
front-page reports on the apology of a city councilor who 
fabricated a scandal concerning mortuary offerings.  Both 
newspapers covered the passage of constitutional amendments, 
too, but on their first inner pages.  The centrist, pro- 
status "China Times" reserved its front-page banner-headline 
for the constitutional news: "The National Assembly 
Successfully Passed the Constitutional Amendments.  Seats 
for Legislators Will Be Reduced in Half, Referendums Will Be 
Added to the Constitution."  The pro-independence "Taiwan 
Daily" carried President Chen Shui-bian's plan to carry out 
a second stage reform in the Constitution after Chen knew 
the passage of the constitutional amendments.  The banner- 
headline in its front page was "Bian: The Second Stage 
Constitutional Reform Would Solidify A New National 
Consensus." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, most of the ones 
published June 8 focus on President Chen Shui-bian's plan 
for a second stage of constitutional reforms.  However, the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times" editorialized that the 
Taiwan people should know clearly that China is a terrorist 
country, and urged the Taiwan people not to accept the "1992 
consensus" or the "One China" principle in order to protect 
Taiwan's sovereignty.  The pro-independence, English- 
language "Taipei Times" carried a commentary written by 
Taiwan's Foundation of Medical Professionals Alliance 
President Wu Shuh-min.  According to Wu, Taiwan's bid to 
join the WHO should allow the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
and the Department of Health to work more closely together. 
End Summary. 
 
A) "Understand Clearly That China is A Terrorist Country 
That Aims At Expanding Its Military Buildup" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 800,000] 
editorialized (6/8): 
 
". The United States views China's military buildup the same 
as a terrorist threat.  In other words, China's military 
threat has been viewed [by the United States] as being in 
the same category as Al Qaeda, leaded by Osama Bin Laden, 
and the lie of `peaceful emergence' that China has been 
bragging about is inevitably unveiled [not to be true by the 
United States.] 
 
"It is hard for one to imagine that political figures in the 
United States, Japan, and Europe are concerned more about 
China's military threat to Taiwan than some Taiwan 
politicians, who are under [the threat of] China's cannons. 
The essence of the Chinese authorities, to be frank, is that 
of a terrorist organization, and it is a rogue state.  If 
someone dreams of recognizing `the 1992 consensus,' `the One 
China principle,' or even wants to pay a pilgrimage visit to 
China like KMT Chairman Lien Chan and PFP Chairman James 
Soong did, these actions are equal to recognizing Taiwan as 
a province of China.  Once Taiwan loses its sovereignty, 
does it not mean to hand over Taiwan's security to 
terrorists?  Can the Taiwan people accept that?" 
 
B) "Taiwan's WHO Bid, Not Simply A Failure" 
 
Taiwan's Foundation of Medical professionals Alliance 
President Wu Shuh-min wrote in the pro-independence, English- 
language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 30,000] (6/8): 
 
". Still, since Taiwan needs to gain support from foreign 
countries during this process [of attending the WHO], our 
diplomats have a great opportunity to develop relationships 
with their foreign counterparts, rather than focusing only 
on unilateral relationships with the US and Japan.  The 
Department of Health (DOH) also repeatedly sent its 
officials to observe at WHO-related committees, and it now 
has a better understanding of international health 
cooperation. 
 
"The experience of jointly pushing for participation in the 
WHO has allowed the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the DOH 
to work more closely together.  The public has also realized 
that Taiwan should not exclude itself from the global 
village, and is willing to offer more medical aid to 
developing countries.  In the future, health, democracy and 
business diplomacy will become the three major pillars of 
Taiwan's international relations. 
 
"Taiwan's frustrated bid to join the WHO was therefore not a 
failure.  It opened up infinite possibilities for our 
diplomacy." 
 
PAAL