05TAIPEI2875
TAIWAN BANK M&A MAY PICK UP STEAM
Fri Jul 01 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 04 TAIPEI 002875 
 
SIPDIS 
 
STATE PASS AIT/W AND USTR 
STATE FOR EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/EP, EB/IFD/OMA 
USTR FOR FREEMAN, WINTER AND WINELAND 
USDOC FOR 4420/USFCS/OCEA/EAP/LDROKER 
USDOC FOR 3132/USFCS/OIO/EAP/ADAVENPORT 
TREASURY FOR OASIA/LMOGHTADER 
TREASURY PASS TO OCC/AMCMAHON 
TREASURY ALSO PASS TO FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD OF GOVERNORS, 
AND SAN FRANCISCO FRB/TCURRAN 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ECON EFIN PINR TW
SUBJECT: TAIWAN BANK M&A MAY PICK UP STEAM 
 
REF: A. TAIPEI 2131 
     ¶B. TAIPEI 1878 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Following the failure to privatize Changhwa 
bank, Taiwan authorities are making measured moves to 
encourage bank consolidation and proceed with the 
second-stage of financial reform.  While it appears unlikely 
that the reform plan will achieve its stated benchmarks 
established in October 2004, progress is being made and there 
is increasing pressure for banks to actively seek merger and 
acquisition partners.  End Summary. 
 
Second Stage of Financial Reform 
-------------------------------- 
¶2.  Ref A reports on the failure to consummate the 
privatization of Changhwa bank.  The planned privatization 
was to be the trigger point to start bank consolidation for 
the financial reform plan announced by President Chen 
Shui-bian on October 20, 2004.  The plan, referred to as the 
second-stage of financial reform in banking circles, was 
developed by the Presidential Economic Advisory Team.  Its 
goal is to increase efficiency in the banking sector and the 
utilization of banking assets.  Currently, the banking 
industry's rate of return on assets is less than one percent, 
and the return on equity, according to figures from the first 
quarter of 2005, has risen to a modest 3.7 percent.  The 
strategy calls for introducing international banking 
standards into the market and decreasing the number of banks 
and financial holding companies.  The plan established some 
quite specific benchmarks: 
 
a.    Having a state-owned bank sold to and operated by a 
foreign one by the end of 2005; 
b.    Reducing state-owned banks from 12 to 6 by the end of 
this year; and 
c.    Cutting financial holding companies from 14 to 7 by the 
end of 2006. 
 
Environment for Banking M&A 
--------------------------- 
¶3.  The American Chamber of Commerce held a seminar on May 18 
featuring international (Goldman Sachs, Jones & Day and HSBC) 
and local firms (ChinaTrust Bank) discussing the prospects 
for banking mergers and acquisitions in Taiwan.  The 
participants noted that there is no shortage of political 
will at senior levels of the Taiwan government for bank 
consolidation and that the government wants to see 
consolidation take place quickly.  One banker also suggested 
that the government's desire for rapid consolidation runs 
counter to industry preference.  He said that merging a weak 
bank with a sound one would take at least a year and that 
merging two sound banks would take considerably longer, 
perhaps three years.  While the industry as a whole agrees 
that consolidation is good for the banking sector and for 
Taiwan's economy, few, if any, senior bank executives want to 
be the first one to sell or merge their bank. 
 
¶4.  Seminar participants said that it is not hard for the 
government to realize its goal of bank consolidation because 
it can quickly merge a number of existing state-owned banks. 
This process may have already begun with banking circles and 
press speculation on the expected merger of the International 
Commercial Bank of China (ICBC) with Chiao Tung Bank.  Both 
of which are operated by state-owned Financial Holding 
Company Mega Holdings.  Other indications of M&A activity 
include a June 30 resolution by the Taipei Commercial Bank to 
merge with SinoPac Financial Holding Company; Yuan Da 
Business Group acquiring Fuhua Financial Holding Company; and 
Cathay Financial Holding Company announcing June 30 its 
acquisition of Lucky Bank.  (Note:  Reftel B reports on 
another ongoing merger in April of Macoto Bank with Shin 
Kong.  End Note.)  The M&A experts, however, called on the 
government to respect market forces and realize that foreign 
banks will place a lower value on local M&A targets than will 
domestic banks.  Foreign banks will be unwilling to pay the 
same price that local banks will, largely because local banks 
have an unmet need for additional branch offices.  One 
seminar participant called on the government to make a 
&good8 bank available for sale to all bidders, suggesting 
that this would serve as a catalyst for increased M&A in the 
banking sector.  This comment reflected the market's view 
that the Changhwa sale was flawed because it limited the 
potential buyers to foreign banks and that Changhwa was not a 
particularly sound bank. 
 
¶5.  Market participants and news reports indicate that 
Changhwa bank is moving forward to try and recover from the 
bungled sale to a foreign bank.  Current plans call for 
several sound local banks, as well as private placement 
funds, to join together and propose a takeover mechanism. 
Cathay, Fubon and ChinaTrust are reportedly in discussions on 
how to solve the Changhwa problem. 
 
Background on the Banking Reform Measures 
----------------------------------------- 
¶6.  Motivated by a sharp rise in the rate of nonperforming 
loans in 2000, Taiwan launched a major effort to improve the 
quality of its banks in 2001.  The NPL rate in 2001 was 
double the rate in 1997 when the Asian Financial crises 
erupted.  Taiwan Authorities established the Financial 
Reconstruction Fund (FRF) with a capital base of NT$140 
billion to address insolvent financial institutions.  The 
FRF, similar to the Resolution Trust Corporation in the US, 
has taken over 47 insolvent financial institutions and, 
eventually, sold them to sound banks.  The 47 institutions 
included the credit departments of 36 farmers associations, 
nine credit cooperative associations and two banks.  In 
addition, Taiwan authorities offered incentives for financial 
institutions that lowered NPL ratios below 7% by December 
2002 and below 5% by December 2003.  Institutions failing to 
meet the targets would be subject to penalties.  Similar 
carrot and stick measures have been adopted for credit 
departments of farmers associations and credit cooperative 
associations.  Officials hope that the combination of 
incentives and penalties will encourage financial 
institutions to consolidate. 
 
¶7.  Taiwan banks, responding to the government's measures, 
cut their NPL rates by writing off bad debt and selling 
problem assets to asset management companies.  By December 
2004, the quantity of non-performing loans fell 64.5% to 
NT$590.7 billion (US$19 billion) from a peak of NT$1,661.9 
billion (US$53.6 billion in March 2002.  Average NPL ratios 
dropped from 11.7% to 3.8%.  The rapid write-offs eroded bank 
profitability, causing banks to post a combined pre-tax loss 
of NT$104.6 billion (US$3.8 billion) in 2002.  By 2004, 
though, banks returned to profitability and reported combined 
profits of NT$153.3 billion (US$5 billion). 
 
¶8.  Reducing NPLs also eroded capital adequacy rates.  Banks 
compensated for the capital losses by issuing debt 
(convertible into equity), resulting in total bank debt 
reaching NT$676.4 billion (US$21.8 billion) in December 2004, 
four times the level in 2001.  The average capital adequacy 
ratio reached 9.5%, higher than the existing requirement of 
8%. 
 
Current Banking Environment 
--------------------------- 
¶9.  The current banking environment consists of 48 banks, all 
with less than a ten percent market share.  This number is 
down from the 53 banks operating in Taiwan at this time last 
year.  Senior officials routinely decry the &overbanking8 
situation and call for bank consolidation.  Financial 
Supervisory Commission Chairman Kong Jaw-sheng told AIT/T 
that his goal is to change Taiwan's banking environment from 
one of lots of little banks into one of several large banks 
capable of effectively operating in the regional market. 
 
More Reform Needed & Delivered in 2005 
-------------------------------------- 
¶10.  Even while citing figures indicating that nonperforming 
loan ratios continue to decline significantly, the FSC's 
Bureau of Monetary Affairs has been enacting a variety of new 
rules in 2005 to encourage banks to improve their operations. 
 BOMA has set targets for all banks to meet on rate of NPLs, 
coverage of bad debts and capital adequacy.  As of February 
2005 all banks are required to lower NPL rates below 5%, to 
increase the level of reserves to cover bad loans above 40% 
and to achieve capital adequacy rates above 10%.  Even while 
the average rates achieved by banks in these three categories 
are quite good, it is a different story when one looks at 
individual banks.  According to AIT/T analysis of data on 
bank operations, some 60 percent of banks do not now meet all 
three of BOMA's basic guidelines listed above.  While most 
banks probably meet one or two of the targets, fewer than 
half meet all three of the targets. 
 
Carrots... 
---------- 
¶11.  Along with announcing the new requirements, BOMA offered 
some incentives for banks to hit the targets.  Among the 
incentives for banks that bring NPL ratios below 5% and 
increase bad debt coverage above 40% are:  the ability to 
introduce new financial products and services; relocate 
branch offices (except for moving to Taipei and Kaohsiung); 
install automatic service facilities outside banking offices, 
and travel to China without applying for a permit. 
Additional incentives for banks that bring their NPL below 
2.5% include establishing offices overseas (including China); 
replacing a full-service branch office with four 
limited-service branches; and the ability to offer the 
following services without going through and application and 
approval process: investment below statutory ceiling limits, 
introduction of collective management services for trust 
funds and introducing mutual funds. 
 
¶12.  FSC offers extra incentives in the case of banks that 
meet the bad debt coverage and capital requirements and bring 
their NPL rates below 2.5%.  Such banks do not need prior 
permission from BOMA to introduce specified new banking 
services.  This benefit will help sound banks to quickly 
offer new services in the marketplace.  Foreign banks enjoy 
this benefit as well as local ones. 
 
¶13.  The FRF has helped eight credit coops transform 
themselves into banks.  BOMA allows these eight new banks and 
community-level financial institutions to relocate branch 
offices provided their NPL rate is below 5%. 
 
Credit Coop Incentives 
----------------------- 
¶14.  BOMA is also trying to encourage community-level Credit 
Cooperative Associations (CCA) to improve their quality. 
CCAs may only operate in a county or city where no other CCAs 
exist.  An existing CCA may expand to two neighboring 
counties or cities if its capital adequacy exceeds 12%, its 
NPL rate is below 1%, and its bad debt coverage is 100%.  A 
CCA may expand to a single neighboring county or city if is 
capital adequacy is 10%, its NPL is 2% and its bad debt 
coverage exceeds 40%. 
 
And Sticks 
---------- 
¶15.  BOMA also has some penalties in hand for banks which 
fail to meet the new targets.  If a bank's NPL ratio exceeds 
5%, it will be subject to the following: 
 
-- Restrictions on establishing branches; 
-- Limits on compensation paid to Board Members; 
-- Limits on dividend payouts to shareholders; 
-- Restrictions on investments in non-financial firms; and 
-- Limits on loans or loan guaranties to related persons. 
 
If the NPL ratio exceeds 15%, a bank faces the following 
penalties: 
 
-- Restrictions on providing banking services to high-risk 
clients; 
-- Restrictions on offering high interest rates for deposits; 
-- BOMA may reduce the number of branches; and 
-- BOMA may require removal of Board members and/or bank 
managers.  (Note:  On June 26, the FSC announced that it has 
ordered the Hualien Business Bank to dismiss the majority of 
its Board Members for making improper loans to business and 
personal associates.  End Note.) 
 
Comment 
------- 
¶16.  In the wake of the failure to sell off Changhwa bank as 
originally planned, the government continues to make measured 
moves to encourage bank consolidation.  The market is 
evaluating a wealth of M&A opportunities.  It seems highly 
unlikely that the first benchmark of the financial reform 
plan -- a foreign bank operating a state-owned bank this year 
-- will be met.  Foreign banks are unwilling to pay domestic 
prices for a financial institution.  The second benchmark -- 
cutting back to 6 state-owned banks this year -- is clearly 
within reach.  Changhwa Bank will probably be taken over by a 
consortium of domestic banks in the near future and, as 
suggested by the AmCham seminar participants, the government 
is moving to merge ICBC and Chiao Tung Bank.  Over the next 
several months Taiwan's smaller and weaker banks will come 
under increasing pressure to consolidate with other 
institutions.  It may not happen as quickly as some in the 
government would like, but some bank consolidation appears to 
be a real possibility in 2005.  The third benchmark -- 
halving the number of Financial Holding Companies -- is not 
due until next year and is unlikely to be addressed until 
then. 
KEEGAN