05TAIPEI4880
TAIWAN: 2005 REPORTS ON TERRORISM
Wed Dec 14 00:00:00 +0100 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS TAIPEI 004880 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR DS/IP/EAP, EAP/TC AND S/CT - RHONDA SHORE 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: ASEC PTER PINR EFIN KCRM TW
SUBJECT: TAIWAN: 2005 REPORTS ON TERRORISM 
 
REF: (A) SECSTATE 193439 
 
¶1. (U) The American Institute in Taiwan's (AIT) submission 
for the 2005 Country Reports on Terrorism (CRT) is as 
follows: 
 
TAIWAN 
------ 
 
¶2. (U) There were no acts of international or domestic 
terrorism in Taiwan in 2005.  Even though Taiwan is 
frequently prevented from participating in international and 
regional fora, Taiwan authorities continue to cooperate on 
counterterrorism issues and enhance regional CT 
capabilities. 
 
¶3. (U) In January 2005, Taiwan established a cabinet-level 
Counter-Terrorism Office (CTO) to oversee and coordinate an 
interagency response to terrorist activities in Taiwan and 
in the region.  The CTO is comprised of representatives from 
ten government agencies including the National Security 
Bureau (NSB), the National Police Administration (NPA), the 
Department of Health and the Atomic Energy Council.  Since 
its inauguration, the CTO has conducted two large-scale 
training exercises.  The first, held in April 2005, tested 
responses to a terrorist attack against critical 
infrastructure as well as dealing with a toxic spill, while 
the most recent exercise in December 2005 focused on 
chemical and biological threats.  The CTO's primary mission 
remains counterterrorism, but there are plans to broaden its 
focus, incorporating crisis management and disaster 
preparedness, to create a new Ministry of Interior and 
Homeland Affairs in a proposed governmental re-organization. 
 
¶4. (U) In September 2005, the Container Security Initiative 
(CSI) began operations in Kaohsiung identifying and 
targeting shipping containers that pose a risk for terrorism 
and significantly enhancing Taiwan's maritime security. 
Inspections have already yielded seizures of counterfeit 
currency and illegal drugs, and preliminary discussions are 
underway to expand CSI to the northern port of Keelung.  The 
Taiwan authorities have also expressed a willingness to 
accept the U.S. Department of Energy's Megaports program to 
help restrict trafficking in radioactive materials. 
 
¶5. (U) Taiwan is not a member of the United Nations and 
therefore cannot ratify international conventions and 
protocols related to terrorist financing.  The U.S. however, 
has consistently urged Taiwan to act as a good international 
citizen and implement, to the maximum extent possible, all 
UN resolutions relating to terrorist finance issues.  In 
2005, Taiwan was elected to the Steering Committee of the 
Asia Pacific Group on money laundering, giving Taiwan better 
access to information on international criminal and 
terrorist activities.  Taiwan continues to provide rapid and 
thorough responses on terrorist finance issues and has 
brought to our attention a number of suspect transactions 
involving Taiwan entities in 2005.  In responses to counter- 
terrorism suggestions made by the FATF, Taiwan's Central 
Bank of China (CBC) implemented a regulation requiring 
remitting banks to report the remitter's name, ID number or 
account data, and address in remittance messages.  The 
Ministry of Justice (MOJ) also has drafted a new, detailed 
"Anti-terrorist Action" law modeled after the U.S. Patriot 
Act.  This bill, however, is still being reviewed by the 
Executive Yuan (EY). 
 
¶6. (U) Point of contact at AIT-Taipei is Acting RSO Byron X. 
BACIK, Tel: (886-2) 2162-2349; FAX: (886-2) 2162-2245; E- 
mail: Bacikbw@state.gov 
 
PAAL