05TAIPEI2022
MEDIA REACTION: LIEN CHAN'S CHINA TRIP
Wed May 04 00:00:00 +0200 2005
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
This record is a partial extract of the original cable. The full text of the original cable is not available.UNCLAS SECTION 01 OF 03 TAIPEI 002022 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/RSP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - 
ROBERT PALLADINO 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: LIEN CHAN'S CHINA TRIP 
 
¶1. Summary: KMT Chairman Lien Chan's return from his 
trip to China and President Chen Shui-bian's comment on 
Lien's trip Tuesday were the spotlight of the Taipei 
dailies May 4.  The front-page news story of the pro- 
unification "United Daily News" and the page-two news 
stories of the pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan 
biggest daily, and the centrist "China Times" all 
reported on Chen's remarks in Kiribati that cross- 
Strait dialogue may come faster and earlier than 
expected.  In the meantime, these newspapers also 
carried reports saying Chen denied that there is a 
"1992 consensus" across the Taiwan Strait.  The 
"Liberty Times" reported on Chen's remarks on its front 
page from a different angle which headlined: "Bian 
strongly criticized Lien's comments that the KMT will 
cooperate with China to counter Taiwan independence." 
In addition, almost all the Chinese-language Taiwan 
dailies carried State Department Spokesman Richard 
Boucher's remarks Monday that the United States 
supports a dialogue across the Taiwan Strait and that 
Washington does not intend to try to manipulate or 
organize such a process. 
 
¶2.  Almost all the editorials of the major Taipei 
dailies sought to evaluate Lien Chan's China trip. 
Editorials of the pro-independence "Liberty Times," 
"Taiwan Daily" and the limited-circulation, pro- 
independence English-language "Taipei Times" defined 
Lien's trip as a journey of failure that will bring 
disaster for Taiwan.  The centrist "China Times" 
editorial, however, said Lien's trip has unveiled the 
first page of a peace roadmap for both sides of the 
Taiwan Strait.  The editorial of the limited- 
circulation, pro-unification English-language "China 
Post" also said Lien's ice-breaking trip will have far- 
reaching implications on Taiwan's domestic politics, 
its relations with the mainland and the role Washington 
plays in cross-strait ties.  End summary. 
 
A) "It Is Easy to Sell out [One's] Country but Very 
Difficult to Pursue Honor - Something That Defeated 
Politicians Should Ponder" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 
600,000] editorialized (5/4): 
 
". [KMT Chairman] Lien Chan's trip to China was by no 
means a journey of peace but absolutely a journey of 
failure, a journey that fawned over the Chinese 
Communist Party (CCP) and betrayed Taiwan.  Lien's trip 
is not a historical trip that ends civil war animosity 
and starts the third round of cooperation between the 
KMT and CCP but a trip that seeks to join hands with Hu 
Jintao of the CCP in order to oppress and restrain 
Taiwan and Chen Shui-bian. . In short, Lien's China 
trip has exposed his narrow view, inflexibility, strong 
mindset of hatred, and his grand Chinese mentality of 
seeing himself as a `genuine Chinese."  It is fortunate 
that Taiwan is a democratic country whose politicians 
need not to hide their mentality.  It is even more 
fortunate that the voters in Taiwan made a correct 
judgment by not voting for Lien, or the island would 
face an unprecedented disaster now." 
 
B) "Lien Chan Fails to Secure Peace But Has Brought 
Disasters to Taiwan's Democracy" 
 
The pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" [circulation: 
150,000] commented in its editorial (5/4): 
 
". Lien's China trip has made things very clear: under 
the grand Chinese nationalism, the KMT's grudges with 
the Chinese Communist Party are merely `internal 
conflicts,' while the KMT's arguments with the DPP 
government under Taiwan's democracy are the real 
`clashes between one country and its enemy.'  This is 
the real historical disaster that Lien's China trip has 
brought to the democratic Taiwan." 
 
C) "It's Time for Lien to Come Clean" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" 
[circulation: 30,000] said in an editorial (5/3): 
 
". Lien's trip has succeeded in cementing a place, 
however small, in China's history.  It has also 
generated reasonable suspicion that he is preparing to 
act treacherously against Taiwan.  On his return, Lien 
should present [President] Chen with a report on his 
trip.  He should also instruct the KMT legislative 
caucus to end its boycott of the arms-procurement 
budget.  This will help repair the damage he has done 
to his image among Taiwanese people. 
 
"Lien must show that domestic stability is on his 
agenda, otherwise he will have demonstrated that 
Taiwan's basic interests do not coincide with his own." 
 
D) "What Changes Has Lien Chan's China Trip Brought [to 
Both Sides of the Taiwan Strait]?" 
 
The centrist, pro-status quo "China Times" 
[circulation: 600,000] commented in an editorial (5/4): 
 
". First, it is certain that [KMT Chairman] Lien Chan's 
China trip has successfully transformed the atmosphere 
across the Taiwan Strait.  Take a look at the cross- 
Strait atmosphere about one and a half months ago when 
Beijing insisted on enacting the Anti-Secession Law or 
the atmosphere around half a year ago when Taiwan was 
immersed in the heated debates of whether to change its 
names or hold a referendum on a new constitution.  At 
that time, the international community was gravely 
concerned that unpredictable conflicts might occur 
anytime across the Taiwan Strait, and the United States 
even strongly criticized Taiwan several times.  Also at 
that time, there was no possibility for a dialogue 
across the Taiwan Strait, let alone talk about a peace 
treaty or confidence-building measures.  But now [we] 
hear proposals regarding cross-Strait peace and 
exchanges.  The change of the atmosphere started 
immediately when Lien set foot in mainland China! 
 
"Lien's trip to China has also uncovered the current 
mainstream public view in Taiwan; namely, people here 
crave peace across the Taiwan Strait.  Lien's China 
trip has won the majority of the Taiwan people's 
support despite the harsh criticism and attacks from 
the Green Camp.  The approval rate of Lien's trip 
indicates that the `status quo' yearned for by the 
Taiwan public now is not the status quo of `hostility 
and confrontation' but the status quo of `peace and 
interaction.' . 
 
"Another point that is worth noting is that Lien's 
China trip has made it impossible for Beijing to avoid 
the `Republic of China' any more.  Even though it may 
still be too early for Beijing to treat the ROC 
positively, Beijing has at least started to accept 
indirectly that both sides of the Taiwan Strait are now 
divided. . 
 
"Perhaps [we] will have to wait until [PFP Chairman] 
James Soong's trip to China, or even President Chen's 
future trip to China to see substantive breakthroughs 
in cross-Strait relations.  But [we] believe that no 
one can deny that such a big historical transformation 
[with regard to the cross-Strait relations] was 
triggered by Lien.  Lien's China trip has indeed 
unveiled the first page of a peace roadmap for both 
sides of the Taiwan Strait, and no one can take away 
his role in the history!" 
 
E) "Lien's Triumphant PRC Visit May Have Wide 
Implications" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language 
"China Post" [circulation: 300,000] observed in an 
editorial (5/4): 
 
"Main opposition KMT chairman Lien Chan returned home 
triumphantly yesterday after having made history 
through a high-profile eight-day Chinese mainland trip 
that culminated in a summit meeting with China's new 
paramount leader Hu Jintao.  The ice-breaking trip will 
have far-reaching implications for Taiwan's domestic 
politics, its relations with the mainland and the role 
Washington plays in cross-strait ties. . 
 
"The growing China fever brought about by the Lien 
visit could eventually erode the role the U.S. has been 
traditionally playing in relations between Taiwan and 
the Chinese mainland.  Once the thaw is achieved in the 
political standoff across the strait, Taiwan would be 
able to directly deal with Beijing, reducing the need 
for Washington to play an intermediary role. 
 
"If relations improve to the extent that leads to the 
conclusion someday of a peace agreement between Taipei 
and Beijing, this island might no longer feel necessary 
to invest heavily in military equipment.  Such a 
development could reduce Taiwan's dependence on the 
U.S. for the supply of weapons. ." 
 
PAAL