06AITTAIPEI2492
MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S POLITICAL SITUATION
Tue Jul 25 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0004
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #2492/01 2060727
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 250727Z JUL 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 1240
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5455
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6663UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 002492 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S POLITICAL SITUATION 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies gave extensive 
coverage July 25 to a decision by National Communications Commission 
(NCC) members Monday to remain in their positions until January 
2008, following the Grand Justices' ruling that the way the 
commissioners are selected is unconstitutional; and to the aftermath 
of the DPP party congress.  News coverage also focused on Typhoon 
Kaemi, which hit Taiwan early Tuesday morning; and investigations 
into the Lafayette frigate kickback scandal and other corruption 
cases.  As the Cabinet-sponsored Sustainable Economic Development 
Conference is about to kick off this coming Thursday, the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest daily, ran a 
banner headline on page two that quoted the Taiwan Advocates, a 
pro-independence local think tank, saying that the opening of 
cross-Strait trade and economics violates Taiwan's mainstream public 
opinion. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials, a "Liberty Times" editorial urged the DPP 
to take action to restore the people's confidence in the party.  An 
editorial in the pro-unification "United Daily News," however, 
criticized the DPP's party congress for only focusing on power 
struggles but failing to note public opinion.  An editorial in the 
limited-circulation, conservative, pro-unification, English-language 
"China Post," on the other hand, discussed the KMT's China policy, 
saying "peace is the ultimate criteria of all political 
enterprises."  End summary. 
 
A) "DPP Should Take Action to Restore People's Confidence in the 
Party" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] 
editorialized (7/25): 
 
"... The DPP became a ruling party within a very short period of 
time, starting from the 'tangwai' (outside the party) period to the 
party's establishment.  Such an accomplishment did not indicate that 
the DPP has super-strong capabilities, or its administrative 
performance over the past six years would not have been so mediocre. 
 Right now, the DPP should understand that what it shoulders is the 
Taiwan people's wishes for democracy, renovation, and becoming their 
own masters.  If the DPP can faithfully carry out its duties, the 
Taiwan people will naturally allow it to continue shouldering these 
responsibilities.  In contrast, if the DPP fails to carry out what 
the Taiwan people have entrusted it to do and fails to stick to the 
line of nativism, incorruptibility, and renovation, the chances are 
high that the party's approval rating will continue to slump." 
 
B) "Look at DPP's Excitement over Power, Indifference to Public 
Opinion" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
commented in an editorial (7/25): 
 
"... In its party congress, the DPP failed to take any action to 
deal with Chen Shui-bian, who is delinquent and lacks moral ethics 
and bearing, but gave a ruthless order to dissolve the party's best 
combat troops.  The results of the DPP party congress were quite 
consistent with the performance of a defeated army.  During its 
party congress, the DPP failed to review its structure and nature, 
and failed to make any response to the public's complaints and some 
scholars' appeals; instead, party members were busy buying and 
exchanging votes with each other and were busy fighting for power. 
How closely has the current DPP come to resemble the KMT before the 
latter was defeated in the presidential election years ago! ..." 
 
 
C) "KMT's New China Policy" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] (7/25): 
 
"... Like the U.S., Japan and the United Nations, the KMT accepts 
the 'one-China' principle as prescribed in the ROC Constitution, to 
ensure regional pace and stability as well as world order.  To calm 
the threatening Communist giant next door, the KMT stands for 
Taiwan's eventual reunification with China, but unification cannot 
take place before the mainland is democratized or when Taiwan's 
people are against it.  This is the status quo the whole world 
demands.  Taiwan people have a right to pursue independence from 
China or integration with the mainland, and the KMT respects this 
right. 
 
"But the KMT, again like the U.S., Japan and the United Nations, is 
opposed to any move that disrupts peace and stability in the Taiwan 
Strait or causes disharmony and social strife at home.  Peace is the 
ultimate criteria of all political enterprises.  The KMT will never 
allow Taiwan's people to be dragged into war for independence or 
other purposes.  The ROC-Taiwan is a fully-fledged democracy, but 
its sovereignty remains incomplete since its security and defense 
are sponsored by the U.S.  And Taiwan's people, though totally free, 
are unjustly deprived of the universal right of self-determination. 
For self-interest and the interests of neighbors and world powers, 
Taiwan's people have to forebear this ongoing injustice.  To do 
otherwise is to invite war.  Despite Beiji9ng's threatening 
rhetoric, this is the only way to assure peace, improve democracy 
and increase prosperity." 
 
YOUNG