06AITTAIPEI1156
MEDIA REACTION: CHINA'S PANDA OFFER
Mon Apr 03 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0032
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1156 0930832
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 030832Z APR 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9503
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5011
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6202UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001156 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CHINA'S PANDA OFFER 
 
 
¶1.  Summary:  Taiwan dailies April 1-3 focused much of their 
coverage on the construction of Taiwan's fourth nuclear-power plant, 
and reports that its budget will be exhausted this May because of 
lack of further action by Taiwan's Executive Yuan; Taiwan's Council 
of Agriculture's announcement that Taiwan is unable to accept 
China's offer of two pandas; KMT Chairman Ma Ying-jeou's upcoming 
meeting (4/3) with President Chen Shui-bian; and KMT candidate Kuang 
Li-chen's victory in the Taitung County magistrate by-election 
Saturday. 
 
¶2.  In terms of editorials and commentaries most focused on local 
politics these three days.  The pro-independence, "Liberty Times," 
however, echoed the government line in its editorial that pandas 
from China should not be imported.  The pro-independence, 
English-language, "Taipei Times" said in its editorial that the 
government has done the right thing in rejecting the importation of 
two pandas from China, because these pandas would have been used for 
"united front propaganda."  End summary. 
 
A)"Pandas Should Not Come to Taiwan Even From the [Environmental] 
Conservation Viewpoint" 
 
The pro-independence, "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] said in 
an editorial (4/1): 
 
"... The Council of Agriculture's ad hoc review panel made a 
professional decision to ban the importation of pandas from China, 
and we support the decision. ... 
 
"It is fortunate that the ad hoc review panel cautiously made the 
decision, without being influenced by outside disturbances, by first 
considering factors such as climate, environment, food, technology 
that are necessary for raising pandas. ..." 
 
B)  "Enough about the Pandas, Already" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language, "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] opined in an editorial (4/2): 
 
"Tomorrow the Council of Agriculture is expected to announce its 
formal rejection of two zoo operators' applications for the 
importation of pandas from China. Criticism from within Taiwan 
(primarily by the pan-blue camp) and from without (primarily Chinese 
officials) over the decision immediately followed the meeting of the 
council's Forestry Bureau on Friday. Critics decry the supposedly 
political nature of the decision. However, they seem to ignore that 
China's motives in offering the pandas were always political, and 
brazenly so. One can hardly blame a government for reciprocating 
with a political decision. ... 
 
"... Ma, as mayor of Taipei, is no doubt also unhappy because Taipei 
Zoo was one of the rejected applicants. Echoing the Chinese media, 
Ma and other critics of the government's decision complained that 
political interests should not intrude on gift-giving. But one 
should never look at such government decisions in isolation. 
Instead, they should be examined in the context of the entire 
cross-strait relationship. Only then can one recognize that the 
gesture was never anything more than an act of propaganda, and an 
admittedly effective one at that. 
 
"Through the simple act of giving two pandas, Beijing was trying to 
create the impression that China means no harm to Taiwan. 
 
"But there is barely a reason to believe in the existence of Chinese 
goodwill toward Taiwan against the backdrop of hundreds of Chinese 
missiles pointed this way, the repeated efforts by Beijing to keep 
Taiwan out of the World Health Organization, and the passage of the 
"Anti-Secession" Law, with possible revisions that will crack down 
on the very act of expressing support for this nation's democracy 
and self-determination. 
 
"Under the circumstances, what could the government do? It could 
have accepted the pandas (ignoring the prison lifestyles that they 
would have had to endure), but this would have rewarded China for 
its cynicism and diverted public attention from the growing danger 
that Taiwan faces. 
 
"If accepting the pandas had led Beijing to respect this place or 
had at least prompted the removal of missiles, then maybe it would 
have been justifiable. But this was never going to happen, and 
everybody knows it. ..." 
 
YOUNG