06AITTAIPEI1662
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Mon May 15 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0002
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1662/01 1352223
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 152223Z MAY 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0185
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5209
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6415UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001662 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
coverage May 13-15 on the conclusion of President Chen Shui-bian's 
nine-day overseas trip; Premier Su Tseng-chang's decision to suspend 
the chairman of the Financial Supervisory Commission, who was 
released on bail after questioning by prosecutors; alleged 
involvement by President Chen's son-in-law in illegal stock 
transactions; and other local issues.  The pro-status quo "China 
Times" ran a banner headline on page two May 13 that read "In 
Response to Zoellick's Remarks about '[Taiwan] Hitting a Wall,' 
Bian: Status Quo of Cross-Strait Peace Is Two Countries on Both 
Sides."  The newspaper also ran an exclusive news story on page four 
May 13 with the headline: "For Taiwan's Future Leaders, United 
States Has High Hopes for Ma and Su; But Doubts About the Two 
Persons' Lines."  The pro-unification "United Daily News" ran a 
banner headline on page four May 13 that said "Bian Returns to 
Taiwan:  Transits of United States Will No Longer Be Focus of [His] 
Overseas Trips."  The pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's 
biggest daily, on the other hand, ran a banner-headline news story 
on page three May 13 that read "Bian:  One-Time Uproar Will Not 
Jeopardize Taiwan-U.S. Relations."  The pro-independence "Taiwan 
Daily" also front-paged May 13 the results of an opinion survey by 
the DPP last Friday, which showed 66 percent of respondents said 
they support President Chen Shui-bian's foreign trip this time. 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a "Liberty Times" news 
analysis urged the government not to listen to whatever the U.S. 
said unconditionally in order to safeguard Taiwan's interests.  A 
"United Daily News" editorial said Washington has ruthlessly torn 
down Chen's two-pronged strategy by clearly indicating its 
opposition to Taiwan independence.  A "China Times" opinion piece 
said Washington will closely monitor Taiwan's every move in the next 
two years.  An editorial in the limited-circulation, 
pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" urged Taipei and 
Washington to build mature relations.  An editorial in the 
limited-circulation, pro-independence, English-language "Taipei 
Times" praised Chen's trip and his stopover in Libya as a great 
success.  End summary. 
 
A) "To Safeguard Taiwan's Interests, Must Not Listen to Whatever the 
United States Says" 
 
Journalist Tsou Jiing-wen commented in a news analysis in the 
pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] (5/15): 
 
"The topic of President Chen's transits of the United States this 
time offered a wonderful opportunity to review how both countries 
should normalize their interaction from now on.  It may be necessary 
[for Taiwan] to mend and restore its relations with the United 
States, but strategically, it is by no means in Taiwan's best 
interests to listen to whatever the United States says 
unconditionally. 
 
"Many people mistakenly believe that Taiwan needs the United States 
more.  But in reality, the United States constantly needs Taiwan's 
'cooperation' under the table, and many examples show that Taiwan 
had to sacrifice itself just to please the United States.  From now 
on, the government should make a comprehensive review of such 
examples and return to the 'normal track' of maintaining [Taiwan's] 
national interests.  The United States is after all Taiwan's biggest 
supporter in terms of the island's security.  Taiwan must treat it 
with courtesy and act like a gentleman.  But in private, the 
government must quickly work out a list based on Taiwan's public 
opinion and carefully review whether it is necessary for Taiwan to 
have been excessively 'obedient to the United States' over the past 
few years. ..." 
 
B) "United States Is Opposed to Taiwan Independence! Is Taiwan 
Independence Opposed to the United States?" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (5/13): 
 
"... Chen Shui-bian has been acting as if he were a 'flag bearer for 
Taiwan independence' inside Taiwan, but he dares not admit to the 
international community that he is a 'Taiwan independence activist.' 
 This time, however, the United States ruthlessly tore down Chen's 
two-pronged strategy, and Washington's related discourse has never 
been so clear:  First, the United States is anti-Taiwan independence 
because 'independence means war.'  Second, Chen is a Taiwan 
independence activist and he has no credibility at all.  The fact 
that Chen wants to challenge the 'one China' policy that was fixed 
on by the United States long ago is 'running into a wall.'  Third, 
the United States supports 'Taiwan', but 'on the other hand, this 
will not encourage those who attempt to lead Taiwan toward 
independence (i.e., Chen).'  Based on these three points, 
Washington's position is consistent and logical:  It opposes Taiwan 
independence and Taiwan independence activist Chen Shui-bian. ..." 
C) "Why Did the United States Make Harsh Criticism [Against 
Taiwan]?" 
 
Professor Edward Chen of Tamkang University's Graduate Institute of 
American Studies opined in the pro-status quo "China Times" 
[circulation: 400,000] (5/13): 
 
"U.S. Deputy Secretary of State Robert Zoellick and AIT Taipei 
Director Stephen Young each made some remarks recently regarding 
[Washington's] cross-Strait policy, which revealed something new and 
profound. ... As the key person in charge of the United States' 
China policy, Zoellick pointed out that the United States does not 
support Taiwan independence or dance to the tune of Taiwan's 
politicians because independence means war and that American 
soldiers would sacrifice their lives.  On the same day, when 
addressing the American Chamber of Commerce in Taipei, Young 
carelessly said 'Zoellick is opposed to Taiwan independence.' 
Whether Young simply misspoke or was speaking from the bottom of his 
heart remains to be seen. ... 
 
"... Zoellick's testimony indicated that the United States will 
closely monitor Taiwan's every move in the next two years.  On the 
same day, Young echoed Zoellick by stressing that Taiwan should be 
very careful in handling its constitutional changes and should not 
touch on the Taiwan independence topic, or it will arouse 
Washington's concern. ...  While Zoellick emphasized that Washington 
will restrain Taiwan independence on the frontline, Young directly 
talked about Washington's role in pushing for direct transportation 
across the Taiwan Strait.  Young said in his speech that the United 
States is happy to see that cross-Strait trade issues such as direct 
transportation are discussed in a democratic way and formulated into 
policy.  These are, without a doubt, the clearest remarks that U.S. 
officials have ever made with regard to direct transportation 
[across the Taiwan Strait]. ... 
 
D) "Building Mature U.S.-Taiwan Ties" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (5/15): 
 
"... Zoellick's alarmist rhetoric shows that he is seemingly unable 
to appreciate that Taiwan is already an independent and democratic 
county and that the efforts of the Chen administration aim to 
safeguard, not 'move toward' or 'declare' independence and to 
preserve the peaceful status quo in the Taiwan Strait.  Instead, 
Zoellick ignores the fact that only one side of the Taiwan Strait is 
rapidly building up offensive military forces and threatening a war, 
and that side is not Taiwan.  It is critical for President Chen's 
Democratic Progressive Party administration to continue to work to 
build and consolidate trust with Washington, but the Bush 
administration should also display fairer treatment and 
understanding toward President Chen and his government and the 
difficulties they face in defending Taiwan's international space 
than shown by Washington's handling of the transit issue and by 
Zoellick's unfounded remarks. ... 
 
"Washington should not demand that Taiwan leaders wait until PRC 
military forces occupy the presidential palace before announcing 
that the precondition to the 'five noes' has been violated.  It is 
also necessary for a mature Taiwan democracy to have the capacity 
and courage to formulate and defend its own foreign policy 
perspectives and interests based on our own democratic values and 
engage in mature dialogue with Washington on this foundation. 
 
"For its part, the Bush administration must keep in mind the 
importance of striking a balance between its engagement with the 
authoritarian PRC and the necessity of continuing to support 
Taiwanese democracy.  Instead of simply pressuring President Chen 
and the DPP administration to avoid ' rocking the boat,' the Bush 
administration must introduce concrete measures to constrain 
Beijing's continued expansion of its missile deployments and other 
offensive forces targeting Taiwan and rein in its diplomatic saber 
rattling against Taipei's international space.  Washington may 
overlook the danger of China's military buildup and its threats 
against Taiwan and choose to portray Chen's expressions of concern 
over these trends as nothing more than electoral rhetoric, but the 
23 million Taiwan people simply cannot stand by and wait until such 
threats become a 'clear and present danger.'" 
 
E) "Naysayers Ignore Chen's Success" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] wrote in an editorial (5/14): 
 
"... Chen's decision to go ahead with the stopover in Libya, and the 
possibility of building closer ties with that country, was obviously 
based on pragmatic, strategic and self-interest considerations 
alone.  So far, Taiwan's 'good image' has not helped the nation win 
formal diplomatic recognition from foreign nations and respect 
within the international community.  There are, of course, inherent 
risks associated with allowing Taiwan's image to become degraded. 
This needs to be balanced against Libya's strategic importance as a 
springboard into North Africa and the abundant oil resources of the 
country. ... 
 
"As for concerns about upsetting the US, that has proven to be a 
non-issue.  US State Department spokesman Sean McCormack said on 
Thursday that the relationship between his country and Libya has 
changed over the past few years, after Libya gave up its program to 
develop weapons of mass destruction.  So, it is up to Taiwan and 
Libya whether they want to develop their bilateral relationship. 
The US has no qualms about the matter.  The joke is that the 
pan-blue lawmakers are usually the first ones to jump up and accuse 
the Chen government of 'kissing up' to the US.  Their anti-US 
sentiment has kept the arms procurement bill tied up in the 
Legislative Yuan for two years now.  Since when have they been 
concerned about how the US feels about anything?" 
 
YOUNG