06AITTAIPEI1251
MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS
Mon Apr 10 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0023
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1251/01 1000823
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 100823Z APR 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 9621
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5035
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6225UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001251 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS 
 
 
¶1. Summary: Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies focused their 
coverage April 8-10 on the upcoming economic forum between the KMT 
and the Chinese Communist Party, in which former KMT Chairman Lien 
Chan will meet with Chinese President Hu Jintao again; the 
corruption scandal surrounding former Presidential Office Deputy 
Secretary-General Chen Che-nan, who was taken into custody last 
 
SIPDIS 
Friday; and the year-end Taipei and Kaohsiung mayoral race.  The 
pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" ran a banner headline on its front 
page April 10 that read: "[Vice President] Annette Lu Is Concerned 
That Lien-Hu Meeting Will Be a Crisis for Taiwan." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials, an editorial in the pro-independence 
"Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest daily, said the best way for 
Taiwan to counter China's false belief in the use of force against 
the island is for the Taiwan government to express its strong 
political position to warn Beijing not to take any rash advances 
militarily.  An editorial in the pro-status quo "China Times" called 
on Beijing to view the notion of "one China, with each side having 
its own interpretation" with a positive attitude.  An editorial in 
the limited-circulation, pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan 
News" criticized the upcoming Lien-Hu meeting, saying it is aimed at 
isolating and marginalizing President Chen Shui-bian's DPP 
government.  End summery. 
 
A) 'The Effective Way for Taiwan to Counterstrike China's False 
Belief in the Use of Force" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] wrote in 
an editorial (4/10): 
 
"... Taiwan has already shouldered too many responsibilities in 
maintaining the status quo across the Taiwan Strait, and it will be 
deadly constrained by China if it does not take any action now. 
This newspaper suggests that the Taiwan government, in addition to 
strengthening its national defense capabilities, proactively 
managing the island's investments in China, and preventing China 
from using the United-Front tactics to divide Taiwan, clearly 
express its strong political position.  [Taiwan should let China 
know that] as long as Beijing decides to take any rash advances 
militarily, Taiwan pledges that it will effectively defend itself 
and make China pay a huge political price.  This is the best way for 
Taiwan to counterstrike China's false belief in the use of force 
[against the island]." 
 
B) "Beijing Should View the Discourse on 'One China, with Each Side 
Having Its Own Interpretation' with a Positive Attitude" 
 
The pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (4/10): 
 
"... [KMT Chairman] Ma Ying-jeou's strategy of discourse is very 
clear; that is, he recovered President Chen's 'Five No's' pledge and 
made it equal to 'maintaining the status quo.'  Then he nailed the 
DPP down using Chen's statement made during his recent meeting with 
Ma that he would 'show absolute respect' [if Beijing agrees to the 
notion of] 'one China, with each side having its own 
interpretation.'  Ma also nailed Beijing down by quoting the 
latter's acceptance of 'one China, with each side having its own 
interpretation,' which could be found in the five-point consensus 
reached by [former KMT Chairman] Lien Chan and [Chinese President] 
Hu Jintao during their meeting last spring.  It is obvious that 
neither Beijing nor the DPP is willing to state clearly that they 
accept the notion of 'one China, with each side having its own 
interpretation.'  It is, however, also difficult for either of them 
to say 'sternly' that it opposes to the notion, because if any of 
them does so, it would be like labeling itself as the side that 
creates trouble, and that would give Ma the space to cut in.  As a 
result, every party involved is watching closely how Beijing isQgoing to do with the ball [now that it is in its court]." 
 
C) "Lien-Hu Meet Aims to Divide Taiwan" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] commented in an editorial (4/10): 
 
"The opposition Chinese Nationalist Party and the People's Republic 
of China's ruling Chinese Communist Party will hold an economic and 
trade forum later this week, just prior to the scheduled visit by 
PRC State Chairman Hu Jintao to the United States to hold a summit 
with U.S. President George W. Bush. ...  The convention of the 
KMT-CCP forum in Shanghai and its timing is likewise politically 
calculated as a means to implement Beijing's 'divide-and-conquer' 
strategy, which aims to isolate and marginalize President Chen 
Shui-bian's DPP government.  Thanks to the enthusiastic 
participation by the KMT, the forum also provides Hu with ample 
ammunition in his upcoming summit with United States President 
George W. Bush on April 20 to blame the continuation of the 
cross-strait stalemate on the 'unilateral refusal' of President Chen 
and the DPP government to engage in cross-strait talks. ... 
 
"Although conducted in the name of peace, Lien's establishment of an 
alliance between the KMT and CCP against Taiwan's democratically 
elected-government runs the risk of permanently sabotaging Taiwan's 
national interests, national security, sovereignty and dignity. ... 
It is also essential that members of the international community be 
able to decipher the underlying content of Beijing's strategy of 
'divide-and-conquer' and demand that the PRC engage in direct, equal 
and dignified negotiations with Taiwan's democratically elected 
government, which is the only mandated representative of our 23 
million people." 
 
YOUNG