06AITTAIPEI3778
MEDIA REACTION: INDICTMENT OF FIRST LADY WU SHU-CHEN
Mon Nov 06 00:00:00 +0100 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0013
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #3778/01 3100858
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 060858Z NOV 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2926
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5894
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 7113UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 003778 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: INDICTMENT OF FIRST LADY WU SHU-CHEN 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's dailies gave significant reporting and 
editorial coverage November 4-7 to the indictments of First Lady Wu 
Shu-chen and three presidential aides last Friday, and President 
Chen Shui-bian's televised address to the Taiwan people Sunday 
evening.  All the major Chinese-language dailies of November 6 
front-paged President Chen's remarks that he will step down if his 
wife is found guilty in an initial trial on corruption charges.  A 
"China Times" poll conducted November 3 found that 53.8% of those 
polled said President Chen should resign over the corruption 
scandal, while 16.7% of respondents said Chen should stay in office 
till his term ends, and 29.5% of them declined comment.  According 
to a "United Daily News" poll conducted November 3, 60% of the 
respondents said President Chen should resign, while 21% said Chen 
should not, and 17% of respondents did not answer the question. 
Following President Chen's "Report to the People" Sunday evening, an 
"Apple Daily" poll indicated November 6 that 66% of the respondents 
did not believe Chen's explanation. 
 
¶2. Editorials in Taiwan newspapers are divided along each paper's 
political stand.  The pan-Green-aligned newspapers basically 
accepted President Chen's clarification and said that a court 
judgment on the presidential allowance for state affairs case will 
provide a foundation for the decision of Chen's political 
responsibility.  The pan-Blue-inclined papers, however, lashed out 
at Chen and said a president who is corrupt and who lies is no 
longer entitled to the presidency.  End summary. 
 
A) "Let's Await Judicial Judgment on the State Affairs Fund Case" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] 
editorialized (11/6): 
 
"... We believe that, even following President Chen's earnest and 
sincere clarification, people who believe in him will continue to do 
so, while those who do not believe in him will remain unchanged as 
well.  But it is a public consensus that Taiwan's political, 
economic, and social stability must be maintained, so those who do 
not believe in Chen must not appeal to mass movements outside the 
system again.  Since everyone believes that, judging from Prosecutor 
Eric Chen's indictment, [Taiwan's] judiciary is worth hoping for, 
then why don't [we] await a court judgment on the presidential 
account for state affairs case?" 
 
B) "The President Must Make His Case" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] editorialized (11/5): 
 
"... After reading the indictment, it seems that [Prosecutor] Eric 
Chen is genuinely dealing with this case purely on the basis of 
evidence and standing by the letter of the law. ...  The 
prosecutor's investigation suggests that the president did not use 
the fund for the legitimate purposes that he has claimed, which is 
the real issue here.  To be more precise, the prosecutor found that 
four out of the six secret missions for which the president had 
claimed reimbursement were non-existent. ...  With so much at stake 
for the nation, President Chen must make his case.  If he is telling 
the truth, he needs to provide proof immediately." 
 
C) "Chen Lets Court Resolve Crisis" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (11/6): 
 
"... The indictments against Wu Shu-chen et al for 'corruption and 
forgery of documents' were a heavy blow to the authority and 
credibility of President Chen, but did not constitute a 'guilty' 
judgment or 'prove' that Chen is a corrupt president or that the DPP 
is a corrupt administration. ...  The question of whether President 
Chen is factually or legally guilty of graft or corruption must be 
the essential foundations of any demand that the president take 
responsibility for corruption on gross misuse of power by resigning. 
 In our view, the question of political responsibility cannot be 
answered until the question of legal or criminal responsibility is 
determined and before a reasonably comprehensive account of what 
actually happened is revealed. 
 
"Hence, we remain strongly opposed to any 'third' recall motion 
filed by the opposition KMT and PFP and deeply regret the decision 
by the pan-green opposition Taiwan Solidarity Union to declare its 
support for such a third recall, which is nothing more than another 
expression of cutthroat political struggle and will neither promote 
justice or democracy. ...  Whether our citizens will believe 
President Chen, we believe his decision to accept the court judgment 
on his wife will then provide a foundation, albeit imperfect, for 
the decision of his personal political responsibility.  We are 
confident that history and the judiciary will indeed confirm 
President Chen's innocence." 
D) "[Chen] Should Be Held Responsible for Political Upheavals Even 
If He Is Not Involved in Corruption" 
 
The mass-circulation "Apple Daily" [circulation: 500,000] 
editorialized (11/6): 
 
"... During his 'Report to the People' yesterday evening, President 
Chen continued to seek to rebut the statements in the indictment, 
scheming to find every linguistic loophole he could.  He still 
failed to grasp the fact that it does not matter any more whether 
the indictment is comprehensive or accurate or not; instead, [he 
must realize that] the key lies in the fact that his family problems 
have caused severe damage [to society], including recurring 
political upheavals, plunging government prestige, ruined 
presidential authority, and a crisis of confidence in public 
authority.  Also, the president's image and leadership have fallen 
apart; the DPP has suffered severe damage; those who support the 
party are humiliated, and all the Taiwan people feel outraged.  Even 
if it is true that the President is not involved in corruption, he 
should resign to quell the political turmoil and let his people rest 
to mend the wound, simply because he has done so much harm to the 
nation. ..." 
 
E) "Abuse of Law and Power Is Abuse of Law and Power; Stop Making up 
Excuses!" 
 
The pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (11/6): 
 
"Chen Shui-bian 'reported to the people,' saying that he will step 
down once Wu Shu-chen is found guilty in an initial trial.  Such an 
announcement was of course aimed at removing the imminent pressure 
forcing him to resign, but a more direct message Chen meant to 
convey was: 'I will not step down!'  Chen even pushed his battle 
line to the initial trial!  During the one-and-a-half hour 'Report 
to the People,' Chen repeatedly argued about 'different perceptions' 
and 'flawed procedures.'  To put it in plain language, Chen has not 
only failed to clarify the charges [against him] of violating the 
law and abuse of power but has openly acknowledged that he has used 
his presidency to abuse his power.  We must say that the more Chen 
talked, the more it proved that he should step down. ... 
 
"Any president who believes he has that many makeshift measures and 
so many difficulties that he cannot talk about is in reality abusing 
his power!  The development of the presidential state affairs fund 
case so far has clearly exposed a president who lacks an accurate 
understanding of the constitutional system and the role of the 
president, and who shows total disregard for the rule of law and the 
supervisory authorities.  Chen's performance in this case alone 
would mean that he is no longer entitled to be president!" 
 
F) "All Lies: A President Involved in Corruption Should Not Be 
Pardoned; A President Who Lies Is Particularly Unforgivable!" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (11/6): 
 
"... The DPP's request that Chen make clarification after the case 
was closed is in fact akin to forcing him to lie in public again. 
Such a move is naturally not conducive for Chen to save his own 
credibility and that of the DPP.  When a president must argue 'I am 
not a liar,' can he still look his people in the eye?  How much 
truth can the people read from his lips?  The remainder of Chen's 
term of office is one-and-a-half years, but the judicial procedures 
are very slow.  Chen claimed that he would step down once [he] was 
found guilty in an initial trial; it is akin to telling the public 
that he will not plead guilty and resign.  A nation's law finds it 
impossible to pardon this corrupt president, and the Taiwan people 
must punish this unworthy politician who is full of lies and has no 
credibility at all!" 
 
G) "DPP Must Break with Chen in Order to Survive" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] commented in an editorial (11/6): 
 
"With the indictment of first lady Wu Shu-chen on corruption 
charges, the Chen Shui-bian government plunged into uncertainty.  No 
one can doubt that the ruling Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) is 
facing the worst crisis since it was founded 20 years ago. ...  Last 
night, President Chen - speaking in a televised address - tried to 
defend himself against the charges in the indictment.  However, the 
explanation he offered can hardly convince those who hear it. ... 
It's time that DPP woke up and realized how unwise and disastrous it 
would be to continue supporting a corrupt leader.  Chen's 
misbehavior has caused the DPP's popularity to sink to new lows and 
had a significant effect on the party's ability to win electoral 
battles.  Polls taken in the past few days show that support for the 
party's candidates in the upcoming elections have fallen further 
behind their opposition counterparts. ...  However, those at the top 
level of the party and most legislators of the party still insist 
Chen should stay on, arguing that he is innocent.  The DPP is 
certainly doomed if these politicians keep their heads buried in the 
sand." 
 
WANG