06AITTAIPEI3431
MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S CONSITUTIONAL REFORM AND
Wed Oct 04 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0010
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #3431 2770529
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 040529Z OCT 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2462
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5740
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6954UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 003431 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: TAIWAN'S CONSITUTIONAL REFORM AND 
CROSS-STRAIT RELATIONS. 
 
 
¶1.  Summary: Taiwan dailies (October 4) focused on U.S. worries 
about Taiwan's constitutional reform. The pro-status quo "China 
Times" front-paged that "The United States has urged President Chen 
Shui-bian through three channels not to touch the 'red line' in 
constitutional reform." 
 
¶2.  In terms of editorials, the pro-unification "United Daily News" 
editorialized that President Chen Shui-bian's attempt at 
constitutional reform has infuriated the United States.  The 
conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" said in 
its editorial that an informal tourism agreement between Taiwan and 
China might be stalled because of the recent traffic accident 
involving mainland Chinese tourists in central Taiwan.  End 
summary. 
 
¶3.  The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (10/04) that: 
 
"Taiwan's New Constitution is Fake; [the fact that] it has 
infuriated the United States is True" 
 
"The DPP will send a draft for constitutional reform to its Central 
Executive Committee.  Days ago, Chen Shui-bian claimed that 'the 
territorial boundaries must be defined pragmatically,' and the 
United States immediately made strong responses.  U.S. Department of 
State spokesmen used strong words twice, and every sentence pointed 
to Chen Shui-bian; the language even expressed strong doubts about 
Chen Shui-bian's competence and legitimacy. 
 
"... In the midst of the Anti-Bian Action, strong words from the 
U.S. government not only directly question Chen Shui-bian's 
competence to lead the country, but they also echo 'anti-Bian' 
actions.  This is a piece of evidence that Chen Shui-bian has really 
infuriated the United States. 
 
"... Why does Chen Shui-bian always want to use a 'fake issue' such 
as 'constitutional reform for Taiwan independence' in exchange for 
'real damages' in Taiwan-U.S. relations?  This kind of political 
thinking is really difficult to comprehend.  Over the past six 
years, whenever the President attempted to cross the 'restricted 
area for constitutional reform,' the United States struck back; and 
the United States took stronger and stronger actions each time. If 
constitutional reform has ever had any space for the development of 
Taiwan independence, the United States has almost blocked it and 
left no room for it.  This time, Chen Shui-bian is humiliated again; 
the space for Taiwan independence is being blocked again.  Moreover, 
it is a further deterioration of relations between the United States 
and the DPP's Taiwan independence forces. ..." 
 
¶4.  "Accident May Stall Tourism Agreement" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (10/04): 
 
"The crash of a tourist bus carrying mainland Chinese tourists in 
central Taiwan's Nantou County was a tragic accident that took the 
lives of five tourists and their Taiwanese tour guide. 
 
"But if the fallout from the accident is not handled properly, this 
tragedy has the potential to derail a long-awaited informal tourism 
agreement between Taipei and Beijing. 
 
"In recent months, following our government's decision to allow 
mainland Chinese residents to make tourist visits to Taiwan, 
governments on both sides have signaled a willingness to let tourism 
business leaders work out arrangements that would normalize the 
process for mainland tourists to visit Taiwan.  Since both 
governments are still in no mood to negotiate directly with each 
other, Taipei and Beijing have instead indicated they will allow 
private tourism associations to work out a private sector 
agreement. 
 
"... In the end, officials here should work to treat injured 
mainland tourists and relatives of the deceased victims in the same 
way that we would want Taiwanese to be treated if the same accident 
happened on the mainland. 
 
"By giving this incident high priority, our government can 
demonstrate sincerity that one hopes could overcome any setbacks so 
that an agreement can still be reached." 
 
WANG