06AITTAIPEI3158
MEDIA REACTION: CAMPAIGN TO OUST PRESIDENT CHEN SHUI-BIAN
Tue Sep 12 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0008
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #3158/01 2551039
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 121039Z SEP 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 2093
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5648
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6859UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 003158 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - DAVID FIRESTEIN 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: CAMPAIGN TO OUST PRESIDENT CHEN SHUI-BIAN 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  Taiwan's major Chinese-language dailies continued to 
give significant coverage September 12 to former DPP Chairman Shih 
Ming-teh's sit-in rally to oust President Chen Shui-bian, and to a 
possible general strike to try to force Chen to step down.  The 
pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest daily, ran a 
front-page banner headline that said "Strike to Undermine Taiwan? 
Daily Output Will Suffer Loss of NT$30 Billion."  The newspaper also 
devoted its entire page three to criticizing the idea of a 
nationwide strike to bring Chen down.  In addition, the paper 
carried a banner headline on page two that read "United States 
Opposes Ousting Bian by Unconstitutional Means." 
 
¶2. In terms of editorials and commentaries, a "Liberty Times" 
editorial criticized the idea of a general strike, saying it is 
merely aimed at undermining the results of democratic elections via 
a mass movement.  An editorial in the limited-circulation, 
pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" also criticized 
moves to oust President Chen as "a ridiculous attempt to subvert 
Taiwan's democracy."  An editorial in the limited-circulation, 
pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" urged Washington to 
continue to maintain "an unbiased stance toward the complicated 
picture of Taiwan's politics."  An editorial in the pro-unification 
"United Daily News," on the other hand, urged the DPP to quickly 
draw a line between itself and President Chen.  An editorial in the 
limited-circulation, conservative, pro-unification, English-language 
"China Post" said Shih's campaign is a good lesson for Taiwan's 
democracy.  End summary. 
 
A) "Please, What Taiwan Needs Is Jobs, Not a Strike" 
 
The pro-independence "Liberty Times" [circulation: 600,000] 
editorialized (9/12): 
 
"... As for launching a recall and a strike, the former will create 
political upheavals and deactivate democratic operations, while the 
latter will create social and economic disturbances, forcing more 
disappointed investors to leave Taiwan.  Should this be the case, 
the objective to exert pressure on the government may be attained, 
but who will benefit from such an action?  The answer is definitely 
those careerists who attempt to usurp power, not the general public 
and workers who will suffer severe disasters; the answer is 
definitely China, not Taiwan. ... 
 
"While using a strike as a means to oust Bian may be given the 
dignified name of a demonstration of people power, it is actually a 
mass movement to subvert the results of democratic elections. ... 
President Chen's performance in reform may not be very satisfactory, 
but mobilizing the people to oust him can neither help speed up the 
pace of reform nor win the support of the majority of the people. 
..." 
 
B) "Sit-in Gets the Big Thumbs down" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" [circulation: 
30,000] wrote in an editorial (9/12): 
 
"... Many analysts believe the campaign will fizzle out and fail to 
achieve its ultimate aim of Chen being forced to step down.  And if 
events so far are anything to go by then they appear to be right. 
The president and the DPP have already received the message loud and 
clear that the people will no longer tolerate corruption, and all 
the cases of alleged impropriety that have been uncovered are being 
dealt with by the authorities.  Shih and the organizers should also 
heed the message that the weekend's events have conveyed to them and 
end this ridiculous attempt to subvert Taiwan's democracy." 
 
C) "Taiwan's Autonomy Cannot be 'Deposed'" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20.000] editorialized (9/12): 
 
"... For international observers, the most intriguing aspect of 
Taiwan's recent political upheavals is the extent to which the 
judicial system can act as an arbiter to find the truth of the 
allegations of scandal surrounding President Chen and pave the way 
for constitutional methods to handle this difficult crisis. 
Nevertheless, claims by some pro-KMT pundits that the U.S. can or 
should persuade or push Chen out of office has riveted renewed 
attention on the role of the U.S. in Taiwan's domestic politics. 
For example, some local  pro-KMT media have mistakenly quoted parts 
of statements by U.S. officials and 'spun' such excerpts into claims 
that Washington does 'not support' the Chen administration or even 
that the U.S. would favor Chen's resignation.  To the contrary, the 
U.S. administration under Republican President George W. Bush has 
consistently stuck to the position that it respects the capability 
of Taiwan's judicial system to investigate the allegations and has 
confidence in the wisdom of Taiwan's people to bridge domestic 
divisions. 
"We urge Washington to continue to maintain an unbiased stance 
toward the complicated picture of Taiwan politics because any 
miscalculated reaction or policy shift toward President Chen at the 
present time will surely be twisted and utilized by pan-KMT 
opposition or even the DPP administration, regardless of 
Washington's intent. ...  Washington's prime concern lies not only 
in a peaceful, constitutional and democratic resolution to Taiwan's 
political difficulties, but also in preventing the authoritarian 
People's Republic of China from interfering in Taiwan politics 
through military or other means. ...  Based on past experience, what 
the U.S. fears most in cross-strait relations are 'surprises' in 
rhetoric from Taiwan and miscalculations by Beijing.  What 
Washington wants are consistent, predictable and peaceful policies 
to be maintained by both sides of the Taiwan Strait. 
 
"The long-delayed passage of three major defensive weapons 
procurements due to two years of unrelenting boycotts by the KMT and 
its allied People First Party has already cast a dark shadow on 
U.S.-Taiwan relations.  Washington's perception now is if Taiwan 
cannot display concrete steps to defend itself by curbing the impact 
of partisan disputes on national security and defense, then the 
island country will run the risk of losing U.S. support.  In light 
of Washington's efforts to convince the PRC to act as a 'responsible 
stakeholder' in the international community, Taiwan should take the 
initiative to play a positive role by showing greater resolution to 
upgrade its own defensive capability, implement domestic reforms, 
promote normalization of cross-strait relations and encourage 
'democratic openings' in the PRC itself. ..." 
 
D) "DPP Should Quickly Draw a Line between Itself and the 'Chen 
Family Regime'!" 
 
The pro-unification "United Daily News" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (9/12): 
 
"... The DPP does not exist simply to defend the corrupt Chen, 
regardless of its honor; the DPP government certainly does not exist 
just to defend Chen, the national criminal, at any cost.  The DPP 
must come to its senses and realize that the current political 
situation has deteriorated to the 'one hundred percent Chen family 
regime,' which is definitely not the DPP's ideal 'DPP regime,' or a 
'nativist regime' that the DPP once wished for! ..." 
 
E) "Shih's Battle a Good Lesson" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] editorialized (9/12): 
 
"Shih Ming-teh's 'sunset battle' enters its fourth day today with 
sustained momentum.  Win or lose, he has taught Taiwan a lesson: 
With the right leadership, reconciliation of all kinds is possible. 
...  More importantly, the movement has drawn support from Taiwan's 
rival political camps, the pan-green camp for Taiwan independence 
and the pan-blue camp for the status quo.  The green group estimates 
30 percent of the depose-Chen rally are his former supporters. ... 
At 65, Shih may not have another battle to fight, but his 'sunset 
battle' may prove to be the dawn of maturity for Taiwan's 
democracy." 
 
YOUNG