06AITTAIPEI1580
MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS
Tue May 09 00:00:00 +0200 2006
UNCLASSIFIED
American Institute Taiwan, Taipei
VZCZCXYZ0027
RR RUEHWEB

DE RUEHIN #1580/01 1290802
ZNR UUUUU ZZH
R 090802Z MAY 06
FM AIT TAIPEI
TO RUEHC/SECSTATE WASHDC 0073
INFO RUEHBJ/AMEMBASSY BEIJING 5179
RUEHHK/AMCONSUL HONG KONG 6380UNCLAS AIT TAIPEI 001580 
 
SIPDIS 
 
DEPARTMENT FOR INR/R/MR, EAP/TC, EAP/PA, EAP/PD - ERIC BARBORIAK 
DEPARTMENT PASS AIT/WASHINGTON 
 
SIPDIS 
 
E.O. 12958: N/A 
 
 
TAGS: OPRC KMDR KPAO TW
SUBJECT: MEDIA REACTION: U.S.-TAIWAN RELATIONS 
 
 
¶1. Summary:  As President Chen Shui-bian's visit in Paraguay and his 
transit plan continued to stay in Taiwan's media spotlight May 9, 
newspaper coverage also focused on the Legislative Yuan's vote on a 
cross-Strait direct transportation bill, scheduled for May 12; the 
Taiwan government's policy regarding investments in China; the 
year-end Taipei mayoral race; and a Taiwan-U.S. child custody case. 
The pro-status quo "China Times" ran a front-page banner headline 
that read "Bian Will Not Transit Alaska on His Way Home. 
High-Ranking [Official]: Do [We] Really Want to be a Lackey of the 
United States?"  Both the pro-unification "United Daily News" and 
the pro-independence "Liberty Times," Taiwan's biggest daily, also 
carried similar news stories on their page two.  The "Liberty 
Times," in addition, ran an exclusive news story on page two with 
the headline "Bian Proactively Greets Laura Bush at Costa Rican 
President's Inauguration Ceremony." 
 
¶2. Several newspapers continued to editorialize on President Chen's 
transits and the current status of Washington-Taipei relations.  The 
"Free Talk" column in the "Liberty Times" said Chen will not use the 
U.S. arms procurements to counter Washington's unfriendly behavior 
toward him.  An editorial in the pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" 
said the more China tries to suppress Taiwan, the more evident the 
fact that Taiwan is not part of China becomes.  A separate "Taiwan 
Daily" commentary criticized the State Department for having made 
the rudest, most stupid decision with regard to Chen's transits.  A 
commentary in the limited-circulation, pro-independence, 
English-language "Taipei Times," on the other hand, praised Chen's 
maturing and resourceful diplomatic strategy in not transiting in 
the United States.  An editorial in the limited-circulation, 
pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" pointed out that 
the U.S. move to downgrade its treatment of Chen has serious 
implications, as it implies that strategic interests always 
supersede moral concerns.  The article also suggested that 
Washington send a delegation to repair or help harmonize 
Taipei-Washington relations.  A "China Times" editorial, however, 
said Washington has drawn a line to separate Chen and Taiwan, and 
that the treatment Chen received is not equal to Taipei-Washington 
ties.  An editorial in the limited-circulation, conservative, 
pro-unification, English-language "China Post" pointed out that 
"Chen's boldness was not born overnight and nor could it have been 
possible without U.S. connivance."  End summary. 
 
A) "To Break Through the Pan-Blue Camp's Blockade" 
 
The "Free Talk" column in the pro-independence "Liberty Times" 
[circulation: 600,000] wrote (5/9): 
 
"... Arms procurements are essential [for Taiwan] to defend its 
security and they are not a bargaining chip in handling foreign 
relations.  [We] believe that A-bian, as a state leader who is 
provided with sufficient national security intelligence, must be 
clearly aware of this.  Also, Taiwan's strategic position shows that 
it is an indispensable stronghold for the United States and the 
[world] democratic camp to resist China's threats.  As a result, 
even though A-bian and Bush may have had some emotional reactions, 
as long as they cool down, they will understand that neither Taiwan 
nor the United States can live without each other.  Using arms 
procurements to counter the United States will surely put Taiwan in 
a deadly dangerous situation, and we are sure that A-bian will not 
make such a move. ..." 
 
B) "President Chen's Overseas Visit Has Garnered Public Support from 
the International Community and Highlighted [Taiwan's] National 
Dignity.  Chen's Thinking and Strategy Deserve Approval" 
 
The pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" [circulation: 100,000] 
editorialized (5/9): 
 
"... These [friendly] reactions from the international community 
elucidated the significance of Chen's overseas trip. China's 
ceaseless attempts and going to extremes in suppressing Taiwan have 
resulted in the United States' decision to yield and act unfriendly 
[toward Taiwan] so as to gain Beijing's cooperation with regard to 
issues such as the Iranian and Pyongyang nuclear crises and Sudanese 
refugees.  But such developments have all the more highlighted 
Taiwan's difficult situation in the international community and made 
the Taiwan issue a focus of international attention.  It has also 
provided the international community with a correct understanding of 
the existence of a democratic Taiwan - namely, Taiwan and China do 
not belong to each other.  This can be viewed as an unexpected 
result that Chen has harvested during his overseas trip this time. 
The more China tries to suppress Taiwan, the more evident the fact 
that Taiwan is not part of China becomes.  Chen's endeavors and 
striving have thus revealed great significance. ..." 
 
C) "The State Department Has Made the Rudest Decision" 
 
Washington correspondent James Wang commented in the "Washington 
Review" column of the pro-independence "Taiwan Daily" [circulation: 
100,000] (5/9): 
 
 
"The State Department has made the rudest, most stupid decision with 
regard to President Chen Shui-bian's transits, and the consequences 
profited neither side.  U.S. congressmen should investigate and 
punish the State Department for such a childish decision. ...  Of 
course, when it comes to foreign relations, ... a 'win-win' 
situation is the best result.  Since the United States understands 
Taiwan's situation and praises Taiwan's democracy, it should not 
have accommodated itself to an undemocratic country and worked with 
the latter to suppress democratic Taiwan.  ..." 
 
D) "Chen Chose the Right Route to Paraguay" 
 
Chen Gau-tzu, deputy director of the Northern Taiwan Society, opined 
in the pro-independence, English-language "Taipei Times" 
[circulation: 30,000] (5/9): 
 
"... We are positively surprised by Chen's maturing diplomatic 
strategies and want to ask the pan-blue camp to offer a public 
apology for their fictitious claims of Chen's confused odyssey. 
More significantly, Chen decided that he would no longer endure 
humiliations and orders from the US.  The greatest pride of 
Americans - their belief in freedom and democracy - is a complex 
issue, and their pride at times is somewhat misplaced.  In 
particular, situations where the US' economic interests conflict 
with its belief in justice are a problem for the US. ...  We were 
glad to see Chen's brave and resourceful display.  The performance 
was also a signal to anyone with ambitions to lead the nation in 
future: They must manifest the will to lead Taiwan down its own path 
to win public respect and support." 
 
E) "Taiwan's U.S. Policy Must Be Rethought" 
 
The pro-independence, English-language "Taiwan News" [circulation: 
20,000] editorialized (5/9): 
 
"... Many observers believe that Bush's decision to prevent 
President Chen from transiting through New York or San Francisco - 
Chen's preferred destinations - was directly targeted as a rebuke 
against the president rather than against Taiwan or the country's 
people.  For Bush to try to draw a line separating Taiwan's people 
from Chen's administration seems on the surface unthinkable and 
ludicrous, but in fact is also anti-democratic since the directly 
elected Chen represents the country's citizens. 
 
"The U.S. move to downgrade the treatment afforded the president 
also has even more serious implications as it implies that strategic 
interests always supersede moral concerns.  With political and 
economic interests far more important than 'doing the right thing,' 
American has sent a clear message to its allies that values can be 
compromised when dealing with or soliciting support from 
totalitarian China.  That thinking will encourage other countries to 
buckle to China's will without any moral burden and ultimately 
undermine the foundation on which international order is based. 
Moreover, Washington will no longer be seen as a moral arbiter by 
its allies.  In Taiwan, many local elites who have an American 
education background feel that the U.S.' active participation in the 
Taiwan Strait is mainly conceived to pursue its own interests, with 
concern for democratic values and human rights only of secondary 
importance.  What kind of message is the U.S. sending when it so 
arrogantly deals with the president of a Taiwan that is a model of 
democracy and free market economics that Washington has long 
advocated? ... 
 
"To atone for its objectionable behavior, the U.S. government should 
send a delegation to repair or help harmonize relations  between the 
two countries.  Substantive issues, such as a Free Trade Agreement, 
for example, can be raised and opportunities should be created to 
exchange good will.  As much as anything, the two sides need to have 
a candid dialogue, with issues related to the 'one-China' policy 
even discussed in confidential channels.  Each side has to tell the 
other its real bottom line.  One the other hand, tactically 
speaking, Taiwan must revise its conventional foreign policy 
approach, which is one-sided in favor of the United States.  Rather 
than putting all of its eggs in one basket, Taiwan can use South 
Korea's shift to more a neutral foreign policy that balances 
relations with the U.S. and China as a reference. ..." 
 
F) "Safeguarding National Dignity Does Not Mean Taking Risks Without 
Considering Consequences" 
 
The pro-status quo "China Times" [circulation: 400,000] 
editorialized (5/9): 
 
"... First, the United States' handling of transits by Taiwan 
leaders is a thermometer of [Washington's] good will and not an 
indicator of [Taiwan's] national dignity.  Taiwan's dignity lies in 
the amount of recognition and mutual respect it can receive in the 
international community; in the amount of sovereignty the island can 
enjoy in interacting with the international community; and in the 
international community's perception of Taiwan's status and values. 
As for the President's transits in the United States, Washington has 
set a principle of 'safety, comfort, and convenience,' which has 
basically revealed the good will it extends to the traveling leader 
of a friendly ally.  Since such a principle is not an indicator for 
evaluating Taiwan's national dignity, it can surely be adjusted 
accordingly, based on its political considerations and different 
circumstances. ... 
 
"Second, the treatment Chen receives during his transits is not 
equal to Taipei-Washington relations.  Since Washington has now 
decided to draw a line separating Chen and Taiwan, its decision to 
reduce the room for Chen's rally plan during the transits by no 
means indicated that it has lessened its good will toward Taiwan. 
In fact, Washington is clearly aware that many of Chen's moves were 
made under his personal or his party's political considerations, and 
that it is neither fair for the Taiwan people nor in the U.S.'s 
interests to ask all the Taiwan people to shoulder the consequences 
[of Chen's moves.] ..." 
 
G) "Chen's Problems U.S.-made" 
 
The conservative, pro-unification, English-language "China Post" 
[circulation: 30,000] said in an editorial (5/9): 
 
"... And this time, accumulated U.S. displeasure with the president 
over his habit of double-talking on policies exploded to make Chen's 
eight-day trip uncomfortable and send Taipei's ties with Washington 
to a possible freeze for at least the last two years of his time in 
office. ...  This highly publicized emotional tit-for-tat between 
President Chen and the U.S. officialdom was unfortunate. ...  With 
Chen's habit of pushing the envelop on independence, blindsiding 
U.S. officials and U.S. interests in keeping the Taiwan status quo, 
U.S. impatience is understandable.  However, Chen's boldness was not 
born overnight nor could it have been possible without U.S. 
connivance. ... 
 
"But President Chen has persistently advertised his opposition to 
the one-China principle, stressing that Taiwan is an independent 
country and that the U.S. position of 'no support' actually means 
'no opposition' to Taiwan's statehood.  Besides, the ruling DPP's 
charter clearly states that the party's ultimate goal is to 
establish a republic of Taiwan, which Chen has pledged to accomplish 
through a referendum on a new Taiwan Constitution before his term 
ends in 2008.  To such provocative plans, the U.S. has chosen to 
ignore, providing ample space for Chen and independence activists to 
fool Taiwan's people that the U.S. will fight China for Taiwan's 
independence in the name of defending democracy.  U.S. ambiguity 
enhances Chen's hand." 
 
YOUNG